Wu Xiaoling: Expanding financing channels of the real estate industry and 
developing a win-win situation for the real estate and financial industries in 
China 
Speech by Ms Wu Xiaoling, Deputy Governor of the People’s Bank of China, delivered at the Annual 
Conference of Real Estate Finance in China, Beijing, 5 November 2005. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen: 
Good morning.  It  is  my  great  pleasure to  attend  the  “Annual  Conference of  Real  Estate Finance  in 
China, 2005”. I would like to take this platform to make a few comments on real estate finance. 
All industries and enterprises are in need of financing, with the real estate industry being only one of 
them. However, the financing issue of other industries is rarely talked about while financing for the real 
estate industry has become a hot topic for wide discussions. Why is that? I think basically there are 
three reasons behind it. 
First,  the  real  estate  industry  concerns  people’s  living  conditions.  To  live  and  work  in  peace  and 
contentment are the two important preconditions for a harmonious society. The possession of a house 
ensures the basic life of the people; whether living in a good and comfortable environment concerns 
the living quality of people. Therefore, the housing policy and the development policy of the real estate 
industry  concerns  the  achievement  of  the  social  development  objective,  which  shall  be  one  of  the 
critical connotations for a well-off society. 
Second, the real estate industry enjoys a relatively long industrial chain and promotes the economic 
development  greatly.  The  economy  in  China  is  in  a  phase  of  transformation  and  transition.  The 
commercialization of housing and the urbanization of rural areas are exactly the processes in which 
the  development  of  the  real  estate  industry  and  that  of  other  industries  are  mutually  re-enforced. 
Consequently,  the  real  estate  industry  shall  be  one  of  the  pillar  industries  in  national  economic 
development for quite a long period in the future.  
Third, the development of the real estate industry concerns national interest and people’s livelihood. 
However, the productive cycle of real estate is so long that there is a process from the emergence of 
intensive demand for funds until the final payments made by the consumers. Such a mismatch can 
also  be  regarded as  the  timing  difference between  the  demand  for  and supply  of  funds,  which  is  a 
financial issue for sure. 
It is the special social and economic role played by the real estate industry and the urgency regarding 
the financing of the real estate industry that have aroused people’s particular interest in the real estate 
finance. 
Real estate finance definitely does not refer to real estate credit only. It covers all the financing modes 
utilized for the development of the real estate industry such as equity financing, bond financing, credit 
financing and trust financing. Like the development of other commodity markets, the development of 
China’s housing market must resolve the problems of final effective market demands and the demand 
for capital in the process of commodity production. The availability of working capital in the process of 
commodity production depends on whether the final effective demands exist.  
In my opinion, the problems of the current real estate finance in China do not mainly revolve on the 
credit policy for the real estate industry, instead they include the following 2 issues: first, there is not a 
risk separation mechanism in shape for the financing modes of the real estate industry. Most of the 
risks are concentrated in banks; second, the housing monetarization reform has not been completed 
yet. We are still lacking an appropriate solution that shall properly deal with the relationship between 
carrying out the housing monetarization reform and ensuring the basic living standard of the general 
public. This leads to some problems yet to be resolved in respect of income allocation, which shall 
have  a  negative  impact  on  the  effective  demands  for  housing  commodities.  The  former  belongs  to 
financial policy issues, while the latter belongs to housing policy and income allocation policy issues, 
but  the  latter  has  great  impact  on  the  safety  of  financial  activities.  We  shall  analyze  the  effective 
BIS Review 79/2005 
 1
demands in the market as well as the effectiveness of various financing modes given the status quo of 
income allocation. 
We shall make research on the real estate finance in terms of the match between risk and return. 
The real estate industry is a capital intensive industry. Prior to World War II in the 20th century, the real 
estate  market  in  various  European  and  American  countries  were  dominated  by  house  leasing  and 
tenancy.  After  World  War  II,  the  purchase  of  houses  was  on  rise  and  gradually  became  the 
predominant trade form in the market. However, nowadays tenancy and selling of houses still co-exist 
in  the  market  in  these  countries.  Thanks  to  the  promotion  of  housing  mortgage  loans,  ordinary 
residents are now able to have access to the house purchase market. However, if the mortgage loans 
are improperly dealt with, they could bring about financial crises such as the crisis of the thrift and loan 
institutions in 1980s in the United States. Maintaining the co-existence of house tenancy and selling is 
not only a method to satisfy the housing needs of the low-income people, but also a prerequisite to 
maintain the free mobility of the workforce. In order to create a certain kind of tenancy and leasing 
market  for  the  housing  industry,  and  in  order  to  ensure  the  housing  mortgage  loans  be  backed  by 
indisputable securities, the real estate developers must utilize equity financing as the main form. As 
the real estate industry is a high-risk as well as a high-return industry, the problem of matching risks 
and returns shall only be better resolved with equity financing mode taking the dominant position. 
According  to  information  provided  by  the  Report  on  China’s  Real  Estate  Market  2003~2004,  the 
leverage ratios of China’s real estate enterprises are relatively high. The leverage ratios of the top five 
listed  companies  in  Hong  Kong  are  basically  kept  at  a  level  between  30%  to  40%,  while  those  of 
domestic real estate companies stand at around 75%. The report also shows that among the 24.6% of 
the  self-raised  capital  13.3%  belongs  to  self-owned  capital.  Such  a  high  leverage  ratio  could  bring 
huge loss to debtors once the market risks arise. According to the Report, the return on self-owned 
capital  is  21.17%,  which  does  not  match  the  risk  borne  by  debtors  when  compared  to  the  cost  of 
financing. With the maturing of financial markets, the principle of matching risks with returns shall be 
absorbed into the financing mode for real estate industry, and it is an inevitable trend that the ratio of 
developers’ equity financing will be increased. 
China’s economy is now in a transition period when many reforms are not compatible with each other 
perfectly. When we put forward the reform of housing commercialization and monetarization, the state 
reduced or halted direct input into the housing industry but failed to open the equity- financing channel 
to  real  estate  developers.  A  multi-level  capital  market  has  not  developed  not  only  to  real  estate 
developers  but  also  to  all  the  enterprises,  leading  to  the  result  that  many  enterprise  flocked  to  get 
listed in the stock market. If they did not succeed in the direct financing market but have to develop, 
the financing burden thus completely falls on banks. In order to support the housing monetarization 
reform  and  promote  the  development  of  the  real  estate  industry,  the  People’s  Bank  of  China  has 
issued a series of credit policies to contribute to the development of real estate credit since 1998. The 
rapid  development  of  the  real  estate  industry  should  be  a  benefactor  of  the  housing  credit  policy 
formulated by the PBC, otherwise the real estate industry shall not be so sensitive to the adjustment of 
the  PBC’  credit  policy.  However,  there  should  be  a  limit  on  risks  borne  by  banks,  otherwise  the 
financial stability could be threatened. The difference between bank credit and direct financing goes as 
follows:  bank  loans  are  able  to  create  purchasing  powers,  which  could  lead  to  asset  bubbles  if 
improperly controlled; direct financing brings about circulation of the realistic purchasing powers, which 
could enhance fund utilization via efficient capital allocation. Therefore, it is an urgent task to expand 
the direct financing channels after the central bank adjusted the real estate credit policies in line with 
the needs of macro economic control.  
Given the current restrictions on financing via public offerings on the part of real estate developers, 
private placements shall be a possible approach worthwhile studying actively. The stipulation of “200 
contracts” in the Provisional Rules on Entrusted Funds by Trust and Investment Companies as well as 
the stipulation that “the issuance of securities to specific objects that amount to more than 200 persons 
accumulatively shall be regarded as public offering in the revised Securities Law enacted on October 
28  this  year  leaves  room  for  privately-raised  trust  funds,  privately-offered  stocks  and  bonds.  The 
privately-raised  trust  funds  can  be  used  for  project  development  or  real  estate  investment,  i.e.  real 
estate purchasing. The privately-offered stocks can solve developers’ capital raising problem to some 
extent. 
In recent years, the real estate trust plan becomes quite popular, but the biggest problem inherent in 
its  development  is  that  loan  trust  plans  being  the  majority  while  real  estate  trusts,  i.e.,  trusts  with 
income relying on the rents of real estates, are rare. When real estate developers fail to meet the loan 
2 
 BIS Review 79/2005
conditions set by banks and then turn to loan trusts, the funds entrusters will assume excessive risks 
and an imbalance between risk and return will take shape. A few days ago, China Banking Regulatory 
Commission  put  forward  supervision  requirements  on  loan  trusts  stipulating  quite  similar  criteria  as 
those  set  on  bank  loans,  therefore,  loan  trusts  thus  would  not  resolve  financing  problems  of 
developers with insufficient equity. Equity funds instead of credit funds shall be established for the real 
estate industry if the developers’ problem of insufficient equity needs to be resolved via trust funds, so 
that funds owners shall bear the investment risks at the same time when they enjoy the investment 
returns. The real estate trust is in essence an industrial investment fund. The underlying assets of trust 
funds used for real estate development are illiquid, difficult to price and have relatively high demands 
on risk-taking capacity of the entrusters. Therefore, this type of financing products shall mainly target 
qualified investors. Given the fact that we have neither rules regulating private funds nor classifying 
standards on qualified investors, people who are lacking in risk identification ability and risk bearing 
capacity are hence usually involved in collective trust plans, leading to relatively high market risks. As 
both the value of underlying assets and the number of units of privately-offered real estate funds are 
not  high,  problems  of  limited  scope  and  low  liquidity  also  exist  for  privately-offered  stocks, 
consequently,  the  above  two  financing  modes  both  face  quite  a  few  restrictions.  To  establish  real 
estate investment trust fund via public offering or issuing beneficiary certificates based on specialized 
management shall be the future development direction as well as a sustainable developing mode for 
direct financing of the real estate industry, and it shall also be an important financing mode to support 
investment in house leasing market. I hope the current reform on non-tradable state shares and the 
implementation of the newly revised Securities Law shall expedite this process so as to develop a win-
win situation for both the real estate industry and the financial industry. 
BIS Review 79/2005 
 3
