Toshihiko Fukui: Towards a new path of growth for the Japanese economy 
Summary of a speech given by Mr Toshihiko Fukui, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Kisaragi-kai 
meeting, Tokyo, 11 November 2005. 
 Introduction 
Semiannually  in  April  and  October,  the  Policy  Board  of  the  Bank  of  Japan  decides  the  text  of  the 
Outlook  for  Economic  Activity and  Prices,  or  the  Outlook  Report  as  we  call  it,  and releases  it.  This 
report  describes  the  Bank's  outlook  for  economic  activity  and  prices  which  provides  the  basis  for 
conducting  monetary  policy,  and  also  explains  the  Bank's  thinking  behind  its  conduct  of  monetary 
policy.  Today  I  would  like  to  focus  on  the  October  2005  Outlook  Report,  which  was  published  two 
weeks ago.  
Recent economic developments and the outlook for economic activity  
I. 
Japan's economy continues to recover, having emerged from the temporary pause that began in the 
summer of 2004. The adjustments in production and inventory in IT-related sectors, which triggered 
the  temporary  pause,  appear  to  have  run  their  course,  and  domestic  private  demand,  such  as 
business fixed investment and private consumption, has been stronger than expected. According to 
the Cabinet Office's reference dates of business cycles, the economy has been expanding since the 
beginning of 2002, that is to say, for almost four years now.  
Although  a  V-shaped  recovery  is  unlikely  to  ensue  after  the  economy's  recent  emergence  from  its 
temporary  pause,  it  is  expected  to  achieve  solid  growth  at  a  moderate  and  sustainable  pace.  The 
Bank's projection for a period of one and a half years ahead, that is, through the end of fiscal 2006, is 
that the economy is likely to experience a sustained period of expansion at a pace slightly above its 
potential. The Bank's main purpose in releasing the Outlook Report is to explain its thinking on the 
underlying mechanisms of economic activity and prices, and the Policy Board members' forecasts are 
also provided as reference figures. In the October Outlook Report, the Policy Board members forecast 
a real GDP growth rate for fiscal 2005 of slightly above 2.0 percent and for fiscal 2006 of around 1.5-
2.0 percent. If the economy performs as projected  in the October Outlook Report, it will have been 
expanding at a pace above its potential for a very long period of time, since the actual growth rates for 
fiscal  2003  and  2004  have  been  around  2.0  percent,  exceeding  the  Bank's  estimate  of  a  potential 
growth rate of around 1.0 percent.  
This outlook for economic growth rests on the following underlying mechanisms. Exports are likely to 
remain on the increase reflecting the continuing expansion of overseas economies, and against this 
background,  the  corporate  sector  is  likely  to  continue  to  show  strength,  and  the  positive  effects  of 
strong corporate performance will steadily exert an influence on the household sector-in other words, 
economic growth will be led by domestic and external demand that are well in balance. Furthermore, 
the extremely accommodative financial conditions are likely to support private demand.  
What  is  notable  is  that  domestic  private  demand,  especially  business  fixed  investment  and  private 
consumption, is likely to remain strong. The context behind this is that the adjustment pressures in the 
corporate  sector  and  the  financial  system  that  have  been  hindering  the  Japanese  economy  from 
achieving a sustainable growth path since the bursting of the economic bubble have mostly dissipated. 
Specifically, in the corporate sector, firms have almost resolved the excess in debt, employment, and 
production capacity-the "three excesses." As for the financial system, the nonperforming-loan (NPL) 
problem, which has placed downward pressure on the economy together with these three excesses, 
has nearly been resolved.  
Diffusion indexes for production capacity and employment conditions in the September 2005 Tankan 
(Short Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan) are at the level of 1992, immediately after the 
bursting  of  the  economic  bubble,  showing  that  adjustments  in  the  excesses  have  made  much 
progress. In particular, the number of firms perceiving their holdings of labor as insufficient exceeded 
the number perceiving them as excessive, implying that firms are starting to see themselves as short 
BIS Review 79/2005 
 1
of  labor.  Firms  have  also  substantially  reduced  their  interest-bearing  liabilities,  as  evidenced  by  the 
marked decline in the ratios of outstanding debt to total assets and to sales not only at large firms but 
also small and medium-sized firms in the last few years.  
While making adjustments in the three excesses, firms have been reviewing their business lines based 
on  the  principle  of  "selection  and  concentration"  and  improving  their  ability  to  generate  high-value-
added products and services as they face intensified global competition. As a result, their profitability 
has  improved  greatly.  According  to  the  Financial  Statements  Statistics  of  Corporations  by  Industry, 
current  profits  of  Japanese  firms  have  increased  for  three  consecutive  years  from  fiscal  2002,  with 
both profits and the ratio of current profits to sales for fiscal 2004 exceeding those during the height of 
the  bubble  era.  Despite  the  headwind  of  a  surge  in  crude  oil  prices,  corporate  profits  are  likely  to 
continue on an uptrend in fiscal 2005.  
Given  the  high  corporate  profits,  business  fixed  investment  has  been  increasing  steadily  in  a  wide 
range of industries and is also expected to continue increasing. In the Tankan survey, business fixed 
investment plans of large manufacturers for fiscal 2005 showed a double-digit increase for the second 
consecutive year, and small and medium-sized firms are also revising their plans upward. As a result, 
business fixed investment is expected to increase for the third consecutive year for firms of all sizes in 
all industries.  
The  strength  of  the  corporate  sector  is  steadily  spreading  to  the  household  sector.  In  particular, 
improvements  in  the  employment  and  income  situation  are  becoming  noticeable.  Firms  have  been 
placing priority on restraining labor costs, but their stance on employment is becoming positive with 
the  problem  of  excessive  holdings  of  labor  in  the  corporate  sector  nearly  resolved.  One  notable 
example suggesting a change in firms' stance on employment is that the ratio of part-time workers to 
regular  employees,  which  had  been  generally  on  an  uptrend  since  the  bursting  of  the  economic 
bubble,  has  started  to  decline.  With  respect  to  wages,  summer  bonus  payments  have  recorded 
relatively high increases, and regular compensation has started to increase very slightly due partly to 
the peaking out of the ratio of part-time workers. Supported by the improvement in the employment 
and income situation, employee income is likely to continue to increase moderately, and against this 
background,  private  consumption  is  expected  to  continue  to  rise  steadily.  Although  private 
consumption has been somewhat weak since the summer, it should be regarded as a reaction to the 
strong developments in the first half of 2005 and it is likely that this weakness will be temporary, given 
that positive influences from the corporate sector to households are spreading steadily via increases in 
employee income.  
There have also been remarkable improvements in the financial system. The NPL problem, which has 
long been a burden on the Japanese economy, has generally been resolved. The amount outstanding 
of NPLs at major and regional banks has been decreasing since reaching its peak at the end of fiscal 
2001, and due mainly to the resulting decline in credit costs, their earnings for fiscal 2004 were the 
highest in recent years. Net income turned positive in fiscal 2004, for the first time since fiscal 2000 at 
major  banks  and  since  fiscal  1994  at  regional  banks.  Against  the  background  of  improvements  in 
profitability  and  capital  adequacy  ratios,  financial  institutions'  lending  attitude  has  become  more 
accommodative. Bank lending, excluding the effects of marketing of loan assets and disposal of NPLs, 
has turned positive on a year-on-year basis since this August, after a prolonged decrease. Financing 
in capital markets through, for example, issuance of CP and corporate bonds has also been favorable 
for firms. In this situation, firms' perception of their financial positions has improved to the level of the 
early 1990s. Such accommodative financial conditions seem to be contributing to the recent increases 
in housing investment as well as business fixed investment by small and medium-sized firms. These 
accommodative financial conditions are likely to support private demand.  
Pace of recovery  
II. 
Japan's economy is likely to continue to expand against the background I have just explained. As I 
mentioned at the beginning of this speech, the pace, however, is expected to be moderate with less 
likelihood of acceleration. The main reason for this is the cautiousness of corporate behavior, which is 
expected to persist.  
It seems that firms have still not become confident about the future, having come through a protracted 
period of low economic growth following the bursting of the economic bubble. Relative to the record-
high level of profits that firms have been posting, the improvement in business sentiment, according to, 
for  example,  the  Tankan  survey,  is  only  moderate.  Although  business  fixed  investment  has  been 
2 
 BIS Review 79/2005
increasing,  it  still  remains  substantially  below  the  level  of  cash  flow,  and  firms  are  reluctant  to 
aggressively  increase  fixed  investment  by  raising  the  funds  through  bank  loans  or  capital  markets. 
While an increasing number of firms are making more efficient use of cash flow since they have nearly 
completed paying back their excess debt, they still appear cautious about accelerating inventory and 
capital investments in response to increases in sales and production.  
As  a  result  of  such  corporate  behavior,  economic  recovery  is  likely  to  remain  moderate  but  at  the 
same time excessive build-up of stocks is unlikely. The current economic recovery, which is already 
the third longest in the post-World War II period, is likely to be sustained for this reason.  
Positive and negative deviations  
III. 
Japan's economy is expected to continue to recover supported by strength in both the corporate and 
household sectors with adjustment pressures that have lingered since the bursting of the economic 
bubble dissipating. Under these conditions, it is unlikely that the economy will fall into recession due to 
domestic  factors,  although  with  globalization,  Japan's  economy  could  be  adversely  affected  in  the 
event  of  a  major  external  shock,  for  example,  a  slowdown  of  the  global  economy.  It  is  therefore 
necessary to pay attention to the path of the global economy, as this could pose a downside risk to 
Japan's  economy.  In  particular,  developments  in  crude  oil  prices,  which  continue  to  be  high,  and  a 
possible  shift  from  the  current  accommodative  financial  conditions  observed  globally  require  close 
monitoring.  
Overseas economies, in particular the U.S. and Chinese economies, are likely to continue to expand. 
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) also expects a high rate of world economic growth, forecasting 
4.3 percent real growth both in 2005 and 2006, even though the figure falls short of 5.1 percent, a 
historic high marked in 2004. Although the growth of the U.S. economy is expected to slow temporarily 
due to the effects of hurricanes, it is expected to basically continue to expand at a pace around its 
potential  growth  rate,  partly  since  there  is  likely  to  be  reconstruction-related  demand.  As  for  the 
Chinese economy, inventory adjustment has been in progress mainly in sectors related to domestic 
demand  since  the  second  half  of  2004  in  response  to  the  government's  measures  to  rein  in  the 
overheated economy. However, inventory adjustment  pressures are likely to taper off in the face of 
robust economic growth.  
Despite the ongoing global economic expansion, there is recently increased awareness of downside 
risks stemming from the surge in crude oil prices. So far, the global economy has continued to expand 
despite  the  record-high  level  of  crude  oil  prices.  A  number  of  factors  have  contributed  to  this 
development.  First,  one  of  the  primary  factors  of  the  surge  in  crude  oil  prices  is  increased  global 
demand,  reflecting  developments  such  as  high  growth  in  emerging  economies,  and  there  is  little 
influence from supply-side constraints. Second, a mechanism of income reflow from oil-producing to 
non-oil-producing countries is operating. The third and the most important factor from central bankers' 
viewpoint is that the rise in crude oil prices has not led to a sharp rise in inflationary expectations, and 
thus monetary policy has not been tightened aggressively. This is because inflationary expectations 
have  been  contained  as  a  result  of  the  intensified  global  competition  accompanying  emerging 
economies' transition to a market economy, and central banks have been taking appropriate monetary 
policy measures.  
Long-term interest rates in the United States and other major industrial countries have not yet shown 
any clear upward movement compared with two years ago when crude oil prices started to rise and a 
year  and  a  half  ago  when  the  Federal  Reserve  started  to  raise  the  federal  funds  rate  target.  The 
coincidence  of  surging  oil  prices  and  relatively  low  long-term  interest  rates  in  a  climate  of  stable 
economic expansion is hard to explain on the basis of past experience. A growing sense of a surfeit of 
funds in the economy stemming from the slack in the global balance between savings and investment 
and the increase in investment in long-term bonds by institutional investors, such as pension funds, 
have  been  cited  as  factors.  However,  since  long-term  interest  rates  basically  reflect  the  market's 
outlook for economic activity and prices, the fact that inflationary expectations have been contained 
has greatly contributed to the stability in the rates.  
The  maintenance  of  accommodative  financial  conditions  has  played  a  crucial  role  in  the  global 
economic  expansion.  This  is  evident  in  the  United  States  in  particular,  where  stability  in  long-term 
interest  rates,  by  causing  a  continued  rise  in  housing  prices,  has  led  to  buoyant  spending  by 
households  through  the  wealth  effect,  and  this  in  turn  has  been  supporting  economic  expansion. 
Should  there  be  unexpected  changes  in  monetary  accommodation  in  light  of  rising  inflationary 
BIS Review 79/2005 
 3
expectations  caused  by,  for  example,  a  further  rise  in  crude  oil  prices,  not  only  would  growth  in 
advanced  economies  slow  but  the  global  economy  including  emerging  economies  could  also  be 
adversely affected, perhaps via a shift in the international flow of funds.  
So much for downside risks: let us now look at upside potentials. The domestic view of the outlook for 
the  Japanese  economy  tends  to  be  pessimistic,  due  probably  to  the  experience  of  low  growth  that 
lasted for more than a decade. The view held overseas, however, has become increasingly optimistic, 
with  the  October  8  issue  of  The  Economist  carrying  a  feature  titled  "The  sun  also  rises."  In  fact, 
firmness in Japanese stock prices since this summer owes significantly to the active investment by 
foreign investors. As for the Bank's outlook, it assumes that corporate behavior will generally remain 
cautious.  However,  with  the  three  excesses  having  run  their  course,  and  the  marked  progress  in 
restructuring corporate balance sheets, it is probable that firms will become more confident about the 
economic  outlook  as  the  economic  recovery  continues.  In  that  case,  firms,  supported  by 
accommodative financial conditions, are likely to increase business fixed investment and hiring. Under 
such circumstances, if there are stronger positive influences from the corporate sector to households 
via  increases  in  employee  income,  household  spending  may  increase  further.  These  developments 
would entail an acceleration of economic recovery.  
Developments in asset prices such as stock prices and land prices reflect people's perceptions about 
the  economic  outlook.  Asset  prices  are  determined  based  on  future  cash  flow  expected  to  be 
generated,  and  they  therefore  contain  important  information  about  people's  view  of  the  future. 
Recently,  stock  prices  have  been  strong,  and  land  prices  in  some  parts  of  Tokyo  and  other  major 
metropolitan areas have started to rise, suggesting an upturn in people's expectations regarding the 
economy. However, land prices on the whole continue to be on the decline. Thus, not all asset prices 
are increasing, reflecting continuing caution in people's perception of the outlook. Since developments 
in asset prices reflect changes in people's perceptions as well as influence investment activity of firms 
and households, they require close attention.  
Outlook for prices  
IV. 
Given this economic outlook, the environment influencing prices is likely to change gradually.  
The output gap is expected to continue narrowing moderately as the economy continues to recover. 
Firms' and households' expectations regarding prices play an important role in the formation of prices 
via,  for  example,  firms'  price  setting  stance.  Various  survey  results  show  that  the  number  of 
respondents perceiving  that  prices  will rise  in  the  future has  been  increasing  gradually  since  hitting 
bottom in 2001-02.  
The consumer price index (CPI; excluding fresh food) has been decreasing on a year-on-year basis 
since the middle of 1998 for more than seven years now. Recently, however, the pace of decline has 
slowed considerably, with a 0.1 percent decline in September year-on-year. As the effects of special 
factors such as the decline in rice prices and the reduction in electricity and telephone charges fall off, 
the year-on-year changes in the CPI are likely to turn positive toward the end of 2005. Thereafter, in 
this environment, the year-on-year changes are expected to remain positive. Forecasts of the majority 
of Policy Board members for the CPI in fiscal 2006 are between 0.4 and 0.6 percent on a year-on-year 
basis.  
Despite the fact that the economy has been growing at a pace above its potential since fiscal 2003, 
over  two  years  now,  and  the  output  gap  continues  to  improve,  the  impact  on  prices  has  remained 
small. This is mainly because the decline in unit labor costs-labor costs per unit of production of goods 
and  services-which  was  brought  about  by  a  decline  in  wages  and  a  rise  in  productivity  worked  to 
contain upward pressure on prices. Unit labor costs are unlikely to record a clear increase in the near 
future because the rise in productivity will still tend to hold them down despite the increases in wages. 
In this situation, it is unlikely that the pace of increase in prices will accelerate.  
The  impact  of  economic  activity  on  prices  has  been  weakening,  and  this  has  been  a  global 
phenomenon. However, it is uncertain whether this will continue in the future. A sustained narrowing of 
the  output  gap  may  cause  a  greater-than-anticipated  increase  in  inflationary  expectations.  This  can 
prompt firms to pass increases in costs, for example, a rise in input prices, on to sales prices. Although 
it is most likely that the rise in prices will be contained, the risk of an upward deviation in prices should 
nevertheless be kept in mind.  
4 
 BIS Review 79/2005
Conduct of monetary policy  
V. 
It  has  been  four  and  a  half  years  since  the  Bank  first  introduced  the  framework  of  the  quantitative 
easing policy. This policy is unprecedented not only in the history of Japan but anywhere in the world. 
In the spring of 2001, Japan faced an economic deterioration and a decline in prices, and concerns 
about  financial  system  stability  intensified.  With  regard  to  monetary  policy,  short-term  interest  rates 
were already practically zero percent and the Bank could not reduce them further. In response to this 
situation, the Bank introduced the current quantitative easing policy framework, which has two pillars: 
provision by the Bank of ample liquidity to the money market so that the outstanding balance of current 
accounts at the Bank exceeds the amount of required reserves; and a commitment by the Bank to 
continue  with  this  ample  provision  of  liquidity  until  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI 
(excluding fresh food) registers zero percent or higher on a sustainable basis.  
When there were strong concerns over the stability of the financial system, the Bank's ample provision 
of  liquidity,  which  met  financial  institutions'  liquidity  demand,  stabilized  financial  markets  and 
maintained  accommodative  financial  conditions,  and  thus  contributed  to  averting  a  contraction  in 
economic activity. This was the case in 2001-02 when the disposal of NPLs at major banks reached its 
peak and the partial removal of blanket deposit insurance drew near, and in 2003 when public funds 
were  injected  into  Resona  Bank.  The  commitment  by  the  Bank,  together  with  market  participants' 
expectations for consumer prices, has led them to expect that short-term interest rates will remain at 
zero  percent for  some  time,  and  as  a result  longer-term  interest rates  have remained stable  at  low 
levels.  The  quantitative  easing  policy  has  thus  been  contributing  greatly  to  the  recovery  in  Japan's 
economy through the Bank's provision of ample liquidity and its policy commitment.  
The  effects  of  the  quantitative  easing  policy  have  been  changing  with  developments  in  economic 
activity and prices as well as the state of the financial system since its introduction. With regard to the 
effects of ample liquidity provision by the Bank, an effect of reducing very short-term interest rates to 
practically zero percent remains unchanged. However, as described earlier, with the progress in the 
disposal of NPLs, precautionary demand for liquidity has declined substantially, reflecting diminishing 
concerns over financial system stability. The effects of the policy commitment by the Bank have also 
been  changing.  In  principle,  the  expected  duration  of  the  quantitative  easing  policy  based  on  the 
Bank's commitment can either lengthen or shorten depending on market participants' expectations for 
prices. With more market participants recently expecting that the year-on-year rate of change in the 
CPI  will  be  a  positive  figure  in  the  near  future,  the  duration  of  the  policy  as  expected  by  market 
participants is shortening. As a result, the policy commitment is gradually losing its influence on the 
formation of longer-term interest rates. This is a natural consequence considering the characteristics 
of the commitment.  
As a result of the above changes, the stimulative effects of the quantitative easing policy on economic 
activity and prices are at present increasingly coinciding with the effects of short-term interest rates 
being at practically zero percent.  
As  for  a  change  of  policy  framework,  the  Bank  will  judge  whether  the  policy  commitment  has 
effectively  been  fulfilled,  in  other  words,  whether  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  is 
registering zero percent or higher on a sustainable basis, by monitoring economic activity and price 
developments.  Assuming  that  economic  activity  and  price  developments  follow  the  projection 
described  in  the  October  Outlook  Report,  the  possibility  of  a  departure  from  the  present  monetary 
policy framework is likely to increase over the course of fiscal 2006. We cannot tell exactly when the 
Bank  will  actually  change  the  framework,  since  it  depends  on  future  economic  and  financial 
developments.  In  any  case,  the  Bank  will  appropriately  determine  the  timing  in  view  of  these 
developments.  
Such a change of framework would mean a reduction in the outstanding balance of current accounts 
at the Bank toward a level in line with required reserves, and a shift in the main operating target for 
money  market  operations  from  the  outstanding  balance  of  current  accounts  to  short-term  interest 
rates.  At  present,  the  effects  of  the  quantitative  easing  policy  are  increasingly  coinciding  with  the 
effects  of  short-term  interest  rates  being  at  practically  zero  percent.  Thus,  a  change  of  policy 
framework itself does not imply an abrupt change in terms of effects of policy. There will then be a 
period of very low short-term interest rates followed by a gradual adjustment to a level consistent with 
economic activity.  
Conceptually, the course of monetary policy after the change of framework will be a reduction in the 
outstanding balance of current accounts, a period of very low short-term interest rates, and a gradual 
adjustment to a level consistent with economic activity.  
BIS Review 79/2005 
 5
How exactly the Bank will proceed, in other words, how the Bank will reduce the outstanding balance 
of current accounts and set the level and time path of short-term interest rates thereafter, will depend 
on future developments in economic activity and prices as well as financial conditions. In this regard, if 
it  is  judged  that  upward  pressure  on  prices  continues  to  be  contained  and  the  economy  follows  a 
sustainable and balanced growth path, this is likely to give the Bank latitude in conducting monetary 
policy through the entire process. Based on this, I would like to point out two things.  
First,  when  reducing  the  outstanding  balance  of  current  accounts,  the  Bank  will  need  to  monitor 
financial market conditions carefully. With the Bank's quantitative easing policy, financial institutions 
have  for  a  long  period  of  time  been  conducting  their  financing  based  on  the  existence  of  the  large 
current  account  balance  at  the  Bank.  Although  the  functioning  of  the  money  market  will  recover 
eventually, investment and raising of funds in financial markets may be hindered for a while after the 
change of framework.  
And  second,  it  is  essential  to  ensure  that  financial markets  are  able  to  perform  the  pricing  function 
smoothly, reflecting underlying economic and price conditions. The markets in principle perform the 
function  of  envisaging  future  monetary  policy  based  on  economic  and  price  conditions  and  also 
perform the function of forming interest rates. However, given that there is no precedent for a change 
from the current policy framework to another, it is important for the purpose of smooth formation of 
interest rates that the Bank clearly explain its assessment of economic activity and prices as well as 
the thinking behind the conduct of monetary policy, and endeavor to stabilize market expectations. In 
order  to  realize  sustainable  economic  growth  and  stable  prices,  the  Bank  will  take  measures  in  an 
appropriate and timely manner in response to economic and financial developments.  
Conclusion  
I  have  talked  mainly  about  the  content  of  the  October  Outlook  Report  as  well  as  expected 
developments  in  Japan's  economy  and  the  thinking  behind  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  The 
economy is on the threshold of a new path of growth, after an adjustment process lasting over ten 
years since the bursting of the economic bubble. The Bank will continue to conduct monetary policy 
appropriately and support this growth from the financial side. 
6 
 BIS Review 79/2005
