Kristina Persson: The property market and the current economic situation 
Speech by Ms Kristina Persson, Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, Uppsala, 11 October 
2005. 
 Introduction 
Thank you for inviting me to take part in this early breakfast meeting. 
As  you  presumably  know  already,  the  issue  of  house  prices  has  recently  been  on  the  agenda  for 
discussions by the Riksbank’s Executive Board. So I thought I would begin by presenting my view of 
the  role  that  indebtedness  and  house  prices  play  in  general  for  our  monetary  policy.  Then  I  shall 
discuss whether there is a risk that the strong growth in lending and the rapid price increases in the 
housing market may accentuate a cyclical slowdown in the future. In conclusion I shall talk about the 
current economic situation in general in the run-up to our interest-rate decision next Wednesday. 
We are by no means the only central bank in the world that is discussing house prices. For a number 
of years now the rapid increase in house prices and the strong growth in credit to households have 
been  on  the  agenda  of  monetary  policy  decision-makers  in  many  countries.  While  the  growth  of 
lending has recently slackened in many countries, the level of household indebtedness is generally 
high. In Sweden the ratio of debt to disposable income is currently over 125 per cent, which is close to 
the levels that were reached in the early 1990s. In the UK, where the annual increase in house prices 
amounted  to  approximately  4  per  cent  the  second  quarter  this  year,  the  ratio  of  debt  to  disposable 
income is around 150 per cent.  
In  Sweden,  house  prices  have  more  than  doubled  in  the  past  decade,  with  a  par-ticularly  strong 
increase in metropolitan regions. Part of the explanation is that household incomes have also risen 
rapidly in this period. It is reasonable to assume that house prices follow income in the long run. What 
gives some cause for concern is that house prices and household debt have both been rising very 
much faster than income and have continued to do so this year. At the end of the second quarter this 
year,  house  prices  had  risen  by  more  than  7  per  cent  and  house-hold  debt  by  over  10  per  cent 
compared with a year ago. Since 1995, house prices and debt have both risen over 40 per cent more 
than income. 
The pertinent issues have mainly been whether there are “bubbles” in the housing market in the sense 
that house prices have deviated markedly from what can be motivated by underlying factors such as 
disposable income and interest rate costs, and whether households have taken on too much debt in 
relation to their future ability to pay. Another question that has come up in recent years in Sweden, as 
well as in England and elsewhere, is why the strong credit growth and rising house prices have not 
been accompanied by increased consumption. Rising wealth ought to stimulate consumption and low 
interest  rates  ought  to  lead  to  saving  being  dampened,  as  well  as  affecting  the  demand  for  loans. 
Instead, the aggregated picture seems to be that loans have been channelled to saving in financial 
assets. One explanation may be that my generation has stepped up saving in financial assets, partly 
because the stockmarket fall eroded a part of our retirement capital. 
What role do loans and house prices play in monetary policy? 
The Riksbank has the statutory objective of maintaining price stability, defined by the Executive Board 
as a CPI increase of 2 per cent plus or minus 1 percentage point. This is the target that governs the 
construction  of  monetary  policy.  Normally  we  aim  to  achieve  the  target  within  a  two-year  period. 
However,  as  we  have  described  in  a  Clarification  of  monetary  policy  published  in  1999,  there  are 
sometimes reasons to allow a little longer to reach the target. 
When we make monetary policy decisions, we take into account how indebtedness and house prices 
may  affect  future demand  and  inflation.  The extent to  which short-run  variations  in  the  interest  rate 
affect property and other asset prices is highly uncertain. Buying a house is a long-term decision and 
short-run,  cyclically  determined  variations  in  the  interest  rate  ought  not  to  have  more  than  a  very 
marginal influence on rational households’ propensity to take house mortgage loans.  
   1/5 
One of the most important factors for developments in house prices in the longer term is household 
income.  Other  notable  factors  are  the  structure  of  the  population,  new  housing  construction  and 
access  to  loans.  Regardless  of  what  it  is  that  generates  an  increase  in  house  prices,  this probably 
stimulates household consumption via the wealth effect, just as a house price fall has the opposite 
effect. An increase in the value of houses and tenant-owned apartments can be realised in part by 
using the property as loan collateral. If this happens when interest rates are low, households will be 
more interested in mortgaging the increased value of their property in order to buy durable goods such 
as cars and household appliances, for example. 
House  prices  therefore  have  significance  for  demand  and  thereby  for  monetary  policy.  The  lending 
potential  and  interest  rates  of  banks  and  mortgage  institutions  are  also  important.  Access  to  loans 
increases the chances of realising an increase in value but also makes it possible to finance a house 
purchase. 
In addition to the inflation target, the Riksbank has the task of promoting finan-cial stability, which is a 
prerequisite  for  a  proper  implementation  of  monetary  policy.  A  functional  payment  system,  capital 
supply  and  arrangements  for  spreading  risks  are  a  precondition  for  the  efficient  working  of  the 
economy in general. An important instrument for the Riksbank’s work on stability is the twice-yearly 
publication of a report that evaluates the risks in the financial system. Lending to households and the 
development of house prices have been recurrent themes in the Financial Stability Report in recent 
years. Among other things, the reports have presented assessments of whether the banks’ credit risk 
exposures, for instance to households in Sweden, could threaten financial stability. 
The assessments of inflation normally presuppose that no major problems will arise in the financial 
system  ―  credit  supply,  payment  mediation  and  risk  sharing  are  assumed  to  function  normally.  If 
financial  stability  were  to  be  threatened,  that  would  of  course  have  to  be  taken  into  account  when 
deciding on monetary policy. 
Our assessments 
Households are not a direct threat to financial stability 
In  the  latest  Financial  Stability  Report,  published  in  June,  the  Riksbank  stated  that  the  risk  of 
households incurring large loan losses for Swedish banks is very small. So the rapid growth we have 
seen in lending to households does not constitute a threat to financial stability. Although indebtedness 
has increased markedly in the past decade, low interest rates have lightened the burden of servicing 
debt. In aggregated terms, interest expenditure adds up to little more than 3 per cent of household 
income, which can be compared with over 10 per cent in the early 1990s. The debt-servicing burden 
of  indebted  households  is  low.  Micro  studies  also  show  that  indebted  households  in  general  have 
comfortable margins and would therefore cope with interest expenditure even with interest rates that 
are considerably higher than at present. 
Approximately  70  per  cent  of  the  loans  have  been  obtained  from  mortgage  institutions  with  the 
residential  property  as collateral.  An  important  issue  in  the  analysis  of  stability  is  therefore  whether 
there is a risk of house prices falling sharply and thereby eroding the security value underlying loans to 
households. Security value is of no consequence as long as borrowers can service and repay their 
loans but if a household becomes unable to pay, it is important that the value of the pledge covers the 
loan. 
While  one  cannot  be  absolutely  sure  about  the  appropriate  long-term  price  level  for  houses  and 
tenant-owned apartments, the estimates the Riksbank has made in various contexts do suggest that 
fundamentals  such  as  incomes,  interest  rates  and  residential  construction  provide  a  fairly  good 
explanation of both house prices and loans in the past decade. This reduces the risk of house prices 
falling  sharply.  Moreover,  the  speculative  elements  in  the  housing  market  are  probably  small.  One 
reason  for  this  is  that  Swedish  households,  unlike  households  in  a  number  of  other  countries,  buy 
housing to live in rather than to make a profit. They do not buy a house merely to be able to sell it a 
little later and make a capital gain. This means that prices are not forced up in the same way as in a 
financial bubble like the one we saw on the stock market not so long ago. 
Neither is it remarkable that households have enlarged their debts so much since the mid 1990s. Debt 
ratios were low after the crisis in the early 1990s. House-holds became more interested in borrowing 
at the same time as the inflation-targeting regime gained increased credibility and the future became 
   2/5 
less uncertain. As it became possible to lower real interest rates, borrowing became cheaper. Low and 
stable  inflation  expectations  also  meant  that  in  the  long  run  households  could  count  on  nominal 
interest rates being lower than before. It is conceivable, moreover, that the low-inflation regime has 
enabled households to borrow more on account of low interest expenditure. 
Can there be a setback for consumer demand later on? 
Thus, neither the high level of debt nor the high house prices are considered to constitute a threat to 
the banking system. But could households’ inflated balance sheets tend to subdue consumption and 
growth later on? Is there a risk of households being forced to cut back sharply on consumption when 
interest rates sooner or later move up? And how will rising interest rates affect house prices? Will the 
decline in household wealth (in the form of housing) that could result from higher interest rates lead to 
decreased  consumption?  These  are  questions  we  try  to  take  into  account  when  assessing  the 
economic outlook on which monetary policy is based. There are no simple answers here either; as 
always, the decisions have to rest on assessments. 
Most things suggest, however, that the adjustments we can foresee after a future increase in interest 
rates belong to the normal transmission mechanism and will therefore occur in orderly forms. Provided 
households’ borrowing decisions have a rational basis and accordingly include realistic assumptions 
about future interest expenditure, there is nothing to suggest that higher interest rates will have drastic 
consequences. This applies to the effects of increased interest expenditure on house prices as well as 
on consumption. 
Still, one cannot disregard the risk that some households have been over-optimistic about their future 
incomes  and  the  future  level  of  interest  rates.  More  than  70  per  cent  of  new  lending  is  currently 
arranged at a variable interest rate. Moreover, the present level of interest rates is considerably below 
what  the  financial  markets  assume  it  will  be  in  time.  So  the  households  that  choose  to  stick  to  a 
variable rate must count on considerably increased interest expenditure further ahead, if interest rates 
develop in line with market expectations.  
Furthermore,  during  the  past  year  the  credit  spread  between  a  risk-free  government  bond  and  a 
housing bond has been virtually nil. All in all, mortgage institu-tions have therefore been able to offer 
very  low  rates  even  for  fixed-interest  loans.  The  combination  of  high  house  prices  and  low  interest 
rates has meant that many households have acquired very large liabilities. In that interest rates have 
been pushed down by a large variety of partly temporary factors, it is not inconceivable that their level 
will  double.  That  may  entail  a  heavy  burden  for  many  households  and  one  cannot  be  sure  they 
realised  this  when  they  decided  to  borrow  so  much.  The  longer  interest  rates  are  held  down  by 
temporary factors, the greater may be the risk that households perceive the low rates as a permanent 
phenomenon.  Even  if  they  cope  with  interest  expenditure  when  interest  rates  turn  upwards,  many 
households  may  be  obliged  to  cut  back  consumption  substantially,  which  would  tend  to  dampen 
demand. 
At the same time, higher interest rates can subdue the increase in house prices. If the higher interest 
rates are accompanied by an increased supply of dwellings, that could also tend to hold house prices 
back. Even the demographic age structure may have a slight restraining effect on the future housing 
market.  The  population  in  active  age  groups  grew  throughout  the  1990s  but  since  2000  there  has 
been  a  minor  reversal.  The  increased  proportion  in  retirement  may  enlarge  the  supply  of  sizeable 
apartments and houses. However, changes in the composition of supply and demand occur slowly as 
a rule and are unlikely to lead to any drastic price adjustments. Moreover, higher interest rates will 
probably coincide with higher growth and increased household income, which by themselves counter 
the  factors  that  subdue  price  developments.  Assessing  the  magnitude  of  the  overall  effect  will  be 
difficult but most things suggest that prices will not fall sharply even if interest rates move up. 
Why has saving been so high? 
Historically, increased debt and rising house prices have been accompanied by a higher consumption 
ratio.  This  pattern  is  to  be  expected  in  particular  when  the  driving  force  comes  from  lower  interest 
rates: rising house prices augment house-hold wealth and together with low interest rates this points 
to increased house-hold consumption. The consumption ratio has been low, however, ever since 2001 
despite  the  increased  lending  and  higher  house  prices.  That  households  both  borrow  and  save  so 
much  and  do  so  simultaneously  may  seem  paradoxical.  The  major  share  of  the  loans  is  probably 
   3/5 
connected with house purchases in the second-hand market. The cash flows that are generated when 
borrowing rises without a corresponding aggregated counterpart in the financing of new housing can 
be used for either consumption or financial investment. 
At the aggregated level it accordingly looks as though in recent years loans have gone to saving. We 
have seen the same development in, for example, the UK. We have no simple explanation of what 
underlies this. One conceivable explanation is that the stockmarket fall in 2000 and the subsequent 
economic slowdown stimulated prudential saving on account of labour market uncertainty and also led 
to increased saving by those who were directly hit by the share price fall. Population groups that are 
approaching retirement, for example, may have increased their saving in financial assets in order to 
restore  their  wealth  after  the  stockmarket  fall.  Moreover,  many  elderly  people  may  have  chosen  to 
move to a cheaper dwelling and thereby converted some of their real wealth into a financial asset. 
At the same time, households unaffected by the stockmarket fall that are younger and unconcerned 
about their future income may have continued to demand expensive dwellings since the interest costs 
have been so low. As the available statistics are mainly at an aggregated level, however, it is difficult 
to  find  evidence  of  the  behaviour  behind  what  we  have  seen.  But  if  this  interpretation  holds,  it  is 
reasonable that consumption picks up when labour market uncertainty diminishes and when wealth 
has been restored by a combination of saving and rising asset prices. 
The current situation for monetary policy 
With that I shall move on to say something about our main scenario for economic developments in the 
years ahead. 
The international picture  
The outlook in the rest of the world is mainly bright. As we see it, international growth will remain high 
this  year.  Conditions  are  also  favourable  for  a  continuation  of  high  growth  in  the  next  few  years, 
although we do count on a somewhat more subdued rate than last year. Important driving forces are 
persistently  strong  economic  activity  in  the  USA  and  further  powerful economic  expansion  in  China 
and the rest of Asia. 
Last spring there were some signals that the slowdown in the international economy would be more 
marked than we had counted on earlier. It was mainly growth in the euro area that seemed to have 
become  more  subdued  than  expected.  In  June,  our  main  assessment  was  that  this  amounted  to  a 
temporary dip in international activity. Our analysis of the risks in the forecast did, however, include 
the possibility of the slowdown being broad and pronounced. But the information received during the 
summer has supported the assessment that last spring’s dip in international activity was transient. 
At the same time, the continued increase in oil prices has to be weighed into the general assessment. 
It is hard to be certain about what has caused the high oil prices but there are many indications that an 
important factor is demand. The price rise is probably due to a combination of increased demand for 
oil from rapidly expanding economies such as China and India and the fact that production capacity 
has not yet been adjusted sufficiently. In recent months, it seems that another contributory factor has 
been uncertainty about the consequences of hurricane Katrina. It is reasonable to suppose that the oil 
price may fall back from the current high level but predicting the future price we should allow for is 
genuinely difficult. 
As to the consequences of the high oil price, it seems that the price rise to date has not appreciably 
curbed  global  growth.  This  is  probably  because  many  industrialised  countries  have  become  less 
dependent  on  oil.  In  Sweden,  for  example,  oil’s  contribution  to  energy  supply  has  decreased  from 
around 70 per cent in 1970 to just over 30 per cent in 2004. There has probably also been a balancing 
effect in that the high price of oil seems to have been generated in part by strong demand in Asia in 
particular. We therefore consider that the high oil price will subdue international growth to some extent 
in the coming year but will not entail any dramatic adjustment. However, the difficulty in assessing the 
effects of the high oil price does make this a central element in our picture of risks. 
Uncertainty  still  also  prevails  about  the  consequences  of  the  saving  imbalances  in  the  world  and 
above  all  the  large  deficit  on  the  US  current  account.  An  adjustment  of  current-account  balances 
would probably involve a weakening of the US dollar’s real exchange rate, through either lower US 
inflation relative to the rest of the world or a fall in the dollar. An adjustment of the imbalances would 
   4/5 
also be likely to raise the very long-term interest rates. If these changes were to occur quickly and 
unexpectedly, there would be a risk of decreased world market growth. 
The Swedish economy 
Signals of an economic slowdown last spring were also evident in Sweden but in June we counted on 
the dip being temporary, with a subsequent renewal of growth. So far, the new statistics since then 
seem  to  confirm  our  assessment.  The  second-quarter  national  accounts  show  that  growth 
strengthened about as much as we had expected. An acceleration seems to have begun in the growth 
of private consumption, accompanied by a continuation of the last year’s upswing in investment, with a 
spread  from  residential  construction  to  the  corporate  sector  in  general.  In  other  words,  domestic 
demand seems to be on the way to taking over as the main driving force for the ongoing expansion.  
It also looks as though last month’s Budget Bill will stimulate consumption in both the private and the 
public sector, above all next year. So we judge that fiscal policy will be more expansionary than we 
assumed in June. Today, moreover, there is the effect of a monetary policy that is more expansionary 
than at the time of our assessment in June. Of course we foresee that this, too, will contribute to a 
somewhat stronger increase in domestic demand than was assumed in June. 
Exports were weaker than expected in the first half-year but recent signals (monthly export statistics 
and business survey data on export orders) point to some increase. The favourable international trend 
is generating general conditions for good export growth. At present a weak krona is contributing to the 
stimulus. 
All  this  points  to  some  acceleration  of  growth  next  year,  followed  by  a  good  continuation  in  the 
following year. 
The labour market 
The  situation  in  the  labour  market  is still  difficult to  assess.  Due to  technical changes  in  the  labour 
force  surveys,  interpreting  recent  developments  has  been  particularly  hazardous.  With  this 
reservation,  there  are  some  signs  that  the  labour  market  is  beginning  to  improve.  The  national 
accounts  indicate  that  hours  worked  started  to  rise  in  the  second  quarter  this  year.  So  it  looks  as 
though  firms’  possibilities  of  stepping  up  production  without  taking  on  more  labour  are  becoming 
increasingly limited. The leading indicators for the labour market also point to an improvement. This 
includes fewer layoffs and more job vacancies.   
Inflation prospects 
In  June  we  envisaged  that  this  year’s  weaker  growth  would  mean  that  resource  utilisation  falls,  if 
anything, and then picks up slowly in the coming years. Inflation was judged to rise by degrees but 
remain moderate.  
I think that this assessment of future inflation still seems to be fairly close to the mark, although it does 
look as though growth and thereby resource utilisation could be somewhat higher than we counted on 
early  in  the  summer.  In  the  shorter  run,  the  effects  of  a  higher  oil  price  must  also  be  taken  into 
account. 
Still, there are a number of uncertainties that have to be included in the picture. Among other things, 
as I mentioned earlier, the high oil price’s impact on growth and inflation is difficult to gauge. A related 
issue  is  how  global  competition  is  likely  to  affect  international  price  pressure  in  the  coming  years. 
Another central question for inflation prospects is how high future productivity growth will be and thus 
how corporate costs will develop. 
How these factors are weighted together at present in our overall assessment of inflation is something 
to which we shall be returning on 20 October when our next Inflation Report is published. 
Thank you. 
 
 
   5/5 
