Glenn Stevens: Governance arrangements for effective public financial policies 
– a central banker's perspective 
Remarks  by  Mr  Glenn  Stevens,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to  the  APEC 
Business  Advisory  Council,  the  Asian  Bankers'  Association  and  the  Pacific  Economic  Co-operation 
Council Symposium on Promoting Good Corporate Governance and Transparency in APEC Financial 
Institutions, Melbourne, 19 October 2005.  
 There is, these days, a great deal of discussion about corporate governance. This is largely because 
governance  arrangements  thought  (with  hindsight)  to  be  deficient  shared  the  blame  for  some 
spectacular corporate failures in the latter stages of the US tech boom of the late 1990s. Of course 
such problems are not that new. Indeed, one could safely assert that governance problems, broadly 
defined,  can  be  found  in  the  margins  of  most  of  the  financial  debacles  of  history;  on  plenty  of 
occasions, they played a starring role. In Australia's own case, the collapses of the empires of some of 
the celebrated 'entrepreneurs' of the 1980s revealed serious failures of a governance nature (though 
not only of that nature).  
Given that so much has been written on the topic, there is probably not much that I could say which 
would be new. In fact, the most important principles of good governance are surely little changed over 
the  long  run  of  history,  and  are  mostly  simple  good  sense,  combined  with  integrity.  A  sense  by 
directors  of  fiduciary  duty,  independence,  honesty,  diligence,  accountability  and  assurance  surely 
have  always  lain  at  the  heart  of  good  governance,  be  it  in  corporations,  governments  or  the  local 
school  canteen.  Much  of  the  current  work  on  governance  seems  to  be  trying  to  embody  such 
principles in a more explicit framework.  
Rather  than  trying  to  extend  any  of  that  detailed  discussion,  I  want  to  focus  on  a  few  high-level 
principles  for  governance arrangements  affecting national  financial  systems.  I  will  interpret  the  term 
'governance'  broadly,  to  include  not  just  the  structure  of  decision-making  in  organisations  but  the 
general set of arrangements in the system. I will speak from the perspective of a central bank – which 
is where my experience as a Board member lies.  
Let's begin by asking what we want from a financial system in a market economy. In brief, we want a 
set of arrangements which facilitate: 
• 
the  intermediation  of  private  saving  and  investment,  fostering  resource  allocation  so  that 
saving earns the highest risk-adjusted return, and that those with the skills to deploy capital 
can get it, and at the cheapest price;  
an efficient, reliable and safe way of making payments;  
mechanisms for private economic entities to manage their risks (either paying others to take 
the risk or accepting payment to take on risk);  
availability of suitable financing for public-sector activities;  
the avoidance of financial crises, if at all possible, or, if not possible, at least minimisation of 
their severity.  
  This  is  a  rather  ambitious  agenda.  For  several  centuries  we  have  been  groping  towards  better 
arrangements, and it would be arrogant to assume we have nothing further to learn.  
But we have learned a few things about the importance of governance. One is that in banking, while 
the normal principles of corporate governance apply, that is not quite enough. Banking isn't just any 
other  business.  Its  role  in  facilitating  the  business  of  the  nation  means  that  when  banking  goes 
seriously astray, the economy suffers more badly than it would if, say, the retailing industry got into 
trouble (as serious as the latter would be). Hence, certain higher standards of prudence are required 
of banks than of the average corporate entity, and there is more intrusive supervision of their activities. 
This is very important, but I will say no more about it, since the Chairman of APRA will speak later this 
morning.  
   1/4 
Let me focus instead on two other issues at more length. In particular, I shall cover first, governance 
arrangements for central banks, and second, relationships between governments and private financial 
markets.  
An independent central bank committed to monetary and financial stability  
1.  
A  key  central  bank  commitment  is  to  preserve  the  value  of  money.  A  system  where  people  are 
prepared to part with their money in order to facilitate the deployment of capital rests heavily on the 
idea  that  when  they  get  it  back,  its  purchasing  power  is  not  eroded  by  high  inflation.  Central  bank 
governance is critical to achieving that. The central bank must, of course, have an adequate legislative 
basis – a legal standing that gives it powers and defines its objectives, including price stability. But 
apart  from  that,  about  the  most  important  governance  condition  is  independence  in  the  day-to-day 
conduct of policy, so that an appropriate focus on the long run can be maintained.  
The  idea  of  central  bank  independence  from  the  political  process  is  widely  accepted  now  in  the 
western industrialised world. This is a result partly of academic thinking about the structuring of the 
decision-making  process,  but  mainly  of  long  experience  of  the  alternative  model.  I  am  not  sure 
whether  such  independence  is  as  widely  accepted  in  Asia.  Of  course,  the  need  for  strong 
independence  so  as  to  enhance  anti-inflation  credibility  has  not  been  as  big  an  issue  in  Asia  as  in 
some other regions, because inflation performance in Asia has mostly been very good. But the same 
principle  arises  in  the  conduct  of  bank  supervision,  whether  that  be  in  the  central  bank  or  another 
body:  the  officials  in  charge  need  to  operate  within  a  clearly  understood  framework,  but  without 
political interference in their day-to-day decisions.  
Central bank independence needs to be more than just of the political variety though: it also means 
the central bank having a capability of resisting the short-termism of financial markets (and, for that 
matter, the occasional intellectual fad which emanates from academia). Key to a central bank's role in 
fostering financial stability will be a capacity and willingness, on occasion, to cast a sceptical eye on 
pricing of assets and risk, and to question the idea, always heard in times of euphoria, that 'this time it 
is different'.  
Naturally, this comes with countervailing disciplines on the central bank of a governance nature. With 
operational independence comes the requirement to inform the public what we are doing, and why, 
and  an  acceptance  that  we  will  face  public  and  Parliamentary  scrutiny  for  our  actions.  So 
communication, to facilitate accountability, is important. There are some differences between central 
banks here: some communicate more fully and more frequently than others. But the similarities are 
probably  greater  than  the  differences.  In  most  cases  these  days,  the  schedule  of  decision-making 
meetings  is  known;  the  goals  of  policy  are  fairly  clear;  and  policy  makers  release  a  great  deal  of 
information about the way they are reading the economy and why they took the decisions they did.  
Alongside this accountability comes an increased focus on the role, composition and processes of the 
body which makes the policy decision. In some central banks, that body is a group of full-time experts; 
in others, it is a single individual. In our own case at the RBA, the decision-making body includes a 
majority of non-executive directors who generally bring a wide range of expertise and experience from 
outside the specialised field of central banking.  
There  is,  from  time  to  time,  discussion  about  which  set  of  arrangements  is  best,  and  reasonable 
people can and do differ on this. But experience seems to be that several types of decision-making 
structure can work acceptably well. The question 'who is on the board?' is important, but perhaps not 
as important as the questions 'what are the board's goals?' and 'does the board have the tools, and 
the independence, to pursue them?'  
It  goes  without  saying  that  a  central  bank  must  also  have  the  highest  reputation  for  probity,  which 
carries obvious requirements for the behaviour of board members, Governors, management and staff. 
But in addition, as in the commercial arena, it must also have, and be seen to have, strong formal 
internal  governance  processes  –  in  financial  management,  audit  (including  external  audit)  and  risk 
management  –  so  as  to  be  able  to  provide  appropriate  assurance  to  its  community.  As  in  the 
commercial world, risk management is a rapidly growing area in central banks. It is likely, moreover, 
that an increasing share of the assistance given to emerging market countries in the next decade will 
be in helping them develop their own risk management and auditing capabilities.  
   2/4 
Arm's length dealing with financial markets  
2.  
The  second  key  arrangement  for  a  well-functioning  financial  system  –  again  using  a  fairly  broad 
definition  of  the  word  'governance'  –  is  that  the  public  sector  deals  at  arm's  length  with  financial 
markets. In other words, markets set financial prices and allocate financial resources.  
There are two dimensions here.  
First, governments should pay the market price for resources that they seek to use for public policy 
purposes. This means borrowing in the market (if borrowing is needed) at the market rate, not at an 
artificially reduced rate from banks or the central bank. (This is, of course, a key element of central 
bank independence. A central bank can't seriously hope to run an independent monetary policy if the 
demands  of  government  finance  dominate  its  balance  sheet.)  For  markets  to  be  able  to  price 
government  borrowing  properly,  they  need  some  information  about  governments'  intentions  –  a 
degree of fiscal transparency is required. Such transparency is a good 'governance' principle for public 
policy  anyway;  countries  which  have  adopted  it,  including  Australia,  find  this  is  ultimately  repaid  by 
governments being able to obtain funding more cheaply.  
Second,  care  must  be  taken  when  governments direct  financial resources  by  using  their  ownership 
stakes  in  financial  institutions.  At  early  stages  of  development,  there  may  be  a  strong  case  for 
extensive public-sector involvement, where the private system is in its infancy. This was seen to be the 
case in Australia in earlier times. But as time goes by and the private sector becomes more vibrant, 
the benefits of extensive public-sector participation have to be weighed against the problems that it 
can bring.  
One such problem is the potential conflict between being a participant in the commercial sector and a 
regulator of it. This was a feature of the RBA itself, which began life as a publicly owned commercial 
bank  and  then  saw  central  banking  functions  grow  in  importance  to  the  point  where  the  two  were 
separated in 1960.  
In addition to managing such potential conflicts, governments have to be mindful of the financial risks 
to which they can be exposed in having ownership stakes in financial institutions. There are a host of 
governance  issues  associated  with  public  ownership  of  business  enterprises,  which  have  been 
extensively  canvassed  elsewhere.1  There  seems  no  good  reason  for  the  general  governance 
principles for publicly owned enterprises espoused by bodies like the OECD not to be applied where 
the  enterprises  are  financial  ones.  These  stress  a  strong  legal  framework,  a  clear  role  for  boards, 
appropriate relationships with other shareholders, disclosure requirements, etc.  
But it should be stressed that in a financial institution, more so than perhaps in most other businesses, 
prudent  management  of  risk  is  critical,  and  governance  arrangements  have  a  key  role  to  play.  In 
Australia  in  the  late  1980s  and  early  1990s,  governance  of  banks  owned  and  guaranteed  by  State 
governments,  in  particular,  evidently  was  not  strong  enough  to  ensure  those  banks  and  their 
associated  entities  were  managed  prudently.  As  a  result,  some  State-owned  banks  got  into  trouble 
and the owners – i.e. the taxpayers – of two States bore the losses. This was funded by higher taxes 
for some years. Whatever good reasons there might once have been for publicly owned banks – such 
as,  in  Australia's  early  history,  to  engender  some  public  confidence  in  the  banking  system  in  its 
formative  stages,  or  (later)  to  provide  competition  for  the  private  banks  –  the  costs  seem  to  have 
outweighed any benefits by this time.  
Today, there are no government-owned banking entities in Australia, and the principle of 'arm's length' 
dealing between governments and private financial markets is well entrenched. That allows markets to 
play  their proper  function  in  the  long  run  of  allocating  resources effectively  (even  if  not  optimally  at 
every moment). It also keeps public-sector entities focused on their roles as custodians and regulators 
of the system, without adding the conflicts and risks associated with being an owner of capital at risk in 
the system.  
                                                      
1   See, 
for  example, 
(2005)  
(http://www.oecd.org/document/33/0,2340,en_2649_37439_34046561_1_1_1_37439,00.html),  or  in  Australia,  Review  of 
(2003) 
the  Corporate  Governance 
(http://www.finance.gov.au/GovernanceStructures/docs/The_Uhrig_Report_July_2003.pdf). 
the  OECD  Guidelines  on  Corporate  Governance  of  State-Owned  Enterprises 
of  Statutory  Authorities 
and  Office  Holders 
(Uhrig  Report), 
   3/4 
Conclusion  
These are just two of many elements in getting the institutional and governance structure right in a 
national financial system, and no doubt more can be said. But generally speaking, policy-makers will 
want to foster competition, disclosure of information and well-functioning private markets on the one 
hand, and strong and independent public policy institutions operating within a clearly articulated policy 
framework on the other. Particular care is needed in cases where public ownership of enterprises has 
the potential to compromise the public interest.  
I trust that your discussions on governance today will be fruitful.  
 
 
   4/4 
