Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Metamorphosis into an international islamic banking 
and financial hub 
Special  address  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia,  at  the 
ASLI’s World Islamic Economic Forum, Kuala Lumpur, 1 October 2005. 
 Distinguished guests, Ladies and gentlemen, 
I  am  honoured  to  deliver  this  luncheon  address  on  the  occasion  of  the  inaugural  World 
Islamic  Economic  Forum  organised  by  the  Asian  Strategy  &  Leadership  Institute  (ASLI). 
Allow  me  to  take  this  opportunity  to  share  with  you  Malaysia’s  experience  in  evolving  a 
comprehensive domestic Islamic financial system that has now become an increasingly more 
internationally-integrated financial system, thereby strengthening our economic and financial 
inter-linkages with the rest of the world. 
In evolving the Islamic financial system, important considerations include the development of 
a  system  that  is  able  to  meet  the  changing  requirements  of  the  consumer  and  business 
community,  that is efficient and competitive, that is safe and sound and that is robust and 
resilient and able to withstand a more challenging and uncertain world environment. These 
considerations  are  vital  to  ensure  the  sustainability  of  the  system  not  only  as  a  form  of 
financial intermediation in the domestic economy but also as an integral component of the 
international financial system.  
Evolving a robust islamic financial system 
Malaysia  has  adopted  a  holistic  approach  in  developing  its  Islamic  financial  system.  Our 
initial focus was to develop a comprehensive domestic Islamic financial system. The strategy 
has  been  to  institute  the  entire  financial  system  chain  to  ensure  its  smooth  functioning 
thereby contributing to a balanced allocation of financial and economic resources within the 
economy, and a greater diversification of risks within the system, and thus achieving overall 
stability  of  the  Islamic  financial  system.  The  initiatives  taken  include  building  the  required 
financial  institutions,  robust  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework,  effective  legal  and 
Shariah  framework,  the  financial  markets,  effective  payment  and  settlement  system, 
reinforced by the development of the skill talents, and putting in place the mechanism for the 
operation of the Central Bank. The development of this chain has promoted greater linkages 
and integration within the domestic Islamic financial system.  
Attention has therefore been given to the development of the key structural components of 
the  system,  comprising  the  Islamic  banking  industry,  the  takaful  industry,  the  non-banking 
institutions and the Islamic interbank and capital markets. These respective components of 
the  Islamic  financial  system  have  now  become  highly  integrated  and  interdependent.  This 
more diversified financial infrastructure has also enhanced the efficiency in the functioning of 
the overall financial system. 
The development of the Islamic financial system in Malaysia started with the establishment of 
Tabung  Haji  in  1969  as  the  first  Islamic  savings  institution.  This  was  followed  by  the 
establishment  of  full-fledged  Islamic  banking  and  non-banking  institutions.  A  year  after  the 
establishment of the first Islamic Bank in 1983, a takaful or Islamic insurance company was 
established under the Takaful Act. These developments were subsequently expanded with 
the  introduction  of  Islamic  windows  by  conventional  banking  institutions  where  Islamic 
products  and  services  could  be  offered  by  these  banking  institutions.  At  the  same  time, 
adequate firewalls have been instituted to ensure absolute separation of banking operations 
to avoid co-mingling between the Islamic and conventional funds so as to ensure the integrity 
of the Islamic banking operations.  
   1/5 
More recently, this structure has been strengthened. Conventional banking institutions that 
have achieved a critical mass in their Islamic finance operations have the option to transform 
their operations into a dedicated Islamic subsidiary. Within this framework, Islamic finance in 
Malaysia has proven to be resilient and able to function effectively and efficiently alongside 
the  conventional  financial  system.  The  ability  of  the  Islamic  banking  institutions  to  arrange 
and offer products with attractive and innovative features at competitive prices has appealed 
to both Muslim and non-Muslim customers, reflecting the competitiveness of Islamic finance 
as a form of financial intermediation. Since 2000, the domestic Islamic banking industry has 
been growing at an average of 18% per annum in terms of assets, while growth in the takaful 
industry was at an average of 28% per annum, with an increasingly more important role in 
supporting the growth and development process of the country.  
Attention  has  also  been  given  to  develop  both  the  Malaysian  Islamic  money  market  and 
capital  market.  A  wide  range  of  instruments  has  been  developed  to  facilitate  the  effective 
management of liquidity and funding by the Islamic financial institutions. This has facilitated 
the smooth flow of funds in the Islamic financial system. With the development of the bond 
market in Malaysia which now accounts for 81% of GDP, the Islamic private debt securities 
account  for  about  44%  of  the  total  outstanding  amount  of  private  debt  securities  in  the 
market, while the monthly traded volume of the Islamic money market is now about RM30 to 
RM40  billion.  The  money  market  also  effectively  serves  as  a  channel  for  the  conduct  of 
liquidity operations by Bank Negara Malaysia as part of its monetary policy.  
The rapid expansion of the Islamic financial services industry in Malaysia is also supported 
by a conducive legal and Shariah framework. In terms of the legal infrastructure, the Islamic 
Banking  Act  1983  and  Takaful  Act  1984  governs  the  conduct  of  the  Islamic  banking 
institutions  and  takaful  operators  respectively.  There  is  also  the  Government  Funding  Act 
which  governs  the  issuance  of  government  Islamic  instruments.  A  dedicated  High  Court 
judge has also been assigned to preside over cases relating to Islamic banking and finance. 
An arbitration centre is also available to deal with disputes. The Central Bank Act has also 
been amended to provide for the establishment of a Shariah Advisory Council at the Central 
Bank  as  the  sole  authority  and  reference  on  all  Shariah  matters.  The  treatment  of  tax 
neutrality has also been accorded to Islamic financial transactions.  
To  ensure  the  soundness  and  stability  of  the  Islamic  financial  system  the  regulatory  and 
supervisory framework has also been improved for the Islamic financial institutions, with the 
incorporation  of  stronger  standards  for  corporate  governance,  transparency,  disclosure, 
accountability, market discipline, risk management and customer protection. In addition, the 
payment system has also been continually upgraded to ensure efficient and effective clearing 
and settlement of payments. It is now highly automated with the ability to handle scriptless 
debt  securities  trading,  processing  and  settlement.  By  providing  a  real  time  settlement 
system  for  inter-bank  fund  transfers,  the  credit  and  settlement  risk  in  the  Islamic  financial 
system has been minimised.  
Attention  has  also  been  given  to  human  talent  management  to  create  a  sufficient  pool  of 
competent  bankers  essential  to  spearhead  innovation  in  Islamic  financial  products  and 
services. To meet the increasing manpower requirements, institutions of higher learning and 
the  Islamic  banking  and  finance  institutes  have  also  initiated  new  programmes  on  Islamic 
finance.  
Leading initiatives in the global integration 
Islamic  finance  in  Malaysia  has  now  taken  on  a  new  dimension  to  become  more 
internationally  integrated.  This  is  part  of  the  strategy  to  evolve  Malaysia  as  an  integrated 
international  Islamic  financial  hub  that  will  have  a  greater  role  in  facilitating  international 
economic and financial flows. 
   2/5 
The  liberalisation  of  the  Islamic  financial  system  in  Malaysia  commenced  in  2004  with  the 
issuance  of  three  new  Islamic  bank  licences  to  foreign  Islamic  financial  institutions.  These 
new entrants with distinct capabilities and strengths will not only participate in the growing 
domestic Islamic banking industry, but will also be able to tap new markets in the region. This 
initiative will also promote healthy competition, thereby contributing to elevate the domestic 
industry to new levels of dynamism. In addition to this initiative, up to 49% foreign interest is 
permitted in the Islamic subsidiaries of the conventional banking institutions and in the takaful 
companies. The increased international integration is also reinforced by our own institutions 
venturing beyond our domestic borders, in particular to the Asian region and to the Middle 
East. This international integration would contribute towards facilitating greater cross-border 
flows  in  terms  of  increased  trade  and  investment  transactions,  thereby  strengthening  the 
global economic and financial inter-linkages.  
Apart from banking, Malaysia is also initiating efforts to promote takaful internationally. This 
is  being  done  in  close  coordination  with  the  Islamic  Development  Bank  where  a  taskforce 
has been established to spearhead, among others, the development and promotion of trade, 
investment, Islamic banking as well as takaful and retakaful industries among OIC member 
countries.  Among  the  main  initiatives  to  be  undertaken  under  a  Memorandum  of 
Understanding signed between Malaysia and the Islamic Development Bank is to specifically 
promote and expand takaful and retakaful businesses in the member countries.  
A  further  initiative  by  Malaysia  was  to  access  the  international  capital  market  with  the 
issuance  of  global  Islamic  financial  instruments.  The  Government  of  Malaysia  made  this 
inaugural  primary  issuance  of  a  globally-accepted  sovereign  Islamic  sukuk  in  2002.  Since 
then, there have been several other issues by other countries. To-date, the total issuance of 
the four global sovereign sukuk has exceeded USD3.5 billion. The sukuk has broadened the 
investor base by creating a new asset class for both Islamic and conventional investors. This 
has  also  been  followed  by  the  issuance  of  global  corporate  sukuk,  which  now  amounts  to 
USD12  billion.  Several  of  these  products  are  listed  on  the  Labuan  international  financial 
exchange. 
In 2004, Malaysia liberalised the foreign exchange administrative rules to allow Multilateral 
Development Banks and multinational corporations to raise ringgit-denominated instruments 
in the Malaysian capital market. Towards this end, two institutions, the International Finance 
Corporation  and  the  World  Bank,  have  issued  ringgit-denominated  instruments  based  on 
Islamic principles in our market. This has contributed to enhancing the depth of the market.  
At the international level, Malaysia has also participated actively in initiatives to develop the 
supporting international Islamic financial architecture. The formation of the Islamic Financial 
Services  Board  (IFSB)  in  2002  is  one  of  the  most  important  achievements  in  this 
development  to  set  the  international  prudential  standards  for  Islamic  finance.  To-date,  the 
IFSB  has  made  commendable  progress,  and  this  includes  the  issuance  of  two  exposure 
drafts  on  capital  adequacy  and  on  risk  management.  Work  is  in  progress  for  three  other 
standards that relate to corporate governance, transparency and market discipline, and the 
supervisory  review  process.  The  IFSB  has  also  played  a  catalytic  role  in  expanding  its 
membership and outreach, thereby contributing further to the global recognition of the Islamic 
financial  system.  Today,  the  IFSB  has  78  members  from  all  over  the  world.  This  will 
contribute towards the standardisation of the prudential rules and more importantly contribute 
to the soundness and stability of the Islamic financial system.  
The International Islamic Financial Market, or the IIFM, which is another leading international 
initiative,  will  also  contribute  towards  promoting  the  development  of  both  the  primary  and 
secondary international Islamic financial market. IIFM provides the environment to link all the 
financial  centres  around  the  world  that  participate  in  Islamic  finance,  thereby  encouraging 
active  participation  by  both  Islamic  and  non-Islamic  financial  institutions  in  the  secondary 
market  for  Islamic  financial  instruments.  As  the  volume  increases,  it  would  strengthen  the 
inter-linkages and integration amongst the Islamic financial centres.  
   3/5 
In the area of Shariah, Bank Negara Malaysia is currently promoting intellectual discourse on 
Shariah issues. Our own Shariah scholars have contributed towards the rapid growth of the 
Islamic  financial  products.  Earlier  this  year  in  conjunction  with  the  IDB  Annual  General 
Meeting  that  was  held  in  Putrajaya,  the  opportunity  was  taken  to  bring  the  international 
Shariah scholars together to deliberate the issues and to foster greater understanding and 
convergence of the practices of Shariah. Bank Negara Malaysia has established a RM200 
million dedicated endowment fund to facilitate regular dialogues among the Shariah scholars, 
to  finance  research  and  scholarships,  and  to  facilitate  enhanced  interaction  between  the 
Shariah scholars and the industry practitioners.  
Malaysia  will  continue  to  initiate  international  endeavours  and  collaborate  closely  with  the 
Islamic financial community on developing the global Islamic financial system by dedicating 
our resources and commitment. 
Key challenges moving forward 
One of the key challenges in promoting greater linkages within the domestic Islamic financial 
system and integration with the international financial system is having the pool of talent and 
professional  skills.  Talents  are  an  important  pre-requisite  for  the  national  and  global 
development  of  the  Islamic  financial  system.  They  are  important  assets  that  will  drive 
innovation in the Islamic financial business and sustain its competitive strength.  
As  the  industry  moves  forward,  the  need  to  develop  the  range  of  products  and  services 
including risk mitigating products intensifies. These products are a necessity for the Islamic 
financial industry not only to meet the new and changing requirements of the domestic and 
international  economy  but  also  to  allow  for  hedging  against  potential  adverse  events  and 
uncertainties. This is important to strengthen the resilience and risk management framework 
of  the  Islamic  financial  industry  amidst  the  increasingly  more  challenging  and  competitive 
global financial environment. 
To fast track the creation of a pool of talents and skill set to meet the increasing manpower 
requirements,  Malaysia  is  currently  undertaking  an  initiative  to  establish  an  international 
centre for education in Islamic finance. It will be designed to act as a professional certification 
body  and  a  training  institute  for  post-graduates.  In  addition,  Malaysia  established  the 
International  Centre  for  Leadership  in  Finance  (ICLIF)  in  2003  to  also  provide  leadership 
development and management training for the Islamic financial institutions. 
Closely linked to having the talent is the need to have strong and well established Islamic 
financial  institutions.  This  presents  another  challenge  for  the  Islamic  financial  industry  as 
there are currently not many large Islamic financial institutions. Many of the players are not 
large enough globally to finance large development projects, particularly in Muslim countries 
and are not strong enough to underwrite the needs of the Islamic financial community on a 
large  scale.  Currently,  some  of  the  project  financing  in  Muslim  nations  are  undertaken  by 
large  conventional  banks  because  of  the  under  capitalisation  of  the  Islamic  financial 
institutions.  We  therefore  need  to  have  strong  and  highly  capitalised  Islamic  financial 
institutions that are able to offer the comprehensive and complete range of Islamic financial 
products and services. 
Besides  having  large  Islamic  financial  players  with  the  required  pool  of  expertise,  the 
integration of the Islamic financial system with the international financial system needs to be 
supported by the development of a full Islamic financial system at the national level, thereby 
increasing  the  potential  to  effectively  participate  in  a  more  liberalised  and  globalised 
environment. 
Towards this end, Malaysia together with other OIC countries, are collaborating with the IDB 
and IFSB to formulate a ten-year master plan for the future global development of the Islamic 
financial  services  industry.  The  Master  Plan  will  provide  a  road  map  to  achieve  a 
   4/5 
convergence towards the common vision among countries in the development of an Islamic 
financial system. 
Conclusion 
In developing and strengthening our Islamic banking and financial system to become more 
integrated with the international financial system, Malaysia is positioning itself as an Islamic 
financial gateway to the East Asian region. In emerging on the radar screen of international 
investors, Malaysia thus not only offering financial communities that want to deal in Islamic 
financial transactions, but also the international investment community at large, the potential 
for further opportunities for financing and investment in productive activities. 
In  closing,  I  wish  to  say  that  our  mission  is  for  the  development  of  an  increasingly 
international integrated Islamic financial system. I am confident that in taking this approach, it 
would  contribute 
transactions, 
strengthening  the  global  economic  and  financial  inter-linkages,  and  thereby  raising  the 
prospects  for  more  balanced  global  growth  and  shared  prosperity  among  the  Ummah, 
InsyaAllah.  
Thank you. 
 
trade  and 
investment 
facilitating 
increased 
towards 
   5/5 
