Timothy Geithner: US and the global economy 
Remarks by Mr Timothy Geithner, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York, at the Asia Society’s CEO Forum, New York, 19 October 2005. 
 I want to focus my remarks today on the imbalances in the world economy and their implications for 
the  United  States  and  Asia.  These  imbalances,  which  are  most  visible  in  the  U.S.  current  account 
deficit, present challenges—and risks—for the world economy. How we manage these challenges will 
have significant implications for our economic future and for the rest of the world. 
The sources of these imbalances are varied and complex. They are the result of fundamental changes 
in the world economy, changes not anticipated and not fully understood. They involve economic forces 
across the global economy, some transitory and some probably more enduring. The imbalances took 
a long time to build up and they will probably take a long time to unwind.  
The magnitude and persistence of these imbalances seems to be the result of the interaction of two 
forces.  The  first  involves  a  decline  in  U.S.  savings  relative  to  domestic  investment,  matched  by  an 
increase in savings relative to investment in parts of the rest of the world, principally in emerging Asia 
and the major oil exporters.  
In  the  United  States,  public  savings  and  household  savings  fell,  while  investment  spending  stayed 
reasonably  strong  and  housing  investment  very  strong,  even  during  the  latest  recession.  In  the 
economies  that  became  large  net  savers,  the  pattern  differed  across  countries.  In  some  countries, 
including  much  of  emerging  Asia  and  Japan,  savings  has  been  flat  or  fallen  somewhat,  while 
investment has fallen by more. In China and in the major oil exporters, investment spending is rising, 
but not by as much as savings is increasing. Europe’s net external position has not changed much 
over  this  period,  and  is  in  rough  external  balance  overall,  with  substantial  differences  across  the 
member states.  
The second feature of this dynamic has been an increase in the willingness of the rest of the world to 
invest its savings in the United States. In those parts of the world where savings are high, they have 
become  more  globally  mobile.  And  a  greater  share  of  those  savings  found  its  way  to  the  United 
States. This phenomenon is due in part to the perceived attractiveness of relative returns in the United 
States  arising  from  the  acceleration  of  productivity  growth  here,  and  in  part  due  to  the  dynamics 
associated with exchange rate regimes linked in one way or another to the dollar.  
Together  these  forces  have  produced  larger  imbalances—deficits  here  and  surpluses  abroad—that 
have been sustained longer and financed more easily than conventional wisdom would have thought 
possible a decade or even five years ago.  
Why does this pattern of imbalances matter and why should it concern us?  
It matters because of the size of the U.S. imbalance. Our current account deficit is now running at a 
rate of above 6 percent of GDP, a level without precedent for a major economy.  
It matters because of the composition of the imbalance. Our trade deficit is now roughly the size of the 
current  account  deficit,  and  very  large  relative  to  our  export  base.  And  our  net  investment  income 
balances are now likely to move into deficit.  
It matters because of the trajectory of the U.S. imbalance. On reasonable assumptions about its likely 
near  term  path,  this  deficit  will  produce  a  very  large  net  deterioration  in  our  net  external  liabilities 
relative to national income, with progressively larger net transfers of income to the rest of the world.  
This  pattern  should  concern  us  because  it  is  not  simply  the  result  of  the  savings  and  investment 
decisions of  the  private  sector.  The  fact  that  we  are using  a substantial  part of  the  savings we  are 
borrowing from the rest of the world to finance an unsustainable level of public borrowing leaves us 
more  vulnerable  than  if  those  savings  were  being  used  for  productive  private  investment.  Large 
structural fiscal deficits limit the size of the sustainable external imbalance for any country, even the 
United  States,  and  they  necessarily  increase  concern  about  the  terms  on  which  we  are  likely  to 
finance the present imbalance.  
   1/3 
It should concern us because of how the imbalance has been financed. A substantial portion of the 
capital  inflows  that  finance  our  current  account  deficit  has  come  from  foreign  central  banks—which 
have been accumulating dollar reserves to preserve exchange rate arrangements that are unlikely to 
be sustainable and are already in the process of change. The impact of a reduction in the scale of 
official  accumulation  of  dollar  assets  could  be  fully  offset  by  increases  in  purchases  by  private 
investors. But even in the context of a continued high degree of confidence in the relative return on 
claims on the United States, it is hard to know with confidence how the preferences of private savers 
might  respond  to  the  process  of  gradual  evolution  in  their  nation’s  exchange  rate  regimes  now 
underway. 
And  most  importantly,  perhaps,  these  imbalances  matter  because  at  some  point  they  will  have  to 
reverse.  Market  forces  will  at  some  point  induce  an  adjustment.  And  that  inevitable  process  of 
adjustment will bring with it the risk of large movements in relative prices, greater volatility in asset 
prices and slower growth in the United States and in the rest of the world.  
The  magnitude  of  this  risk  is  difficult  to  measure  with  any  confidence.  Past  episodes  of  external 
adjustment  offer  some  reassurance,  but  the  present  circumstances  seem  sufficiently  different  from 
historical precedent that history may not be a particularly useful guide.  
The size of the imbalances and the persistence of the forces supporting them probably mean that we 
will  be  living  for  a  prolonged  period  of  time  with  the  tensions  that  could  come  with  the  need  for 
adjustment.  
The  risks  associated  with  this  adjustment  process  may  be  magnified  by  changes  in  the  household 
balance sheet in the United States. The average household in the United States today has a higher 
level  of  debt  to  income  and  is  somewhat  more  exposed  to  interest  rate  risk  than  in  the  past.  The 
sustained  rise  in  housing  prices  and  the  scale  of  borrowing  against  housing  assets  raises  the 
possibility that a rise in risk premia could have a greater impact on household spending that would 
have been true in the past.  
The  adjustment  process  is  also  complicated  by  the  fact  that  the  rest  of  the  world  does  not  appear 
likely, even over the medium term, to be in a position to provide a sufficiently strong offsetting source 
of demand growth to compensate for the necessary slowing in U.S. domestic demand. Policy actions 
to promote structural reform in the labor, product and financial markets could potentially change this, 
but the policy changes required are politically difficult, and their effects on net savings over time might 
be offset by demographic and other forces working the other direction.  
A number of observers have suggested that we can live comfortably with these imbalances for a long 
time, with very little risk to the U.S. and world economy. The rise in the surplus savings of the rest of 
the world, the relative ease with which those savings now move across borders, and the increase in 
the relative attractiveness of claims on the United States together may suggest the world can sustain 
larger imbalances, more easily, for a longer period of time.  
These  factors,  however,  do  not  alter  the  fundamental  judgment  that  our  external  position  is 
unsustainable and the adjustment process ahead could materially affect future economic outcomes. 
The fact that these imbalances might be sustained for some time shouldn’t make us more confident 
that  they  will  be.  Even  if  we  could  be  confident  that  the  world  would  be  comfortable  financing  the 
United States on these terms going forward, that would not make it prudent for the U.S. to continue 
borrowing on this scale.  
Time doesn’t necessarily help. The longer these gaps continue to build, the greater the risks, and the 
more difficult their resolution.  
What can we do to mitigate these risks?  
For the United States, these challenges put a premium on putting in place a more credible fiscal policy 
framework, maintaining as strong and resilient a financial sector as possible, and preserving an open 
and flexible economy. These things are all important and desirable, but they are more important, and 
we can less afford to tolerate any erosion, than would be the case if we were closer to a sustainable 
external position. 
Improving our fiscal position is the most effective means we have available to reduce our vulnerability 
during  this  prolonged  period  of  adjustment.  We  need  to  produce  a  substantial  reduction  in  our 
structural  deficit  over  the  medium  term  and  begin  to  reduce  the  more  dramatic  longer  term  gap 
   2/3 
between  our  resources  and  commitments.  And  we  need  to  restore  a  reasonable  cushion  in  our 
structural budget balance to help us deal with future shocks.  
If we are unable to begin to generate more confidence in the capacity of the U.S. political system to 
produce  these  improvements,  we  would  face  a  greater  risk  of  future  increases  in  risk  premia.  And 
even though substantial fiscal consolidation would not by itself bring the external imbalance down to a 
more sustainable level, it would improve the prospect for a smoother adjustment to that outcome.  
The general risk inherent in these imbalances—the risk of more adverse growth outcomes and asset 
price volatility—reinforces the importance of sustaining the strength and resilience of the U.S. financial 
system. Our financial system today is in substantially stronger shape than it was even in the recent 
past, and the major institutions now appear to be managed so that they are less vulnerable to the type 
and magnitude of shocks they’ve experienced in the past couple decades.  
Our  challenge,  however,  it  to  make  sure  they  are  as  well  positioned  to  deal  with  the  full  range  of 
potential future risks. And this requires an investment in risk management and controls commensurate 
with the increasing complexity of these challenges, and it requires a cushion of capital and liquidity 
large enough to capture the potential risk of losses in a less favorable macroeconomic environment.  
The increase in the flexibility and resilience of the U.S. economy over the past two decades has a lot 
to  do  with  the  increased  openness  of  the  U.S.  economy.  And  sustaining  this  flexibility,  which  is  so 
important  to  our  capacity  to  adjust  to  shocks,  requires  that  we  continue  to  support  the  process  of 
openness and economic integration. We jeopardize future income gains if we are unable to sustain 
support in the United States for what has been a relatively open trade policy. How effective we are in 
meeting this political challenge is likely to depend significantly on how effective we are in improving 
educational opportunity and achievement in this country, and perhaps also in improving the design of 
the  temporary  assistance  we  provide  individuals  who  bear  the  brunt  of  the  adjustment  costs  than 
come with greater global economic integration.  
These policies by the United States would help improve the prospects of a more benign adjustment 
process.  But  they  would  not  be  sufficient  to  produce  a  more  favorable  adjustment  path.  A  more 
favorable adjustment scenario would require a complex mix of policies and action in each of the major 
economic areas, sustained over a considerable period of time.  
For global growth to be sustained at a reasonably strong pace during this period of adjustment, the 
desirable  increase  in  U.S.  savings  and  the  necessary  slowing  in  U.S.  domestic  demand  growth 
relative  to  growth  of  U.S.  output  would  have  to  be  complemented  by  stronger  domestic  demand 
growth  outside  the  United  States,  absorbing  a  larger  share  of  national  savings.  Exchange  rate 
regimes, where they are currently closely tied to the dollar, will have to become more flexible, allowing 
exchange rates to adjust in response to changing fundamentals.  
The global nature of these requirements does not imply that the United States can put the principal 
burden for adjustment on others, or that we can expect the broader global adjustment imperative to 
easily  alter  the  forces  in  countries  outside  the  United  States  that  have  contributed  to  these 
imbalances. If we focus adequate political capital on the factors within our control, we will have more 
credibility internationally in encouraging policy changes outside the United States that might reduce 
our collective risks in the adjustment process ahead. 
The  increase  in  macroeconomic  stability  in  the  United  States  over  the  past  two  decades,  or  the 
reduction  in  the  volatility  of  growth  and  inflation,  has  contributed  to  what  seems  to  be  a  significant 
reduction  in  expected  future  volatility  of  asset  prices.  And  the  U.S.  economy  is  in  many  ways  in  a 
relatively  favorable  position  to  manage  through  the  risks  in  the  adjustment  process  ahead.  The 
apparent  strength  in  U.S.  productivity  growth,  our  greater  overall  flexibility  as  an  economy  and  the 
resilience  of  our  financial  system  puts  us  in  a  stronger  position  to  deal  with  the  challenges  in  the 
transition  ahead.  But  we  face  a  number  of  difficult  long-term  challenges  as  a  nation—in  our  fiscal 
position, in how well we equip our citizens to prosper in a more competitive world and in our ability to 
sustain political support for the policies, including our relatively open trade policy, that have been an 
important  source  of  the  improvement  in  U.S.  prosperity.  Our  external  imbalances  make  it  more 
important that we invest in meeting those challenges.  
Thank you. 
   3/3 
