Toshiro Muto: Dynamism and diversity of Asia - a central banker's view  
Remarks by Mr Toshiro Muto, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at "Emerging Opportunities in 
the  Global  Economy"  the  29th  Annual  Joint  Meeting  of  Japan-U.S.  Southeast  Association  and 
Southeast U.S.-Japan Association, Tokyo, 17 October 2005. 
 Introduction  
I. 
Good morning, ladies and gentlemen. It is a great pleasure to join you at this special gathering.  
Asia is undergoing tremendous changes. Links between the countries in this region are getting closer. 
Two big countries, China and India, are growing on a global platform. These changes are taking place 
not only in economic terms but also in the political and diplomatic arenas. Against this background, 
changes in Asian dynamics are beginning to reshape the contours of the US-Asia relationship.  
With  these  things  in  mind,  I  will  address  four  facets  of  today's  Asia:  booming  economies,  rising 
regional cooperation, looming challenges, and evolving relations with the US.  
Booming economy  
II. 
Following  the  economic  crisis  in  1997-98,  the  economies  in  south-east  Asia  have  made  a  strong 
recovery.  Indeed,  countries  in  this  region  have  exhibited  impressive  resilience  in  restoring  their 
economic  vitality.  When  the  world  economy  slowed  in  the  wake  of  the  bursting  of  the  IT  bubble  in 
2002-03,  Asia's  solid  growth  helped  avert  the  global  recession.  China's  economic  expansion  is 
particularly remarkable as it has sustained an average growth of 8-9 percent per annum for the past 
decade.  
If  you  take  a  closer  look at  the current  economic dynamism  in Asia,  you  will  not  fail  to see  a  stark 
difference  from  the  past  economic  booms.  In  the  past,  trade  in  this  area  was  simple.  Industrial 
countries  like  Japan  and  Korea  imported  raw  materials  from  their  Asian  neighbors  to  export  final 
products to the US and Europe. In contrast, trade patterns within Asia are now much richer on the 
basis of the sophisticated vertical division of production processes. Countries are specializing in the 
optimal  parts  of  the  supply  chain  on  the  basis  of  their  resource  endowment  and  comparative 
advantage. This process is being propelled by foreign direct investment (FDI) coming from both within 
and outside the region. For example, Japan exports intermediate and capital goods to China and other 
Asian  countries,  and  these  countries  assemble  what  they  import  from  Japan  in  order  to  make  final 
products  for  the  global  markets.  Consequently,  the  proportion  of  intra-regional  trade  in  Asia  has 
climbed to 54 percent, which lies between NAFTA's 46 percent and the EU's 62 percent.  
Asia's export-led growth has increased its absorption, thereby stimulating its imports from abroad. This 
is particularly true of China where huge domestic demand has yet to be saturated. Because of its large 
population, China presents itself as both an international production hub and a big consumer market. 
For instance, China accounted for 7 percent of global trade in 2004. Combined with Hong Kong and 
Taiwan, it captures 11 percent, only slightly below the US. Against this background, China is exerting 
a strong influence on the global economy. Also note India, which is becoming the major off-shoring 
destination for foreign multinationals, particularly in the service sector.  
This  strong  performance  of  Asian  economies  might  possibly  be  affected  by  the  recent  spike  in  oil 
prices.  In  fact,  some  Asian  currencies,  like  the  Indonesian  rupiah,  came  under  pressure  when  oil 
prices  reached  a  record  high  this  August.  However,  the  economic  fundamentals  of  most  Asian 
countries are much stronger than in the 1970s when they were hit by the worst oil market turmoil ever. 
In addition, Asian countries responded swiftly this time by raising interest rates or slashing public fuel 
subsidies. These prompt actions have helped them minimize potential disruptions to their economies. 
Furthermore,  Asian  countries  have  large  volumes  of  foreign  reserves  and  only  a  small  amount  of 
external  debt  in  comparison  to  both  their  own  past  and  developing  countries  in  other  parts  of  the 
globe. For mutual liquidity assistance in times of external stress, countries in this region are working 
toward  an  expanded  network  of  bilateral  swap  arrangements,  to  which  I  will  come  back  in  a  few 
BIS Review 79/2005 
 1
minutes. In short, Asian economies are better equipped with both the will and capability to fend off 
sources of disturbance to their sound economic growth.  
Rising regional cooperation  
III. 
Under these circumstances, we have seen increasing drive for regional cooperation in Asia, especially 
among the "ASEAN+3 nations" consisting of the ten ASEAN countries plus Japan, China, and Korea. 
As  I  said  earlier,  these  countries  are  strengthening  their  trade  links.  But  similar  attempts  are  being 
made in other fields as well where progress has been less impressive, such as finance, environment, 
energy,  and  scientific  technology.  Collaboration  in  these  areas  is  proceeding  in  a  functional  and 
pragmatic manner.  
Closer  trade  links  in  Asia,  as  symbolized  by  the  web  of  free  trade  agreements  (FTA),  are  likely  to 
promote trade liberalization and catalyze FDI flows in and out of the region, thereby providing a boost 
to economic globalization. In other words, regional trade arrangements are not aimed at creating an 
exclusionary  economic  bloc.  To  the  contrary,  such  trade  networks  can  make  the  Asian  economies 
more  open  and  prosperous.  On  the  financial  front,  cooperation  among  Asian  countries  is  gathering 
pace. Its prime motivation is to avert a financial crisis like the one we went through in 1997-98. Efforts 
in  this  field  are  producing  tangible results  around  two  pillars:  1)  the  establishment  of  bilateral swap 
arrangements, and 2) the development of regional bond markets.  
As some of you might know, there is a collegial group of central banks in this region. This group, called 
EMEAP,  an  acronym  for  the  Executive  Meeting  of  East  Asia  Pacific  Central  Banks,  has  eleven 
members.  From  its  inception  in  1991,  EMEAP  comprises  nine  east-Asian  central  banks  plus  two 
central  banks  from  Australia  and  New  Zealand.  EMEAP  is  very  active  in  three  key  areas,  namely, 
financial  markets,  banking  supervision,  and  settlement/payment  systems.  To  give  you  a  picture  of 
what EMEAP is doing for bond market development, allow me to digress a little bit.  
EMEAP  has  engaged  itself  in  the  project  known  as  ABF,  or  Asian  Bond  Fund.  In  this  fund,  eleven 
EMEAP  central  banks  jointly  set  up  their  foreign  reserves  to  place  investment  funds  composed  of 
Asian sovereign bonds. The purpose of ABF is to stimulate turnovers in the bond market in this region. 
In June 2003, the central banks launched ABF1, the first stage of the ABF project, to invest in dollar-
denominated sovereign bonds issued by Asian countries. In May 2005, EMEAP went a step further by 
announcing  the  start  of  ABF2.  ABF2  invests  in  sovereign  bonds  issued  in  Asian  local  currencies. 
Although  led  by  the  EMEAP  central  banks,  ABF  is  not  an  "Asia-only"  project.  Actually,  Western 
financial services companies take part in this project as a fund manager and custodian. From what I 
have said, you can sense the pragmatic spirit of Asian regional cooperation. In fact, pragmatism is the 
hallmark of joint initiatives in this region.  
Another  point  is  that  these  cooperative  endeavors  are  largely  market-driven.  Put  differently,  Asian 
cooperation is an "autonomous" process. It is in sharp contrast to the EU integration where member 
nations have agreed to transfer some of their sovereignty to Brussels, Frankfurt, and other European 
cities to operate supra-national governance. Therefore, Asian regional collaboration does not have a 
lead  player  a  priori.  Instead,  a  variety  of  players  are  involved.  In  fact,  Asia  has  several  groups  of 
different stripes, like EMEAP, ASEAN, ASEAN+3, Asian Development Bank (ADB), each with its own 
unique membership. Such an "open-ended" modality for regional cooperation reflects Asia's diversity 
in ethnic, historical, religious, and linguistic backgrounds.  
Some say that Asia's diversity could weaken its regional unity. There is some truth in this view, but 
diversity  has  its  own  advantages  as  well.  It  can  create  an  environment  in  which  people  appreciate 
different  values  and  ideas,  develop  a  sense  of  tolerance  to  others,  and  become  more  innovative 
through such cross-cultural interaction. This is a unique advantage for Asia to maximize, and I believe 
Asian cooperation should move ahead in this direction.  
The first East Asian Summit meeting is slated for this December. The summit will be attended by the 
leaders of ASEAN+3 nations, India, Australia, and New Zealand and will be the first of its kind. This 
gathering  of  countries  attests  to  the  flexibility  of  Asia's  cooperation.  Given  the  prospect  for  energy 
development in east Siberia or Sakhalin, the attendees to the East Asian Summit may even include 
Russia in the future. But this is anyone's guess, of course.  
2 
 BIS Review 79/2005
Looming challenges  
IV. 
Despite  the  collective  progress  so  far  made,  Asian  countries  are  facing  new  challenges.  In  my 
judgment, response to these problems will define the path of Asian cooperation going forward.  
There is no doubt that high growth has enabled Asia to savor better economic welfare. However, I see 
four challenges to further prosperity in Asia;  
•  accelerate financial market integration  
•  establish  sound  socioeconomic  infrastructures  like  intellectual  property  right  protection, 
transparent corporate governance, and impartial judiciary  
tackle  transnational  problems  like  regional  epidemics,  natural  calamities  and  environmental 
disruptions  
formulate sustainable energy policy  
  First, financial market integration. Financial markets in Asia are still ring-fenced by national borders. 
That makes it hard to link savings with investment opportunities within the region efficiently. As I said, 
the financial authorities in Asia are working together to develop liquid bond markets, as they expect 
such  markets  to  facilitate  the  marriage  of  savings  and  investment  in  the  region.  Organic  linkage  of 
savings and investment would underpin sustainable growth in Asia, thereby contributing eventually to 
the adjustment of global payment imbalances.  
Second, socioeconomic infrastructures. In a nutshell, Asia has yet to establish its credentials as an 
economic  area  where  the  rule  of  law  receives  due  respect.  This  is  particularly  crucial  since  Asia 
derives enormous benefits from FDI flows via foreign multinationals. In order to sustain FDI inflows, it 
is of vital importance to provide legal protection of patents, brands, and copyrights. Asia also needs to 
consolidate  a  law-abiding  and  corruption-free  business  culture  to  help  legal  frameworks  function 
effectively.  
Third,  transnational  problems.  These  problems  have  global  dimensions,  but  they  have  some  Asian 
features as well. The nightmare of the tsunami disaster is still vivid in our memory, but this region has 
other weather-related anomalies, including tropical cyclones, floods, droughts, and dust storms, some 
of  which  are  exacerbated  by  desertification  and  deforestation.  It  is  easy  to  see  how  these  natural 
disasters  decimate  our  economies.  In  addition,  given  the  high  population  density  and  still-poor 
sanitation  infrastructures  in  Asia,  systematic  steps  should  be  taken  to  contain  the  spread  of  lethal 
epidemics such as avian flu, HIV/AIDS and SARS before they become a global pandemic. The spread 
of  these  contagious  diseases  will  virtually  halt  the  cross-border  movement  of  goods  and  people, 
thereby causing fatal damage to our economies.  
Both natural disasters and public health crises call for rapid intervention by the relevant authorities. In 
order to formulate effective emergency response, we may as well study swiftly a possible region-wide 
mechanism for surveillance, early warning, and information sharing. Concerted efforts by countries in 
this region would also make it easier to obtain badly needed international funding for the prevention 
and mitigation of such human emergencies.  
Fourth, energy policy. Asian emerging countries are big consumers of energy, while they have little 
natural resources to count on. This means that, to sustain the present economic rise, these countries 
need to secure stable sources of energy while developing alternative energy supplies as well. Equally 
important is a demand-side effort to curtail energy intensity. Better energy efficiency is also helpful in 
reducing air pollution and green house gas emission.  
I  said  earlier  that  Asian  regional  cooperation  should  proceed  without  rigid  boundaries  regarding 
membership.  As  geography  is  relative,  boundaries  should  be  "open-ended."  As  far  as  financial 
markets are concerned, however, membership can be defined by the time zone. The majority of East 
Asian countries are located within the 3-hour time band from Sydney to Bangkok. Thus, it is of little 
surprise that the countries in this zone constitute the core of numerous regional groups. But it will be 
too naive to assume that Asia alone can handle all the challenges I have described. For instance, we 
should  learn  more  from  the  US  and  Europe  when  it  comes  to  transparent  governance,  biomedical 
technology, public hygiene, and environmental conservation. Being "open-ended" will continue to be 
an essential element for Asian cooperation.  
BIS Review 79/2005 
 3
Evolving relations with the US  
V. 
Now let me conclude by adding a few words on US-Asia relations.  
The  trans-pacific  economic  space,  spanning  Asia  and  the  US  continent,  explains  roughly  half  the 
global GDP. In regard to cross-border money flows, the vast portion of Asia's savings are invested in 
US financial markets, and then recycled back to Asia in the form of FDI by multinationals. The ongoing 
RMB (renminbi) reform could lead to a substantial change in the monetary landscape between Asia 
and the US. Given these and other elements I do not cover today, Asia and the US will most likely 
continue  to  assume  shared  responsibility  for  the  smooth  functioning  of  the  global  economic 
architecture.  
Besides  the  economic  issues,  Asia's  cohesion  is  as  evident  as  that  of  Europe.  Unlike  Europe, 
however, Asian countries are divided or "linked," I would say, by the sea. Therefore, the safety and 
stability of sea routes are vital for the cross-border movement of goods, services, and people. With 
respect  to  culture,  ethnicity,  and  religion,  Asia  remains  an  area  of  immense  diversity.  Also,  Asia  is 
undergoing profound changes as I said at the outset. Dynamic and diversified perspectives, instead of 
linear and stereotyped views, help us understand what is going on in Asia, upon which productive US-
Asia relations develop.  
As the US-Asia relationship evolves into a multi-layered nexus like a tapestry, it is essential for leaders 
on both sides of the Pacific to interact closely through prominent forums like the one we are attending 
today. Let us hope that our trans-pacific ties will continue to be solid on this basis.  
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 79/2005
