Wu Xiaoling: Speeding up financial innovation and promoting development of 
the small and medium-sized enterprises 
Speech  by  Ms  Wu  Xiaoling,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  People’s  Bank  of  China,  at  the  High  Level 
Seminar  on  Development  and  Investment  of  Small  and  Medium-sized  Enterprises  (SMEs)  in  East 
Asia, Beijing, 27 October 2005. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen: 
I am very pleased to attend the first High Level Seminar on Development and Investment of Small and 
Medium-sized Enterprises (SMEs) in East Asia. The rise of SMEs has not only become an important 
force behind the rapid, sustainable and sound development of the economy, but also played an active 
role  in  structural  adjustment  and  job  creation.  Hence,  governments  have  attached  increasing 
importance to the development of SMEs. 
In recent years, the financial sector of China has taken concrete measures in accordance with the Act 
on Promoting Small and Medium-sized Enterprises and other policies of the state. Progress has been 
made in providing quality financial services for SMEs. According to the survey launched by the PBC, 
loans to SMEs have accounted for more than 50% in total credit assets in the past few years, roughly 
equivalent to the contribution of SMEs to GDP. Nevertheless, it remains hard for many SMEs to obtain 
financing and many entities expect to improve the management of loans to SMEs. I would like to touch 
upon three issues on this occasion: 
Strengthen credit management and foster growth of customers 
I. 
Most SMEs have incomplete corporate governance, loose management, and lack of transparency in 
accounting  information,  resulting  in  difficulty  in  obtaining  financing.  It  is  not  difficult  to  discover  that 
SMEs at various stages differ in financing needs and channels. 
SMEs at starting stage face high uncertainties in production and operation. They have little capacity to 
provide collateral, nor do they have credit record and transparent information. Hence, it is difficult for 
commercial  banks  to  accurately  judge  the  yield  and  risk  of  the  potential  loans,  thus  impeding  the 
lending. As a result, these SMEs mainly rely on internal financing, limited direct financing and private 
borrowing to raise funds. Some high-tech SMEs also get money from venture capital. 
SMEs  at  growing  period  gradually  foster  some  capacity  to  provide  collateral  and  accumulate  credit 
records  as  they  expand  their  business  over  time.  Their  internal  information  and  relationship  with 
commercial  banks  become  increasingly  transparent.  Usually  these  SMEs  are  eager  to  expand  and 
strongly need credit. However, given their incomplete internal management and financial operation, it 
remains hard for them to meet the credit examination criteria and obtain credit. 
Mature SMEs face declined uncertainty in their operations. With sufficient credit records and relatively 
transparent information, creditors and investors are in a better position to grasp internal information of 
these  SMEs,  and  the  SMEs  have  the  capacity  to  provide  sufficient  collateral.  In  this  context,  these 
enterprises  usually  are  quality  customers  that  financial  institutions  compete  for.  Their  loans  would 
grow rapidly. The most successful SMEs may become large enterprises, thus being able to access 
direct financing. These enterprises may raise funds by issuing bonds or stock shares, thus facing little 
constraints in obtaining financing. 
SMEs  are  a  big  group  of  customers.  To  differentiate  among  SMEs  and  corresponding  financing 
channels  could  actually  enhance  the  allocation  of  social  resources.  The  central  bank  shall  provide 
credit  guidance  for  commercial  banks  from  a  more  macro  perspective.  In  this  process,  commercial 
banks  shall  strengthen  loan  management,  enhance  its  efficiency,  and  discover  and  foster  potential 
customers. With the rapid development of the financial market, the direct financing channel of large 
enterprises would be further explored, and its share increased. Commercial banks will face challenge 
in terms of their customer structure. Hence, it is urgent for commercial banks to discover and foster 
stable customers from the bunch of SMEs. 
BIS Review 87/2005 
 1
Credit  market  and  capital  market  mainly  differ  in  the  fact  that  there  is  a  one-to-one  negotiation 
between commercial banks and their customers. Hence, commercial banks are in a better position to 
get  management  information,  make  judgment  on  risks  and  price  the  loans.  Therefore,  commercial 
banks  can  tailor  their  products  for  SMEs  according  to  their  financing  needs  at  various  stages. 
Meanwhile, commercial banks shall have a long vision to explore the potential of customers and help 
SMEs quickly transit from starting stage towards mature stage. 
Appropriately price lending risks with SMEs 
II. 
Lending rate is actually the price of credit products. The pricing of credit products mainly includes cost 
of capital and risk premium. The pricing capacity of Chinese financial institutions is generally weak. 
One  reason  is  that  there  have  been  many  administrative  restrictions  where  many  prices  were 
determined  by  the  government.  Financial  institutions  had  no  pricing  power  and  no  experience  to 
autonomously  determine  the  price.  Moreover,  financial  institutions  had  no  incentive  to  make 
autonomous pricing duce to the institutional weaknesses. 
Chronically,  there  has  been  a  perception  that  we  shall  provide  preferential  interest  rate  for  the 
industries and areas we would support. In general, banks’ lending to large customers is like wholesale 
business  and  that  to  SMEs  is  retail.  Loans  to  SMEs  are  usually  featured  by  small  amount,  many 
batches and sophisticated procedures. According to a survey, the administrative cost of SME loans is 
on average 5 times that of large enterprises. If there is too strict restriction on lending rate, banks may 
have  little  incentive  to conduct  feasibility  assessment  for  SME projects.  As  a result  SMEs will  have 
limited  access  to  bank  loans  and  thus  face  more  severe  situation.  Hence,  we  shall  change  the 
traditional  way  of  thinking  and  encourage  commercial  banks  to  price  the  risk  associated  with  SME 
loans  so  that  they  can  explore  new  source  of  profits.  Of  course,  it  might  to  some  extent  increase 
interest expense of SMEs. Nevertheless, it is less important compared with the increased access of 
SMEs  to  loans.  In  particular,  some  high-tech  and  high-risk  enterprises  and  private  enterprises  will 
benefit. Since the People’s Bank of China removed the ceiling on lending rates on October 28, 2004, 
we have observed that some banks began to utilize the new policy to foster their risk pricing capacity. 
Of course, the government and social intermediaries can help SMEs reduce risk and financing cost 
through risk sharing and compensating measures. On the one hand, guarantee institutions shall be 
supported through such market operations as recapitalization and improved risk control mechanism. 
On the other hand, local governments can diversify the systemic risks associated with guarantee for 
SME  loans  through  direct  guarantee  or  re-guarantee.  With  risk  of  SME  loans  shared,  they  will  be 
subject to less risk premium and lower lending rate. 
Reform of credit system management with respect to SMEs 
III.  
Credit  system  management  involves  banks’  credit  management,  risk  control,  asset  disposal  and 
supervisory  mechanism.  In  recent  years,  with  the  deepening  of  China’s  financial  reform,  banking 
sector has been increasingly aware of credit risk, leading to centralization of credit approval power and 
opposition  of  SMEs.  On  the  one  hand,  local  branches  of  commercial  banks  have  less  power  to 
approve credit and most loan requests had to be reported to branches of provincial level or even the 
headquarter. As a result, it takes a long time and sophisticated procedure to process loan application, 
making  it  hard  to  meet  the  financing  needs  of  local  SMEs.  On  the  other  hand,  local  branches  of 
commercial  banks  in  the  lagged  areas  have  become  ‘savings  bank’,  which  transfer  the  savings  to 
developed areas that need large amount of money. The savings bank thus could earn spreads, while 
the local enterprises could not obtain credit. 
Frankly  speaking,  the  centralized  management  pattern  is  in  line  with  the  development  trend  of 
international  banking  industry.  However,  it  needs  to  be  adjusted  to  meet  the  needs  of  SMEs.  The 
current credit management has two problems. First, a large commercial bank is a single legal entity, 
making it hard to provide frequent short-term loans to SMEs in a swift manner. Second, credit rating 
method for SMEs is significantly different from that of large ones. The current credit risk rating system 
adopted  by  commercial  banks  does  not  accommodate  the  operations  and  accounting  information 
disclosure patterns of SMEs. 
Given the long processing procedures of large banks, the People’s Bank of China has been actively 
promoting the institutional innovation of joint-stock banks and the establishment of community banks 
so that they can build up close relationship with local SMEs and provide sound financial services for 
2 
 BIS Review 87/2005
them by simplifying processing procedures. Meanwhile, commercial banks are encouraged to improve 
credit management and develop new products oriented towards SMEs including loan approval, credit 
rating,  collateral,  guarantee,  pricing  and  loan  management.  The  China  Banking  Regulatory 
Commission  has  promulgated  the  Guidance  on  Bank  Loans  to  SMEs  and  commercial  banks  are 
making efforts to probe the way. 
To support SMEs is not only in line with the needs of the macroeconomic development, but also an 
important  channel  for  financial  sector  to  explore  new  source  of  profits,  adjust  credit  structure  and 
diversify credit risk. In the period ahead, we will further use monetary and credit policy to help develop 
the  channel  of  financial  services  for  SMEs  and  enhance  efficiency  of  financial  institutions  in  this 
regard. 
The development of SMEs is a long and sophisticated process, involving joint efforts of government 
agencies, banks and enterprises as well as the introduction of advanced experiences abroad. I believe 
that  to  establish  a  broad  and  multi-layer  financing  system  for  SMEs  will  give  rise  to  more  rapid 
development of these enterprises. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 87/2005 
 3
