Ardian Fullani: Remittances: An opportunity for growth - the Albanian 
migration to Italy as a case study 
Speech by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania, at  the Conference  on Remittances, 
Bari, 4 March 2006. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I am very pleased to speak to you today on the occasion of the Conference on Remittances. I would 
like  to  congratulate  the  World  Bank  and  the  Puglia  Region  for  co-organizing  this  esteemed 
international event. I greatly appreciate your partnership and this opportunity to explore with you the 
possible ways for a sustainable growth, formalization and higher effectiveness of remittances. 
I  would  like  to  open  my  remarks  by  asking  a  simple  question.  Why  are  remittances  our  main  topic 
today?  
Remittances  represent  the  most  direct  and  immediate  benefit  to  emigrants  families  and  to  the 
economy. Remittance  flows  to  developing countries are  now estimated  to  be twice  as  much  as  the 
development  aid  these  countries  receive.  In  some  countries  like  Albania,  they  noticeably  exceed 
foreign direct investment. Therefore, governments nowadays are paying more and more attention in 
their development strategies to remittance flows as an important financial source to boost economic 
development, especially in depressed areas where economic conditions force people to migrate. A key 
input for these policies is the economic and the logistic framework behind migration and remittance. 
This conference and its underlying case-study make a great contribution to these developing efforts. 
Since the beginning of the transition, the volume of remittances to Albania has grown rapidly. Indeed, 
remittance  flows  are  increasingly  important  relative  to  other  foreign  exchange-earning  activities, 
representing around 14 percent of GDP, 70 percent of exports, and 33 percent of imports. Italy is the 
major  migration  destination  country  for  Albanians.  On  the  other  hand,  Albania  is  the  number  one 
recipient  country  in  terms  of  remittance  flows  from  Italy  to  other  countries.  Therefore,  remittance 
services from Italy to Albania have become a topic of great interest. The Italian-Albanian remittance 
corridor is a relevant case to examine the effects of remittances on local communities and to discuss 
the ways of making these flows more efficient and less costly.  
A recent survey of the Bank of Albania shows that remittances have had positive impact across all 
Albanian regions. The influence is slightly higher in less developed regions alleviating to some extent 
income disparities. Remittances have become a critical source of income for households, reaching 33 
percent of disposable income of an average family recipient and almost 40 percent in rural areas. The 
recipients of remittances are from all social groups, including middle income class (60 percent) as well 
as the low income class (27 percent). Our estimates show that the level and severity of poverty are 
significantly  reduced  among  those  households  receiving  remittances,  with  greater  influence  on 
severity rather than the level of poverty. 
Remittances  are  mostly  used  for  imported  consumer  goods,  services,  and  for  the  purchase  or 
construction of houses. A small share is saved or invested in businesses, mainly in agricultural sector. 
Therefore, the impact of remittances in creating new jobs has been limited. In this view, I do not want 
to  downplay  the  importance  of  remittances,  but  to  draw  attention  to  additional  structural  reforms 
needed to enhance their impact in the economy. It is not a coincidence that after reaching the level of 
14  percent  of  GDP,  the  growth  rate  of  remittances  has  been  as  constant  as  that  of  foreign  direct 
investments in Albania. This shows that in the mid-term, there is no difference between the decision of 
foreign investors and remitters to invest in Albania. Of course, emigrants may have a better knowledge 
of  domestic  markets.  They  are  more  connected  to  their  home-country  and  react  faster  than  foreign 
investors. Nevertheless, they demand guarantees for their investments as much as foreign investors 
do. Therefore, both the volume of remittances and their effectiveness largely depend on improvements 
of Albanian business environment.  
While efforts to speed up reforms aiming to improve business environment are underway, especially 
now  with  the  most  recent  signing  of  the  Stabilization  and  Association  Agreement,  a  question  still 
remains:  is  there  any  other  measure  that  may  enhance  the  contribution  of  remittances  in  the 
development?  The  Bank  of  Albania  in  cooperation  with  other  governmental  and  non-governmental 
institutions  has  been  considering  some  concrete  measures,  which  I  have  already  highlighted  in  a 
BIS Review 16/2006 
 1
conference organized by EBRD on these issues last September. I would like to briefly mention some 
of them here again, with some new insights. 
First,  improving  our  knowledge  about  remittances  remains  critical  for  the  assessment  of  policies, 
which directly impact the developing role of remittances in the economy. The improved information is 
needed not simply to assist policies on remittances but also financial infrastructure (e.g. by reducing 
transaction  costs)  and  to  understand  the  impact  on  poverty.  The  Bank  of  Albania  has  continuously 
emphasized  the  importance  of  accurate  estimation  of  capital  inflows  in  the  form  of  emigrants’ 
remittances. For better statistics we have been assisted by IMF missions to bring the methodology in 
defining remittances closer to the international standards. Also, there is a close cooperation with our 
main  economic  partners,  Italy  and  Greece,  as  the  main  destinations  of  the  Albanian  emigrants,  to 
harmonize our methodologies in order to improve the estimation accuracy of remittances. The report 
of  the  World  Bank  on  the  Italian-Albanian  corridor  is  also  a  great  contribution  to  improve  our 
understanding of remittances, and on behalf of the Albanian authorities I express our gratitude for this 
support.  
Second,  formalizing  the  inflow  of  remittances  is  a  very  important  moment.  More  than  half  of 
remittances  enter  the  country  through  informal  channels.  Our  surveys  show  that  the  bulk  of 
remittances to Albania are channeled through unofficial sources; physically brought by the emigrants 
(59 percent), friends and relatives (23 percent). This is partially a reflection of the short geographical 
distance  between  the  two  countries.   However,  this  high  flow  of  remittances  through  unofficial 
channels also asks for actions to make official channels more attractive in terms of efficiency, safety, 
cost and anonymity. As the study team has found out, emigrants in Italy have a high banking utilization 
rate – more than 50 percent have bank accounts. On the Albanian side, this figure drops to less than 
20 percent. Emigrant families’ access to banks is suboptimal despite the considerable geographical 
expansion of commercial banks in recent years. In contrast with other remittance-receiving countries, 
banks  in  Albania  still  have  only  a  small  market  share  in  remittance  services.  However,  there  are 
encouraging signs of demand for new technologies, innovative partnerships and entry points to reach 
disadvantaged groups.  
The  high  fees  of  the  money  transfer  applied  by  the  banks  are  often  brought  up  as  a  motive  why 
individuals  do  not  prefer  this  service.  Nevertheless,  there  is  already  an  Albanian  commercial  bank, 
which offers transfers from Italy to Albania without charging any fee for amounts up to 250 euros a 
day, when the average monthly delivery of emigrants usually ranges from 100 to 150 euros. In the 
meantime,  there  are  several  other  banks  that  provide  the  same  service  for  transfers  from  Greece. 
Actually,  we  are  examining  the  possibilities  to  lower  the  transfer  costs  through  broader  bilateral 
agreements between the two countries.   
Even  though,  money  transfer  companies  provide  transfer  services  at  reasonable  rates  with  a  good 
geographical coverage, we still observe a lot of cash entering the country in bags. I retain, this is more 
a regulatory problem rather than the preference of emigrants to go informal. The disparity between our 
two countries in terms of bank accounts accessibility is largely a reflection of the fact that in Italy you 
cannot get your salary if you do not provide with your bank account number. The anti-cash program 
initiated by the Bank of Albania clearly indicates that in order to lower the cash economy, we have to 
abolish the option of cash payments, including here salaries of the private sector, payments of utilities, 
etc.  Our  bank  is  fully  committed  to  support  this  process  at  all  levels,  being  these  regulatory  or 
technical. 
Of course, this comes at some cost, which in case of remittances is going from zero rates that informal 
or cash channels offer to some positive commissions required by formal channels. I understand the 
concerns raised by some analysts that legislation on exchange rate control or anti-money laundering 
could increase transfer rates further and push people to go underground. This calls for a revision of 
regulation that does not penalize the volume of remittances. As I mentioned earlier, the formalization 
of  the  economy  is  a  major  component  of  improving  business  environment  in  Albania.  Therefore, 
“forcing” individuals to get into formal channels while comes at a short term cost of some positive rates 
most probably will have the long term benefit of signaling the serious intentions that we are moving on 
the right directions to both emigrants and foreign investors. 
For  recipient  families,  accessibility  to  financial  institutions  plays  a  more  important  role  due  to  large 
percentage of receipts delivered straight to the recipient’s door. In fact, the disconnection between the 
physical  receipt  of  funds  and  the  location  of  the  financial  institution  may  have  a  great  impact  on 
disintermediation among recipients. Assuming that receivers can exercise some control over the mode 
and location of receipt, the geographic proximity of a branch or the ability to pick up a remittance in an 
2 
 BIS Review 16/2006
office  (as  required  by  Western  Union)  can  determine  an  institution’s  ability  to  compete  in  the 
remittance market of the Albania, not to mention the possibility of mobilizing savings from these new 
potential clients. 
Remittances can be a point entry for many remitters and their families to the formal financial system. 
Many  emigrant  families  are  either  not  familiarized  with  banks  or  have  limited  access  with  financial 
institutions. The Bank of Albania through its public communication strategy is aiming to bring the public 
closer to banking products and services, including transfers. No matter the small size of remittance 
amounts. Even those small shares left by recipient families in bank accounts could assist economic 
development as more funds will be available in banks to provide loan products to private sector. The 
same  concern  was  initially  expressed  about  public  administration  salaries.  Now,  this  service  is 
provided  by  the  banking  system,  and  we  see  the  power  of  pooling  small  amounts.  For  commercial 
banks, their ability to market additional value-added services, such as savings products, loans or other 
types  of  credit  to  remittance  recipients,  will  require  the  achievement  of  a  critical  mass  of  customer 
acquisition, as well as a higher technology delivery mechanism, to bring down the average cost of the 
investment required to serve that client.  
Micro  credit  programs  and  qualitative  improvements  of  banking  infrastructure,  concerted  with 
introduction  of  new  financial  instruments  will  also  help  to  attract  more  remittances.  Promoting 
microfinance organizations as participants in remittances market, could offer certain advantages to the 
microfinance  sector,  to  the  government  and  to  remittance  recipients.  The  costs  of  this  expansion 
would primarily fall to the regulatory and supervisory authorities. We already took an important step in 
bringing  these  institutions  under  the  Bank  of  Albania  supervision  which  we  expect  to  improve  their 
status in the market by enhancing the confidence of operating with them. Microfinance institutions are 
already providing small amount loans to the low income class. Their existing programs allow them to 
leverage  their  network  and  geographic  reach  to  assist  remittance  senders  and  receivers  in  gaining 
access to low cost financial services, as well as access micro-saving and investment products. 
The  third  area  of  our  efforts  is  to  channel  the  workers’  remittances  toward  country’s  development 
needs.  The  formalization  is  a  necessary  step  but  does  not  ensure  the  role  of  remittances  as  a 
developing instrument. It is often claimed that emigrants are not the most preferred clients of banks, 
since this category is considered to have more unstable jobs and low level of income. First of all, this 
perception is not entirely correct and the results of the Italian team support the fact that the pool of 
emigrant savings is becoming significant enough to be a profitable business. The latest Italian bank 
entering the market in Albania (Banca Italiana di Sviluppo) is another witness of this reality. However, I 
would like to see the other banks operating in Albania to be as aggressive as their Italian counterparts 
in competing for this pool of savings sooner rather than later. There are also other financial services 
that  could  be  offered  to  the  remittance  recipients.  For  instance,  linking  workers’  remittances  with 
investments  by  channeling  remittance  flows  toward  micro-credit  loans  or  projects;  or  supporting 
migrants’ contribution and emigrants’ communities in the development of the country.  
A  concerning  signal  comes  out  from  our  survey  showing  emigrants  low  intention  to  invest  in  either 
private ventures and/or public developing projects. It tells us that the issue of remittances goes beyond 
the financial framework. Therefore we should think of new ways to improve incentives of emigrants to 
invest  back  in  Albania,  like  the  recent  government  initiative  to  offer  to  emigrants  the  opportunity  to 
return  and  invest  in  their  country  by  enjoying  a  three  year  exemption  from  the  profit  and  personal 
income taxes.  
In  conclusion,  I  would  add  that  a  distinctive  feature  that  makes  remittances  particularly  important 
instruments  for  the  economic  development  is  their  relative  stability  compared  to  private  capital  and 
financial  flows.  In  contrast  to  financial  flows  that  showed  a  high  volatility  during  1990s,  remittances 
continued  to flow  much  more  steadily. In  terms  of the “life cycle”  duration  of individual  remittances, 
theory holds that the longer the duration of migrant status, the lower the probability of large flows of 
remittances. This urges us to speed up our efforts to exploit the potential of remittances sooner rather 
than  later.   Their  immense  role  calls  for  new  ways  of  achieving  a  sustainable  growth,  a  full 
formalization and higher effectiveness of remittances. Obviously, this is not a battle we can win today. 
It requires a lot of attention, good will, but also a complete enforcement strategy. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 16/2006 
 3
