Nils Bernstein: Recent economic and financial developments in Denmark  
Speech by Mr Nils Bernstein, Governor of the National Bank of Denmark, at the Annual Meeting of the 
Association of Danish Mortgage Banks, Copenhagen, 27 April 2006.  
 The  Danish  economy  is  doing  well.  This  is  the  result  of  a  dedicated  effort  over  many  years  and 
probably  first  and  foremost  agreement  across  the  political  spectrum  on  the  fundamental  economic 
framework. One need not look far beyond Denmark to find examples of the opposite.  
In the short term the major challenge is to make the good times last, while preventing the economy 
from overheating. In the long term the challenge is to maintain a healthy balance between the labour 
force and the rest of the population. 
To  a  high  degree  the  large  government  surpluses  relate  to  the  strong  growth,  but  also  to 
extraordinarily high revenue from taxation of pension yields and corporate tax, including from the North 
Sea.  This  type  of  revenue  cannot  finance  permanently  higher  expenditure  or  tax  cuts.  The  sound 
economy must be maintained, which could prove to be a challenge, knowing that the number of 25-60 
year-olds, who are the core of today's labour force, will decline by almost 20,000 per year over the 
next ten years. 
Let me continue by repeating that Denmark pursues a fixed-exchange-rate policy vis-à-vis the euro. 
This means that we are part of the euro area's efforts to maintain inflation close to, but not above, 2 
per  cent.  The  fixed-exchange-rate  policy  has  been  one  of  the  means  to  achieve  and  maintain  the 
sound  Danish  economy.  It  has  ensured  a  steady  increase  in  real  incomes  for  wage  earners  and 
pensioners alike and facilitated Danish business enterprises' long-term planning. 
As we all know, it is impossible to have your cake and eat it. Consequently, under the fixed-exchange-
rate policy Danmarks Nationalbank's lending-rate decisions cannot take any account of homeowners' 
interest  expenses,  or  housing  prices  for  that  matter,  or  the  overall  economic  situation.  The  spread 
between the Danish lending rate and the benchmark interest rate of the euro area is determined solely 
by the foreign-exchange conditions. If there is a persistent tendency for foreign-exchange outflows we 
raise the lending rate without considering the day of the week or the time of day. This is explained 
clearly  in  descriptions  of  Danish  monetary  policy  over  the  years.  Nevertheless,  Danmarks 
Nationalbank's raising of the lending rate by 10 basis points in mid-February came as a surprise to 
some  market  players.  The  interest-rate  increase  was  Danmarks  Nationalbank's  reaction  to 
considerable outflows of foreign exchange and brought the foreign-exchange flows back into balance. 
This tool will also be wielded in future when made necessary by the foreign-exchange conditions. 
The mortgage-credit institutes and the rest of the financial sector are in good and profitable shape. 
This is among other things the result of strong activity in the housing market where low interest rates 
and other factors have pushed up prices and stimulated new construction. The prices of single-family 
houses have risen by 24 per cent in recent years. Apartments have seen even larger price increases. 
Greater Copenhagen and the major provincial towns have accounted for the strongest price increases, 
implying an uneven distribution across the country.  
Are the strong price increases signs of a price bubble about to burst? In overall terms that is hardly the 
case. The outlook of a continued high employment rate gives no reasons to expect housing prices to 
plummet.  Besides  the  favourable  development  in  employment  and  real  incomes,  other  factors 
explaining  the  price  increases  so  far  are  low  interest  rates,  new  loan  types,  including  deferred-
amortisation and adjustable-rate loans, and a strong preference for certain areas where the supply of 
housing  is  limited.  A  further  factor  is  the  freezing  of  property  taxes,  which  has  affected  prices  in 
particularly attractive areas where the progressive property tax has or would have an impact. 
Despite the most recent increase, interest rates remain very low in both nominal and real terms. In 
view  of  the  stronger  economic  outlook  for  Europe  and  continued  high  energy  prices  the  financial 
market generally expects interest rates to rise further in the near future. This will lead to lower housing 
prices than would otherwise be the case, perhaps even slightly decreasing housing prices, but for as 
long  as  the  favourable  economic  development  continues,  there  are  no  prospects  of  considerable 
large-scale price drops. 
BIS Review 34/2006 
 1
As  in  so  many  other  respects,  this  is  by  no  means  an  open  and  shut  case.  A  combination  of 
considerably  higher  interest  rates  and  unemployment  could  cause  housing  prices  to  fall  more 
dramatically. At present this is not the most likely scenario, however. 
The very strong price increases for real property have generated substantial capital gains. If a major 
proportion  of  these  gains  is  translated  into  consumption,  there  is an  increased  risk  of  the  economy 
overheating.  The  possibility  is  there.  In  2005  the  housing  wealth  of  the  households  rose  by 
approximately kr. 500 billion. In comparison, private consumption totalled approximately kr. 750 billion. 
The real property of many households thus appreciated by a good deal more than their earned income 
after tax. Fortunately, the households have generally managed the rising property values prudently. 
The increased housing wealth can probably only explain "additional consumption" of kr. 7-8 billion.  
Instead,  the  price  increases  have  increased  net  worth.  2005  saw  an  increase  in  net  worth  –  even 
when housing wealth is excluded. Substantial borrowing, e.g. from mortgage-credit institutes, was the 
order of the day, but to a great extent the loans were used to acquire financial claims, including for 
pension saving purposes. 
The households have quickly adopted the new loan types.  All in  all, the use of the new loan types 
gives no grounds for concern. An interest-rate increase by 1 percentage point for adjustable-rate loans 
would on average lead to an increase in the households' interest expenditure on mortgage-credit loans 
by 1.2 per cent of gross income. This corresponds to an annual increase of kr. 6,000 before tax for a 
household income of kr. 500,000. There will always be some exposed groups, who will have bitten off 
more  than  they  can  chew.  But  the  extent  of  this  does  not  by  a  long  way  pose  a  threat  to  financial 
stability. However, in the present situation there is every reason to think carefully about ones personal 
finances, to avoid ending up in the exposed category. 
History  has  proven  the  Danish  mortgage-credit  system  to  be  a  good  system  that  has  facilitated 
considerable product development. The annual meeting of the Association of Danish Mortgage Banks 
is  a  good  occasion  for  listing  some  of  the  qualities  of  the  Danish  system.  Thanks  to  the  legal 
framework,  including  loan  limits  and  the  balance  principle,  it  is  a  very  safe  system.  This  plays  an 
important role for the rating agencies. The system has also created a large and liquid bond market. A 
particularly important aspect is that the system offers individuals access to highly transparent home 
financing based on the market yield for the issued bonds plus administration fees.  
There is no doubt that new home-financing products will continue to be developed. The coming year 
will probably see some innovation in the bond area. Denmark will have to adapt its legal framework to 
gilt-edged  or  covered  bonds.  The  special  collateral  requirements  could  make  covered  bonds 
particularly attractive to investors and could thus also benefit borrowers. Initially it will be easier for the 
banks  to  accommodate  the  special  collateral  requirements  under  EU  legislation,  while  it  will  be 
considerably more difficult for the mortgage-credit institutes, unless they reduce the loan limits. 
It  goes  without  saying  that  this  may  shift  the  competitive  balance  between  the  banks  and  the 
mortgage-credit institutes.  
Danmarks Nationalbank believes that any price advantages related to covered bonds should accrue to 
the  borrowers.  This  can  best  be  achieved  by  implementing  legislation  that  allows  both  banks  and 
mortgage-credit  institutes  to  issue  covered  bonds  –  to  ensure  a  large  number  of  home-financing 
intermediaries, including major players – and by enabling the product development to take place within 
a framework that continues to ensure safe and transparent home financing at wholesale market rates. 
This calls  for  a  thorough  review  of  the future  regulations,  including  their  implications,  to  establish  a 
legal basis for covered bonds that provides a safe and secure home-financing system based on gilt-
edged bonds. 
Competition  is  a  good  thing.  The  development  of  new  products  in  the  financial  system  is  clearly 
subject to fierce competition. Success stories about price competition emerge from time to time. Fees 
for  electronic  share  trading  are a  case  in  point where  it  became  easier  for  the  users  to  assess  the 
market and vote with their feet. In view of the level of profitability in the financial system, I am sure that 
there is ample room for more success stories of this type. 
After  this  kindly  meant  encouragement  I  would  like  to  conclude  by  acknowledging  the  excellent 
cooperation  between  the  Association  of  Danish  Mortgage  Banks,  the  sector's  business  enterprises, 
and Danmarks Nationalbank. 
2 
 BIS Review 34/2006
