T T Mboweni: The outlook for the South African Economy in a period of 
uncertainty 
Address  by  Mr  T  T  Mboweni,  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  at  the  London  Capital 
Club, London, 27 June 2006.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
 Introduction 
1.  
I was very pleased to have received this invitation to address the members of the London Capital Club 
today for two reasons. Firstly, I suspect that this club might contain within its history the first seeds of 
central banking. I believe this Club builds on the proud foundations of the Gresham Club, named after 
Sir Thomas Gresham. And I was interested to learn that Sir Thomas was an advisor to King Edward VI 
in 1551 on the financial difficulties facing the country at the time. Sir Thomas implemented a set of 
plans to overcome these difficulties, which raised the external value of the pound. In his management 
of  these  problems,  one  can  perhaps  conclude  that  Sir  Thomas  was  one  of  the  first-ever  central 
bankers. Indeed, Sir Thomas might have had an easier task if England had already followed a policy 
of inflation targeting at the time as both South Africa and England do today.  
The second reason why I am delighted to be here today is that the South African Reserve Bank has a 
direct  association  with  the  London  Capital  Club.  One  of  our  former  Deputy  Governors,  Ian 
Plenderleith, CBE, serves on the Board of Advisors of the Club. I am therefore indeed honoured today 
to make a contribution to your deliberations but, more importantly, to enjoy lunch with you.  
Recent upheavals in the international markets have placed the spotlight again on emerging markets. 
There  is  disagreement  in  the  markets  as  to  what  this  burst  of  global  volatility  actually  reflects,  with 
answers ranging from inflation concerns, to global liquidity and to the growth outlook. South Africa has 
in the past few weeks experienced significant movements in the rand exchange rate and stock market 
prices. These developments may be seen by some as a threat to South Africa’s recent strong growth 
performance, as well as to the growth strategy of the government. But that should not necessarily be 
the case.  
Recent international developments 
2.  
Emerging  markets  have  enjoyed  an  extended  period  of  investor  exuberance  and  search  for  higher 
yield  over  recent  years,  which,  combined  with  a  generally  supportive  environment  of  strong  global 
growth  and  high  commodity  prices,  have  caused  their  currencies  to  appreciate,  equity  prices  to 
increase  and  bond  spreads  to  narrow.  Recently,  we  have  experienced  the  effects  of  greater 
uncertainty about future inflation, interest rates and growth in the major economies. These concerns, 
combined with a state of general nervousness about the fairly sharp increases recently in the prices of 
riskier assets such as equities and commodities, caused many investors to pause, take profits, square 
positions and generally adopt a lower-risk investment strategy.  
The increased risk aversion of global investors was reflected in a number of indicators: The volatility 
index of the Chicago Board of Exchange (or the VIX), which gives a general reflection of risk aversion 
in equity markets, doubled from just below 12 on 10 May to almost 24 on 13 June. Prices of foreign-
currency denominated bonds of emerging markets also fell, contributing to an increase in the spread 
of these bond yields over US Treasuries. The JPMorgan EMBI Plus spread widened from 176 on 10 
May to 232 on 13 June. The widening in spreads occurred across all the sub-indices of the EMBI plus, 
with Latin America the most affected. South Africa’s spread widened relatively less, from around 80 in 
mid-May to around 90 in mid June.  
The  initial  sell-off  of  higher-risk  assets  commenced  in  the  US  equity  markets  on  11  May  following 
increased market uncertainty regarding the outlook for global interest rates. A marked decline in the 
S&P 500 index was followed by similar trends in the equity markets of Europe, Japan and the UK. By 
mid-June, all the year-to-date gains in most of the major equity markets had been wiped out. Equity 
BIS Review 60/2006 
 1
prices in some emerging markets were even more affected. The South African equity market, which is 
dominated by the resources sector, declined by over 16 per cent from its peak reached in mid-May. 
A  number  of  emerging-market  currencies  depreciated  markedly.  Since  11  May  until  mid-June,  the 
Turkish lira depreciated by over 16 per cent and the Brazilian real by almost 11 per cent. The rand has 
not fared any better, having depreciated by almost 13 per cent over the same period. As is normally 
the case whenever investors cut their emerging-market exposures, the liquid South African market has 
been more severely affected than most of its peers. 
The rand exchange rate is strongly influenced by commodity prices, which in turn are dependent on 
global growth and also by the deteriorated sentiment towards emerging markets. Commodity markets 
also felt the effects of the sell-off of riskier assets. The price of gold declined from around US$725 per 
fine ounce in mid-May to around US$570 a month later. Similarly, platinum declined from a high of 
US$1331  per  ounce  in  May  to  a  low  of  US$1125  in  June.  It  should  be  noted  however  that  these 
changes are exaggerated by particularly strong upward price movements in the previous month. For 
example, the gold price averaged around US$550 per fine ounce in each of the first three months of 
this  year,  whilst  the  platinum  price  averaged  around  US$1040  per  ounce  in  these  months.  This 
suggests  that  there  had  been  some  overshooting  and  that  the  current  trends  may  be  an  inevitable 
correction, rather than a generalised collapse in commodity prices. However, the degree of volatility in 
commodity markets creates an uneasy environment for commodity-based currencies. 
Interestingly, despite the “sell-off” in emerging market assets since May, non-residents have remained 
net  buyers  of  South  African  financial  assets  and  there  have  been  significant  investment  flows  into 
South Africa over the past year. Non-resident investors bought a net R13 billion worth of South African 
equities during May 2006, and R460 million in the first half of June 2006. Despite generally negative 
sentiment towards emerging-market assets, they continued to buy R768 million worth of bonds in May, 
and R4,5 billion in June. These purchases brought the net amount of South African bonds and equities 
bought  in  the  year  to  mid-June  to  R68  billion,  compared  with  R41  billion  in  the  whole  of  last  year. 
Similarly, Britain’s Vodafone Group paid R21 billion earlier this year to take over VenFin’s stake in the 
local cellular operator, Vodacom. And towards the middle of last year, British bank Barclays bought a 
majority  stake  in  local  bank,  Absa,  for  an  amount  of  about  R33  billion,  making  this  most  likely  the 
single largest foreign investment in South Africa to date. 
While the market outlook has become more uncertain against the backdrop of a withdrawal of liquidity 
as  well  as  geopolitical  developments  which  have  impacted  on  the  international  oil  markets,  the 
macroeconomic landscape still appears to be generally favourable, although not without risks. Inflation 
pressures  seem  to  be  building  up  across  emerging  markets  whilst  trade  and  industrial  production 
trends look robust. High levels of international reserves and current account surpluses in a number of 
emerging market countries, together with reductions in external debt, have radically improved solvency 
ratios so that existing volatility, although very large, is unlikely to precipitate any systemic credit events 
in  emerging  markets.  This  is  in  contrast  to  the  Asian  crisis  in  1997/98,  which  was  generated  by 
imbalances  originating  in  emerging  markets.  These  recent  trends  have  also  left  their  mark  on  the 
South  African  financial  markets.  However,  not  much  has  changed  fundamentally  in  the  domestic 
economy, and there still seems to be significant appetite for South African financial assets, albeit with 
a  somewhat  higher  risk  premium  being  priced  in.  Although  South  Africa  is  not  a  current  account 
surplus  country,  our  low  level  of  foreign  indebtedness,  both  public  and  private,  and  improved 
international reserves position, in conjunction with upgrades from credit rating agencies in the past two 
years, means that we are likely to be less vulnerable to balance sheet effects that have characterised 
previous emerging market crises. 
The growth outlook 
3.  
From a broader perspective, the above suggests that although a period of heightened volatility and 
uncertainty may ensue, there should be no undue negative impact on South Africa’s growth prospects. 
In 2005 and 2005 the South African economy grew at a robust pace of 4,5 per cent and 4,9 per cent 
respectively. Growth in 2006 is expected to be moderately lower than that achieved last year following 
the 4,2 per cent measured in the first quarter of this year. This is in sharp contrast to the 3 per cent 
average annual growth experienced between 1994 and 2003.  
The  recent  strong  growth  performance  has  been  underpinned  by  strong  consumer  demand  which 
grew at annual rates of 6,5 per cent in 2004 and 6,9 per cent in 2005. Sustaining growth at higher 
levels will require significant structural reforms and an increase in investment relative to consumption 
2 
 BIS Review 60/2006
as a contributor to the growth process. Gross fixed capital formation has been growing at annual rates 
of over 8 per cent for the past three years, driven mainly by private sector investment. In recent years, 
however, parastatal and public sector investment growth has been extremely low, which accounts for 
the relatively modest ratio of gross fixed capital formation to GDP of 16,8 per cent in 2005. This ratio 
has however been on a rising trend since 2002.  
As you may be aware, the South African government has embarked on the Accelerated and Shared 
Growth Initiative of South Africa (ASGISA), with the intention of raising the GDP growth rate to around 
4,5  per  cent  until  2009  and  6  per  cent  thereafter.  Central  to  this  strategy  is  a  strong  focus  on 
infrastructural  investment.  As  indicated  in  the  Medium  Term  Budget  Policy  Statement  in  late  2005, 
government and public enterprise investment expenditure for the period April 2006 to March 2009 is 
planned to be about R370bn. This investment should not only raise current growth, but will also allow 
for sustained future growth through improved transport, communication and electricity provision. 
Estimating potential output of a country is a notoriously difficult thing. The problems of estimation are 
compounded when a country has been experiencing significant structural changes, as has been the 
case in South Africa. There is no doubt that over the past few years such changes have raised the 
efficiency and the potential output of the economy. Previous estimates by the IMF and others had put 
the potential rate of output growth at around 3 per cent per annum or lower. Preliminary research at 
the Bank estimates current potential output growth to be in the region of between 4 and 4,5 per cent, 
assuming no significant changes in the underlying economy. Other scenarios in this study show that if 
the investment initiatives contained in the government’s strategy come to fruition, a potential output 
growth rate of over 6 per cent can indeed be achieved and sustained. 
An important component of the future growth scenario is the availability of finance. South Africa has 
been running current account deficits in the recent past, and will therefore continue to be reliant on 
non-resident inflows to finance the investment-savings gap. In the past few years, these deficits have 
been more than financed by capital inflows which, in turn, are being attracted by the improved growth 
prospects in the economy. These inflows enabled the Bank to further increase its holdings of foreign 
exchange reserves. By the end of May, official gross gold and other foreign exchange reserves had 
increased to US$24,1 billion, while the international liquidity position had increased to US$20,4 billion. 
This  is  a  significant  improvement  on  the  negative  average  international  liquidity  position  of  almost 
US$10 billion in 2000.  
The stronger  reserves position  is  expected  to contribute  to  greater stability  in  the  foreign exchange 
market  and  reduce  South  Africa’s  vulnerability  to  external  shocks.  The  recent  inflows  have  been 
mainly equity or FDI inflows, reflecting the fact that favourable growth prospects have been key, and 
will be critical for future inflows. The sustainability of these flows will depend in part on the evolution of 
the  current  bout  of  volatility  in  international  markets  and  investor  perceptions  towards  emerging 
markets  in  general,  and  South  Africa  in  particular.  An  important  element  in  the  growth  outlook  is 
macroeconomic stability, which is where monetary policy makes its contribution. 
The role of monetary policy 
4.  
The mandate of the Bank is to achieve low inflation in the interest of sustainable economic growth and 
development. A low inflation environment contributes to growth and development by providing a more 
certain basis for investment decisions in the economy, and lowering overall risk.  
The  inflation-targeting  framework  adopted  in  February  2000  has  contributed  to  the  reduction  of 
inflation to low levels. For the past 32 months, CPIX inflation (i.e. headline inflation excluding mortgage 
interest  cost)  has  remained  within  the  target  range  of  3-6  per  cent,  despite  strong  output  and 
expenditure growth in the economy, and significantly higher international oil prices. Furthermore, there 
is evidence that inflation expectations have become entrenched at levels consistent with the target. 
These  developments  have  allowed  for  nominal  interest  rates  to  fall  to  levels  last  seen  in  the  late 
1970s. Between June 2003 and April 2005, the repo rate was reduced by a total of 650 basis points, 
although at the most recent Monetary Policy Committee meeting earlier this month, the repo rate was 
raised  by  50  basis  points  to  7,5  per  cent  per  annum.  Real  interest  rates  have  also  come  down 
somewhat and have become less variable.  
The recent repo rate increase, the first since September 2002, was motivated by the deteriorating risks 
to the inflation outlook. Apart from adverse oil price developments, the concerns of the Committee also 
centred around the continuing high levels of consumer demand, which have been reflected in rising 
levels of credit extension to the private sector and also the larger-than-usual current account deficit 
BIS Review 60/2006 
 3
on/of  the  balance  of  payments.  Twelve-month  growth  in  bank  loans  and  advances  extended  to  the 
private sector measured 23,1 per cent in April compared to 24,3 per cent in March, while asset-backed 
credit extended to the private sector continued to grow strongly at a year-on-year rate of 27,2 per cent 
in  April.  Although  there  were  few  signs  of  inflationary  consequences  at  that  stage,  the  impact  was 
being felt in the deficit on the current account of the balance of payments which had expanded to 6,4 
per cent of GDP by the first quarter of this year.  
As  we  observed  in  our  latest  Monetary  Policy  Review,  current  account  deficits  are  a  reflection  of 
higher domestic expenditure and are not in themselves inflationary. There is however a possible risk to 
the  exchange  rate  if  the  deficits are  perceived  to  be  unsustainable,  particularly  if  the deficits reflect 
higher consumption expenditure. This is particularly the case where the international markets are re-
rating  emerging  market  risk.  Under  these  circumstances,  there  is  the  risk  of  a  significant  exchange 
rate  adjustment  which  could  threaten  the  longer-term  attainment  of  the  inflation  target.  The  recent 
events  in  international  markets,  particularly  with  respect  to  New  Zealand  and  Iceland,  show  how 
sensitive market perceptions can be to large current account deficits. Moderately higher interest rates 
therefore  should  not  be  seen  to  be  undermining  growth.  Failure  to  respond  to  inflation  risks  could, 
however, be inimical to growth. 
Conclusion 
5.  
Despite  the  recent  turbulence  in  international  markets,  we  are  of  the  view  that  growth  prospects 
remain  sound  both  in  South  Africa  and  in  the  rest  of  the  world.  The  inflation  threats  are  likely  to 
subside given the resolute determination of central banks around the world to tighten policy. Although 
the global interest rate environment may need further tightening and the results of which might be a 
moderation in global growth, it is unlikely to lead to a significant downturn in global growth. Combined 
with  continued  strong  growth  in  China  and  other  Asian  countries,  this  should  underpin  commodity 
prices. Nevertheless serious risks remain, particularly those posed by geopolitical events which could 
have  an  impact  on  international  oil  prices.  Domestically,  the  Bank  will  continue  to  play  its  part  by 
contributing to the favourable growth environment. This we do through ensuring that inflation remains 
within the target band of 3-6 per cent. 
Thank you.  
4 
 BIS Review 60/2006
