X P Guma: Low domestic inflation in an environment of high oil prices, 
vigorous household spending and credit demand and a widening current 
account deficit; and the outlook for interest rates in South Africa 
Luncheon address by Dr X P Guma, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at Investec, 
Pretoria, 4 July 2006. 
 Inflation in the world economy has declined significantly in recent years and has remained relatively 
subdued over the past few years despite a significant rise in commodity prices and strong economic 
growth. Chart 1, based on World Bank data illustrates the trend in world inflation, clearly showing the 
peak  that  occurred  at  a  rate  in  excess  of  35  percent  per  annum  in  the  early  1990s  and  the  rapid 
deceleration to rates around 5 per cent per annum thereafter. 
South Africa’s inflation performance began to improve during the 1990s, as the next chart indicates; 
and subsequent to the adoption of the inflation targeting framework, inflation as measured by CPIX 
entered and has remained within the target range since September 2003. 
Oil  prices  have  risen  sharply  since  2003  (as  the  next  chart  indicates),  on  account  of  various 
determinants.  During  this  year,  the  spot  price  of  Brent  crude  oil  has  increased  dramatically  from 
approximately US$59.9 per barrel in February to levels around US$70.5 per barrel towards the end of 
April and an average of US$68.15 per barrel in June. 
Continued brisk expansion in final consumption expenditure by households has been underpinned by 
a  steady  increase  in  household  disposable  income,  continued  buoyancy  in  the  real  estate  and 
securities markets and what some describe as an accommodative interest rate environment. Overall 
household debt as a percentage of annualised disposable income increased to a record level of 68 
percent in the first quarter of 2006. 
Robust  growth  in  gross  domestic  expenditure  and  a  concomitant  strong  increase  in  the  value  of 
merchandise imports resulted in a sizeable deficit on the trade account of the balance of payments in 
the first quarter of 2006. Given the larger shortfall on the services and income account with the rest of 
the  world  and  the  somewhat  subdued  performance  of  South  Africa’s  exports  –  notwithstanding  the 
buoyancy of international commodity prices, the current account of the balance of payments registered 
a deficit equivalent to 6.4 percent in the first quarter of 2006. 
Interestingly,  as  others  have  observed,  despite  the  sell-off  in  emerging  markets  since  May,  non-
residents have remained net buyers of South African financial assets and there have been significant 
investment flows into South Africa over the past year. Non-resident investors bought a net R13 billion 
worth of South African equities during May 2006 and R460 million the first half of June 2006. Despite 
generally  negative  sentiment  towards  emerging  market-market  assets,  they  continued  to  buy  R768 
million worth of bonds in May and R4.5 billion in June. 
About this there can be little argument, for all that I have done is to summarise the facts. It is also not 
in dispute that the repo rate, the rate at which the South African Reserve Bank will lend to the banks, 
was increased recently, primarily on account of deteriorating risks to the outlook for inflation. 
What we can debate, and what I look forward to hearing your views about, is the nature of the conflict 
regarding  the  outlook  for  interest  rates  in  South  Africa.  The  South  African  Reserve  Bank  Monetary 
Policy Review (May 2006) states it as follows: “On the one hand the inflation outlook, as reflected in 
the  recent  inflation  forecasts  of  the  Bank,  has  improved  significantly…  “on  the  other  hand,  there  a 
number of developments that have led the MPC to remain vigilant”. This was before the last meeting 
of the MPC. Does a dilemma remain and how would you characterise it? 
Let me have your views. 
BIS Review 66/2006 
 1
