Burhanuddin Abdullah: Managing the banking industry within the new 
dynamics of the Indonesian economy 
Speech  by  Mr  Burhanuddin  Abdullah,  Governor  of  Bank  Indonesia,  at  the  Annual  Banker’s  Dinner 
2006, Jakarta, 13 January 2006. 
 Fellow Bankers in Indonesia, Senior colleagues at Bank Indonesia, Distinguished guests, Ladies and 
Gentlemen 
Assalamu’alaikum wr.wb, 
Good evening and greetings to you all, 
To  begin,  I  would  like  to  invite  all  of  you  to  join  me  in  expressing  praise  and  thanksgiving  to  God 
Almighty for once again extending us the opportunity to meet in this pleasant and congenial setting at 
the  Bankers’  Dinner  2006.  For  the  banking  community,  the  Dinner  is  an  event  in  which  we  have 
established a tradition of taking time to reflect and build our communication with one another, among 
Bank Indonesia and fellow bankers in Indonesia.  
An  event  like  this  is  an  opportunity  for  reflection,  to  look  at  ourselves  in  front  of  a  large  mirror  and 
assess  our  strengths  and  shortcomings,  make  the  necessary  improvements,  and  move  on  to  the 
future.  We are reminded of a quote from Chairil Anwar, oft cited at the beginning of each year, “Take 
a look at yourself in the mirror, but not to get ready for partying”. Tonight we shall reflect, self-improve 
so that we could continue to deliver benefits to the people of Indonesia. 
In departure from our tradition of hosting this dinner only for bankers, tonight we are privileged to have 
with us special guests: The Economic Coordinating Minister, The Finance Minister, and The National 
Development  Planning  Minister.  Also  present  with  us  today  are  members  of  the  Indonesian 
Parliament, the Chair of the Indonesian Chamber of Commerce and Industry, economic analysts, and 
leading media figures.  Your presence here this evening clearly signifies that monetary and banking 
issues are of concern to us all.  
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen: 
As I start to speak tonight, I am reminded by a night similar to this in early 2005. There, I stood before 
you ladies and gentlemen as I am now. However, that night was different from tonight as there was a 
big cloud of worry overshadowing us.  By end of 2004, most of us had planned to ring in the coming 
2005 with great celebration.  To the contrary, at the end of 2004 we saw a massive Tsunami disaster 
engulf Aceh and Northern Sumatera. We were left aghast and speechless.  We all felt sadness. Tens 
of  thousands  of  our  fellow  countrymen  lost  lives  and  everything  they  had.    We  were  touched  by  a 
sense of shared loss. As the sadness and mourning began to finally ebb, a breeze of hope started to 
flow. Slowly but surely, optimism towards Indonesia’s economic revival was planted in the chests of 
the people.   
And tonight, I would like to ask you to give a momentary look at what we have achieved in 2005, to 
review our implemented policies and to draw some lessons that can be learned and implemented for 
the coming years. Subsequently, I would like to convey several steps and thoughts aimed to increase 
the role of Bank Indonesia and the banking industry in supporting the nation’s economic recovery. We 
hope this effort is inline with the government’s policies towards economic recovery. In the end, we find 
that we all have a common goal: to reach an Indonesian society that is just and prosperous. 
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen: 
During the first quarter of 2005, optimism ran strong throughout our nation.  Economic indicators were 
on track.  Nevertheless, we knew that our economy, having only just pulled out of crisis, still lacked the 
resilience to withstand external and internal shocks.  Excess liquidity, disharmony between strategy 
and policy implementation, and the lack of economic infrastructure resilience towards external shocks 
are among the risks potentials our economic stability must face.  
This  vulnerability  became  apparent  in  the  second  semester  of  2005.  Global  financial  imbalances, 
increases in world oil prices, and hikes in domestic fuel prices in October were followed by an increase 
in inflation (17.11%) in 2005. The Rupiah depreciated by 8.5% and the Balance of Payments showed 
a  deficit  of  USD  778  million.  This  contrasts  with  2004’s  surplus  of  USD  309  million.  The  World 
BIS Review 1/2006 
 1
Economic Forum stated that Indonesia’s competitiveness slipped from 69th position in 2004 to 74th in 
2005. This position placed Indonesia in a rung lower than Vietnam. However, despite all the problems, 
we have to be grateful that our economy was able to maintain a growth of 5.3 – 5.6% in 2005. This 
growth has helped provide work for only some of those entering the job market and leaving the others 
adding to the “openly unemployed” statistics. 
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen: 
From the policy making point of view, 2005 is a year full of challenges. The macroeconomic stability 
faced great challenges. Faced with the shocks, Bank Indonesia issued several policies which included 
tightening  of  the  economy’s  liquidity,  taking  measures  to  minimize  currency  speculation,  managing 
demand and supply of state owned enterprise’s foreign currency, and intensifying the commitment to 
increase  provisions  of  foreign  exchange  liquidity  facilities  in  order  to  secure  the  situation  through 
Bilateral  Swap  Arrangement  mechanisms.  These  policies  proved  to  be  effective  in  managing  the 
volatile  movements  of  the  exchange  rate.  The  exchange  rate  returned  under  control  and  thus 
remained stable at around Rp9.800 to the US dollar at year’s end. 
In the midst of these difficult trials and challenges in 2005, we were grateful that the banking industry 
continued to consistently function well in its service to the public.  Credit growth exceeded third party 
fund  growth,  with  the  Loan  to  Deposit  Ratio  (LDR)  significantly  up  to  68%.  Bank’s  financing  to 
prospective  economic  sectors,  such  as  the  consumption  sector  and  the  Micro,  Small  and  Medium 
Enterprises (MSME’s), remains high at levels exceeding 30%. However, a note of caution is in order 
here as NPL’s tend to move to unfavorable levels. 
From the money and capital markets, the increase in interest rates in the second semester of 2005 
has triggered redemptions from several financial instruments, particularly so for fixed income mutual 
funds. The mutual funds industry got a bitter taste of large-scale redemptions after times of boom. 
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen: 
Based  on  the  2005  experiences  in  the  economy  and  banking  system,  we  can  ask  ourselves  what 
lesson is there to be learned? There are four lessons: 
• 
First,  in  the  midst  of  a  highly  dynamic  global  economic,  we  must  be  able  to  recognize 
problems  immediately  and  make  adequate  decisions  quickly.  Our  inability  to  make  a 
timely policy responds to external developments, such as rising world oil prices and global 
imbalances,  have  often  caused  us  to  lose  momentum,  which  brings  a  higher  cost 
consequences to be borne by the economy. 
Second, the collapse of the mutual fund industry after such rapid growth has become a 
source of financial system instability. In this regard, early warnings from authorities of the 
financial  sector  become  necessary  to  prevent  the  need  for  sudden  and  drastic 
adjustments in portfolios. We also need to continuously improve the coordination between 
the capital market authority (Bapepam) and Bank Indonesia. 
Third, our relatively thin foreign exchange market that is dominated by large players like 
Pertamina, is frequently colored by excessive volatility. This relatively high volatility would 
negatively affect market confidence to the prospects of our macroeconomic stability. This 
problem would continue if we do not make structural improvements in foreign exchanges 
liquidity by improving exports performance and capital inflows.   
Fourth,  the  need  to  think  of  ways  to  lessen  our  dependency  on  fuel  products.  In  this 
regard, the development of alternative energy sources and public transportation with low 
levels of fuel consumption will become a must in the years to come. 
   Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen: 
Stepping into year 2006, it is common that in entering the new year, we would define the expectations 
we want to achieve as well as identify challenges we hope to overcome within the coming year. In my 
view, the major challenge we will face in 2006 will be to bring the economy to a new equilibrium.   
From  the  external  point  of  view,  several  international  institutions  have  projected  that  the  growth 
prospects for the world economy will not change much. It will remain at around 4.3%, with America 
and China still as the main engine in the global economic growth. Based on those external conditions, 
we  predict  that  the  dynamics  of  the  2006  economy  will  largely  depend  on  coordination  between 
2 
 BIS Review 1/2006
monetary,  fiscal,  and  the  real  sector’s  policies.    Such  coordination  needs  to  be  done  optimally  to 
manage macro economy stability while promoting economic growth. 
• 
From the monetary side, Bank Indonesia will consistently make efforts to reduce the rate 
of inflation to a single digits in 2006 to allow interest rates to be gradually lowered in order 
to boost consumption and private sector investment.    
From the fiscal side, fiscal stimuli through government consumption and investment would 
provide a strong jump start towards economic recovery, especially if the government could 
make  use  of  the  unrealized  2005  budgeted  spending,  carry  it  forward  to  2006  and 
immediately make it realized within the first quarter of this year.  
From  the  real  sector  side,  economic  prospects  will  be  more  dynamic  if  the  previously 
planned infrastructure projects can be realized.   
  If coordination of these policies is able to be conducted coherently, we will see an improved economic 
growth  supported  by  the  needed  investment  and  consumption  levels  from  the  second  semester  of 
2006 Overall, Bank Indonesia projects that the 2006 GDP will reach 5.0-5.7%. 
Growth of that level is predicted to be achievable if investment financing sources from both domestic 
and  abroad  can  be  secured.    Aside  from  stimuli  provided  by  government’s  capital  expenditures,  I 
expect the banking industry to continue its role in funding long-term investment projects. An optimistic 
level of economic growth may be achieved if the banking industry at least maintains last year’s level of 
credit extensions. Foreign sources are also assumed to play a significant role as well. It was noted in 
2006  that  foreign  funding  contributed  up  to  approximately  40%  of  that  year’s  growth  level.  These 
foreign  sources  comprise  of  Foreign  Direct  Investment  (FDI),  portfolio  investments,  and  foreign 
corporate loans. Therefore, it is apparent that the steps we must take in improving investment climate 
becomes the keys of success in achieving the level of growth we strive for.  
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen: 
The  dynamics  of  the  macro  economy  in  its  path  to  reach  a  new  equilibrium  will  in  itself  impact 
developments in the banking industry. An example could be seen from the credit market. The increase 
in interest, the increasing burden carried by the real sector, and lowered purchasing power result to 
predictions of a lower credit demand. From the supply side, the increase of the real sector’s credit risk 
will  cause  the  banking  industry  to  be  increasingly  careful  in  considering  the  potential  debtor’s 
repayment  capacity.  From  the  various  discussion  forums  we  have  held,  we  are  under  the  tentative 
impression and conclusion that the banking industry percieves that there are many risks involved in 
efforts to rejuvenate the real sector. The banking industry holds doubts regading the real sector. Some 
of these doubts may have come from, among others, the economy’s level of competitiveness and and 
that of several commodities which nearly reached nadir levels, the limited information and the banking 
industry’s  limited  understanding  towards  the  complexities  of  particular  industries,  and  unclarity  in 
development direction and development priorities chosen in certain industries in a particular period. All 
of this exist even though it is understood that clear information regarding to the above issues become 
a critical navigational tool for banks in allocating their funding. 
The  opposite  occurs  in  the  fund  market.  The  amount  of  third  party  funds  collected  by  the  banking 
sector has been continuously increasing. The community in general believes that the banking industry 
is  an  institution  that  is  able  to  provide  ease  and  benefits  towards  their  business  activities.  It  is  our 
prediction  that  the  third  party  fund  growth  rate  continue  towards  levels  similar  to  those  of  in  2005. 
Despite the positive outlook, deposit growth in 2006 demands our deftness and care in management 
considering  risk  factors  that  are  increasingly  sensitive.  As  we  understand,  starting  from  2006, 
guarantee coverage of the Deposit Insurance Corporation will gradually decrease from Rp 5 billion on 
March 2006 to become Rp 100 million in March 2007. Taking this into regard, the real competition in 
deposit taking should be in areas of management and service quality, and banks soundness. 
The  ultimate  effect  of  the  developments  I  have  elaborated  are  that  profit  and  capital  levels  are 
increasingly pressured. Taking that into consideration, for 2006, we view that a short term pain, while 
harvesting  long  term  gains  business  strategies  are  a  good  choice.  Bank  Indonesia  views  that  the 
longer  run  perspective,  which  puts  financial  system  stability  on  top  of  short  term  profits,  should 
become the option. 
 
 
BIS Review 1/2006 
 3
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen: 
I would now like to convey to you Bank Indonesia’s policy steps in banking. We have divided the policy 
steps  into  two  according  to  its  completion  periods,  short  term  and  intermediate  to  long  term  policy 
steps.  There  are  four  short  term  policy  steps  aimed  towards  providing  banks  with  bigger  room  to 
maneuver in performing its intermediary function in 2006, five intermediate to long term policy steps 
which basically is an elaboration of Indonesian Banking Architecture (API).   
As  the  first  short  term  step,  Bank  Indonesia  will  implement  temporary  adjustment  to  the 
regulation  regarding  the  quality  of  productive  assets,  while  still  maintaining  the  priciples  of 
prudentiality. Regulation 7/2/PBI/2005 issued in 2005 has been successful in bringing about positive 
changes in the debtor behavior in dealing with banks.  With such regulation, debtor’s exposures and 
performance will be tightly monitored by the bank providing its financing.  On the other hand, we also 
realize  that  the  implementation  of  this  regulation  during  these  challenging  times  will  not  be  easy. 
Mounting  production  costs  from  higher  oil  prices  and  cost  of  capital  following  increases  in  interest 
rates weakens the corporate balance sheets.  The uniform classification requires improvements in the 
operation  of  the  credit  bureau,  a  key  part  within  the  banking  industry’s  infrastructure  that  provides 
debtor information on a symmetric basis to all banks.  At this point, the credit bureau is still on the 
development process, with full operation expected to begin in the next one or two years. 
Considering the abovementioned aspects, this year, we will be making adjustments to Regulation No. 
7/2/PBI/2005. This policy is a temporary measure which in essence is a simplification and phasing in 
of  the  regulatory  provisions.  For  this  reason,  the  phasing  in  of  these  provisions  will  begin  with 
syndicated loans, which is already supported by adequate means of communication and later to be 
followed by bigger debtors and debtors of certain amounts.  
Second,  Bank  Indonesia  will  consider  a  downward  revision  in  the  statutory  reserves 
requirement when the condition of macroeconomic stability permits. The adjustment in statutory 
reserves requirement will be considered for the first quarter of this year. This consideration is based on 
the  belief  that  the  2006  macro  economy  will  reach  a  relatively  stable  level  and  thus  liquidity  of  the 
banking sector can be relaxed. 
Third, Bank Indonesia will work steadily to improve public access to sharia banking services. 
We are preparing a regulation that permits branches of conventional banks with a Sharia Unit to also 
provide sharia transactions through office channeling. By providing office channeling at conventional 
branches,  banks  will  no  longer  need  to  open  Sharia  Unit  branches  in  numerous  locations  to  offer 
sharia banking services.   
Fourth,  Bank  Indonesia  will  pursue  efforts  to  expand  the  coverage  of  banking  services with 
focus on the Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises (MSME) sector for more equitable outreach 
extending  to  all  remote  areas.  We  will  take  several  steps  to  realize  this  policy  particularly  by 
empowering the role and functions of the banking sector in providing the service truly needed by the 
MSME.  The  mapping  survey  conducted  clearly  shows  that  the  MSME  sector  has  a  high  resilience 
level. Profit levels of this sector is in the range of 10 – 50%, and profit levels of 50% is achieved by 
30% of business in the MSME sector.  It is clear that the MSME sector is prospective in terms of credit 
and business management, and more importantly, there is a relatively big portion of this sector that is 
capable to absorb and conduct healthy principles of economics without the need for subsidies. We will 
continue the mapping survey in 2006 to identify MSME sectors which truly holds potential and capacity 
to grow and develop. The results of the mapping process will then be synchronized with the Basel II 
concepts to accommodate the need to finance the MSME sector. Basel II provides special treatment to 
the retail portfolio by assigning a lower risk weight, assessments toward debtors in this group on a 
portfolio  basis,  and  requiring  a  more  flexible  criteria  towards  developments  in  the  economy  and 
accommodate financing issues of small businesses. In this regard, we will make adjustments in Risk 
Weighted Assets for certain retail business, including Risk Weighted Assets calculations for financing 
the micro and small sector. We hope that through this step, the banking sector will have a regained 
sense of enthusiasm and more room to provide financing support to various businesses in this sector. 
Distinguished  guests,  ladies  and  gentlemen:  God  willing,  we  will  issue  regulations  regarding  to  the 
revision to Bank Indonesia Regulation 7/2/2005. Office Channeling, and MSME this month. 
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen 
For the intermediate to long term, we will focus all regulations and policies towards the strengthening 
of banks operational factors and the implementation of prudential principles. Therefore, as a vision, we 
may expect to see a more complete picture of the banking industry’s new shape by the end of 2010.  It 
4 
 BIS Review 1/2006
would be a banking industry with greater resilience, higher competitiveness in the global environment, 
and contributing towards the development of the nation’s economy. To serve these purposes, we will 
issue the following policies: first, to reinforce capital structures in order to accelerate the consolidation 
process; second, to expand the role of foreign banks in the economy, third, to build the readiness of 
the banking system in anticipation of future developments in banking business; fourth, to strengthen 
bank internal management; and fifth, to improve the banking system infrastructure.  
First, reinforce capital structures in order to accelerate the consolidation process. During the 
beginning  of  2006,  we  will  conduct  an  in-depth  evaluation  of  bank  business  plans  through  2008. 
According to our records, there is at least 27 banks which face an uphill struggle to reach the Rp 80 
billion  capital  requirement  by  the  end  of  2007.  We  view  that  in  order  to  make  the  consolidation 
program effective we will need to focus on the supervision process as follow up steps. By referring to 
Bank  Indonesia  Regulation  No.  7/15/PBI/2005  regarding  to  Minimum  Tier-1  Capital  for  Commercial 
Banks, we will be able to see the effectiveness of the consolidation acceleration process during the 
first  quarter  of  2006.  This  may  be  done  through  the  evaluation  of  action  plans  to  be  submitted  by 
banks with capital levels under Rp 100 billion. 
I should emphasize that Bank Indonesia will not hesitate to take necessary actions to ensure that the 
regulations regarding to limitations in banking activities is upheld should regulation 7/15 cannot be met 
by a certain bank. These policies are necessary to ensure that the banking industry develops in the 
desired direction for the future.  
Second,  expand  the  role  of  foreign  banks  in  the  economy.  As  we  know,  during  the  last  three 
years, we have seen steady expansion in foreign ownership.  Foreigners now hold 48.51% ownership 
of the Indonesian banking industry, comparing to the government’s decreasing stake of the 37.45%.  
Amongst Indonesia’s 131 banks, 41 are under the ownership control of foreign investors.    
Bank Indonesia’s policy regarding foreign ownership in banking has been very clear. We have been 
very open.  We realize that with their various strengths, foreign ownership banks have been able to 
bring  added  value  to  the  Indonesian  banking  industry.  Their  role  in  channeling  capital  flows, 
supporting  bonds  secondary  market  activity,  supporting  international  trade,  creating  product 
innovations,  and  transferring  knowledge,  are  decipherable.  Foreign  banks  and  foreign  ownership  of 
domestic  banks  has  created  a  positive  circumstance  for  the  strengthening  of  the  national  banking 
industry. We convey our sincere thank you for all that have been done. 
However, we also have hopes that foreign banks, as part of the national banking industry, increase 
their roles in supporting financing for the development. 
One of our studies indicates that foreign banks, both foreign bank branches and joint venture banks, 
have a relatively small role in the intermediation process. In the post-crisis period, foreign and joint 
venture banks moved relatively slowly in restoring their levels of lending. When other banks embarked 
on credit expansion in mid-2001, lending by foreign banks on contrary declined and even showed a 
negative credit expansion during the 2002-2003 period. Going forward, I expect and would like to see 
foreign banks and joint venture banks to participate more in Indonesia’s economic revival through its 
financing activities as often said by their officials. 
With the larger presence of foreign banks in the banking industry, it is understandable that the number 
of expatriate staffs in Indonesia is on the increase. However, to create greater opportunities for local 
talents,  Bank  Indonesia  will  limit  the  use  of  expatriate  staff  in  middle  management  levels,  with  the 
exception  for  positions  that  cannot  yet  be  filled  by  the  domestic  work  force.  Bank  Indonesia  will 
prepare a policy guideline concerning the development of human resources in the banking sector. This 
policy will take important notice regarding the presence and role of expatriate staff, which presence 
should be temporary, and during their stay, they are obliged to conduct transfer of know-how to local 
staffs through various training processes.  
Another topic related to foreign banks is regarding to ownership. It may be seen that several foreign 
banks are owned by the same ultimate shareholder. From the point of view of bank supervision, this is 
obviously  neither  effective  nor  efficient.  The  same  should  also  hold  true  for  the  bank  owners 
themselves. It is not easy to harmonize the business strategy of several banks under their control and 
avoid unnecessary competition. For this reason, we are looking at the possibility of adopting a single 
presence policy for banks under foreign ownership control. Under the single presence policy, ultimate 
shareholders controlling more than one bank in Indonesia will be asked to consolidate their ownership.   
 
BIS Review 1/2006 
 5
Third, Bank Indonesia will build the readiness of the banking system in anticipation of future 
developments in banking business. Regarding to a global trend in the banking industry, it can be 
said that consolidation is under way between almost all ownership of major banking institutions and 
other financial industry corporations (such as insurance, money market, securities, mutual funds, and 
other related derivative activities). Over time, this has rapidly become widespread practice, producing 
a  change  in  the  nature  of  a  bank’s  business  from  conventional  operations  to  the  more  complex 
business of universal banking.   
Universal  banking  is  a  development  that  we  must  anticipate  as  part  of  the  future  of  the  national 
banking industry. Considering the possible consequences, we will be very cautious and selective in 
the policy to open the possibility to universal banking activities in Indonesia.     
Fourth,  strengthen  bank  internal  management.  The  fast  pace  development  of  information 
technology  requires  a  level  playing  field  in  banking  activities  to  enable  the  global  market  to  be 
accessible from all corners of the world. This will force us to realign our operational standards in order 
to survive and to win in the competitive international banking world. 
Understanding the importance of this issue, in the coming years, the implementation of best practices 
in good governance and Basel II should become our focus of attention. It is hoped that when the time 
comes where the momentum of strengthening shifts to become the momentum of growth, we will be 
equipped  with  effective  operational  capacities  which  allow  us  to  dynamically  move  forward  in  a 
sustainable manner. 
Fifth, improve the banking industry infrastructure. We realize that a strong stable financial system, 
an  efficient  and  effective  operating  industry,  and  consumers  that  fully  understand  their  rights  and 
obligations  will  only  materialize  given  that  the  supporting  infrastructure  is  able  to  facilitate  the 
developing dynamics. 
It  is  for  that  reason  that  improvements  of  banking  industry  must  receive  top  priority.  In  2006,  Bank 
Indonesia will improve and strengthen infrastructures in five areas, i.e., improving the Financial Sector 
Safety Net, the establishment of APEX banks for Rural Banks (BPR’s), Banking Mediation Agency, 
Bank Research Institutions in various areas of Indonesia, and the regulation of Card Based Payment 
Facilities.  
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen: 
All of this is what I intend to convey to you tonight. It is not hard to imagine the magnitude of problems 
we must face ahead if we fail to act correctly and quickly. Our economic growth prospect is less than 
optimal,  world  oil  prices  may  endure  shocks,  global  imbalances  are  predicted  to  rise,  and  inflation 
pressure  risks  remain  high.  All  the  while,  our  time  to  act  is  very  limited  before  the  effects  of  those 
various problems make its way to the banking and financial industry, and ultimately to our daily lives. 
This  gives  us  great  reason  not  to  delay  our  actions.  It  is  my  hope  that  the  several  policy  steps  I 
mentioned will be able to fix the various problems within the banking sector. 
To take the steps that I have elaborated, it is obvious that many sacrifices must be made. Therefore, 
we  must  continue  to  work  hard  and  rest  only  when  we  reach  our  goals.  The  banking  sector  will 
continuously improve itself while Bank Indonesia will consistently and with strong discipline guard the 
steps to take towards the improvements.  This nation will also continue to work until all that is aspired, 
a society that is just and prosperous, is achieved. 
Once again, I would like to wish you a Happy New Year for 2006. May God Almighty bless us in this 
new year to take the necessary steps for a better future. 
6 
 BIS Review 1/2006
