Mervyn King: Monetary policy developments 
Speech  by  Mr  Mervyn  King,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  at  the  Lord  Mayor’s  Banquet  for 
Bankers and Merchants of the City of London, London, 21 June 2006. 
 My Lord Mayor, Mr Chancellor, My Lords, Aldermen, Mr Recorder, Sheriffs, Ladies and Gentlemen: 
Chancellor,  I  know  how  much  store  you  put  on  education.  So,  in  the  modern  spirit  of  audience 
participation, let’s see how our City audience matches up to the standards of the past. One hundred 
years ago, candidates for employment in the Bank of England were required to take an examination. 
The arithmetic paper contained 16 questions to be completed in three hours. I’m going to give you just 
two questions and you will have either 15 minutes or the length of my speech, whichever is the shorter 
and I am in no doubt as to your preference on that, to find the answers. 
Qu.1: Simplify the expression; 
2
9
1
3
 4
 1
1
2
5
6
1
 1
13
1
of
1
−
3
5
7
−
8 12
 Qu.2: A person invested £2,205 in a 3% Stock at 90. He afterwards sold out at 93 1/2, and invested 
the proceeds in a 4 1/2 percent Stock at 98. What change was thereby made in his income? 
Answers  can  be  sent  to  the  Financial  Services  Authority.  No  compensation  is  available  if  you  are 
incorrectly advised by your neighbour or any other person from the financial sector. 
Twenty  years  ago,  the  City  was  anxiously  awaiting  its  revolution  -  Big  Bang.  If  ever  there  was  an 
example of structural change in response to global competition, Big Bang was it. None of the leading 
broking and jobbing firms of the time now survives. Yet the City, and the people who work here, are 
more successful today than at any time in its history. Few in 1986 could have imagined how much the 
City would change and how far its domain would extend - from Canary Wharf to the West End, no 
longer a single Square Mile but a banker’s dozen.  
A key ingredient of the City’s success has been, as the Lord Mayor remarked, a stable set of rules 
within which to play up and play the game. Simple, clear rules of the game are essential for a market 
economy  to  function.  But  excessive  regulation  makes  life  difficult  for  us  all.  In  March  of  this  year  I 
received a letter from a certain government department which read as follows: 
“Dear Mr. King; I am writing to inform you about how the changes to Crown immunity … in relation to 
planning legislation, will affect flying national flags … . Flags are defined as advertisements under the 
Town and Country Planning (Control of Advertisements) Regulations 1992. Under these regulations 
you  are  allowed  to  fly  the  national  flag  of  any  country  …  from  a  single  vertical  flagpole  without 
requiring  the  prior  express  consent  of  the  local  planning  authority.  The  European  Union  flag  is  not 
classified as a national Flag under the current regulations. … the Office of the Deputy Prime Minister is 
proposing to change the Regulations”. Until then, however, consent is required. The letter continued: “I 
have been advised that consent usually takes six to eight weeks to obtain and costs £75. You need to 
send the completed advertisement consent form plus fee with a covering letter explaining when and 
where  you wish  to  fly  the flag  providing  details of  the  size  of  the  flag and  photos of  the  flagpole  in 
relation to the building.”  
Chancellor, you can be sure that the Bank of England will abide by the rules - although we may not fly 
many  flags,  both  literally  and  metaphorically.  The  Bank  now  has  a  very  clear  focus  on  maintaining 
monetary and financial stability - the former defined by the inflation target and the latter by the revised 
Memorandum of Understanding between Bank, FSA and Treasury published in March.  
The great strength of the 1997 reforms to the monetary policy process is that they establish clear rules 
of the game for making decisions on interest rates. The Monetary Policy Committee sets interest rates 
each month to meet the inflation target. But how do we implement those decisions in the market? Our 
objective is to ensure that the policy rate set at the monthly meetings of the MPC is the rate in the 
money markets until the following meeting. For many years, the Bank operated several times a day in 
BIS Review 61/2006 
 1
the money markets, but that hyperactive approach did not succeed in stabilising the overnight interest 
rate which remained more volatile than in most other advanced countries. It was important to move to 
a simpler system in order to reduce that volatility, and the new system of money market operations, 
which was introduced last month, has done precisely that. The Bank now deals in the markets only 
once  a  week.  Almost  all  banks  and  building  societies  now  have  access  to  the  Bank.  And  they  no 
longer  have  to  balance  their  books  with  us  at  the  close  of  business  every  day,  but  instead  must 
achieve a target balance with us on average over the month running between MPC meetings. For the 
first time in its history, the Bank pays interest on reserve balances held by the commercial banks with 
us. The rate paid by the Bank on those reserve balances is the rate set by the MPC - Bank Rate is 
back.  
Great credit is due to the teams led by Andrew Bailey and Paul Tucker who together managed the 
introduction of the new system, proving that, as Cameron Cobbold remarked in 1958, “the Bank is a 
bank, not a study group”. 
The  1997  reforms  also  changed  the  rules  of  the  game  for  communication  between  the  Bank  and 
financial markets, and I would like to say a word about what they are. Markets need to form a view on 
the  probabilities  of  different  paths  of  future  interest  rates  in  order  to  price  a wide  range  of financial 
instruments.  So  they  are  interested  in  what  central  banks  say.  In  recent  months  both  the  Federal 
Reserve  and  the  European  Central  Bank have  found  it  far  from straightforward  to convey  the  likely 
trajectory of future interest rates. And the Fed announced three weeks ago that Chairman Bernanke 
had established a subcommittee of the FOMC to examine a number of “communication issues”. There 
is now a lively debate about how, and to what extent, central banks should try to communicate their 
intentions with respect to future official interest rates to financial markets and the wider public.  
At the Bank of England, our approach is to keep it as simple as possible. We don’t say where interest 
rates will go next for the simple reason that we don’t know. And it would be quite misleading to pretend 
otherwise.  The  MPC  reaches  a  new  judgment  each  month,  made  afresh  in  the  light  of  all  the  new 
information about the prospects for inflation. We don’t decide in advance. So trying to give direct hints 
on the path of interest rates over the next few months risks deceiving financial markets into believing 
there are definite plans for the next few months when no such plans exist. 
But  in  order  to  form  judgements  about  the  likely  path  of  interest  rates  over  somewhat  longer  time 
horizons, markets do require some information from the central bank. To be precise, two key pieces of 
information - our objective, and our analysis of the economy.  
Our objective is the 2% inflation target given to us by the Chancellor and plain for all to see. And our 
analysis of  the  economy  is  published  in  the  minutes  of our  monthly  meetings,  in  more detail  in our 
quarterly Inflation Report, and in speeches by members of the MPC.  
Knowledge of our objective and our analysis is all that markets need from us to form judgements about 
the future path of interest rates. Changes in our analysis, and the range of views within the Committee, 
may  well  affect  the  conclusions  that  financial  markets  draw  about  the  likely  path  of  interest  rates. 
Markets  appear  to  have  been  rather  successful  in  drawing  conclusions  because  our  decisions  on 
interest rates have not, by and large, surprised them. But there is a big difference between setting out 
our analysis of the UK economy and dropping hints about decisions we have yet to make.  
So  all  those  listening  to  the  speeches  of  MPC  members  -  including  this  one  -  for  a  hint  as  to  the 
decisions we shall take in the coming months will be disappointed repeatedly. We make up our minds 
one  month  at  a  time.  Those,  however,  who  read  our  Minutes,  Inflation  Reports  and  speeches  to 
understand our thinking will mine a richer seam. Knowing our thinking, they will be in a better position 
to evaluate the implications of developments in the economy for the future path of interest rates.  
There is one other arena where clearer rules of the game would be of great value - the Commercial 
Court. After 13 years, we have at last drawn a line under the BCCI case, the most expensive fishing 
expedition in history. It ended as a comprehensive victory for the Bank, both on the substance of the 
case and on costs. The trial set new records - the longest opening speech in English legal history, an 
even longer reply, and almost certainly the most expensive commercial litigation ever.  
It is for others to comment on the behaviour of those who brought a case that even they described as 
a blood sport. I can presume only that they were allowed to play within the rules of the game. In which 
case, it is the rules of the game that should be questioned.  
A legal framework for enforcing contracts and resolving disputes is not just an arcane process which 
allows professionals to earn vast fees, but an integral part of the infrastructure of a successful market 
2 
 BIS Review 61/2006
economy. It matters that there are simple, clear and timely ways of resolving disputes. What the BCCI 
case revealed was a legal system incapable of guaranteeing that. How can a case described by the 
trial judge himself as built “not even on sand but on air” take thirteen years and over £100 million in 
costs to come to a conclusion?  
The  Bingham  Report  was  produced  in  only  a  year  and  contains  all  that  is  worth  saying  about  the 
supervision of BCCI. It was not comfortable reading for the Bank, but the Bank accepted and acted on 
its findings. The subsequent legal proceedings over thirteen years have benefited only one group at 
the expense, in the end, largely of the creditors. 
As Mr Justice Lightman argued in his 2003 Edward Bramley Memorial Lecture, the adversarial system 
imposes huge costs on litigants and defendants alike. As he put it, “to the great majority of the public 
the perception (if not the reality) is that the legal system is a profitable monopoly of the lawyers”. BCCI 
showed that perception was indeed reality.   
A system that is powerless to prevent a case so hopelessly misconceived continuing for thirteen years 
requires examination. I very much hope that the Government will look carefully at this case, learn the 
lessons, and take steps to ensure that such an outcome can never occur again. 
Finally, who managed to obtain the correct answers to the two questions I gave you at the beginning? 
Chancellor, you can see that mental arithmetic in the City is not what it was. In fact the answer to the 
first question is 3/100 or 3%, and to the second question is £31 13s. 9d. - before tax. 
Lord Mayor, over the past year you have brought the global economy to Mansion House, you have 
opened its doors to many who would not otherwise have thought of entering, especially from the Asian 
community, and you have gone out of your way to meet young people from our financial firms. You 
have raised money for disabled children and you have promoted Cornwall - next Tuesday is “Cornwall 
Day in the City” with, I hope, free pasties for everyone. 
And tonight all of us here would like to pay tribute to your work since you became Lord Mayor, and to 
thank both the Lady Mayoress and you for the splendid hospitality - Cornish produce in fact - which 
you have extended to us all this evening. 
So I invite you all to rise and join me in the traditional toast of good health and prosperity to “The Lord 
Mayor and the Lady Mayoress”, David and Tessa Brewer. 
BIS Review 61/2006 
 3
