Jean-Pierre Roth: Switzerland and Singapore - small countries as platforms for 
global business 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Jean-Pierre  Roth,  Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss  National 
Bank and Chairman of the Board of Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, at the Swiss 
Business Association, Singapore, 18 September 2006. 
 Once in a while, the Annual Meetings of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank do not 
take place in Washington, as usual, but are held somewhere else in the world. The fact that we are 
meeting in Singapore this time is a welcome opportunity for me to return to the "City of the Lion". I am 
happy to be with you today and I would like to thank the Swiss Business Association and Ambassador 
Woker for hosting this Association lunch. 
For Swiss people, it is always a pleasure – even a delight – to spend time in this fascinating city. Since 
Singapore is often referred to as the "Switzerland of Asia" it is particularly interesting for them to make 
comparisons with their home country. As a matter of fact, I am one of some 50,000 Swiss who visit 
Singapore each year.1 Singapore is a unique place with its beautiful skyline, its outstanding location, 
its pulsating life, and – most of all – its openness to the world. Interestingly, Singapore and Switzerland 
share  many  common  features.  In  particular,  both  of  our  countries  have  to  deal  with  surrounding 
neighbours  that  are  much  larger  and  more  powerful.  Some  believe  this  must  make  it  harder  to 
succeed in competition of any kind, but in fact the opposite is true. Let me show you why our position 
needn't be a disadvantage, but, on the contrary, an asset. 
Clichés are very hard to overcome. In the case of Switzerland, as you know, we are best known for 
our banks, watches, chocolate and cheese. Other than this, and despite the strong presence of Swiss 
multinationals abroad, the world doesn't usually take too much notice of what some regard as a "small 
village  in  the  heart  of  Europe".  In  international  surveys,  we  are  largely  ignored,  and  in  European 
statistics we are almost non-existent. Sometimes this can be an advantage. However, in a more and 
more globalised world, it is rather the opposite. Success depends heavily on your marketing. 
So, let me show you some hidden aspects of Switzerland. You will see that modern Switzerland is 
adjusting rapidly to the changing reality of the world economy. Let's consider a few facts. 
A booming economy, at home and abroad 
With  7.5  million  people,  Switzerland  is  indeed  a  small  country,  surrounded  by  the  economically 
powerful European Union. We have no natural resources, and contrary to Singapore, we do not even 
have a chance of gaining new territory by raising it out of the surrounding sea. Nevertheless, we have 
a  highly  developed  economy  and  a  GDP  per  capita  that  clearly  exceeds  the  European  average. 
Contrary  to  the  situation  among  some  of  our  neighbours,  our  population  is  still  growing,  thanks  to 
immigration. Our foreign population now represents more than 20% of the total population and 25% of 
the labour force. Despite strong immigration, our unemployment rate – 3.1% – is relatively low. 
In recent years, our economy has been doing better than its neighbouring countries in terms of growth 
and employment. At probably close to 3% this year, our economic expansion is above our potential. 
Obviously,  the  fact  that  we  are  not  a  member  of  the  European  Union  is  no  obstacle  to  our 
development.  This  is  good  news.  However,  Switzerland  remains  a  slow-growing  country  –  not  only 
when compared to Singapore and other "East Asian Tigers". Our weak growth performance in the long 
run is due in part to full employment, the relatively high level of personal income and the limited scope 
for domestic investment. 
Like many other highly developed industrial nations, Switzerland is increasingly a producer of services. 
The flagship of our service industry is the financial sector, which expanded markedly in the 1990s and 
now accounts for 15% of our GDP – more than the machine tool industry and the chemical industry 
together. During the same period, however, the number of banks was reduced by half and the number 
                                                      
1  Switzerland ranks fifth in terms of European visitor arrivals to Singapore, just behind France and the Netherlands. 
BIS Review 85/2006 
 1
of bank employees has remained stable despite expanding financial activities. These figures show that 
our financial industry has been eager to react swiftly to the challenges posed by globalisation. 
Switzerland  has  a  solid  balance  of  payments  position.  Thanks  to  a  large  excess  of  savings  over 
domestic  investment,  our  current  account  surplus  is  constant  and  substantial.  Contrary  to  popular 
belief, my country is not an importer of capital, but a net capital exporter. Our current account surplus 
represents 15% of our GDP, a level which can only be compared to that of some Asian countries like 
Singapore. 
In terms of labour market openness, another step will be achieved next year with the full liberalisation 
of labour markets between Switzerland and the traditional members of the EU. From our perspective, 
this is good news. We expect a new impetus to our labour markets. Europe will become even more 
important as a reservoir of skilled labour for Switzerland. The opening and integration of these markets 
is  putting  pressure  on  the  wages  in  our  country,  which  are  traditionally  high  as  compared  to  other 
countries. 
The position of Switzerland in Asia 
Large Swiss firms invest more money and create more jobs abroad than they do at home. Switzerland 
has become a major investor not only in Europe, but also here in Asia. Today, there are 4.2 million 
jobs in Switzerland, while 1.9 million people work abroad for Swiss firms. Apart from Singapore and 
Hong  Kong,  there  is  no  other  country  where  foreign  investments  exert  this  kind  of  leverage.  This 
situation is the result of a long tradition of Swiss presence abroad. In Asia, Swiss direct investments 
amount  to  35  billion  Swiss  francs,  and  Swiss  firms  employ  300,000  people,  up  20%  from  2000.  In 
Singapore, to take an example, Switzerland is among the top European investors, ranking third after 
the  UK  and  the  Netherlands.  The  250  Swiss  companies  here  contribute  18%  to  total  European 
investment in Singapore. 
Our trade relations with Singapore have developed rapidly in recent years. Since the late 1990s, total 
bilateral trade has increased by almost 50% to a new record of 1.9 billion Swiss francs last year. As a 
consequence of the rapid expansion of our trade with Asia, in general, and Singapore, in particular, 
the  overall  significance  of  Asian  trade  for  us  is  now  of  the  same  magnitude  as  our  trade  with  the 
United States. However, taking into account the relative size and the potential in Asia, there is still a lot 
of leeway for Swiss firms. 
A similar picture can be observed with respect to Swiss direct investment on the continent of Asia. 
Despite an increase of 30% between the late 1990s and 2004, Asia still only accounts for 7.7% of total 
Swiss investment abroad. Although Singapore commands the lion's share in this regard – 2.5% or 11 
billion  Swiss  francs  –  it  is  evident  that  there  is  enormous  potential  for  the  expansion  of  bilateral 
economic  relations  between  our  two  countries,  and  even  more  between  Switzerland  and  other 
emerging Asian countries. 
For both historical and geographical reasons, our country is exposed to a considerable commercial 
risk in Europe, with 60% of our exports going to European countries. These European markets are no 
longer the most dynamic, nor will they become so in the future. Clearly, in recent years, the emerging 
economies in Asia have become one of the vibrant regions of the global economy. This is precisely 
why  globalisation  makes  sense  for  an  economy  open  to  international  markets,  such  as  ours. 
Therefore, it is essential that we step up the diversification process so as to ensure the expansion of 
our  export sector.  It  is  in our  own  best  interests  to  further  strengthen  economic  relations with  Asia. 
With  our  liberal  philosophy  and  sound  financial  standing  we  have  the  necessary  tools  to  pursue  a 
policy of openness and enhance our strong presence abroad. 
Our monetary framework 
Switzerland is well-known for its stable monetary framework. Average inflation over the last 20 years 
has been 1.8%, and for the last 13 years, we have had price stability. We have never gone through 
monetary reforms as many European countries have done over the past few decades. 
Our monetary regime has been unchanged since 1973, when the peg to the US dollar was removed. 
Today, the Swiss franc is freely determined by market forces. As a representative of a country that has 
had  floating  exchange  rates  for  over  thirty  years  now,  I  can  only  underscore  the  importance  of  an 
exchange  rate  regime  that  reflects  the  realities  of  the  market.  During  the  past  three  decades,  the 
2 
 BIS Review 85/2006
Swiss franc has been an essential factor in the development of the Swiss economy. However, it has 
never been a reason for our exporters to sit back and relax. On the contrary, the Swiss franc has put 
pressure on them to become more efficient and to specialise in those product areas in which we have 
a real competitive edge. Consumers have also profited from the strong Swiss franc in that the prices of 
imported goods have fallen significantly. A currency that is accurately priced enables the economy to 
benefit  from  improvements  in  its  terms  of  trade  triggered  by  productivity  increases.  That  is  why 
Switzerland is a firm believer in flexible exchange rates. 
Another advantage of a flexible Swiss franc is that changes in the international monetary system have 
little  bearing  on  our  currency,  which  is  largely  determined  by  economic  realities  in  Switzerland. 
Consequently, the launch of the euro in 1999 – probably the most important event on the monetary 
scene in recent years – did not lead to the disappearance or the destabilisation of the franc as feared 
by  some.  Though  the  euro  –  to  all  intents  and  purposes  –  is  accepted  as  a  means  of  payment  in 
Switzerland,  there  are  not  more  euros  in  circulation  now  than  there  were  French  francs,  German 
marks or Italian liras prior to monetary integration. Furthermore, the calm that has characterised the 
foreign  exchange  market  in  Europe  since  the  disappearance  of  national  currencies  has  mitigated 
speculative pressures on the franc. When the euro was launched, its exchange rate against the Swiss 
franc was 1.60; now it is only 1-2 cents below this rate – in other words, almost unchanged. On the 
whole,  the  euro  has  stabilised  the  monetary  scene  in  Europe,  and  our  currency  is  therefore  less 
volatile than before. 
To be sure, floating rates still mean volatility, especially in the case of market disruption. At times, the 
Swiss  franc  has  been  pushed  up  to  levels  no  longer  compatible  with  the  economic  reality  of  our 
country’s fundamentals. However, these episodes have usually lasted for a limited period only. After 
September  11  and  before  the  outbreak  of  the  war  in  Iraq,  the  safe-haven  function  of  the  franc 
triggered a 10% appreciation in our currency against the euro. As a consequence, we pursued a more 
aggressive interest rate policy than the ECB in order to lower the attractiveness of our currency and 
give our economy some room for manoeuvre. 
Also, in the current business cycle, with a rapidly growing Swiss economy, we started lifting interest 
rates earlier than – and independently of – the ECB. In the last two years, we have already increased 
interest rates on six occasions. Contrary to the pessimistic assumption that the Swiss National Bank 
would be forced to shadow the policy of the European Central Bank, we have been able to set interest 
rates according to the needs of the Swiss economy. And we will continue to do so. Summing up, we 
are as happy as central bankers can be with the outcome of the test imposed by the change in the 
European monetary system. 
Why joining the EU and the euro is not a realistic option 
And what about the European issue? As you know, we are not a member of the European Union, nor 
do I foresee Switzerland joining the EU in the near future. The Swiss people remain sceptical about 
the efficiency of the Union and are very aware of what they stand to lose in terms of political rights and 
economic freedom in the event of integration. But our relationship with the EU is of key importance, 
since Europe accounts for two-thirds of our foreign trade, as I mentioned before. In order to secure our 
access  to  the  European  market  and  to  avoid  discrimination,  we  have  concluded  two  packages  of 
bilateral agreements with the Union – one in 2002 and one in 2004. The present situation – with free 
movement of goods, capital and labour, but without monetary and fiscal integration – is probably the 
best solution for us. In short, our relationship to Europe is well organised and established. 
At  this  point,  one specific  question often  arises:  If we are  so well  integrated,  why  don't we  peg  the 
franc to the euro instead of pursuing an independent monetary policy? Wouldn't this help eliminate the 
exchange rate risk, without giving up monetary flexibility entirely? 
The answer is that there is no certainty that a peg would engender the foreign exchange stability that 
exporters sometimes dream of. We have learned from our experience with flexible exchange rates that 
any  explicit  foreign  exchange  target  stimulates  the  appetite  of  speculators  instead  of  calming  the 
situation.  And  this  would  be  especially  true  if  our  pegging  decision  were  to  be  taken  unilaterally, 
without the prospect of a full and permanent integration into the euro area. Today, with global markets 
and global speculation, it is an illusion to believe that a central bank can defend a specific exchange 
rate  target.  The  only  exception  would  be  if  the  economy  whose  currency  serves  as  the  peg  were 
strongly convergent with the domestic economy. 
BIS Review 85/2006 
 3
Furthermore,  a  nominal  peg  against  the  euro would  do  little  to  stabilise  the real  value  of  the  Swiss 
franc – the only thing that matters for the international competitiveness of the Swiss economy – or to 
stabilise the franc vis-à-vis third currencies, especially the US dollar. 
Last but not least, Switzerland enjoys the lowest interest rates in Europe. This situation has nothing to 
do with the appeal of our bank secrecy, as many believe, but with the abundance of savings and the 
high degree of price stability. Since the introduction of the euro in 1999, the average interest rate on 
three-month Swiss franc deposits – 1.4% – has been less than half the rate for euro deposits. 
If  Switzerland  were  to  give  up  its  monetary  independence  by  pegging  the  franc  to  the  euro  or  by 
joining the euro area, Swiss interest rates would increase to European levels. Since higher interest 
rates mean lower asset prices, lower levels of investment, and also higher mortgage rates, the Swiss 
are, understandably, not keen on giving up their national currency. A major decision of this kind would 
have to be approved in a public referendum in Switzerland; the prospect of EU and euro membership 
in the near future is thus highly unlikely. 
Conclusion 
Having chosen the option of free trade and free movement of capital, Switzerland is, in many respects, 
better  prepared  than  others  to  take  advantage  of  the  greater  opening  of  borders  brought  about  by 
globalisation. To be sure, this is no easy ride, as international competition always necessitates painful 
adjustments, and Switzerland is no exception in this respect. Given our openness, we are immediately 
affected by a slowdown of the world economy. On the other hand, as in the current circumstances, we 
can take full advantage if worldwide business activity is healthy. 
When  we  take  stock  of  the  last  few  years,  the  bottom  line  looks  favourable.  However,  we  would 
certainly  be  in  an  even  better  position  now  if  we  had  built  up  a  stronger  presence  in  emerging 
economies. Contrary to what some people believe, I am fully convinced that globalisation is not the 
cause of weak growth and unemployment in Switzerland; indeed the opposite is true. Foreign trade is 
the engine driving our economy. It has expanded in recent years in step with the global economy. By 
contrast, our domestic market has been much less dynamic and has registered only limited gains in 
productivity. 
In comparing Switzerland to Singapore the many similarities are evident. As small countries, both of us 
have simply no choice but to trade with the rest of the world, if we want to prosper. In many respects, 
we also face the same challenges: We have to adjust to a rapidly changing world, we have to remain 
competitive  with  our  high  technology  products  as  well  as  our  world-class  services,  and  we  have  to 
focus on niche policies. In other words, we have no choice but to opt for excellence. 
4 
 BIS Review 85/2006
