Zhou Xiaochuan: Switch to a new way of thinking and steadily experiment with 
cross-sector operation in the financial industry 
Speech  by  Mr  Zhou  Xiaochuan,  Governor  of  the  People’s  Bank  of  China,  at  the  BoCom-HSBC 
Forum, Beijing, 15 June 2006. 
 Distinguished guests,  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The  topic  of  today's  Forum  is  integrating  the  Chinese  and  Western  cultures  and  creating  a  world 
brand. Centering around this very broad topic, let me talk about piloting cross-sector operation in the 
financial  industry.  I  know  that  Chairman  Jiang  Chaoliang  cares  a  lot  about  this  subject.  In  our 
discussion  with  Mr.  Stephen  Green,  Vincent  Cheng  and  Peter  Wong  of  the  HSBC  group  yesterday 
afternoon,  we  touched  upon  HSBC's  expertise  and  experience  in  this  area.  This  subject  has 
something  to  do  with  integrating  the  Chinese  and  western  cultures.  It  also  has  a  bearing  on  the 
competitiveness of China's financial industry. 
With  the  evolution  of  the  domestic  and  international  economies,  and  out  of  consideration  for 
enhancing competitiveness, the Chinese policy has changed on how the operation of different sectors 
in  the  financial  industry  should  be  arranged.  The  5th  Plenum  of  the  16th  CPC  Central  Committee 
formally proposed that piloting cross-sector operation should be promoted steadily. Around that time, 
relevant financial legislations were also revised to leave some space for such piloting efforts. The pilot 
operation has been on track.  
I.  
A system of segmented operation of banking, securities and insurance was proposed 
in connection with the change of mentality in the transition from a command economy 
to a market economy. 
In the early days of reform and opening up in 1980s, the different sectors were not segmented in the 
Chinese  financial  industry.  At  that  time,  commercial  banks  had  their  own  trust  and  investment 
companies and securities companies. The Bank of Communications and the Pacific Insurance were 
affiliated. Later on, some disorder occurred in the financial industry. As for how to analyze and look at 
the  situation,  one  mainstream  opinion  then  was  that  the  disorder  and  risks  were  caused  by  cross 
sector operation. Gradually, the different sectors were segmented with the support of legislations. A 
strict separation of the three sectors was established.  
In my personal view, such a philosophy of segmented operation and supervision has something to do 
with the change of mentality in the transitional process. In the command economy, emphasis was put 
on separating sector and sub-sectors. Some drew an analogy to slicing a potato, where one usually 
cut  the  potato  into  pieces  before  further  cutting  them  into  smaller  slices.  Many  industries  were 
arranged and regulated along this line. For example, in the auto industry, a truck maker only produced 
trucks whereas a bus maker made buses only, and car maker manufacture just cars. Furthermore, in 
the truck sector, production of heavy-duty trucks, light trucks and agricultural trucks were separated. If 
an enterprise wished to operate beyond one sub-sector, approval was needed, which was in fact very 
difficult  to  get.  This  was  also  true  for  foreign  trade.  In  order  to  prevent  competition  and  pricing 
problems  among  the  more  than  a  dozen  state-owned  trade  companies,  the  trade  business  was 
carefully divided among them. For example, the national trading companies in China were established 
to  specialize  respectively  in  machinery,  instrument,  chemical  products,  textiles,  silk,  medicine, 
minerals, metals, edible oil, cereals and foodstuffs import and export. As the economy evolves, such 
segmentation  increasingly  became  out  of  place  in  a  market  economy,  nor  was  it  contributing  to 
competitiveness.  
In  the  financial  sector,  market  demand  for  financial  products  has  also  changed.  If  we  divide  the 
financial business too much, this will affect the growth of financial institutions, and their ability to satisfy 
customers' need. Of course, this may be convenient for the supervisors, because one supervisor only 
need to know one sub-sector. Yet, regulation and supervision should develop with the times, along 
with economic growth.  
BIS Review 71/2006 
 1
II.  
In order to create a favorable environment to promote cross-sector operation, one 
need to properly understand the current situation and history.  
internal  control  and  accounting  standards.  The 
It is not easy to properly understand history. For example, in the aftermath of the Great Depression in 
the  U.S.,  the  1933  Securities  Act  were  adopted  to  provide  for  separate  operation  of  the  securities, 
insurance and banking sectors. But many years after that, efforts of revisiting the Great Depression 
found many other  explanations  of  the crash.  One  of  the conclusions  is  whether  the  financial  sector 
was divided was not a fundamental factor contributing to the Great Depression, and consequently, the 
1933 Securities Act was an misinterpretation of the history. Indeed, those who have undergone the 
situation  might  not  be  able  to  properly  understand  it.  There  are  both  superficial  reasons  and  deep 
rooted reasons for explaining the occurrence of an incident. Sometimes, superficial reasons and deep-
rooted reasons are very different. Furthermore, many economic problems are counter-intuitive. How to 
properly understand and interpret history will always be a challenge for economists and policy makers 
alike.  
As  I  have  said,  in  late  80s  and  early  90s,  the  financial  industry  was  not  segmented  in  China.  The 
disorder financial industry witnessed in early 90s was caused by many reasons, including the lack of 
legislation,  supervision,  expertise, 
financial 
eco-environment then would inevitably give rise to problems. In the first part of 90s, commercial banks 
were requested to terminate their international business company and credit card company, because 
many  of  the  disorders  were  thought  to  have  originated  in  non-banking  companies  created  by 
commercial banks. In retrospect, many banks still feel that a separate credit card company to run the 
business was a meaningful exploration. Later on, problems occurred in the stock market and capital 
market, leading to the perception that it was a dangerous thing for fund to flow from banks into the 
stock  market.  At  the  same  time,  in  consideration  of  what  happened  in  the  Great  Depression,  the 
banking and securities sectors were further segmented.  
In  1999??one  reason  that  the  four  big  commercial  banks  established  four  asset  management 
companies was that Provisions on the Management of Asset Management Companies could provide 
them with some flexibility in disposing of NPLs, flexibilities that were beyond the reach of commercial 
banks. For example, asset management companies could do debt equity swap, but commercial banks 
were not allowed. Other methods of asset disposal by asset management companies were also not 
allowed in the case of commercial banks. The purpose of establishing asset management companies 
was  to  dispose  of  NPLs  in  a  flexible  manner.  Of  course,  large-scale  transfer  of  NPLs  out  of 
commercial  banks  might  not  be  possible  in  the  future;  rather,  commercial  banks  will  resolve  the 
problem  assets  on  their  own.  Therefore,  if  commercial  banks  are  still  constrained  by  the  rules  of 
segmented operation in investment, share-holding and asset disposal, their ability to dispose of NPLs 
will be limited. In addition, asset management companies also hope to further enhance their capability 
by  establishing  their  own  securities  companies  to  put  the  assets  under  their  management  on  the 
capital market. There should be new considerations and arrangements. We are in favour of reviewing 
and interpreting history in our endeavor while moving forward. This will help us find a correct way of 
thinking and create a necessary environment for experimenting cross-sector operation in the financial 
sector as put forward by the 5th Plenum of the 16th CPC National Congress. 
III. 
The experiment with cross-sector operation must proceed steadily, because such 
operation needs a large pool of high quality talents and risk control capability.  
We  all  know  the  importance  of  talents.  Risk  control  has  increasingly  become  the  core  of  financial 
sector performance as a result of the increasing complexity of financial businesses and products, yet 
not all people have realized it. In China, many financial institutions have begun to pay attention to risk 
control  only  in  recent  years.  Thus,  risk  control  is  rather  weak.  In  many  large  financial  institutions 
abroad,  risk  control  department  is  very  important  and  powerful,  so  much  as  that  the  Risk  Control 
Officer is in a position to reject what the President has said. Therefore, when we explore cross-sector 
operation and new cross-sector products, importance should be attached, first and foremost, to talents 
and risk control. Otherwise, problems of one kind or another might emerge in the piloting operation. 
Problems are not bad things for experience could be accumulated in the process. But problems in the 
financial sector usually will slow down the reform and experiments.  
2 
 BIS Review 71/2006
IV.  
In the steady progress of cross-sector operation, not all financial institutions will 
adopt the pattern of cross-sector operation.  
Every financial institution has its own development strategy and features, and needs to consider how 
to position itself in the market, on the basis of the specificities of its clients and what kind of services to 
provide to such clients. In many countries, after the restrictions of segmented operation were lifted, 
especially after the Bank Reform Act was adopted to lift control in 1999 in the U.S., not all financial 
institutions rushed to expand their business into other sectors. Decisions on whether to conduct cross-
sector  business  or continue  to  focus on  some businesses should  be  made  by  a  financial  institution 
after careful deliberation, based on its strength, development strategy and the specific characters of 
operation.  
V.  
Central bank and regulatory authorities face challenges in the piloting cross-sector 
operation.  
First of all, the quality of supervisors should be improved. They need to have knowledge of all kinds of 
financial businesses. Of course, this will take some time. Second, given the framework of segmented 
supervision, coordination among the three regulatory agencies should be strengthened, and functional 
supervision stressed. The agency who gives license to financial institutions should not be the one to 
approve  all  the  businesses  of  all  financial  institutions.  Rather,  financial  institutions  should  be 
supervised  according  to  the  type  of  their  businesses.  Many  new  issues  relating  to  functional 
supervision should be studied.  
As for the role of central bank, through its payment and settlement system, it provides a platform for 
various kinds of financial activities; on the other hand, because contagious risks usually come from 
deposit  taking  institutions,  a  deposit  insurance  system  and  other  mechanisms  to  protect  investors, 
depositors and the insured will quickly dissolve and reduce the risks as they arise. Finally, the central 
bank needs to look at the systemic risks in the entire system. When systemic risks do arise, prompt 
and  proper  action  shall  be  taken  in  terms  of  monetary  policy  and  liquidity  based  on  domestic  and 
international  experience,  in  order  to  alleviate  the  damage  on  the  financial  industry  and  the  national 
economy.  
In conclusion, when we steadily promote the pilot cross-sector operation in the financial industry, the 
legislature, central bank and supervisory agencies are faced with new challenges. In the direction set 
by the 5th Plenum of the 16th CPC Central Committee, we will strive to do a good job in every area to 
make effective progress and accumulate more experience.  
Thank you.  
BIS Review 71/2006 
 3
