Rachel Lomax: Global financial imbalances 
Remarks  by  Ms  Rachel  Lomax,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  at  the  Chatham  House 
conference on Global Financial Imbalances, London, 24 January 2006. 
   One spin off from the debate about global imbalances has been renewed interest in the international 
monetary system. It is a benign aspect of a potentially acrimonious debate about whether the scale 
and persistence of global imbalances – and specifically the US current account deficit – was made in 
the USA or made in Asia – or conceivably Europe (and maybe even the Middle East). 
A better approach is to view global imbalances as the outcome of decentralised savings-investment 
decisions  within  an  interdependent  global  system.  And  it’s  worth  emphasising  straight  away  that 
substantial imbalances may be the natural product of a healthy global monetary and financial system: 
they do not necessarily represent a problem.  
But is the current pattern of large and persistent global imbalances healthy in this sense? Or does it 
reflect unsustainable behaviour on the part of policy makers, companies or private individuals around 
the  world,  rooted  in  unrealistic  expectations,  sub  optimal  economic  policies  or  tensions  between 
national policy objectives? Are global imbalances now on such a scale that their reduction inevitably 
poses  a  threat  of  some  kind,  whether  to  global  activity,  trade  or  financial  stability?  And  does  the 
current international monetary system embody sufficient incentives to deliver an orderly correction of 
imbalances? 
At the risk of going over ground which was already covered yesterday, let me start by briefly reviewing 
the changing pattern of global imbalances. In doing so, the main point I want to make is that this is 
quite  a  complex  story,  which  is  consistent  with  several  different  –  but  not  mutually  exclusive  – 
interpretations.    And,  hard  as  it  is  to  understand,  the  past  may  not  be  much  help  in  predicting  the 
future. 
The steady increase in the US current account deficit since the 1990s and its present unprecedented 
level – at over 6% GDP – has made it particularly tempting to look for home grown factors which can 
consistently  explain  this  trend.  But  the  pattern  of  US  saving  and  investment  underlying  its  current 
account deficit look very different in the pre and post 2000 periods. 
The  former  period  was  characterised  by  sustained  fiscal  consolidation,  leading  to  fiscal  surpluses, 
together with a fast growth in private investment in response to high expected productivity in the US; 
the latter by an emerging fiscal deficit, in response to tax cuts, and a fall off in business investment. 
Only  the  steady  downward  trend  in  the  household  saving  ratio  –  now  into  negative  territory  –  is 
common to both periods. 
This shift in the composition of the pattern of US savings and investment has coincided with a change 
in the composition of external financing flows into the US.  
The  private  equity  inflows  which  dominated  in  the  earlier  period  fell  sharply  after  the  stock  market 
crash, and were replaced by inflows into corporate and especially government bonds.   
A  significant  proportion  of  the  demand  for  US  government  securities  came  from  the  official  sector, 
notably Asian central banks, whose foreign exchange reserves have more than doubled since 2001.  
The fact that the US current account deficit has been funded at historically low and falling real interest 
rates suggests that the fall in US net savings may not have been the only – or even the main – driver 
of  global  imbalances.  And  while  there  are  other  possible  explanations  for  the  current  low  levels  of 
global interest rates, it is certainly true that high saving relative to investment in East Asia has been an 
important counterpart of the US current account deficit. To be more specific, the rise in saving has 
outpaced  the  growth  in  investment  in  China,  while  domestic  investment  in  the  rest  of  East  Asia 
remained stagnant after the Asian crises.  
Finally,  last  year’s  doubling  of  oil  prices  in  response  to  buoyant  world  demand  has  led  to  a  further 
change in the pattern of imbalances, with the combined surpluses of oil producing countries now likely 
to equal half the US current account deficit, on the same scale as the combined Asian surplus. 
BIS Review 3/2006 
 1
How much of a threat might persistent imbalances on this scale pose to the world economy?  
It is, of course, conceivable that these imbalances will prove to be relatively short lived. They might be 
driven  by  underlying  influences  that  prove  to  be  largely  temporary  –  for  example  an  investment 
overhang in East Asia, which is eventually worked off, or a purely cyclical divergence in growth rates 
between major regions, or a short lived spike in world oil prices. But at the moment there is little sign of 
this – rather the reverse.  
It  is  therefore  worth  reflecting  whether  today’s  international  monetary  system  (IMS)  is  sufficiently 
robust to ensure that global imbalances can be financed, contained or corrected through the normal 
mechanism of market forces, without crisis; or failing that, whether institutional arrangements exist to 
resolve  collective  action  problems  and  conflicting  priorities  without  damage  to  the  wider  world 
economy. 
There  are  three  key  features  of  today’s  IMS  which  are  particularly  relevant  in  thinking  about  this 
question.  
The  first  is  financial  globalisation  which  has  totally  transformed  the  landscape  over  the  past  two 
decades.  Total  financial  wealth  has  risen  sharply  relative  to  GDP;  and  investors  are  now  able  and 
willing to hold a higher proportion of their portfolios in external assets.  The trend to larger external 
asset and liabilities has been particularly significant in industrial countries, whose external assets and 
liabilities relative to output roughly tripled between 1990 and 2003, reaching average levels of more 
than 200 per cent of GDP.  
This has two effects. First, the expansion in external balance sheets has relaxed the constraints on the 
financing  of  countries’  savings  and  investment  imbalances.  And  second,  balance  sheet  effects  can 
have material impacts – affecting the link between current account deficits and external debt burdens, 
as well as the external adjustment process itself. 
A corollary of financial globalisation has been the increased importance of market forces, rather than 
institutionalised  inter  government  agreements,  in  providing  incentives  for  policy  makers  within 
systemically  important  countries  or  regions  to  follow  policies  that  are  mutually  consistent  – 
notwithstanding the longevity of the Bretton Woods sisters (the IMF and the World Bank). 
The second important feature of today’s world is the rising economic importance of a group of Asian 
emerging market economies who heavily manage their exchange rates. As a result, the international 
monetary  system  has  mutated  into  a  ‘hybrid’  system  in  which  some  systemic  countries  float  their 
exchange rates while others fix or manage them.  One implication is that the pressure for adjustment 
to  any  given  shock  can  be  very  asymmetric  relative  to  a  floating  rate  world.  Thus,  market  driven 
exchange rate changes are likely to be concentrated on particular blocs rather than diffused across 
the system as a whole. As Obstfeld and Rogoff and others have pointed out, this is a situation which 
could  create  some  difficult  policy  frictions.  These  have  the  potential  to  undermine  free  trade,  and 
weaken world growth. 
The third feature is the continued dominance of the US dollar as both a reserve currency as well an 
anchor for those countries that choose to fix or manage their exchange rates. But nowadays countries 
have choices. They might fix against the dollar but choose to hold at least a portion of their reserves in 
other major currencies. Since the advent of the euro, the dollar is no longer the only credible reserve 
currency.  
How do these features of the international monetary system affect the risks associated with today’s 
imbalances?  
Financial globalisation has relaxed the constraints on countries in financing their savings investment 
imbalances, thus allowing larger imbalances to be sustained for longer. This is in principle welcome in 
so far as it permits more efficient adjustment over time, and smoothes the impact of economic shocks 
on real activity and consumption. But it also poses major new challenges for creditors and debtors, 
both public and private sector. 
The reason is that the price at which the market is willing to finance imbalances depends on investors’ 
expectations about the future. This means that debtors in today’s world face much greater uncertainty 
about when credit constraints will begin to tighten. So there is always a risk that a reassessment of the 
economic prospects of a debtor country might lead to a rise in external financing costs. But there is 
considerable uncertainty about whether – and when – such a reassessment might occur. 
2 
 BIS Review 3/2006
This uncertainty is particularly acute in the case of the US. Its dominant position in the world economy, 
its huge balance sheet and its reserve currency status make it special in a number of ways.  
At  present  the  US  still  earns  positive  net  income  from  abroad  despite  a  steady  deterioration  in  the 
current account since 1991, and a slower rise in its net external indebtedness.  This is not to imply that 
the US is immune to the basic arithmetic of debt sustainability – sooner or later persistent deficits will 
lead to levels of external indebtedness that represent a significant economic burden even on the US; 
but it is more than usually hard to predict how long this might take.  
The  dollar’s  central  role  in  the  foreign  exchange  policies  of  Asian  emerging  markets  adds  to  the 
uncertainty  about  the  deficit  levels  at  which  the  US  will  face  tighter  credit  constraints.    Since  the 
foreign official sector – mostly Asian central banks – have been financing a substantial part of the US 
current account deficit (in net terms) and now hold a substantial amount of the outstanding stock of US 
Treasuries,  private  investors’  willingness  to  hold  dollar  assets  depends  to  some  extent  on  their 
expectations of what these Asian central banks will be doing. 
Since  many  Asian  EMEs  already  have  far  more  reserves  than  they  need  for  self-insurance  against 
financial crisis, their appetite for continued accumulation of US dollar assets will at some stage abate: 
indeed there has been some anecdotal evidence of this over the past year. They can already choose 
to diversify their reserve holdings, and the options available may become more attractive to them with 
the development of Asian bond markets.  
Their development strategies will also evolve. One-way intervention has potentially significant costs as 
well as benefits – costs which go well beyond the risk of substantial capital loss in the event of future 
exchange  rate  realignment.  These  include  growing  implementation  problems,  which  are  likely  to  be 
particularly  acute  in  very  open  economies,  and  a  potentially  serious  misallocation  of  domestic 
resources. It will not be in the interests of the Asian countries concerned to ignore these issues.   
That is why I find the so called Bretton Woods II hypothesis – or at least the proposition that Asian 
central  banks  will  have  a  more  or  less  open  ended  commitment  to  financing  ever  increasing  US 
deficits – rather implausible, at least as a prediction of what is likely to happen in the medium term, 
rather  than  as  a  description  of  the  past  few  years.  It  assumes  the  continuation  of  unsustainable 
policies, which are not in the interests of the countries concerned. I concede however, that it is hard to 
make a precise forecast about the timing of a policy shift in Asia. And it is worth bearing in mind that 
this may depend on global and regional political considerations as much as on economic and financial 
pressures.  
So given these uncertainties over the evolution of global imbalances, what should we do about them?  
There is clearly no case for turning the clock back and re-introducing the constraints that characterised 
the  genuine  Bretton  Woods  system.   The  challenge  is  for  policy  makers to find  ways  of    operating 
more effectively within the current system, to maximise the opportunities it affords and to manage the 
risks associated with open capital markets. 
As a monetary policy maker, I am acutely conscious that a world of large imbalances carries some risk 
of disruptive market adjustments, even if the probability of them occurring is low.  These could have a 
significant  impact  on  economic  activity,  especially  if  they  included  a  sharp  reversion  of  long-term 
interest rates to something closer to their long-run average.  We have been trying to factor this risk in 
to our thinking about interest rates as long as I have been on the MPC. But it is not a risk that maps 
easily on to any particular interest rate decision. 
While  the  risk  of  a  disruptive  adjustment  may  still  be  low,  the  sheer  scale  of  current  imbalances 
increases the potential costs of policy mistakes and misperceptions.  Any disconnect between what 
the markets expect and what policy makers intend to do becomes increasingly hazardous.  That puts a 
premium  on  excellent  policy  communication,  to  reduce  uncertainty  and  minimise  the  risk  of  sharp 
market corrections.  And policy makers need to ensure that their policies are robust to the possibility 
that market expectations may not be consistent with economic fundamentals.   
Policy  makers  in  systemically  important  countries  also  need  to  be  better  at  factoring  wider  political 
risks into their decision taking. They need to have an informed view of how markets and policy makers 
in  other  countries  are  likely  to  react,  before  they  decide  which  domestic  policies  are  likely  to  prove 
sustainable – and they need to ensure that their policies are robust to possible shifts in other countries 
policies. The key political risk at present is of course protectionism – not just the possibility of bilateral 
restrictions, but of a fatal lack of momentum on the Doha round. This could be a material consideration 
in almost any scenario created by financial market pressures.  
BIS Review 3/2006 
 3
All  these  risks  underline  the  need  to  greatly  improve  the  standard  of  dialogue  on  international 
economic issues. The quality of analysis needs to improve, the right countries need to participate in 
the debate, discussions need to be franker, and their outcome needs to be communicated clearly.  
Getting these things right will be tricky but the need for reform is growing. So I am sure we will need to 
address these issues soon. As to how we do it? That's for another day. 
4 
 BIS Review 3/2006
