Y V Reddy: Challenges and implications of Basel II for Asia 
Remarks by Dr Y V Reddy, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Seminar on “Challenges and 
implications of Basel II for Asia” as a part of the Asian Development Bank's 39th Annual Meeting of the 
Board of Governors, Hyderabad, 3 May 2006. 
Dr Y V Reddy is thankful to S/Shri K. Damodaran, General Manager and Anand Sinha, Executive Director for the assistance 
provided. 
 Mr. Chairman and friends,  
I  am  thankful  to  the  organisers  for  inviting  me  to  participate  in  the  annual  meetings  of  the  Asian 
Development Bank and give my views on Basel II in the Asian context. I have a special affinity to the 
city of Hyderabad. I started in this city as a Research Scholar in 1960, then taught as a lecturer in 
Osmania University till 1964, and later, was the Collector and District Magistrate of Hyderabad city in 
1976-77. Again, I worked here as Secretary in Finance and Planning Department of the Government 
of  Andhra  Pradesh  for  most  part  of  the  decade  of  1980s.  So,  as  a  Hyderabadi,  I  extend  a  warm 
welcome to the distinguished delegates from all over the world.  
Basel I : voluntarism and gradualism in India 
Let me start with Basel I framework for capital adequacy, which was introduced in 1988. The Basel I 
framework  was  designed  to  establish  minimum  levels  of  capital  for  internationally  active  banks. 
However, its simplicity encouraged over 100 countries across the world to not only adopt the Basel I 
framework  but  also  apply  it  across  the  entire  banking  segment  without  restricting  it  to  the 
internationally active banks. Thus, the voluntary adoption of Basel I framework by several countries 
has made it, de facto, a globally accepted standard, though not all countries are fully compliant with all 
the aspects.  
Adopting our general approach of gradualism, we in India have implemented the Basel I framework 
with effect from 1992-93 which was, however, spread over three years – banks with branches abroad 
were required to comply fully by end March 1994 while the other banks were required to comply by 
end March 1996. Further, India responded to the 1996 amendment to the Basel I framework, which 
required banks to maintain capital for market risk exposures, by initially prescribing various surrogate 
capital charges for these risks between 2000 and 2002. These were replaced with the capital charges 
as required under the Basel I framework in June 2004, which became effective from March 2005. We 
have gone a step further than the Basel I requirement and have required the banks in India to maintain 
capital charge for market risks on their ‘Available for Sale’ portfolio also with effect from March 2006. 
We  continue  to  see  considerable  merit  in  pursuing  a  policy  of  gradualism  in  harmonising  our 
regulations with the global standards. 
Basel II : benefits and major issues 
The  complexity  of  Basel  II  arises  from  several  options  available  and  these  are  well  known. 
Consequently, many of the countries which have voluntarily adopted Basel I also view these issues 
with considerable caution. Compared to Basel I, the revised framework, namely Basel II, is considered 
to be highly complex, making its understanding and implementation a challenge to both the regulatory 
and the regulated community.  
Dangers of premature adoption 
Since the revised Framework has been designed to provide options for banks and banking systems 
worldwide, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) acknowledges that moving toward its 
adoption in the near future may not be the first priority for all non-G10 supervisory authorities in terms 
of what is needed to strengthen their supervision. Each national supervisor is expected to consider 
carefully the benefits of the revised Framework in the context of its domestic banking system when 
developing a timetable and approach for implementation. 
BIS Review 37/2006 
 1
The views of the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund clearly indicate that premature 
adoption of Basel II in countries with limited capacity could inappropriately divert resources from the 
more urgent priorities, ultimately weakening rather than strengthening supervision. They agreed that 
countries  should  give  priority  first  to  strengthening  their  financial  systems  comprising  institutions, 
markets  and  infrastructure  and  focus  on  achieving  greater  level  of  compliance  with  the  Basel  Core 
Principles. Against this background, the IMF has cautioned that Fund staff should avoid conveying the 
perception that countries will be criticised for not moving to adopt the Basel II framework. They have 
urged staff to be completely candid when asked to assess countries' readiness to move to Basel II and 
to indicate clearly the risks of moving too quickly and too ambitiously. 
Varying implementation plans across jurisdictions in Asia-Pacific 
The implementation plans in regard to Basel II, as far as Asia-Pacific is concerned, may be broadly 
divided into three ranges – one, where the simplest approaches and the most advanced approaches 
are available at the time of first implementation (Australia, Korea, Singapore, New Zealand); second, 
where  the  simplest  approaches  are  available  initially  and  at  least  one  of  the  most  advanced 
approaches is available within a year or two thereafter (Hong Kong, Japan, Indonesia, Thailand); and 
third,  where  the  simplest  approaches  are  allowed  initially  and  the  date  of  availability  of  the  most 
advanced approaches is yet to be announced or are available after more than two years (China, India, 
Malaysia, and Philippines). Further, one might be able to link the choice of the above broad ranges to 
the extent of share of foreign banks in the respective banking sectors.  
It  is  observed  that  the  banking  systems  where  foreign  banks  account  for  a  significant  share  in  the 
banking  assets  (Singapore,  Hong  Kong)  are  reflecting  a  desire  to  adopt  the  advanced  approaches 
ahead of those territories where the foreign bank share is not significant (India). One might also see a 
similar trend in respect of countries which might remain on Basel I for a longer period before migrating 
to Basel II (China). 
Implementation in India 
The policy approach to financial sector in India is that the ultimate goal should be to conform to the 
best international standards and in the process, the emphasis is on gradual harmonisation with the 
international best practices. Consistent with this approach, for Basel II also, currently all commercial 
banks in India are expected to start implementing Basel II with effect from March 31, 2007 – though a 
marginal stretching beyond this date should not be ruled out in view of the latest indications on the 
state of preparedness. While considering implementation of Basel II, special attention was given to the 
differences in degrees of sophistication and development of the banking system and it was decided 
that they will initially adopt the Standardised Approach for credit risk and the Basic Indicator Approach 
for  operational  risk.  After  adequate  skills  are  developed,  both  by  the  banks  and  also  by  the 
supervisors,  some  of  the  banks  may  be  allowed  to  migrate  to  the  Internal  Rating  Based  (IRB) 
Approach.  
As  per  normal  practice  in  regard  to  all  changes  in  financial  sector,  and  with  a  view  to  ensuring  a 
particularly smooth migration to Basel II, a consultative and participative approach has been adopted 
for both - designing and implementing Basel II.  
On current indications, implementation of Basel II will require more capital for banks in India due to the 
fact that operational risk is not captured under Basel I, and the capital charge for market risk was not 
prescribed until recently. The cushion available in the system, which at present has a Capital to Risk 
Assets  Ratio  (CRAR)  of  over  12  per  cent,  provides  for  some  comfort  but  the  banks  are  exploring 
various avenues for meeting the capital requirements under Basel II. The Reserve Bank has, for its 
part, issued policy guidelines enabling issuance of several instruments by the banks viz., innovative 
perpetual  debt  instruments,  perpetual  non-cumulative  preference  shares,  redeemable  cumulative 
preference shares and hybrid debt instruments  so as to enhance their capital raising options. 
Three-track approach for implementation in India  
In India, we have 85 commercial banks, which account for about 78% (total assets) of the financial 
sector;  over 3000  cooperative  banks,  which  account  for  9%;  and  196  Regional  Rural  Banks,  which 
account  for  3%.  Taking  into  account  the  size,  complexity  of  operations,  relevance  to  the  financial 
2 
 BIS Review 37/2006
sector,  need  to  ensure  greater  financial  inclusion  and  the  need  for  having  an  efficient  delivery 
mechanism, the capital adequacy norms applicable to these entities have been maintained at varying 
levels of stringency. One might say that we are adopting a three-track approach with regard to capital 
adequacy rules.  Given the differential risk appetite across banks and their business philosophies, it is 
likely that banks would ‘self select’ their own approach, which in turn, is likely to engender a stabilising 
influence on the system as a whole. 
On the first track, the commercial banks are required to maintain capital for both credit and market 
risks as per Basel I framework; the cooperative banks, on the second track, are required to maintain 
capital for credit risk as per Basel I framework and through surrogates for market risk; the Regional 
Rural Banks, on the third track, have a minimum capital requirement which is, however, not on par 
with the Basel I framework. Consequently, we have a major segment of systemic importance on a full 
Basel I framework, a portion of the minor segment partly on Basel I framework, and a smaller segment 
on a non-Basel framework.  
It is for the same reasons that, at least initially, a similar diversity may be visible in the Indian banking 
segment even after the commercial banks begin implementing Basel II framework in March 2007. In 
the  post-March  2007  scenario  we  may  witness  Basel  II,  Basel  I  and  non-Basel  entities  operating 
simultaneously in the Indian banking system. It is useful to note that a somewhat similar choice has 
been  exercised  even  in  the  USA  where  one  is  likely  to  see  at  least  Basel  II  and  Basel  I-A  entities 
operating simultaneously. Similarly, even amongst the Basel II entities, it is likely that banks will be 
implementing  various  combinations  of 
for  computing  capital 
requirements for the three major risks. Consequently, we may see Basel II implementation as a part of 
a  spectrum  of  frameworks  within  which  there  can  be  progressive  enhancement  of  quality  amongst 
different categories.  
It is likely that on implementation of Basel II, some banks might adopt the IRB Approach for credit risk 
while some other banks in the same jurisdiction, might adopt the Standardised Approach. Since the 
IRB  Approach  is  more  risk  sensitive  vis-à-vis  the  Standardised  Approach,  a  small  change  in  the 
degree  of  risk  could  result  in  a  large  additional  capital  requirement  for  the  banks  following  the  IRB 
approach - which would dissuade such banks from assuming high-risk exposures. From a systemic 
point of view, therefore, the banks adopting the Standardised Approach, and consequently, having a 
greater concentration of high-risk assets in their portfolio, could perhaps become vulnerable in times of 
economic downturns. These issues would need to be appropriately taken into account while deciding 
on the implementation of the Basel II. 
the  multiple  options  available 
Implementation challenges in developing countries 
Even though it has been mentioned in several places that over 100 countries had implemented Basel 
I, the assessments done in 71 countries as a part of Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) 
have  revealed  many  deficiencies  in  the  areas  of  risk  management,  consolidated  supervision  and 
corrective  action  for  undercapitalised  institutions,  which  are  considered  to  be  crucial  to  sound 
supervision and proper Basel II implementation. While a supervisory system which is fully or largely 
compliant with Basel Core Principle 6, which incorporates Basel I as the capital adequacy standard, is 
considered  necessary  for  moving  to  Basel  II,  the  assessments  reveal  that  about  37%  of  these 
countries had not complied with this Core Principle. The remaining countries were at various stages of 
compliance. Given this level of compliance, the challenges that are likely to be faced by the developing 
economies in implementing the Basel II framework, will be daunting.  
As acknowledged by the IMF, they do not have adequate internal expertise to assess and assist Basel 
II implementation in various jurisdictions. Given the complexities of financial regulation and the added 
complexities of the Basel II framework, which will have to be specifically tailored to suit the domestic 
economies and the domestic banking systems, the regulators are right in insisting on the freedom and 
flexibility  for  adopting  and  implementing  an  appropriate  roadmap  without  being  constrained  by  any 
external pressures, direct or indirect. The ideal solution for managing a complex task of this nature is 
through mutual cooperation and assistance amongst the central banks.  
Dangers of asymmetry in financial intermediation 
A  likely  scenario,  which  might  arise  post-Basel  II  implementation,  is  the  asymmetry  in  regulatory 
regime  amongst  the  competing  broad  segments  of  the  financial  sector  viz.,  banking,  securities  and 
BIS Review 37/2006 
 3
insurance sectors. While the commercial banking sector is expected to migrate to the Basel II regimen 
soon, the other segments are not likely to be subjected to the same or similar discipline unless they 
are a part of a banking group, where Basel II regimen would apply indirectly through the parent bank. 
Hence, we are likely to see some scope for regulatory arbitrage amongst the three broad segments 
unless  the  regulators  of  these  segments  also  recognise  the  need  and  relevance  of  a  comparable 
prescription for those segments. The Joint Forum has taken some initiatives in this direction, which 
may have to be pursued further to achieve parity in the level of regulatory burden across the three 
sectors, which compete amongst themselves for the business of financial intermediation. 
Basel II and social dimensions 
The  three-track  theme  to Basel  II  implementation, which  I had mentioned  earlier,  might give  rise  to 
scope  for  regulatory  arbitrage  within  the  banking  system.  This  would,  however,  not  be  of  much 
concern in the Indian context on account of the relatively insignificant size of the non Basel II entities 
and their relevance from the systemic perspective. While the desire would be to reduce the scope for 
regulatory  arbitrage,  we  may  have  to  strike  a  delicate  balance  to  ensure  that  this  desire  does  not 
constrain  the  non-Basel  II  entities  from  discharging  their  respective  specified  roles  in  the  national 
economies  viz.,  achieving  greater  financial  inclusion,  playing  a  developmental  role,  and  acting  as 
conduits  for  credit  delivery  to  the  neglected  sectors.  I  think,  the  multi-track  theme  for  Basel  II 
implementation  and  the  consequent  handling  of  regulatory  arbitrage  and  stability  issues  may  be 
reflected in other similarly placed emerging market economies as well. 
A roadmap approach for implementation of Basel II 
In the light of experience gained by us, it appears that the balance of advantage would lie in favour of 
encouraging  the  central  banks  /  banking  sector  regulators  to  implement  Basel  II  framework  at  their 
own  pace  and  in  a  manner  as  appropriate  to  their  economies,  banking  systems  and  supervisory 
mechanisms. It is also possible that the multilateral development agencies are yet to get fully equipped 
to assist in Basel II implementation. Ideally each country may devise a road map to be implemented 
flexibly taking account of the country context. In Telugu, the official language of the State of Andhra 
Pradesh, we say ‘samayam, sanderbham mukhyam’. It means timing and context are vital for anything 
and, in my submission, it also includes Basel II in Asia.  
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 37/2006
