John Gieve: Stability and change 
Speech by Sir John Gieve, Deputy Governor of the Bank of England, to the Engineering Employers’ 
Federation North West, Warrington, 20 July 2006. 
 I am delighted to be here today. The Bank of England has long connections with this region. We first 
set  up  offices  in  Manchester  and  Liverpool  back  in  1820s.  That  was  a  time  when  North  West  of 
England was a key hub in an emerging international economy, with the Port of Liverpool providing the 
gateway for industry in Lancashire and Cheshire to trade with the rest of the world, particularly textiles.  
The structure of the economy in the North West has of course changed markedly since those days 
and the region is now more associated with the aerospace, defence and pharmaceuticals industries 
than with textiles. Here as elsewhere, recent years have been a time of rapid change in the structure 
of industry and the economy. We may have been talking about globalisation for years but that doesn’t 
mean it is complete; in fact it is still gathering momentum.  
Macroeconomic stability: a platform for change  
In the face of that rate of change, it may seem paradoxical that among central banks the last 10 years 
have been known as the “Great Stability”.  
The  UK  is  an  example  of  that.  Since  1992,  when an  explicit  target  for  inflation  was  first  introduced 
here,  inflation  has been  stable  and  very  close  to  its  target.  Not  only  has  inflation  been  low,  but  we 
have avoided the large swings in output and employment that have characterised previous periods in 
UK  economic  history.  We  have  seen  employment  grow  from  around  56%  of  the  population  at  the 
trough in 1993 to over 60% now and unemployment fall back to levels not seen since the mid-1970s. 
GDP growth has been between 1% and 4.5% per annum throughout. To someone like me who was in 
the Treasury in the 70s and 80s when we experienced real booms and busts, the last 10 years have 
looked like a golden age (Chart 1).  
Of course we hoped that the reform of economic policy would bring greater stability, but the speed and 
extent  of  that  success  has  been  unexpected.  When  the  MPC  was  created  in  1997  and  given 
responsibility  for meeting the  inflation  target,  it was told  that whenever  inflation  was  more  than one 
percentage  point  away  from  the  target  the  Governor  would  have  to  write  a  letter  to  the  Chancellor 
explaining  why  this  had  occurred.  The  Bank’s  current  chief  economist  estimated  that  the  Governor 
would need to write a letter on average one month in every two.1 Even the current Governor thought 
that  ‘given  past  experience  of  inflation  volatility  it  is  likely,  even  allowing  for  the  change  in  policy 
regime, to restore the lost art of letter writing to British life’.2 It is remarkable that not a single letter has 
needed to be written – yet. 
But  stability  at  the  macroeconomic  level  does  not  mean  stability  for  individual  firms  or  industries. 
Indeed one of the virtues of macro stability is that it allows – indeed forces – firms to focus on the real 
long term business challenges and opportunities they face rather than how to survive or profit from the 
short-term cycle. It is not a paradox therefore that the Great Stability has also been a time of great 
change in industry in ownership, structure and technology. 
The Engineering Employers’ Federation has itself stated that ‘manufacturing prospers best in a stable 
macroeconomic environment with low inflation, low interest rates and stable exchange rates’.3 That is 
not  because  they  are  a  recipe  for  a  quiet  life  but  because  they  allow  businesses  to  focus  on  what 
really matters – their products, their technology, their customers and their competition. In the last few 
years, macroeconomic stability has provided business with a platform for rapid changes in ownership, 
location and product mix, and for the transformation by IT of all business processes in the factory, the 
warehouse and the office.  
                                                      
1 
2  
3  
 Bean, C (1998), ‘The New U.K. Monetary Arrangements: a view from the literature’, Economic Journal, November.  
‘The Inflation Target Five Years On’, Quarterly Bulletin 
‘Manufacturing in the UK’, Engineering Employers Federation, May 2005. 
BIS Review 70/2006 
 1
Globalisation and UK manufacturing  
Looking  wider  than  the  UK,  one  of  the  most  striking  changes  of  the  last  few  years  has  been  the 
integration  of  China,  India  and  countries  from  the  former  Soviet  Union  into  world  markets  and  the 
sharper competition that is bringing first into goods markets and, increasingly, into services also. The 
EEF  report,  ‘Where  now  for  manufacturing?’,  published  at  the  end  of  2004,  highlighted  the  ‘huge 
increase  in  the  importance  of  lower-cost  countries  as  competitors’.  Just  under  half  of  companies 
surveyed by the EEF saw China as the biggest competitive threat to their activities and nearly 60% 
identified China as a major competitive threat over the next five years. That was sharply up on the 
equivalent figure of 18% in 2001, illustrating that the change was occurring faster than companies then 
foresaw. 
One of the consequences of the globalisation of production is that a reduced proportion of output in 
the developed economies is in manufacturing. This is true of the UK, where manufacturing accounts 
for less than 15% of GDP, but also of France, Spain, the Netherlands and US (Chart 2).4 Some have 
felt  the  blunt  end  of  this  competition  from  Asia.  But  the  emergence  of  China  and  others  has  also 
created opportunities. It has encouraged UK manufacturers to specialise in those products for which 
they have a comparative advantage over their competitors, prompting a change in structure and focus 
of the UK manufacturing sector. The fact that globalisation encourages this type of specialisation is 
one of the great benefits of having an open trading system, felt by both consumers and manufacturers. 
The  EEF,  for  example,  remains  ‘upbeat  about  the  future  of  UK  manufacturing’,  especially  when  it 
comes to high value-added activities.  
Globalisation and UK inflationary pressures  
The  changes  we  have  seen  in  UK  manufacturing  have  occurred,  in  part,  due  to  the  impact 
globalisation has had on the relative prices of different goods and services. These changes have also 
had  a  big  impact  on  the  sources  of  inflationary  pressure  over  the  past  decade,  both  here  and 
internationally.  
First, as in other developed countries, the prices of goods imported into the UK have fallen relative to 
goods and services produced domestically. Second, most markets for goods and many markets for 
services are now internationally ‘contestable’. In other words, companies are under continual pressure 
to keep prices down because of the threat of competition from potential rivals from around the globe 
and this has limited the extent to which domestic producers can raise prices even in markets where 
import  penetration  is  low.  Third,  factors  of  production  have  become  more  mobile.  For  example, 
increased labour migration into the UK has helped employment to grow with low wage inflation. And 
the ease with which production can be switched across countries has contributed towards lower costs 
in a wide range of services and goods which are still home grown.  
It  is  difficult  to  quantify  the  impact  of  these  factors  on  inflation.  It  depends  on  the  importance  of 
imported  goods  in  the  consumer  price  index  and  on  whether  lower  import  prices  are  passed  on  to 
consumers.5 In the UK in the ten years from 1994 to 2004, the price of imported goods fell on average 
by one per cent per annum, so the direct effect of this on the consumer price index was quite marked. 
This shows up in the striking contrast between goods and services consumer price inflation (Chart 3).  
But  the  impact  of  greater  competition  does  not  stop  with  prices.  Business  tells  us  that  greater 
competition  between  companies  is  encouraging  them  to  protect  their  profits  by  cutting  costs.  This 
involves  control  of  wage  growth  and  the  search  for  productivity  improvements.  This  has  been 
complemented  by  greater  contestability  in  the  labour  market  due  to  both  greater  migration  and  the 
potential for out-sourcing and relocation of production should wage demands become excessive.  
My  view  therefore  is  that  the  disinflationary  pressure  from  globalisation  may  well  have  been  more 
substantial  than  the  direct  estimates  suggest,  and  this  helps  to  explain  why  inflation  has  fallen 
throughout the world over the last 15 years from 30% in the early 1990s to about 4% in 2003.6 This 
                                                      
4   The weight of manufacturing in UK gross value added was 14.7% in 2003. (United Kingdom Economic Accounts, 2006q1). 
5   This is discussed in detail by my former MPC colleague, Stephen Nickell in ‘Why Has Inflation Been So Low Since 1999?’  
6   Estimates  from  Kenneth  Rogoff,  ‘Globalization  and  Global  Disinflation’,  paper  prepared  for  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
Kansas City conference on ‘Monetary Policy and Uncertainty: Adapting to a Changing Economy’ Jackson Hole, WY, August 
2 
 BIS Review 70/2006
decline has been particularly marked in Africa, Latin America and the transition economies but is also 
significant in the UK and other developed countries.  
None of this makes monetary policy any less important. Ultimately inflation in the UK is a product of 
our monetary policy. Inflation would certainly reappear if we relaxed. But the disinflationary pressures 
from the Far East and elsewhere have made our job easier. In the UK, interest rates are set to deliver 
the inflation target. If there is disinflationary pressure from the rest of the world then that allows us to 
set  lower  interest  rates  (and accommodate a  higher  rate of  price  increases  in services) than would 
otherwise have been the case. Thus the consequence is lower interest rates as well as low inflation. 
Prospects for UK inflation  
That leaves the question whether that benign trend is likely to continue in the future. Over the past 
year, the downward trend in the prices of imported goods has stopped and import prices have started 
to rise, even after excluding oil and erratic items (Chart 4). The MPC’s current view, as expressed in 
the latest Inflation Report, is that import price inflation will moderate over the coming period, but that it 
will  not  prove  as  much  of  a  downward  force  on  inflation  as  in  the  late  1990s  and  early  2000s.  We 
have, for example, seen signs of costs rising in China and the Far East. Looking further ahead, there 
must be a risk that this begins to spillover into higher import price inflation.  
And while globalisation has helped to hold down prices of most goods, the demand for energy and 
other raw materials coming from the newly emerging economies has contributed to higher prices of 
energy and some commodities. The direct effect on the CPI of higher petrol prices has been much 
more limited here than in the US for example because so much of the price of our petrol is accounted 
for by duty. Nonetheless since the beginning of 2004, petrol prices have gone up by over 25% and gas 
prices  by  more  still.  The  prices  of  petrol,  utilities  and  transport  services  added  about  1  percentage 
point to CPI inflation in May. And this does not include the effect on other goods and services where 
oil or gas is a component cost.  
In the past we have seen wages pick up in response to hikes in the oil price and all central banks have 
been – and remain – watchful for those “second round effects” now. So far we have seen few signs of 
them. Part of the reason for that has been that the oil price increases have been offset by lower price 
increases  elsewhere.  Most  recently  CPI  inflation  peaked  at  2.5%  during  2005  and  has  recently 
returned to that level (Chart 5). Given the relatively small immediate impact of higher oil and gas prices 
on CPI inflation, it is less surprising that this has not had major knock on effects.  
Indeed it is not clear how far it is possible to predict the movement of prices overall by adding up the 
movements of different components. You might expect overall inflation to be made up of a “core” of 
domestically  produced  and  consumed  goods  and  services  which  would  be  relatively  stable  and 
responsive to policy at home and a more unpredictable and uncontrollable component arising from oil 
and other world markets. But that doesn’t seem to match our recent experience.  
The  CPI  in  total  seems  to  have  been  more  stable  than  the  CPI  adjusted  to  exclude  the  impact  of 
energy and import prices. The rise in these external components of our inflation rate has been offset 
by lower price increases of domestically produced goods and services. Services inflation, for example, 
has weakened from 4.6 per cent in August to 3.4 per cent in June. This might be because UK price 
setters have chosen to take a hit to their margins or squeeze other costs rather than pass on higher oil 
and other import prices to their consumers. In other words, they have taken account of the effect of 
higher import prices in depressing the real incomes of their customers and curtailed price increases on 
their own products to avoid losing sales.  
This all suggests that in an economy with well-anchored inflation expectations, relative prices adjust 
quickly to maintain the overall rate near target; with domestic price inflation, for example, moving in the 
opposite  direction  to  import  price  inflation.  In  effect,  where  the  target  is  credible,  the  market 
adjustments to relative prices will do most of our work. 
That is another reason for paying very close attention to inflation expectations. The MPC has been 
successful  over  the  years  in  maintaining  inflation  expectations  at  a  rate  broadly  consistent  with  the 
inflation  target.  Anchoring  expectations  in  this  way  is  important  because  it  prevents  the  wage-price 
spirals that were a key part of the inflation process in the past. If wage and price setters believed that 
inflation was going to rise above the target, then they would make some allowance for this in setting 
                                                                                                                                                                      
28-30, 2003. The Bank for International Settlements has also emphasised the ‘increasing global character of the inflation 
process’, see BIS Annual Report 2006. 
BIS Review 70/2006 
 3
current  wages  and  prices.  That  would  add  to  current  inflationary  pressure,  requiring  higher  interest 
rates  to  control  it.  While  there  was  some  evidence  of  a  pickup  in  the  general  public’s  inflation 
expectations at the beginning of the year, probably in response to higher gas prices, they have fallen 
back a little since then and do not yet appear to have had any effect on actual wages or prices. 
Conclusion  
To sum up, by delivering the inflation target the MPC seeks to produce a platform of stability. That 
doesn’t produce a quiet life for businesses – on the contrary it can make the pace of change quicker 
because it makes the underlying business imperatives clearer. In recent years, we have been helped 
in keeping inflation low and stable by the integration of new economies into the world market and the 
disinflationary pressure that has produced. As a result of that stability, the market and the public now 
expect inflation to remain around target and that appears to have helped to damp the impact of the 
recent oil price hikes on the overall inflation rate; the total impact has been modest and there are no 
signs yet of spillovers into wages and prices.  
We do not know yet whether the benign international context will continue or what other shocks may 
occur. We are seeing renewed rises in energy prices this year which have helped push inflation back 
above target. Our role is to continue to assess the situation as it develops, monitoring economic data, 
financial markets, and listening to our regional agents and their business contacts. We will not hesitate 
to change interest rates if it is necessary to keep inflation on track. That will allow you to concentrate 
on the real business issues of the future.  
Charts 
 4 
 BIS Review 70/2006
 BIS Review 70/2006 
 5
 6 
 BIS Review 70/2006
 BIS Review 70/2006 
 7
