Erkki Liikanen: Monetary policy in theory and practice 
Speech by Mr Erkki Liikanen, Governor of the Bank of Finland, at the Turku School of Economics and 
Business Administration, Turku, 26 April 2006. 
 I would like to thank the Turku School of Economics and Business Administration and Professor Okko 
for providing me with this opportunity to lecture on monetary policy to representatives of academia. As 
I myself work in the practical sphere of monetary policy, it is natural that in this presentation I shall look 
into the relationship between theory and practice in monetary policy. 
According to an old anecdote, an economist is a person who, when seeing that something works in 
practice, asks whether it could also work in theory. Robert Solow's satirical comment may, in its time, 
have been half true, but when it comes to monetary policy it is equally clear that the influence should 
also  operate  in  the  right  direction  –  from  theory  to  practice  –  and  that  central  bankers  have  been 
greatly influenced by economic research. 
Research and accumulated practical experience have led to central bankers and economists currently 
sharing surprisingly similar views on monetary policy principles the world over. In the last two decades, 
both  the  theory  and  the  practice  of  monetary  policy  have  undergone  sweeping  changes  that  have 
resulted in a high consensus with respect to the theory of monetary policy and its conduct in practice. 
The gap between theory and practice is at present apparently narrower than for a long time. 
I shall break down my brief overview of the relationship between monetary policy practice and theory 
into three sections. I shall first focus on setting monetary policy objectives, then go on to dealing with 
the  institutional  framework  for  monetary  policy  and  finally  review  monetary  policy  strategy  and 
implementation. In all these areas, the practice of monetary policy has made enormous progress in the 
last few years, in fruitful interaction with monetary policy research. 
Monetary policy objectives 
The  stability  of  the  general  price  level  is  currently  widely  recognised  as  the  primary  objective  of 
monetary policy. This means that monetary policy seeks to ward off fluctuations in the overall price 
level, ie inflation and deflation. 
The objective of price stability invariably concerns the general level of prices for goods and services 
over the medium term. Accordingly, the objective of monetary policy is not to stabilise the prices of 
individual goods but to review the price level for the economy as a whole, for instance, by means of a 
consumer price index. 
It is expressly the prices of goods and services that are at stake, so that monetary policy does not 
basically aim at stability in asset prices, such as share or housing prices, even if their fluctuations are 
often a source of concern for central banks. 
As the effect of monetary policy decisions on inflation is delayed, to a certain degree, monetary policy 
has no scope for steering the general price level in the short term; rather policy orientation has been 
defined for a medium term. 
In fact, the forms of defining monetary policy objectives vary globally more than does the real practice. 
In  the  case  of  euro  area  monetary  policy,  the  objectives  are  clearly  defined.  Price  stability  was 
assigned in the Maastricht Treaty as an objective for the European System of Central Banks (ESCB). 
Under the Treaty, price stability constitutes the primary objective of monetary policy, and the European 
Central Bank (ECB) must support the general economic policies in the Community without prejudice to 
the objective of price stability. The Governing Council of the ECB has later provided an operational 
framework for the concept of price stability, stating that it means an increase in consumer prices of 
below but close to 2% over the medium term. 
The objectives of euro area monetary policy have often been compared with those of the US monetary 
policy  regime.  The  US  central  banking  system,  the  Federal  Reserve  System,  is  assigned  in  law  a 
number  of  parallel  objectives,  such  as  price  stability  and  a  maximum  level  of  employment.  It  is 
interesting that, despite such legal differences, both the ECB and the Federal Reserve, as the central 
BIS Review 66/2006 
 1
banks of other major industrial countries, perceive their role as being largely the same: the central aim 
being  to  keep  inflation  low  and  stable  over  the  medium  term,  as  this  is  also  crucial  for  sustainable 
growth and employment. 
Price stability should be aimed at for a number of reasons. It helps consumers to distinguish relative 
price  changes  from  changes  in  the  general  price  level,  thereby  providing  greater  efficiency  to  the 
functioning  of  the  price  mechanism  in  the  economy.  It  reduces  inflationinduced  risk  premia  in 
connection with required returns on investment and hence lowers the ‘natural’ level of interest rates. It 
also  reduces  economic  agents'  need  to  use  their  resources  for  hedging  against  inflation,  thereby 
preventing unfair and arbitrary income redistribution effects caused by inflation. 
Previously,  it  was  often  thought  that  curbing  inflation  and  the  pursuit  of  economic  growth  and  high 
employment  would  be  mutually  contradictory  objectives.  Both  practical  experience  and  theoretical 
research have however indicated that this does not hold true in the long run. 
The currently prevailing view is that monetary policy is able to determine the rate of inflation in the long 
term and that the maintenance of price stability entails no permanent costs in terms of lower economic 
growth or job losses, for instance. Research however stresses the importance of a number of price 
rigidities  affecting  the  economy,  which  weaken  the  ability  of  monetary  policy  to  control  short-term 
inflationary developments and possibly cause interest rate movements to exert even major temporary 
effects on overall demand and economic growth. 
The conclusion from this has been that it is worthwhile for monetary policy to aim at price stability over 
the medium term, but not to strive for a short-term steering of the price level, which would require the 
conduct  of  a  very  aggressive,  stop-and-go  interest  rate  policy,  leading  to  unnecessary  shocks  to 
employment and economic growth. 
In situations where price stability is exposed to threats from fluctuations in overall demand, monetary 
policy aimed at price stability also directly evens out cyclical fluctuations. 
Historical experience shows that consistent monetary policy aimed at price stability has brought about 
beneficial effects. In the last decade, inflation and its costs have been brought down significantly the 
world over. Meanwhile, monetary policy has been able to make an ongoing contribution to growth and 
it  has  been  possible  to  formulate  monetary  policy  so  as  to  have  a  dampening  effect  on  cyclical 
fluctuations.  The  difference  with  regard  to  the  widespread  economic  instability  of  the  1970s  is 
absolutely startling. 
The global average rate of increase in consumer prices has fallen from about 14% in the period from 
1980  to  1984  to  less  than  4%  in  the  period  from  2000  to  2005.  At  the  same  time,  a  number  of 
countries have witnessed a definite moderation in inflation and output volatility. This experience denies 
the idea of a contradiction between price stability and stability in the real economy. 
Although  the  orientation  of  monetary  policy  towards  curbing  inflation  has  clearly  been  a  major 
international success, it must be admitted that monetary policy has not been the single determinant of 
the strongly falling inflation. Another driving force with a similar effect has been the much discussed 
globalisation. Tightening international competition has changed corporate pricing behaviour and also 
trade  unions'  objectives  of  negotiation  towards  a  more  moderate  stance.  This  has  led  to  the 
weakening of the wage-price spiral in a number of old industrial countries. 
Monetary policy institutions 
Another area where the interaction between monetary policy theory and monetary policy practice is 
clearly visible is the development of institutions. Since the end of the 1980s, an increasing emphasis 
has been laid on central bank independence within the institutional arrangements for monetary policy. 
This  derives  from  the  fact  that  credibility  has  been  understood  to  constitute  a  precondition  for  a 
successful monetary policy. 
Central bank independence does not, of course, mean that a central bank ought to be free to choose 
its operational goals. On the contrary, the modern viewpoint emphasises central bank independence 
for  the  reason  that  only  independent  central  banks  are  able  to  act  as  reliably  as  possible  in  the 
performance  of  precisely  those  tasks  that  have  been  democratically  conferred  on  them  –  in  other 
words,  to  maintain  price  stability  through  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  The  importance  of 
independence in this connection is that it adds to monetary policy credibility and thereby confidence in 
the value of money. 
2 
 BIS Review 66/2006
Providing evidence and analysis of the importance of expectations and credibility is certainly among 
the key issues for which the practice of monetary policy can give credit to economic research done in 
the last few years. These concepts have in fact dominated theoretical monetary policy research more 
than anything else at least since the mid-1980s. 
The modern macroeconomic picture of the functioning of the economy is strongly forwardlooking. This 
means that both inflation and overall demand are largely determined by expectations concerning the 
future. For example, the rate of inflation is determined by what people, companies and trade unions 
expect of future inflation. The demand for goods and services, in turn, depends on future income and 
real interest rate expectations. 
According to modern understanding, the effects of monetary policy are also largely transmitted through 
expectations of future inflation and of future interest rate levels, and monetary policy can be perceived 
as being an instrument of exerting influence on the expectations of the public and the market. Michael 
Woodford, one of the current leading monetary policy researchers, has noted that very little else than 
expectations actually matter to monetary policy implications. 
The credibility of monetary policy means that the inflation expectations of the public and the market 
are  consistent  with  the  central  bank's  monetary  policy  objectives  so  that  the  public  and  the  market 
have confidence in the ability and willingness of the central bank to achieve its monetary policy goals. 
This is of great importance, in practice. A high level of credibility enables the central bank to achieve 
its  objective  of  price  stability  through  the  conduct  of  even  a  fairly  moderate  monetary  policy.  In 
contrast,  if  credibility  is  weak,  defending  the  value  of  money  will  require  a  heavyhanded  monetary 
policy, which causes shocks to economic growth and employment, without necessarily managing to 
control inflation. 
Economists  say  that  central  banks  lacking  monetary  policy  credibility  have  a  problem  with 
commitment. To this problem, economic literature proposes a variety of solutions. Perhaps the most 
famous is the idea presented by Kenneth Rogoff that the management of an independent central bank 
should be appointed from among persons who are more conservative than ‘the public opinion’ so that 
the  managers  are  only  interested  in  achieving  price  stability,  without  laying  much  emphasis  on  the 
short-term  effects  of  monetary  policy  on  the  real  economy.  Another  idea  is  the  proposition  by  Carl 
Walsh,  under  which  politicians  should  agree  with  the  central  bank  management  on  a  long-term 
agreement on results, which would reward the management for achieving price stability and punish it 
for inflation or deflation. 
I cannot tell how literally or even seriously these researchers have intended their propositions to be 
taken.  In  practice,  efforts  to  build  up  central  bank  credibility  have  however  been  slightly  different, 
mainly comprising the following three complementary approaches. 
The  first  one  of  these  is  ensuring  central  bank  independence.  The  European  Central  Bank,  for 
example, enjoys full functional and financial independence in relation to the European Union's political 
institutions, and the members of the Governing Council responsible for the ECB's monetary policy are 
widely  protected  in  the  discharge  of  their  duties.  Nor  are  we  allowed  to  take  monetary  policy 
instructions from any outside instance. The same requirement for independence also applies to the 
central banks of all Member States participating in Economic and Monetary Union (EMU). With new 
Member  States  joining  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  in  the  next  few  years,  legislation  concerning 
their central banks will also have to fulfil these requirements. 
Another approach is building up a solid reputation. Through the conduct of a consistent, successful 
and well-founded policy, the central bank may, over time, acquire such credibility as is needed in the 
implementation of monetary policy. The build-up of a solid reputation may be accelerated by a public 
commitment to the objective of price stability. Transparent communication on policy measures, their 
underlying  economic  analysis  and  rationale,  and  on  factors  affecting  future  policy  has  added  to 
monetary policy credibility. 
Despite its young age, the European System of Central Banks (ESCB) has been able to gain a high 
level of confidence, reflected in, for instance, the fact that inflation expectations in the euro area are 
fairly well in line with the objective of price stability. In this respect, the ECB has benefited from the 
confidence and credibility that the German central bank, the Bundesbank, had acquired in the course 
of decades. Notably in its first years of operation, the ECB focused on maintaining continuity relative to 
the traditional monetary policy stance of the largest Member State, Germany. 
BIS Review 66/2006 
 3
A third approach to securing monetary policy credibility consists of the coordination of other economic 
policies  with  the  aim  of  maintaining  price  stability.  This  especially  concerns  fiscal  ie  budget  policy. 
Disciplined fiscal policy, which avoids excessive deficits and borrowing, is not only the hallmark of a 
good economic policy, but also a prerequisite for a successful monetary policy. In the absence of such 
discipline, no central bank can succeed in the long term in achieving price stability. A sort of deadlock 
in public finances would lead to such strong pressure on monetary policy that the mere possibility of a 
deadlock should be ruled out in advance for the sake of monetary policy credibility. 
Economic  and  Monetary  Union  provides  a  comprehensive  mechanism  for  the  coordination  of 
economic  policies,  the  hub  of  which  is  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact,  aimed  at  constraining  public 
deficits and public debt. 
It is widely known that the surveillance procedures and sanctions related to the Stability and Growth 
Pact have been heavily tested recently, as many of the Member States participating in Monetary Union 
have  broken  the  limits  set  for  public  deficits.  The  ECB  has  called  for  a  strict  compliance  with  the 
regulations contained in the Pact. This is natural: the credibility of monetary policy requires both that 
the  Pact  provides  sufficient  flexibility  to  be  credible  and  that  the  framework  is  sufficiently  solid  to 
ensure  that  the  management  of  public  finances  in  the  euro  area  and  in  each  of  its  Member  States 
really remains on a sustainable basis over the long term. 
Monetary policy implementation 
As has been the case with the definition of monetary policy objectives and the central bank role, the 
principles  for  implementing  monetary  policy  have  also  undergone  changes,  which  are  related  to 
research done in the area. 
The  present  mainstream  of  macroeconomics  is  characterised  by  the  tendency  to  simply  portray 
monetary  policy  as  representing  a  mere  setting  of  interest  rates.  A  number  of  models  describe 
monetary policy by means of interest rate rules, which tell how the central bank's policy rate depends 
on the prevailing rate of inflation and the status of the real economy. The most famous of these rules is 
the Taylor rule. According to this rule, the deviation of the real central bank rate from its neutral level 
depends, on the one hand, on how much inflation deviates from its targeted level, and, on the other 
hand, on how much the level of GDP deviates from the output potential prevailing in the economy at 
any given time. 
Reducing monetary policy into mere interest rate decisions is in fact a fairly realistic way of reviewing 
the matter, even if no central bank relies on mechanistic rules in determining interest rates. Treating 
monetary policy as a series of interest rate decisions has also meant that disputes over money supply 
and  demand  that  have  plagued  macroeconomics  for  decades  –  the  debate  on  what  is  known  as 
monetarism – has simply been put aside after the interest rate approach has gained ground. 
Central banks naturally seek to closely monitor economic developments and to respond through their 
respective  interest  rate  policies  to  perceived  shocks  to  price  stability.  This  is  no  easy  task,  as 
distinguishing temporary factors affecting inflation from permanent changes is difficult. Central banks 
aiming  at  price  stability  over  the  medium  term  do  not  want  to  react  to  all  temporary  fluctuations  in 
inflation.  On  the  other  hand,  monetary  policy  under  changing  circumstances  must  give  proof  of 
sufficient sensitivity in order to keep inflation expectations firmly anchored to price stability. 
The  main  reason  for  the  non-reliance  on  mechanistic  rules  in  making  interest  rate  decisions  is  the 
difficulty  of  interpreting  the  economic  situation.  Monetary  policy  theory  and  also  practical  decision-
making necessarily operate on the basis of highly abstract concepts. These include potential output, 
the rate of change in total factor productivity, the neutral real interest rate level and prevailing inflation 
expectations. These variables are theoretical concepts that cannot be measured unambiguously. They 
also  vary  over  time.  Making  a  proper  assessment  of  the  economic  situation  is  however  the  fatal 
question of monetary policy. US studies have even pointed out that losing control of inflation in the 
1970s was a consequence of a misjudgement of the US economy's output potential after the 1973 oil 
crisis. 
Therefore, as interest rate decisions are inevitably accompanied by a high degree of discretion and 
decisions must be made in an environment of uncertainty, it would be unrealistic to assume that price 
stability could be maintained over short horizons, from month to month and from quarter to quarter. 
Taking uncertainty into account underscores the fact that the objective of price stability must be set 
over the medium term. Even more important is that monetary policy credibility rests on a sound footing 
4 
 BIS Review 66/2006
and  that  inflation  expectations  are  firmly  anchored,  making  it  unnecessary  for  monetary  policy  to 
respond to every fluctuation in inflation. 
In the last few years, one of the focal areas for both practitioners and researchers of monetary policy 
has been the question of policy transparency, in other words the effectiveness of communication. 
Monetary  policy  transparency  means  how  well  the  public  is  aware  of  the  central  bank's  monetary 
policy intentions and the issues on which the next interest rate decisions will depend. 
Transparency concerning monetary policy objectives is naturally an important issue, as I already noted 
earlier.  Current  discussion  focuses  specifically  on  shorter-term  transparency,  in  other  words,  how  a 
central bank should communicate its intentions for the near-term interest rate policy. 
Communicating the stance of interest rate policy is vital, as market rates are not determined solely by 
the  prevailing  policy  rate  but  are  also  forward-looking:  they  are  always  largely  dependent  on  the 
expected interest rate moves by the central bank over the coming weeks and months. In Finland, for 
instance, most housing loans are tied to the 12-month Euribor, which is clearly more dependent on 
interest rate expectations than on the level of the ECB's policy rate. 
News  on  monetary  policy  mostly  tends  to  focus  on  the  interest  rate  decision  made  each  time.  The 
interest  rate  decision  is  not,  however,  the  whole  story  of  monetary  policy,  as  central  banks  in  fact 
dispose  of  two  at  least  slightly  differing  instruments  –  the  prevailing  level  of  the  policy  rate  and 
expectations of the future interest rate level. Expectations of the future interest rate level are not only 
influenced by the prevailing interest rate but also by the information the central bank provides on its 
interest rate decisions and on its areas of concern as well as by the monetary policy framework within 
which the central bank operates. 
In the case of the European Central Bank, the monetary policy framework is reflected in the strategy 
published by the ECB. The strategy provides an organised framework for monetary policy presentation 
at  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  and  for  the  post-meeting  explanatory  note,  known  as  the 
introductory  statement.  The  strategy  is  composed  of  two  pillars,  the  one  covering  an  economic 
analysis  of  inflationary  pressures,  including  euro  area  macroeconomic  projections,  and  the  other  a 
monetary analysis providing information on inflationary pressures as reflected in monetary and credit 
developments. 
One  of  the  purposes  of  the  strategy  is  to  enhance  the  transparency  of  ECB  policy.  The  two  pillar 
structure has occasionally been criticised by researchers. It has been considered ambiguous, and it is 
certainly so compared with the Taylor rule. The monetary analysis has also recently been less popular 
among researchers than it used to be. I however believe that the strategy in its present form is useful 
for the purposes of policy transparency, as the Governing Council naturally needs to focus attention 
not  only  on  the  real  economy  but  also  on  the  development  of  the  money  and  credit  markets. 
Overlooking this would not increase policy transparency. 
In past years, central banks often sought to make their interest rate decisions unexpectedly and even 
considered  it  a  matter  of honour.  Transparency  in central  bank policy  has  however  been  increased 
systematically in recent years. This has been made in an effort to contribute to a stable and smooth 
functioning of the money market. 
Central banks, as also the markets and the media, presently take a highly serious attitude towards the 
form and content of communication on topical monetary policy issues, as what is told about interest 
rates is almost equally important as what is done with them. For the present, however, I am not in a 
position to mention any more about transparency in interest rate policy, as the purdah period, a period 
during which the members of the Governing Council of the ECB refrain from making any comment, 
starts one week before each Governing Council meeting. 
BIS Review 66/2006 
 5
