David Dodge: Global imbalances and the Canadian economy 
Remarks  by  Mr  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Barbados  International 
Business Association, Bridgetown, 6 February 2006. 
 Global imbalances and the Canadian economy 
Canada  and  Barbados  may  not  have  much  in  common  in  terms  of  climate,  but  we  both  have  very 
open  economies.  So  we  both  rely  on  good  economic  performance  globally  for  good  performance 
domestically. Recently, the global economy has been delivering that performance, and is expected to 
record real growth of about 4 per cent or better through 2007. It would be nice to think that this solid 
growth could endure forever. However, we all know that the global economy is subject to a number of 
risks, and policy-makers in international forums spend a lot of time thinking about how best to handle 
those risks. Most recently, discussions have focused on two major issues that are partly related to the 
rise to prominence of China and other Asian economies. One is that world oil markets remain very 
tight, and a further increase in oil prices remains a possibility. The other issue relates to the global 
economic  and  financial  imbalances  that  we  now  see,  and  the  way  in  which  they  will  be  resolved. 
Today, I want to spend some time discussing these imbalances and how they might be resolved. Then 
I'll say a few words about the state of the Canadian economy before turning to you for questions and 
discussion. 
Global imbalances - origins and solutions 
I  should  start  with  a  definition.  When  I  say  "global  imbalances,"  I  am  referring  to  the  large  and 
persistent  current  account  deficit  in  the  United  States  that  is  mirrored  by  large  current  account 
surpluses elsewhere, especially in Asia and in many oil-exporting countries. Given that Canada and 
Barbados  depend  on  international  trade  and  global  financial  stability  for  economic  growth,  we  both 
have a major stake in seeing that global imbalances are resolved in an orderly way. 
There has been much written and spoken commentary on the causes of these imbalances. But at the 
Bank of Canada, we see them as reflecting the financial flows associated with mismatches in savings 
and investment within major regions of the global economy. Since the latter part of the 1990s, many 
economies outside the United States have, for various reasons, increased their national savings by a 
very  large  amount.  At  the  same  time,  the  United  States  has  reduced  its  savings  and  has  become 
increasingly reliant on foreign borrowing. 
Is this a problem? So far, no. Global financial markets-in which many of you are involved-have done a 
good  job  of  matching  international  savings  flows  with  investment  opportunities.  International  capital 
flows are the lifeblood of the global economy. However, the sheer size of these financial flows into the 
United States is not sustainable indefinitely. We know that U.S. external indebtedness-even with that 
country's  reserve-currency  status-cannot  keep  growing  forever.  This  is  especially  so  given  that  this 
borrowing is being used mainly to finance current consumption. 
We  also  know  that  in  many  places  outside  the  United  States-particularly  in  Asia  and  in  many  oil-
exporting  countries-households  currently  want  to  save  more  than  businesses  want  to  invest.  At  the 
same time, desired national savings in the United States are not sufficient to meet desired investment, 
although  it  is  not  certain  that  this  situation  will  persist.  Eventually,  domestic  savings  in  the  United 
States will have to increase. Should that occur suddenly, we could see global economic growth slow 
sharply, unless there was corresponding growth in domestic demand outside the United States. Such 
a slowdown in growth, in turn, raises the risk that policy-makers might resort to protectionism. In that 
event, a period of very slow growth could, perhaps, be punctuated by periods of outright recession. 
I hasten to add that this is not a prediction on my part. I am only saying that such an outcome could be 
the  consequence  of  inappropriate  policies  in  many  economies.  And  this  outcome  would  hurt  all 
countries, including those that are following appropriate policies. 
Global imbalances are a global problem, and we need to think about them collectively. So how can we 
achieve  their  orderly  resolution?  Let  me  spend  a  few  minutes  talking  about  what  is  needed,  both 
domestically and internationally, to help resolve the imbalances. 
BIS Review 8/2006 
 1
Appropriate domestic policies support confidence 
One of the keys to changing the flows of global savings and investment is for each country to follow 
policies that have the best chance of achieving sustained growth in the medium term. The best way to 
ensure that global demand continues to grow over time is for policy-makers to provide an environment 
that gives households the confidence to spend and businesses the confidence to invest. If all countries 
were to follow appropriate domestic policies, this would go a long way towards defusing the danger 
posed by global imbalances. 
Specifically,  in  terms  of  fiscal  policy,  there  is  a  clear  need  for  countries  to  focus  on  having  a 
sustainable ratio of public debt to GDP. This would give confidence to businesses and consumers that 
the value of their money will not be eroded over time, either by high inflation or by excessive taxation. 
Where  a  sustainable  public  debt-to-GDP  ratio  is  now  absent,  it  should  be  achieved;  where  it  is 
present, it should be maintained. 
The second point is that authorities everywhere need to ensure that domestic policies are promoting 
well-functioning markets for goods, services, capital, and labour. In particular, labour markets need to 
be flexible enough to facilitate the movement of workers from sector to sector as the economy adjusts 
to  events.  By  promoting  domestic  flexibility,  policy-makers  in  all  countries  could  support  confidence 
and boost growth. This would be good for national economies, and it would also help to resolve global 
imbalances. 
There is also a need for policy-makers to recognize the positive role played by a well-functioning social 
safety  net.  Here,  I  am  referring  to  unemployment  insurance,  public  health  care,  and  public  pension 
systems. Consider the countries of emerging Asia, where such systems are lacking. Citizens in those 
countries need very high levels of savings to mitigate the risk of job loss and illness, and to provide for 
the years after they leave the workforce. An effective and efficient social safety net pools risk, so that 
citizens  can  have  increased  confidence  about  the  future  and  reduce  their  need  for  precautionary 
savings. I know that the Chinese authorities that we at the Bank deal with are well aware of the need 
to create a well-functioning social safety net. 
Authorities everywhere also need to follow policies that help a country's financial system to work well. 
This  is  critical  if  the  financial  system  is  to  carry  out  its  vital  role  of  helping  to  match  savings  with 
productive investments. The financial system can also support confidence by giving households and 
businesses  appropriate  access  to  credit.  I  know  all  of  you  in  this  room  are  well  aware  of  the 
importance of a well-functioning financial system, so I don't need to belabour the point. But I would 
add that, in terms of supporting confidence, appropriate monetary policy is also critical. It is important 
that central banks follow policies that anchor inflation expectations and thus promote confidence in the 
future value of money. 
A renewed international monetary order 
Having spoken about what policy-makers can do domestically, let me now turn to international issues. 
Essentially,  the  global  economy  needs  a  commitment  by  all  countries  to  a  renewed  international 
monetary order, and a willingness to play by accepted rules within this order. 
Let me explain what I mean. Around the end of World War II, the developed countries came together 
and  reached  a  series  of  agreements.  They  agreed  to  establish  a  monetary  order  based  on  fixed 
exchange  rates,  together  with  a  process  to  realign  exchange  rates  in  the  event  of  fundamental 
imbalances. Important institutions, such as the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, and the 
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, were also established. 
But since the 1970s, many economies have adopted flexible exchange rate regimes. In general, these 
regimes have been able to coexist with fixed exchange rate regimes, and to do so relatively well in a 
world of open capital markets. However, the success of this coexistence has depended on countries 
following "the rules of the game" appropriate to the exchange rate regime they have chosen. 
What do I mean by "the rules of the game"? For countries with a flexible exchange rate, this means 
that authorities should actually let their currency float freely. And for countries with a fixed exchange 
rate, this means that authorities need to run appropriate policies in order for the fixed exchange rate to 
be  sustainable.  In  particular,  countries  with  a  fixed  exchange  rate  and  a  current  account  surplus 
should not "sterilize" the foreign exchange interventions required to fix the value of their currency. By 
"sterilize," I mean offsetting the effect of interventions on the domestic money supply. 
2 
 BIS Review 8/2006
Recently,  problems have arisen  from  countries  not  playing  by  the  rules  of  the  game.  Certain  Asian 
economies have been stifling the inflationary effects of their interventions and, in the process, building 
up massive amounts of foreign reserves. 
When countries offset the effects of intervention, they delay domestic economic adjustment. They also 
delay  global  adjustment.  Just  as  worrying  is  the  fact  that  such  intervention  is  provoking  threats  of 
protectionist measures in certain political quarters. Such wrong-headed measures could choke off the 
growth of international trade that has led to rising incomes worldwide. 
What is needed today is a renewal of the international monetary order and of the spirit of international 
co-operation that led to the original agreements. The global economy has changed enormously since 
the end of World War II. But the danger posed by global imbalances is a clear reminder that there is 
still a need for a coherent international monetary order-and a need for countries to play by the rules. 
In this context, it is also very important that all countries work to protect and enhance the free flow of 
goods and services by finding a way to break the stalemate at the Doha round of trade talks and by 
strengthening the World Trade Organization. We all need to support these efforts and to be vocal in 
resisting calls for protectionism. 
Current economic developments in Canada 
Having set out this global context, let me now turn to how Canada fits into the picture. As I said at the 
outset, like Barbados, Canada has a very open economy, so how we deal with the current challenges 
is crucial to our economic health. We have been following policies that allow the Canadian economy to 
adjust to global developments. Let me say a few words here about my own area, which is monetary 
policy. 
Canada's  monetary  policy  consists  of  an  inflation-targeting  system,  backed  by  a  freely  floating 
exchange rate. We aim to keep inflation at 2 per cent, the midpoint of a 1 to 3 per cent target range. 
Under  this  regime,  not  only  has  inflation  in  Canada  remained  near  the  target  in  recent  years,  but 
inflation  expectations  are  now  anchored  near  2  per  cent.  As  a  result,  market  signals  are  sent  and 
received more clearly, and Canadian businesses and consumers are more confident about the future 
value of their money. 
A critical feature of our inflation-targeting system is that we operate symmetrically around our target. 
This means that we care just as much about inflation falling below target as we do about inflation rising 
above it. This symmetric approach helps keep the Canadian economy near its production potential, 
thus encouraging strong, sustained growth in output and employment. 
Another feature of our monetary policy is that we aim to be transparent. At the Bank of Canada, we 
believe that monetary policy is more effective when people understand what we are doing and why we 
are doing it. We publish regular reports and updates about our monetary policy. In the most recent 
Update, published on 26 January, we noted that the Canadian economy continues to adjust to global 
developments and to the associated changes in relative prices. 
As I said at the beginning, global economic growth is expected to remain robust-around 4 per cent this 
year and next. Against this backdrop, we continue to judge that the Canadian economy as a whole is 
currently operating at its production capacity. And we expect it to keep on growing roughly in line with 
its production potential through 2007. Specifically, we project annual average growth of 3.1 per cent 
this year and 2.9 per cent in 2007. 
Total consumer price inflation, which was at 2.3 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2005, has been and 
will  continue  to  be  affected  by  changes  in  the  prices  of  crude  oil  and  natural  gas.  Assuming  that 
energy  prices  evolve  in  line  with  the  prices  reflected  in  futures  markets,  we  expect  total  inflation  to 
return to the 2 per cent target by the first half of 2007. The same is true of core inflation which, in the 
closing months of 2005, was at 1.6 per cent. 
With  the  Canadian  economy  operating  at  capacity  and  expected  to  grow  at  potential  through  the 
projection period, on 24 January we raised our policy interest rate by 25 basis points, bringing it to 3 
1/2 per cent. And we indicated that, in line with our base-case projection and our current assessment 
of risks, some modest further increase in the policy interest rate would be needed to keep aggregate 
supply and demand in balance and inflation on target over the medium term. 
It  is  important  to  keep  in  mind  that  there  are,  as  always,  both  upside  and  downside  risks  to  our 
projections. For 2006, these risks appear to be balanced. But through 2007 and beyond, the risks are 
BIS Review 8/2006 
 3
tilted  to  the  downside  because,  as  I  have  said,  the unwinding  of  global  imbalances could  involve  a 
slowdown in world economic activity. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. Global imbalances are a global problem, and their resolution requires a global effort. 
Every country has a role to play in this effort. And while the specific policy measures will vary from 
country to country, there are common principles that policy-makers everywhere should follow. These 
include the adoption of appropriate fiscal policies, the promotion of well-functioning labour and product 
markets,  the  provision  of  a  well-functioning  social  safety  net,  policies  that  allow  for  an  efficient  and 
sound financial system, and a monetary policy focused on low, stable, and predictable inflation. We 
also need a commitment by all countries to a renewed international monetary order and a willingness 
to play by the rules of the game. 
This does not represent a new prescription for global economic health. But the need for urgent action 
has increased. Imbalances are persisting, and if they aren't resolved in an orderly way, we face the 
threat  of  great  disruption.  That  is  particularly  true  for  countries  with  very  open  economies  such  as 
Canada and Barbados. An orderly resolution of imbalances is in all of our interests. 
4 
 BIS Review 8/2006
