Timothy F Geithner: Uncertainty and transparency in the conduct of monetary 
policy  
Remarks  by  Mr  Timothy  F  Geithner,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  Financial  Services  Leadership  Forum  Breakfast,  New  York  City,  31  May 
2006. 
 At the Jackson Hole Symposium in 2003, Alan Greenspan remarked that "uncertainty is not just an 
important feature of the monetary policy landscape; it is the defining characteristic of that landscape." 
Historically, this pervasive uncertainty was associated with a tendency toward opacity on the part of 
central bankers. But in recent years we've seen a rather dramatic reversal in this tendency as central 
bankers  have  come  to  recognize  the  potentially  valuable  role  that  communication  with  financial 
markets and the general public can play in the achievement of monetary policy goals.  
While transparency has emerged as one of the hallmarks of modern central banking, so too has an 
appreciation for the challenge of communicating about policy under uncertainty. This challenge can be 
substantial. It means conveying not only the most likely trajectory for key economic variables, but also 
the uncertainty around that trajectory and perhaps some indication of how policy might react under the 
myriad ways that the uncertainty could be resolved. I want to devote my remarks today to exploring 
what it means, and what it does not mean, for a central bank to communicate in an effective way about 
policy in the face of uncertainty. 
The issue of communication is particularly relevant in the current economic environment. For much of 
the past three years, financial markets have reflected a high degree of certainty about the near-term 
outlook for monetary policy in the United States. Market expectations in the weeks preceding each of 
the last 16 Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meetings attached a probability close to one that 
the FOMC would raise the target for the federal funds rate by 25 basis points. Also, there was very 
little probability attached to inter-meeting moves over this period, or to moves in increments larger than 
25 basis points. And, although market expectations about how far the FOMC would ultimately move 
were revised significantly over the course of this period as the economic outlook was revised, these 
changes occurred without the Committee needing to deviate from the near-term path. 
This  period  of  unusual  certainty  in  the  path  of  the  fed  funds  rate  was  the  result  of  a  confluence  of 
factors. When the Committee first moved to tighten policy in June 2004, the fed funds rate was at the 
historic low of 1 percent, and it was clear that policy would have to move a substantial distance to get 
back  within  the  range  of  plausible  estimates  of  the  neutral  rate.  Over  the  course  of  the  following 
months the incoming data tended to reinforce the case for a progressive move up in the target rate. 
And, the Committee made a conscious decision to signal that in view of the likely path of growth and 
inflation  further  tightening  of  monetary  policy  was  necessary  and  could  be  achieved  at  a  relatively 
gradual pace. 
We are now in the process of emerging from this rather exceptional period, and this provides us with 
an  interesting  context  in  which  to  reflect  on  uncertainty  and  how  it  affects  the  conduct  of  monetary 
policy and communications about monetary policy. 
The degree of confidence in the sign and shape of the near-term path of the fed funds rate we've seen 
in recent years is unlikely to be a common feature of monetary policy in the United States or in other 
countries. The simple reason for this is that the economic circumstances that precipitated the policy 
were  also  not  typical.  There  are  likely  to  be  times  when  incoming  data  deviates  substantially  and 
persistently from our forecasts. In those situations, policymakers have to examine whether they have 
significantly  misestimated  certain  fundamental  features  of  the  economy,  such  as  the  NAIRU  or  the 
trend productivity growth rate, that might alter the appropriate course of monetary policy. 
Central banks everywhere conduct policy in a state of limited knowledge about the economy and how 
best to achieve their objectives. The sources of uncertainty they confront are many and varied. 
Sometimes,  what  we  think  we  know  about  how  the  economy  works  turns  out  to  be  wrong,  either 
because certain features of the economy have changed, or because our understanding was not right 
in the first place. It was once widely held that monetary policy could achieve somewhat lower rates of 
unemployment by allowing somewhat higher rates of inflation, and that it could do this without risking a 
BIS Review 54/2006 
 1
substantial  acceleration  of  inflation.  This  view  proved  to  be  mistaken  because  it  did  not  correctly 
account for the role inflation expectations played in inflation dynamics. 
Economic concepts that are critical to our understanding of the economy may be difficult or impossible 
to capture in practice. One such concept is the neutral or equilibrium interest rate, which is the rate 
that,  if  sustained  over  some  period  of  time,  is  likely  to  be  consistent  with  an  economy  growing  at 
potential with low inflation. Plausible estimates for the prevailing level of this rate have a range of at 
least 100 basis points, and the center of the estimates tends to move around quite a bit. 
Another concept that is difficult to estimate precisely is the economy's potential, or sustainable, growth 
rate. The acceleration in productivity growth in the United States in the late 1990s, for example, led us 
to  revise  our  estimates  of  how  fast  the  economy  was  likely  to  be  able  to  grow  at  that  time  without 
undermining price stability. 
We  also  face  considerable  ignorance  about  the  precise  channels  through  which  policy  actions 
ultimately affect the economy, as well as how long those effects will take to show up and how large 
they will be when they do show up. As you would expect, this makes it difficult to assess in advance, 
or even in real time, the amount of loosening or tightening that is likely to be necessary to achieve the 
goals of central banks. 
Even  if  we  had  precise  knowledge  of  key  economic  relationships,  our  ability  to  assess  economic 
conditions  in  real  time  would  be  impeded  by  data  limitations.  Though  most  modern  central  banks 
implicitly  or  explicitly  target  some  measure  of  inflation,  the  host  of  issues  surrounding  the  proper 
definition  and  measurement  of  inflation  for  policy  purposes  is  daunting.  In  general,  most  economic 
data  are  subject  to  sampling  error  and so cannot  simply  be  taken  at  face  value.  Also,  many  of  the 
series  we  rely  on  are  subject  to  revision  as  more  or  better  information  becomes  available,  and 
potentially  can  even  be  redefined  in  a  way  that  makes  the  history  of  the  series  less  useful  for 
interpreting current movements. Finally, data are often reported with a significant enough delay to limit 
their use as a read on current conditions. 
But,  even  if  we  knew  the  model  and  data  with  certainty,  it  is  impossible  to  perfectly  predict  the 
evolution  of  factors  that  are  largely  beyond  the  influence  of  current  monetary  policy  but  that  would 
likely affect our policy today if we knew for sure how they would look tomorrow. One way to say this is 
that we simply cannot know what types of "shocks" are likely to hit the economy or when they will hit. 
And even as they impact the economy, the appropriate policy response may not be obvious because it 
may be difficult to assess in real time the probable duration of the shock and whether it is demand 
driven or supply driven. 
Even at a one-year horizon, which for policy purposes is not a very long time, there is considerable 
uncertainty  surrounding  forecasts  of  GDP  growth.  For  example,  the  Survey  of  Professional 
Forecasters reports that on average 50 economists attach a 90 percent probability to an outcome for 
real  GDP  growth  for  2007  that  ranges  from  1.0  percent  to  5.0  percent.  The  width  of  this  band  of 
confidence or uncertainty is similar to that in the published forecasts of many central banks. 
The  types  of  fundamental  uncertainty  I  just  reviewed  are  always  present,  but  their  impact  on  the 
appropriate near-term trajectory of rates, and hence on the degree of confidence the central bank can 
convey about that trajectory, may vary substantially over time. 
I want to mention a few other concrete examples of the uncertainty we currently face. The latest wave 
of global economic integration has influenced inflation and output dynamics around the world in ways 
that may be hard to understand fully in real time. Technological progress, along with the transition to 
greater labor force participation in emerging and developing economies has probably served to keep 
inflation low in many other countries and has served to increase the rate of growth in potential output 
globally. But the rapid growth in the market sectors of emerging and developing economies may also 
contribute to more rapid growth in global demand and inflation pressures. This changing configuration 
of world markets complicates the task of forecasting inflation and output within national economies. 
Energy prices have surprised us over the past few years, in terms of the extent of the rise in prices, 
the  increase  in  volatility,  and  the  limited  negative  effects  to  date  on  global  economic  growth.  Our 
capacity to project future energy prices has proven to be very limited, as has our ability to convincingly 
ascertain the extent to which temporary supply factors, rather than an unrecognized strength in global 
demand,  accounts  for  the  energy  price  trajectory  we've  witnessed  recently.  The  consequences  of 
these  limits  to  our  knowledge  may  be  even  greater  given  the  extent  of  the  price  increases  already 
experienced. 
2 
 BIS Review 54/2006
The unprecedented level of the U.S. current account deficit and dramatic rise in U.S. indebtedness 
adds  to  the  normal  degree  of  uncertainty  that  surrounds  any  medium-term  forecast  because  of  the 
dynamics that could accompany the path to a more sustainable pattern of capital flows. 
The process of adjustment that appears to be underway in the U.S. housing market, occurring as it is 
after a sustained and very substantial decline in the household savings rate, provides more than the 
usual challenge in predicting the future strength of consumer spending. 
It is also hard to assess the degree to which the current constellation of global monetary conditions 
has  influenced  the  behavior  of  long-term  interest  rates.  This  makes  it  harder  to  assess  the 
appropriateness of the current stance of monetary policy. And it may also mask some of the pressures 
on risk premiums we might expect to see given the deterioration of the U.S. long-term fiscal situation 
and the magnitude of the U.S. current account imbalance. 
In reviewing these dimensions of uncertainty, I want to emphasize that the fundamental conditions of 
the  U.S.  economy,  and  much  of  the  world  economy,  are  very  strong  today.  But  these  aspects  of 
uncertainly help illustrate what makes monetary policy interesting, and they help explain why central 
banks  may  confront  wide  bands  of  uncertainty  around  even  a  strong  central  outlook.  They  also 
emphasize the importance of the process we use to make decisions about policy in a state of limited 
knowledge. 
Policymakers can use a range of approaches to deal with uncertainty. In addition to making a very 
substantial investment in trying to capture changes in economic activity that may not be fully evident in 
the national data, we typically spend a lot of time looking at the assumptions that underpin the central 
forecast, and the sensitivity of that forecast to the possibility that those assumptions prove wrong. 
We regularly  and systematically  examine  a range  of  alternative scenarios  that  attempt  to  capture a 
broad range of different paths for the main forces operating on the economy. These scenarios include 
those that seem highly implausible but might prove very damaging, as well as those that seem more 
plausible but might alter the outlook less. To complement this, we look at the implications for monetary 
policy  of  alternative  scenarios  for  the  outlook—what  should we  do  if  the  world  moves  in  a  different 
direction. And we also look at the impact on the outlook for growth and inflation of different paths for 
the fed funds rate. 
These approaches help illustrate the size and sources of uncertainty we live with at any moment. They 
do not give us the capacity to attach precise probabilities to alternative scenarios or to quantify with 
precision the implications, but they help frame a discussion of the material risks to the outlook and the 
potential consequences of different types of policy mistakes. And they can help inform choices about 
how central banks should affect expectations about future interest rates. 
Along with these analytical tools, many central banks have adopted a decisionmaking structure that is 
designed  to  bring  a  diversity  of  independent  perspectives  to  the  table.  Although  the  FOMC's 
discussions  begin  with  the  presentation  of  a  forecast  prepared  by  the  staff  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
Board, the committee members bring to the discussion substantial information based on independent 
efforts  to  understand  the  underlying  dynamics  of  demand  and  inflation  and  their  implications  for 
monetary policy. This can provide a stronger foundation for decisions, particularly where uncertainty is 
inherently great. 
Central  banks  have  adopted  different  approaches  to  this  challenge,  even  as  there  has  been  broad 
convergence toward the model of independent central banks, with explicit mandates that include price 
stability and greater disclosure and transparency. 
The central banks that publish quantitative forecasts for growth and inflation now typically show the 
confidence  bands  around  their  forecasts.  In  some  cases,  these  forecasts  use,  as  a  conditioning 
assumption,  financial  market  expectations  for  the  path  of  short-term  interest  rates.  In  others,  the 
central bank publishes a forecast that includes the central bank's assessment at that time of the likely 
path  of  monetary  policy  over  some  horizon.  In  the  former  case,  the  implications  of  the  forecast  for 
monetary policy are left implicit. In the latter case, the likely path of monetary policy is made explicit, 
but that path is heavily qualified or conditioned to make it clear that that expected path of short-term 
interest rates will change as conditions change. 
The FOMC's approach to communication differs in interesting and important ways from these other 
models.  Although  the  Committee  has  introduced  a  gradual  but  marked  increase  in  the  degree  of 
communication  over  the  past  two  decades,  it  provides  information  about  its  forecast  in  quantitative 
terms less frequently and with less detail than has become typical of many other central banks. And 
BIS Review 54/2006 
 3
yet,  because  of  the  unique  circumstances  over  the  past  two  to  three  years,  it  has  provided  more 
information about the near-term path for monetary policy than has been the practice of many of our 
counterparts. 
These differences in approaches to communication do not seem to reflect fundamental differences in 
perceptions  of  the  degree  or  nature  of  uncertainty.  The  proponents  of  the  regimes  with  the  most 
explicit forecasts and greater disclosure about the future path of interest rates do not claim to have 
greater confidence in their ability to forecast. They do express, however, greater comfort with some of 
the potentially adverse consequences of such approaches, the tendency, for example, for observers to 
gravitate  toward  the  central  tendency  of  the  forecast  and  to  look  past  the  uncertainty  bands  and 
qualifications.  And  they  express  less  concern  that  these  approaches  to  communication  will  end  up 
limiting  the  flexibility  of  central  banks  to  react  as  circumstances  change  without  inducing  damaging 
volatility into markets. 
And so, even as central banks have moved in varying degrees toward greater clarity about their goals, 
forecasts  and  policy  decisions,  they  have  also  moved  to  being  more  explicit  about  uncertainty  and 
about the need for flexibility in how policy should adjust over time. 
This reflects an evolving appreciation that there are limits to transparency. Transparency in monetary 
policy  cannot  mean  that  the  central  bank  conveys  more  confidence  in  the  outlook  for  growth  and 
inflation  than  it  can  reasonably  have,  and  it  cannot  provide  more  assurance  about  the  likely  future 
course of policy than it actually has. 
This seems self evident. And yet as central banks have moved to communicating more and disclosing 
more  about  monetary  policy,  transparency  in  monetary  policy  has  been  associated  with  rising 
expectations for clarity about the path of target interest rates over time. It might seem desirable in an 
ideal state of the world for expectations in financial markets about the future course of policy to closely 
track  in  real  time  those  of  the  central  bank.  But  given  the  degree  of  uncertainty  that  surrounds 
monetary policy making, this is unlikely to be possible, except in special circumstances. 
There  will  be  circumstances  when  it  is  appropriate  for  the  central  bank  to  send  a  signal  about  the 
target  rate  that  extends  well  beyond  the  immediate  horizon.  These  circumstances  are  not  likely  to 
arise  frequently,  and  will  be  appropriate  in  particular  conditions  when  the  benefits  afforded  by  the 
effect on expectations clearly outweigh the cost imposed by the loss to flexibility. 
Central banks should be clear about what they are trying to achieve. They should be open with the 
knowledge  and  insight  they  possess.  And  they  should  provide  the  public  with  clarity  where  it  is 
attainable. But they also need to convey the limits to their knowledge and avoid providing a sense of 
certainty they do not, or cannot, possess. 
Uncertainty  strengthens  the  case  for  being  open  about  what  we  do  not  know,  and  exploring  the 
robustness  of  our  decisions  to  a  range  of  alternative  scenarios.  But  uncertainty  also  reinforces  the 
case  for  clarity  in  communications  about  the  objectives  that  guide  policy  and  the  rationale  for  our 
decisions.  Perhaps  most  crucially,  this  means  preserving  confidence  in  our  commitment  to  keep 
underlying  inflation  low  over  time,  and  for  retaining  the  capacity  to  respond  with  flexibility  to  the 
challenges we face in this uncertain world. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 54/2006
