Svein Gjedrem: Monetary policy in Norway 
Speech by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), given at Norges 
Bank’s Conference on Monetary Policy 2006: Evaluating Monetary Policy, Oslo, 30 March 2006. 
The speech is based on Inflation Report 1/06 and previous speeches. 
The 
Charts in pdf-format can be found on the Norges Bank’s website. 
 1. Introduction 
The  title  of  this  conference  is  “Evaluating  Monetary  Policy”.  The  conference  therefore  gives  me  an 
opportunity to provide a background for the assessment of monetary policy in Norway.  
2. Transparency and communication of monetary policy strategy 
In  most  industrial  countries,  monetary  policy  is  oriented  towards  low  and  stable  inflation.  Low  and 
stable  inflation  is  the  most  important  contribution  monetary  policy  can  make  to  sound  economic 
developments. As a framework for organising and explaining monetary policy, inflation targeting is now 
common. In our country, inflation targeting was introduced in March 2001.  
As non-elected bodies, central banks are granted substantial autonomy in the execution of monetary 
policy.  Here,  as  in  many  other  countries,  the  political  authorities  have  delegated  monetary  policy 
decision-making  to  the  central  bank.  This  means  that  it  has  instrument  independence,  that  is,  the 
Bank’s Executive Board sets the short-term interest rate. The Bank is also accountable to the political 
authorities.  
To be able to evaluate our policy – not only the political authorities – but also financial markets and the 
general public need to know how we interpret our mandate, our view on how the economy works and 
trade-offs. Therefore, monetary policy must be transparent.  
Transparency and communication are also important for monetary policy effectiveness.  
Monetary policy works mainly through expectations and is only effective if the central bank is able to 
influence interest rate expectations.  
Professor  Michael  Woodford  has  expressed  this  very  clearly  in  stating  that  monetary  policy  is 
“management of expectations”. “For not only do expectations about policy matter, but (…) very little 
else matters”.  
The central bank determines the shortest money market rates through the key rate. The shortest rates, 
however, are of limited importance. Economic agents’ spending depends more on their interest rate 
expectations.  
In recent years, Norges Bank has strived to achieve greater transparency with regard to its monetary 
policy strategy. As from the beginning of 2003, the Board has published its monetary policy strategy 
document  for  the  next  four  months.  The  strategy  was  initially  published  at  the  end  of  the  period  to 
which it applied. Since June 2004 it has been published ahead of the period. While the document was 
initially  an  appendix  to  our  Inflation  Report,  it  is  now  the  first  section  of  the  Inflation  Report  with 
monetary policy assessments.  
The  strategy  includes  a  recommended  interval  (red  bars)  for  the  policy  rate  over  the  following  four 
months, conditional on economic developments that are broadly in line with our projections. The Board 
assesses  the  key  rate  at  monetary  policy  meetings  within  these  four  months  on  the  basis  of  the 
approved strategy. The Bank thus gives the market some indication of the upcoming monetary policy 
decisions.  
As from last November, we took this process one step further and published our own forecast for the 
interest rate three years ahead. This means that we have now in a sense “assumed ownership” of the 
interest  rate  in  our  projections.  Chart  3  shows  the  interest  rate  forecasts  in  the  previous  Report, 
published a few weeks ago.  
BIS Review 26/2006 
 1
Forecasts for inflation, output, the interest rate and other variables are based on an assessment of the 
current  situation  and  a  perception  of  how  the  economy  works.  There  is  substantial  uncertainty 
associated with future interest rates, as illustrated in the fan charts.1  
While we assumed the interest rate to be constant through the forecasting period in 2001 and 2002, 
our projections were based on market expectations in 2003 and up to November last year. On some 
occasions we stated that it was our view that the interest rate would move on a different path than that 
indicated  by  market  expectations.  For  example,  in  June  2004  we  stated  that  “the  most  appropriate 
alternative now seems to be that the interest rate should be kept unchanged for a longer period than 
indicated by market expectations”.  
However,  monetary  policy  is  probably  most  effective  when  the  central  bank  communicates  its 
monetary  policy  intentions  directly  rather  than  commenting  on  others’  interest  rate  expectations.  By 
publishing the strategy interval and our own interest rate forecast, we give the public more information 
about  our  intentions.  This  should  –  we  hope  -  make  future  interest  rates  more  predictable  and 
monetary  policy  more  effective.  Therefore,  the  strategy  interval  and  the  interest  rate  forecasts  are 
important elements of our communication strategy.  
In addition, it is easier to interpret and evaluate our forecasts based on an interest rate assumption 
that we consider to be realistic.  
3. The balance between the objectives: criteria for a good interest rate path 
Important components in the assessment of what constitutes a good interest rate path are expressed 
in a set of criteria:  
If  monetary  policy  is  to  anchor  inflation  expectations  near  the  target,  interest  rate  policy  must  be 
geared to moving inflation towards the target. Inflation should be stabilised close to the target within a 
reasonable time horizon, which in our view is normally 1-3 years.  
Provided  inflation  expectations  are  on  target,  the  inflation  gap  and  the  output  gap  should  be  in 
reasonable proportion to each other until they close. Looking ahead, the inflation gap and the output 
gap should normally not be positive or negative at the same time.2  
Given the low inflation rate, we have decided to keep interest rates at a low level and have at times 
considered an even lower interest rate. However, as the Norwegian economy has shown solid growth 
since summer 2003, we decided instead to allow a somewhat longer period for bringing inflation back 
to target.  
Chart 6 shows our projections of inflation and the output gap from the previous Inflation Report. The 
paths reflect our aim of striking a balance between inflation and output stabilisation. The paths also 
reflect the fact that monetary policy works through the demand side and the capacity utilisation of the 
economy.  Therefore,  we  have  to  accept  a  positive  output  gap  in  the  years  ahead  as  a  means  of 
bringing inflation up to target.  
Interest rate developments should result in acceptable developments in inflation and output also under 
alternative, albeit not unrealistic, assumptions concerning the economic situation and the functioning 
of the economy.  
In  the  Inflation  Reports  we  analyse  developments  in  inflation,  output  and  the  interest  rate  under 
alternative scenarios.  
Chart  8  is  from  the  latest  Inflation  Report.  It  shows  on  the  left  hand  developments  in  inflation  and 
output  under  two  alternative  scenarios,  one  with  lower  inflation  and  one  with  a  wider  output  gap. 
Consequences  for  the  interest  rate  are  shown  on  the  right  hand.  In  the  case  of  lower  inflation,  the 
interest rate path falls below the baseline scenario. In contrast, a wider output gap results in a higher 
                                                      
1   The uncertainty surrounding the forecasts and how we calculate the fan charts are discussed in a box in Inflation Report 
3/05: “Uncertainty surrounding future interest rate developments”. 
2   However, economic theory indicates that under  an optimal precommitment policy, it  will under some circumstances (e.g. 
after a cost push shock) be optimal to keep both the inflation gap and the output gap negative or positive for some time 
ahead, see for example Walsh, Carl (2003): Monetary Theory and Policy, Second Edition, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
2 
 BIS Review 26/2006
interest  rate  path.  In  both  scenarios  it  is  assumed  that  it  takes  time  to  identify  the  causes  of 
developments and to adjust policy.  
Beyond  such  specific  scenario  analyses,  in  the  Inflation  Report  we  also  discuss  more  generally 
possible consequences of more severe disturbances to the economy.  
The interest rate should normally be changed gradually so that we can assess the effects of interest 
rate changes and other new information. Thus, we started increasing the key rate from a low level of 
1.75 per cent last summer. Thereafter, the interest rate has been increased in small increments of 25 
basis points to 2.5 per cent.  
Interest rate policy must also be assessed in the light of developments in property prices and credit.  
A  build-up  of  financial  imbalances  may  influence  future  inflation  and  output.  In  recent  years,  house 
prices and household debt have increased sharply in several countries and in our country as well.  
Growth in housing investment moved up further in 2005 from the record-high level in 2004. A gradual 
normalisation of the interest rate level and a larger supply of new dwellings are expected to curb the 
rise in resale home prices in the years ahead.  
The  question  of  whether  financial  stability  considerations  should  be  explicitly  included  in  monetary 
policy  is  a  subject  of  widespread  debate,  both  in  academia  and  within  central  banks.  The  answers 
diverge and international consensus has not yet been reached.  
A  flexible  inflation  targeting  regime  provides  scope  for  taking  into  account  the  impact  of  potential 
financial  imbalances  on  future  inflation  and  output.  Asset  prices  and  household  credit  and  debt  are 
inputs  for  the  analysis  of  future  developments  in  inflation  and  the  output  gap.  In  this  way,  the 
assessment of asset prices and debt levels may influence interest rate policy.  
Furthermore, it is important to keep in mind that the unwinding of financial imbalances may lie many 
years  ahead,  well  beyond  the  horizon  for  the  inflation  target.  It  is  questionable  whether  monetary 
policy today should respond to potential repercussions of possible financial imbalances well beyond 
the monetary policy horizon.  
First,  it  is  well  documented  that  asset  price  bubbles  and  financial  imbalances  are  very  difficult  to 
identify  ex  ante.  Second,  the  appropriate  timing  of  a  proactive  monetary  response  is  likely  to  be 
difficult to determine, given the lags in the impact of monetary policy. Third, even in the case where the 
central bank knew that financial imbalances were building up, the size of the interest rate rise needed 
to reduce the imbalances might be so large that it could lead to a severe economic downturn.  
In Norway, the central bank is one of the institutions with responsibility for analysing and monitoring 
the financial system. As a flexible inflation-targeting country, we have chosen to incorporate financial 
stability considerations into the monetary policy decision-making process, partly because asset prices 
and debt are important for inflation and output, and partly because it provides focus on potential risks 
to financial stability.  
It may also be useful to cross-check by assessing our interest rate policy in the light of simple rules 
like the Taylor rule, which are less dependent on a specific analytical framework for the Norwegian 
economy. On the other hand, the rules will not capture all details in the projections, but can provide an 
indication of whether the current interest rate level is reasonably adapted to the economic situation. As 
we now publish our own interest rate forecast, market interest rate expectations are one cross check 
of particular interest. If expectations deviate from our projection, it may indicate that the market has a 
different  view  of  future  economic  developments.  If  we  are  to  influence  interest  rates  in  the  money 
market,  we  must  be  able  to  explain  such  deviations.  Of  course,  it  might  also  be  the  case  that  the 
market’s view is the most accurate.  
We must always bear in mind that monetary policy is not an “exact science” based on well-defined 
natural laws. It is not possible to fine-tune the interest rate to attain the objectives with high degree of 
precision. Irrespective, the criteria for a good interest rate path provide a guide for our interest rate 
policy.  
4. Inflation volatility, deviations from the inflation target and external shocks 
Inflation  adjusted  for  energy  prices  and  taxes  has been  low  in Norway  in recent  years.  It  has  risen 
somewhat, but it is still considerably lower than the target of 2.5 per cent.  
BIS Review 26/2006 
 3
Inflation has been and is still being restrained by the fall in prices for imported consumer goods, an 
unexpected  high  level  of  competition  in  domestic  markets  and  increased  cross-border  labour  flows. 
The trend in prices for consumer goods and services over the past two or three years is a result of 
favourable  developments  in  the  Norwegian  economy.  Low  inflation  is  being  accompanied  by  real 
income  growth  and  a  rise  in  production  and  is  not  the  result  of  declining  demand,  activity  or 
employment.  
Deviations  from  the  inflation  target  in  Norway  have  been  somewhat  higher  than  in  other  countries, 
which  may  partly  reflect  the  degree  of  openness  of  our  economy.  Chart  12  shows  deviations  from 
target and the degree of openness. The higher the columns, the larger the deviations are from target. 
The lines indicate the degree of openness. This may indicate that there is a relationship between the 
degree of openness and deviations from target, although Canada is an exception.  
It should also be noted that the figures for the twelve-month rise in consumer prices are considerably 
more volatile here than in other countries. We see from the figures that consumer prices in Norway, 
even  when  tax  changes  and  energy  products  are  excluded,  are  more  volatile  than  indices  in  other 
countries where these products are included.  
Developments in recent years have also been influenced by the pronounced favourable disturbances 
to  which  the  Norwegian  economy  has  been  exposed.  Developments  in  Norway’s  terms  of  trade 
provide an illustration.  
As consumers, we enjoy the benefits of falling prices for many imported goods. As a nation, we benefit 
from a fall in prices for the goods we import relative to prices for the goods we export. Norway’s terms 
of trade have improved. The impact of the rise in oil and gas prices is particularly strong. However, 
there have also been terms-of-trade gains in the mainland economy. The situation in Norway differs 
from that of our Nordic neighbours.  
Although  the  domestic  economy  is  partly  insulated  from  oil  price  fluctuations  through  the  oil  fund 
mechanism, terms-of-trade gains have been a challenge to monetary policy in Norway. Low imported 
inflation  has  put  downward  pressure  on  our  rate  of  inflation.  At  the  same  time,  our  currency  has 
remained strong, partly reflecting an improvement in Norway’s terms of trade.  
In  a  period  of  increasing  cross-border  labour  flows,  substantial  technological  advances,  changes  in 
competitive conditions and new trade patterns, we may, with our very open economy, have to accept a 
somewhat greater variability in inflation and deviations from the target, as we have witnessed over the 
past two to three years.  
Thank you for your attention!  
4 
 BIS Review 26/2006
