I J Macfarlane: Australia's economic situation and implications to monetary 
policy  
Opening statement by Mr Ian J Macfarlane, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the House 
of Representatives Standing Committee on Economics, Finance and Public Administration, Canberra, 
17 February 2006. 
 It  is  a  pleasure  to  be  back  here  again  in  front  of  the  Committee,  and  to  be  having  this  hearing  in 
Canberra for the first time in a number of years.  I note that the  membership of the Committee has 
changed again, particularly on the Government side. That is something that has happened pretty well 
continuously in the nearly ten years I have been reporting to it under the current arrangements, but it 
has not interfered with the Committee's effectiveness.  
As you know, we had our February Board Meeting last week and we issued our quarterly Statement 
on  Monetary  Policy  earlier  this  week.  This  document  spelled  out  in  detail  how  we  see  the  current 
situation in the economy, and why the stance of monetary policy is where it is.  
This  morning  I  would  like  to  take  the  opportunity  of  looking  at  the  broader  trends  in  Australia's 
economic situation and examining the implications they have for the stance of monetary policy going 
forward.  
I will take as a starting point Australia's current economic expansion. For years I have made the point 
that progress in winding back economic slack is made not by high growth in any individual year, but by 
maintaining an expansion over a sustained period. Australia's current expansion began in late 1991 
and is now in its fifteenth year. This means that it is already significantly longer than its predecessors 
in the 1960s, 1970s and 1980s. The expansion has been marked by good growth in GDP, which has 
averaged  3¾  per  cent  per  annum  over  this  period,  one  of  the  best  performances  in  the  developed 
world.  
A consequence of the sustained expansion is that the economic slack generated in the last recession 
has been gradually used up. One indicator of this is the unemployment rate, which has trended down 
from  a  peak  of  11  per  cent  in  1993  to  be  currently  just  over  5 per  cent.  Other  indicators  of  the 
economy's  capacity  utilisation  are  also  at  cyclically  high  levels.  Business  surveys  report  that 
businesses are operating at close to their highest levels of capacity utilisation since the late 1980s. 
The surveys have also been reporting high levels of labour scarcity. For the past year or so, many 
businesses have been in the unusual position of reporting that scarcity of suitable labour was a bigger 
constraint on their activities than their traditional concerns about the adequacy of demand or sales.  
Given the maturity of the expansion it should not be surprising if the average growth of the economy is 
now less than it was in the earlier stages. As a general principle, it is easier for an economy to grow 
quickly when there is a large pool of unused resources to be re-employed, and in Australia's current 
position  in  the  cycle,  that  source  of  growth  is  now  much  more  limited.  So,  in  the  absence  of  a 
significant lift in trend productivity growth, we should expect to see annual GDP growth rates mainly in 
the 2s and 3s, rather than in the 3s and 4s as was typical for most of the expansion. It is not surprising 
therefore  that  growth  of  the  economy  over  the  latest  year  for  which  data are available was  2.6  per 
cent, or an annualised rate of 3 per cent for the latest half-year.  
Business investment has been a major driver of growth in recent years, expanding by 18 per cent over 
the past year, and at an average annual rate of 14 per cent over the past three years. The upswing in 
business investment is being stimulated by high commodity prices and favourable financial conditions. 
With strong investment growth and an expected improvement in exports, our forecast for the economy 
overall  is  that  annual  GDP  growth  will  pick  up  modestly  during  2006  to  about  3¼  per  cent.  While 
strong  business  investment  obviously  contributes  to  capacity  expansion,  the  sorts  of  outcomes 
envisaged for GDP growth would imply that the economy will continue to operate close to full capacity.  
While the overall growth of the economy during the current expansion has been good, there has been 
concern expressed about its composition. In particular, the growth of the economy over the past few 
years has been more than fully accounted for by growth in domestic spending, while Australia's export 
performance has been disappointing. In consequence, Australia's current account deficit has remained 
high  at  around  6  per  cent  of  GDP  recently,  despite  a  strong  international  environment  and  rising 
commodity prices. Notwithstanding these concerns, it needs to be emphasized that monetary policy 
BIS Review 10/2006 
 1
cannot be expected to target a particular composition of growth or current account deficit. Any attempt 
to do so (for example, by running a much tighter policy in order to constrain domestic demand) would 
be counterproductive and would detract from the Bank's broader macroeconomic goals.  
The global business cycle  
Australia's  economic  situation  should  also  be  viewed  against  the  backdrop  of  the  global  business 
cycle. In broad terms, business cycles across various countries have tended to move together, at least 
among countries in the developed world. That is, there has been a reasonably high correlation in the 
timing of recessions and expansions among developed countries over the past few decades. Most of 
the  advanced  countries  experienced  recessions  in  the  mid  1970s,  the  early  1980s  and  the  early 
1990s, and many did so in 2001. It is relatively unusual for countries in this group to experience what 
might  be  termed  a  'home-grown'  recession,  that  is,  a  recession  not  shared  by  the  major  industrial 
countries. Similarly, it is fairly unusual for countries to skip an international recession, though Australia 
and some other countries have recently done so, as did Japan in the early 1980s. This is not to say 
that domestic conditions and policies are unimportant. Nevertheless, as a general rule, when the world 
economy as a whole is in a sustained expansion, there is a good chance that an expansion will also 
be continuing in an economy such as Australia.  
Currently the world economy is expanding strongly. The recovery from the global downturn in 2001 is 
now well established and, on past experience, the expansion should still have some way to run. While 
growth  to  date  has  been  led  mainly  by  the  United States  and  China,  there  have  been  encouraging 
signs  over  the  past  year  that  growth  is  becoming  very  broadly  based,  with  conditions  improving  in 
Japan  as  well  as  in  a  number  of  other  economies.  Assessments  of  the  risks  to  the  global  growth 
outlook  have  focused  mainly  on  the  effects  of  higher  oil  prices  and  on  the  possibility  that  the  US 
current account imbalance will have a disruptive effect on the world economy. However, there is little 
sign  that  these  forces  are  restricting  growth  at  present.  World  GDP  growth  in  2005  is  estimated  to 
have been above average, and most observers expect this to continue in 2006.  
This growth performance has been accompanied by generally subdued inflation outcomes. One factor 
behind this was the increased focus on inflation control by central banks around the world, after the 
high  inflation  of  the  1970s  and  1980s.  Many  central  banks  have  now  adopted  numerical  inflation 
targets  and  others  have  clearly  become  more  focused  on  inflation  control  even  without  adopting 
explicit  targets.  At  the  same  time,  the  importance  of  structural  factors,  and  particularly  the 
industrialisation  of  China,  should  be  recognised.  The  huge  pool  of  low-cost  labour  that  this  has 
brought into play has put sustained downward pressure on a wide range of prices of internationally 
traded goods.  
The terms of trade  
One consequence of these developments has been a marked upswing in Australia's terms of trade, 
defined  as  the  ratio  of  our  export  to  import  prices.  Currently  Australia  is  benefiting  from  the  largest 
cumulative increase in our terms of trade since the early 1970s. The main factor driving this has been 
the rapid growth in global demand for resources, with China in particular contributing strongly. As a 
result, world prices for a wide range of resource commodities have been increasing sharply.  
Over the past three years Australia's terms of trade have increased by around 30 per cent. This is 
estimated to have added 1½–2 percentage points per annum to the growth in national income over 
this period, a significant expansionary force for the economy as a whole. The economic effects can be 
seen  in  a  number  of  areas  including  strong  growth  in  business  investment,  company  profits,  share 
prices and imports. Increased export prices also tend to boost government revenues through company 
taxes and a range of federal and state royalties.  
Interest rates and financial markets  
Although Australia avoided the recession that engulfed many developed countries at the start of this 
decade, it was not totally unaffected by world events, and the Bank found it necessary in 2001 to cut 
the  cash  rate  to  4.25 per  cent  in  a  series  of  steps.  While  that  was  a  new  low  for  Australian  official 
interest rates – the previous low had been 4.75 per cent in the late 1990s – it was a relatively muted 
response compared with the very large cuts in interest rates that occurred elsewhere in the world.  
2 
 BIS Review 10/2006
In  mid  2002,  with  both  domestic  and  global  economic  conditions  improving,  the  Bank  began  the 
process  of  restoring  official  interest  rates  to  more  normal  levels.  It  did  this  in  five  steps  over  three 
years – two in mid 2002, two in late 2003 and one in early 2005 – a more gradual tightening cycle than 
normal.  
At the current level of 5.5 per cent, the cash rate is in line with its average over the low inflation period 
since 1993. There is therefore a sense that the current level is relatively neutral in terms of its impact 
on economic activity and inflation. One complication in assessing the level of interest rates, however, 
is  that  competition  in  the  financial  sector  has  seen  margins  between  the  cash  rate  and  institutions' 
lending rates narrow over recent years, so the interest rates faced by borrowers are still a little below 
average.  
Australia  moved  to  restore  normal  interest  rates  well  ahead  of  other  developed  economies.  All  the 
major countries had reduced interest rates to unprecedented levels in the early part of this decade – 0 
per  cent  in  Japan,  1 per  cent  in  the  United  States  and  2  per  cent  in  the  euro  area  –  and  they 
maintained this position for a prolonged period. Of the major countries, the United States was the first 
to raise rates, with the Fed beginning to tighten in mid 2004. The European Central Bank has only just 
started the process in recent months and the Bank of Japan is not expected to start lifting rates for 
some time yet. Thus, even though the Fed has now restored the funds rate to a relatively normal level 
of 4.5 per cent, world policy interest rates on average remain well below normal.  
Another unusual aspect of current global interest rates is that long-term rates, which are set by the 
demand for and supply of funds in capital markets, have remained quite low in the face of rising official 
interest  rates.  Although  various  explanations  have been  put  forward  for  this  unusual  behaviour,  the 
most likely cause is an ex ante excess supply of savings relative to investment around the world, with 
Asia accounting for a large part of the excess global savings.  
For equity markets, the combination of low interest rates, strong economic growth and low inflation has 
proved very beneficial, with global share markets rising solidly in each of the past three years. This 
has been underpinned by strong growth in profits so that, notwithstanding the rise in share prices, P/E 
ratios have been declining on average. 
It is worth noting that the Australian share market has behaved quite differently from the global market 
over  the  past  decade.  It  was  affected  much  less  than  most  markets  by  the  tech  bubble  and  the 
subsequent  collapse,  and  in  recent  years  has  been  rising  faster  than  average.  Along  with  the 
Canadian share market, it is the only major market that is currently above earlier peak levels, whereas 
in  Europe  and  the  United  States  share  markets  are  still  about  20  per  cent  below  their  early  2000 
peaks.  
The Australian dollar has remained in a relatively steady range over the past couple of years, at levels 
that are a little above average against the US dollar and about 10 per cent above average in trade-
weighted  terms.  Some  people  have  found  this  steadiness  puzzling  against  the  background  of  very 
strong  rises  in  commodity  prices  and  the  terms  of  trade,  as  such  episodes  in  the  past  have  been 
associated  with  strong  rises  in  the  currency.  A key  to  understanding  the  different  behaviour  on  this 
occasion  is  the  change  in  the  interest  differential  with  the  United  States.  This  has  narrowed 
appreciably over the past 18 months because the Fed has tightened much more than we have.  
Domestic credit and debt  
In  recent  years  we  have  given  a  lot  of  attention  to  the  growth  of  household  debt  and  its  possible 
effects on the macro economy. I would like to say a little more about it today and will divide the subject 
into  two  aspects:  the  shorter-term  cyclical  fluctuations  in  household  credit  growth,  and  the  fact  that 
various debt ratios have trended upwards over time.  
Regarding the first of these issues, the most recent cyclical peak in household credit growth occurred 
around  the  end  of  2003,  when  it  reached  an  annual  rate  of  over  20  per  cent.  Since  the  bulk  of 
household  borrowing  is  housing-related,  it  is  not  surprising  that  this  phenomenon  was  closely 
associated  with  a  sharp  run-up  in  house  prices.  Nationwide  house  prices  increased  strongly  for 
several years up to late 2003, reaching a peak growth rate of around 20 per cent in that year. The 
increases in credit and house prices were inter-related, with credit availability fuelling the price rises, 
while  rising  house  prices  meant  people  had  to  borrow  larger  amounts  to  achieve  home  ownership. 
Much of this behaviour was driven by expectations, particularly in the investor market, of future price 
gains – the classic definition of bubble-like behaviour.  
BIS Review 10/2006 
 3
In  the  period  since  late  2003,  both  the  housing  market  and  the  demand  for  credit  have  cooled. 
Nationwide  house  prices  have  been  broadly  flat  over  the  past  two  years  and  prices  have  fallen  in 
Sydney. Household credit growth has eased back to an annual rate of around 12 per cent. Although 
this might still be regarded as quite high in absolute terms, it is towards the lower end of the range in 
which it has fluctuated in the past two decades. While there are some tentative signs that credit and 
housing market conditions have firmed a little in recent months, the risks to the economy posed by the 
over-heating in housing and credit markets in the period up to late 2003 have eased. Households now 
seem to have entered a period of greater financial caution, and this may act as a restraining influence 
on the growth of household spending for a while to come.  
The second issue is the high average growth rate of household credit over an extended period. This is 
a  longer-run  issue  and  one  on  which  it  is  more  difficult  to  make  firm  judgments.  For  more  than  a 
decade,  household  indebtedness  has  grown  at  a  rate  well  in  excess  of  the  growth  in  household 
incomes. This has meant that the aggregate ratio of household debt to household income has trended 
upwards,  as  has  the  proportion  of  household  income  required  to  service  the  debt,  and  the  gearing 
ratio (debt to value of household assets).  
Simple rules of thumb would suggest that this cannot be sustained indefinitely. Yet there are a number 
of reasons why these ratios may rise further. In a low-inflation environment, nominal interest rates are 
also low, and households are able to service much higher levels of debt than they could in the past. A 
significant proportion of households still carry little or no debt, and in the years ahead might choose to 
borrow more. Attitudes towards borrowing appear to be changing, with people becoming more willing 
to borrow against assets later in life.  
For these and other reasons, it is quite possible that the rise in household debt ratios could go a good 
distance  further.  The  risk,  of  course,  is  that  the  process  goes  too  far  and  that  a  painful  correction 
ensues.  There  has  been much  debate  around  the  world  about  the  role  of  monetary  policy  in  these 
circumstances, with the consensus being that the best it can do is to continue to pursue the general 
objectives of macroeconomic stability and low inflation.  
We  should  also  not  forget  influences  on  the  supply  side.  Banks  and  other  providers  of  credit  to 
households have been competing vigorously to expand or protect their market share. In the process, 
lending standards have been progressively eroded so that lenders are now engaging in practices that 
would have been regarded as out of the question five or ten years ago. These are matters in which 
prudential regulators are taking a strong interest.  
While the growth of household borrowing has been relatively high throughout the current expansion, 
business borrowing on average has been more restrained. This is the reverse of the pattern that was 
observed in the 1980s and, as a result, the business sector generally is in good financial shape with 
low levels of debt. In the past two or three years businesses have begun to take advantage of that 
position by again expanding their borrowing and lifting the rate of growth in their investment spending. 
Business credit has thus strengthened quite markedly, so that it is now growing at a rate of 16 per 
cent, well above that for the household sector.  
Inflation  
Australia's  inflation  performance  over  the  past  decade  or  so  has  been  consistent  with  the  Bank's 
medium-term target. Since 1993, when the 2–3 per cent objective was first articulated, average CPI 
inflation  (excluding  the  one-off  GST  effect)  has  been  2.5  per  cent.  Of  course,  the  inflation  rate  has 
inevitably fluctuated quite a bit from year to year, including periods where it has been above 3 and 
below  2.  But  it  should  be  remembered  that  the  Bank's  objective  is  expressed  in  terms  of  average 
outcomes, and should not be thought of as a rigid commitment to eliminate short-term fluctuations in 
inflation.  In  the  latest  year,  inflation  in underlying  terms  has been  close  to 2½  per cent,  though  the 
headline CPI figure is higher, principally reflecting the effect of rising fuel prices.  
While inflation has remained contained over the past decade it is important, as always, to consider 
how inflationary pressures might evolve from here. At the current stage of the expansion there are a 
number  of  factors  that  might  be  expected  to  put  upward  pressure  on  inflation.  The  economy  is 
operating  at  a  high  level  of  capacity  utilisation,  the  labour  market  is  relatively  tight,  and  there  have 
been some large increases in raw materials costs. Aggregate wages growth has picked up over the 
past  year,  and  businesses  generally  are  reporting  difficulty  in  attracting  labour.  These  conditions 
underpin the current forecast of a modest rise in underlying inflation over the year ahead. Based on 
4 
 BIS Review 10/2006
the current level of oil prices, this forecast implies that headline CPI inflation would remain close to 3 
per cent in the short term.  
This outlook is, as usual, subject to significant uncertainty. One area of uncertainty relates to wages 
growth, where there is a risk that current labour market tightness will result in higher-than-expected 
wage increases. This will be an important area to watch in the months ahead. On the other hand, the 
latest CPI figure was a little below expectations, and may indicate that global disinflationary forces are 
stronger than had been expected. There are also some tentative signs that conditions in the labour 
market are easing. The issue over the period ahead will be whether these latter forces prove sufficient 
to contain inflation in an economy operating with little spare capacity.  
In these circumstances, the Board at its recent meeting judged the current policy setting to be broadly 
consistent with the economy's requirements for the time being. Looking ahead, however, it felt that on 
balance, based on the considerations I have outlined here today, it is more likely that the next move in 
interest rates would be up rather than down. 
BIS Review 10/2006 
 5
