Krzysztof  Rybiński:  Global  labour  market  and  its  limitations  –  reasons  and 
effects of the emergence of homo sapiens globalus 
Address by Mr Krzysztof Rybiński, Deputy President of the National Bank of Poland, at the debate: 
“WORKERS  2020  –  a  vision  of  the  labour  market  and  the  labour  environment  in  the  forthcoming 
decades”, Gdańsk, 10 June 2006. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The question about the symbol of the global labour market would most probably be answered by a 
majority  of  the  Europeans  with  the  words:  “the  Polish  plumber”.  In  France,  the  Polish  plumber  has 
become the key culprit of the rejection of the European Constitution, with the French media showing 
the Polish plumber on his quest for depriving the hard-working French plumbers of their work. At the 
same  time,  the  data  of  the  French  society  of  plumbers  show  that  there  were  140  Polish  plumbers 
working  in  France  at  that  time,  with  6000  plumber  jobs  still  remaining  vacant  in  the  country.1  This 
example demonstrates how many false preconceptions concerning globalization are embedded in the 
media and in the public opinion. 
In the recent years, the process of globalization has been broadly based across all the markets: the 
financial  market,  the  capital  market,  the  market  of  products,  services,  knowledge,  and  the  labour 
market. 
In  many  countries,  the  opportunities  and  threats  related  to  the  process  of  globalization  have  been 
observed  early  and    their  economic  policy  has  been  adjusted  accordingly.  For  instance,  many 
countries (the UK, the Scandinavian countries, many Asian countries, such as China, South Korea, 
Singapore,  and  India)  have  realized  that  the  future  economic  success  will  strongly  depend  on  the 
ability of a country to provide innovative solutions and offer products and services of high value added. 
Thus, their system of education is being adjusted to those needs. For example in 2003, the number of 
American  patents  obtained  by  companies  from  the  five  largest  developing  countries  was  3,900, 
against 166,000 and 59,000 patents obtained by Japanese and German companies, respectively. In 
2002, Polish companies filed 123 patent applications and were granted 11 patents. According to the 
present  forecasts,  starting  from  2010  the  annual  number  of  graduates  from  engineering,  technical, 
mathematical  and  related  faculties  in  China  will  reach  ca.  800,000,  and  in  India  –  about  600,000, 
which will jointly exceed the number of graduates from American colleges by twelve-fold.2 As early as 
now,  IT  companies,  pharmaceutical  and  many  other  industries  are  launching  or  extending  their 
research  centres  in  Asia,  not  only  with  the  aim  of  optimising  their  research  costs,  but  also  to  gain 
access  to  the  fast-growing  army  of  highly  qualified  experts.  Hence,  a  snowballing  increase  in  the 
number  of  patents  registered  by  companies  from  the  developing  countries,  mostly  in  Asia,  may  be 
expected in the forthcoming years.  
It  has  been  observed  in  many  countries  that  the  public  sector  itself  must  become  a  source  of 
innovation as well as must actively support e.g. the development of e-economy, since such economy 
may  benefit  most  from  the  process  of  globalization.  There  are  numerous  examples  of  such  actions 
taken by many governments, and this problem has been discussed in more detail in my recent speech 
at the Congress of e-Economy. The text of the speech is available on the NBP website: www.nbp.pl → 
publications → speeches and lectures. 
In today’s speech, I will try to present the reasons why the economic policy must not only take into 
consideration the process of globalization and adjust accordingly but also why it must be conducted in 
a  way  that  enables  to  take  the  chance  that  globalization  gives  to  the  Polish  economy.  It  applies 
especially to various aspects of the labour market, such as the education system, the role of the labour 
market institutions, including that of trade unions, its mobility and flexibility as well as to the aforesaid 
creation of favourable conditions for the growth of innovation. 
                                                           
1   Newsweek, 17 October  2005. 
2   Aguiar M. et al. “The New Global Challengers. How 100 Top Companies from Rapidly Developing Economies Are Changing 
the World”, The Boston Consulting Group, May 2006. 
BIS Review 64/2006 
 1
Demographic changes 
A discussion on the global labour market must be commenced with a presentation of the demographic 
trends. Over the past fifty years, demographic factors had a significant influence on labour markets, 
and these changes will go even further in the next fifty years. Since the labour market is becoming 
ever  more  global,  the  demographic  changes  will  be  increasingly  influential  on  local  labour  markets. 
According to UN estimates3, Europe’s population in 1950 was 547 million, in 2005 – 728 million, and is 
bound  to  decrease  to  653  million  in  2050,  under  the  assumption  that  the  present  trends,  including 
migrations, do not change significantly. It is estimated that over the next 45 years, when the European 
population drops by 75 million, the Asian population will grow by 1.3 billion, and the African population 
– by over a billion. At present, the share of the Asian, European and African population in the worlds’ 
population is 60%, 14%, and 11%, respectively. In 2050, according to UN projections, the respective 
shares will reach 57%, 21% and 7%. Fifty years ago, the number of Europeans exceeded that of the 
Africans by threefold; in fifty years, this trend will reverse. 
What do the data show? In my opinion, there are three vital and far-reaching conclusions to be drawn. 
Firstly, the Asian population will account for over a half of the world’s population, and if the economic 
growth continues to significantly exceed the growth dynamics in the US and Europe, Asia will become 
the world’s economic centre. 
Secondly, the share of Europe in the world's population will decrease threefold over a hundred years, 
i.e.  in  the  period  from  1950  to  2050.  This  means  that  if  the  Old  Continent  does  not  respond 
appropriately to the globalization challenges, in a few dozen years, all major global decisions will be 
made  outside  Europe,  especially  if  the  integration  tendencies  are  continued  in  Asia,  including  the 
possible adoption of a single currency, which may be tentatively called  the “asian”.4
Thirdly, the share of Africa in the world's population will be a mirror image of the European trends and 
will increase almost threefold. It is still a very poor continent, of an unfavourable climate and poorly 
qualified workforce. However, in my opinion, the African countries will join the process of globalization in 
the manufacturing and services sectors sooner than it is expected, and some countries of the African 
continent may experience a very high economic growth rate in the decades to come, if their key political 
decision-makers take the chance that the globalization process gives. 
                                                           
3   For estimates please refer to http://esa.un.org/unpp/ 
4   On  4  May  2006  in  Hyderabad,  India  during  the  39th  annual  meeting  of  the  Asian  Development  Bank  a  consensus  was 
reached by the finance ministers of Japan, China, and South Korea. Han Ducksoo, Jin Renqing and Sadakazu Tanigaki 
agreed  that  under  the  Chiang  Mai  initiative, joint  research  will  be  conducted  concerning  the  possibility  of  introducing  the 
single  currency  in  Asia.  During  that  meeting,  the  parties  decided  to  join  the  forces  of  the  Asian  countries  to  change  the 
allocation of voting rights in the International Monetary Fund. For instance, South Korea is the eleventh global economy with 
the voting share of 0.77%, which makes it hold 28th position among the IMF participants; whereas as per analyses of Kelkar 
V. et al. ”The International Monetary Fund: entitled Integration and Democratization in the 21st Century”, presented at the 
meeting of G24 in Manila, 17 - 18 March 2005, the total vote of Brazil, China and India in international institutions is equal to 
the  total  of  Italy,  Belgium  and  the  Netherlands,  whereas  the  total  GDP  of  the  first  group  of  countries  based  on  PPP  is 
fourfold higher, with a 29 times larger population. 
2 
 BIS Review 64/2006
Chart 1. Global demographic trends – the world population according to UN forecasts 
 LO – left axis (LA) 
PO – right axis (RA) 
Africa – (LA) 
Europe – (RA) 
The rest of the world – (RA) 
Asia – (LA) 
North America – (RA) 
Note: „LA”, „RA” mean the left and right axis, data in million persons.  
Source: the UNO, http://esa.un.org/unpp/
Hence the demographic developments, supported by the globalization mechanisms which have led to 
the  establishment  of  the  global  labour  market,  will  drive  Asia  and  possibly  some  areas  of  Africa  to 
become fierce competitors for Europe and the US in the forthcoming decades. 
There are many estimates that show the sizes of particular economies in the decades to come, based 
on demographic trends, assumptions concerning the long-term growth of performance,  or changes in 
real FX rates. To give you and example, according to the estimates of PricewaterhouseCoopers5, by 
the buying power parity, in 2050 the Chinese economy will be over 40% larger than that of the US, 
India will catch up with the US, the economies of Mexico and Indonesia will outgrow that of Germany, 
and  the  Brazilian  economy  will  exceed  Japan.  We  must  ask  the  question  whether  the  present 
economic policy in Poland takes these facts into consideration. 
                                                           
5   See the study by Hawksworth J. (2006), “The World In 2050. How big will the major emerging market economies get and 
how can the OECD compete?”, PricewaterhouseCoopers, March 2006. 
BIS Review 64/2006 
 3
Table 1: Estimated relative size of economies in 2005 and 2050 (US = 100)  
Country 
(index for the USA = 100) 
 
GDP 
to 
market  US  dollar  FX 
rates  
according 
USA 
Japan 
Germany 
China 
UK 
France 
Italy 
Spain 
Canada 
India 
South Korea 
Mexico 
Australia 
Brazil 
Russia 
Turkey 
Indonesia 
2005 
100 
39 
23 
18 
18 
17 
14 
9 
8 
6 
6 
6 
5 
5 
5 
3 
2 
2050 
100 
23 
15 
94 
15 
13 
10 
8 
9 
58 
8 
17 
6 
20 
13 
10 
19 
GDP  according  to 
estimates  of  the  
buying 
power 
parity 
2005 
100 
32 
20 
76 
16 
15 
14 
9 
9 
30 
9 
9 
5 
13 
12 
5 
7 
2050 
100 
23 
15 
143 
15 
13 
10 
8 
9 
100 
8 
17 
6 
25 
14 
10 
19 
Source: Estimates of PricewaterhouseCoopers. According to a research of the World Bank, in the years 2005 - 2025, the labour 
force participation rate in the developed countries of high income will fall by ca. 20 million, whereas that the developing countries 
will increase by almost a billion. At the same time, in view of the aging populations, especially in Europe, there will be a rapid 
growth in the number of elderly people, from 36 per 100 working people to 52 per 100 working people. These trends, coupled 
with a fivefold difference in average wages between the developed and the developing countries, will inevitably bring about an 
increase in the economic migration rate. 
What triggered the emergence of the global labour market? 
The economic literature features a few factors that caused the emergence of the global labour market 
over the past dozen years6: 
- 
the  collapse  of  the  former  Soviet  block  and  joining  the  world  economy    by  Central  and 
Eastern European countries, 
the reforms implemented in India and China, with the crowning achievement of China joining 
the WTO at the end of 2001, 
a  rapid  advancement  in  the  implementation  of  IT  and  telecommunications  solutions  in 
enterprise management, which has enabled the separation and standardization of a number 
of business processes that have been subsequently shifted to countries or locations of lower 
manufacturing costs, 
a significant fall in the transport cost (prices have fallen by 21% in the road transport, by 30% 
in the air transport,  whereas prices of telephone calls have plummeted by 95%), 
multilateral trade liberalisation, the average customs duty has been down by ca.30%, 
                                                               
6   See also the study of the Economic Policy Committee (2005) “Responding to the Challenges of Globalization”, November 
2005, and the McKinsey Global Institute (2005) “The Emerging Global Labor Market”, June 2005. 
4 
 BIS Review 64/2006
 the technological progress has blurred the fine line between what may or may not be traded 
internationally.7 
It  is  worth  noting  that  the  global  labour  market  has  emerged  as  a  result  of  the  aforesaid  factors, 
despite the fact that restrictions to migration of the population have remained tight.8
The emergence of homo sapiens globalus i.e. the global labour market 
Further in my speech, I would like to present two main global forces that will drive the emergence of 
the homo sapiens globalus: 
- 
economic migration, i.e. relocation of people in search for better-paid jobs and better living 
standards; 
outsourcing  and off-shoring, i.e. relocation of workplaces in search of less costly or better 
qualified workforce to lower the production costs, increase the product and service quality, 
mitigate the risk, and boost innovation. 
 People relocate in search for work – economic migration 
One of the strongest motivations behind migration is the difference in wages, or – more broadly – in 
the living standards between countries. Such differences have existed for many years, as is the case 
with migration. It may be expected, however, that the emergence of the global labour market coupled 
with  the  aforesaid  demographical  trends  and  the  decrease  in  the  cost  of  transport  will  lead  to 
increased economic migration, including migration from poor countries and regions to the rich ones. 
According  to  UN  estimates,  in  the  period  1970  -  1980  the  number  of  immigrants  to  the  developed 
countries increased by 2.4%, in the period 1982 -  1990  by 2.9%, and in the period 1990 - 2000 by 
3.1%. 
Migration adds to the value of the global income. According to a simulation by the World Bank, if the 
number of immigrants in wealthy countries keeps growing by 2025 at a pace slightly lower than the 
average over the past three decades (which, being a very prudent assumption, means that over 14 
million people will move from the developing to the developed countries, and even more taking into 
consideration their family members), the global income will increase by 0.6%, of which by 1.8% in the 
developing countries and by 0.4% in wealthy countries.  
Migration should also be analysed by central banks, as it may influence relative price developments 
and the general level of prices. According to estimates by the World Bank, migration causes a slight 
decline  in  the  general  level  of  prices  in  the  developed  countries,  whereas  the  decline  is  larger  in 
services (such as health services, services in the construction industry, and leisure), and the largest – 
in  the  economy  sector  for  which  no  data  is  typically  available,  i.e.  the  domestic  help  (babysitting, 
cleaning, etc.). 
As  opposed  to  other  world  regions,  the  flow  of  persons  across  the  countries  of  the  EU  has  been 
stable.  Annual  net  migration  to  the  EU15  has  remained  at  a  level  below  5  persons  per  1000 
inhabitants  over  the  past  40  years.  Ca.  9%  of  the  UE  population  was  born  in  countries  other  than 
those  in  which  they  currently  live,  whereas  in  the  US  this  figure  stood  at  12%  and  in  Canada  and 
Australia  at  20%.  However,  following  the  EU  enlargement  with  ten  new  countries,  migration 
accelerated also in our part of the world, as illustrated in Table 3 below. In some cases, a significant 
part of national workforce took up employment in foreign countries. It is estimated, for instance, that 
ca. 5% of Lithuanians took employment in the countries that opened their labour markets to the new 
EU member states following 1 May 2004. 
                                                           
7   A thorough analysis that shows what services may be traded internationally is available in the study by Jensen B., Kletzer L. 
(2005)  “Tradable  Services:  Understanding  the  Scope  and  Impact  of  Services  Offshoring”,  Institute  for  International 
Economics working paper, 5 - 9 September 2005. 
8   The  World  Bank  (2006)  “Global  Economic  Prospects.  Economic  Implications  of  Remittances  and  Migration”,  Washington 
DC, 2006. 
BIS Review 64/2006 
 5
Table  2.  Number  of  work  permits  in  the  UK,  Ireland,  and  Sweden,  issued  to  citizens  of  new 
Member States in the post-accession period  
 
thousand 
of 
   In  % 
workforce† 
 UK* 
Ireland** 
Sweden*** 
Total 
Lithuania 
Latvia 
Estonia 
Poland 
The Czech 
Republic 
Hungary 
Slovakia 
44.72 
23.03 
4.68 
204.90 
20.01 
10.35 
36.36 
26.37 
12.94 
3.39 
70.14 
6.39 
3.83 
10.93 
0.37 
0.16 
0.36 
2.16 
0.07 
0.20 
0.09 
71.46 
36.14 
8.43 
277.20 
26.47 
14.37 
47.38 
4.4 
3.2 
1.3 
1.6 
0.5 
0.3 
1.8 
Source:  Accession  Monitoring  Reports,  http://www.ind.homeofice.gov.uk.  Data  for  May  2004  through  December  2005.  NBP 
calculations. 
Source: Skills needs in the Irish economy: The role of migration, A submission by the Expert Group on Future Skills Needs and 
Forfás to the Minister for Enterprise, Trade & Employment, http://www.skillsireland.ie. Data for May 2004 through August 2005. 
Source: Migracje specjalistów wysokiej klasy w kontekście członkostwa Polski w Unii Europejskiej, [eng. Migration of high class 
specialists  in  the  context  of  Polish  membership  in  the  EU].  Centre  of  Migration  Research,  Warsaw  University.  Data  for  May 
2004 through December 2004. 
†Workforce – persons aged 15 and over in the first quarter of 2004. 
The  number  of  Poles  working  in  the  UK  is  growing  rapidly.  Everyone  visiting  the  UK  in  the  recent 
months  must  have  experienced  the  same  –  Poles  can  be  met  everywhere.  According  to  the  most 
recent  information  from  the  British  Embassy,  in  May  2006,  there  were  240,000  Poles  registered, 
against 205,000 in December 2005. 
Migration of many, mostly young people abroad will allow them to acquire new skills, experience, learn 
foreign languages, and fully integrate in the society of homo sapiens globalus.  The open question 
remains, whether the next step of those people will be to climb the career ladder abroad, or to return to 
their country to set up their own companies. There is no answer to this question; however, a properly 
conducted  economic  policy  may  increase  the chance  for  the  return  of  Poles  to  their  country,  which 
would in turn increase the chance for a higher economic growth rate in the long-term. 
Workplaces are being relocated in search for employees – outsourcing and off-shoring 
For  the  purpose  of  this  speech,  a  simplified  definition  may  be  adopted,  under  which  outsourcing 
means relocating orders, services, production, employment or, in broader terms, a business process 
to  another  company  (irrespective  of  its  location),  whereas  off-shoring  means  relocating  a  business 
process abroad (irrespective whether to another company, or within the same enterprise).9
There  are,  however,  not  too  many  hard  data  which  would  allow  for  an  assessment  of  the  scale  of 
outsourcing/off-shoring. Until now, there have been only estimates and fragmentary research results 
available on this subject, limited to some countries only. However, the data on global trade in goods 
and services and foreign investment proves the growing scale of this phenomenon. Over the past 15 
years, there were significant changes in the share of particular regions in the global trade, with the 
decline  of  the  UE  share  accompanied  by  increasing  shares  of  the  developing  countries,  including 
Asian countries. In global terms, foreign trade as percentage of the GDP increased from the average 
19% of the GDP in the period from 1980 to 1989, to 25% between 2000 and 2004. 
                                                           
9   Where off-shoring takes place within the same company, the English name captive off-shoring is used. 
6 
 BIS Review 64/2006
countries 
2002 
63 
1995 
67 
1990 
7222 
11 
38 
37 
20 
12 
39 
33 
19 
1222 
44 
28 
13 
Table 3. Shares of individual regions in global trade. 
% Total 
Industrialized 
world 
USA 
UE15 
Developing countries 
Asia 
Source: IMF Direction of Trade Statistics 
Global capital flows keep growing at an even higher rate, the share of global FDI in the global GDP 
increased  from  8%  in  1989  to  22.1%  in  2003,  whereas  foreign  assets  as  percentage  of  the  GDP 
increased from 62.6% of the GDP to 186.1% of the GDP, respectively. 
Numerous  empirical  studies  have  demonstrated  that  outsourcing  and  off-shoring  entail  increased 
competitiveness  of  enterprises,  which  raise  their  employment  level  abroad  in  subsidiary  companies 
and intensify their expansion on foreign markets, thus being forced to create workplaces, often much 
better  paid  and  requiring  higher  qualifications  also  in  parent  undertakings.  Thus,  the  growth  of 
employment abroad is accompanied by the same at home.10 An analysis of the impact of off-shoring 
services to India in the years 2000 – 2003 on the US labour market shows that, for example, jobs for 
programmers of low value added were lost in favour of India; however the total employment in the IT 
services industry grew rapidly.11
As  it  has  been  observed,  the  role  of  trade  and  capital  links  among  enterprises  in  various  countries 
strengthened over the recent years. In the past, in response to increasing fuel prices or costs of living, 
trade unions demanded wage increases. It would result in the so–called second–round effects, and 
central banks had to increase their interest rates to mitigate inflation. Now, trade unions must take into 
consideration the fact that if wage increases exceed the growth in productivity, manufacturing may be 
off-shored to countries with lower manufacturing costs. 
In view of the research results presented at the recent conference organized by the Financial Times, 
dedicated  to  outsourcing  and  off-shoring12,  an  increasing  number  of  companies  is  planning  on  the 
globalization  of  their  manufacturing  and  services.  This  decision  is  underpinned  with  the  wish  to 
optimise costs, improve the quality, deliver new products, provide better customer service (e.g. use of 
various time zones to provide 24/7 customer service), mitigate risk, and drive innovation. The public 
sector holds the second position in the ranking of business sources for companies offering outsourcing 
and off-shoring services. The majority of the speakers stressed that the cost factor dominated in the 
first  phase  of  off-shoring;  now  these  are  quality,  innovation,  and  the  use  of  talent  bank  in  other 
countries that gain on significance. 
More and more often, aside from the supportive activity, companies outsource and off-shore their core 
business, as part of their elaborated strategy. They do so, because they obtain both lower costs, and 
better  quality  and  innovation  improvement.  For  instance,  a  call  centre  in  Manila  on  the  Philippines 
initially dealt with simple complaints. It turned out that the customer satisfaction level was much higher 
than  in  the  call  centres  across  Europe.  The  next  step  involved  customer  services  of  higher  value 
added (such as, e.g., lost cheques, where the employee’s own invention is required – such a customer 
call cannot be fully described with procedures). The subsequent step consisted in taking over phone 
investment consultancy from Europe, which was even more demanding in terms of qualifications. This 
was possible due to much higher educational standards represented by the employees (often at the 
level of PH.D. degree, holding appropriate licences) than those of typical employees of call centres 
across Europe. 
                                                           
10   See e.g. Landefeld R., Mataloni R. “Offshore Outsourcing and Multinational Companies”, BEA working paper WP2004-06. 
11   Baily  M.,  Lawrence  R.  “What  Happened  to  the  Great  U.S.  Job  Machine?  The  Role  of  Trade  and  Electronic  Offshoring”, 
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2004. 
12   Conference of the Financial Times “Global off-shoring and outsourcing”, London, 17 May 2006. 
BIS Review 64/2006 
 7
Companies  whose  business  activity  consists  in  the  implementation  of  off-shoring  processes  are 
growing rapidly. For the majority of companies in India, this growth amounts to a few dozen percent 
per annum. The scale of the activity is also growing, as it is not confined to simple call centres any 
more, but it also includes outsourcing of ever more advanced business processes (e.g. related to IT, 
logistics, etc.). There is a demand for totally different managerial skills in the global economy, which 
are  currently  being  rapidly  developed  in  the  Asian  countries.  For  instance,  in  order  to  lower  the 
personnel rotation, which is an ever-present problem of all call centres, the Indian companies have 
elaborated HR management techniques. 
It appears that off-shoring  of  services  is  only  gathering  momentum  and  is  covering  ever  new 
areas  (IT, shared services, BPO13, logistics, finance, legal services, etc.). Moreover, a new type of 
outsourcing/off-shoring, namely KPO14, appeared. Companies that outsource knowledge processes 
employ  a  few  thousand  high  rank  experts  (often  holding  Ph.  D.  degree)  in  countries  of  low 
manufacturing costs. For example, one of the major international investment banks, which holds top 
positions  in  quality  rankings  of  research  and  analyses,  has  outsourced  its  research  and  analyses 
department.  Following  the  completion  of  each  research,  there  is  a  follow-up  research  to  check 
customer  satisfaction;  moreover,  outsourcing  has  made  it  possible  to  launch  new  products  and 
improve quality. For example, thanks to lowering the costs and increasing the number of  analysts, it 
was  possible  to  start  analysing  small  and  medium-sized  listed  companies,  which  had  not  been 
possible  before,  due  to  a  high  cost  of  an  analyst.  Outsourcing  of  knowledge  processes  is  covering 
more  and  more  areas  and  requires,  as  opposed  to  the  outsourcing  of  business  processes,  a  close 
collaboration of the customer and the end-user. 
More  and  more  companies  are  planning  on  developing  products/services  through  adopting  a global 
product development strategy. This means that more and more forms of activity will be generated by 
international optimisation of business processes. This in turn will force individual countries/regions to 
increase  their  attractiveness  for  the  global  business,  which  requires  an  active  attitude  of  local  self-
governments. For instance, Dubai Outsource Zone is a government initiative, aimed to make Dubai a 
highly attractive international off-shoring/outsourcing centre. The concept of multi-off-shoring appears, 
where a decision on globalization of manufacturing entails starting business activity (routing orders) in 
several locations. 
There is a lot being said and written on the impact of globalization on the US economy, but there is a 
lot going on across Europe as well. Off-shoring of manufacturing and services to other countries is not 
the  key  reason  for  restructuring  yet;  however  its  significance  grows  year  by  year.  The  European 
Restructuring  Monitor15  website,  at  the  end  of  2005,  contained  a  description  of  ca.  3500  cases  of 
company  restructuring  in  Europe,  which  has  been  announced  in  the  media  (international  and 
national) since 2002. In the years 2002 - 2005 there were only 202 cases of company restructuring 
(i.e. 6% of total) which, as their main reason, reported the transfer of manufacturing or service abroad 
(that is colloquially called off-shoring), whereas in 47% the reason was internal restructuring, which 
could have partly resulted from the growing competitive pressure ensuing from globalization. The EU 
enlargement in 2004 led to significant changes in the off-shoring process across Europe. 
In the years 2002 - 2003 the largest job destruction was reported in the UK, as a result of transferring 
manufacturing and services to India, and to a lesser degree to China and other Asian countries (a total 
of 44% of all jobs shifted in the period 2002 - 2003). However, at the same time, in 1/3 of all instances, 
companies from the old EU countries generally mentioned the Eastern Europe as the destination of 
off-shoring. In the years  2002 - 2003 a total of over 33,000 workplaces were shifted from the old EU 
countries to other countries, i.e. 16,500 on average in each of those two years. Among the present 
new EU Member States, Hungary and the Czech Republic enjoyed the greatest popularity, whereas 
Poland was mentioned only occasionally. 
In 2005 the process of off-shoring in Europe accelerated in the period from January to November, with 
32,000 jobs shifted, i.e. nearly twice the average in the period 2002 - 2003. The leader among the 
                                                           
13   Eng. Business Process Outsourcing. 
14   Eng. Knowledge Process Outsourcing. 
15   European  Restructuring  Monitor  is  the  European  Commission  information  service.  All  publicly  announced  instances  of 
company restructuring in the EU, Bulgaria and Romania, are collected if these fulfil the following requirements: employment 
reduction  by  at  least  100  people  per  annum,  must  concern  companies  with  at  least  250  employees  and  the  reduction 
applies to at least 10% of employment, or at least 100 jobs are created as a result of restructuring, as the case may be. 
8 
 BIS Review 64/2006
countries  transferring  their  jobs,  following  a  few  years  of  domination  of  the  UK  in  Europe,  was 
Germany, whereas India continued to be the leader among the countries which provided destination 
for  the  off-shoring  process.  Following  India was the  Czech Republic (before China  and  other  Asian 
countries), where quite a number of jobs were shifted from Germany and Portugal. In light of the data, 
Poland’s attractiveness as a destination of the off-shoring process is growing gradually, whereas that 
of Hungary is going down. 
Table 3. Off-shoring in the EU 
The country to which jobs were
shifted  
the  EU 
Job  destruction 
Job  destruction  (in  number  of
 
January  –  November  2005,  due 
workplaces)  in  the  EU  in  the
period  2002  -  2003 through  off-
to off-shoring 
shoring 
in 
3361 
9458 
3786 
780 
1110 
120 
33151 
3077 
5470 
3271 
3890 
772 
2676 
31942 
China 
India 
Asian countries 
Czech Republic 
Hungary 
Poland 
Total 
Source: European Restructuring Monitor, own calculations 
Numerous  available  analyses  have  revealed  that  off-shoring  is  bound  to  grow  and  increasingly 
concern  the services sector16. For instance, in the years 1980 – 2002 trade in goods and services 
grew annually by 6.9%. According to the forecasts by McKinsey Global Institute, in the years 2003 - 
2008 off-shoring of services to countries with low manufacturing costs will grow at a rate of 30% per 
annum. In 2003 the global trade in services stood at ca. USD 1.7 trillion, of which a mere 3% resulted 
from off-shoring to countries of low manufacturing costs. It is expected that in 2008 the global trade in 
services  will  amount  to  ca.  USD  2.4  trillion,  of  which  10%  will  represent  off-shoring  of  business 
processes and ICT to countries with low manufacturing costs. For a comparison, the travel industry 
represents ca. 30% of trade in services according to the OECD data, whereas transport – 20%. Based 
on an analysis of eight representative sectors, McKinsey Global Institute estimated that in 2003 18.3 
million jobs in the services sector could have been off-shored (this applies mostly to such sectors as 
the IT – 2.8 million, banking – 3.3 million, insurance – 2.3 million, health care – 4.6 million, retail trade 
–  4.3  million).  Extrapolating  these  results  for  the  global  economy,  it  may  be  estimated  that  in  2008 
there may be as many as ca. 160 million jobs in the services, i.e. 11% of the estimated 1.46 billion of 
global employment in the services sector, may be performed at a distance from the service recipient. 
Most evidently, the off-shoring of business processes to various corners of the world to optimise the 
process  of  manufacturing  or  performing  services  will  grow,  and  the  scale  of  this  phenomenon  will 
probably surprise many architects of the economic policy. In many rankings, Poland holds one of the 
leading positions for its off-shoring attractiveness17, which is also reflected by the business decisions 
taken. For instance, a few days ago, Accenture announced opening a new centre in Warsaw, which 
deals with outsourcing of business processes, offers finance services, delivery management and HR 
management. Ultimately, the centre will employ up to a thousand of highly qualified experts and offer 
services in a dozen of languages. The outsourcing centre in Warsaw will be another one Accenture 
opens  in  Central  and  Eastern  Europe,  with similar having  been launched  in Prague,  Bratislava  and 
Riga. 
                                                           
16   See e.g. the McKinsey Global Institute “The Emerging Global Labour Market”, June 2005. 
17   See e.g. AT Kearney Offshore Location Attractiveness Index; or Ernst & Young European Attractiveness Survey 2005. 
BIS Review 64/2006 
 9
Today, due to time constraints, I did not touch many topics closely related to the emergence of the 
global  labour  market.  For  instance,  we  should  consider  why,  in  the  ranking  of  Boston  Consulting 
Group  covering  a  hundred  companies  with  the  highest  global  growth  potential  on  the  emerging 
markets, there is no Polish company18, whilst the ranking is dominated by China and India, plus some 
companies from Turkey, Egypt, Indonesia, Thailand or Mexico. 
For  instance,  we  should  consider  what  impact  of  the  demography,  migration,  off-shoring,  and 
outsourcing will be on the income of global employees. The available results demonstrate that poorly 
qualified  workers  in  expensive  countries  may  experience  their  wages  go  down  or  even  become 
unemployed19. However the impact on the economy remains positive, as outsourcing and off-shoring 
allow companies to increase their competitiveness and lift the sales – inter alia, due to the fact that 
foreign  branches  to  a  large  degree  serve  the  local  markets  –  which,  in  turn,  requires  a  higher 
employment level in head offices and a higher number of well-qualified people at home.20 Moreover, 
the fear of off-shoring increases the investment of employees in human capital, which results in better 
performance  and  flexibility  of  the  labour  market.21  Therefore,  the  ability  to  change  and  improve 
qualifications as well as to assess which sectors in Poland have the potential and which are on the 
decline due to their inability to face the global competition, is gaining on significance.  
We  should  also  assess  what  impact  globalization  has  on  company  strategies.  If  multi-sourcing 
strategies are to be more and more widely applied, the question arises how Polish enterprises should 
operate  on  that  market.  The  question  whether  a  long-term  employment  relationship  in  a  large 
organisation  is  better  than  the  one  of  self-organizing  cooperating  nets  of  small  companies  or  even 
persons,  which  proved  well  in  the  manufacturing  of  motorbikes  and  textiles  in  China,  and  some 
software, still remains unanswered. 
Last  but  not  least,  we  should  consider  how  Polish  companies  and  their  employees  should  develop 
their most precious assets in the homo  sapiens  globalus  society  i.e.  the  intellectual  capital. I 
am just making a remark of these extremely important topics. 
Conclusions 
The recently published report by Edward Bendyk, “Przyszłość pracy. Polska, Czechy, Słowacja.” [“The 
future of labour. Poland, the Czech Republic and Slovakia.”] concludes that out of the three analysed 
countries, the culture of innovation has the smallest chances for development in Poland. The author 
recommends to launch a modernisation project under the name Polska 2.0. 
It appears that in the homo  sapiens  globalus  society  of  the  21st  century,  many  of  the  terms 
used  in  the  debate  on  a  unified  Poland or the IV Republic of Poland, should adopt totally new 
meanings.  Solidarity  should  not  mean  an  algorithm  for  sharing  the  growth  fruit,  but  should  mean  a 
policy  which  will  allow  the  greatest  possible  number  of  Poles  to  function  well  on  the  global  labour 
market.  Patriotism  should  not  confine  to  the  roots  of  Poland,  the  tradition  of  the  great  fellow 
countrymen, but should also have a global character, i.e. lead to such behaviour and policies that will 
enable  Poland  as  a  country  and  its  citizens  to  become  successful  in  the  fast  globalizing  economy, 
whilst maintaining close ties of Poles with their homeland. 
In this context, it is worth raising a few questions. 
- 
Is the Polish educational system able to deliver a sufficient number of specialists in the fields 
on which the success of Poland in the global economy depends, in particular engineers, IT 
specialists, people with multi-language skills, incl. e.g. Chinese? 
                                                           
18  See the study by Aguiar M. et al. (2006) referred to in footnote 2. 
19   For example, Baily M., Lawrence R. op. cit. and Author D., Levy F., Murnane R. “The Skill Content of Recent Technological 
Change: An Empirical Exploration”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2003. 
20   The  literature,  which  shows  these  problems  is  very  extensive,  for  example:  Hanson  G.,  Mataloni  R.,  Slaughter  M. 
“Expansion Abroad and the Domestic Operations of U.S. Multinational Firms”, mimeo, 2003; Landefeld, Mataloni (2004) op. 
cit.; Desai M., Foley F., Hines J. “Foreign Direct Investment and Domestic Economic Activity”, NBER Working Paper 11717; 
Mankiw N.G., Swagel P. “The Politics and Economics of Offshore Outsourcing”, mimeo, November 2005. 
21   For example, Blinder A. “The Fear of Offshoring”, Princeton University, mimeo, October 2005. 
10 
 BIS Review 64/2006
         Does  the  Polish  educational  system  provide  continuing  training,  and  in  particular,  are  we 
able  to  offer  quick  and  smooth  re-qualification  of  workforce  that  is  prone  to  loose  jobs  in 
companies or industries which cannot stand the global competition? 
Are  there  sound  relations  between  businesses  and  universities  in  Poland,  which  would 
deliver a large number of innovations? 
Is  the  public  administration  in  Poland  stimulating  the  innovation  process  (e.g.  through  the 
use of modern communication channels, giving up paperwork for the Internet, etc.)? 
Do we create and support organizations for Poles emigrating abroad, to help them maintain 
their relation with the country and facilitate their return to set up their own companies? 
Do we conduct an active policy of developing business contacts and personal connections 
on the fast growing markets? Do we use the potential lying in the Polish universities (e.g. 
Poles that study in China or India and their counterparts studying in Poland)? 
What  is  the  role  of  trade  unions?  Should  they  add  to  their  mandates,  so  far  involving  the 
defence of employee rights, informing employees of the anticipated changes and preparing 
them  for  the  changes,  e.g.  through  providing  appropriate  means  for  re-qualifying  and 
training? 
Do  we  have  a  policy  to  tackle  the  imminent  mass  migration,  mostly  from  Asia  and  Africa, 
over the forthcoming decades? How should we provide social integration of immigrants so as 
to help them become Polish global patriots? How can we mitigate the possible pressure on 
social  expenditure  due  to  the  immigration  of  poorly  qualified  workforce,  and  how  can  we 
attract highly qualified staff to move to Poland? 
Do we sufficiently consider global factors, especially the involvement of countries with low 
manufacturing costs to the global manufacturing, services, knowledge and labour markets, in 
our strategic planning, both at the country and corporate level? 
Are we able to anticipate Poland’s specialisation on the global market, with the view to the 
demographic trends, and do we invest sufficient funds to develop such areas, at the expense 
of  the  discontinuing  areas?  Will  Poland,  for  instance,  become  a  healthcare  centre  for  the 
aging Europe, or a global centre of outsourcing of business processes, which require a fluent 
command  of  several  languages,  or  will  it  become  an  American  silicon  valley  or  an  Indian 
Bangalore  in  IT  services  of  the  highest  value  added?  How  long  will  the  car  factories  built 
over  the  past  years  in  Europe  and  Poland  and  their  co-operants  stand  the  fast  growing 
competition of China? 
It seems that we are in an exceptional period of the world economic history. The forthcoming years 
and  decades  will  shape  the  economic  world  map  anew,  which  will  reflect  the  demographic  trends, 
migration, and the growing globalization of manufacturing and services. Poland has a great chance to 
use the forthcoming global changes to improve their income and the standard of living of its citizens, 
and to mark its significant position on the new economic world map. Answers to the questions raised 
above  and  to  many  others,  as  well  as  drawing  proper  conclusions  from  those  answers  for  the 
economic policy should endorse such chance, which I wish to this and the future generations of global 
Poles. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS Review 64/2006 
 11
