Nils Bernstein: A view from the outside - effects on the introduction of the euro  
Statement  by  Mr  Nils  Bernstein,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Denmark,  at  the  Conference 
"Experience with and Preparations for the Euro" at the Raiffeisen Landesbank Oberösterreich, Linz,  
10 - 12 May 2006. 
 It is a great pleasure and honour to have been invited to give a view from an out-country on the effect 
of the introduction of the euro. Conferences like this offer an excellent opportunity for mutual exchange 
of experiences and discussion of issues related to monetary policy and financial sector developments. 
I  will  focus  my  statement  on  the  effect  of  the  euro  for  Denmark  on  four  topics:  Monetary  policy, 
financial  integration,  trade  integration  and  the  requirements  for  fiscal  policy  and  other  economic 
policies.  Finally,  I  will  summarise  our  experience  with  the  euro  as  the  nominal  anchor  for  inflation 
expectations within the Danish fixed-exchange-rate regime.  
First,  let  me  describe  the  effects  of  the  introduction  of  the  euro  on  monetary  policy  in  Denmark. 
Denmark maintains a fixed-exchange-rate policy vis-à-vis the euro area. Since the start of the third 
stage of the Economic and Monetary Union in the EU on 1 January 1999, the formal framework for the 
fixed-exchange-rate  policy  has  been  the  European  Exchange-Rate  Mechanism,  ERM  II.  Denmark 
participates in ERM II with a narrow fluctuation band of +/- 2.25 per cent around the central rate. The 
central  rate  is  a  conversion  of  the  central  rate  of  the  krone  vis-à-vis  the  D-mark  in  the  previous 
European Exchange-Rate Mechanism (ERM I), and the central parity of the Danish krone vis-à-vis the 
anchor has now been unchanged for more than 19 years.1 
Due  to  this  long-standing  experience  with  a  firm  fixed-exchange-rate  policy,  the  introduction  of  the 
euro has not implied any major changes for the overall monetary-policy framework in Denmark. During 
its  more  than  seven  years  of  existence,  the  euro  has  served  as  a  stable  nominal  anchor  for  the 
inflation  expectations  in  Denmark.  The  fluctuations  in  the  krone  vis-à-vis  the  euro  are  now  so 
moderate  that  most  ordinary  households  and  business  enterprises  no  longer  take  them  into 
consideration. On average, prices on retail goods have been broadly constant for a long period.  
During most of  the  ERM  I  period  the D-mark was  the  nominal anchor  of  the Danish  economy,  and 
Germany  has  been  Denmark's  largest  single  export  market  since  the  late  1970s.  Even  though  a 
number of other European currencies were closely pegged to the D-mark during the ERM I period, the 
introduction of the single currency in replacement of 12 national currencies has made the anchor more 
clearly visible for Danish households and business. The euro has a weight of more than 50 per cent in 
the effective krone-rate index compared to just above 20 per cent for Germany alone. It may also be 
argued that the anchor was more diffuse during the ERM I period due to the multilateral nature of the 
system and the widening of the fluctuation bands to +/- 15 per cent in 1993. The ERM II is a so-called 
“hub and spokes” model where each participating currency has a central parity vis-à-vis the euro but 
not vis-à-vis the other participating currencies as they did in ERM I. Together with the narrow Danish 
+/- 2.25 per cent fluctuation band the introduction of the euro and the transition from ERM I to ERM II 
have therefore made the communication of the fixed-exchange-rate policy somewhat easier.  
Since the introduction of the euro in 1999 the krone has been stable against the euro, close to the 
central rate, and it has been possible to stabilise the krone with relatively limited use of interventions in 
terms of both frequency and amounts. During the most recent years the monetary-policy interest rate 
spread  has  amounted  to  15-25  basis  points.  The  long-term  yield  spread  between  Denmark  and 
Germany  has  virtually  disappeared  and  even  been  negative  in  some  periods.  Anecdotal  evidence 
indicates that the participants in the foreign-exchange market often take positions in the expectation of 
a  stable  krone.  This  contributes  in  itself  to  a  stable  exchange-rate  development  and  confirms  the 
credibility of the Danish fixed-exchange-rate policy and stable economic conditions.  
Let me now turn to the second topic, financial integration. The introduction of the euro has acted as 
catalyst  for  a  renewed  interest  in  financial  integration  in  Europe  –  both  within  the  euro  area  and 
between the euro area and the non-participating EU countries. However, even though the euro area is 
clearly Denmark’s most important trading partner there has been no sign of currency substitution in 
                                                      
1   The monetary policy in Denmark is described in details in Danmarks Nationalbank (2003), Monetary Policy in Denmark. 
BIS Review 40/2006 
 1
Denmark. By the end of 2005 euro-denominated deposits accounted for less than 0.2 per cent of the 
resident households' total deposits in the Danish banking sector. Tourists can though normally make 
their payments in euro in Danish shops without paying unfair margins.  
The mortgage-credit institutes offer euro-denominated loans, but these loans accounted only for 5 per 
cent  of  the  total  volume  of  outstanding  domestic  mortgage-credit  loans  at  end-2005.  This  should 
probably be viewed in light of the low interest-rate differential between Denmark and the euro area. At 
low  interest-rate  spreads,  the  Danish  households  and  firms  apparently  find  it  more  convenient  to 
borrow  in  their  base  currency,  i.e.  in  Danish  kroner,  since  this  is  the  currency  denomination  of  the 
households' wages and salaries.  
The last decade or so has also been characterised by some significant changes in the structure of the 
Danish  credit-institute  sector.2  The  Danish  mortgage-credit  system  has  been  transformed  from  a 
system based mainly on long callable fixed-interest rate mortgages to a system with many different 
types of loans and a high share of adjustable-rate mortgages. However, the driving forces behind this 
development have been liberalisations and increased domestic competition. It does not seem in any 
significant way to be related to the introduction of the euro and the Danish fixed-exchange-rate policy 
vis-à-vis the euro.  
The  period  since  the  introduction  of  the  euro  has  also  witnessed  a  number  of  major  cross-border 
mergers involving Danish banks. In 1997, the Swedish Nordbanken and the Finnish Merita formed a 
group into which the Danish Unibank and the Norwegian Christiania Bank were included in 2000. In 
2001 the group was renamed “Nordea”. Nordea has considerable market shares in Denmark, Norway, 
Sweden and Finland and is by most standards the second largest banks in Denmark. Furthermore, in 
2001  Svenska  Handelsbanken  acquired  the  Danish  Midtbank,  and  in  2004  the  Icelandic  Kaupthing 
Bank  acquired  the  Danish  bank  FIH.  There  has  also  been  an  increased  internationalisation  of  the 
Danish  banking  sector  through  the  establishment  abroad  of  branches  and  subsidiaries  of  Danish 
banks.  Danske  Bank  acquired  for  instance  the  Swedish  Östgöta  Enskilda  Banken  in  1997  and  the 
Norwegian Fokus Bank in 1999, and in 2004 Danske Bank entered into an agreement to purchase 
National Irish Bank (based in Ireland) and Northern Bank (based in Northern Ireland).  
The increased international representation in the Danish Banking sector has until now mainly involved 
banks from the Nordic countries. Among the Nordic countries only Finland is a member of the euro 
area. Sweden is a member of the EU, but is not a member of ERM II, and Norway and Iceland are not 
members of the EU at all. The structural changes in the Danish banking sector during the last decade 
do therefore not seem to be related to the introduction of the euro in any significant way. Rather, the 
development has been driven by some of the "traditional" factors that motivate cross-border mergers 
and acquisitions in the banking industry such as cost reductions due to scale economies.  
In view of the still relatively low level of cross-border mergers and acquisitions activity within the euro 
area-banking sector in general, the absence of major cross-border mergers into the Danish banking 
sector by euro area banks does not appear to be a result of Denmark being outside the euro area. Nor 
are there any indications that the level of financial integration as measured by the development in the 
number of branches and subsidiaries of foreign banks is lower in Denmark than in the euro area.  
My third topic is the effect of the euro on trade integration. Empirical evidence suggests that launch 
of the single currency has increased the intra-euro area trade.3 Furthermore, there are no indications 
that the euro area member states are trading less with countries in the rest of the world. However, due 
to the relatively short time span since the introduction of the euro such empirical studies should always 
be interpreted with caution.  
In theory one should expect the introduction of the euro has also had a positive effect on the Danish 
export sector. The unification of 12 currencies into a single currency has reduced the exchange-rate 
uncertainty and other costs faced by the Danish exporters.  
Danish hourly wage costs are among the highest in the world, and the gap to Denmark's competitors 
has widened in the last decade. Despite of this, exports have fared well, and in 2005 Denmark had a 
                                                      
2   Cf. Thomsen, J. (2005), Experience of Danish Credit Institutions in ERM2, Bančni vestniks Journal for Money and Banking, 
vol. 54, July-August, pp. 78-82. 
3   Cf.  e.g.  the  survey  in  Pedersen,  A.  M.  (2004),  Currency  Unions  and  Foreign  Trade,  Danmarks  Nationalbank  Monetary 
Review, 2nd Quarter, pp. 35-50. 
2 
 BIS Review 40/2006
surplus equivalent to around 5 per cent of GDP on external trade in goods and services.4 This is also 
a large surplus by international standards. The current-account surplus, which in addition to goods and 
services includes interest on the external debt and current transfers, showed a surplus of around 2.5 
per cent of GDP in 2005.  
However, it is difficult to trace any effect of the introduction of the euro on Denmark's foreign-trade 
relations due to some other major structural tendencies. Denmark operates one of the world's largest 
merchant fleets, and the sea freight exports have more than doubled in less than ten years. Shipping 
is now the second-largest export sector after the manufacturing industry.5 An increased production of 
oil  and  gas  from  the  Danish  North  Sea  fields  also  contributes  significantly  to  the  surplus  on  the 
balance of goods and services.  
My  last  topic  is  the  requirements  for  fiscal  policy  and  other  economic  policies  under  a  fixed 
exchange-rate  regime  vis-a-vis  the  euro.  A  fixed-exchange-rate  policy  implies  that  the  stance  of 
monetary policy is from time to time out of line with domestic short-term cyclical needs. When the key 
monetary-policy  interest rates  in Denmark  are closely  linked  to  euro-area  interest  rates,  there  is  no 
room for domestic stabilisation by means of monetary policy. This problem might appear particularly 
severe in Denmark, where the business cycle during the last two decades or so often seems to have 
been negatively correlated with the cyclical conditions in Germany and the euro area. However, in light 
of the consistent Danish fixed-exchange-rate policy it is also possible to draw a completely opposite 
conclusion: cyclical divergence is immaterial to the success of a fixed-exchange-rate policy provided 
that the fiscal policy and other economic policies are in line with the requirements of a fixed-exchange-
rate regime.6
In the Danish case two fairly general experiences has been seen regarding the relationship between 
monetary  policy  and  fiscal  policy  in  a  fixed-exchange-rate  regime:  First  there  has  been  an 
unconditionally willingness to subordinate monetary policy to the exchange-rate strategy in order to get 
a stable exchange rate. Secondly a medium-term horizon in the annual fiscal budget planning process 
without ad hoc based and short-sighted changes in the fiscal policy contributes to an environment that 
is supportive to the fixed-exchange-rate policy.7 
Denmark is subject to the objectives and requirements of the Stability and Growth Pact on equal terms 
with  euro  area  member  states,  although  no  sanctions  are  imposed  in  case  of  non-compliance. 
However, being a satellite – and not the core – within the European exchange-rate cooperation, the 
fiscal policy in Denmark has to be at least as prudent – if not even more – if a credible fixed-exchange-
rate regime is to be maintained.  
Today  the  macroeconomic  fundamentals  of  the  Danish  economy  are  sound  and  fairly  robust:  Low 
inflation,  surpluses  on  the  current  account  as  well  as  on  the  general  government  budget,  and  a 
relatively  low  level  of  unemployment.  However,  this  has  not  always  been  the  case!  Today's  firm 
commitment to a fixed exchange rate in Denmark has its background in bad macroeconomic policies 
and, consequently, poor performance of the Danish economy in the 1970s and the beginning of the 
1980s. It was the switch to a stability-oriented fiscal policy and a firm fixed-exchange-rate policy during 
the 1980s that let the Danish economy on a path of stable economic development as well as low and 
stable inflation.8
The political situation in the 1970s was characterised by frequent elections and short-term orientation 
of  the  macroeconomic  policy.  This  resulted  in  a  stop-go  nature  of  the  fiscal  policy  with  frequent 
"packages". When the first oil crises came in 1973 Denmark had already experienced a deficit on the 
                                                      
4   Cf.  Beier,  N.  C.  and  Pedersen,  E.  H.  (2005a),  Wages,  Competitiveness  and  the  Balance  of  Payments,  Danmarks 
Nationalbank Monetary Review, 1st Quarter, pp. 43-60. 
5   Cf.  Beier,  N.  C.  and  Pedersen,  E.  H.  (2005b),  Sea  Freight  and  the  Danish  Economy,  Danmarks  Nationalbank  Monetary 
Review, 4th Quarter, pp. 41-56. 
6   Cf. Jensen, H. F. (2001), Costs and benefits of ERM II: The Danish experience, in: National Bank of Poland (2001), The 
Polish Way to the Euro, Conference 22-23 October 2001, pp. 252-262. 
7   Cf. the background paper "The relationship between fiscal policy and monetary policy in a fixed exchange rate regime" to 
the speech given by Governor Jens Thomsen at the Central Bank of Cyprus on 24 November 2003. 
8   An elaboration of the origin of today's fixed-exchange-rate regime in Denmark is found in Christensen, A. M. and J. Topp 
(1997), Monetary policy in Denmark since 1992, in: Monetary policy in the Nordic countries: Experiences since 1992, BIS 
Policy Papers, No. 2, pp. 5-23. 
BIS Review 40/2006 
 3
current account of the balance of payment for each consecutive year since 1963 leading to a limited 
room  of  manoeuvre  in  economic  policy.  Furthermore,  the  labour  market  system  was  based  on 
automatic inflation indexation of wages. This implied a more or less direct feed of the oil price shocks 
into  wages and  prices.  The  1970s saw  a broad range  of  economic policy  interventions, but  without 
clear success. Unemployment was increasing rapidly9, government deficits were approaching 10 per 
cent  of  GDP,  the  balance  of  payments  deficit  persisted,  and  inflation  was  running  at  double-digit 
numbers. In principle, a fixed-exchange-rate policy was pursued within the European exchange-rate 
co-operation,  but  the  krone  was  devaluated  several  times  against  the  Deutsche  mark  during  the 
second half of the 1970s and the early 1980s. Therefore, de facto the exchange rate did not serve as 
the economy's "nominal anchor". As the result of high inflation and lack of credibility, long-term central-
government interest rates reached more than 20 per cent in the beginning of the 1980s and the long-
term  interest-rate  differential  between  Denmark  and  Germany  was  above  10  per  cent.  The 
government debt increased rapidly, and a fear that Denmark was on the verge to “state bankruptcy” 
began to rise.  
In the early 1980s, a radical change in policies took place after a shift in government. In relation to a 
change of government in September 1982 the incoming government declared that devaluation would 
no  longer  be  considered  as  an  economic-policy  instrument.  This  was  subsequently  followed  by  a 
significant tightening of the fiscal policy and an abolition of the automatic cost-of-living adjustment of 
wages. The promise to pursue a firm fixed-exchange-rate policy was soon put to a serious test when 
Sweden – one of Denmark's largest trading partners – devalued its currency by 16 per cent one month 
later. Denmark did not devalue. This and the other tightening measures meant that the credibility of 
Denmark's  fixed-exchange-rate  policy  was  soon  enhanced.10  In  the  following  years  the  government 
budget improved, and the inflation and interest-rate differentials to Germany fell significantly.  
The medium-term horizon in the Danish fiscal policy framework during the last two decades or so has 
been crucial for the conduct of the fixed-exchange-rate policy. The discretionary fiscal policy measures 
carried  out  within  this  framework  have  also  often  contained  elements  of  structural  policy.  Hereby 
consideration  has  been  taken  to  both  the  short-term  macroeconomic  stabilisation  as  well  as  to  the 
medium-turn and long-term growth-potential of the economy. The most important permanent structural 
element during the second half of the 1980s was a tax reform that lowered the tax on capital income – 
positive or negative – and thus the value of the full deductibility of interest payments.11
Other  economic  policies  have  also  contributed  to  a  more  flexible  economy  with  better  incentive 
structures. During the period 1994-2000 several labour market reforms has played an important role in 
reducing  structural  unemployment.  The  reforms  have  effectively  reduced  the  maximum-benefit-
duration  period  from  8-9  years  in  1994  to  4  years  in  2000.  Furthermore  more  intensive  use  of 
activation measures (job training and education for unemployed, etc.) has been implemented.12
Let me finalise this speech by concluding that the introduction of the euro has been successful and 
that  the  ERM  II  works  well  as  the  formal  framework  for  the  Danish  fixed-exchange-rate  policy.  In 
practice Danish business and Danish trade unions have become perfectly aware that Denmark is in a 
price stability environment that is anchored by ERM II-participation. A few may even know the ECB's 
definition of price stability. More will know that the objective of price stability is taken serious by the 
ECB.  For  the  past  15  years  or  so  inflation  in  Denmark  has  been  in  accordance  with  this  definition 
without  an  independent  monetary  policy  to  support  it  and  with  a  fiscal  policy  that  is  medium-term 
oriented and sound as well, but normally not geared to manage short term inflation objectives. In short 
scientific language: ERM II has helped anchoring inflation expectations at 2 per cent.  
Thank you very much for your attention.  
In particular if one abstracts from an early retirement scheme introduced in 1979. 
                                                      
9  
10   It should be mentioned that the transition to a firm fixed exchange rate policy in Denmark was not fully completed until 1987. 
The Deutsche Mark was revalued several times within the ERM in the period 1983-1987, including vis-à-vis the krone, but 
not on the initiative of Denmark. Since 12 January 1987 there has been no change in the central rate of the krone vis-à-vis 
the D-mark and subsequently euro. 
11   Before the tax reform in the mid-1980s (effective from 1987) the tax value of interest rate deductions were up to 73 per cent. 
After  the  maximum  tax  value  of  interest  rate  deductions  was  lowered  to  51  per  cent.  A  further  reduction  of  the  tax 
deductibility of interest payments was implemented during the 1990s. The tax value of interest rate deductions reached the 
current level of 33 per cent in 2001. 
12   Cf. Gaard, S. and Kieler, M. (2004), Two decades of structural reform in Denmark: a review, Oesterreichische Nationalbank 
32nd Economic Conference, May 27 and 28, Vienna. 
4 
 BIS Review 40/2006
