John Hurley: Economic developments in Ireland and other issues 
Opening statement by Mr John Hurley, Governor of the Central Bank and Financial Services Authority 
of Ireland, at the presentation of the Annual Report 2005, Dublin, 12 July 2006.  
 You are all very welcome to this press briefing to mark the publication of the Central Bank’s Annual 
Report for 2005. 
The Annual Report describes in detail our activities in 2005, which proved to be another busy year for 
the Central Bank, both in terms of our domestic and our euro area responsibilities. 
I should also mention at the outset that the Financial Regulator will publish its own Annual Report later 
this month, which will detail its activities over the past year, while the Central Bank will publish our 
annual Financial Stability Report in the autumn. 
Economic developments 
Let me start by briefly reviewing the main developments in the Irish economy over the past year or so.  
The economy performed well in 2005 with GNP growth of 5.4 per cent. This was a notable increase on 
2004, when the figure was 4 per cent. GDP grew by 4.7 per cent last year. I understand that the CSO 
will release new National Accounts figures tomorrow, which may include revisions to figures for 2005.  
The strength of the economy was evidenced by another robust performance in the labour market, with 
an additional 87,200 persons at work and with the unemployment rate averaging 4.3 per cent. This 
labour  market  performance,  coupled  with  relatively  stable  economic  growth  rates  over  the  last  few 
years of about 4½ to 5 per cent, indicates that the economy is operating at capacity. 
The  Budgetary  position  has  been  very  sound  with  General  Government  surpluses  each  year  since 
2002, in which year a small deficit was recorded. 
Growth  last  year  was  driven  by  domestic  demand,  principally  by  consumption  and  investment 
expenditure.  The  construction  sector  continued  to  grow  at  a  very  strong  rate,  with  average 
employment growth of more than 14 per cent. This sector now accounts for approximately 13 per cent 
of total employment, an exceptionally high ratio by international and historical standards. The strong 
performance in  this  sector  has  been  driven  primarily  by  residential  house  building,  with  2005  again 
characterised  by  a  record  number  of  new  house  completions.  In  addition,  the  home  improvements 
sector also grew strongly. There was also quite marked growth in personal consumption expenditure 
last year, with a volume increase of 5.6 per cent, which was the fastest rate of growth since 2000. This 
was  a  reflection  of  the  strong  employment  gains  experienced  in  the  economy,  rising  disposable 
incomes and relatively favourable financing conditions. 
Growth  in  the  economy  over  the  past  couple  of  years,  and  particularly  last  year,  was  concentrated 
mainly  in  predominantly  labour  intensive  sectors,  namely  construction  and  services,  with  a 
correspondingly weaker productivity performance. While the overall performance of the economy has 
been positive, the relatively unbalanced nature of growth in recent times is a concern, particularly the 
modest developments in productivity. Specifically, in the latter half of the 1990s, average productivity 
growth  in  Ireland  was  about  3¼  per  cent  per  annum,  whereas over  the  past  two  years  productivity 
increases have been running at about 1 per cent annually. While increases in employment contribute 
to economic growth, it is important that a major effort is focused on improving trend productivity growth 
across the economy. 
The sector that traditionally delivers high productivity growth is the manufacturing sector, which grew 
by about 3 per cent last year compared with growth of just ½ per cent in 2004 and double-digit rates of 
growth in the late 1990s. Since the 2001 downturn, the sector has been characterised by more modest 
growth rates. While a move to services activity is a feature of more mature economies, the weaker 
performance  of  the  manufacturing  sector  reflects  a  deterioration  in  cost  competitiveness  in  the 
economy  and  stronger  international  competition.  The  decline  in  competitiveness  is  evidenced  by  a 
disappointing  export  performance.  In  2005,  exports  of  goods  and  services  grew  by  1¾  per  cent, 
whereas world trade grew by 7½ per cent, indicating a loss of market share. However, the latest trade 
data show some recovery in exports.  
BIS Review 65/2006 
 1
Turning to inflation, in 2005 the average increase in the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices was 
2.2  per  cent,  the  same  as  that  recorded  in  the  euro  area.  Furthermore,  inflation  excluding  energy 
prices  was  much  weaker  last  year  and  well  below  2  per  cent.  However,  this  has  not  continued. 
Inflationary  pressures  have  increased  so  far  in  2006  due  to  higher  energy  prices  and  a  pick  up  in 
services sector inflation. As a result, quite a significant gap has again emerged between Irish and euro 
area inflation. This is a concern particularly in view of the fact that the price level is already high by 
international  standards.  It  is  likely  that  HICP  inflation  will  average  about  2¾  per  cent  this  year, 
although much will depend on energy price developments. The recent increases in interest rates, as 
well as the resurgence in house prices, have contributed to a widening in the differential between the 
Consumer  Price  Index  and  the  HICP  measures  of  inflation,  as  the  former  includes  mortgage 
repayments. The CPI increased by 3.9 per cent in the year to May 2006, whereas the HICP increased 
by 3 per cent. 
The economy is expected to grow by about 5 per cent this year - a broadly similar rate to that in recent 
years. With relatively favourable conditions in the global economy, it is hoped that exports will pick up 
through  the  course  of  the  year.  Nevertheless,  the  main  driver  of  growth  is  likely  to  continue  to  be 
domestic demand. Strong growth in consumer expenditure and investment is forecast on the back of 
strong employment growth, the maturing of the SSIAs and rising income levels. The labour market is 
expected to continue growing, albeit at a slightly reduced pace given the projected moderation in the 
growth of the construction sector. The unemployment rate is forecast to remain broadly unchanged.  
There  are  risks  and  vulnerabilities  in  the  domestic  economy  that  could  affect  the  relatively  good 
economic outlook. I will now outline some of those risks. 
• 
In relation to the housing market, while moderating through much of last year, the recent re-
acceleration in house price increases, well in excess of the increase in nominal incomes, is a 
concern and has increased the risk of a sharp correction in the market. For the most part, 
house price increases over the last decade have been well supported by fundamentals, such 
as demographics, employment and incomes. However, the recent re-acceleration in house 
price inflation does not seem to be fully driven by a corresponding upturn in fundamentals. 
This could suggest that there is a danger some gap may be emerging between actual house 
prices  and  the  price  warranted  by  the  fundamentals.  However,  given  the  wide  range  of 
measures that different valuation methods tend to show, it is not possible to be precise about 
this. Even if there were some over-valuation in the market, this need not necessarily lead to 
a  sharp  correction.  It  could,  for  example,  ease  over  time,  by  a  combination  of  a  broad 
stabilisation of prices and continuing improvements in the fundamentals. This gradual easing 
over time continues to be our expectation. 
Borrowing  levels  have  continued  to  increase  strongly.  Residential  mortgage  lending  has 
been increasing at annual rates of about 30 per cent in the early part of 2006. The household 
sector’s debt to income ratio is now very high by international standards.  
Another  risk  relates  to  an  over  reliance  on  domestic  demand.  Personal  consumption 
expenditure picked up in 2005 after a number of years of quite modest growth, combined 
with  exceptionally  strong  investment  expenditure.  There  was,  however,  a  much  weaker 
export market performance, which needs to improve. In addition, the heavy weighting of the 
construction sector in the economy is a concern. This risk was highlighted last year in our 
Financial  Stability  Report,  which  looked  at  the  implications  of  a  sudden  correction  in  the 
construction sector. 
As I already pointed out, the economy has lost competitiveness in recent years. Given the 
already high price level in Ireland and the rising cost base, every effort should be made to 
avoid a further erosion of competitiveness. An important element in this is to ensure that our 
productivity performance improves so as to avoid further losses. 
   On the external side, the volatility in energy markets and the possibility of sharp changes in exchange 
rates  arising  from  global  imbalances  continue  to  be  the  main  risks  facing  the  economy.  Ireland’s 
dependence  on  oil  remains  higher  than  most  developed  countries,  thereby  raising  our  exposure  to 
movements in oil prices. Similarly, with 60 per cent of Irish exports going to countries outside of the 
euro area, the economy is more vulnerable to sharp movements in exchange rates than other euro 
area members.  
2 
 BIS Review 65/2006
Monetary policy and the euro area economy 
Turning  to  the  international  background  for  the  Irish  economy,  developments  have  been  broadly 
favourable.  The  global  economy  continued  its  robust  expansion  in  2005,  withstanding  most  of  the 
dampening influence of higher oil prices, and is projected to grow at a broadly similar pace in 2006. 
Closer to home, the euro area recovery has gained momentum, with growth becoming more broadly 
based and sustained in the first-half of this year. While external trade continues to provide significant 
impetus  to  euro  area  growth,  there  are  now  also  signs  of  an  improvement  in  domestic  demand. 
Business  confidence  has  strengthened  significantly  and  we  have  seen  a  welcome  recovery  in 
investment. However, progress remains slow in relation to consumer spending, though there are some 
signs of improvement. Forecasts and projections point to an improved euro area growth outlook for 
this  year  and  next  compared  with  the  past  two  years,  with  economic  growth  of  around  2  per  cent 
projected for both 2006 and 2007.  
Turning to euro area price developments, the headline rate of inflation has been above two per cent 
since the start of the year and is expected to remain above that level into 2007. Risks to outlook for 
price developments remain on the upside and relate to the potential for further increases in oil prices, 
stronger pass-through into consumer prices than expected or further increases in administered prices 
or indirect taxes. In addition, risks to the medium to longer-term outlook are also being signalled by 
strong  growth  in  the  money  supply.  In  the  light  of  the  various  risks  to  the  outlook,  the  Governing 
Council  has  increased  interest  rates  on  three  occasions,  totalling  75  basis  points,  since  last 
December.  
Looking ahead, the Governing Council has signalled that it will exercise strong vigilance to ensure that 
risks to price stability do not materialise and that inflation expectations are kept firmly anchored. As we 
have  emphasised  consistently  since  last  December,  future  interest  rate  decisions  are  not  pre-
determined and there is no pre-commitment to any future policy action - either in terms of timing or 
scale. The Governing Council always bases its actions on its latest assessment of the risks to price 
stability, taking account of the most up-to-date information and analysis of the economic and monetary 
situation and prospects. Doing this ensures that the euro area recovery, which is now widely projected 
by all the major economic forecasters, takes place in an environment of price stability. 
Financial results 
I will now briefly mention our financial results for the year, the full detail of which is contained in the 
annual  report.  In  2005,  the  Central  Bank  recorded  a  profit  of  €122  million,  compared  with  the 
equivalent figure of €107 million for the previous year. The Surplus Income paid by the Central Bank to 
the Exchequer in respect of 2005 was €109.2 million. An amount of €45 million, representing the net 
proceeds of coin issued during the year, was also transferred to the Exchequer. 
Conclusion 
To  conclude,  I  would  like  to  express  appreciation  to  the  staff  of  the  Central  Bank  and  Financial 
Regulator, for their work and commitment throughout the year. I would also like to thank the members 
of the Board of the Central Bank and Financial Services Authority of Ireland for their efforts, advice 
and diligence through another busy and challenging year. I would also like to thank the Chairman and 
Board of the Irish Financial Services Regulatory Authority for their co-operation throughout the year so 
ensuring continued excellent working arrangements between the Bank and the Financial Regulator. 
This concludes my opening remarks. My colleagues and I are now on hand to answer any questions 
you may have. 
BIS Review 65/2006 
 3
