Yiu-kwan Choi: The debt market of Hong Kong - what can we offer to 
investors? 
Keynote address by Mr Yiu-kwan Choi, Deputy Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, 
at the third Annual Asia Pacific Bond Congress, Hong Kong, 13 June 2006. 
 Mr. Shale, distinguished guest, ladies and gentlemen, 
It gives me great pleasure to speak at this year’s Asia Pacific Bond Congress. On behalf of the Hong 
Kong  Monetary  Authority,  I  would  like  to  extend  my  warmest  welcome  to  everyone  here  today, 
especially those of you who have traveled from afar to visit us. I would like also to thank Euromoney 
for organizing this excellent event, and for organizing it in Hong Kong for the third time. It is a clear 
recognition of the important role of Hong Kong - Asia's World City, in the bond markets of the Asia 
Pacific region. 
Like  many  other  financial  markets,  the  bond  markets  in  the  Asia  Pacific  region  have  recently  seen 
plenty of new developments, challenges as well as opportunities. I am glad to see that the Congress 
has rightly covered many of these latest issues, and I am sure that for those who were here yesterday 
would  have  learnt  from  my  colleague,  Ms  Julia  Leung,  about  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority’s 
efforts in enhancing regional cooperation. So today it would probably be useful for me to take a few 
minutes to share with you on what the HKMA has been doing to develop our bond market, and more 
importantly, what our market can offer to investors. 
Development of the bond market in Hong Kong 
Let me give you a quick overview of the current status of the Hong Kong dollar debt market. At the end 
of 2005, the value of outstanding Hong Kong dollar debt reached $660 billion HK dollars, equivalent to 
$85 billion US dollars, which is over 30 times the size of the market 14 years ago. The size of the HK 
dollar debt market relative to GDP also increased significantly to 48% in 2005 from 3% in 1991. In 
2005, the gross issuance of Hong Kong dollar debt reached $400 billion HK dollars, or an equivalent 
of  $51  billion  US  dollars.  Everyday,  overseas  borrowers,  financial  institutions  and  corporations 
participate actively in our market. In Asia, our market has the highest proportion of overseas issues, 
with the amount outstanding being only second to Japan and Korea. 
While we have a very well developed debt market today, one should be aware that there was virtually 
no debt market in Hong Kong before the 90s. Because of cumulative fiscal surplus, the Hong Kong 
government had not found it necessary to borrow any money in the market at that time. While this is 
good from the point of view of fiscal management, it was not conducive to debt market development, in 
the sense that we did not have a representative yield curve for the Hong Kong dollar. 
As we all know, a liquid and deep debt market is an important component of a financial centre. The 
HKMA therefore decided to develop a local debt market through a two-pronged approach, namely to 
develop  a  market  of  high  quality  Exchange  Fund  paper,  and  to  build  an  efficient  financial 
infrastructure. 
A market for exchange fund paper 
In  order  to  facilitate  the  development  of  a  Hong  Kong  dollar  debt  market,  the  HKMA  rolled  out  the 
Exchange  Fund  Bills  and  Notes  programme  in  1990.  This  initiative  has  been  very  successful  in 
creating a yield curve for Hong Kong dollar. As of today, the yield curve has been extended up to 10 
years and serves as a benchmark for debt instruments issued by other entities in the local market. 
In order to maintain a liquid market for the Exchange Fund paper, the HKMA has also put in place a 
market-making system under which market makers are obliged to quote two-way prices. Currently, 26 
banks in Hong Kong have been appointed as market makers, and tenders of Exchange Fund Bills and 
Notes of maturities between 3 months and 10 years are held regularly. 
These arrangements have been effective to help promote the liquidity of the Exchange Fund paper 
and  enhance  the  credibility  of  the  Hong  Kong  dollar  yield  curve.  Indeed,  overseas  borrowers  have 
BIS Review 56/2006 
 1
remained the largest issuers in our market, with outstanding debts reaching an equivalent of 32 billion 
US dollars at the end of 2005, from just 1.3 billion US dollars at the end of 1997. 
Financial infrastructure 
Let me now move on to another important area of our work: that is the building of an efficient financial 
infrastructure  for  the  bond  market.  Our  objective  is  to  build  a  multi-currencies  and  multi-product 
payment and settlement platform to make Hong Kong the payment and settlement hub of the region. 
We believe that a safe and efficient payment and settlement system is crucial to the development of 
the debt market. Our system will serve not only the local investors but also investors elsewhere in the 
region  to  facilitate  their  fund  transfers  and  delivery  versus  payments  when  they  buy  or  sell  debt 
instruments. 
We  have  therefore  been  working  actively  on  linkages  between  the  Central  Moneymarkets  Unit  (the 
CMU),  which  is  our  key  custodian  system  for  debt  instruments  in  Hong  Kong,  and  other  custodian 
systems  in  the  region  and  international  custodian  systems  such  as  the  Euroclear  and  Clearstream. 
These linkages have been instrumental in fostering cross-border bond trading and investment. 
With the seamless interfaces between the CMU and the Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) systems 
in  Hong  Kong  for  the  Hong  Kong  dollar,  US  dollar  and  Euro,  all  transactions  in  debt  instruments 
denominated in any of these three currencies and under the custodianship of the CMU can be settled 
in Hong Kong on a DvP basis in an efficient way. 
The recent IPO of the Bank of China Limited is probably a good example to demonstrate the efficiency 
and  robustness  of  our  HKD  RTGS  system:  being  a  settlement  system  which  typically  handles  an 
average turnover of $400 to $500 billion Hong Kong dollars a day, it saw a record high turnover of 
$1.23 trillion on 1 June when the Bank of China was listed on that day. Notwithstanding such huge 
amount of settlement, the inter-bank payments were processed smoothly on that day. 
To further develop Hong Kong into a payment and settlement hub for the region, we will continue to 
explore opportunities for linking our RTGS systems and the CMU with similar systems in the region. 
For example, the HKMA has been working with Bank Negara Malaysia for the establishment of a link 
between the Ringgit RTGS system and the US dollar RTGS system in Hong Kong. This is aimed at 
reducing  the  settlement  risk  of  Ringgit/US  dollar  foreign  exchange  transactions  through  PvP 
settlement in the Asian time zone. The link is expected to go live by the end of 2006. We are exploring 
similar linkages with other Asian central banks. 
Bond Price Bulletin 
One of the factors affecting secondary market activities in the bond market is the lack of information on 
bond  prices.  To  help  overcome  this  problem,  the  HKMA  launched  the  Bond  Price  Bulletin  at  the 
beginning  of 2006.  The  bulletin  provides  investors with  convenient  on-line  access  to  information  on 
bond products and bond prices provided by eight major banks in Hong Kong. Indicative bid/offer prices 
of over 200 bonds of different currencies issued by both public and private sector entities are provided 
by the eight contributing banks. 
Outlook 
Let me now turn to talk about the outlook of our debt market. 
Notwithstanding  the  achievements  we  have  made  so  far  in  developing  our  debt  market,  we  fully 
appreciate that there is nothing to be complacent and there are still many challenges facing us. The 
HKMA has therefore embarked on a review of our debt market development with a view to identifying 
measures which can be adopted to help market development. 
On  the  demand  side,  everybody  knows  that  the  Mainland  of  China  is  enjoying  a  rapid  economic 
growth  and  business  opportunities  are  mushrooming.  The  recent  announcement  by  the  Mainland 
authorities of measures to liberalise portfolio investment outflows has marked the emergence of such 
kind of opportunity for Hong Kong. Under these new rules, each Chinese citizen is allowed, among 
other things, to invest in fixed income securities overseas within certain limits. We expect that this will 
help boost the demand for fixed income securities although we do not know exactly how much such 
investment outflows will be approved by the Mainland authorities in the initial years. 
2 
  BIS Review 56/2006
Given  our  experience  and  achievements  in  financial  services  and  the  fact  that  we  are  the  only 
international  financial  centre  of  China,  I  am  sure  that  Hong  Kong  is  well  positioned  to  grasp  the 
opportunity. 
Apart  from  the  initiatives  and  developments  I  just  mentioned,  I  believe  that  it  would  be  useful  to 
highlight a few fundamental factors which make Hong Kong an ideal place for the bond market. The 
first is our free capital mobility. The absence of capital controls means that there are no restrictions on 
foreign enterprises using our capital markets to raise funds. Foreign investors can also freely invest in 
our  markets  and  easily  remit  the  proceeds  back  home.  Secondly,  our  well-developed  financial 
markets, including derivative markets, would allow issuers and investors to manage any interest rate 
risk or exchange rate risk effectively. Thirdly, Hong Kong has a critical mass of financial institutions 
which  stand  ready  to  support  issuers  to  tap  the  capital  markets.  Hong  Kong  is  also  an  asset 
management centre thus providing a large investor base for debt instruments. Last but not least, the 
absence of capital gains tax and interest withholding tax would also favour bond market development. 
Our exceptional geographical, cultural and language advantages also make Hong Kong an ideal place 
to link up the Mainland of China with the rest of world. 
On our part, the HKMA will continue to play a leading role in enhancing the development of the debt 
market in Hong Kong, by removing market frictions and unnecessary restrictions, and by keeping up 
with the best practices adopted in other well-developed markets. 
Lastly, I would like to thank Euromoney again for inviting me to speak. I look forward to the continued 
cooperation with our partners on the healthy development of the bond market in this region. Thank 
you. 
BIS Review 56/2006 
 3
