T T Mboweni: Recent developments in the global and domestic financial 
markets 
Address by Mr T T Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the Microsoft Senior 
Information Technology Officer Summit, George, 18 May 2006. 
 1. Introduction 
Ladies and Gentlemen, thank you for the invitation as keynote speaker at this event in one of the most 
beautiful parts of our country. Please allow me also to congratulate you on the selection of your theme 
for this year, “Pathways to Growth”, which I think is most appropriate in the light of the current state of 
the domestic and global economy.  
Indeed,  it  is  a  pleasure  to  deliver  a  speech  focussing  on  recent  economic  and  financial  market 
developments in the current environment. In your sector, no one needs to remind you of the painful 
experience when the Nasdaq Composite Index lost almost 70 per cent of its value between 2000 and 
2002.  Giving  a  speech  of  this  nature  at  that  time  would  have  been  considerably  more  difficult. 
Fortunately, those times are now well past, and the picture today is a much rosier one. 
2. Developments in the world economy and financial markets 
The Ministers of Finance and central bank governors of the Group of Seven industrialised countries 
issued a statement, after their most recent meeting on 21 April 2006, in which they confirmed that the 
strong  global  economic  expansion  continues  into  its  fourth  year  and  that  the  outlook  remains 
favourable. Being then on a “pathway to growth”, we should not miss this opportunity to take a step 
back and assess some of the recent developments in international and domestic financial markets. 
World output has grown by 5,3 per cent in 2004 and by 4,8 per cent in 2005, and is forecast to remain 
close to the 5,0 per cent level over the next two years, according to the IMF’s latest World Economic 
Outlook. Growth in emerging markets has been particularly strong, staying well above 7,0 per cent in 
2004 and 2005, and forecast to remain in that region over the next two years. Sub-Saharan Africa, 
which has historically suffered from low or even negative growth rates, managed to grow by close to 
6,0 per cent. Generally, these growth numbers have exceeded expectations. 
One  of  the  clerks  working  in  the  SA  Reserve  Bank  has  over  the  past  few  years  qualified  herself 
through  part-time  study  as  an  Advocate  of  the  High  Court  of  South  Africa  under  very  difficult 
circumstances, whilst at the same time raising two small children. She quoted Einstein as saying that: 
“In the middle of difficulty lies opportunity”. To a large extent this wisdom can be applied to the world 
economy and financial markets. There are numerous examples of how it sometimes takes a disaster 
or a crisis for a structural improvement to occur. It was only after the Asian crises of the late 1990s that 
Asian  emerging  markets  started 
their 
macroeconomic fundamentals. Today, emerging markets are the net savers of the world, and reap the 
good results of their macroeconomic discipline in the form of low risk premiums and borrowing rates, 
ratings upgrades, increased foreign investment and accelerated growth rates. 
On  a  micro  level,  companies  have  behaved  in  much  the  same  way.  After  having  been  plagued  by 
accounting scandals, downgrades to “junk” status, section 11 classifications and some verging on the 
edge  of  bankruptcy,  they  have  pulled  themselves  together.  Corporations  have  deleveraged  their 
balance  sheets  and  became  net  savers,  accounting  standards  have  improved  and  corporate 
governance  has  become  a  major  focus  area.  In  an  environment  of  strong  economic  growth,  this 
should definitely put them on a ‘pathway to higher growth’. Consistent with the strength of corporate 
profits,  improved  balance  sheets  and  diminishing  excess  capacity,  investment  is  expected  to  be 
strong, contributing to renewed growth. 
A positive development in the global economy that tentatively seems to be emerging is that growth is 
becoming more balanced and broad-based. In 2004, the US growth rate was double that of Europe 
and Japan. Although the US remains the main engine of growth among the industrialised countries, 
the gap in growth rates is expected to narrow, with US growth moderating from 4,2 per cent in 2004 to 
3,4  per  cent  in  2006,  European  growth  remaining  around  2,0  per  cent  and  Japanese  growth 
accelerating from 2,3 per cent in 2004 to 2,8 per cent in 2006. Developing Asia is also likely to remain 
foreign  exchange  reserves  and  strengthen 
to  build 
BIS Review 42/2006 
 1
an engine of growth, with output expected to increase by 8,2 per cent in 2006, and that of China alone 
by 9,5 per cent. 
Another  remarkable  thing  about  the  current  cycle  of  strong  global  growth  is  that  it  has  been  taking 
place whilst oil prices have been hovering between USD60 and USD75 per barrel for some time now – 
levels that would have been almost unthinkable a few years ago and which would have caused market 
analysts to significantly revise down their growth forecasts. Perhaps more surprising is that high oil 
prices  do  not  seem  to  have  filtered  through  to  other  prices  to  the  extent  that  might  have  been 
anticipated.  The  so-called  “core  inflation”,  which  excludes  energy  and  other  volatile  prices,  remains 
subdued in most countries.  
A third factor that distinguishes growth in the current and next few years from previous years is that, 
while the period of expansion started in an environment of highly accommodative monetary conditions 
worldwide, it (growth) is now forecast to continue in an environment of higher interest rates. The US 
Fed has increased the fed funds target rate to its current level of 5,0 per cent, from 1,0 per cent at the 
start of the tightening cycle, and the general expectation is that it might be close to its peak. The ECB 
started to increase rates in December 2005 with further increases expected, and market expectations 
are that the Bank of Japan would follow suit later in the year, having ended their policy of quantitative 
easing  (pumping  liquidity  into  the  banking  system)  in  March  2006.  Nevertheless,  global  financial 
market  conditions  remain  favourable,  characterised  by  unusually  low  risk  premiums  and  volatility. 
Despite monetary policy tightening, long-term rates remain below average. The relatively flat US yield 
curve is a “conundrum” which even Mr Greenspan could not solve before going into retirement!  
Given this favourable environment, equity prices have risen significantly. Since the beginning of 2003 
until the end of April 2006, the Dow Jones has risen by 35 per cent, the Nasdaq by 77 per cent, the 
German Dax by no less that 117 per cent and the Japanese Nikkei 225 by 104 per cent. In this bull 
run,  equity  markets  experienced  an  unprecedented  flurry  of  activity  with  regard  to  mergers  and 
acquisitions, which further boosted investor sentiment. (Some retracement in equity prices occurred in 
the first part of May 2006 – let us hope that it is temporary and that share prices will continue to be 
supported by positive economic fundamentals.) 
Low bond yields in industrial countries caused funds to flow into alternative investment opportunities 
and into emerging markets. Despite a recent warning by the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) 
in  its  quarterly  bulletin  that  emerging-market  assets  might  be  becoming  overvalued,  investors 
continued to favour these assets. In South Africa, non-residents increased their holdings of domestic 
bonds and equities by a net amount of R48,4 billion in 2005, and by a further R49 billion in the year to 
the end of April 2006. Some sell-off in emerging-market assets occurred during May 2006, due partly 
to  three  factors:  seasonal  position  squaring  ahead  of  the  holidays  in  the  northern  hemisphere; 
developments  in  specific  emerging  markets;  and  higher  returns  now  being  possible  in  developed 
markets. It is too soon to judge the possible extent and effects of this sell-off – hopefully it would not 
disrupt financial markets in affected countries. 
However,  having  painted  such  a  rosy  picture,  one  cannot  help  but  also  highlight  the  risks  and 
uncertainties  that  currently  face  the  world  economy  and  financial  markets.  At  the  forefront  of 
everyone’s minds is most definitely the behaviour of the oil market. It remains to be seen for how long 
the  general  level  of  inflation  can  withstand  the  current  high  oil  prices,  and  recent  comments  by 
prominent central bankers the world over seem to point to increased concern about the impact of oil 
on  inflation,  going  forward.  South  Africa  is  no  exception,  and  in  the  most  recent  statement  of  the 
Monetary Policy Committee of the SA Reserve Bank, rising international oil prices were once again 
highlighted as a key risk for inflation. The effects of the very high oil prices are likely to increase if 
inflationary expectations start to react. 
Secondly, the world remains plagued by geopolitical uncertainties in the Middle East and other parts of 
the world. Partly as a result of these tensions, combined with inflationary concerns starting to increase, 
the gold price has recently surpassed a series of 25-year highs, trading above USD730 per fine ounce 
early  in  May  2006  before  retracing  to  just  below  USD700.  There  are  some  in  the  market  whose 
forecast is that the gold price might test the USD1000 per ounce level in the near term.  
A  third  risk  to  the  global  economy  is  substantial  further  increases  in  interest  rates.  Despite  various 
degrees  of  monetary  policy  tightening  in  industrial  countries  during  the  past  two  years,  monetary 
conditions can still be described as relatively accommodative. Any exogenous or endogenous factors 
that could lead to a sharper increase in rates could well threaten the strength of the global economy. 
In such circumstances, volatility and risk premiums are likely to pick up. 
2 
 BIS Review 42/2006
A  fourth  concern  that  again  surfaced  recently  was  the  issue  of  rising  global  imbalances,  and  in 
particular the widening current account deficit in the US, combined with significant surpluses in most of 
the Asian countries, in particular China. The fact that the US has to date found it relatively easy to 
finance  the  current  account  deficit  through  capital  inflows  has  to  some  extent  obscured  the  risks 
associated with this imbalance. However, the US current account deficit, which according to the latest 
numbers amounted to 6,5 per cent of US GDP, cannot keep growing indefinitely. One can only hope 
that  the  inevitable  adjustments  in  global  imbalances  will  occur  in  a  controlled  and  synchronised 
manner  and  that  it  will  not  lead  to  increased  protectionism.  Such  an  adjustment  would  require  the 
participation of all regions and countries. The IMF was mandated at the recent April meetings to focus 
on the issue of resolving these global imbalances (the so-called multilateral survey during the Article 
IV country consultations). 
As  a  necessary  step  to  start  addressing  global  imbalances,  the  most  keenly  awaited  event  in  the 
currency markets finally came to pass in July 2005 - the revaluation of the Chinese renminbi (RMB) 
when the People's Bank of China (PBoC) finally abandoned its decade long peg of the RMB, placing it 
under a managed float against an un-specified basket of currencies. Subsequently, more steps were 
taken by the PboC to liberalise the foreign exchange market, such as: announcing the currencies in 
the basket, widening the daily band of the renminbi against non-dollar currencies, abandoning quotas 
of foreign currency for domestic companies to invest abroad and allowing more instruments to be used 
in the foreign exchange market.  
3. Developments in South Africa  
Let me then briefly turn to developments in our own economy.  
Against the background of a growing global economy, the South African economy has continued to 
grow at a healthy pace since 2004, with the GDP growth rate of 4,9 per cent in 2005 exceeding the 4,5 
per  cent  registered  the  year  before.  Continued  sound  fiscal  and  monetary  policies  have  resulted  in 
good budgetary and inflation outcomes. CPIX inflation has been within the target range of between 3 
and 6 per cent for 31 months. The outlook for inflation continues to be generally favourable, with CPIX 
inflation  expected  to  remain  inside  the  target  range  until  the  end  of  the  forecast  period  in  2008, 
although risks and challenges remain. Vigilance is, therefore, required as is always the case in these 
matters.  
Financial markets have also performed well. Yields on domestic government bonds declined to record 
lows in February 2006, and have only moderately started to increase since then. The All-share index 
of the JSE reached record highs in April 2006, and has already gained around 18 per cent in the year 
to the end of April, before retracing somewhat in May, following trends in the global markets and lower 
commodity  prices.  It  is  particularly  encouraging  that  share  prices  performed  so  well  despite  the 
resilience of the exchange rate. This is true even for sectors that have historically been very sensitive 
to  exchange  rate  fluctuations.  Part  of  this  buoyancy  is,  of  course,  attributable  to  high  commodity 
prices.  However,  in  the  Bank,  we  like  to  see  this  also  as  a  sign  that,  in  general,  companies  have 
adapted to a relatively robust exchange rate. 
As for developments in the South African foreign exchange markets, the exchange rate of the rand 
remains resilient and liquidity remains high relative to other emerging markets, despite the retracement 
in recent days. We have seen the average net daily turnover (in respect of transactions involving the 
rand) increase from around USD8bn in 2004 to just below USD10bn in 2005. In addition, the volatility 
of the ZAR exchange rate has also subsided. From the most recent peak of around 30 per cent and 25 
per cent in January 2004, the one-month historical volatility and one-month implied volatility were at a 
level around 10 and 12 per cent, respectively, in March 2006. 
It is this positive environment that has attracted substantial investment flows into South Africa, allowing 
the central bank to build up the official gross foreign exchange reserves from USD8,0 billion in January 
2004 to slightly more than USD23 billion in April 2006. It is partly owing to this increase in the reserves 
in recent times that the country was awarded credit ratings upgrades by all three rating agencies in 
2005, to BBB+ with a stable outlook. This has also contributed to a decline in sovereign risk spreads. 
A more stable currency is critical to an attractive investment environment. Exchange rate volatility has 
in the past made the rand vulnerable to speculation and discouraged direct investments. The recent 
build up in reserves, together with some structural impediments that have now been dealt with (e.g. 
the Net Open Foreign Currency Position), should over time add to the stability we have already seen 
and reduce uncertainty for both domestic as well as non-resident long-term investors. 
BIS Review 42/2006 
 3
The sell-off in emerging-market assets and currencies during the first part of May 2006, and the effect 
that it had on financial markets and exchange rates, including our own, has once again reminded us of 
the vulnerability of emerging-market economies to a sudden and sharp change in sentiment by non-
resident  investors.  In  the  case  of  South  Africa,  the  effects  could  be  even  greater,  against  the 
background  of  a  current-account  deficit  of  around  4,5  per  cent  of  GDP.  In  the  past,  sell-offs  of 
emerging-market assets had been triggered by a wide array of events, which were infrequently related 
to actual developments in the domestic economy. 
Conclusion 
Despite these risks, let me conclude by reiterating that the world and South Africa seems to be well set 
on a “pathway to growth”. It is conferences such as this one that are likely to sustain this growth. It is 
also conferences such as this one that will contribute to overcoming obstacles, reducing uncertainty 
and managing risks. Let us not be discouraged by those, but use a position of relative strength to plan 
for the future and be mindful of the risks that undoubtedly exist. 
Thank you for your attention.  
4 
 BIS Review 42/2006
