Paul A Acquah: Overview of the economy in Ghana  
Opening remarks by Dr Paul A Acquah, Governor of the Bank of Ghana, at the Consultative Group 
Meeting, Accra, 21 June 2006. 
 The economy is in its fifth year of deepening macroeconomic stability. Indeed, it is significant that the 
Fund staff have characterized it as a ‘mature stabilizer’. And the logical policy thrust is to extend this 
record of economic performance in the coming years and to accelerate growth. 
It  is  fair  to  say  that  this  round  of  discussions  of  the  Consultative  Group  is  taking  place  against  the 
backdrop  of significantly  changed  economic  outlook,  reflecting strong  fundamentals  underpinned  by 
anti-inflation  focus  of  monetary  policy  and  fiscal  consolidation  over  the  past  five  years.  There  is 
evidence  that  the  private  sector  is  responding  positively.  Banks  are  restructuring  their  portfolios  to 
increase lending to the private sector; with inflation expectations subdued, business planning horizons 
are being stretched out and the rising capital inflows suggest an increasing investor appetite for risk in 
the domestic market. The economy seems to be at the cusp of developing in the pattern of emerging 
market economies. 
Looking ahead, monetary policy and prudential supervision, along with the accompanying fiscal policy 
and public expenditure management, are being formulated with a commitment to maintaining financial 
stability to support an accelerated growth that would be broad based. And this should lock in hard-won 
economic gains and preserve domestic and external debt sustainability, secure good sovereign credit 
ratings, and the confidence of the markets and development partners. 
To  develop  an  economic  system  for  an  efficient  allocation  of  resources,  there  are  proposed 
modifications to the legal and regulatory framework governing the financial system and the domestic 
money  and  capital  markets.  Much  of  the  necessary  payments systems  infrastructure  are  already  in 
place,  which  will  serve  to  develop  efficient  financial  services  industry  and  markets,  which  is  key  in 
emerging market economies. These structural changes will help to maintain the health and stability of 
the financial system. They will also improve the transmission mechanism of monetary policy actions 
(e.g. the speed with which banks and the markets react to interest rate movements). 
To be specific, let me indicate some of the legislation that will hopefully pass through Parliament this 
year. These have major significance for developing a market for financial services and an economy 
well integrated into the global market. These include, the Foreign Exchange Bill, which will give a de 
jure effect and recognition to the liberal external trade and payments regime operating in the country 
and remove the documentation and bureaucratic requirements associated with the Exchange Control 
Act 1961 (Act 71). The second is the Credit Reporting Bill that would mitigate a good deal of the credit 
risks associated with lack of information on borrowers and that is an important factor in credit defaults 
and non-performing loans. The third is the Central Depository System Bill, which ensures certainty and 
safety of title to equities and government debt instruments – it should foster the development of the 
stock market. And finally, the Anti-Money Laundering Bill, which will protect the integrity of the financial 
system. 
I have dwelled on the policy commitment to financial stability and efficient domestic capital markets for 
good  reasons.  We  have  seen  the  economy  grow  in  resilience.  We  have  used  the  strong  external 
current  account  position  and  capital  flows,  including  debt  relief  under  HIPC  initiative,  to  fund  a 
substantial build-up of reserves. This provides cushion against rising oil prices and other shocks. The 
significant reductions in the stock of external debt and the domestic public debt over the last few years 
have improved the savings-investment and growth dynamics and there are signs of growing investor 
interest  in  taking  risks  in  the  domestic  market.  We  are  therefore  making  these  changes  to  set  the 
stage for the domestic capital market to play a central role in resource intermediation and the growth 
process. 
On  the  side  of  fiscal  policy,  the  objective  of  accelerating  growth  to  high  and  sustainable  levels 
demands that the budget moves beyond the low consolidation threshold of managing tight cashflows 
and  liquidity,  towards  levels  where  public  expenditure  policy  provides  the  vehicle  for  growth-critical 
investments  to  create  synergies  with  the  private  sector  to  lead  the  growth  process.  Obviously, 
underlying  macroeconomic  policy  should  continue  to  give  confidence  to  the  markets  that  the  fiscal 
BIS Review 75/2006 
 1
space  created  through  consolidation  and  debt  relief  will  be  used  productively  without  risks  to 
macroeconomic stability. 
The Government’s investment strategy establishes the way forward. It identifies a huge infrastructure 
deficit which must be addressed to reduce barriers and other bottlenecks to growth, while pulling on all 
the levers to develop the productive capacity of the economy.  
Distinguished  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  a  comprehensive  investment  plan  has  been  put  together  to 
move forward the public sector growth agenda under the GPRS II. The plan requires fresh resources 
to  scale  up  investments.  This  is  the  core  of  the  growth  and  poverty  reduction  agenda  which 
development partners will be considering for support at this meeting. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 75/2006
