Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Building a strong foundation for wealth creation 
Remarks by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, at the launch of 
Wealth Magazine, Makati Golf Club, Makati City, 20 June 2006.  
 Chairman  Gerry  Geronimo,  President  Rudy  Romero,  Editor-in-Chief  Dulce  Maria  Saret,  respected 
journalist Mr. Willie Ng, other staff members of Wealth magazine, friends, special guests.  
When Rudy told me about the launching of this magazine on business and the economy, I thought… 
finally, here is a group that immediately communicates what it aspires to achieve: wealth.  
Wealth for its readers, for itself and for its country.  
Insofar  as  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  is  concerned,  your  timing  is  perfect.  In  observance  of 
“National Savings Week” in the first week of July, the Bangko Sentral is launching with the Department 
of Education a campaign to develop the habit of saving regularly among school children. 
This  includes  teaching  them  to  respect  coins  as  currency  of  value….and  incorporating  money 
management in the curriculum of elementary students.  The program includes a trainors’ training so 
that teachers can be effective channels for financial literacy.  
In other words, we are going to teach elementary students the foundation for wealth creation: that of 
saving regularly. 
This is particularly important in the light of a survey conducted two years ago, indicating that less than 
5% of children save money regularly. What is disturbing is that these children prioritize spending for 
loads or texts on their cell phones, over saving!  
We  have  to  address  this;  otherwise,  we  will  be  raising  a  new  generation  of  deficit  spenders,  the 
opposite of wealth creators.   
I am therefore looking forward to Wealth Magazine as a parallel medium for adults to learn from…for 
developing, growing and protecting one’s wealth. 
If economic and financial literacy are your subjects, to us at the BSP, these are priority advocacies. 
As our partners, we will support you regularly with data requirements to help inform and guide your 
readers on what is really happening in our economy in general and in business in particular. 
And  so,  I  wish  Wealth  Magazine  and  all  the  people  behind  it,  a  truly  successful,  meaningful  and 
inspiring first 100 years. 
Cheers!  
 
BIS Review 69/2006 
 1
