Arnold Schilder: Banks and the compliance challenge 
Speech by Professor Arnold Schilder, Chairman of the BCBS Accounting Task Force and Executive 
Director of the Governing Board of the Netherlands Bank, at the Asian Banker Summit, Bangkok, 16 
March 2006. 
 Compliance  risk  is  becoming  one  of  the  major  risks  banks  are  facing.  The  increasing  globalization, 
issues  with  the  corporate  governance  of  complex  institutions,  changing  laws  and  regulations,  the 
understanding of what constitutes sound risk management, and the  continuous evolution of financial 
products create complex situations for banks that operate on a cross border basis. One may wonder 
whether  the  compliance  framework  in  place  is  robust  enough  to  effectively  manage  these  rapidly 
changing factors. Creating a “best in class” compliance framework seems to be the best way forward. 
The  development  and  implementation  of  such  framework  might  well  be  a  challenge  equal  to  the 
implementation of Basel II. 
Introduction 
The subject of my speech is the challenges that banks face today with respect to compliance. You 
may wonder - why? 
The  main  reason  for  delivering  a  speech  about  this  topic  is  that  we  have  all  recently  seen  banks 
involved in compliance related problems. Riggs Bank acts as a well known example of such problems. 
In  July  2004,  the  U.S.  Senate  Permanent  Subcommittee  on  Investigations  of  the  Committee  on 
Governmental Affairs published a report on Riggs Bank. The evidence reviewed by the Subcommittee 
staff  establishes  that,  since  at  least  1997,  Riggs  Bank  had  disregarded  its  anti-money  laundering 
obligations,  maintained  a  dysfunctional  anti-money  laundering  programs  and  allowed  or,  at  times, 
actively  facilitated  suspicious  financial  activity1.  In  a  more  recent  case  De  Nederlandsche  Bank, 
together  with  the  relevant  regulators  in  the  United  States,  issued  a  Cease  and  Desist  order  with 
respect to ABN AMRO Bank. The reason for ordering this Order had to do with compliance issues. 
The problems ABN AMRO was faced with, albeit less far-reaching then those at Riggs Bank, act as 
another example of compliance related deficiencies. 
Another  reason  for  this  speech  can  be  found  in  the  publication  of  the  paper  ‘Compliance  and  the 
compliance function in banks’ published by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) in 
April 2005. In the related Press Release of 29 April 2005, BCBS Chairman Caruana said: “Compliance 
has  emerged  as  a  distinct  branch  of  risk  management  within  the  banking  system2.”  So  it  is  fully 
appropriate and timely to address this important topic in this Conference’s broader context of sound 
risk  management  in  banks.  Compliance  risk  is  quickly  becoming  one  of  the  major  risks  banks  are 
facing.  So  the  efforts  banks  should  undertake  concerning  compliance,  may  become  comparable  in 
size and importance to the endeavours of banks in relation to the implementation of the new Basel II 
Capital Accord. 
However, unlike the various risks discussed by the new Capital Accord, holding additional capital to 
‘cover’ compliance risks will not act as a mitigating factor. Other efforts are needed. 
During the first part of this speech I will briefly discuss what should be understood under compliance. 
Then I will go more in depth on the nature of the compliance related problems that not only banks, but 
the  entire  financial  world  is  encountering.  Subsequently,  a  closer  look  at  what  compliance  really 
implies and what the international standard-setting bodies perceive as compliance. I will then discuss 
some issues involved in the ABN AMRO case and lessons learned. I will conclude with some broader 
perspectives on how to approach the challenges ahead. 
                                                      
1   Case  study  involving  Riggs  Bank,  United  States  Senate,  Permanent  Subcommittee  on  Investigations,  Committee  on 
Governmental Affairs, released on 15 July 2004, page 2. 
2   Press release of 29 April 2005, www.bis.org/press/p050429.htm
BIS Review 20/2006 
 1
Scope and definition of compliance 
The notion of ‘compliance’ literally means ‘obedience’ or ‘dutifulness’. It has a broad scope. As such it 
is  known  to  have  various  interpretations.  To  avoid  any  misunderstandings  during  my  speech,  I  will 
provide you with the definition used by the Basel Committee. 
In its Compliance function paper, the Committee has defined compliance risk as being “the risk of legal 
or regulatory sanctions, material financial loss, or loss to reputation a bank may suffer as a result of its 
failure  to  comply  with  laws,  regulations,  rules,  related  self-regulatory  organization  standards,  and 
codes  of  conduct  applicable  to  its  banking  activities”3.  Hence,  compliance  generally  covers  matters 
such  as  observing  proper  standards  of  market  conduct,  managing  conflicts  of  interest  and  treating 
customers fairly. Also, compliance typically includes specific areas such as the prevention of money 
laundering and terrorist financing, and may extend to tax laws that are relevant to the structuring of 
banking  products  or  customer  advice4.  In  my  opinion,  the  compliance  function  should  protect  the 
institution against unlawful behaviour and strengthen its ethical consciousness.  
Drivers of compliance related problems 
As supervisors we provide frameworks and guidance for the financial sector to facilitate the functioning 
of the financial world - although I am aware that our efforts may not always be perceived as such by 
the industry. In the end, however, the industry and supervisors serve the same goal, which is to create 
a  stable and prosperous  financial  industry  worldwide.  It  is  essential  that clients  are confident  in  the 
solidity  of  financial  institutions  and  that  they  are  assured  that  their  salaries  paid  into  their  bank 
accounts  are  safe.  So,  the  industry  as  well  as  standard-setting  bodies  should  always  reflect  on 
irregularities  and  consider  whether  the  current  risk  control  framework  in  place  is  still  adequate  and 
warrants stability. By adequate I mean that the framework should be effective for the industry as well 
as for the supervisory community. It is therefore essential to consider the possible underlying drivers of 
recent compliance related irregularities. 
If we look at the financial world of today, one of the greatest challenges is the rapid globalization of the 
world  economy.  New  economies  such  as  China  and  India  are  emerging,  and  are  rapidly  attracting 
investors and financial institutions. This globalization does not only take place in a traditional way, i.e. 
through businesses´ presence in the countries concerned. 
What I personally find fascinating is the current trend with regard to outsourcing, offshoring and ‘smart 
sourcing’. Not too long ago, I myself observed how service providers in India even play along with the 
different time zones their customers are located in by tailoring work shifts of their employees to these 
time zones. 
A  first  complication  that  globally  operating  financial  institutions  are  facing  as  a  consequence  of  the 
globalization,  relates  to  corporate  governance,  and  especially  head  office  oversight.  Of  course,  a 
board  of  directors  should  approve  and  oversee  the  bank’s  strategic  objectives,  and  set  a  desired 
compliance  culture.  Also,  the  board  should  ensure  the  institution  has  adequate  policies  and 
procedures to ensure head office oversight of the activities carried out by the various business lines. 
However, given the increasing complexity of ‘cross border’ institutions, this sounds easier than it is. 
The  board  should ensure  that  adequate  controls  are  in  place  to  oversee  the  decisions made  by  its 
senior management, and to ensure that the entire organisation acts in line with the set objectives, and 
the  desired  compliance  culture.  This  raises  all  kinds  of  organisational  and  managerial  questions, 
varying from the amount of autonomy that the business lines should have, to issues with regard to 
control frameworks and reporting lines. There is no easy answer. 
Secondly,  financial  institutions  have  to  make  sure  that  they  comply  with  applicable  laws  and 
regulations in the jurisdictions where they operate. As a result of the increasing globalization, financial 
institutions nowadays have to make sure that they are compliant with laws that have extraterritorial 
effects. These different legal requirements pose a challenge for institutions operating cross border. 
Another  challenge  is  that  our  understanding  of  what  constitutes  sound  operational  management  is 
continuously changing. What we all understood to be sound operational management five years ago 
                                                      
3   Compliance and the compliance function in banks, Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, April 2005, paragraph 3. 
4   Compliance and the compliance function in banks, Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, April 2005, paragraph 4. 
2 
 BIS Review 20/2006
no  longer  applies.  The  recent  best  practices  papers  produced  by  the  Basel  Committee  sustain  the 
view that the understanding of adequate operational management is rapidly changing5. The number of 
standards  and  regulations  that  banks  have  to  adhere  to,  is  tremendous  and  not  by  definition  in 
accordance with how banks in practice have been conducting their businesses. 
The  development  of  new  products  and  the  increasing  complexity  of  the  products  being  offered  by 
financial institutions, are making life even more difficult. The specific risks of these complex products 
and  their  global  distribution,  should  be  analyzed  by  banks  and  be  included  in  their  global  risk 
management framework. Given the ongoing evolution of the financial markets in Asia, it is essential for 
your institutions, like ours, to analyze the compliance risks that relate to the financial products sold by 
them, especially since these products will continue to evolve. 
The  increasing  globalization,  issues  with  the  corporate  governance  of  complex  institutions,  the 
continuously  changing  understanding  of  what  constitutes  sound  operational  management,  changing 
laws and regulations, as well as the ongoing evolution of products - combined with a determination 
with  governments  and  regulators  to  fight  money  laundering,  terrorist  financing  and  other  illegal 
financial  transactions  -  all  create  complex  situations  for  banks  that  operate  cross  border.  The 
unavoidable  conclusion  is  that  banks  need  to  address  these  compliance  challenges  in  their  risk 
management programs on a global basis, and that the most stringent requirement quickly becomes 
the benchmark. 
When reflecting on these challenges, one may wonder whether the compliance framework in place is 
robust  enough  to  effectively  manage  the  challenges  and  risks  that  financial  institutions  face.  What, 
then, are the latest developments concerning such compliance framework? 
Closer look at compliance 
During the last couple of years, various international standard-setting bodies have published papers 
on compliance related issues. For instance, as a response to the increasingly sophisticated money-
laundering techniques the Financial Action Task Force has revised its recommendations in 2003. Also, 
the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision published a paper on customer due diligence in 2001 
and  the  Consolidated  Know  Your  Customer  paper  in  20046.  The  cause  for  these  papers  was  that 
supervisors  around  the  world  were  increasingly  recognizing  the  importance  for  banks  to  have 
adequate  controls  and  procedures  in  place  so  that  they  know  the  customers  who  they  are  dealing 
with.  Also,  the  Basel  Committee  published  a  paper  on  the  compliance  organization  and  the 
compliance function in 2005. This paper provides guidance on embedding a compliance organization 
within credit institutions. 
The compliance definition used by the Basel Committee considers the sanctions, or loss to reputation, 
that an institution may suffer as a result of failure to comply with laws, regulations and standards. As 
the laws, regulations and standards are continuously changing, compliance becomes a moving target. 
The question that arises from this observation is that one should continuously ask oneself: “how can I 
be sure that my organization is compliant”? The changes occur at such a high-speed that one may 
well be “compliant” today but no longer so tomorrow. Today’s challenges are tomorrow’s history. 
The Compliance function paper emphasizes that compliance starts at the top. Compliance will be most 
effective - if not, will only be effective - in a corporate culture that emphasizes standards of honesty 
and integrity. The board of directors and senior management should lead by example. The tone at the 
top  is  vital  for  a  culture  of  awareness.  The  board  of  directors  is  responsible  for  overseeing  the 
management of the bank’s compliance risk. To this end, the board or a committee of the board should 
at least once a year assess the extent to which the bank is managing its compliance risk effectively7. 
Having  said  this,  compliance  requires  continuous  attention  of  the  board  of  directors  and  senior 
management; its responsibilities are not limited to the yearly assessment. Compliance implies a great 
                                                      
5   E.g. papers published by the Basel Committee on the internal audit function, compliance function, operational risk and (very 
recently) corporate governance. 
6   Customer  due  diligence  for  banks,  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  October  2001,  Consolidated  KYC  Risk 
Management, Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, October 2004. 
7   Compliance and the compliance function in banks, Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, April 2005, paragraph 14 et 
seq. 
BIS Review 20/2006 
 3
involvement of the board of directors, especially since it is widely accepted that the board is ultimately 
responsible for the operations and soundness of a bank8. 
Without  disclaiming  the  ultimate  responsibilities  of  the  board  of  directors,  the  responsibility  for  the 
effective management of the bank’s compliance risk resides with the bank’s senior management. One 
of the most important responsibilities of senior management with regard to compliance is to make sure 
that the main compliance risk issues an institution is facing, are identified and assessed on an annual 
basis.  Subsequently,  senior  management  -  with  the  assistance  of  the  compliance  function  -  has  to 
ensure  that  plans  are  prepared  to  manage  these  risks.  Such  plans  should  address  any  shortfalls 
(policy, procedures, implementation or execution) related to how effectively existing compliance risks 
have been managed, as well as the need for any additional policies or procedures do deal with new 
compliance  risks  identified  as  a  result  of  the  annual  compliance  risk  assessment9.  This  risk 
assessment,  together  with  the  subsequent  introduction  of  improvements  to  the  control  framework, 
form an essential step in the ongoing process to ensure adequate control of the risks banks are faced 
with. 
Aside  from  the  responsibilities  of  the  board  of  directors  and  senior  management,  the  paper  also 
mentions principles concerning the status and responsibilities of the compliance function. It is essential 
that the compliance function has a formal status within a bank. This in order to give the compliance 
function  the  appropriate  standing,  authority,  and  independence10.  The  responsibilities  of  the 
compliance function should be to assist senior management in managing effectively the compliance 
risks faced by the bank. Specifically this means that the compliance function should: 
•  advise senior management; 
•  provide guidance and education to employees on compliance issues;  
• 
•  monitor and test compliance and report the findings through the reporting line in accordance 
identify, measure and assess compliance risks; and  
with the bank’s internal risk management procedures.  
Once  more,  I  would  like  to  stress  the  importance  of  timely  identification,  measurement  and 
assessment  of  compliance  risks.  Citing  the  Compliance  function  paper  “the  compliance  function 
should, on a pro-active basis, identify, document and assess the compliance risks associated with the 
bank’s  business  activities,  including  the  development  of  new  products  and  business  practices,  the 
proposed establishment of new types of business or customer relationship, or material changed in the 
nature  of  such  relationships”.  The  paper  continues  by  stating  that  the  compliance  function  should 
consider  ways  to  measure  compliance  risk  (e.g.  by  using  performance  indicators)  and  use  such 
measurements to enhance compliance risk assessment. It should assess the appropriateness of the 
bank’s  compliance  procedures  and  guidelines,  promptly  follow  up  any  identified  deficiencies  and 
formulate proposals for amendments11. Institutions are expected to tailor their control measures to the 
risk classification of both their clients, and their products and to implement specific control measures 
for the nature and severity of the compliance risks posed by each category. 
Therefore, the question that each one of you will need to answer for his or her organisation is: “how 
can I be sure that my organisation is compliant?” 
The ABN AMRO case12
Recently, the importance of an adequate compliance function was illustrated by events that took place 
within ABN AMRO, one of the largest credit institutions headquartered in the Netherlands, and one of 
the large internationally operating banks worldwide. 
                                                      
8   Enhancing  corporate  governance  for  banking  organisations,  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  February  2006, 
paragraph 17. 
9   Compliance and the compliance function in banks, Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, April 2005, paragraph 18. 
10   Compliance and the compliance function in banks, Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, April 2005, paragraph 22. 
11   Compliance and the compliance function in banks, Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, April 2005, paragraph 37 et 
seq. 
12   This section is based on publicly available information, www.dnb.nl, www.federalreserve.org, www.abnamro.com. 
4 
 BIS Review 20/2006
Those of you who have read ABN AMRO’s press release of 19 December 2005, the related website 
publications  of  the  regulators  in  The  Netherlands  and  the United  States,  or  subsequent  press 
publications, may already be familiar with this case. However, for those of you that are not, I’ll provide 
a brief overview. 
In  July  2004,  ABN  AMRO  signed  a  so-called  Written  Agreement  with  US  banking  regulators 
concerning  compliance-related  deficiencies,  identified  by  the  regulators  at  the  US  dollar  clearing 
activities of ABN AMRO in New York. These deficiencies were related to cases of non-compliance with 
the United States’ Bank Secrecy Act and OFAC regulations (the United States’ sanction regime). This 
Written  Agreement,  that  addressed  ABN  AMRO’s  anti-money  laundering  policies,  procedures  and 
practices,  was  designed  to  correct  these  deficiencies.  In  response  to  this  Written  Agreement,  ABN 
AMRO strengthened its compliance function and its anti-money laundering programme in New York. 
Many  measures  were  taken  to  achieve  a  best-in-class  compliance  programme.  These  measures 
varied from a centralisation and increase of its compliance function to the implementation of new IT-
support systems. 
Nevertheless, during the remediation process ABN AMRO itself identified other shortcomings in one of 
its  overseas offices. Investigations  from  its  audit  department revealed  that certain  employees  of  the 
branch, without the enforcement or knowledge of anyone outside the branch, were not observing the 
bank’s policies and standards in relation to certain US dollar payment instructions sent to the bank’s 
US dollar clearing centre in New York on behalf of Libyan and Iranian clients. Under EU legislation, 
ABN AMRO was allowed to have dealings with said counterparties. Nonetheless, the United States’ 
OFAC regime imposed certain limitations. Further investigations by the bank made it clear that these 
procedures were aimed at not including certain client-specific information from the relevant payment 
instructions.  As  such,  it  was  ensured  that  the  payments  would  pass  through  the  New  Yorkbranch’ 
OFAC filter without being detected and blocked. 
Having been informed by ABN AMRO about these procedures, the United States bank regulators and 
De  Nederlandsche  Bank  concluded  that  this  constituted  a  pattern  of  unsafe  and  unsound  practices 
warranting further enforcement action13. 
On 19 December 2005, an “Order to Cease and Desist” was issued by the joint regulators, requiring 
ABN  AMRO  to  undertake  comprehensive  additional  measures  -  in  addition  to  the  measures  it  had 
already undertaken in response to the Written Agreement. Amongst others, these additional measures 
related to: 
   the submission of a U.S. Law Compliance Programme, ensuring continuous compliance with 
state and federal laws of the United States;   
the improvement of Head Office oversight to ensure effective control over and supervision of 
its foreign branches; and  
the completion of a written plan to improve the effectiveness of the management oversight in 
the United States. 
On top of the “Cease and Desist Order”, the USbank regulators imposed a fine amounting to US dollar 
75 million, and a voluntary endowment of US dollar 5 million to the Illinois Bank Examiners´ Education 
Foundation. 
Lessons learned 
It  goes  without  saying  that  ABN  AMRO’s  Supervisory  Board  and  its  Managing  Board  respectively, 
have  ordered  detailed  analyses  of  the  compliance-related  incidents,  to  ensure  the  lessons  learned 
would be beneficial in the future. In addition to the institutions themselves, the regulatory community 
must learn from such incidents as well. 
Given the severe impact of such incidents, it is important that the regulatory community and financial 
institutions reflect on whether the so-called “principle based” approach is adequate in this area. The 
reality is that appropriate compliance means adhering to many rules in various jurisdictions. So even if 
supervisors  apply  a  principle  based  approach,  at  least  the  financial  institutions  themselves  need  to 
                                                      
13   Page 3 of the Order to Cease and Desist Issued upon Consent issued by De Nederlandsche Bank and the US Regulators. 
BIS Review 20/2006 
 5
couple this with rule based instructions. Some banks have introduced a mix of risk-based and rule-
based compliance programs. My point is that both supervisors and the industry need to reflect on their 
paradigms.  It  is  not  either  principles  or  rules,  but  rather  an  intelligent  combination  of  principles  and 
rules. 
Another issue that warrants further consideration is that of “awareness cultivation”. It is widely believed 
that  compliance  should  always  be  at  the  forefront  of  the  employees’  thinking.  Nevertheless,  the 
modification of US dollar payment instructions acts as an example of deliberate attempts of employees 
to  dodge  internal  and  external  regulations.  Clearly,  these  employees  lacked  the  desired  mindset. 
Training and counsel remain very important tools to create the desired mindset: it helps employees to 
better  understand  not  only  the  requirements  and  regulations  itself,  but  also  the  “why”  of  such 
requirements. 
Unfortunately, training alone will not always suffice to get the message through. It remains difficult to 
deal  with  this  issue,  but  alternative  solutions  are  not  inconceivable.  You,  as  senior  management  of 
supervised institutions, continue to have, of course, an exemplary role within your own organisation. 
This enables you to influence your staffs´ behaviour by acting as shining examples. 
In addition, an interesting approach that you as senior management might want to consider, relates to 
annual  appraisals  of  staff  members.  In addition  to  the  traditional  commercial  objectives  that  usually 
dominate  the  appraisal  process,  one  might  consider  including  compliance-related  objectives.  Such 
objectives,  of  course,  remain  difficult  to  measure  and,  therefore,  require  careful  consideration;  the 
proverb  “haste  makes  waste”  is  certainly  applicable  here.  However,  the  growing  usage  of  such 
performance objectives by banks like ABN AMRO as a tool to further influence employees´ behaviour, 
illustrates that - if properly applied - they have their merits. I am convinced that the importance of such 
factors will continue to grow, in the Netherlandsbut also in Asia. 
In the end however, whereas the aforementioned factors undoubtedly contribute to the observance of 
internal  and  external  requirements  and  regulations,  it  is  my  belief  that  the  tool  ‘par  excellence’  to 
achieve  compliance  remains  the  combination  of  control  and  enforcement.  “Control”  to  increase  the 
possibility of being caught, either by internal control bodies like the audit- and the compliance function 
or  by  external  authorities  like  the  banking  regulators.  And  “enforcement”  to  exact  compliance  with 
rules, regulations and other requirements. 
Parallel with Basel II 
In  the  beginning  of  my  speech  I  made  a  brief  comparison  between  compliance  and  the  new  Basel 
Capital Accord. I can imagine that you may wonder what the afore-mentioned has to do with the new 
Basel Capital Accord. And yes, there seems to be little convergence between the capital requirements 
laid down in the Accord, and today’s challenges with regard to compliance. There are, however, some 
interesting links that I would like to highlight. 
“Compliance risk” is swiftly becoming one of the most important risk drivers that credit institutions are 
facing.  Firstly,  not  having  adequate  controls  to  prevent,  for  example,  money  laundering  or  terrorist 
financing  will  be  unacceptable  for  regulators,  who  -  as  illustrated  by  the  fines  levied  against  ABN 
AMRO  in  the United  States-  will  not  hesitate  to  take  formal  measures  against  your  institutions. 
Secondly,  and  perhaps  even  more  importantly,  involvement  in  serious  compliance  related  incidents 
can  lead  to  reputational  damage,  the  impact  of  which  may  be  even  larger  than  that  of  regulatory 
interference.  As  confidence  remains  one  of  the  financial  sector’s  cornerstones,  a  substantial 
impairment of an institution’s reputation could very well lead to its collapse. Nevertheless, whereas the 
Basel  Accord,  of  course,  requires  institutions  to  set  aside  capital  to  cover  credit-,  market  and 
operational risk, “compliance risk” is not covered. 
Is this a missed opportunity? Should the drafting panels of the new Capital Accord have spent time on 
a concept like “compliance capital”? 
In my opinion, requiring institutions to set aside capital to cover losses from compliance incidents is 
not the issue. I believe that it is justified that the Basel Committee has not included compliance risk in 
its  Capital  Accord.  Whereas  (potential)  credit  losses  can  be  financially  compensated  by  holding 
additional capital, compliance incidents will not be mitigated by financial means. After all, compliance 
incidents will impact the reputation of a credit institution, which cannot be measured in financial terms. 
Compliance is not a financial matter, but a matter of principle. Nevertheless, the question about the 
position of compliance continues to intrigue me. 
6 
 BIS Review 20/2006
institutions, 
issues  with 
the  corporate  governance  of  complex 
You will  undoubtedly be aware  that  Pillar  II  (the so-called  Supervisory Review  Process)  of  the  new 
Capital  Accord  deals  (amongst  others)  with  the  treatment  of  risks  that  are  not  fully  covered  by  the 
requirements under Pillar 114. Under Pillar II, the Accord requires banks to address all material risks 
faced  in  the  capital  assessment  process,  even  those  risks  that  cannot  be  measured  or  quantified 
precisely15. Banks are expected to further develop techniques for managing unquantifiable risks like 
reputational risk16. Although the language in the Capital Accord gives the impression that ‘something’ 
needs  to  be  done,  it  also  implies  that  holding  additional  capital  for  unquantifiable  risks  is  not  the 
solution. So, what then is the solution? 
I would argue that, whereas it remains necessary to mitigate compliance risks, a more structured and 
coherent approach is necessary. As previously discussed, banks are faced with challenges like the 
increasing  globalization, 
the 
continuously  changing  understanding  of  what  constitutes  sound  operational  management,  changing 
laws and the ongoing evolution of products. At the same time, the requirements and best practices 
imposed  by  legislators,  supervisors  and  international  standard  setting-bodies  are  not  necessarily 
attuned to each other. 
Those of you who work for an internationally active bank will recognize the difficulties that this brings 
to  day-to-day  practice.  One  important  step  towards  solving  these  difficulties  will  be  to  bring  these 
requirements  and  best  practices  together.  This  entails  monitoring  the  implications  of  these 
requirements and best practices and putting effort in finding workable solutions and where possible to 
improve  the  consistency  of  standards  already  available.  In  my  mind,  this  will  be  one  of  the  bigger 
challenges for the supervisory and legislative community for the upcoming years. But you know that 
we are working hard here, amongst others through the BCBS Accord Implementation Group and the 
Core Principles Liaison Group. 
In the end such effort will as a result also entail new challenges for the banks themselves. It is widely 
realised that implementing the new Basel Accord is a huge burden on financial institutions, not only 
because of the complexity of the materials, but also because of the sheer size of the implementation 
project. 
The development and implementation of a consistent international compliance framework, might well 
be a challenge of equal size. New policies have to be written, approved and implemented, procedures 
have  to  be  developed,  IT-systems  (e.g.  automated  systems  to  facilitate  transaction  filtering  and  - 
monitoring) have to be installed, staff members have to be trained and control measures have to be 
put in place to detect and correct deficiencies. The amount of work done by ABN AMRO in response 
to the Cease and Desist Order resulted in comprehensive and extensive plans. This is illustrative of 
the effort that might well be the desired benchmark for the entire financial industry. 
Closing remarks 
I  have  highlighted  the  challenges  that  banks  are  facing  today  with  respect  to  compliance  and  the 
compliance  function  amidst  the  ongoing  increasing  globalization,  issues  with  the  corporate 
governance  of  complex  institutions,  the  continuously  changing  understanding  of  what  constitutes 
sound risk management, changing laws and regulations, a continuous evolution of financial products, 
and a determination of governments and regulators to fight money laundering, terrorist financing and 
other illegal financial transactions. Therefore I expect that the importance of “compliance” will continue 
to  grow  exponentially.  At  this  moment,  multiple  requirements  and  best  practices  with  regard  to 
compliance  have  already  been  issued.  Nevertheless,  it  is  my  view  that  creating  a  “best  in  class” 
compliance framework by integrating these requirements and best practices should become a main 
priority, both for regulators and the industry. I realize that this will not be easy, but I am convinced that 
this is the best way forward. 
                                                      
14   Par. 724 of the new Capital Accord. 
15   Par. 732 of the new Capital Accord. 
16   Par. 742 of the new Capital Accord. 
BIS Review 20/2006 
 7
