Svein Gjedrem: Business cycles and monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), for Norges Bank’s 
regional network, arranged by the Centre for Economic Research at NTNU – Norwegian University of 
Science and Technology in Trondheim, Fosen, 3 May 2006. 
Please  note  that  the  text  below  may  differ  slightly  from  the  actual  presentation.  The  address  is  based  on  the  assessments 
presented at Norges Bank’s press conference following the Executive Board’s  monetary policy meeting on 26 April, Inflation 
Report 1/06 and on previous speeches.  
The 
Charts in pdf-format can be found on the Norges Bank’s website. 
 Introduction 
Monetary policy in Norway is oriented towards low and stable inflation, with annual consumer price 
inflation of close to 2.5 per cent over time. This is also the most important contribution monetary policy 
can make to sound economic developments in the long term. Low and stable inflation provides the 
economy  with  a  nominal  anchor.  This  contributes  to  predictability  for  agents  who  make  decisions 
about saving and investment today, although the result depends on economic developments ahead.  
In its conduct of monetary policy, Norges Bank operates a flexible inflation targeting regime, so that 
weight is given to both variability in inflation and variability in output and employment. Flexible inflation 
targeting builds a bridge between the long-term objective of monetary policy, which is to keep inflation 
on  target  and  provide  an  anchor  for  inflation  expectations,  and  the  more  short-term  objective  of 
stability in the real economy.  
The economic situation 
Growth  in  the  Norwegian  economy  has  been  strong  since  summer  2003.  The  reduction  in  Norges 
Bank’s  key  rate  through  2003  and  into  2004  resulted  in  low  interest  rates.  Low  interest  rates  have 
contributed to a relatively sharp rise in household demand throughout this upturn. At the same time, 
solid growth globally has generated increased demand for many Norwegian export goods and thereby 
high  prices.  Fixed  investment  in  the  petroleum  sector  has  increased  strongly,  resulting  in  growing 
demand for goods and services supplied by mainland enterprises. Mainland fixed investment has also 
picked up gradually.  
The mainland economy expanded by 3.7 per cent in  2005. Growth in private services, construction 
and  electricity  production  was  strong.  So  far,  a  substantial  share  of  output  growth  has  been 
attributable to strong growth in person-hours worked. The fall in sickness absence in 2004 provided an 
additional supply of labour to enterprises, but sickness absence increased through 2005.  
Wage developments reflect and influence business cycles. Strong employment growth in the 1990s 
resulted in a rise in labour costs, which in turn had a dampening impact on growth. Moderate wage 
growth in recent years is being accompanied by a strong cyclical upturn.  
The  increase  in  the  number  of  employed  has  been  relatively  moderate  throughout  the  upturn. 
Employment has shown a smaller rise than in previous cyclical upturns in the 1980s and 1990s, but 
this is now changing.  
The  labour  market  continues  to  tighten  at  a  rapid  pace.  It  is  likely  that  continued  strong  growth  in 
output and employment will result in a higher rise in prices and costs, but it may take time. According 
to Statistics Norway’s Labour Force Survey (LFS), employment growth picked up markedly towards 
the  end  of  2005  and  into  2006.  LFS  unemployment  fell  further  in  January,  while  the  number  of 
registered unemployed was approximately unchanged in March. Measured in per cent of the labour 
force, seasonally adjusted LFS unemployment was 3.9 per cent.  
The labour supply is also being influenced by an increase in inward labour migration from the new EU 
accession  countries.  These  changes  are  difficult  to  measure  in  official  labour  market  statistics.  The 
Central Office – Foreign Tax Affairs recorded an increase of about 7400 employees from the new EU 
accession countries from 2004 to 2005. This figure covers employees in both Norwegian and foreign 
enterprises. The size of the actual supply of labour behind these figures is uncertain, because there is 
BIS Review 35/2006 
 1
no information about the duration of such employment relationships. On balance, however, there are 
signs  that  the  use  of  foreign  labour  has  contributed  to  dampening  pressures  on  real  economic 
resources  through  the  upturn.  The  effect  has  probably  been  largest  in  the  construction  industry,  as 
evidenced in particular by continued moderate wage growth last year, despite very high activity. The 
figures for the first quarter of this year indicate that inward labour migration is still rising.  
There is competition for the best labour in the EU countries. Many people have travelled to the UK and 
Ireland  in  particular,  and  the  barriers  to  inward  labour  migration  may  be  greater  in  the  Norwegian 
labour market than in the British and Irish labour markets. Activity is edging up in the central European 
countries.  Therefore,  there  is  uncertainty  about  how  large  the  supply  of  labour  will  be  from  these 
countries in the future.  
There is also considerable inward labour migration from other Nordic countries, but measured in terms 
of  number  of  persons,  the  supply  of  labour  from  these  countries  has  not  changed  substantially  in 
recent  years.  Swedish  nationals  have  comprised  the  bulk  of  the  supply  of  labour  from  the  Nordic 
countries. In view of the tightening taking place in the Swedish labour market, there may be reason to 
expect a reduction in the supply of Swedish labour to Norway.  
The supply of labour is also affected by developments in persons on disability benefit and sickness 
absence. The trend in sickness absence has reversed and is now rising, and the number of persons 
on disability benefit continues to show a steady increase. This is offsetting the rise in the supply of 
labour stemming from inward labour migration when we look at the labour market as a whole.  
Behind us, we have a period of moderate wage settlements. It appears that the wage settlements this 
spring will, as expected, result in somewhat higher wage growth. Measured in terms of relative labour 
costs in a common currency, competitiveness can be estimated to be close to 8 per cent weaker than 
the average for the past 30 years.  
Over  the  past  30  years,  manufacturing  industry  has  been  scaled  back  in  waves.  Ahead  of  these 
periods, the manufacturing sector’s competitiveness deteriorated. The last wave came after the turn of 
the millennium. The decline has now come to a halt, or at least taken a break, in spite of the strong 
real exchange rate. High export prices, solid demand for many Norwegian export goods and buoyant 
growth in oil-related industries are making a contribution. According to Statistics Norway’s business 
sentiment survey of industrial leaders, growth in production and employment is expected to continue in 
the  period  ahead.  According  to  Norges  Bank’s  regional  network,  capacity  utilisation  is  high  in 
manufacturing, particularly among suppliers to the oil industry.  
Norges Bank’s regional network is an important part of the information basis for our analyses of the 
Norwegian economy. Information about the state of the Norwegian economy is available earlier than 
information  provided  by  official  statistics,  and  it  is  edifying  to  have  closer  contact  with  the  labour 
market and business and industry throughout the country. The main impression from the latest round 
of interviews is that demand and output are rising in all sectors. Growth is expected to remain high 
over the next six months.  
The industry structure in North and South Trøndelag does not differ substantially in most sectors from 
the country as a whole. The exception is the primary industries, which play a far more important role in 
these  two counties  than  in  the  rest of the  country. The share  employed  in  the  public sector  is also 
somewhat higher than in Norway as a whole.  
Developments in North and South Trøndelag counties are largely consistent with the overall picture for 
Norway.  Suppliers  to  the  petroleum  industry  and  business  sector  services  report  particularly  strong 
growth. The interviews reflect optimism with respect to the next half year with confidence in continued 
growth. The service sector and suppliers to the petroleum industry are also expecting the strongest 
growth  ahead.  With  the  exception  of  retail  trade,  all  industries  appear  to  be  increasing  investment. 
Construction of day-care centres is pushing up investment in the local government sector. Investment 
is still high in the service sector, but high investment over the past year is pushing down growth ahead. 
In  general,  profitability  developments  are  favourable.  The  retail  industry  reports  unchanged 
profitability, while the building and construction industry has reported an improvement in profitability. 
Profitability growth in the export and service industries appears to be solid.  
Employment  is  rising  in  the  region  and  unemployment  is  at  its  lowest  level  for  five  years.  For 
manufacturing  and  retail,  the  rate  of  employment  seems  to  be constant,  while  the  construction  and 
service sectors are showing a clear rise. There are clear indications of growth in employment in the 
local  government  sector.  Skills  shortages  are  increasingly  being  perceived  as  a  constraint  on 
production growth. In the retail sector and household service industry, prices are expected to show 
2 
 BIS Review 35/2006
only a moderate rise in the period ahead. In the building and construction industry, there are now more 
signals of rising prices.  
Consumer price inflation has edged up, but is still very low even 2½ years after the cyclical change. 
The year-on-year rise in the consumer price index (CPI) was 2.4 per cent in March. Price impulses 
from consumer goods that are imported to Norway have been negative in almost all the years since 
the mid-1990s, reflecting the liberalisation of international trade and the shift in imports towards low-
cost countries.  
The rise in prices for domestically produced goods and services slowed somewhat towards the end of 
2005  and  into  2006.  The 12-month  rise  in  prices  for  these  products  is  estimated  at  1.6  per  cent  in 
March  adjusted  for  the  effects  of  lower  maximum  day-care  rates.  However,  several  factors  point 
towards rising inflation. Capacity utilisation in the Norwegian economy is increasing, and tighter labour 
market  conditions  may  result  in  higher  wage  growth  in  the  coming  years.  The  rise  in  oil  prices  is 
resulting in higher input costs for producers.  
As a rule, monetary policy shall not take account of the direct effects on consumer prices resulting 
from changes in the interest rate level, taxes, excise duties and extraordinary, temporary disturbances. 
However,  there  is  no  certain  method  for  distinguishing  extraordinary,  temporary  disturbances  from 
more long-lasting price changes. The inflation measure CPI-ATE excludes the effects of changes in 
taxes  and  energy  prices.  Norges  Bank  has  given  weight  to  this  indicator  of  underlying  inflationary 
pressures in the economy, but also keeps an eye on other indicators. The 12-month rise in the CPI-
ATE adjusted for the effects of lower maximum day-care rates is estimated at 1.1 per cent in March.  
However,  the  CPI-ATE  not  only  strips  out  temporary  effects  of  changes  in  tax  changes  and 
fluctuations in energy prices, but also trend changes in these variables. Thus, this indicator is not a 
full-proof measure of underlying inflation. In the last 10-20 years, where energy prices have risen at a 
faster pace than other consumer prices and the tax level has increased somewhat, the CPI-ATE has 
tended to underestimate underlying inflation. This is illustrated in the chart, which shows the difference 
between  the  year-on-year  rise  in  the  CPI  and  the  CPI-ATE  over  a  moving  10-year  average.  Since 
1997,  the  difference  has  been  about  0.35  percentage  point.  Even  when  taking  into  account  trend 
increases in energy prices, inflation is still moderate. The indicators that provide the best expression of 
underlying inflationary pressures in the economy may vary over time.  
Driving forces ahead 
Monetary policy influences the economy with long and variable lags. This means we must look ahead 
when  setting  interest  rates.  I  would  therefore  like  to  comment  briefly  on  some  international 
developments  that  are  important  to  the  Norwegian  economy  and  the  assumptions  concerning 
developments in Norway on which Norges Bank’s assessments are based.  
Oil  prices  are  of  importance  for  the  activity  level  in  the  Norwegian  economy  and  the  government 
revenues. In recent years, oil prices have risen sharply. High demand for oil, limited idle production 
capacity and uncertain production levels in many oil-producing countries have contributed to this. Oil 
prices have risen to over USD 74 per barrel, partly as a result of the uncertain political situation in a 
number of producer countries. Futures prices for Brent Blend are now more than USD 72 per barrel 
until  autumn  2008.  Futures  prices  indicate  that  oil  prices  will  remain  at  around  USD  70  per  barrel 
several years ahead. This is higher than the level assumed in the March 2006 Inflation Report. Statoil 
and Hydro gas prices have also increased sharply in recent months.  
Petroleum production is expected to increase gradually in the period to 2011, and decline thereafter. 
Developments  in  the  gas market  will  become  increasingly  important.  During  the  next  10  years,  gas 
production could become as high as oil production, measured by energy content.  
High  oil  prices  have  led  to  a  strong  increase  in  activity  on  the  Norwegian  continental  shelf.  Many 
projects have been launched to increase recovery from fields in operation. A number of companies 
have revised up the long-term oil prices that are used as a basis for investment decisions, but they are 
still moderate compared with futures prices.  
Further  out  in  the  projection  period,  developments  in  petroleum-related  investment  become  highly 
uncertain. It is assumed that overall activity will decline somewhat when the Snøhvit and Ormen Lange 
projects are completed, but high oil prices are expected to contribute to maintaining investment at a 
relatively high level throughout the projection period.  
BIS Review 35/2006 
 3
The  Government  Pension  Fund  –  Global,  previously  called  the  Government  Petroleum  Fund,  will 
increase  substantially  in  the  years  ahead.  The  fiscal  rule  entails  a  gradual  phasing-in  of  petroleum 
revenues into the economy, approximately in pace with the expected real return on the Fund, which is 
estimated at 4 per cent. On the basis of our assumption in the March Inflation Report for developments 
in oil prices (oil futures prices), the fiscal rule allows for an increase in petroleum revenue spending of 
more than NOK 30 billion from 2006 to 2009.  
If the Norwegian economy continues to exhibit solid growth, it will nevertheless be in line with the fiscal 
guidelines that petroleum revenue spending is lower than the expected real return for a few years. Our 
projections  are  based  on  the  assumption  that  fiscal  policy  will  provide  some  stimulus  to  aggregate 
demand and output in 2008 and 2009, but somewhat less than a mechanical application of the fiscal 
rule based on our oil price assumption would imply.  
High growth in the global economy has contributed to pushing up prices for non-oil commodities as 
well.  Over  the  past  year,  cobber  prices  have  almost  doubled  and  aluminium  prices  have  risen  by 
around 50 per cent. Futures prices have also risen markedly, indicating expectations of a sustained 
increase in metal prices similar to the increase in oil prices.  
Prices for fresh farmed salmon have also exhibited a pronounced rise.  
Rising commodity prices and buoyant activity in markets that are important for Norway have fuelled 
growth  in  the  Norwegian  economy,  even  though  growth  has  been  low  in  some  of  Norway’s  most 
important export markets.  
Overall, prices for our imported goods are falling in relation to prices for goods we export. Norway’s 
terms of trade are improving. The impact of the rise in oil and gas prices is particularly strong, but the 
terms-of-trade gains for the mainland economy have also been high. The domestic economy is partly 
insulated  thanks  to  the  oil  fund  mechanism.  The  situation  in  Norway  differs  from  that  of  its  Nordic 
neighbour countries. Sales of Swedish and Finnish high-tech products are growing strongly in volume 
terms, but prices are falling. Denmark has a diversified business sector, which is overall moving on a 
steady path.  
Growth  among  our  trading  partners  remains  solid.  High  commodity  prices  are  exerting  upward 
pressure on consumer price inflation in a number of countries, although underlying inflation remains 
low.  Economic  growth  in  the  US  probably  picked  up  again  in  the  first  quarter.  In  Japan,  growth 
appears to be solid. In the euro area, confidence indicators point to optimism in the business sector. 
There  is  a  broad-based  expansion  in  the  Swedish  economy,  while  some  indicators  in  the  UK  have 
shown weak developments.  
The central banks in the US, Canada and Switzerland have raised their key rates by 0.25 percentage 
points  since  mid-March.  Market  expectations  concerning  key  rates  in  other  countries  have  risen 
slightly. For the next year, market pricing indicates that key rates will be increased in the euro area, 
the UK, Sweden, Switzerland, the US, Canada, Japan and Australia.  
In Norway, the key rate was last raised by 0.25 percentage point to 2.5 per cent at the monetary policy 
meeting on 16 March this year. Financial markets still expect a gradual increase in the sight deposit 
rate ahead. In line with developments in global markets, the rise in Norwegian long-term interest rates 
has gathered pace. Markets have factored in that the key rate will be lower in Norway than in the US 
and the UK at the end of 2009, but higher than in the euro area and Sweden.  
In the past couple of years, low interest rates and relatively high growth in real wages has contributed 
to  strong  growth  in  household  purchasing  power  and  consumption.  Increased  housing  wealth  and 
equity price gains may also have contributed to the high level of consumer demand and will probably 
continue to make a contribution ahead. With the prospect of an improving labour market and relatively 
low inflation through the projection period, growth in household real wage income will probably remain 
fairly  high  in  the  years  ahead.  A  gradual  normalisation  of  the  interest  rate  level  will  curb  growth  in 
disposable  income  as  the  interest  burden  increases.  Consumption  growth  is  also  expected  to 
moderate in the years ahead.  
Wide fluctuations in asset prices may be a potential source of instability in demand and output in the 
somewhat  longer  run.  House  prices  and  household  debt  have  risen  sharply  since  the  mid-1990s. 
Developments in the 1990s can probably be viewed to some extent as a delayed adaptation to the 
deregulation  of  the  housing  and  credit  markets  in  the  1980s,  after  many  households  burned  their 
fingers  immediately  after  deregulation.  In  recent  years,  household  income  growth  has  been  solid, 
household confidence regarding the future has been strong and households probably perceive higher 
4 
 BIS Review 35/2006
income  levels  as  permanent.  This  may  have  resulted  in  a  further  rise  in  house  prices  and  debt.  In 
addition, low real interest rates are currently making a contribution.  
In  countries  whose  credit  markets  have  been  liberalised  for  a  long  period,  for  example  Denmark, 
where  credit  markets  were  liberalised  over  a  hundred  years  ago,  the  debt-to-income  ratio  for 
households is higher than in other countries.  
Monetary policy assessments 
Since last summer, interest-rate setting has been oriented towards a gradual increase in the interest 
rate – in small, not too frequent steps – towards a more normal level. According to the assessment in 
the March Inflation Report, higher growth in the economy could, in isolation, warrant a faster rise in the 
key rate ahead. This would reduce the risk of bottlenecks in the economy, with rising cost inflation and 
continued debt build-up. On the other hand, the objective of bringing inflation up to the target of 2.5 
per cent and anchoring inflation expectations suggested in isolation that further interest rate increases 
should be delayed until there are clearer signs of a further rise in inflation.  
The  trend  in  prices  for  consumer  goods  over  the  past  two  or  three  years  is  a  result  of  favourable 
developments in the Norwegian and global economy. The shift in trade towards low-cost countries has 
led  to  lower  prices  and  higher  real  income.  In  addition,  the  changes  in  the  world  economy  have 
provided  Norway  with  higher  income  because  our  terms  of  trade  have  improved.  Increased 
competition has curbed the rise in prices for a number of domestically produced goods and services.  
When inflation deviates substantially from the target for a period, the interest rate will be set with a 
view  to  gradually  returning  it  to  the  target,  so  that  we  avoid  substantial  variations  in  output  and 
employment.  Through  the  1990s,  inflation  generally  remained  in  the  interval  1½  –  3½  per  cent. 
Inflation has varied slightly more in the past few years. In a period of increasing cross-border labour 
flows,  substantial  technological  advances,  changes  in  competitive  conditions  and  new  trading 
patterns,  we  may,  with  our  very  open  economy,  have  to  accept  a  somewhat  greater  variation  in 
inflation and deviations from the target, as we have witnessed over the past two to three years.  
An overall assessment implies that the interest rate in the baseline scenario gradually increases to a 
more  normal  level.  The  projections  are  based  on  the  assumption  that  interest  rates  in  Norway  and 
abroad  will  rise  somewhat  faster  than  may  be  implied  by  today’s  forward  rates.  Since  the  previous 
Inflation  Report,  the  upward  movement  in  Norwegian  and  international  long-term  interest  rates  has 
become more pronounced. Exchange rate movements are difficult to project. In Inflation Report 1/06, 
the  path  for  the  interest  rate  in  Norway  and  abroad  was  assessed  to  be  consistent  with  an 
approximately unchanged krone exchange rate.  
The  high  rate  of  economic  growth  implies  that  price  and  cost  inflation  will  edge  up  after  a  period. 
Inflation measured by the CPI-ATE is projected to increase from today’s level of around 1¼ per cent, 
up to almost 2 per cent at the end of 2007. There are prospects that inflation will increase further and 
be close to the target of 2.5 per cent three years ahead. With a gradual reduction in unemployment, 
Norges  Bank  expects  wage  growth  to  edge  up.  At  the  same  time,  it  will  probably  be  easier  for 
enterprises to pass on cost increases to prices in pace with the rise in demand and capacity utilisation.  
Capacity utilisation is now projected to be somewaht higher than its normal level. Mainland GDP is still 
growing  strongly  in  2006.  Capacity  utilisation  in  the  economy  is  expected  to  rise  over  the  next  two 
years.  Even  though  a  gradual  increase  in  the  interest  rate  will  result  in  somewhat  weaker  growth 
impulses after a period, monetary policy will still be expansionary. A further interest rate increase will 
stabilise  growth  in  output  and  employment.  Capacity  utilisation  may  in  time  be  brought  down 
somewhat and stabilise. This will curb the rise in inflation, so that it stabilises close to target.  
Developments in inflation and capacity utilisation seem to provide a reasonable balance between the 
various objectives of monetary policy. The interest rate is sufficiently low for inflation to approach the 
target of 2.5 per cent while avoiding a capacity utilisation level that is too high.  
Projections are uncertain. We have illustrated this uncertainty in the projections for the interest rate, 
the  krone  exchange  rate,  inflation  and  capacity  utilisation  using  fan  charts.  The  width  of  the  fan  is 
based on historical disturbances. However, there is no certainty that future disturbances will be of the 
same character or scale. The wider the fans, the more uncertain the forecasts are. In other words, 
uncertainty  with  regard  to  the  interest  rate  reflects  the  monetary  policy  response  to  unexpected 
disturbances in inflation, output and the exchange rate.  
BIS Review 35/2006 
 5
When the interest rate, as forecast in the baseline scenario, is raised to a more normal level, Norges 
Bank  will  be  able  to  assess  the  effects  of  interest  rate  changes  and  other  new  information  about 
economic  developments.  According  to  our  projections,  inflation  will  be  close  to  target  three  years 
ahead.  We  are  uncertain  as  to  the  functioning  of  the  economy  and  how  long  it  will  take  for  the 
resource  shortages  observed  in  some  sectors  of  the  Norwegian  economy  to  translate  into  higher 
inflationary pressures. This may warrant small steps in interest-rate setting.  
Employment  is  now  rising  more  rapidly  than  expected.  Corporate  earnings  are  rising  sharply,  with 
higher  growth  in  corporate  demand  for  credit.  The  sharp  increase  in  household  debt  is  persisting. 
House  price  inflation  remains  high.  Prices  for  oil  and  several  other  commodities  have  picked  up 
further. At the same time, the underlying rise in consumer prices remains low. So far, a tighter labour 
market does not seem to have resulted in higher-than-expected pay increases, but there is a risk that 
wage  growth  may  subsequently  rise  faster  than  projected.  The  krone  is  stronger  than  assumed. 
Overall, there are not sufficient grounds for changing the outlook for inflation and output or the risk 
assessment.  
Thank you for your attention.  
6 
 BIS Review 35/2006
