Stefan Ingves: Introduction on monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Stefan  Ingves,  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  the  Riksdag  Committee  on 
Finance, Stockholm, 23 February 2006. 
The Diagrams to the speech 
 can be found on the website of the Sveriges Riksbank. 
 Let me first of all thank you for the invitation to come here. This is my first hearing with the Committee 
on Finance and I hope that we will have a rewarding discussion on monetary policy.  
I shall begin with a brief report on our current assessment of the economic situation and future inflation 
prospects. Above all, I wish to clarify the reasoning as to why we are choosing to raise the repo rate 
now. Given that the recent monetary policy debate has revolved to a large extent around the objective 
of  monetary  policy,  I  would  also  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  report  our  fundamental  view  of 
monetary policy strategy. My main message can be summarised thus:  
•  There is one objective for monetary policy and that is to maintain price stability.  
•  The task given to the Riksbank by the Riksdag and our method of working provide scope for 
taking other factors into account, such as growth and employment, as long as this does not 
jeopardise price stability. The inflation targeting policy has worked well in its present form and 
I therefore see no reason to change it.  
•  The inflation forecast we publish today shows that UND1X inflation will be approximately in 
line with the target a couple of years from now. This assessment is based on, for instance, the 
assumption of firm growth in Sweden and abroad and gradual increases in the repo rate from 
its present low level.  
I will conclude my speech with a look back. The Riksbank has just completed its annual accounts for 
2005 and it is therefore an appropriate time to discuss inflation developments over the past year, as is 
usual at the first hearing of the year. The most important conclusions are:  
 Inflation was unexpectedly low in 2005. This was mainly due to various changes on the supply 
side  of  the  economy  holding  down  inflationary  pressure  more  than  we  had  expected. 
Essentially, these changes were high productivity growth and weak growth in import prices.  
•  These types of structural changes are difficult to capture at an early stage of the forecasting 
work. One indication of this is that in principle all forecasters overestimated inflation in 2005.  
The current assessment  
Before I discuss our assessment of the current economic situation, I would like to take up the issue of 
the  link  between  our  interest  rate  decisions  and  inflation.  Why  have  we  begun  to  conduct  less 
expansionary monetary policy despite the fact that inflation is, and has been, low?  
To  understand  the  most  recent  interest  rate  decisions,  it  is  important  to  remember  that  we  do  not 
adjust  the  repo  rate  to  affect  the  present  inflation  rate,  but  to  influence  inflation  a  couple  of  years 
ahead. It takes time for monetary policy to achieve its full impact on the economy. Monetary policy 
must  therefore  be  based  on  expectations  of  the  future,  i.e.  we  are  dependent  on  forecasts.  It  is 
therefore necessary that we occasionally ”lean against the wind”, that is, that we raise the repo rate 
despite the current inflation rate being below target level or that we lower the repo rate despite inflation 
being above the target level. If we were only to look at the present inflation rate, there is a risk that we 
would be forced to make more drastic adjustments further ahead and this type of roller-coaster interest 
policy would benefit no one.  
How  do  we  assess  future  inflation  prospects?  The  economic  outlook  is  currently  bright,  both  in 
Sweden and abroad. International growth has been both high and stable in recent years (diagram 1). 
Strong  growth  in  the  United  States  and  parts  of  Asia  has  been  a  driving  force  for  global  economic 
activity.  Increased  participation  in  global  trade  by,  among  others,  several  Asian  countries  has 
contributed  to  this  upswing  and  to  stiffer  international  competition.  So  far,  the  increase  in  global 
BIS Review 12/2006 
 1
demand has not had a visible impact on consumer prices. This is despite the oil price having almost 
doubled over the past two years and substantial price rises on other commodities.  
Most indications are that international economic activity will continue to develop well over the coming 
years. We are assuming that economic activity in the euro area will improve more and more and that 
growth in the United States and Asia will slow down somewhat.  
The Swedish economy has also shown good growth in recent years. The upswing in world trade has 
contributed  to  strong  growth  in  Swedish  exports.  Over  the  past  year,  domestic  demand  has  also 
developed favourably, partly due to stimulation from expansionary monetary policy. The labour market 
situation has at long last begun to improve. Our assessment is that growth in the Swedish economy 
will  remain  high  over  the  coming  years.  Household  consumption  is  expected  to  accelerate  and 
employment to increase.  
We  also  envisage  inflation  rising  as  capacity  utilisation  increases  (diagram  2).  Over  the  past  six 
months we have witnessed the beginning of a rise in the rate of price increase, albeit from a low level. 
This does not appear to be due to large price rises within a few product groups; it appears to be a 
broader upturn. The Inflation Report we are publishing today indicates that inflation will be close to the 
target level a couple of years from now. This assumes gradual increases in the repo rate.  
I  would  like  to  emphasise  that  there  are  factors  which  complicate  this  picture.  Inflation  was 
unexpectedly low in January. Dividing price trends into different categories shows that it was mainly 
some imported product groups that showed unexpectedly weak development. It is difficult to determine 
from  the  outcome  of  only  one  month  whether  or  not  this  is  a  sign  of  a  more  lasting  development. 
Naturally, it is something we will pay attention to in our future assessments of inflation.  
We can also observe that over the past few years inflation has been kept down by high productivity 
growth and low import prices. This is partly related to developments in economic activity. However, 
there  are  probably  also  lasting  factors  behind  the  low  inflationary  pressure.  We  can  see  similar 
patterns  in  some  other  countries.  Amongst  other  things,  it  is  probably  a  question  of  the  effects  of 
increased global competition. The durability of this type of structural change is difficult to determine. I 
intend to return to this in connection with my look back at inflation developments during 2005.  
A  further  complication  is  that  house  prices  and  household  borrowing  have  increased  rapidly 
(diagram 3). There are some risks with this type of development that can be difficult to quantify. One 
cannot entirely rule out the possibility that credit expansion and house prices are being driven up by 
over-optimistic  expectations.  This  could  lead  to  a  situation  in  future  with  sudden  downward 
adjustments  in  house  prices  and  a  large  increase  in  household saving.  Our assessment  is  that  the 
probability of this type of scenario is small at present, but that if it were to occur, the negative effects 
on the economy would be substantial.  
Given  our  inflation  forecast  and  after  taking  into  account  other  factors,  the  Executive  Board’s 
assessment is that it is reasonable to continue gradually raising the interest rate. At the same time, it is 
important to emphasise that we are easing up on the accelerator, not putting on the brakes. Monetary 
policy is still expansionary, which is clear from a historical comparison of repo rate levels (diagram 4). 
Even in an international comparison, it is clear that Sweden’s key rate is still very low.  
The link between interest rate decisions, house prices and household debts  
There  have  recently  been  claims  that  the  Riksbank’s  decision  to  raise  the  repo  rate  was  largely 
because we have been concerned over house prices and increased household indebtedness. This is 
not the case. I would like to argue that the decisions to raise the interest rate now and in January are 
primarily  justified  on  the  traditional  basis  of  inflation  prospects  two  years  ahead.  Inflation  has  been 
assessed as being close to the target level a couple of years ahead, given gradual increases in the 
repo rate. We have therefore chosen to raise the repo rate.  
Our monetary policy considerations have of course taken into account considerations related to risks 
linked  with  house  prices  and  the  build-up  of  household  debt.  House  prices  affect  demand  through 
households'  decisions  regarding  saving  and  consumption.  Our  inflation  forecast  therefore  always 
includes an assessment of credit developments and the housing market. As I mentioned earlier, it may 
be difficult to quantify the risks linked to a rapid increase in house prices and indebtedness over a long 
period of time using our usual forecasting methods.  
As  the  expansionary  monetary  policy  is  to  a  large  extent  a  driving  force  in  developments  in  house 
prices and indebtedness, we have considered it reasonable in our monetary policy considerations to 
2 
 BIS Review 12/2006
view  these  risks  as  an  argument  in  favour  of  beginning  to  increase  the  repo  rate  now,  rather  than 
postponing the increases for a few months. However, this does not mean that we have set up any 
target for house prices. I intend to discuss the objective of monetary policy in more detail later. Let me 
first say a few words on future interest rate developments.  
Future interest rate developments  
The inflation forecast contains an assumption of how the interest rate will be adjusted in future. This is 
a relatively new method of making forecasts for the Riksbank. Like many other central banks, we have 
previously worked on the assumption of the interest rate remaining at the same level throughout the 
forecast period.  
The new method of forecasting also alters the communication and motivation of interest rate decisions 
somewhat. An important insight is that it is not possible to describe the strategy for monetary policy in 
terms  of  a  simple  policy  rule  -  for  instance,  that  the  interest  rate  will  be  raised  now  if  the  inflation 
forecast two years ahead shows inflation above target level. This type of interpretation assumes that 
the  forecast  is  based  on  an  assumption  that  the  interest  rate  will  not  change  during  the  forecast 
period.  
With the new assumption, the inflation forecast is instead based on a whole series of future interest 
rate adjustments. The Riksbank’s forecasts currently assume that the series of interest rate changes 
will follow market expectations (diagram 5). I have recently raised the question of possibly going one 
stage further and instead reporting the Riksbank’s own forecast of interest rate developments. For my 
part,  I  consider  it  natural  to  make  forecasts  of  future  interest  rates  in  the  same  way  that  we  make 
forecasts  for  a  number  of  other  variables.  Nor  do  I  see  any  drama  in  this  type  of  transition,  as  we 
already  express  opinions  about  one  interest  rate  path.  However,  this  is  something  we  will  discuss 
among the Executive Board members.  
Regardless  of  which  alternative  we  choose,  it  is  important  to  point  out  that  the  interest  rate 
development we publish should not be regarded as written in stone. The future development of the 
economy is uncertain and interest rate developments are therefore also uncertain. The Riksbank is 
therefore  unable  to  tie  monetary  policy  to  a  particular  sequence  of  future  interest  rate  raises  in 
advance.  
Our current assessment is that the forecasts described in the Inflation Report indicate low inflationary 
pressure  and  that  the  repo  rate could perhaps  be raised  at  a slightly  slower rate  in  future  than  the 
interest  rate  path  on  which  the  forecasts  are  based.  Market  expectations  of  future  interest  rate 
increases have also been adjusted downwards in recent days, which thus appears reasonable – given 
the information we have at present. Prior to the next interest rate decision in April, we will of course 
need  to  make  a  new  assessment  and  take  into  account  the  information  available  then.  The  future 
stance  of  monetary  policy  will  thus  depend  as  usual  on  new  information  received  and  on  the 
Riksbank’s assessment of the inflation outlook.  
The principles for the Riksbank’s monetary policy  
The  economic  debate  has  recently  focussed  on  monetary  policy  objectives.  Some  people  have 
suggested that we should supplement our inflation target with other targets. Others have interpreted 
our most recent interest rate decision as meaning that we already have targets for other quantities and 
that  we  are  trying  to  achieve  too  many  targets.  It  is  unfortunate  that  there  appears  to  be  a  certain 
amount of confusion in this matter, so let me repeat my earlier comment: there is one objective for 
monetary  policy  and  that  is  to  maintain  price  stability.  This  is  the  objective  set  by  law  for  the 
Riksbank’s monetary policy. In addition, we have been given the task of promoting a safe and efficient 
payment system.  
In connection with the work on legislation, it was discussed whether the Riksbank should also have 
objectives  regarding  GDP  growth  or  employment,  for  instance.  The  Government  and  the  Riksdag 
(parliament)  decided  that  the  Riksbank  as  an  authority  under  parliament  was  obliged  to  support 
general  economic  policy  goals  such  as  sustainable  growth  and  high  employment.  However,  it  was 
pointed out that this support should not come into conflict with the price stability objective.  
It is thus important to remember that the legislators considered it natural for the Riksbank to take into 
consideration the real economy, but that this consideration was not described as an objective for the 
Riksbank’s monetary policy. In my opinion, this was a wise decision and I see no reason to change the 
BIS Review 12/2006 
 3
framework  and  introduce  additional  objectives  to  price  stability.  The  Riksbank’s  current  method  of 
working  closely  follows  the  views  of  the  legislators.  Monetary  policy  takes  into  consideration  other 
aspects than inflation trends, and it should do so.  
How do we do this? As you know, the practical monetary policy work is governed by the objective that 
the increase in the consumer price index should be 2 per cent a year. This is how the Riksbank has 
chosen  to  specify  the  statutory  objective  of  price  stability.  There  is  a  tolerance  interval  of  ±  1 
percentage point around the target. The purpose of this interval is to explain that deviations from the 
target are unavoidable, but also that overly large deviations cannot be easily accepted if the inflation 
target is to remain credible. To make this clearer, monetary policy is guided by the principle that when 
there are deviations from the target, our aim is usually to bring inflation back to target level within two 
years.  
The  tolerance  interval  together  with  this  principle  creates  flexibility  for  monetary  policy.  This  is 
necessary, as it is not possible for the Riksbank to control inflation with any precision in the short term. 
It is quite simply not within our power to maintain inflation at exactly 2 per cent all of the time. The 
flexibility also creates an opportunity for us to take into account real economic considerations as long 
as  price  stability  is  not  jeopardised.  Temporary  deviations  may  thus  be  justified  by  taking  into 
consideration growth and employment, for instance. The statutory objective of price stability must not 
be  disregarded  so  it  is  important  that  the  flexibility  is  not  used  in  a  way  that  would  undermine 
confidence in the inflation target. One can say that the two-year horizon sets a limit as to how much 
consideration we can normally give to other aspects than price stability.  
The  clarification  of  monetary  policy  published  in  1999  also  made  it  clear  that  under  some 
circumstances it might be necessary to have an even greater degree of flexibility and allow inflation to 
take  longer  to  reach  the  target  than  the  usual  two years.  For  instance,  the  economy  could  suffer a 
major supply shock that led to prices of commodities, energy and foods rising or falling substantially. In 
these situations it might be reasonable to accept a longer deviation from the target than two years if 
the strain on the real economy would otherwise be unacceptably high.  
Let me summarise: The Riksbank has one objective for monetary policy and that is to maintain price 
stability. The Riksbank's method of working encompasses possibilities within this framework to take 
into  account  different  aspects  of  interest  rate  decisions,  such  as  fluctuations  in  the  real  economy. 
However,  such  considerations  do  not  mean  that  we  have  specific  targets  for  other  quantities  than 
inflation.  
A look back - inflation 2005  
Finally, I intend to take a look back at developments in inflation over the past year. This is to follow the 
usual custom at the first hearing of the year and give an account of the outcome of the monetary policy 
conducted.  
As you know, inflation was low last year (diagram 6). For the second year in a row, the inflation rate 
was below the Riksbank's tolerance interval for inflation. UND1X inflation was 0.8 per cent and CPI 
was 0.5 per cent on average for the year. The forecasts of inflation made by the Riksbank in 2003 and 
2004 anticipated that inflation would be much higher than that in 2005.  
Why  was  inflation  surprisingly  low?  To  begin  with,  one  can  observe  that  it  was  not  due  to  a  weak 
economic  upturn.  On  the  contrary,  the  economic  upturn  accelerated  in  2004  and  growth  was  even 
stronger than expected. Last year the economy also continued to grow at a good rate. To understand 
the low inflation it is necessary to find other explanations than weak demand in the economy.  
The  reasons  should  mainly  be  sought  in  the  positive  changes  on  the  supply  side  of  the  economy, 
which I have already mentioned, namely high productivity growth and low import prices.  
High  productivity  growth  has  held  down  cost  pressures  in  the  economy  more  than  expected. 
Production has been able to increase without any particularly high increase in companies’ labour costs 
per unit produced (diagram 7). During 2003 and 2004 unit labour costs in the business sector actually 
fell.  
At the beginning of an economic upturn it is normal to have a period when production increases at a 
more rapid rate through companies using existing labour force more intensively rather than through 
new recruitment. However, even taking into account the business cycle, productivity growth has been 
high in recent years.  
4 
 BIS Review 12/2006
This indicates that productivity growth has increased in a more lasting manner. The Riksbank has also 
gradually  increased  its  forecast  for  the  productivity  growth  trend  in  recent  years.  Despite  this, 
productivity has continued to be higher than forecast up to 2005. One difficulty in the forecasting work 
is  that  productivity  growth  usually  fluctuates  considerably  even  taking  into  account  changes  in 
economic activity. For instance, productivity growth fell heavily in 2001.  
Another supply factor that has contributed to low inflation is, as already mentioned, low increases in 
imported goods prices. Since early 2003, consumer prices for imported goods and services, excluding 
oil products, have fallen (diagram 8). The fact that the krona appreciated continuously from 2002 and 
up  to  the  end  of  2004  naturally  played  a  role  in  the  low  import  prices.  However,  the  Riksbank’s 
forecasts  for  import  prices  included  an  assessment  that  the  exchange  rate  would  strengthen. 
Nevertheless, import prices excluding oil products have been surprisingly low.  
What can then explain the high productivity growth and the weak developments in import prices? This 
is, of course, difficult to know. One hypothesis often used to explain high productivity growth is that the 
extensive investment in information technology made earlier has begun to show results.  
Another explanation that I touched on earlier, and which has a bearing on both the rapid productivity 
growth and the depressed import prices, is the increase in competition. Stiffer competition from China 
and other low-cost countries has, for instance, contributed to increased pressure for rationalisation in 
many  sectors.  This,  combined  with  outsourcing  of  work  to  low-wage  countries,  may  have  created 
opportunities to improve productivity at a faster rate than before. In addition, an increasing percentage 
of Swedish imports are coming from countries with low price levels. This shift in imports from countries 
with  relatively  high  prices  to  countries  where  prices  are  much  lower  has  probably  contributed  to 
keeping  down  prices  of  imports  to  Sweden  more  than  the  Riksbank  had  previously  estimated. 
Competition within Sweden has also sharpened, which has increased the need for greater efficiency in 
many sectors. For example, our assessment is that increased establishment of low-price supermarket 
chains contributed to a fall in food prices in 2005.  
Should the interest rate have been cut further?  
It is clear that structural changes in the economy have in many ways held down inflation and created 
scope to cut the repo rate to historically low levels (diagram 9).  
From time to time there has been criticism which says that we should have cut the repo rate even 
more. The fact that such a discussion arises when inflation is well below the target level is not in itself 
surprising.  However,  it  is  important  to  have  realistic  expectations  as  to  what  monetary  policy  can 
achieve. Changes of a structural nature are difficult to capture at an early stage of the forecasting work 
as it takes some time before it becomes clear that the changes are not merely transient factors. This is 
one reason that needs to be recognised why inflation may deviate from the target level.  
One  indication  of  the  difficulties  in  making  accurate  forecasts  is  that  inflation  in  2005  was  over-
estimated  by  in  principle  all  forecasters  (diagram  10).  A  comparison  indicates,  if  anything,  that  the 
Riksbank  was  among  the  first  forecasters  to  take  into  account  the  effects  that  have  subdued 
inflationary pressures. Some analysts have periodically advocated a somewhat faster rate for interest 
rate  cuts  than  that  chosen  by  the  Riksbank.  However,  the  difference  has  on  average  been  small. 
Given  the  effects  of  monetary  policy  normally  assumed,  the  difference  in  inflation  and  employment 
would have been marginal.  
For monetary policy to bring inflation much closer to the target level, a radically different policy would 
have been necessary. For instance, the Riksbank would probably have needed to cut the repo rate 
quickly  and  substantially  a  couple  of  years  ago  rather  than  making  the  gradual  cuts  that  were 
implemented.  It  would  have  been  difficult  to  justify  this  type  of  monetary  policy  given  the  view  of 
economic prospects at that time.  
It is also clear that the monetary policy that was conducted has had a strong expansionary effect on 
the economy. For instance, GDP growth has been high. The expansionary monetary policy has also 
been  evident  in  the  rapid  credit  expansion  in  the  household  sector  and  the  price  increases  in  the 
housing market. It is doubtful whether it would have been wise to reinforce this development with even 
more expansionary monetary policy.  
Unfortunately, the strong growth has not resulted in a corresponding recovery in employment. On the 
contrary,  the  labour  market  has  developed  more  weakly  than  might  have  been  expected  from  a 
historical perspective, given the high GDP growth. To some extent this reflects the unexpectedly high 
BIS Review 12/2006 
 5
productivity growth. However, a reasonable explanation is that there are also problems in the labour 
market that are not cyclical. This is something that should be resolved by other means than monetary 
policy.  
Let  me conclude  by saying  that  I  welcome  discussions on  monetary  policy. Monetary  policy  is  to a 
great extent based on assessments and it is therefore natural that there are differing opinions as to 
what should be done with the repo rate – both outside of the Riksbank and within the Executive Board. 
However, it is also important that the discussion is based on a realistic picture of what monetary policy 
can achieve. Nor should the discussion be simplified by targeting one issue without taking into account 
all  of  the  risks  and  other  aspects  that  need  to  be  weighed  against  one  another  in  monetary  policy 
decisions. We at the Riksbank will do all we can to contribute to this type of discussion climate.  
6 
 BIS Review 12/2006
