Zhou Xiaochuan: Financial services of the central bank and industrial 
development 
Speech by Mr Zhou Xiaochuan, Governor of the People’s Bank of China, at the High-level Forum of 
Industrial Development, Beijing, 12 January 2006. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, dear participants, 
Good  afternoon.  First  of  all,  let  me  congratulate  on  the  inauguration  of  the  China  Industrial 
Development Promotion Society. Taking this opportunity, I would like to discuss financial services that 
central bank can provide to promote the development of other industries. 
Provided jointly by commercial banks and central banks in most cases, financial services, including 
deposits,  loans,  private  banking  services,  transactions  of  various  financial  instruments  and  financial 
market  services,  etc.  involve  many  aspects  and  huge  volumes.  As  these  services  are  delivered  to 
consumers directly by commercial banks and other financial institutions, people are likely to neglect 
supporting services provided by the central bank. 
Many  people  may  only  have  limited  knowledge  of  the  services  provided  by  a  central  bank.  Talking 
about a central bank, people may link it with macro adjustment policy, like adjusting interest rate and 
exchange rate, but actually only less than half of the staff in the People’s Bank of China involve in 
macro  economic  adjustment  works,  while  the  others  are  involved  in  financial  services.  As  to  the 
financial services of a central bank, most people may directly associate them with printing banknotes, 
such as issuing banknotes in different series, denominations and currencies, withdrawing worn notes 
etc.  Currently,  the  outstanding  balance  of  banknotes  in  circulation  totaled  some  2.4  trillion  yuan, 
requiring an enormous transportation and storage system by the People’s Bank of China to ensure 
such large amount of banknotes in circulation. However, cash accounts for less than one tenth of the 
broad  money  (M2);  in  most  circumstances,  money  is  only  numbers  on  customers’  bank  accounts. 
Fund  transfer  and  payment  among  those  accounts  are  realized  through  computer  network. 
Accordingly, I would like to introduce five supporting service systems that the central bank provides to 
protect the safe operation of economy and financial industry. 
First is the payment & settlement system. Previously, fund transfer between enterprises or between a 
holding company and its subsidiaries relied on postal system and took a lot of time, but nowadays, 
based  on  computer  and  electronic  network,  remote  network  system  and  even  international  multi-
currency payment system, fund transfer can be realized through electronic and automatic methods. 
Commercial  banks  also  have  their  own  fund  transfer  system.  If  both  the  receiver  and  payer  open 
accounts  in  the  same  commercial  bank,  internal  fund  transfer system  can  provide  more  convenient 
and faster services. Cross-bank transactions generally can be dealt with in two ways, either through 
correspondent  bank  of  commercial  banks,  or  the  payment  system  of  the  central  bank  to  settle 
payments.  China  National  Advanced  Payment  System,  run  by  the  central  bank,  includes  the  large-
value  payment  system  that  provides  large-value  and  urgent  small-value  cross-bank  real-time 
settlement services and the retail payment system, a netting payment system, whose customers are 
many small& medium-sized enterprises and individuals.  Due to the huge economic size, the payment 
& settlement system managed by the central bank involves huge transaction volumes. Launched on 
June  30,  2005,  the  large-value  payment  system  can  process  more  than  500  thousand  cross-bank 
transactions on average each day, involving 700 billion yuan. Each transaction can be finished within 
a minute. Many enterprises feel payment efficiency has improved quite a lot. China National Advanced 
Payment System is connected with more than 60 thousand commercial bank outlets nationwide on the 
basis  of  modern  computer  and  communication  network  technology  and  requires  both  physical 
maintenance&  development  as  well  as  application  software  upgrade.  This  system  will  keep  on 
upgrading  to  maintain  safe  and  high  efficient  payment  and  settlement  services  so  as  to  support 
economic and industrial development. 
Second  is  a  credit  registration  system.  The  construction  of  credit  registration  system  is  to  smooth 
information sharing and flow between financial institutions and enterprises. Basic information such as 
enterprise’s  organization  framework,  history  and  bank  account,  payments,  credits,  mortgage 
information etc. will make commercial banks understand much clearly enterprises reputation and fund 
safety when offering loans and payment and settlement services, and help business counterparts and 
commercial banks to make a rational judgment. Even personal information can also be covered in the 
BIS Review 9/2006 
 1
system, such as individual home mortgage loans, auto loans, credit limit of individual credit card, and 
information  related  to  personal  credit  records.  Obviously,  the  credit  registration  system  is  a  huge 
system  composed  of  the  enterprise  credit  registration  system  and  the  individual  credit  registration 
system.  The  individual  credit  registration  system  was  launched  in  Shanghai  first  on  a  pilot  basis 
covering all Shanghai residents. Under the guidance of the State Council, in the beginning of 2003 the 
PBC  started  to  establish  individual  credit  registration  system  nationwide  which  has  been  put  into 
operation  recently.  Together  with  the  enterprise  credit  registration  system  established  in  1997,  the 
national credit registration system run by the PBC now covers all enterprises and individuals who have 
transactions  with  banks.  Both  enterprises  and  financial  institutions  are  very  concerned  about  the 
system. Currently, 4.52 million borrowing enterprises are registered in the enterprise credit registration 
system,  and  the  outstanding  balance  of  RMB  loans  reached  17.36  trillion  yuan,  accounting  for  90 
percent of total outstanding loans of financial institutions, with monthly inquiry averaging at 1.44 million 
times. 340 million individuals are registered in the individual credit registration system; among whom, 
35  million  individuals  have  credit  records,  with  2.2  trillion  yuan  of  outstanding  balance  of  loans, 
accounting  for  97.5  percent  of  the  outstanding  balance  of  total  consumer  loans  and  daily  inquiry 
averaging at 110 thousand times. These two systems have played a crucial role in preventing credit 
risks. In sum, the credit registration system will help promote the establishment of a good social credit 
environment.  Of  course,  many  tasks  remain  to  be  done  in  this  regard,  including  improving  the 
database, developing both hardware and software, improving relevant laws and deep processing of 
the  information.  For  example,  some  problems  are  caused  by  the  absence  of  defined  laws  or 
regulations on credit registration, such as, what kind of information can be used by the third party? 
What information cannot be provided due to privacy concern? Whether different information including 
bank  account,  payment  history,  tax  payment,  mortgage,  fake  goods  production  records  and  black 
points  in  the  customs  can  be  gathered  in  a  package?  In  addition,  information  processing  is  very 
complicate due to different demands. If both the central bank and commercial banks cannot meet the 
needs  of  information,  processing  by  the  third  party  will  require  legal  approval  to  be  conducted. 
Currently, credit registration system has been functioning well; both the industrial and financial sectors 
have paid high attention to it and acknowledged its important role in China’s economic and industrial 
development. 
Third  is  an  inter-bank  bankcard  information  exchange  system.  Bankcards  are  mainly  used  by 
individual  consumers,  but  many  enterprises  and  government  agencies  also  use  them  in  their  daily 
activities.  The  bankcard  market  is  a  competitive  one  with  different  brands  issued  by  different 
companies. Without cross-bank acceptance, a POS machine placed in a shop could only process a 
particular bankcard, so the payment efficiency will be seriously reduced, and bankcard users will also 
feel  inconveniency  in  using  the  cards.  Accordingly,  an  inter-bank  bankcard  information  exchange 
system  must  be  established  to  realize  cross-bank  acceptance.  Under  the  PBC’s  coordination,  the 
China Unionpay was established by commercial banks to be responsible for the bankcard information 
exchange  among  commercial  banks.  Successful  cross-bank  transactions  done  through  the  China 
Unionpay in 2005 totaled 2.209 billion, involving a value of 108 million yuan. At present, the Unionpay 
has been registered as a brand logo that was used by all domestic RMB bankcards and also some 
bankcards issued by commercial banks in Hong Kong. The Unionpay bankcards are also accepted in 
20  countries  and  regions,  including  Hong  Kong,  Macao,  Singapore,  Malaysia,  Thailand,  USA, 
Germany, France and Australia. It has not only facilitated the Chinese consumers to travel and spend 
abroad, but also exerted great impact on the development of relevant industries. 
Fourth  is  the  anti-money  laundering  system.  Needless  to  say,  money-laundering  is  harmful  to 
sustained  social  and  economic  development  and  the  sound  performance  of  financial  institutions. 
Orderly business development needs not only a good  AML information monitoring system, but also 
relevant prevention measures and punishment mechanism. At present, AML legislation is advanced 
steadily. The PBC has made great efforts in different levels to set up the AML system. The first level is 
the  AML  Joint  Ministerial  Conference  led  by  the  PBC  under  the  steering  of  the  State  Council. 
Comprising of 23 government departments including authorities of justice, public security, commerce, 
taxation,  industrial  business,  customs  and  financial  supervision,  the  Joint  Ministerial  Conference  is 
mainly  responsible  for  research,  working  out  AML  strategy,  guideline  and  policy  and  strengthening 
coordination  and  cooperation  among  different  government  departments  in  drawing  AML  regulations 
and examining irregularities. The second level is the AML management system, i.e. the AML system of 
the PBC that is also a national system. It includes an AML irregularities inspection system targeted at 
financial industry, and also an AML information monitoring center, a large data processing system that 
detects money-laundering activities and other funds transaction clues related to other illegal actions 
through  collecting  and  analyzing  large-value  and  suspicious  transaction  reports  from  commercial 
2 
 BIS Review 9/2006
banks.  The  third  level  is  to  participate  in  international  AML  cooperation  since  money-laundering 
activities  always  connect  with  drug  traffic  and  terrorist  activities.  Currently,  China  is  making  great 
efforts to join the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) and other international organizations, participate 
in  the  stipulation  of  international  AML  rules  and  establish  bilateral  supervision  cooperation  and 
information  exchange  in  AML  with  other  countries  to  create  a  favorable  external  environment  for 
financial institutions and business entities to undergo cross-border business operation. 
Fifth  is  a  state  treasury  system.  The  state  treasury  system  provides  financial  services  for  fiscal, 
taxation and customs agencies and ensures the smooth implementation of government budget as well 
as safe,  efficient  use  of  fiscal  funds.  The  services of  state  treasury  system  are  relatively  indirect  to 
industries and businesses. The central bank is responsible for the fund flow of state treasury system, 
including collecting tax revenues and allocating budget expenditure. Fiscal funds managed by state 
treasury belong to the whole nation; therefore, it is the PBC’s responsibility to safeguard its timely and 
full  collection  and  proper  use.  In  China,  each  government  level  has  its  own  treasury,  even  the 
government at county level, so the treasury system is also a huge one. The state treasury has also 
established computer network and undergone continuous upgrade to make sure that tax revenue can 
be timely collected and fiscal funds can be transferred on time.  
To properly provide the above-mentioned services, the relevant systems should function safely and 
soundly without interruption, so a back-up system must be established. When the “9.11” incident in the 
USA  took  place,  many  people  worried  whether  commercial  banks  in  New  York  and  the  Stock 
Exchange and NASDAQ in the Wall Street could maintain its normal operation. Accordingly, how to 
recover from disasters has attracted much attention of the financial industry because electronic service 
systems play a very important role in financial market system, not only affecting cross-bank payment & 
settlement, but also impacting the operation of money market, bond market, stock market and foreign 
exchange market. The PBC is endeavoring to promote the construction of relevant back-up systems. 
The above-mentioned service system provided by the central bank is not a fully competitive system, 
but the central bank has managed such a system in a business way to provide industrial enterprises 
with these social services. 
In  addition,  the  central  bank  also  provides  other  important  market  services  by  establishing  market 
platforms. The first is a foreign exchange market. People may regard the foreign exchange market as 
a  place  where  financial  institutions  continuously  trade  foreign  exchanges,  but  in  fact,  most  of  the 
foreign exchange trading done by financial institutions on behalf of the enterprises. Since enterprises 
have demands for currency exchange and risk management to manage their foreign exchange risks 
by foreign exchange forward or swap transactions, financial institutions first trade risks with enterprises 
before they go to the foreign exchange market to trade with other financial institutions. At the same 
time,  enterprises  can  also  participate  in  foreign  exchange  trading  directly.  In  particular,  the  foreign 
exchange  market  becomes  very  dynamic  with  much  stronger  demands  after  the  reform  of  RMB 
exchange rate regime on July 21 of 2005. The PBC as a central bank must establish a market-trading 
platform  to  ensure  market  operation,  such  as  quotation,  delivery  and  clearing,  at  the  same  time  to 
maintain a good market order. 
The second is an inter-bank bond market. This market now is keeping on growing. In terms of bond 
transactions,  some  3730  enterprises  participate  in  the  market  apart  from  the  financial  institutions. 
Market participants can manage their own account by investing in bonds or other financial instruments 
with their short-term idle money. At present, the inter-bank bond market has developed more abundant 
products  to  help  enterprises  manage  their  funds,  especially,  enterprises  with  different  revenue  time 
period. For example, some may spend more money in the first half of a year and receive more in the 
second half, while others are fee-collecting enterprises, like water companies and power plants, which 
collect  money  on  monthly  basis.  The  inter-bank  bond  market  also  provides  electronic  delivery  and 
settlement services to much more participants than the foreign exchange market does. 
The third is a gold market. Gold is a kind of metal as well as a production material. In some industries, 
particularly  in  electronic  industry,  gold  is  used  quite  often;  in  addition,  gold  is  also  used  in  jewelry 
industry. Accordingly, gold is involved in foreign trade in large volume. To regulate and develop the 
gold  market  in  China,  the  PBC  established  Shanghai  Gold  Exchange  in  2002.  Shanghai  Gold 
Exchange  now  has  128  members,  among  which,  110  members  are  involved  in  industry  of  gold 
production,  consumption  and  refinery.  Enterprises  can  conduct  gold  transactions,  invest  and  hedge 
risks through the gold market. 
Those  examples  explain  how  the  central  bank  together  with  commercial  banks  and  other  financial 
institutions  establishes  market  platforms  for  industrial  enterprises  in  terms  of  financial  services  and 
BIS Review 9/2006 
 3
provides  good  services  to  satisfy  enterprises’  demands  in  market.  Of  course,  the  central  bank  is 
mainly responsible for stipulating market rules and resolving relevant problems. 
Today, I introduced the financial services provided by the PBC in terms of financial support service 
system  and  market  platforms,  which  are  highly  related  to  economic  development  and  industrial 
development.  Along  with  economic  development,  the  central  bank  will  meet  higher  demand  for 
financial services with regard to service level, size and safety and face new challenges in preventing 
and  cracking  down  money-laundering  and  banknotes  counterfeits  activities.  Together  with  other 
partners in the society, the central bank will utilize modern technology to accelerate service innovation 
and improve financial services so as to promote the rapid development of financial industry and the 
whole economy and other industries. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 9/2006
