Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Working together for a better nation  
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines,  at  the 
General  Membership  Meeting  and  Induction  of  2006-2007  Officers  and  Directors,  Bank  Marketing 
Association of the Philippines (BMAP), Makati City, 26 January 2006. 
 Distinguished  officers  and  members  of  the  Bank  Marketing  Association  of  the  Philippines  (BMAP), 
colleagues and friends in the banking industry, special guests, ladies and gentlemen: good evening! 
Thank you for this privilege of once again witnessing your first general meeting for the year and the 
induction of your newly elected officers.  
It  is  comforting  to  note  that  your  2006  officials  are  mainly  re-electionists,  led  by  your  President  Mr. 
Roberto  Banaag.  Your  membership  made  a  wise  decision  as  this  move  ensures,  among  others, 
continuity and consistency of your programs and advocacies. 
We expect this to consequently translate to BMAP’s sustained support of the priority reforms that we, 
at  Bangko  Sentral,  continue  to  implement  for  a  more  stable  and  dynamic,  more  efficient,  more 
depositor- and customer- friendly banking system. 
BSP reform initiatives  
The  BSP  indeed  has  taken  bold  and  decisive  moves.  We  believe  we  have  already  mounted  the 
appropriate  regulatory  framework  for  the  prudent  conduct  of  banking  business  in  these  challenging 
times through the reforms initiated by my esteemed predecessor.  
The next thing to do is to make this work. 
Foremost on our must-do-list is the alignment of existing regulations with international standards and 
the promulgation of policies more responsive to the growing competitiveness and sophistication of the 
financial services industry.  
We  are  now  following  through  on  the  enhancements  of  regulations  to  strengthen  corporate 
governance,  risk  management,  and  capital  adequacy  in  our  banks,  which  would  be  complemented 
with effective and efficient enforcement.  
In  line  with  these  commitments,  the  Monetary  Board  (MB)  recently  approved  the  issuance  of  three 
major regulations covering:  
• 
• 
• 
The  new  FRP  effectively  amends  the  Manual  of  Accounts  MOA)  and  revises  the  reportorial 
requirements  for  banks  to  align  these  with  the  provisions  of  the  Philippine  Financial  Reporting 
Standards (PFRS) / Philippine Accounting Standards PAS). To the extent possible, we have integrated 
in the new FRP the requirements of the PFRS/PAS and the Basel 2 capital adequacy framework. The 
new FRP will also facilitate an enhanced off-site surveillance for the BSP on its supervised entities.  
On the other hand, embodied in the guidelines on supervision by risks are BSP’s expectations on how 
banks and other financial institutions should manage their risks. These are also designed to provide 
guidance on how the risk-focused supervision will be applied to these risks.  
Likewise, the guidelines on I.T. risk management are intended to communicate BSP’s expectation of 
banks in the area of I.T. risk management process. These would effectively identify, measure, monitor 
and control banks’ technology risk exposure.  
To  ensure  healthy  competition  and  promote  growth,  we  have  also  liberalized  certain  aspects  of 
banking.  We  have  lifted  the  moratorium  on  bank  branching.  We  have  opened  up  outsourcing 
The new financial reporting package (FRP);  
The guidelines on supervision by risk; and  
The guidelines on information technology (IT) risk management  
BIS Review 6/2006 
 1
possibilities  and  allowed  an  increasingly  wide array of  treasury,  consumer  and  wealth  management 
products.  
Many more meaningful changes in the banking industry can be expected this year and in the coming 
years as we further move to fully adopt international best practices. For instance, you will be seeing 
more  binding  standards  on  connected  party  transactions  come  into  force  after  a  2-year  transition 
period.  There  will  also  be  more  standards  and  better  enforcement  of  risk  disclosure  and  client 
suitability to better protect customers.  
Moreover, the BSP is coming out with a stricter “fit and proper rule” to ensure that officials tasked to 
manage banks and other financial institutions possess the required integrity and competence. 
These regulatory enhancements will naturally affect the conduct of banking in our land.  
2. 
Banking prospects in 2006  
We  envision  a  banking  landscape  dominated  by  a  handful  of  major  banks  complemented  by  many 
smaller banks that serve various well-defined market niches. We expect an accelerated consolidation 
process in the banking industry in the next 3 years that will be principally driven by:  
1. 
a stronger regulatory framework that will hasten the exit of weak banks (hopefully on voluntary 
basis);  
the  increasingly  stronger  competition  by  existing  foreign  banks  and  new  foreign  investors 
coming in into existing banks; and  
the rigorous technical demands posed by modern banking and finance standards.  
3. 
We  also  see  parallel  exciting  developments  in  the  capital  market.  The  BSP  will  continue  its  active 
collaboration  with  other  government  agencies  and  the  private  sector  for  the  completion  of  much-
needed market infrastructure to enhance system integrity and overall market confidence. In the end, 
our vision is that all these changes in the capital market will provide:  
• 
• 
• 
• 
A richer array of investment opportunities for the public,  
Greater funding flexibility for public as well as for the private sectors;  
Greater scope for interest rate risk management, and  
More reliable signaling mechanism for pricing financial assets  
the 
than 
view 
rather 
orientation 
after-the-fact 
forward-looking 
BSP’s own transformation process  
We are complementing the industry’s transformation process with our own.  
In fact, we are in the process of fully adopting a consolidated and risk-based supervision approach. 
International best practice on banking supervision has adopted this approach primarily because of its 
more 
traditional 
supervision. Accordingly,  the  focus  of  our  attention  now  is  on  the  most  significant  risks  within  a 
particular financial institution and within the industry as a whole.  
Consistent with this new approach, we are reorganizing the BSP supervision and examination sector. 
We expect to generate benefits particularly in terms of operational efficiency, cost efficiencies, as well 
as  greater  value-added  to  BSP  supervised  entities  through  better-focused  post-examination 
recommendations.  
We are also continuing our lobbying efforts in congress for the amendment of the BSP charter. This 
will make the BSP a more effective monetary authority and banking regulator.  
We  are  likewise  strongly  advocating  for  the  enactment  of  the  Credit  Information  System  (CIS)  Act, 
which will pave the way for the establishment of a truly comprehensive credit information system. This 
is  expected  to  lower  the  cost  of  credit,  provide  greater  access  to  credit  in  general,  and  reduce  the 
dependency on collateral-based lending.  
Toward a seamless supervision of  the BSP’s supervised and regulated entities, we are also further 
strengthening our ties with our co-regulators, both here and abroad.  
of 
2 
 BIS Review 6/2006
I am happy to report that we are making real progress on various initiatives being undertaken under 
the umbrella of the financial sector forum (FSF). Discussions during the sixth FSF meeting centered 
on  programs  aimed  at  deepening  consumer  literacy  and  further  strengthening  of  coordinating 
arrangements between and among the member agencies (SEC, BSP, OIC and PDIC).  
The Financial Sector Forum, through its Consumer Protection and Education Committee (CPEC), shall 
mount a consumer protection and education campaign plan. This plan aims to equip consumers with 
adequate,  timely  and  relevant  information  about  financial  products  and  services,  not  only  for  their 
protection but also for maintaining the stability of the financial sector.   
This is a specific area where the expert assistance of BMAP will be most welcome. Actually, we are 
counting on BMAP to respond to this campaign with the same vigor and dedication as it did to our call 
for the crafting of a consumer code in the Philippines. The BSP attributes to BMAP’s strong political 
will the expedient launching of the “Service code for consumer banking in the Philippines” in October 
2005. (Only 14 months after BSP challenged the industry to make one for the Philippines).  
The FSF, through its Reporting, Information Exchange and Dissemination Committee (RIED), has also 
moved  to  supplement  its  current  Memorandum  of  Agreement  (MOA)  covering  bilateral  information 
exchange  among  FSF  members.  The  amendments  will  allow  the  establishment  of  an  overall 
framework  for  the  exchange  of  relevant  reports  and/or  data  which  in  turn  shall  facilitate  the 
development of comprehensive statistics on the financial system.  
To  address  cross-border  supervisory  issues,  we  have  already  established  contacts  with  our  foreign 
counterparts  in  ten  (10)  countries  where  Philippine  banks  also  operate. Two  of  them,  the  China 
Banking Regulatory Commission and the Nederlandsche Bank, have already made commitments for 
the exchange of information on areas of common interest as supervisory authorities. Meanwhile, we 
are confident that we shall be able to see the fruits of our negotiations for the adoption of a minimum 
set  of  ground  rules  for  the  exchange  of  similar  information  with  the  remaining  eight  foreign 
supervisors1.  
A call for support  
BMAP,  together  with  the  other  captains  of  the  banking  industry,  has  undoubtedly  made  significant 
contributions towards the realization of many of our reform initiatives. However, we still have a plateful 
of them to complete.  
We  believe  that  BMAP  remains  strategically  positioned  to  continue  to  enlist  the  support  of  industry 
primemovers in these endeavors. You have the power to promote synergy amid a mixture of divergent 
plans to achieve our shared vision for the banking industry and for our country.  
We  look  forward  to  another  year  of  closely  working  with  you. Once  again,  congratulations  to  your 
officers!  
Thank you very much. Mabuhay tayong lahat. 
                                                      
1   Namely:  Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore,  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority,  Germany’s  Federal  Financial  Supervisory 
Authority  (FFSA),  Taiwan’s  Financial  Supervisory  Commission,  UK’s  Financial  Services  Authority,  Japan’s  Financial 
Services Agency, and the US Federal Reserve Bank 
BIS Review 6/2006 
 3
