Jarle Bergo: The role of interest rates and the outlook for the Norwegian 
economy 
Address  by  Mr  Jarle  Bergo,  Deputy  Governor  of  Norges  Bank,  at  a  seminar  hosted  by  Swedbank 
Markets Oslo/First Securities, Gardermoen, 23 March 2006. 
 charts can be found on the Norges Bank’s website. 
The 
The  address  is  based  on  the  assessments  presented  at  Norges  Bank’s  press  conference  following  the  Executive  Board’s 
monetary policy meeting on 16 March, Inflation Report 1/06 and on previous speeches. 
 The interest rate is a variable that affects most of us, whether we are investors or borrowers. And even 
if  we  don’t  have  debts  or  assets,  the  influence  of  the  interest  rate  on  the  economy  will  affect  us 
indirectly.  In  this  presentation,  I  would  like  first  to  discuss  briefly  the  various  roles  played  by  the 
interest  rate  in  a  theoretical  framework  and  as  an  instrument  in  monetary  policy.  With  this  as 
background, I will go on to present Norges Bank’s view of the Norwegian economy and our monetary 
policy assessment, which was published in the Inflation Report on 16 March.  
The interest rate has several functions 
Interest rates are the terms at which money or goods today may be traded off for money or goods at a 
future date - the price we pay to bring consumption forward in time and the compensation we receive 
for postponing consumption. 
The interest rate is also the price of money – the price we pay in order to have liquid holdings and the 
compensation we receive for storing our savings in less liquid forms. 
The interest rate is also used as an instrument in economic policy. Setting the interest rate to achieve 
a monetary policy objective, often price stability or low and stable inflation, is usually the responsibility 
of the central bank. This is also the case in Norway.  
Low  and  stable  inflation  provides  the  economy  with  a  nominal  anchor,  and  is  the  most  important 
contribution  monetary  policy  can  make  to  sound  economic  developments  in  the  long  term.  This 
contributes to increased predictability for those who take decisions about saving and investment today, 
although the result of those decisions also depends on how the economy develops in the future.  
In its conduct of monetary policy, Norges Bank operates a flexible inflation targeting regime, so that 
weight is given to both variability in inflation and variability in output and employment. Flexible inflation 
targeting builds a bridge between the long-term objective of monetary policy, which is to keep inflation 
on  target  and  provide  an  anchor  for  inflation  expectations,  and  the  more  short-term  objective  of 
stability in the real economy.  
Monetary policy influences the economy with long and  variable lags. Norges Bank sets the interest 
rate  with  a  view  to  stabilising  inflation  at  the  target  within  a  reasonable  time  horizon,  normally  1–3 
years. The relevant horizon will depend on disturbances to which the economy is exposed and how 
they will affect the path for inflation and the real economy in the period ahead.  
The primary instrument in monetary policy is Norges Bank’s sight deposit rate. This rate determines 
the very short interest rates in the money market with maturities from one day upwards, normally up to 
Norges  Bank’s  next  monetary  policy  meeting.  Longer-term  rates  are  determined  by  expectations 
concerning  Norges  Bank’s  use  of  instruments  in  the  future  and  by  the  degree  of  confidence  in 
monetary policy.  
It may be useful to distinguish between three channels through which the real interest rate influences 
inflation:  
The  demand  channel:  As  interest  rates  increase,  household  and  municipal  consumption  and 
investment will tend to slow down. This is because they have less money left over after servicing their 
debt  and  because  borrowing  is  more  expensive.  Corporate  finances  are  weakened  and  investment 
may become less attractive. Lower demand leads to lower output and employment. Wage growth may 
BIS Review 22/2006 
 1
slow  down.  Lower  wage  growth  combined  with  reduced  profit  margins  will  result  in  decreasing 
inflation.  
The  exchange  rate  channel:  The  effect  of  interest  rate  changes  may  be  amplified  because  the 
interest rate also affects the krone exchange rate. When interest rates are higher, more people will 
invest and fewer will borrow in NOK. Higher interest rates will thus normally lead to an appreciation of 
the krone. Imported goods will then become less expensive and inflation will decelerate. A stronger 
krone also dampens exports and reduces profitability in Norwegian business and industry. The effect 
on  the  exchange  rate  of  a  change  in  interest  rates  will  vary  as  themes  and  sentiments  shift  in  the 
foreign exchange market.  
The  expectations  channel:  We  believe  that  expectations  play  an  important  role  when  prices  and 
wages  are  set.  Expectations  concerning  future  inflation  and  economic  stability  have  considerable 
impact, not least in the foreign exchange market. Inflation expectations also influence wage demands 
and  have  an  effect  when  companies  adjust  their  prices.  It  is  difficult  to  be  precise  about  how 
expectations are formed. Confidence in the inflation target may provide an anchor. Past inflation rates 
may also influence what we think inflation will be in the future. There is thus an interaction between 
inflation expectations and inflation. 
If there is confidence in monetary policy, expected inflation in the medium term will be close to the 
inflation  target.  This  contributes  to  stabilising  inflation  around  the  target.  It  is  thus  important  for  the 
central  bank  to  ensure  that  households,  companies,  the  social  partners  and  financial  market 
participants are confident that inflation will remain low and stable.  
Let me introduce the concepts of the “neutral rate” and the “long-term equilibrium rate”. Both should be 
seen  as  real  rates,  that  is  nominal  interest  rates  adjusted  for  expected  inflation.  The  neutral  real 
interest rate is defined as the rate that does not in itself result in an increase or a reduction in price and 
cost inflation in the economy in the course of a business cycle. An assessment of whether interest rate 
setting is expansionary or contractionary involves comparing actual short-term market rates with the 
neutral rate. I will revert to the quantification of the neutral rate later. 
The  interest  rate  influences  savings  and  investment.  In  the  longer  term,  the  real  interest  rate  level 
determines capital accumulation in the economy and the potential for economic growth. The long term 
equilibrium  real  interest  rate  is  the  rate  that  ensures  that  capital  accumulation  corresponds  to  the 
saving  decisions  in  the  economy.  This  rate  results  in  a  path  for  potential  output  that  satisfies  the 
preferences for distributing demand over time without generating pressures or slumps in the economy.  
The  equilibrium  rate  is  determined  by  long-term  phenomena  associated  with  the  structure  of  the 
economy, like consumer impatience, population growth and technological progress. The neutral rate is 
defined on the basis of its impact on capacity utilisation and inflationary pressures in the economy. In 
the long term, the neutral interest rate should correspond to the long-term equilibrium interest rate in 
the economy. 
There will also be limits as to how much the long-term equilibrium interest rate can deviate between 
countries over time in a world of liberalised capital markets.  
The interest rate therefore has several roles to play in the economy and these roles are fairly closely 
linked. The interest rate shall in the short and medium term contribute to stable inflation and stable 
developments in production. This will require active use of the interest rate as a policy instrument. But 
the interest rate should also contribute to equilibrium in the market for real capital in the long run. To 
achieve this, the real interest rate must not over time deviate too much from the return on real capital. 
Substantial deviations can give rise to undesirable fluctuations in the markets for real capital that have 
no basis in economic fundamentals.  
In Norway, both short- and long-term real interest rates are at the moment at a low level, compared to 
the past few decades. This is also the case in many other countries. How large the deviations from the 
neutral and the equilibrium rates are, on the other hand, is less clear. Neither the neutral rate nor the 
equilibrium rate are variables that can be observed. Economic theory can contribute insight into the 
factors  that  determine  the  equilibrium  rate,  but  attempts  to  quantify  it  based  on  theory  yield  an 
uncomfortably broad interval. An alternative is to use historical average interest rates on the basis of 
an assumption that actual real interest rates will vary around the equilibrium rate. This method also 
poses problems, however.  
2 
 BIS Review 22/2006
Throughout the period 1870-2005, the average long-term real interest rate in Norway has remained 
close to the average in the UK and the US: Norway 2.2 per cent, the UK 2.0 per cent and the US 2.8 
per cent. 
In all countries, fluctuations in real interest rates have been substantial in periods. The real interest 
rate has fallen markedly since the beginning of the 1990s. 
There is an ongoing debate about the reasons for the decline in long-term real interest rates over the 
last few years. I will not elaborate on that debate here; it is a subject worthy of a seminar by itself. One 
particular possibility, pertaining to the discussion of the roles of the real interest rate, is that the fall in 
long-term interest rates may partly reflect market participants’ assessment that the neutral real interest 
rate  has  fallen.  During  a  business  cycle,  it  is  the  real  interest  rate’s  deviation  from  the  neutral  real 
interest rate – the real interest rate gap – that indicates whether monetary policy is expansionary or 
contractionary.  
The neutral real interest rate is difficult to estimate and may change over time. Nevertheless, we have 
tried.  On  an uncertain  basis we estimate  that  the neutral real  interest rate  for Norway may now  be 
close to 2½ per cent, having come down approximately 1½ percentage points since the mid-1990s. 
Forecasts in the latest Inflation Report indicate that the short term real interest rate in Norway will be 
close to its neutral level in about four years. 
According  to  this,  the  real  interest  rate  gap  (the  difference  between  the  neutral  rate  and  the  actual 
rate)  has  been  negative  since  2004.  There  is  evidence  that  monetary  policy  has  had  the  desired 
impact both on the real economy and on inflation.  
Monetary policy at the present phase of the cycle 
Growth in the Norwegian economy has been high since summer 2003. The expansion has gradually 
broadened.  Low  interest  rates  have  contributed  to  a  relatively  sharp  rise  in  household  demand 
throughout the upturn. At the same time, solid global growth has led to increased demand for many 
Norwegian  export  goods  and  high  prices.  Fixed  investment  in  the  petroleum  sector  has  increased 
sharply,  resulting  in  growing  demand  for  goods  and  services  supplied  by  mainland  enterprises. 
Mainland fixed investment has also picked up gradually. So far in the economic upturn, the mainland 
economy has grown by an average of about 3.5 per cent quarterly, measured as an annualised rate.  
The  output  gap  is  a  measure  that  expresses  our  assessment  of  total  capacity  utilisation  in  the 
economy. The output gap is defined as the percentage difference between actual output and potential 
output. Potential output indicates the level of output that is consistent with price and cost stability. The 
estimate for the output gap is uncertain partly because the level of potential output is unobservable. 
Since  official  statistics  on  overall  activity  in  the  economy  are  not  available  immediately  and  are 
subsequently revised, the level of actual output will be uncertain. In assessing the size of the output 
gap,  technical  calculations  are  compared  with  other  information  about  capacity  utilisation  in  the 
economy.  As  more  information  has  come  to  light,  the  output  gap  has  been  revised  downwards  for 
2005, but at the same time the growth rate towards the end of the year is estimated to be higher. 
Output has increased more rapidly than potential output for 2-3 years. Much of the available capacity 
has  now  been  put  to  use.  We  now  estimate  that  capacity  utilisation  was  approximately  ½  per  cent 
above normal at end-2005.  
Despite strong economic growth, inflation is still low. As the recovery became more broadly based, 
inflation gradually began to edge higher. In the second half of 2005, the 12-month rise in consumer 
prices adjusted for tax changes and excluding energy products (CPI-ATE) varied between 1 and 1½ 
per cent, before surprising on the downside in December and January. In February, inflation edged up 
again. Monthly variations in the CPI-ATE have been fairly pronounced recently.  
There  is  little  prospect  that  inflation  will  increase  substantially  in  the  near  term.  If  we  adjust  for  the 
effect of reduced maximum day-care rates, the year-on-year rise in the CPI-ATE is projected to be 1¼ 
per  cent  in  the  second  quarter  of  2006.  Inflation  will  be  dampened  by  continued  low  external  price 
impulses and the appreciation of the krone through 2004 and 2005. After a period, the unwinding of 
the sharp rise in petrol prices through 2005 will probably lead to some decline in the year-on-year rise 
in the CPI.  
Growth among our trading partners is still solid, and appears on the whole to be somewhat stronger 
than  assumed  a  few  months  ago.  High  commodity  prices  have  contributed  to  somewhat  higher 
BIS Review 22/2006 
 3
inflation,  but  so  far  underlying  inflation  has  not  been  pushed  up.  Key  rates  have  been  raised  in  a 
number of countries, and market participants expect further interest rate increases.  
Key  rates  remain  low  among  many  of  our  trading  partners.  Market  participants  expect  a  gradual 
increase in key rates in the period ahead, both in Sweden and the euro area. In the US, the key rate is 
expected to increase by a further 50 basis points before peaking. In the UK, the key rate is expected 
to remain virtually unchanged in the period ahead.  
Long-term interest rates are also low in most other countries.  
Oil prices have risen markedly over the last couple of years. 
Growth in global oil demand is expected to approach 2 per cent in 2006. This is in line with expected 
growth in supply from non-OPEC countries. On the whole, this supports the view that the price of oil 
will remain high. Futures prices indicate that the price of oil may remain above USD 60 per barrel for 
the next few years. 
High growth in the global economy also contributed to a further rise in prices for other commodities. 
This increase has continued in 2006. In spite of a slight decline recently, metal prices have increased 
substantially  in  recent  months.  There  has  also  been  a  pronounced  increase  in  futures  prices, 
indicating expectations of a sustained upward movement in metal prices similar to that of oil prices. 
High commodity prices have contributed to somewhat higher head-line inflation, but so far underlying 
inflation has not risen.  
Rising commodity prices and buoyant activity in markets that are important for Norway have fuelled 
growth in the Norwegian economy.  
We assume that the upturn will continue for our trading partners as a whole. Growth is projected to be 
somewhat stronger in 2006 than in 2005. Nevertheless, there will still be idle resources, especially in a 
number of European countries, implying continued low inflation.  
In  recent  years,  investment  in  the  petroleum  sector  has  increased  sharply.  Investment  growth  has 
generated substantial impulses to the mainland economy. The large development projects relating to 
Snøhvit outside of Hammerfest and Ormen Lange at Aukra have made a large contribution to the high 
level of investment. Both these projects also involve considerable onshore development, which may 
have  generated  stronger  impulses  to  the  business  sector  locally  than  pure  offshore  projects. 
Investment  activity  associated  with  Snøhvit  and  Ormen  Lange will  probably decline  in  the  period  to 
completion in 2007. 
High  oil  prices  have  led  to  a  strong  increase  in  activity  on  the  Norwegian  continental  shelf.  Many 
projects have been launched to increase recovery from fields in operation. A number of oil companies 
have  revised  upwards  the  long-term  oil  prices  that  are  used  as  a  basis  for  investment  decisions, 
although they are still moderate compared with futures prices.  
Further  out  in  the  projection  period,  developments  in  petroleum-related  investment  are  highly 
uncertain. It is assumed that overall activity will decline somewhat when Snøhvit and Ormen Lange 
are completed, but that the high oil price will contribute to maintaining investment at a relatively high 
level throughout the projection period.  
The fiscal rule implies a gradual phasing-in of petroleum revenues into the economy, approximately in 
pace with the expected real return on the Government Pension Fund – Global, formerly known as the 
Petroleum  Fund.  The  Government  Pension  Fund  –  Global  is  likely  to  expand  sharply  in  the  years 
ahead. On the basis of our assumptions for developments in oil prices ahead (oil futures prices), a 
mechanical application of the 4 per cent rule implies that the use of petroleum revenues will increase 
by  more  than  NOK  31  billion  from  2006  to  2009.  This  is  somewhat  higher  than  expected  in  the 
Government’s supplement to the budget for 2006. The difference can partly be explained by the fact 
that at end-2005 the Fund’s capital was higher than that estimated by the Government, and partly that 
the Government assumed that oil prices ahead would be lower than current oil futures. For 2007, we 
assume an approximately unchanged structural non-oil deficit.  
With continued solid growth in the Norwegian economy, it would be in line with the fiscal rule if the use 
of  petroleum  revenues  is  lower  than  the  expected  real  return  on  the  Government  Pension  Fund  – 
Global over a few years. Our projections are based on the assumption that fiscal policy will provide 
some  stimulus  to  aggregate  demand  and  output  in  2008  and  2009,  but  somewhat  less  than  a 
mechanical application of the fiscal rule based on our oil price assumption would imply.  
4 
 BIS Review 22/2006
Norges Bank operates a flexible inflation targeting regime and seeks to achieve an interest rate path 
that provides a reasonable balance between the objective of bringing inflation up towards 2.5 per cent 
over time and stabilising developments in output and employment.  
Norge Bank’s projections in the baseline scenario is based on an interest rate path that we find strikes 
a reasonable balance between the two objectives. In the baseline scenario, interest rates in Norway 
and abroad are assumed to rise somewhat faster in the longer term than current forward rates may 
imply. Exchange rate movements are difficult to project. The interest rate path at home and abroad 
may be consistent with an approximately unchanged krone exchange rate.  
The high growth rate in the economy implies a gradual pick-up in price and cost inflation. With interest 
rate developments as outlined above, CPI-ATE inflation is projected to increase from about 1¼ per 
cent today to about 2 per cent at the end of 2007. There are prospects of a further increase in inflation, 
with inflation projected to be close to the target of 2.5 per cent three years ahead. 
According to our estimates, capacity utilisation is now slightly higher than its normal level. Mainland 
GDP is projected to show sustained strong growth in 2006. The output gap is expected to increase 
over the next two years, but will peak at a fairly moderate level as gradual increases in the interest rate 
dampen demand growth. Growth in the global economy is projected to remain high, resulting in both 
high  demand  and  favourable  prices  for  the  Norwegian  export  sector.  There  are  prospects that  high 
petroleum investment will contribute to sustaining the high level of activity in the Norwegian economy. 
In  2008  and  2009,  a  continued  high  level  of  petroleum  revenues  may  imply  an  expansionary  fiscal 
policy. 
Interest-rate setting since last summer has been oriented towards a gradual increase in the interest 
rate  –  in  small,  not  too  frequent  steps  –  towards  a  more  normal  level.  Based  on  Norges  Bank’s 
assessment of the driving forces in the economy, this strategy appears robust. Output growth is strong 
and the labour market is becoming tighter more quickly than expected. Higher growth in the economy 
may  in  isolation  suggest  a  faster  increase  in  the  interest  rate  ahead.  This  would  reduce  the  risk  of 
bottlenecks in the economy, with rising cost inflation and continued debt build-up. On the other hand, 
the objective of bringing inflation up towards the target and anchoring inflation expectations argues for 
restraint in the upward movement of interest rates.  
On balance, this implies that the interest rate outlook remains virtually unchanged compared with the 
previous Report. Thus our current assessment indicates an interest rate path where the interest rate is 
raised by about 1 percentage point this year, in line with expectations in the market.  
The two previous Inflation Reports underlined the risk that a low interest rate over a long period may 
result in strong pressures in the economy, with a risk of bottlenecks, accelerating cost inflation and 
debt accumulation. On the other hand, the Reports also pointed to the risk that continued trade shifts 
and increased competition in labour and product markets might result in lower price and wage inflation 
and weaker pressures in the economy. Through autumn, statistics did not favour either alternative, but 
now we see signs of both. This may increase the uncertainty surrounding the state of the Norwegian 
economy. Monetary policy must strike a balance between the various objectives. Strong growth in the 
Norwegian economy, a tighter labour market, a pronounced rise in equity prices and high credit growth 
must be weighed against unexpectedly low inflation.  
We have illustrated the uncertainty surrounding forecasts for the interest rate, inflation and the output 
gap with fan charts. The width of the fan charts is based on historical disturbances. However, there is 
no certainty that future disturbances will be of the same nature and scale. The wider the fan charts 
are, the more uncertain the projections. Uncertainty surrounding the interest rate reflects the monetary 
policy response to unexpected disturbances to inflation, output and the exchange rate.  
On  the  basis  of  the  analysis  in  the  Inflation  Reports,  Norges  Bank’s  Executive  Board  assesses  the 
consequences  for  future  interest  rate  development  and  adopts  a  monetary  policy  strategy  for  the 
period to the next Report. The Executive Board’s assessment in its meeting 16 March was that the 
interest rate may gradually – in small, not too frequent steps – be brought back towards a more normal 
level.  The  objective  of  bringing  inflation  back  to  target  and  anchoring  inflation  expectations 
nevertheless implies that monetary policy will remain expansionary. The sight deposit rate should be in 
the interval 2¼ – 3¼ per cent in the period to the publication of the next Inflation Report on 29 June 
2006, conditional on economic developments that are broadly in line with the projections. 
Norges Bank’s Executive Board also decided at its meeting on 16 March to raise the sight deposit rate 
by 0.25 percentage point to 2.50 per cent.  
BIS Review 22/2006 
 5
