T T Mboweni: South Africa’s economic policy challenges 
Address by Mr T T Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the XVI meeting of the 
Central Bank Governors’ Club1, Irkutsk, Russia, 2 September 2006. 
 Governors, 
Honoured guests 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Introduction 
1. 
I am grateful to the Central Bank of the Russian Federation for inviting me to address the Governors’ 
Club today. I have been informed that one of the main objectives of the Governors’ Club is to promote 
co-operation  in  the  sphere  of  central  banking  among  member  countries.  In  the  light  of  the  rapid 
developments  in  the  global  financial  system,  there  is  little  doubt  about  the  benefits  of  associations 
such  as  the  Governors’  Club.  I  trust  that  the  experience  of  South  Africa  and  the  southern  African 
region  that  I  am  going  to  highlight  today  will  be  informative  to  the  objectives  and  activities  of  the 
Governors’ Club. 
South Africa’s economic growth performance 
2.  
Similar  to  the  many  countries  participating  at  this  meeting,  the  South  African  economy  can  be 
described as an economy in transition. It is the largest economy in Africa with gross domestic product 
in 2005 measuring US$239,4 billion (R1523 billion), compared to US$135,8 billion (R482,1 billion) in 
1994. GDP per capita increased from approximately US3,500 in 1994 to approximately US$5000 in 
2005,  in  a  country  with  a  population  of  approximately  47  million  people  and  an  annual  population 
growth  rate  of  marginally  below  1  per  cent.  Because  of  the  legacy  of  the  apartheid,  there  is  still  a 
highly skewed distribution of income and wealth in the country. According to recent estimates, the Gini 
coefficient is approximately 0.65. One of the primary objectives of the current government is to rectify 
these inequalities. This is a particular challenge given the high levels of unemployment in the country. 
The most recent unemployment rate for 2005 was approximately 27 per cent, slightly higher than a 
year earlier. 
Although South Africa is a major commodity producer, and commodities or commodity-based products 
make up a significant proportion of our exports, the contribution of mining to GDP is relatively small at 
6 per cent. The largest sector in the economy is the finance, real estate and business services sector 
which accounts for almost 20 per cent of GDP, followed by the manufacturing sector which accounts 
for just over 16 per cent. The agricultural sector is one of the smallest sector, contributing about 2,4 
per cent of GDP. 
Only twelve years ago the country emerged from apartheid, international isolation and economic and 
financial sanctions. The new dispensation inherited an economy characterised by low growth and high 
levels of inflation. Growth averaged 1,0 per cent over the period 1984 to 1993, while inflation averaged 
14,3 per cent during the same period. 
Since then, macroeconomic performance has improved significantly as a result of improved policies. In 
sharp  contrast  to  the  1,0  per  cent  GDP  growth  attained  during  the  decade  preceding  1994,  South 
Africa has since experienced twelve years of uninterrupted GDP growth, averaging 3,3 per cent per 
annum. The economy grew by 4,5 per cent and 4,9 per cent during the last two years and growth this 
year is also expected to exceed 4 per cent. 
                                                      
1  The  Governors`  Club  is  an  association  of  central  banks  from  Central  Asia,  Black  Sea  Region  and  Balkan  Countries.  It 
consists  of  19  members  from  the  following  countries:  Azerbaijan,  Albania,  Armenia,  Bulgaria,  Bosnia  and  Herzegovina, 
Greece,  Georgia,  Israel,  Kazakhstan,  Kyrgyz  Republic,  Macedonia,  Montenegro,  Moldova,  Russia,  Romania,  Serbia, 
Tajikistan, Turkey and Ukraine. 
BIS Review 80/2006 
 1
Prudent fiscal management has seen South Africa's budget deficit reduced from 5,2 per cent of GDP 
in  1994  to  2,0  per  cent  of  GDP  in  2004,  and  0,3  per  cent  of  GDP  in  2005.  Monetary  policy  also 
underwent a significant ‘regime change’ during the period, with the adoption of an inflation-targeting 
framework in February 2000. One of the fundamental objectives behind the adoption of the inflation 
targeting framework was to enhance policy transparency and accountability and thereby decrease and 
anchor inflationary expectations over time. 
The  improvement  in  the  performance  of  the  South  African  economy  needs  to  be  maintained  if 
meaningful progress is to be made in meeting the economic and social challenges facing the country, 
particularly  the  eradication  of  poverty  and  unemployment.  The  South  African  government  has, 
therefore,  set  itself  the  goals  of  halving  poverty  and  unemployment  by  2014.  To  meet  these 
challenges, the government seeks an annual GDP growth rate that averages 4,5 per cent or higher 
between 2005 and 2009, and an average growth rate of at least 6 per cent between 2010 and 2014. 
Public infrastructure investment to the value of R370 billion is also planned for the next three years. 
The targeted interventions in public transport, communication and electricity provision should not only 
contribute  to the  growth performance  over  the  next  couple  of  years  but  also go  some way  towards 
increasing the growth potential of the economy. 
Monetary policy 
3. 
It  is  our  firmly  held  view  that  the  best  contribution  that  monetary  policy  can  make  towards  the 
attainment of sustainable higher growth rates is to ensure price stability. The mandate of the South 
African Reserve Bank is defined in the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa as the protection of 
the value of the currency in the interest of balanced and sustainable economic growth in the Republic. 
Deriving  from  this  constitutional  mandate,  the  Bank  regards  its  primary  goal  in  the  South  African 
economic system as "the achievement and maintenance of price stability". This is currently interpreted 
as CPIX inflation – that is headline inflation less mortgage interest costs – being between 3 to 6 per 
cent. 
Despite some initial setbacks in late 2001 and during 2002, when inflation increased rapidly in reaction 
to  the  significant  depreciation  of  the  currency,  the  inflation  targeting  framework  has served  us  well. 
Having averaged 7,9 per cent between 2000 to 2002, inflation has been contained within the target 
range  since  September  2003.  For  the  past  two  years  inflation  has  averaged  4,0  per  cent.  Without 
getting into the merits and demerits of inflation targeting, the inflation targeting framework has served 
as a good anchor for monetary policy in South Africa. It has led to better co-ordination of monetary 
policy and other economic policies than was the case in the past. The political commitment, as evident 
in the pursuance of prudent fiscal policies, has been crucial to the containment of inflation within the 
target band. 
In  addition,  the  inflation  target  provides  the  basis  for  the  accountability  of  the  central  bank  and  it 
improves  public  understanding  of  monetary  policy  decisions.  The  inflation  targeting  framework  has 
also  helped  to  anchor  inflation  expectations  within  the  target  range,  thereby  further  enhancing 
confidence in monetary policy. This has, however, not been achieved easily. Although it proved to be 
unpopular in some quarters, a stringent monetary policy stance had to be adopted initially in order to 
demonstrate  the  commitment  of  the  Bank  to  meeting  its  statutory  obligations  and  ensuring  the 
credibility  of  monetary  policy.  The  initially  painful  experience  had  a  positive  outcome,  given  the 
subsequent favourable impact on price and wage setting behaviour in the economy. 
South Africa’s financial markets 
4.  
South  Africa  is  a  small  open  economy  by  international  standards.  This  in  itself  presents  some 
challenges  for  the  pursuit  of  price  stability,  not  least  of  which  is  the  nature  of  the  South  African 
financial  markets.  South  African  financial  markets  are  relatively  deeper,  broader  and  more 
sophisticated  than  those  in  a  number  of  emerging  markets.  According  to  the  latest  World 
Competitiveness  Yearbook,  South  Africa  is  ranked  46th  overall  but  22nd  in  Banking  and  Financial 
Services, higher than countries such as Ireland, Spain, France and even the United Kingdom. 
Trading in bonds and equities is fully automated and exchange-driven through the Bond Exchange of 
South  Africa  (Besa)  and  the  Johannesburg  Securities  Exchange  Limited  (JSE),  respectively. 
Corporates currently account for about 32 per cent of the total debt listed on Besa. The turnover on 
Besa  has  increased  from  R2,1  trillion  in  1995  to  R8,1  trillion  in  2005.  As  at  the  end  of  2005,  388 
2 
 BIS Review 80/2006
companies were listed on the JSE. The JSE has evolved into a truly international bourse, with more 
than 60 companies listed on at least one other exchange internationally, and non-residents accounting 
for about 20 per cent of the daily turnover. Turnover on the JSE has also grown sharply over recent 
years, increasing from an annual turnover of R22  billion in 1992 to R1,279 trillion in 2005. The All-
share index of the JSE reached record highs in April 2006, gaining around 18 per cent in the year to 
the  end  of  April.  The  All-share  index  is  currently  trading  at  levels  close  to  those  in  April,  having 
recouped  some  of  the  losses  incurred  in  May  2006  as  a  result  of  developments  in  international 
financial markets. 
The foreign exchange market in South Africa is the biggest domestic financial market, with an average 
daily  net  turnover  of  US$14,5  billion  in  July  of  this  year.  This  consisted  of  US$1,9  billion  spot 
transactions against the rand, US$1,0 billion forward contracts against the rand, US$7,5 billion swaps 
against  the  rand  and  the  balance  of  US$4  billion  consisting  of  transactions  in  third  (non-rand) 
currencies. The foreign exchange market is very liquid which makes it an easy target for portfolio re-
alignment by international investors. Thus, the potential for a direct impact on the exchange rate of the 
rand emanating from this source is great. As a result, the exchange rate of the rand is generally more 
volatile than those of most other emerging-market currencies. 
Since 2005, the rand has traded in a fairly stable range. However, as you are aware, the rand is seen 
as  both  a  commodity  and  emerging-market  currency.  As  a  result,  the  volatility  of  the  currency  has 
recently increased due to developments in commodity prices and changes in investors’ risk appetite 
for emerging-market currencies. The rise in precious metals prices has provided support to the rand 
while  the  currency  experienced  some  weakness  –  particularly  in  May  –  due  to  the  repricing  of 
emerging-market risk. The currency depreciated to levels around R6,60 to the dollar in mid-May from 
levels of around R6,00 to the dollar at the beginning of the year. The weakening of the currency was 
essentially due to the sell-off in emerging–market assets in May 2006. The rand depreciated further in 
June in response to concerns about adverse developments in the current account of the balance of 
payments. Unlike many of the other commodity producing countries, South Africa has a deficit on its 
current account, which increases the country’s vulnerability to currency movements. I will return to this 
issue a little later on. 
Historically the South African Reserve Bank practiced a policy of intervening in the foreign exchange 
markets in an attempt to smooth the volatility of the exchange rate. With no success, I must mention! 
These  activities  resulted  in  huge  losses  amounting  to  almost  US$24  billion  emanating  from  the 
oversold net open forward position of the SARB. The unsuccessful and costly policy of intervening in 
the  foreign  exchange  market  has  convinced  us  that  it  is  better  to  leave  the  determination  of  the 
exchange  level  of  the  rand  to  the  market.  The  SARB  has  stuck  to  this  policy  even  when  the  rand 
depreciated to R13,89 to the US dollar in late 2001 from levels around R8,00 to the US dollar at the 
beginning of 2001. Some analysts believe that this was a test of SARB’s resolve not to intervene in the 
foreign exchange market. 
Currently, the Bank’s activities in the domestic foreign exchange market are aimed at building foreign 
exchange  reserves,  smoothing  money-market  liquidity  conditions  through  intra-month  foreign 
exchange swaps and meeting clients’ foreign currency needs. The strategy of accumulating reserves 
is  done  in  such  a  way  that  we  “cream  off”  excess  “dollars”  in  the  market  without  any  significant 
influence  on  the  exchange  rate.  The  accumulated  gross  gold  and  other  foreign  exchange  reserves 
now amount to over US$24 billion and, combined with prudent macro-economic policies, has led to 
South Africa’s credit rating moving up four notches over the last twelve years - from BB in 1994 to 
BBB+ in August 2005. As you know, maintaining reserves is an expensive exercise – the challenge is 
therefore to ascertain and maintain a level of reserves that supports the economic fundamentals of the 
country.  However,  the  increase  in  reserves,  together  with  the  eradication  of  the  Net  Open  Foreign 
Currency Position, should contribute towards the stability of the currency and reduce uncertainty for 
both domestic and non-resident investors. 
Monetary policy challenges 
5.  
Let me now turn to some of the monetary policy challenges currently facing South Africa. 
The favourable inflation trend over the last couple of years has allowed for nominal interest rates to fall 
to levels last seen some three decades ago. Between June 2003 and April 2005, the repo rate was 
lowered  to  7  per  cent,  representing  a  total  reduction  of  650  basis  points  over  the  period.  After 
remaining unchanged for 13 months, the repo rate was increased by 50 basis points at each of the 
BIS Review 80/2006 
 3
MPC  meetings  in  June  and  August  this  year.  Given  the  increase  in  inflationary  pressures  and  the 
resultant deterioration in the risks to the inflation outlook, the Monetary Policy Committee considered it 
necessary to tighten policy at the last two meetings. 
The  main  factors  that  have  recently  led  to  the  heightening  of  the  risks,  namely  the  high  levels  of 
consumer spending, adverse movements in the exchange rate, a larger current account deficit, higher 
food prices and high oil prices. 
Consumer  spending  has  been  increasing  at  robust  levels  for  some  time  now.  The  low  interest  rate 
environment has fuelled rising levels of credit extension to the private sector. Growth in bank loans 
and  advances  extended  to  the  private  sector  measured  at  annual  rates  have  recently  increased  to 
levels  exceeding  20  per  cent.  While  the  inflationary  effects  are  limited  at  this  stage,  the  impact  is 
manifesting  itself  via  the  deficit  on  the  current  account  of  the  balance  of  payments,  which  had 
increased to 6,4 per cent of GDP by the first quarter of this year. 
While  the  deficit  is  currently  more  than  adequately  financed  by  capital  inflows,  these  are  mainly 
portfolio inflows, which increase the risks of adverse movements in the exchange rate, especially if the 
current  account  deficit  is  perceived  to  be  unsustainable.  This  situation  makes  the  exchange  rate 
particularly  vulnerable  to  changes  in  investor  sentiment  and  risk  tolerance,  which  can  result  in  a 
tapering off or even withdrawal of portfolio inflows. This issue is of particular relevance given the way 
in  which  international  markets  have  been  re-rating  emerging  market  risk  recently.  In  such 
circumstances,  there  is  an  increased  risk  of  a  significant  exchange  rate  adjustment  which  could 
threaten  the  longer-term  attainment  of  the  inflation  target.  However,  the  best  way  to  avoid  this 
happening is by maintaining sound and prudent macroeconomic policies. 
While we do not target any specific level of the exchange rate, exchange rate developments impact 
significantly on inflation. For a small and open economy like South Africa, the pass-through effects of 
exchange rate changes on inflation are significant and rapid. Hence, monetary policy has to take due 
cognisance of the fluctuations in the exchange rate of the rand insofar as their effect on the inflation 
forecast is concerned. 
On  the  issue  of  oil  prices,  these  have  been  at  sustained  high  levels  for  some  time  now.  Given  the 
prevailing  geopolitical  tensions,  there  is  little  doubt  that  oil  prices  pose  the  single  biggest  threat  to 
global  growth  and  inflation.  However,  the  challenges  for  monetary  policy  emanating  from  high  oil 
prices  are  not  so  straightforward.  The  textbook  recommendation  is  that  monetary  policy  should  not 
react to first-round oil price effects but rather prevent second-round effects from taking hold. The pass-
through effects from oil price increases to the different indicators of inflation have been relatively low, 
with the result that pre-emptive monetary policy decision-making has not been easy. However, there 
are indications that secondary inflationary pressures from the oil price increases are starting to occur 
in South Africa, as is evident in the recent acceleration in domestic producer price inflation. 
The recent tightening of monetary policy should thus be viewed in the context of the deterioration in 
the risks to the inflation outlook and the objective of the SARB to ensure the credibility of monetary 
policy and sustainable economic growth in South Africa. 
Regional co-operation among central banks in Africa 
5. 
Let me now move to the issue of regional co-operation among central banks in the southern African 
region. 
Initiatives such as the Governors’ Club, which promote regional co-operation, are vital for success in 
our  modern  world,  one  that  is  becoming  increasingly  globalised.  Globalisation  has  brought  many 
benefits,  not  least  of  which  have  been  the  disinflationary  trends  that  many  of  our  countries  have 
experienced.  However,  the  painful  experience  emanating  from  the  adverse  developments  in 
international financial markets is also fresh in our memories and hence, one cannot over-emphasise 
the importance of co-operation, particularly among central banks. I am glad to report that central banks 
in Africa have been actively co-operating on different initiatives for some time now. 
As  you  may  be  aware,  African  political  leaders  have  adopted  the  New  Partnership  for  Africa’s 
Development (NEPAD). This is a multidimensional development framework encompassing economic, 
political, security, social and cultural dimensions of development. The African Monetary Co-operation 
Programme  (AMCP)  which  underpins  monetary  co-operation  between  central  banks,  forms  an 
important  part  of  the  economic  objectives  of  NEPAD.  In  the  main,  this  involves  a  single  monetary 
union, encompassing a common currency and a common central bank by the year 2021. 
4 
 BIS Review 80/2006
At the continental level, the Association of African Central Banks subscribes to the AMCP while the 
Committee of Central Bank Governors in SADC (CCBG) spearheads the various continental initiatives 
in the southern African region. The South African Reserve Bank (SARB) plays an active role in both 
these fora. 
The CCBG was established in 1995 with the specific purpose of achieving closer financial/ monetary 
co-operation and integration in the SADC area. There are a variety of initiatives that the central banks 
have been, or are currently involved in, which promote monetary integration within SADC. These have 
inter  alia  spanned  the  areas  of  national  payment  systems,  bank  supervision,  human  resource 
development and legal issues. 
In  some  instances  the  co-operation  has  been  formalised  through  the  signing  of  Memoranda  of 
Understanding (MOU). There is little doubt that all the central banks in the region have benefited from 
co-operating with one another. We have found that co-operation is not only advisable, but a necessity 
for efficiency in central bank operations in southern Africa. 
Conclusion 
6.  
In conclusion, I would once again like to reiterate my sincere appreciation for this invitation to address 
you today. I wish the Governors’ Club every success in its endeavours and would like to assure you of 
our co-operation and support. I believe that sharing experiences can provide invaluable lessons going 
forward.  
Thank you very much. 
BIS Review 80/2006 
 5
