Zhou Xiaochuan: Take care of the stakeholders and improve corporate 
governance 
Speech  by  Mr  Zhou  Xiaochuan,  Governor  of  the  People’s  Bank  of  China,  at  the  China  Economic 
Summit, Beijing, 23 May 2006. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Good morning! It is an honor to have been invited to attend this meeting and I would like to talk about 
the issue of stakeholders in corporate governance. I choose this topic because of three reasons. One 
is  that  this  summit  is  on  developing  high  technology  industries  and  my  topic  shall  reflect  this  main 
theme. As Mr. Kim mentioned just now, this industry is knowledge-based and needs a lot of talented 
people. Therefore, we shall say that the corporate governance in this field is notably different from that 
in the traditional industries. Second, the issue of stakeholders also relates to harmonized growth; and 
third, in the new economic environment, the development of present companies may be different in 
terms of investor-employee relationship. 
The  Government  has  reiterated  that  the  main  direction  of  state-owned  enterprise  reform  is 
shareholding reform. At present, significant progress has been achieved in share-holding reform of the 
state financial enterprises in the banking, insurance and securities sectors with the most noticeable 
results in state-owned commercial banks. In the process, many enterprises have expressed the wish 
to  introduce  employee  share-holding  plans,  which  lie  in  the  heart  of  the  stake-holder  concept  of 
corporate governance.  
The reason why enterprises bring forth employee share-holding plan is that successful experiences of 
international  businesses  have  shown  the  advantages  of  right  incentives.  Many  international 
companies,  especially  high-tech  companies,  have  adopted  employee  share-holding  plans.  Other 
non-high-tech companies, such as the United Airlines, have also adopted such plans. There are three 
major  underlying  reasons.  First,  the  plan  can  promote  employees’  enthusiasm  for  work;  second,  it 
encourages employees to be involved in management of their companies; and it also gives incentives 
to employees to be vigilant and keen on compliance and preventing frauds and illegal activities.  
In  recent  years,  progress  on  establishing  good  corporate  governance  has  not  been  smooth  as  we 
have neither had a clear vision on how to proceed nor thoroughly reviewed past mistakes. So far there 
is no employee shareholding plan in place though some companies have made their proposals. The 
reform is still going forward.  
Corporate  governance  is  the  core  of  shareholding  reform.  In  the  reform  of  financial  enterprises, 
corporate  governance  is  the  most  emphasized  by  the  state-leaders.  The  concept  of  corporate 
governance is very clear and has been spelled out in the Company Law. In the content of corporate 
governance,  a  substantial  part  is  about  philosophy,  principles  and  guidelines,  which  is  not  to  be 
explicitly  defined  by  laws  or  regulations.  One  of  the  important  issues  is  about  coverage  of 
stake-holders. In terms of definition, stakeholders in a broad sense should include investors, whose 
rights and interests are covered by the Company Law. Generally speaking, stakeholders as we speak 
of refer to employees, businesses with which a company has a stable relationship, and creditors. For 
enterprises with environmental impacts, the concept extends to the neighboring communities. 
Corporate  governance  is  a  new  concept  for  the  Chinese.  Our  first  attempt  to  include  corporate 
governance in important government documents in 1993 failed because the concept was not widely 
accepted. It was not until 1999 was it included in the documents of the Fourth Plenary Session of the 
15th National Congress of CPC. We still have a lot to learn on this subject. Initially, the emphasis was 
on guarding the owners’ interests, making profit for owners, as well as setting up a good check and 
balance  relationship  and  structure.  Then,  corporate  governance  was  translated  as  corporate 
governance structure in Chinese, emphasizing the importance of a good structure.  
Even  though  each  country  has  its  country-specific  corporate  governance  stemming  from  its  cultural 
tradition  and  legal  system,  some  common  elements  are  the  most  important  and  most  basic.  These 
common elements are included in two very important OECD documents that are worth our attention 
and  research.  One  is  the  Five  Principles  on  Corporate  Governance  released  in  1999.  The  other  is 
Revised  Principles  on  Corporate  Governance  issued  in  2004.  The  1999  version  listed  the  role  of 
stakeholders  in  corporate  governance  as  a  separate  principle,  and  stated  that  the  legitimate  rights 
BIS Review 71/2006 
 1
should  be  established  in  the  corporate  governance  framework,  to  encourage  companies  and 
stakeholders to work together to create wealth and employment and ensure the company’s financial 
soundness  and  sustainability.  The  document  included  the  following  four  parts.  First,  the  corporate 
governance  framework  make  sure  that  stakeholders’  legitimate  rights  are  respected;  second,  when 
their  legitimate  rights  are  violated,  the  stake-holders  should  be  compensated;  third,  the  corporate 
governance  framework  should  provide  a  mechanism  for  stakeholders  to  participate  in  enhancing  a 
company’s  performance;  especially,  it  should  allow  different  stakeholders  to  play  different  roles. 
However,  the  extent  to  which  stakeholders  are  involved  in  managing  the  company  should  vary 
according  to  the  laws  and  regulations  and  to  different  companies.  For  example,  employee  shall  be 
represented at the Board; employee share-holding plan or other profit sharing mechanism shall be put 
into place; views of stakeholders shall be considered in some important decisions. It was especially 
emphasized that stakeholders should be involved in the insolvency process. Fourth, the stakeholders 
should have access to necessary information on managing the company. 
The OECD again revised the five principles in 2004. In this revision, the protection of stakeholders and 
whistle blowers is emphasized. It, to a larger extent, stresses the rights of employees and creditors. 
There  are  three  main  aspects.  First,  it  clearly  states  to  establish  a  mechanism  that  enhances  the 
participation  of  employees.  Stakeholders,  including  individual  employees  and  their  representatives, 
shall be able to freely express their views to the Board with respect to any illegal or immoral activities 
in  the  company.  Employees’  views  and  their  rights  to  express  the  views  shall  be  respected  and 
protected. It shall be ensured that information can flow safely and confidentially to the Board. Second, 
corporate governance shall ensure the enhanced participation of employees, so that the employees’ 
special  skills  can  be  put  to  use  in  the  company,  benefiting  the  company  directly  or  indirectly.  The 
examples  of employees’  participation  include  increasing  representatives  of  employees  in  the  board, 
adopting the plan of employee stocks holding and establishing a profit sharing mechanism such as 
pension contribution. For instance, pension contributions can be pooled into an independent fund and 
the  fund  manager  shall  be  independent  from  the  company’s  management  in  terms  of  business 
operation.  Third,  it  stresses  the  important  role  of  creditors  in  corporate  governance  and  external 
supervision.  It  also  states  that  effective  and  efficient  liquidation  framework  and  credit  rights 
enforcement  mechanism  are  important  supplement  to  effective  corporate  governance,  ensuring 
effective protection for the rights of the shareholders. The importance of employees and creditors is 
further stressed in the new version. 
China  wishes  to  learn  from  international  experiences  and  practices  in  the  process  of  building  a 
socialist  market  economy  with  Chinese  characteristics.  It  can  be  said  from  the  point  of  view  of  a 
socialist market economy, China should do better in terms of employees’ status and their involvement 
in managing companies. However, we do not have any established principles or framework related to 
stakeholders. We will learn by doing and reviewing experiences.  
Why have we not done better compared with many traditional western economies in this aspect? It 
has to do with the mistakes in the past. For any country learning from the history and past experiences 
is a very important, though not an easy task, and one that is liable to misunderstanding. An example at 
hand  is  the  Americans’  review  of  the  Great  Recession  in  1929.  The  reviews  generated  different 
conclusions right after the recession and in the 30’s and 40’s. And a number of people became Nobel 
laureates because they found the true causes of the recession through their studies. I am not saying 
that all that need to be found have been found. New findings may emerge as the studies go.  
Let me come back to employee share-holding in China. This had something to do with practices and 
mistakes in the 1990s. Due to the lack of proper legal procedures, insider control was rampant. Chaos 
occurred in employee share-holding in the 1990s. The so called original shares or employees shares 
were issued when insiders controlled the company and distributed the employees’ shares without any 
necessary legal procedures nor services from law firms. This resulted in serious frauds and bribery so 
every time employees’ share was mentioned it stirred negative responses. The other reason is that the 
administratively set prices were usually too low due to procedural shortcomings. In the early 1990s, 
once  a  stock  was  listed,  its  market  price  jumped  sharply  to  much  higher  than  the  administratively 
determined price. The big jump in prices resulted in a huge profit margin and a channel for interests 
transfer. 
However, now things have changed and the Company Law is very clear. It is no longer possible for 
any insiders to launch employee shares without going through an established procedure, or without a 
true name-list of employees. The market is becoming mature too. Not every listing on the stock market 
will create an opportunity for the price of original share to rise sharply. It is fair to say that the market is 
more and more rational in pricing. For stocks that are priced too high as original stocks, the prices do 
2 
 BIS Review 71/2006
not even go up much. Compared to past, many of the old concerns no longer exist. We need to study 
our history carefully, cool-headedly, in a fresh perspective, and learn our lessons.  
In sum, I would like to take this opportunity to emphasize that the direction of state enterprise reform is 
share-holding reform with corporate governance at its core. In this core one important component is 
the treatment of stakeholders, i.e. their rights, their roles and their protection. We need to further study 
and combine international experiences with China’s own situation and come up with our own solutions 
for stakeholder protection. This will contribute to harmonized growth, and the sustainable development 
of high-tech companies, human-resource intensive and knowledge based companies, which will in turn 
create wealth for our society.  
The above are my thoughts. Your comments are welcome. 
Thank you.  
BIS Review 71/2006 
 3
