Ben S Bernanke: Productivity  
Remarks  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve 
System, before Leadership South Carolina, Greenville, South Carolina, 31 August 2006. 
 One of the most important economic developments in the United States in the past decade or so has 
been a sustained increase in the growth rate of labor productivity, or output per hour of work. From the 
early 1970s until about 1995, productivity growth in the U.S. nonfarm business sector averaged about 
1-1/2 percent per year - a disappointingly low figure relative both to U.S. historical experience and to 
the  performance  of  other  industrial  economies  over  the  same  period.1  Between  1995  and  2000, 
however,  the  rate  of  productivity  growth  picked  up  significantly,  to  about  2-1/2  percent  per  year - a 
figure that contributed to the view, held by many at the time, that the United States might be entering a 
new economic era.  
Talk of the "new economy" faded with the sharp declines in the stock valuations of high-tech firms at 
the  turn  of  the  millennium.  Yet,  remarkably,  productivity  accelerated  further  in  the  early  part  of  this 
decade. From the end of 2000 to the end of 2003, productivity rose at a 3-1/2 percent annual rate and, 
even  after  recent  downward  revisions  to  the  data,  it  is  estimated  to  have  increased  at  an  average 
annual rate of 2-1/4 percent since the end of 2003. These advances were achieved despite adverse 
developments  that  included  the  2001  recession,  the  terrorist  attacks  of  September  11,  corporate 
governance  scandals,  and  in  the  past  few  years,  devastating  hurricanes  and  very  substantial 
increases in the cost of energy. 
Why  is  the  rate  of  productivity  growth  so  important?  Economists  agree  that,  in  the  long  run, 
productivity growth is the principal source of improvements in living standards. The logic is simple: In 
the long run, what we can consume as a nation is closely tied to how much we can produce. The link 
between  the  growth  of  productivity  and  the  standard  of  living  of  the  average  person  is  somewhat 
looser in the short-to-medium run, because variation in factors such as the share of the population that 
is  employed,  the  division  of  income  between  capital  and  labor,  and  the  distribution  of  each  type  of 
income across households also matters. Nevertheless, the rate of productivity growth influences the 
economy in important ways even in the short run, affecting key variables such as the growth rate of 
output, employment gains, and the rate of inflation. 
Today I will discuss the acceleration of productivity that has occurred over the past decade and our 
current understanding of its causes. In the discussion I will comment on two puzzles raised by this 
improved  performance  and  then  conclude  by  briefly  addressing  the  longer-term  prospects  for 
productivity growth in the United States.  
The U.S. productivity resurgence and its causes 
What  underlies  the  resurgence  in  U.S.  productivity  growth?  Explanations  of  the  rise  in  productivity 
growth since about 1995 have evolved somewhat over time. By 2000 or so, an emerging consensus 
held  that  the  pickup  in  productivity  growth  was,  for  the  most  part,  the  product  of  both  rapid 
technological progress and increased investment in new information and communication technologies 
(IT) during the 1990s (see Jorgenson and Stiroh, 2000, and Oliner and Sichel, 2000). According to this 
view, developments in IT promoted U.S. productivity growth in two ways. First, technological advances 
allowed  the  IT-producing  sectors  themselves  to  exhibit  rapid  productivity  growth.  For  example,  the 
development  of  more-reliable  semiconductor  manufacturing  equipment  and  faster  wafer-inspection 
technologies  increased  the  rate  at  which  companies  such  as  Intel  were  able  to  produce 
microprocessors. Intel was also able to shorten its product cycle and increase the frequency of new 
chip  releases,  shifting  its  product  mix  toward  more-powerful  and,  consequently,  higher-value  chips. 
Both the more-rapid pace of production and the higher average quality of output raised productivity at 
Intel as well as at competing firms that were forced to keep pace. 
                                                      
1  
I will use "labor productivity" and "productivity" interchangeably in  my remarks today. An alternative productivity concept, 
multifactor productivity, measures the quantity of output that can be produced by a given combination of capital and labor. 
Changes in labor productivity reflect changes in both multifactor productivity and the amount of capital per worker. 
BIS Review 80/2006 
 1
Second,  advances  in  information  technology  also  promoted  productivity  growth  outside  the  IT-
producing  sector,  as  firms  in  a  wide  range  of  industries  expanded  their  investments  in  high-tech 
equipment and software and used the new technologies to reduce costs and increase quality. Some 
large  retailers,  for  example,  developed  IT-based  tools  to  improve  the  management  of  their  supply 
chains and to increase their responsiveness to changes in the level and mix of customer demands. 
Securities  brokers  and  dealers  achieved  substantial  productivity  gains  by  automating  their  trading 
processes  and  their  back-office  operations.  In  the  durable  goods  sector,  automobile  producers 
developed programmable tooling systems to increase the flexibility of their manufacturing processes - 
for example, to permit vehicles based on different platforms to be produced on the same assembly 
line. One study (Stiroh, 2002) found that a majority of U.S. industries experienced an acceleration of 
productivity  in  the  latter  part  of  the  1990s.  Significantly,  the  study  also  found  the  gains  to  be  the 
greatest in industries that use IT capital most intensively. 
Undoubtedly, the IT revolution and the resurgence of productivity in the United States after 1995 were 
closely connected. However, the technology-based explanation of increased productivity growth does 
raise a couple of puzzles (see, for example, McKinsey and Company, 2001 and 2005, and Basu and 
others,  2003).  First,  the  United  States  was  not  the  only  country  to  have  access  to  the  new 
technologies or to have experienced a rapid expansion in IT investment; other industrial countries also 
invested  heavily  in  these  technologies  in  the  1980s  and  1990s.  Yet,  with  a  few  exceptions,  the 
available  data  show  that  productivity  growth  in  other  advanced  countries  has  not  increased  to  the 
extent seen in the United States. Second, as I have noted, productivity growth increased very rapidly 
earlier  this  decade  and  has  continued  to  rise  at  a  solid  pace,  even  though  IT  investment  declined 
sharply  after the  stock  prices  of  high-tech  firms  plummeted  in  2000.  More  generally,  as a  historical 
matter,  increases  in  IT  investment  have  not  always  been  followed  in  short  order  by  increases  in 
productivity  growth.  This  observation  raises  the  question  of  why,  in  some  cases,  the  putative 
productivity  benefits  of  investments  in  new  technologies  do  not  occur  until  years  after  those 
investments are made.  
In regard to the first puzzle - the fact that the United States has enjoyed greater productivity growth in 
recent years than other advanced countries - the comparison with Europe is particularly interesting. 
Throughout most of the post-World War II period, productivity growth in Europe exceeded that in the 
United  States,  at  first  because  of  the  rapid  gains  during  the  postwar  reconstruction  and  then  later 
because  of  a  gradual  convergence  of  European  technology  and  business  practices  to  American 
standards. By one estimate, European productivity increased from 44 percent of the U.S. level in 1950 
to near-equality with the United States by 1995 (Gordon, 2004 and 2006). However, the available data 
suggest that, since about 1995, productivity growth in European nations has slowed, on average, in 
contrast  to  the  pickup  experienced  in  the  United  States.  These  trends  have  led  to  an  increasing 
divergence in productivity levels in the United States and Europe (see van Ark and Inklaar, 2005).  
Researchers have made the important point that differences in productivity growth between the United 
States and Europe appear not to have been particularly large in the IT-producing sectors, where U.S. 
strengths in the development of computers and semiconductors have been partly offset by European 
leadership  in  communications.  Rather,  the  U.S.  advantage  has  been  most  evident  in  the  IT-using 
sectors,  which  have  performed  better  in  the  United  States  than  elsewhere.  What  accounts  for  this 
apparent U.S. advantage?  
Differences in economic policies and systems likely have accounted for some of the differences in the 
performance  of  productivity.  One  leading  explanation  for  the  strong  U.S.  productivity  growth  is  that 
labor markets in the United States tend to be more flexible and competitive, market characteristics that 
have  allowed  the  United  States  to  realize  greater  economic  benefits  from  new  technologies.  For 
example,  taking  full  advantage  of  new  information  and  communication  technologies  may  require 
extensive reorganization of work practices, the reassignment and retraining of workers, and ultimately 
some reallocation of labor among firms and industries. Regulations that raise the costs of hiring and 
firing workers and that reduce employers’ ability to change work assignments - like those that exist in a 
number of European countries - may make such changes more difficult to achieve.  
Likewise, in product markets, a high degree of competition and low barriers to the entry of new firms in 
most industries in the United States provide strong incentives for firms to find ways to cut costs and to 
improve  their  products.  In  some  other  countries,  in  contrast,  the  prominence  of  government-owned 
firms  with  a  degree  of  monopoly  power,  together  with  a  regulatory  environment  that  protects 
incumbent  firms  and  makes  the  entry  of  new  firms  difficult,  reduces  the  competitive  pressure  for 
innovation  and  the  application  of  new  ideas.  For  example,  some  economists  have  argued  that 
restrictions on land use and on shopping hours in Europe have impeded the development of "big box" 
2 
 BIS Review 80/2006
retail  outlets,  reducing  competition  and  denying  European  firms  the  economies  of  scale  that  have 
been important for productivity growth in the retail sector in the United States (Gordon, 2004). More 
generally, recent empirical research has typically found that economies with highly regulated labor and 
product markets are indeed less able to make productive use of new technologies (Gust and Marquez, 
2004).  Also,  although  it  is  not  a  feature  unique  to  the  United  States,  the  increasing  degree  of 
openness  of  our  economy  to  trade  and  foreign  investment  and  the  consequent  exposure  of  U.S. 
companies  to  the  rigors  of  international  as  well  as  domestic  competition,  may  have  promoted 
productivity  growth.2  As  a  leading  example,  productivity  gains  in  U.S.  manufacturing  -  which  is 
particularly  subject  to  international  competition  -  have  been  especially  impressive  in  recent  years, 
averaging, by one measure, about 6 percent per year over the past decade.3
A  number  of  other  explanations  have  been  advanced  for  the  relatively  stronger  performance  of 
productivity  in  the  United  States  in  recent  years,  including  international  differences  in  management 
practices,  the  depth  and  sophistication  of  U.S.  capital  markets,  more  favorable  attitudes  toward 
competition and entrepreneurship in the United States, and the role of U.S. research universities in 
fostering innovation.4 Further study of national productivity differentials clearly is warranted. 
The second productivity puzzle relates to the further acceleration in productivity that occurred earlier in 
this decade despite the decline in IT investment after 2000 and the rather modest recovery in recent 
years.5 Again, a number of explanations have been proposed, including business restructuring and an 
even  more  rapid  pace  of  technical  change  and  of  the  diffusion  of  technological  advances.  It  is 
interesting,  however,  that  the  recent  episode  is  not  the  first  time  that  we  have  seen  productivity 
improvements  lagging  well  behind  investments  in  new  technology.  Notably,  computers  were  first 
commercialized in the 1950s, and personal computers began to come into widespread use in the early 
1980s;  but  until  the  mid-1990s,  these  developments  had  little  evident  effect  on  measures  of 
productivity. Indeed, an oft-quoted quip by economist Robert Solow held that, as of the late 1980s, 
"computers are everywhere except in the productivity statistics." 
In  attempting  to  explain  the  tendency  of  productivity  growth  to  lag  behind  investments  in  new 
technologies,  economists  have  emphasized  that  much  more  than  the  purchase  of  new  high-tech 
equipment  is  needed  to  achieve  significant  gains  in  productivity.  In  particular,  to  be  successful, 
managers  must  have  a  carefully  thought-out  plan  for  using  new  technologies  before  they  acquire 
them. Case studies of individual industries show that the planning for technological modernization has 
not always been adequate, with the result that some purchases of high-tech equipment and software 
have not added much to productivity or profits. The idea that managers can buy the hardware first and 
then decide what to do with it does not square with the evidence. 
Some observers have characterized the new information and communication technologies as general-
purpose technologies, which means that - like earlier major innovations such as electrification and the 
internal combustion engine - they have the potential to revolutionize production and make many new 
goods and services available to consumers (see Bresnahan and Trajtenberg, 1995). To make effective 
use of such a technology within a specific firm or industry, however, managers must supplement their 
purchases of new equipment with investments in firm- or industry-specific research and development, 
worker training, and organizational redesign - all examples of what economists call intangible capital. 
Although investments in intangible capital are, for the most part, not counted as capital investment in 
the  national  income  and  product  accounts,  they  appear  to  be  quantitatively  important.6  One  recent 
study estimated that, by the late 1990s, investments in intangible capital by U.S. businesses were as 
                                                      
2   Lewis (2004) discusses the link between competition and productivity. 
3   The  figure  for  growth  in  output  per  hour  in  the  text  uses  the  Federal  Reserve’s  industrial  production  index  for  the 
manufacturing sector as the measure of output. 
4   Regarding  differences  in  management  practices,  Bloom,  Sadun,  and  Van  Reenen  (2006)  found  that  business 
establishments  in  the  United  Kingdom  that  are  owned  by  U.S.  multinationals  get  higher  productivity  from  information 
technology  than  do  other  establishments  in  that  country.  Their  study  tied  the  differential  to  the  management  and 
organizational practices employed by U.S. firms. 
Indeed, productivity accelerated in a wide range of industries that had not experienced much improvement in productivity 
growth  in  the  1990s.  For  discussions  of  more  recent  developments  at  the  industry  level,  see  Corrado,  Lengermann, 
Bartelsman, and Beaulieu (2006), Bosworth and Triplett (2006), and Stiroh (2006). 
5  
6   Software is one intangible investment that is treated as part of business fixed investment in the U.S. national accounts. 
BIS Review 80/2006 
 3
large as investments in traditional tangible capital such as buildings and machines (Corrado, Hulten, 
and Sichel, 2006). 
Recognizing the  importance  of  intangible  capital  has several  interesting  implications.  First,  because 
investment in intangible capital is typically treated as a current expense rather than as an investment, 
aggregate  saving  and  investment  may  be  significantly  understated  in  the  U.S.  official  statistics. 
Second, firms’ need to invest in intangible capital - and thus to divert resources from the production of 
market goods or services - helps to explain why measured output and productivity may decline or grow 
slowly during the period after firms adopt new technologies. Finally, the concept of intangible capital 
may shed light on the puzzle of why productivity growth has remained strong despite the deceleration 
in  IT  investment.  Because  investments  in  high-tech  capital  typically  require  complementary 
investments  in  intangible  capital  for  productivity  gains  to  be  realized,  the  benefits  of  high-tech 
investment  may  become  visible  only  after  an  extended  period  during  which  firms  are  making  the 
necessary investments in intangibles. 
Longer-term prospects for productivity growth 
Historical analyses of the sources of fluctuations in productivity growth are challenging, but not nearly 
so challenging as trying to predict how productivity will evolve in the future. However, because the rate 
of  productivity  growth  is  a  primary  determinant  of  economic  performance,  policymakers  have  few 
options other than to try to forecast future gains in productivity. For example, estimates of long-term 
productivity growth are needed to determine the rate of output growth that the economy can sustain in 
the long run without generating inflationary pressures.  
The task of trying to predict the behavior of productivity in the medium-to-long run is complicated by 
the  fact  that  productivity  growth  generally  varies  with  the  business  cycle,  tending  to  be  below  its 
longer-term trend when the economy is contracting and above that trend when the economy is in the 
early stages of an expansion (see Basu and Fernald, 2001, for a discussion). (This well-documented 
pattern  makes  the  strong  growth  of  productivity  during  the  early  part  of  this  decade,  a  period  that 
featured a recession and generally slow growth, all the more remarkable.) Economists use statistical 
methods to try to abstract from cyclical influences to determine the longer-term trend in productivity. 
What do they find? 
As of a couple of years ago, the consensus among leading researchers was that productivity in the 
nonfarm business sector was likely to grow at about 2-1/2 percent per year in the longer term, close to 
the rate of productivity growth achieved during the 1995 to 2000 period (see, for example, Baily, 2003; 
Gordon, 2003; and Jorgenson, Ho, and Stiroh, 2004). On the one hand, recent data revisions to the 
national income and product accounts have shown that productivity growth over the past few years 
was slightly weaker than we thought, leading some analysts to revise down their estimates of trend 
productivity  growth  about  1/4  percentage  point  or  so  per  year.  On  the  other  hand,  the  fact  that 
productivity growth has remained solid in recent years increases confidence that a larger fraction of 
those  productivity  gains  reflects  longer-term  developments  and  a  smaller  fraction  reflects  cyclical 
factors. On net, the recent experience does not appear to require a significant rethinking of long-term 
productivity  trends.  Indeed,  recent  estimates  by  leading  economists  continue  to  peg  the  expected 
longer-term rate of productivity growth at roughly 2-1/2 percent per year.7
Of course, as the saying goes, past returns do not guarantee future results, and not all the evidence 
supports  this  optimistic  view  of  productivity  trends.  For  example,  although  spending  on  high-tech 
equipment and software has recovered noticeably from its recent lows, growth in IT spending remains 
well below the rates observed before the 2001 recession. Some industry participants have suggested 
that less-rapid growth in IT spending may reflect the absence of major new business applications for 
IT - "killer apps," as they are called. Moreover, until we have a more complete understanding of the 
factors behind productivity growth in the past five years, we should be cautious in drawing any strong 
conclusions about the future. 
                                                      
7   Martin Baily puts the trend for the nonfarm business sector a little above 2-1/2 percent (conversation  with Board  staff in 
August 2006). Robert Gordon reports a current trend of 2.6 percent but predicts that it will move lower in the next couple of 
years (conversation with Board staff in August 2006). Jorgenson, Ho, and Stiroh (2006) put the trend at 2.6 percent for the 
private economy (a sector quite close to nonfarm business), but that figure was generated before the recent NIPA revisions. 
4 
 BIS Review 80/2006
These caveats notwithstanding, a case can be made that the strong productivity growth of the post-
1995 era is likely to continue for some time. Notably, the price of computing power continues to fall 
sharply, having declined by nearly half in the five years between 2000 and 2005. Increased computing 
power has in turn contributed to advances in other fields, such as biotechnology, and has helped to 
increase  the  range  of  goods  and  services  available  to  businesses  and  consumers.  Moreover, 
whatever the pace of future technological progress, further diffusion of already-existing technologies 
and applications to more firms and industries should continue to increase aggregate productivity for a 
time. 
I  have  focused  today  on  how  technological  change  and  investment,  both  tangible  and  intangible, 
promote productivity growth. I will close by noting that, from the perspective of society as a whole, a 
particularly important form of intangible investment in future years will be investment in the skills of the 
U.S.  labor  force.  As  we  know  from  everyday  experience,  few  jobs  or  occupations  have  not  been 
affected in some way by the technological changes of recent years, a trend that will certainly continue. 
Not  only  scientists  and  engineers  but  also  nurses,  auto  mechanics,  and  factory  workers  now  use 
advanced technologies every day. But new technologies will translate into higher productivity only to 
the  extent  that  workers  have  the  skills  needed  to  apply  them  effectively.  Moreover,  because 
technology is always changing, the acquisition of those skills has become a lifelong challenge, one 
that continues well after formal education is completed. If the recent gains in productivity growth are to 
be  sustained,  ensuring  that  we  have  a  workforce  that  is  comfortable  with  and  adaptable  to  new 
technologies will be essential. 
References 
Baily, Martin (2003). "The U.S. Economic Outlook: Investment, Productivity, Deflation (396 KB PDF)." 
Washington: Institute for International Economics (April) 
Basu, Susanto, and John Fernald (2001). "Why is Productivity Procyclical? Why Do We Care?" in C. 
Hulten, E. Dean, and M. Harper, eds., New Developments in Productivity Analysis, National Bureau of 
Economic Research, Studies in Business Cycles. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 225-296. 
Basu,  Susanto,  John  Fernald,  Nicholas  Oulton,  and  Sylaja  Srinivasan  (2003).  "The  Case  of  the 
Missing Productivity Growth, or Does Information Technology Explain Why Productivity Accelerated in 
the United States but not the United Kingdom?" NBER Macroeconomics Annual, vol. 18, pp. 9-71. 
Bloom, Nick, Raffaella Sadun, and John Van Reenen (2006). "It Ain’t What You Do, It’s the Way You 
Do  I.T.:  Investigating  the  Productivity  Miracle  Using  the  Overseas  Activities  of  U.S.  Multinationals," 
working paper. London: Centre for Economic Performance, London School of Economics (May). 
Bosworth,  Barry,  and  Jack  Triplett  (2006).  "Is  the  21st  Century  Productivity  Expansion  Still  in 
Services? And What Should Be Done About It? (126 KB PDF)" paper presented at the 2006 Summer 
Institute sponsored by the National Bureau of Economic Research and the Conference on Research in 
Income and Wealth, held in Cambridge, Mass., July 17. 
Bresnahan,  Timothy,  and  Manuel  Trajtenberg  (1995).  "General  Purpose  Technologies:  ‘Engines  of 
Growth’?" Journal of Econometrics, vol. 65 (January), pp. 83-108. 
Corrado,  Carol,  Paul  Lengermann,  Eric  Bartelsman,  and  J.  Joseph  Beaulieu  (2006).  "Modeling 
Aggregate Productivity at a Disaggregate Level: New Results for U.S. Sectors and Industries (502 KB 
PDF)," paper presented at the 2006 Summer Institute sponsored by the National Bureau of Economic 
Research and the Conference on Research in Income and Wealth, held in Cambridge, Mass., July 17. 
Corrado, Carol, Charles Hulten, and Daniel Sichel (2006). "Intangible Capital and Economic Growth," 
Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2006-24. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal 
Reserve System, April. 
Gordon, Robert J. (2003). "Exploding Productivity Growth: Context, Causes, and Implications (349 KB 
PDF)," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2:2003, pp. 207-98. 
Gordon,  Robert  J.  (2004).  "Why  Was  Europe  Left  at  the  Station  When  America’s  Productivity 
Locomotive  Departed?"  Working  Paper  Series  10661.  Cambridge,  Mass.:  National  Bureau  of 
Economic Research, August. 
Gordon,  Robert  J.  (2006).  "Issues  in  the  Composition  of  Welfare  Between  Europe  and  the  United 
States," unpublished paper, Northwestern University (July). 
BIS Review 80/2006 
 5
Gust, Christopher, and Jaime Marquez (2004). "International Comparisons of Productivity Growth: The 
Role of Information Technology and Regulatory Practices," Labour Economics, vol. 11 (February), pp. 
33-58. 
Jorgenson,  Dale,  and  Kevin  Stiroh  (2000).  "Raising  the  Speed  Limit:  U.S.  Economic  Growth  in  the 
Information Age (458 KB PDF)," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1:2000, pp. 125-235. 
Jorgenson, Dale, Mun Ho, and Kevin Stiroh (2004). "Will the U.S. Productivity Resurgence Continue?" 
Current Issues in Economics and Finance, vol. 10 (December), pp. 1-7. 
Jorgenson,  Dale,  Mun  Ho,  and  Kevin  Stiroh  (2006).  "The  Sources  of  the  Second  Surge  of  U.S. 
Productivity and Implications for the Future," unpublished paper, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 
March. 
Lewis,  William  W.  (2004).  The  Power  of  Productivity:  Wealth,  Poverty,  and  the  Threat  to  Global 
Stability. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press. 
McKinsey and Company (2001). U.S. Productivity Growth 1995-2000: Understanding the Contribution 
of Information Technology Relative to Other Factors. Washington: McKinsey Global Institute. 
McKinsey  and  Company  (2005).  "U.S.  Productivity  after  the  Dot-Com  Bust,"  perspective  paper. 
Washington: McKinsey Global Institute. 
Oliner,  Stephen,  and  Daniel  Sichel  (2000).  "The  Resurgence  of  Growth  in  the  Late  1990s:  Is 
Information Technology the Story?" Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 14 (Autumn), pp. 3-22. 
Stiroh, Kevin (2002). "Information Technology and the U.S. Productivity Revival: What Do the Industry 
Data Say?" American Economic Review, vol. 92 (December), pp. 1559-76. 
Stiroh,  Kevin  (2006).  "The  Industry  Origins  of  the  Second  Surge  of  U.S.  Productivity  Growth," 
unpublished paper, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, July. 
van Ark, Bart, and Robert Inklaar (2005). "Catching up or Getting Stuck? Europe’s Trouble to Exploit 
ICT’s Productivity Potential," Research Memorandum GD-79. Groningen, The Netherlands: Groningen 
Growth and Development Centre, September. 
6 
 BIS Review 80/2006
