Wu Xiaoling: Strengthening China’s financial industry in the process of 
opening up 
Speech by Ms Wu Xiaoling, Deputy Governor of the People’s Bank of China, at the Sino-US Economy 
and Trade Forum, Beijing, 14 February 2006. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure to join such a distinguished audience to discuss about issues related to trade and 
economic  cooperation  between  China  and  the  United  States.  As  two  large  countries  in  the  world, 
China and the United States maintains a friendly cooperative relationship between each other not only 
fits in with their respective fundamental interests, but also helps to create a favorable environment for 
world development. It is an independent choice of the Chinese people to embark on the way transiting 
to the market economy and it is an internally generated force that pushes China to open to the outside 
world and actively integrate into the world economy. Opening up has not only brought China vitality, 
but  also  deepened  the  reform  process  which  helped  to  create  a  better  platform  for  the  Chinese 
economy to integrate into the world economy. China is developing in the process of opening up while 
the rest of the world is benefiting from China’s development. 
China’s financial industry has also benefited from the opening up process. In October 1979, Mr. Deng 
Xiaoping, the late architect and mastermind of China’s reform and opening up, asked Mr. Rong Yiren 
to establish the China International Trust and Investment Corporation (CITIC), a holding company with 
its business spreading from the financial sector to various other industries. The incorporation of CITIC 
has opened for China a window to the outside world in terms of external financing. After that, China 
began to introduce foreign financial institutions in the country by allowing them to set up representative 
offices,  operational  entities  and  even  joint-equity  institutions  in  China,  turning  a  new  chapter  in  the 
reform and opening up of the Chinese financial industry. 
It is the financial reform and opening up that has brought China out of the rigid doctrine that confined 
the country to a self-pride fallacy of “ a nation of no domestic and external debt”, and helped China to 
learn to use financial instruments and foreign capital to develop the Chinese economy. In conventional 
Chinese wisdom, borrowing debt becomes a feasible choice only when other options are exhausted. 
In the past, a Chinese usually needs to save several months or even years before he or she could 
offer  to  buy  some  relatively  expensive goods,  and  borrowing  money  is considered  to  be  something 
shameful and reflecting one’s incapability. Under the centralized command economy, we were once 
proud  of  being  a  country  with  neither  domestic  nor  foreign  debt.  With  the  deepening  of  China’s 
economic  interactions  with  the  outside  world  since  the  start  of  reform  and  economic  opening  up, 
mentality of the Chinese people has witnessed tremendous changes. In 1979, China resumed external 
borrowing which was suspended for 20 years, and financed a total of US$3.5 billion externally in the 
year. In 1981, the Chinese government decided to issue treasury bonds totaling 4.9 billion yuan. With 
steady progress of the financial industry, consumer credit has gradually become popular among the 
Chinese people who find their livelihood is increasingly dependent on various services and facilities 
provided through the financial system. In 1985, the Shenzhen Branch of the China Construction Bank 
issued  the  first  ever  home  mortgage  loans  to  a  customer  in  China.  As  of  the  end  of  2005,  China’s 
outstanding balance of government bonds reached 2.7 trillion yuan, and that of foreign debt and house 
mortgage loans amounted to over US$260 billion and 1.84 trillion yuan respectively. China’s financial 
assets totaled 37.5 trillion yuan, 2.06 times of the GDP. 
It is the financial reform and opening up that has enabled the Chinese financial institutions to improve 
its business performance and management level amid market competition, especially in competition 
with the foreign institutions. At the same time, the foreign financial institutions has also benefited from 
the  opening  up  of  the  Chinese  financial  industry.  The  foreign  financial  institutions  have  brought 
competition  incentives  for  their  Chinese  counterparts  to  improve  and  transform  business  strategies 
and  management  by  setting  good  examples  in  the  conduct  of  intermediary  business,  patent 
application of certain banking products, charging fees on account services, disintegrating the customer 
market and introducing the concept of check and balance in building up the internal control system 
etc.  As  the  most  open  and  developed  city  in  Mainland  China  in  terms  of  the  financial  industry, 
Shanghai  harbors  the  best  branch  offices  of  the  Chinese  financial  institutions  with  respect  to 
profitability, asset quality and product innovation, with its financial openness not posting a competitive 
BIS Review 12/2006 
 1
barrier  for  growth  of  the  domestic  institutions.  With  the  development  of  the  Chinese  economy,  the 
deepening  of  financial  reform,  steady  improvement  of  management  skills  in  the  Chinese  financial 
institutions  and  the  strengthening  of  profitability,  the  Chinese  banks  realized  profits  totaling  253.2 
billion  yuan  in  2005,  compared  with  23.2  billion  yuan  in  2001.  At  the  same  time,  asset  quality  also 
evidently  improved,  with  the  NPL  ratio  dropped  from  25.4  percent  in  2001  to  9.8  percent  in  2005. 
Foreign  financial  institutions  harvested  profits  amounting  to  US$446  million,  increasing  by  227.6 
percent over that of 2001 which was registered at US$196 million. 
China is a country that honors its commitments. The Chinese government has been fulfilling its WTO 
commitments strictly on time or even ahead of schedule in terms of opening up the financial sector. In 
December 2005, five more cities, namely Harbin, Changchun, Lanzhou, Yinchuan and Nanning, were 
opened ahead of schedule to foreign financial institutions for local currency business, bringing the total 
number of cities allowed for RMB business from 18 up to 25. In the areas of securities and insurance 
business, the Chinese government has almost fulfilled all commitments concerning market access and 
business  scope  except  that  the  Sino-foreign  joint  equity  brokers  are  not  allowed  to  provide 
underwriting services for issuance of A shares.  
For the time being, foreign banks equity taking in a Chinese bank is subject to a ceiling of 25 percent, 
or a limit of 20 percent in the case the equity is bought by a single foreign financial institution, if these 
foreign banks intend to be treated same as their local Chinese partners in terms of business conduct. 
By  the  end  of  2006  when  the  domestic  market  is  fully  open  to  foreign  banks  for  local  currency 
business,  such  a  proportional  limit  will  only  hold  significance  for  taxation  purpose,  and  bears  no 
restrictions on the conduct of business.  
China’s practice since its accession to the WTO has shown that although the business growth rate of 
foreign  banks  in  recent  years  was  higher  than  that  of  domestic  banks,  the  market  share  of  foreign 
banks in China’s banking sector does not see dramatic changes. In 2001, foreign banks accounted for 
1.8 percent of the total banking assets, 0.35 percent of the RMB loans, and 14.7 percent of foreign 
exchange  loans.  While  in  2005,  these  figures  rose  respectively  to  1.89  percent,  0.55  percent  and 
20.97 percent. With restrictions on RMB business to be removed in 2006, the market share of foreign 
banks in RMB business is likely to further expand.  
By  2005,  25  foreign  banks  have  taken  stakes  in  altogether  20  domestic  banks,  with  some  banks 
investing  in  different  domestic  banks.  In  our  view,  in  the  share-holding  reform  of  the  state-owned 
commercial banks, the main purpose of inviting strategic investors is to introduce advanced business 
concepts  and  management  skills  so  as  to  further  improve  the  corporate  governance  of  domestic 
banks.  With  regard  to  introducing  strategic  investors,  the  Chinese  regulatory  authorities  have  laid 
guiding  principles  called  “long  stake  holding,  governance  improving,  business  cooperation  and 
avoiding peer competition”. Under the precondition that the State holds the majority of stakes, more 
involvement by the foreign and public investors will do no harm but to improve corporate governance 
and business management in the state-owned commercial banks.  
In the process of banking reform, introducing strategic investors is unlikely to threaten China’s financial 
security.  I  agree  with  Mr.  Cheng  Siwei,  Vice  Chairman  of  the  Standing  Committee  of  the  National 
People’s Congress, that financial security here is a macro concept. At the micro level, safeguarding 
financial security is to preserve soundness of individual financial institutions and avoid systemic risks 
resulting  from  the  failure  of  a  single  institution.  At  the  macro  level,  pursuing  financial  security  is  to 
maintain a balanced development of the national economy and keep the currency value and exchange 
rate  basically  stable,  which  is  closely  related  to  the  macroeconomic  management  capability  of  a 
country. With the State still holding the majority of stakes, participation of strategic investors will help 
to produce stronger state-owned commercial banks rather than undermine China’s financial security. 
What  is  important  is  to  manage  the  structural  balance  of  the  economy  and  create  a  more  flexible 
mechanism for the economy so as to make it more adaptable to the changing situation, otherwise the 
performance of the individual financial institutions could be impaired. Promoting economic reform and 
opening  up  and  rationalizing  the  economic  system  are  essential  to  the  sound  development  of  the 
financial sector. While introducing foreign strategic investors, we expect that domestic investors could 
also  be  involved  in  the  reform  process.  In  this  case,  we  need  to  quicken  the  steps  in  reform  of 
domestic capital market so that the Chinese investors could benefit from the economic reform.  
The opening up of China’s financial market has provided good opportunities for foreign investment, 
enabling investors from various countries to capitalize on China’s rapid development. The reform of 
China’s  financial  sector  and  its  development  also  need  a  relatively  easy  external  environment  that 
understands China’s reform efforts. Currently, the lopsided development of the world economy, large 
2 
 BIS Review 12/2006
fluctuations of oil prices, escalating “twin deficits” of the United States and other unstabilizing factors 
has  not  only brought uncertainties  to  the  world  economy  but also  produced stern  challenges  to  the 
Chinese financial reform and development. China’s financial reform and opening up is a long journey 
that requires arduous efforts to conquer, therefore we need to continue to steadily advance the reform 
according  to  the  guiding  principles  and  policies,  further  liberalize  the  financial  market,  and  strive  to 
build a mutually beneficial relationship between China and its foreign partners. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 12/2006 
 3
