Axel A Weber: The ECB and its watchers - 1999-2006  
Speech  by  Professor  Axel  A  Weber,  President  of  the  Deutsche Bundesbank,  at  the  CFS Research 
Conference: The ECB and its watchers VIII, Frankfurt am Main, 5 May 2006. 
 Review - seven years of “The ECB and its watchers” 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  it’s  a  real  pleasure  for  me  to  give  you  a  short  review  of  the  ECB  watcher 
conferences over the period from 1999 until today. 
Most  of  you  will  know  that  I  myself  organised  this  event  from  1999  until  2003.  So  be  warned:  my 
review of this conference and its impact might be slightly positively biased! 
But nevertheless, my primary conclusion is very likely to be undisputed. For good reasons, the ECB 
watcher  conferences  organised  by  the  CFS  have  become  a  central  part  of  the  yearly  agenda  for 
everyone interested in a serious monitoring of European monetary policy. 
Starting in 1999, we wanted the conference to fulfil three main functions:  
•  Firstly,  the  professional  ECB  watchers  should  be  provided  with  a  regular  platform  for 
communicating their evaluation of ECB policy actions directly to the ECB policy makers (rather 
than addressing them indirectly through the press).  
•  Secondly,  the  conferences  should  give  ECB  representatives  the  opportunity  to  directly 
respond to the watchers’ assessments.  
•  Finally,  the  conferences  should  generate  an  intellectual  competition  among  the  various 
monitoring groups.  
Reviewing the conferences that have taken place so far, I can conclude that, happily, these objectives 
have been achieved.  
Especially  the  direct  communication  between  watchers  and  ECB  officials  is  a  special  asset  and  a 
central part of the uniqueness of these events. 
One  could  add  that  the  conferences  have  not  only  generated  an  intellectual  competition  among 
watcher groups, but have also posed an intellectual challenge to the ECB and its officials participating 
in a wide array of panels. 
As a result, not only the public, but also the ECB and the entire Eurosystem have learnt a lot from the 
exchange with watcher groups in the context of the annual watcher conferences. 
Over the years, the topics discussed at these events have covered all issues that were and are still 
highly relevant for monetary policy in EMU. Let me give you some examples:  
•  Monetary policy strategy  
•  Monetary and fiscal policy coordination  
•  Central bank communication  
•  European financial integration  
•  EU enlargement  
• 
•  Global imbalances  
International role of the euro  
But I do not want to provide you with further details with respect to these topics. The large number of 
distinguished speakers (also at today’s conference), the large number of interested participants and 
the  wide  press  coverage  tell  me  that  I  do  not  need  to  elaborate  further  on  the  relevance  of  these 
issues for European monetary policy. 
BIS Review 38/2006 
 1
I would, rather, like to stress another facet: eight annual ECB watcher conferences also mean eight 
consecutive appearances of Otmar Issing at this event. Therefore, I would like to take a closer look at 
Otmar's role in these conferences.  
Otmar Issing’s role 
From the very beginning, the history of the ECB watcher conference has been inextricably linked to 
Otmar Issing.  
Firstly,  because  I  organised  the  first  conference  in  1999  in  close  cooperation  with  him.  Secondly, 
because  he  has  participated  in  every  conference  since  it  was  established,  providing  explanations, 
comments, replies, opening or concluding remarks. A pretty good track record!  
Throughout  all  the  years  as  the  ECB’s  chief  economist,  Otmar  Issing  has  always  stressed  the 
importance  of  communication  and  transparency  for  an  effective  monetary  policy.  His  annual 
participation in the watcher conferences shows just how rigorously he personally sticks to these two 
principles.  His  unbroken  participation  is  a  concrete  example  of  central  bank  transparency  and 
communication policy in action.  
It also reflects Otmar Issing’s general open-mindedness towards sceptics and outright critics alike. As 
an example, let me briefly recall the controversial issue about whether or not the Eurosystem should 
use its two-pillar-strategy for conducting monetary policy, or, more generally speaking, whether or not 
monetary  aggregates  should  play  a  prominent  role  in  monetary  policy,  a  question  of  ongoing 
relevance.  
In  this  context,  substantial  criticism  has  been  voiced  in  recent  years  –  not  least  during  previous 
watcher  conferences.  Nevertheless,  Otmar  Issing  always  chose  to  face  his  critics  directly  at  such 
events  in  order  to  patiently  and  repeatedly  explain  the  whys  and  wherefores  underpinning  the 
Eurosystem’s current monetary policy strategy.  
Let me conclude my short review with the following, rather personal thoughts regarding Otmar Issing’s 
legacy.  At  each  of  the  previous  watcher  conferences,  I  was  impressed  by  Otmar’s  mild-mannered, 
calm  style  coupled  with  his  resolute  attitude.  Otmar  made  it  a  habit  to  deal  personally  with  each 
challenge. This commitment and tenacity is probably why he has enjoyed such an outstanding career 
as one of the few economists who have been exceptionally successful as an academic, as a policy 
advisor and, finally, as a policy maker.  
His  pragmatic  approach  to  monetary  policy  was  based  on  a  number  of  strong  convictions:  the 
desirability of stable money, the need to take a medium-term policy perspective and the usefulness of 
exposing theories to the rigour of real-world data in order to draw inferences about their reliability for 
policy decisions.  
As regards his work at the ECB, I would conclude that Otmar Issing was the brain behind the ECB’s 
monetary policy strategy in the first years of EMU. Or, in other words, during this time, he was the 
implicit third pillar of this strategy.  
Again  and  again,  he  has  stressed  the  utmost  importance  of  such  an  explicit  strategy  for  monetary 
policy. In doing so, he has been quite successful in implementing a policy focusing on steadiness and 
medium-term objectives, thus fostering stability and hence the foundation of the policy itself.  
In  addition,  the  Eurosystem’s  monetary  policy  strategy  has  another  advantage:  monetary  policy 
becomes largely independent of the influence of individual policy makers.  
To a certain degree, an explicit monetary policy strategy leads to a “depersonalisation” of monetary 
policy. In this vein, monetary policy is likely to gain steadiness and predictability even at times when 
the composition of the policy making body changes.  
Against the background of Otmar Issing’s prominent influence over the last eight years, this conclusion 
might seem paradox at first sight, but let me elaborate. Precisely because Otmar Issing has been so 
successful in nurturing the Eurosystem’s monetary policy strategy and thus the underlying basis for 
the  stable  euro,  his  forthcoming  retirement  at  the  end  of  May  will  not  change  the  fundamental 
principles of the single European monetary policy.  
2 
 BIS Review 38/2006
