Y V Reddy: Financial sector reform and financial stability 
Speech by Dr Y V Reddy, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 8th Global Conference of 
Actuaries, Mumbai, 10 March 2006. 
 Mr. President and distinguished friends, 
It is a privilege and an honour to be invited for this 8th Global Conference of Actuaries. Dr. R. Kannan 
has been a respected colleague of mine for several years in the Reserve Bank and I am thankful to 
him for persuading me to join you. Also, Mr. C.S. Rao, Chairman, IRDA and Mr. D. Swarup, PFRDA 
have been my friends and colleagues in the Government of Andhra Pradesh and Government of India. 
Financial  sector  reform  and  financial  stability  are  subjects  of  high  priority  to  central  bankers,  are  of 
relevance to all financial regulators and may be of interest to a gathering of finance professionals like 
actuaries. My address will, therefore, focus on the features of the financial sector reforms in India; the 
initiatives  taken  to  assure  financial  stability;  the  links  between  reforms  and  stability  in  the  financial 
sector and conclude with some observations in the current context.  
Financial sector reform 
The financial sector reforms in India, like almost all other countries, have some common and a few 
unique features. They were undertaken early in the reform cycle, in early 1990s. They were designed 
by  eminent  professionals  in  the  country,  and  implemented  pragmatically.  This  is  evident  from  the 
dynamic  mix  between  public  and  private  ownership  and  transition  of  Development  Financial 
Institutions  as  well  as  Unit  Trust  of  India  into  their  new  incarnations.  Fiscal  support  has  not  been 
burdensome and legacy problems such as non-performing loans have been absorbed by banks and 
not  transferred  to  fisc.  New  regulatory  bodies  such  as  those  for  securities  markets,  insurance  and 
pension funds have been legislated or are underway. While prudential regulation of banks has been in 
vogue  for  decades,  independent  regulatory  framework  for  other  entities  has  been  a  recent 
phenomenon. Enhanced competition has been induced with the entry of private foreign entities and 
foreign capital in financial sector. In brief, there has been progress in the three inter-related pillars of 
financial sector, namely ownership, regulation and competition. 
Let me illustrate the pragmatic nature of reforms in the fiscal-monetary policy interface. Reserve Bank 
entered  into  a  Memorandum  of  Understanding  to  limit  the  issuance  of  ad  hoc  Treasury  Bills  to  the 
central government and terminate automatic monetisation of the government’s financial needs in 1994 
and 1997, respectively.The Reserve Bank avoided participation in the primary issues in recent years 
except to prepay external debt or as a transition measure, last week. These de facto arrangements, 
proven to be workable, are coming into effect through legislative sanction only on April 1, 2006. 
Financial stability 
Financial Stability is difficult to define and thus difficult to measure. Basically, it refers to the smooth 
functioning  of  the  financial  markets  and  institutions  but  it  does  not  mean  absence  or  avoidance  of 
crisis  but  presence  of  conditions  conducive  to  efficient  functioning  without  serious  disruption.  The 
relevant  legal,  institutional  and  policy  frameworks  are  wide  ranging  and  policy  instruments  at  the 
disposal  of  authorities  very  varied.  In  a  way,  the  financial  stability  objective  is  shared  with  a  set  of 
public policy bodies and professional bodies like auditors and actuaries but the primary responsibility 
for overall financial sector efficiency and stability generally rests with the central bank. The plausible 
reasons for such a responsibility are the major elements contributing to financial stability, namely, the 
oversight of the financial infrastructure, in particular payments systems; regulation and supervision of 
financial  institutions;  crisis  management  and  provision  of  liquidity;  and  macro  financial  stability 
encompassing monitoring not only the behaviour of all important players in the financial sector but also 
non-financial sector balance sheets as well as that of the governments. 
BIS Review 19/2006 
 1
Financial sector reforms and stability 
National  authorities  have  typically  adapted  the  design  of  financial  sector  reforms  -  the  pace, 
sequencing  direction  and  ambit  -  to  country-specific  situations,  mindful  of  the  threats  to  financial 
stability. The relevant considerations may be summarized here. 
First, there is substantial consensus, backed by some historical and cross-country evidence, that there 
are strong complementarities between financial stability and macroeconomic stability. 
Second, a key issue in the design of financial sector reforms is the pace of reforms in the context of 
ensuring  financial  stability.  Opinion  remains  sharply  divided  over  the  choice  between  a  big-bang 
approach or shock therapy and a cautious or gradualist strategy. On balance, it appears, the reforms 
need to be introduced more as a process than as a short-lived event while the process moves fast 
enough to produce reasonable results without running the risk of disruption in the short run. 
Third,  in  case  the  gradualist  approach  is  adopted,  the  question  that  arises  is  what  should  be  the 
optimal  sequencing  of  reforms  which  secures  financial  stability.  Such  sequencing  is  crucial  for 
ensuring inter-sectoral balances and avoiding the chances of disproportionality. 
Fourth, no reform process, however, paced and sequenced, can be consistent with financial stability if 
it  is  widely  perceived  as  temporary  and  lacking  credibility.  In  a  market-based  environment,  the 
expectations  of  the  economic  agents  are  extremely  important  for  economic  decisions.  The  reform 
process can succeed only if the economic agents, especially investors, believe that the reforms are 
enduring. The issue of credibility is inter-related with the choice of the pace of reform. Our experience 
has been that a graduated pace wins credibility since it avoids disruptions and roll-backs in the short 
run  while  at  the  same  time  allowing  the  beneficiaries  to  build  a  consensus  in  favour  of  continuing 
reforms. A key issue is that of managing expectations. 
There is reason to believe that the financial reforms process in India has greatly aided in strengthening 
and  reinforcing  financial  stability.  The  financial  sector  has  acquired  the  strength  to  absorb  shocks, 
largely facilitated by regulatory actions. The financial system is now robust and resilient, contributing to 
public confidence and overall stability. 
At  this  stage,  the  optimism  generated  by  impressive  macroeconomic  performance  and  the  modest 
success 
for  significantly 
accelerating the pace of external financial liberalisation. It is essential to take into account the risks 
associated  with  it  while  resetting  an  accelerated  pace  of  a  gradualist  approach.  It  needs  to  be 
emphasized that the existing international financial architecture is not adequate to prevent or mitigate 
the  domestic  and  external  effects  of  a  financial  crisis  in  large  economies  like  India.  The  impact  of 
instability in times of crisis appears largely to be borne by the home or domestic public sector rather 
than the global private sector. The issue of setting the pace of financial liberalisation revisits the issue 
of  trade-off  between  sustained  growth  and  a  growth  rate  that  could  potentially  turn  volatile  and 
unstable. While it is necessary to add to the pace of growth, it is also equally important to minimize the 
risks of instability, and the experience shows that more than desirable pace of financial liberalisation 
was  often  followed  by  financial  instability  and  crises.  Avoiding  crises  is  ultimately  a  national 
responsibility. The approach to managing the financial sector, the choice of instruments and the timing 
and sequencing of policies are matters of informed judgment, given the imponderables.    
financial  sector  reforms  has 
intensified  pressures 
in  implementing 
Current context 
Some  thoughts  on  the  issue  of  financial  stability  in  the  current  context,  are  perhaps  in  order.    Low 
growth accompanied by high inflation is a nightmare for a central banker.  High growth coupled with 
low inflation is indeed a central banker's dream.  I have reason to be happy, considering the growth 
and inflation numbers in India now.  So are all my brother or sister central bankers who seem to have 
similar positive trends. However, currently almost every central banker in this globalised world keeps 
wondering whether the night ahead will continue the dream run and if so, when will it run out of steam.  
The concerns of central bankers today arise out of what has been described as stable disequilibrium - 
with every day adding to potential disequilibrium while continuing to be stable.  The perceived risks 
arise mainly out of global imbalances and outlook for oil prices, particularly in the light of emerging 
geo-political situation.  Most market participants seem to sense these risks but this sentiment does not 
appear to be reflected in the pricing of risks. Risks do not disappear but they get transferred to another 
part of the system. The macro policies in emerging markets in particular have to factor in these risks 
while continuously balancing financial sector reform and stability considerations. More important, for 
2 
 BIS Review 19/2006
the  regulators,  monitoring  where  the  risk  lies  has  become  very  difficult  due  to  emergence  of  large 
conglomerates,  sophisticated  market  instruments  such  as  derivatives  and  presence  of  players  like 
hedge  funds.    The  good  news  is  that  there  is  international  cooperation  among  central  bankers  to 
mitigate the impact of such risks. The Actuaries can certainly help the process of analysing the risks in 
insurance sectors that do affect a large segment of population that in fact seeks to minimize such risks 
through insurance. 
Let me conclude by thanking the organisers for provoking me to think aloud and share my thoughts on 
a subject of common interest to all of us assembled here. I wish the conference fruitful deliberations, 
well balanced by pleasant stay and memories.  
BIS Review 19/2006 
 3
