Krzysztof Rybiński: Outlook for Poland’s economic and financial situation 
Speech  by  Mr  Krzysztof  Rybiński,  Deputy  President  of  the  National  Bank  of  Poland,  at  the  Annual 
General  Meeting  of 
the  Association  of  Chartered  Certified  Accountants  (ACCA),  Warsaw, 
18 May 2006. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Thank you for your invitation to address the Annual General Meeting of the ACCA. Today I am going 
to speak about prospects of the Polish economy with a special emphasis on the financial situation. 
In  short,  I  can  say  that  economic  prospects  of  the  Polish  economy  are  good.  Let  me  justify  this 
conclusion by presenting four dimensions of future prospects of the Polish economy: global outlook, 
financial markets, domestic outlook and public finances prospects. 
Global outlook 
According to recent IMF and European Commission forecasts1,2, the global economy, after recording 
a growth of above 5 percent in 2004, slowed to an estimated 4.6-4.8 percent in 2005 and is expected 
to  grow  at  a  similar  or  marginally  higher  rate  this  year.  Forecasts  for  2007  call  for  a  global  growth 
moderation by  0.2-0.3%.  If  the  forecasts come  true,  the  global conditions will  remain  favorable  and 
conducive  to  robust  growth  of  the  Polish  economy.  In  particular,  according  to  the  European 
Commission, the eurozone, - a destination for more than half of Poland’s exports - is expected to grow 
at  2.1  percent  in  2006  and  1.8  percent  in  2007,  which  is  significantly  above  a  eurozone  average 
growth rate in the years 2002-2005 when it stood at 1.2 percent per annum. 
There are numerous risks to these forecasts and the balance of risks is slanted to the downside. The 
International Monetary Fund in its World Economic Outlook published in April 20063 mentioned four 
risks: high and volatile oil prices, tightening in financial market conditions, rising global imbalances and 
an avian flu pandemic. 
Let  me  now  comment  briefly  on  three  of  the  risks,  and  I  will  address  the  fourth  -  financial  markets 
conditions a little later. So far high oil prices have had a remarkably small impact on world growth and 
world  inflation  in  comparison  with  previous  oil  price  shocks.  For  example,  in  one  of  the  recent 
speeches4  titled  “Has  oil  lost  ability  to  shock?”  David  Walton,  member  of  the  Bank  of  England’s 
Monetary  Policy  Committee,  analyzes  five  episodes  in  which  oil  prices  have  risen  significantly  and 
tries to uncover the reasons for the relatively benign outcome on this occasion. He comes up with two 
key conclusions: (1) this time the shock has taken longer to unfold and the economy is less dependent 
on oil; (2) both monetary policy conduct and monetary policy framework focused on stabilizing inflation 
have  anchored  inflation  expectations  well  and  prevented  the  second  round  effects,  ie.  higher  wage 
claims. Indeed, despite large increases in oil prices inflation in OECD countries oscillated around 3 
percent in the past year and core inflation (CPI excluding food and fuel) drifted from 2 percent to 1.8 
percent  in  the  same  period5.  However,  in  my  view,  further  prolonged  increases  in  energy  prices, 
especially  those  stemming  from  supply  constraints  or  related  to  political  risk  could  result  in  more 
elevated inflationary pressures in the short term and could seriously harm global growth prospects in 
the medium term, also because they would contribute to further worsening of global imbalances. 
The  issue  of  global  imbalances  has  attracted  enormous  attention,  both  from  academics,  investors, 
policy-makers  and,  of  course,  central-bankers.  You  may  find  a  detailed  description  of  the  issue  of 
International Monetary Fund, World Economic Outlook, April 2006. 
                                                      
1  
2   European Commission, Directorate General For Economic and Financial Affairs, Economic Forecasts, Spring 2006. 
3   See endnote 1. 
4   Walton D. „Has oil lost the ability to shock?”, speech to the University of Warwick Graduates’ Association Senior Directors’ 
Forum at the Commonwealth Club, London, 23 February 2006. 
5   OECD “OECD Consumer Price Index“, various releases. 
BIS Review 61/2006 
 1
global imbalances in my earlier speeches posted on the NBP website (www.nbp.pl (cid:31) publications (cid:31) 
speeches/lectures). Today I will only say that never in a human history has the largest economy run 
such a high current account deficit reaching 6.5 percent of GDP, not to mention that this economy is a 
provider of the global reserve currency. Moreover, this deficit is financed in large part by purchases of 
U.S.  debt  securities  by  Asian  central  banks  and  by  public  institutions  from  oil  exporting  countries. 
Some  people  call  it  a  “revived  Bretton  Woods”  system  and  claim  it  could  work  for  years,  if  not 
decades6. I agree that temporary constructs often survive much longer than one could expect; just 
recall the former temporary Syreny military pontoon bridge on the Vistula river in Warsaw built in 1985, 
that  lasted  for  fifteen  years7.  However,  one  can  be  next  to  certain  that  without  farreaching  reforms 
undertaken by major stakeholders financial markets may experience significant volatility in the not-too-
distant future, with potentially harmful consequences for global growth. The third risk to global growth 
is  the  avian  flu  pandemic.  Both  the  risk  and  the  consequences  of  the  worst-case  scenario  are 
impossible to assess, but the potential human and economic costs could be enormous. 
Financial markets 
Now  let  me  turn  to  financial  markets.  The  recent  few  years  are  marked  by  a  significant  growth  in 
financial  transactions,  stock  exchanges  have  risen,  corporate  and  emerging  markets  spreads  have 
tightened, the ratio of non-performing loans has dropped8,9. According to the Bank for International 
Settlements,  private  capital  flows  to  emerging  markets  have  reached  the  level  last  seen  in  1997, 
before the Asian crisis. Inflows to European emerging markets have reached all-time highs. Factors 
responsible for a sharp increase in capital flows to emerging markets can be divided into pull factors 
(local  fundamentals)  and  push  factors  (global  liquidity,  global  cyclical  factors).  While  pull  factors 
actually improved, and rating upgrades by Moody’s outnumbered downgrades by three to one in 2005, 
they  cannot  fully  account  for  the  magnitude  of  capital  flows  to  emerging  markets  in  that  year.  For 
example, BIS provides a measure of an average sovereign credit rating for emerging markets based 
on long-term foreign currency Standard & Poors ratings. While credit spreads fell to an all-time low, at 
the same time emerging markets sovereign ratings remained below their highest levels recorded in 
1997. Therefore we may conclude that push factors have been playing an important role in emerging 
markets. For example, the hedge fund community came to a view that in early 2004 the Polish zloty 
was  an  obvious  “no-brainer”  trade,  partly  because  it  had  depreciated  significantly  in  previous  years 
and partly because EU accession resulted in a significant and permanent drop in the country’s risk 
premium. In early 2005, hedge funds were telling me that the Brazilian real was another “no-brainer” 
trade,  as  the  central  bank  would  have  to  keep  high  rates  to  control  inflation  and  a  good  external 
balance indicated that the exchange rate could appreciate. In both cases, the Polish zloty in 2004 and 
the Brazilian real in 2005 were star performing currencies, and hedge funds pursuing carry trade and 
momentum strategies were important players on these markets. 
Such a situation poses a true challenge for many central banks in emerging markets. They have to 
judge to what extent their local currency strength is a result of solid fundamentals and to what extent it 
is just another “no-brainer” trade that may last for quite a while but may also end suddenly. Research 
conducted  at  the  National  Bank  of  Poland  and  by  other  institutions  indicates  that  financial  markets 
have become much more integrated in recent years, global factors drive the performance of emerging 
market currencies much more than just a few years back, that home bias is being reduced and even a 
well-known Feldstein-Horioka puzzle is almost gone10, ie the cross-country correlation between saving 
and investment rates has declined markedly. 
Favorable  global  liquidity  conditions,  attractive  rates  of  returns  and  good  economic  prospects  draw 
global investors to Polish financial markets. Additionally, Poland’s accession to the EU and the future 
                                                      
6   See Dooley M., Folkerts-Landau D., Garber P. „An Essay on the Revived Bretton Woods System“, NBER Working Paper 
9971, September 2003; and a series of other papers published by these authors in 2004 and 2005. 
7   http://www.um.warszawa.pl/v_syrenka/miasto/mosty-9.htm 
8  
9   Bank for International Settlements “BIS Quarterly Review. International banking and financial market developments”, March 
International Monetary Fund “Global Financial Stability Report”, March 2006. 
2006. 
10   Feldstein M. “Monetary Policy in a Changing International Environment: The Role of Capital Flows”, NBER Working Paper 
11856, December 2005. 
2 
 BIS Review 61/2006
entry into the euro area have made the Polish T-bond market, with the average daily net turnover of 
PLN 6 billion (the largest and the most liquid market in the region), more attractive to foreign investors. 
EU membership has enabled institutional investors, that are allowed to invest in instruments issued 
within  the  Community,  to  increase  their  exposure  to  Polish  securities.  In  2004,  non-residents’ 
investments in T-bonds issued in Poland rose by about PLN 20 billion, and in 2005 - by a further PLN 
7  billion.  The  beginning of  2006 was  also  marked by  new records  on  the Warsaw  Stock  Exchange 
amid  purchases  made by  foreign  investors  and  domestic  investment  funds.  In  2005,  the  number  of 
IPOs amounted to 35 and the market capitalization increased by almost 50%. 
However, one should not take these favorable global liquidity conditions for granted. Federal Reserve 
has already raised the interest rate to 5 percent. The ECB is in the process of normalizing interest 
rates  and  the  Bank  of  Japan  has  announced  an  end  to  quantitative  easing  and  markets  started  to 
price  in  first  increases  of  BoJ  interest  rate.  This  may  expose  some  emerging  markets,  which  have 
weak  fundamentals  to  a  change  in  investors’  sentiment,  may  lead  to  the  depreciation  of  local  EM 
currencies  and  a  significant  drop  in  market  liquidity.11  Some  risks  are  also  related  to  the  changing 
structure of our financial markets. Since the second half of 2004, the liquidity of offshore spot zloty 
market  has  increased  significantly  and  average  daily  turnover  reached  almost  USD  1  billion.  In 
addition,  high  nominal  values  of  single  transactions  between  non-residents  contribute  to  a 
segmentation of the zloty foreign exchange market. This phenomenon is even more visible in the case 
of the zloty option market. At the same time the consolidation of the Polish banking sector, transfer of 
treasury  operations  to  parent  banks  and  very  limited  amount  of  Polish  banks’  capital,  which 
determines the scope of risk they can take, limits the liquidity of the domestic market. 
In  the  future,  financial  market  for  instruments  denominated  in  zlotys  could  become  even  more 
segmented  and  therefore  less  effective  in  absorbing  different  kinds  of  risks.12  This  process  will 
accelerate  with  our  accession  to  the  eurozone.  Experience  of  some  EMU  members,  e.g.  Finland, 
indicates that EMU membership will be accompanied by a visible contraction of the domestic market.13 
The introduction of the euro will change banks’ internal organisation of risk and liquidity management. 
Treasury  activities  will  be  centralised  on  a  multi-country  group  level  and  proprietary  trading  will  be 
transferred abroad to head offices. 
This  process  might  be  accelerated  by  the  already  observed  transformation  of  subsidiaries  into 
branches of foreign banks. 
Domestic outlook 
Let me turn to domestic outlook of the Polish economy. The NBP projection released in April - which 
assumes unchanged interest rates at 4 percent - points to economic growth within the range of 4.5 to 
5.5 percent in the years 2006-2008 and inflation gradually returning to 2.5 percent target sometime in 
2008. The statement issued after the April Monetary Policy meeting stated, and I quote14: 
“The Council maintains its assessment that with large probability inflation will in 2006 Q2 and maybe 
Q3  remain  below  the  inflation  target  mainly  due  to  short-term  factors.  If  the  developments  in  the 
economy were consistent with the April NBP inflation projection, then the current level of the reference 
rate  of  the  central  bank  would  support  a  gradual  return  of  inflation  to  the  target  over  the projection 
horizon and would also be conducive to keeping economic growth at a pace, which is consistent with 
the potential output growth, determined by the structural features of the Polish economy. 
The fact that inflation and core inflation has stayed below the previous forecasts for a relatively long 
period  may  be  an  indication  that  the  impact  of  the  factors  which  may  slow  down  the  returning  of 
inflation  to  the  target  in  relation  to  that  accounted  for  in  the  projection  is  stronger  than  previously 
assumed. Factors which could potentially accelerate the return of inflation back to the target include a 
higher  wage  growth  than  assumed  in  the  projection,  provided  it  would  not  be  accompanied  by 
                                                      
11   National Bank of Poland “Financial Stability Review Report”, Warsaw, September 2005 
12   National Bank of Poland “Financial System Development in Poland 2004”, Warsaw, November 2005 
13   H. Koskenkylä, Ed. “Finnish Financial Markets 2002”, Bank of Finland, 2003 
14   Monetary Policy Committee statement, 26 April 2006 
BIS Review 61/2006 
 3
sufficiently fast increase of productivity, further oil price hikes or a deterioration of the public finance 
situation in relation to that envisaged in the Convergence Programme. 
The Council maintains its belief that the most favourable scenario for Poland would be to implement 
an economic strategy focused on creating conditions which would ensure the introduction of the euro 
at the earliest possible date, which would be conducive to a higher long-term economic growth.”, end 
quote. 
Public finances prospects 
This brings me to the developments in public finances.  
The fiscal outlook over the medium-term future would be broadly positive, if it were not for substantial 
risks, mainly political, surrounding the deficit path. 
In 2005, Poland recorded an ESA’95 deficit of 2.5% of GDP. This corresponds to a deficit of 4.4% of 
GDP  with  the  pension  funds  classified  outside  the  general  government  sector,  which  will  be  the 
binding  methodology  from  next  year  onwards  and  which  is  therefore  the  relevant  methodology  for 
assessing Poland’s future compliance with the European fiscal rules. This implies that Poland is 1.4 
percentage points away from meeting the Maastricht fiscal criteria. It is not a demanding medium-term 
consolidation target for an economy with an expected real GDP growth of close to 5 percent, providing 
a  very  good  environment  to  reduce  the  ratio  of  public  spending  to  GDP.  It  is  worth  noting  that 
Germany  may  achieve  consolidation  of  this  magnitude  over  the  2006-2008  period,  without  such  a 
favorable growth environment. 
However, the Convergence Programme15 presented by the government in January of this year, does 
not foresee fulfilment of the deficit criterion in the programme horizon; in 2008 the deficit is to stand at 
3.7% of GDP. Such a slow pace of deficit reduction has been criticized by the Council of the European 
Union16,  which  pointed  out  that  Poland  would  be  failing  to  comply  with  the  required  annual  fiscal 
adjustment of 0.5 percentage points of GDP in cyclically adjusted terms. 
NBP  projections  confirm  that  the  deficit  path  is  not  an  ambitious  one.  In  case  of  a  favorable 
macroeconomic  scenario,  particularly  one  in  which  the  job-rich  growth  observed  in  2004  and  2005 
continues over the period 2006-2008, the deficit could decline more than set forth in the Convergence 
Programme, even in the absence of consolidation measures but also without the introduction of new, 
deficit-increasing  legislation.  A  stronger  deficit  reduction  could  be  additionally  supported  by  the 
implementation  of  the  new  Public  Finance  Act,  which  should  contribute  to  more  efficient  fiscal 
management. Unfortunately, these upside risks to deficit targets in the Convergence Programme are 
far outweighed by downside risks in the form of new deficit-increasing legislation. This includes the 
recently proposed 4.5 point cut in social contribution rates. While this measure would bring about the 
much needed reduction of the tax wedge on labour income, it would cost the budget more than 1% of 
GDP in foregone revenue. Therefore it is essential that it should be accompanied by cuts in spending. 
Instead,  it  is  more  likely  that  spending  will  increase,  with,  among  other  measures,  salary  hikes 
promised  to  various  groups  of  public  employees,  as  well  as  more  generous  social  assistance  and 
pension indexation formulas. 
To  sum  up,  in  the  medium-term  horizon,  Poland  should  be  in  a  position  to  achieve  a  general 
government balance in line with the Maastricht fiscal criteria. This would require moderate discipline in 
public spending, which unfortunately does not appear very likely at the present moment. 
Conclusions 
Global growth has been very strong in the last few years and global financial conditions have been 
very  favorable  for  emerging  markets.  This  prosperous  period  has  been  used  in  some  countries  to 
improve public finances, while certain countries have not made much of a progress. If some of the 
risks  mentioned  today  materialize,  global  growth  and  global  risk  appetite  may  decline  and  many 
emerging markets will find it harder to maintain a high growth rate. It is therefore of utmost importance 
                                                      
15   Convergence Programme. 2005 Update, January 2006. 
16   Council Opinion of 14 March 2006 on the updated convergence programme of Poland, 2005-2008 (2006/C 82/12). 
4 
 BIS Review 61/2006
that  necessary  reforms  are  introduced  as  early  as  possible  to  get  ready  for  a  possible  global 
headwind. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 61/2006 
 5
