David Dodge: Summary of the latest monetary policy report 
Opening statement by David Dodge, Governor of the Bank of Canada, at a press conference following 
the release of the Monetary Policy Report Update, Ottawa, 26 January 2006. 
 Today, we released the Update to our October Monetary Policy Report (MPR). The Update reviews 
economic and financial trends in the context of Canada's inflation-control strategy. 
The Canadian and world economies are evolving essentially in line with the Bank's expectations, and 
the  outlook  for  growth  and  inflation  in  Canada  is  similar  to  that  in  the  October  MPR.  Canada's 
economy continues to adjust to global developments and to the associated changes in relative prices. 
The Bank continues to judge that the Canadian economy is operating at its production capacity and 
will grow roughly in line with its production potential through 2007. Annual GDP growth is expected to 
be 3.1 per cent this year and 2.9 per cent in 2007, with strong growth in domestic demand and further 
gains in exports. 
Total CPI inflation, which was 2.3 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2005, will continue to be affected by 
the prices of crude oil and natural gas. The Bank projects that total inflation will be about 2.5 per cent 
in  the  first  half  of  2006,  easing  to  2 per cent  by  the  first  half  of  2007.  Core  inflation,  which  was 
1.6 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2005, should also return to 2 per cent by the first half of next year. 
Risks to the Bank's projection remain balanced for 2006. Through 2007 and beyond, risks are tilted to 
the  downside,  as  the  unwinding  of  global  imbalances  could  involve  a  slowdown  in  world  economic 
activity. 
In  line  with  the  Bank's  base-case  projection  and  current  assessment  of  risks,  some  modest  further 
increase in the policy interest rate would be required to keep aggregate supply and demand in balance 
and inflation on target over the medium term.  
BIS Review 4/2006 
 1
