Ben S Bernanke: Basel II - its promise and its challenges 
Remarks  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve 
System, at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago’s 42nd Annual Conference on Bank Structure and 
Competition, Chicago, 18 May 2006. 
 I am pleased to speak to you this morning at what has become, over more than four decades, perhaps 
the most prestigious conference for bankers, academics, and bank supervisors in the United States. In 
every year but one of his tenure, Chairman Greenspan spoke at this meeting, and he sometimes used 
the occasion to advocate major changes to the bank regulatory system. Notable examples include the 
revisions to deposit insurance and bank capital standards that were embedded in the Federal Deposit 
Insurance Corporation Improvement Act of 1991 (FDICIA), the relaxation of restrictions on interstate 
banking in the Riegle-Neal Act of 1994, and the repeal of Glass-Steagall's limits on combinations of 
commercial and investment banking implemented by the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act of 1999.  
Today, I will discuss the importance of implementing another major change in the way we regulate and 
supervise banking organizations, especially our largest, most complex, and most internationally active 
firms.1 That change is the modernization of our approach to assessing the adequacy of bank capital, 
within the context of the framework that has come to be known as Basel II. The current system of bank 
capital standards, the so-called Basel I framework agreed upon internationally in 1988, was a major 
step forward in that it embodied the important principle that regulatory capital requirements should be 
tied to the risks taken by each banking institution.2 However, the relatively crude method of assigning 
risk weights to assets, as well as an emphasis on balance-sheet risks as opposed to other risks facing 
financial firms, limits the overall responsiveness of capital requirements to risk under Basel I, which 
renders  that  system  increasingly  inadequate  for  supervising  the  largest  and  most  complex  banking 
organizations. For these organizations, we need to move beyond Basel I to a more risk-sensitive and 
more  comprehensive  framework  for  assessing  capital  adequacy.  Basel  II  represents  the  concerted 
efforts of the supervisory community, in consultation with banks and other stakeholders, to develop 
such a framework. 
The broad principles of Basel II have become increasingly clear over many years of discussion and 
consultation, and I will review them briefly. I will argue that a framework built on these principles is the 
right one for supervising the largest and most complex institutions. Moreover, the Basel II framework is 
inherently  dynamic;  it  will  be  able  to  adapt  to  ongoing  innovation  and  change.  But  I  also  want  to 
convey  today  that  Basel  II  remains  very  much  a  work  in  progress.  As  we  proceed  toward  the 
implementation of this framework, success will require that bank regulators, the banking industry, the 
Congress, and other relevant parties engage in an ongoing and frank dialogue, and that policymakers 
be open-minded, flexible, and ready to make needed adjustments. For our part, the Federal Reserve 
is committed to getting Basel II right. 
Financial innovations in mortgage and other markets 
As  in  years  past,  the  Chicago  Fed  has  chosen  wisely  in  selecting  the  theme  of  the  conference. 
Innovations in the financing of homes and other real estate have come at a remarkable pace over the 
past decade or more, leading to more sophisticated and flexible instruments, more liquid markets, and 
better  risk-sharing.  Taking  full  advantage  of  these  innovations  has  required  banks  and  other 
institutions to make important improvements in risk measurement and risk management.  
Financial innovations and improved risk management have not been limited to real estate finance, of 
course. Securitization, improved hedging instruments and strategies, more-liquid markets, greater risk-
based  pricing,  and  the  data-collection  and  management  systems  needed  to  implement  such 
innovations have also occurred in other retail and wholesale markets.  
                                                      
1  
2   A second major contribution of Basel I was that it created international standards for measuring bank capital. 
In my talk, I will use the terms "bank" and "banking organization" interchangeably. 
BIS Review 43/2006 
 1
In my judgment, these developments, on net, have provided significant benefits. Borrowers have more 
choices and greater access to credit; lenders and investors are better able to measure and manage 
risk; and, because of the dispersion of financial risks to those more willing and able to bear them, the 
economy  and  the  financial  system  are  more  resilient.  To  be  sure,  rapid  financial  innovation  carries 
some risks, if new instruments are used improperly or if the market infrastructure that facilitates the 
trading of those instruments is inadequate. Regulators must be aware of and ready to mitigate those 
risks.  Overall,  however,  the  public  interest  is  served  both  by  the  prudent  use  of  new  financial 
instruments  and  by  the  improvements  in  risk-measurement  and  risk-management  practices  that 
prudent use requires. 
Implications for financial regulation 
As market participants innovate and markets become more efficient and sophisticated, bank regulators 
and supervisors must ensure that they do not fall behind. Indeed, a regulatory and supervisory system 
that  is  increasingly  divorced  from  actual  business  practice  may  well  become  counterproductive.  A 
regulatory  and  supervisory  system  that  is  not  in  tune  with  practice  may  increase  the  costs  of 
regulation,  stifle  efficiency  and  innovation,  and  ultimately  be  less  effective  in  mitigating  the  moral 
hazard problems associated with the financial safety net. 
Most regulatory changes are incremental, which is entirely appropriate given the inherent uncertainties 
about  how  best  to  respond  to  market  developments  and  the  desire  to  avoid  unintended 
consequences.  Examples  of  incremental  regulatory  change  are  common.  For  example,  the  U.S. 
banking  agencies  have  made  more  than  twenty-five  amendments  to  the  Basel  I  framework  in 
response to ongoing changes in banking and financial markets.  
But sometimes a more fundamental rethinking of the regulatory framework is needed. Sometimes a 
crisis  is  the  catalyst  for  such  rethinking,  as  in  the  case  of  the  deposit  insurance  and  capital  policy 
reforms in FDICIA that I mentioned earlier. At other times, major change is motivated by the gradual 
accumulation  of  factors,  such  as  the  blending  of  commercial  and  investment  banking  that  evolved 
before passage of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act. I would put the need for Basel II squarely in this latter 
category. No immediate crisis requires us to move toward Basel II, but the gradual evolution of market 
practice and the emergence of very large and increasingly complex banking organizations operating 
on a global scale require that we make significant changes in the way we assess capital adequacy at 
these organizations. Indeed, waiting for a crisis to force change would be foolish; by moving forward 
now,  we  have  the  luxury  of  being  deliberate  in  the  development  and  introduction  of  a  system  that 
promises significant benefits. 
Why Basel II? 
Many  aspects  and possible  effects  of Basel  II  have  been  debated,  including  its  potential effects  on 
banks'  costs  and  on  the  competitive  landscape.  I  will  discuss  some  of  those  aspects  shortly.  It  is 
important to keep in mind, however, that the core goal of Basel II is to promote the stability of the U.S. 
financial  system  by  ensuring  the  safety  and  soundness  of  U.S.  banks.  Its  ability  to  promote  that 
objective is the first criterion on which the proposed Basel II framework should be judged. 
I stated that the core goal of Basel II is to promote the stability of the U.S. financial system; but, as 
everyone here understands, the U.S. banking and financial system is increasingly interwoven with that 
of the rest of the world. Indeed, increasing globalization was a major factor that led the U.S. banking 
agencies to negotiate the Basel I agreement in 1988. Of course, the extent of globalization of both 
financial and real product markets is even more extensive today, and systemic financial problems will 
not  respect  national  borders.  Thus,  it  remains  very  much  in  the  interest  of  the  United  States  to 
continue to encourage international cooperation and consistency in regulating and supervising those 
banks that pose the greatest potential systemic risk. For this reason, we have chosen to work with our 
international and domestic colleagues on the Basel Committee to develop a new capital framework for 
the largest, most complex, and most globally active banking organizations. 
To maintain U.S. and global financial stability, we want to ensure that banks, particularly our largest 
and most complex institutions, will remain able to serve their customers and meet their obligations as 
lenders and counterparties  during  periods  of  economic  or  financial  stress.  That  requires,  of  course, 
that banks have both adequate capital and strong risk management. Because confidence promotes 
2 
 BIS Review 43/2006
stability, it is also important that supervisors and market participants are able to assess for themselves 
the financial soundness and risk-management capabilities of these institutions. 
Basel  II  is  a  comprehensive  framework  for  improving  bank  safety  and  soundness  by  more  closely 
linking  regulatory  capital  requirements  with  bank  risk,  by  improving  the  ability  of  supervisors  and 
financial markets to assess capital adequacy, and by giving banking organizations stronger incentives 
to improve risk measurement and management. The framework encompasses three elements: risk-
focused regulatory capital requirements, supervisory review, and market discipline. These are the so-
called three pillars of Basel II.  
Under Pillar 1, the risk sensitivity of minimum risk-based capital requirements would be much greater 
than  under  the  current  accord.  This  greater  sensitivity  would  be  achieved  by  linking  each  banking 
organization's  capital  requirement  to  empirically  based  measures  of  credit  and  operational  risk,  as 
determined in part by risk parameters estimated by that organization, such as a loan's probability of 
default and its expected loss given default. The methods used to construct such estimates would be 
subject  to  supervisory  standards,  guidance,  and  reviews,  including  a  requirement  that  the  risk 
parameters  used  for  Pillar  1  be  consistent  with  risk  assessments  actually  used  by  the  bank  for  its 
internal risk management. The Pillar 1 treatment of credit risk also reflects more accurately the risk-
reducing effects of guarantees, credit derivatives, and securitization, thus improving regulatory capital 
incentives for banks to hedge portfolio credit risks. The incorporation of operational risk in Pillar 1 is 
also a significant step, which recognizes that operational failures are indeed a potentially important risk 
for  many  banks,  one  that  they  should actively  seek  to  minimize.  In  addition,  Pillar  1  incorporates  a 
more comprehensive treatment of trading account risk. 
We should not underestimate the importance of strong minimum capital requirements. Strong capital 
helps  banks  absorb  unexpected  shocks  and  reduces  the  moral  hazard  associated  with  the  federal 
safety  net.  A  key  lesson  of  the  banking  and  thrift  crises  of  the  late  1980s  and  early  1990s  is  that 
prudent  and  explicit  minimum  regulatory  capital  requirements  are  needed  to  ensure  that  banks 
maintain  adequate  capital  and  to  anchor  an  effective  supervisory  system.  For  example,  explicit 
minimum  regulatory  capital  requirements  that  accurately  reflect  a  bank's  risk  provide  more-effective 
triggers for prompt corrective action. 
Besides making regulatory capital ratios more risk-sensitive, Basel II provides a consistent framework 
for improving supervisory assessments of capital adequacy and risk management. Under Pillar 2, a 
bank would be required to maintain a capital cushion above the regulatory minimums to capture the 
full  set  of  risks  to  which  the  bank  is  exposed.  These  include  liquidity  risk,  interest  rate  risk,  and 
concentration risk, none of which is reflected in Pillar 1. Currently, the U.S. banking agencies assess a 
bank's overall capital adequacy as a normal part of the examination process. But the overall quality of 
both the supervisors' and each bank's assessments of capital adequacy should improve greatly under 
Basel  II  because  of  the  expanded  information  that  will  be  available  from  Pillar  1,  from  supervisory 
reviews of a bank's systems for implementing Pillar 1 and Pillar 2, and from the bank's own analyses. 
Under Pillar 3, banks will be required to disclose to the public the new risk-based capital ratios and 
more-extensive information about the credit quality of their portfolios and their practices in measuring 
and  managing  risk.  Such  disclosures  should  make  banks  more  transparent  to  financial  markets, 
thereby improving market discipline.  
Taken  together,  these  three  pillars  provide  a  broad  and  coherent  framework  for  linking  regulatory 
capital  to  risk,  for  improving  internal  risk  measurement  and  management,  and  for  enhancing 
supervisory and market discipline at large, complex, and internationally active banks. The three pillars 
build  on  the  economic  capital  and  other  risk-management  approaches  of  well-managed  banks  and 
better  align  regulatory  and  supervisory  practices  with  the  way  the  best-run  banks  are  actually 
managed.  As  a  result,  Basel  II  will  be  better  able  than  the  current  system  to  adapt  over  time  to 
innovations  in  banking  and  markets.  In  addition,  Basel  II  sets  standards  for  risk  measurement  and 
management  and  for  related  disclosures  that  will  give  banks  ongoing  incentives  to  improve  their 
practices in these areas. Indeed, we have already seen significant progress in risk measurement and 
management  at  many  banks  in  the  United  States  and  elsewhere  as  a  result  of  the  Basel  II 
development process. More progress can be expected as we move forward.  
The need for ongoing dialogue and flexibility 
Basel  II  has  the  potential  to  provide  significant  benefits,  but  any  policy  change  as  fundamental  as 
Basel II inevitably creates uncertainties and raises difficult and complex tradeoffs. Successfully dealing 
BIS Review 43/2006 
 3
with  these  challenges  requires  that  the  banking  agencies,  the  industry,  and  other  stakeholders 
maintain a frank and ongoing exchange of views and remain flexible and open-minded as we tackle 
difficult issues. 
In this spirit, I urge the industry and other interested parties to comment thoroughly on the Basel II 
Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (NPR), proposed supervisory guidance that will come out in the near 
future, and the upcoming proposed changes to Basel I that would apply to the vast majority of banks 
not subject to Basel II. In an effort to aid this process, I would like to touch on a number of concerns 
that have been raised regarding Basel II.  
The first issue is the complexity and potential cost of the framework. The Basel II NPR is long and 
detailed.  The  draft  agreed  upon  among  the  banking  agencies  and  approved  unanimously  by  the 
Federal  Reserve's  Board  of  Governors  in  late  March  is  just  short  of  450  pages.  The  length  and 
complexity of that document, not to mention the additional supervisory guidance that will be needed, 
have led some to fear that the costs of implementing Basel II in the United States will outweigh any 
benefits it brings in terms of greater safety and soundness of banks, improved risk measurement and 
management, and better market discipline. 
I understand these concerns. We must recognize, however, that the Basel II proposal is complex for 
the  good  reason  that  modern  risk  measurement  and  risk  management  are  inherently  complex 
activities. Indeed, some commenters have argued that Basel II is overly simplistic in certain areas. The 
draft  proposals  also  represent  many  judgments  about  how  best  to  deal  with  sometimes  competing 
objectives.  On  the  one  hand,  the  system  must  be  enforceable  and  it  must  allow  for  reasonable 
comparability of regulatory capital ratios across large, complex, and diverse institutions. Thus, some 
standardization is required. Regulators and supervisors also owe it to the industry and other market 
participants to be as clear as possible about what we mean by such core concepts as the probability of 
default  and  loss  given  default  and  about  our  expectations  for  how  banks  go  about  estimating  such 
parameters.  
On the other hand, the diversity of practices across banking organizations, the absence of any single, 
definitive "best practice," and the need to provide strong incentives for improving risk measurement 
and  management  require  that  the  system  be  flexible  enough  to  allow  the  exercise  of  judgment  by 
supervisors and bankers. This need for flexibility and the use of judgment is the major reason that we 
have  long  emphasized  that  the  supervisory  reviews  in  Pillar  2  are  a  necessary  complement  to  the 
explicit minimum regulatory capital requirements set forth in Pillar 1.  
Naturally, we would like to see the framework implemented as cost-effectively as possible. The desire 
to avoid unnecessary regulatory costs is another reason why we have tried to build Basel II on what 
banks are already doing. However, Basel II does ask banks to make some infrastructure investments 
whose primary purpose is to help supervisors validate and compare banks' systems--investments that 
many banks would not otherwise make. Feedback from the industry regarding our proposals in this 
area would be very helpful.  
A  key  mechanism  in  Basel  II  for  balancing  the  inevitable  tensions  that  arise  when  attempting  to 
achieve sometimes competing objectives is the so-called use test. Under the use test, the systems 
and processes that a bank uses for regulatory capital purposes must be consistent with those used 
internally.  Note  that  I  use  the  word  "consistent,"  not  "identical."  For  example,  minimum  regulatory 
capital need not equal the economic capital requirements computed internally by a bank, but our intent 
is that the two will be highly correlated. In addition, Basel II seeks to accommodate a range of risk- 
measurement and risk-management practices, a range that can change over time. No regulator wants 
to impose a single definition of "best practice" or to set current practice in stone. In light of questions 
about the use test, I would highlight our desire for specific feedback on how best to implement this 
important principle. 
More generally, I hope the industry will work with the agencies to identify aspects of the framework 
that  are  neither  cost-effective  nor  supportive  of  sound  risk  management.  Relative  to  the  Advanced 
Notice  of  Proposed  Rulemaking  issued  in  2003,  the  current  NPR  incorporates  many  specific 
suggestions from the industry along these lines. Important examples include the definition of default 
and  the  treatments  of  expected  losses,  loan-loss  reserves,  credit  derivatives,  and  securitization.  If 
more adjustments are needed, we are ready to listen and adjust.  
Another concern that has been expressed regarding Basel II is that it will unfairly tilt the competitive 
playing field. This concern has two aspects. First, some have argued that the bifurcated application of 
Basel  II  within  the  United  States  could  allow  domestic  banks  that  adopt  the  framework  both  lower 
4 
 BIS Review 43/2006
capital charges on certain activities and lower overall regulatory capital requirements compared with 
other  domestic  banks.  Lower  regulatory  capital  charges  would,  it  has  been  argued,  translate  into  a 
cost advantage for adopters that would place non-adopters at a competitive disadvantage. In addition, 
some  fear  that  adopters  would  use  any  newly  created  excess  regulatory  capital  to  acquire  smaller 
banks. 
It is an important principle that differences in capital rules among institutions should not distort financial 
markets or create artificial competitive advantages for any particular class of banks. With this principle 
in mind, the Federal Reserve has conducted research on the potential competitive impacts of Basel II, 
and  all  of  the  U.S.  banking  agencies  have  received  comments  from  many  sources.  Based  on  this 
information, the banking agencies have announced their intention to propose revisions to the existing 
Basel  I  capital  standards  that  would  aim  to  mitigate  competitive  inequities.  Proposals  should  be 
released in the not-too-distant future, and I urge interested parties to give us specific advice regarding 
what else we may need to do to reduce any unintended competitive consequences of Basel II. 
The second competitive equity concern relates to the international consistency with which Basel II will 
be  implemented.  Inconsistency  in  international  standards  of  implementation  and  enforcement,  it  is 
sometimes said, will put internationally active U.S. banks at a competitive disadvantage and may also 
hurt purely domestic U.S. banks vis-à-vis the U.S. subsidiaries of foreign banks. 
All bank regulators recognize that achieving international consistency will be a challenge. However, 
this problem is not really new. Companies operating across national borders, and their supervisors, 
are  familiar  with  the  challenges  of  complying  with  sometimes  conflicting  legal  and  regulatory 
requirements. Still, we recognize that some international implementation issues will be more complex 
than those we currently face. U.S. regulators are working hard through the Basel Committee and with 
individual firms and national supervisors to address international implementation issues. A great deal 
more  effort  and  cooperation  will  be  needed,  but  I  believe  that,  as  in  the  past,  we  can  craft  an 
acceptable set of agreements and work out means of resolving future issues.  
The final concern I will discuss is the worry that Basel II could lead to a substantial decline in minimum 
regulatory  capital  requirements  at  adopting  banks.  I  emphasized  earlier  that,  for  supervisors,  an 
overarching  lesson  from  the  banking  and  thrift  crises  of  the  late-1980s  and  early-1990s  is  the 
importance of prudent minimum regulatory capital standards. All the banking agencies are committed 
to this principle. 
At present, we cannot quantify precisely how much Basel II, once fully implemented, will affect banks' 
risk-based  capital  requirements  relative  to  Basel  I  levels.  Although  our  quantitative  impact  studies 
have been useful, they have been conducted using bank systems and measurements that generally 
would  not  be  expected  to  meet  the  Basel  II  standards.  We  will  learn  more  as  the  process  moves 
forward,  the  standards  and  guidance  come  into  sharper  focus,  and  banks  upgrade  their  risk-
management systems.  
Because of the irreducible uncertainty in this process, the implementation plan set forth in the NPR 
incorporates extensive safeguards to limit the potential for unintended consequences, including any 
possibility of a large decline in required capital levels. These safeguards include a minimum one-year 
parallel run for each bank, during which the bank will calculate what its risk-based capital requirement 
would be under Basel II, even though its actual requirement will be determined using the Basel I rules. 
Following the parallel run, each bank will be subject to a transition period of at least three years during 
which capital floors based on the Basel I rules will ensure that there is no sharp decline in regulatory 
capital. In addition, the agencies have committed themselves, throughout the transition process and 
beyond,  to  continually  evaluate  the  effects  of  the  new  framework  and  to  make  any  needed 
adjustments to ensure prudent levels of capital. Finally, I would note that, even when Basel II is fully 
implemented, all banking organizations will continue to be subject to the current minimum leverage-
ratio requirement and prompt-corrective-action rules.  
This  step-by-step  implementation  plan,  which  all  the  U.S.  banking  agencies  support,  should  ensure 
that banking organizations maintain strong capital positions throughout the transition years and after. 
Moreover,  safety  and  soundness  depends  not  only  on  the  absolute  level  of  capital  in  the  banking 
system but on how well that capital is deployed. The Basel II framework should make any given level 
of bank capital work harder, so to speak, by aligning capital more closely with risks taken, by providing 
incentives for banks to improve their risk management, and by enhancing market discipline through 
greater transparency. To reiterate, however, to make that framework achieve what is intended requires 
getting the details right. Therefore, I once more urge the banking industry and other members of the 
BIS Review 43/2006 
 5
public to review the NPR and the draft supervisory guidance closely and to provide the agencies with 
constructive comments on all aspects of the proposed framework. 
Conclusion 
In summary, I believe the time has come to move to the next stages of implementing Basel II. This 
framework will modernize bank supervision and bring supervisory practice into line with best industry 
practice. Substantial benefits will ensue--most importantly, a safer and sounder banking system--but 
uncertainties remain. Satisfactory resolutions of these uncertainties will require hard work and close 
cooperation among bank regulators, the industry, Congress, and other key players. There is a long 
way to go, but the Federal Reserve is committed to this task. It is very much in the best interest of all 
Americans for the next generation of bank capital standards to be as effective as possible in promoting 
the stability of the U.S. banking and financial system.  
6 
 BIS Review 43/2006
