Axel A Weber: Forecasting in Eurosystem central banks – overview and 
challenges 
Speech  by  Professor  Axel  A  Weber,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the  Bundesbank 
Spring Conference, Eltville, 5 May 2006. 
References to the speech can be found on the Deutsche Bundesbank’s website. 
  Introduction 
1 
It is a pleasure for me to open this conference on new developments in economic forecasting. I would 
like to welcome the presenters, discussants and other guests who have come to Eltville to take part in 
the conference. 
Forecasting  is  nowadays  a  central  element  in  the  decision-making  process  of  central  banks.  This 
conference  aims  to  present  and  discuss  new  insights  gained  from  academic  research  which  might 
help  to  improve  the  current  practice  of  forecasting,  with  the  aim  of  using  these  insights  to  develop 
further the forecasting tools employed by the Bundesbank and the Eurosystem. 
To  start  with,  it  might  be  helpful  to  take  stock.  Therefore,  in  my  introductory  remarks,  I  shall  be 
discussing  various  aspects  of  the  forecasting  procedures  employed  at  central  banks  with  a  special 
focus on the Eurosystem and the Bundesbank. 
There is a straightforward reason why central banks have a strong interest in forecasting: because of 
lags in the effects of monetary policy on macroeconomic activity monetary policy cannot affect current 
inflation  and  output.1  Owing  to  these  lags,  it  is  widely  recognised  that  monetary  policy  should  be 
forward-looking and have a medium-term perspective. As a consequence, monetary policy decisions 
are, to some extent, dependent on forecasts. 
Future developments in inflation and output are of key interest in central banks’ forecast exercises. 
The relevance of price developments stems from the fact that the primary objective of many central 
banks  is  to  establish  and  maintain  price  stability.  Their  interest  in  forecasting  output,  or,  more 
generally,  some  measure  of  broad  macroeconomic  activity,  results  from  their  influences  on  future 
prices. Moreover, many central banks take real developments into consideration for another reason: 
the  objectives  of  these  central  banks  explicitly  include  real  variables  such  as  unemployment  and 
output.  
But  even  for  central  banks,  such  as  the  Eurosystem,  which  have  a  more  hierarchical  ordering  of 
objectives, and pursue price stability as the primary objective, output developments play an important 
role: Focusing exclusively on price stability, regardless of the type of shock hitting the economy, would 
otherwise have the undesirable consequence of increasing output volatility to inefficiently high levels. 
In the end, this may complicate the preservation of price stability. 
As part of their communication strategy, many central banks have decided to publish their forecasts in 
order to increase transparency. In a forwardlooking environment, fostering transparency by means of 
published  forecasts  is  more  than  an  end  in  itself.  It  also  serves  to  guide  expectations  of  future 
monetary  policy  actions,  thus  making  the  central  bank  more  effective  in  fulfilling  its  duties.  For  this 
reason, the quality of the forecasts is crucial not only under reputation aspects but also for reasons of 
policy effectiveness. 
As a result, central banks have a natural interest in applying the best forecasting methods available. 
This necessitates to continuously incorporate the latest academic developments in forecasting into the 
models used by economic and research departments at central banks. In my following remarks, I shall 
discuss some of the recent developments. 
                                                      
1   A rough benchmark for the euro area is that monetary policy affects output in about a year and inflation in about two years. 
See Angeloni, Kashyap and Mojon (2003). 
BIS Review 36/2006 
 1
 Recent developments in forecasting 
2 
One way of distinguishing the main developments in forecasting methods is to focus on the amount of 
information used for specifying forecast models:2
 
•  Forecasting in data-rich environments with as much information as is available: 
Factor forecasting with large datasets, 
Forecast pooling or combination, and 
• 
• 
•  Disaggregation versus aggregation of data, 
•  Forecasting with reduced information: 
Theory-based forecasting: for example DSGE models, 
• 
•  Model selection: general-to-specific modelling strategies 
 
To highlight the diversity of models within both the limited information and full-information approaches, 
I  have  included  some  examples  of  methods  in  the  above  listing  which  may  be  of  potential  use  for 
central bank forecasting. 
 Forecasting tools in central banks: some stocktaking 
2.1 
What kind of forecasting approaches have been adopted by central banks? As outlined in Sims (2002) 
and  in  Pagan  &  Robertson  (2002),  most  of  the  central  banks  employ  traditional  macroeconometric 
models,  sometimes  replaced  by  medium-scale  DSGE  models,  as  core  or  workhorse  models  for 
forecasting and policy analysis. These models have a well-specified theoretical framework in statistical 
and  economic  terms  that  helps  providing  some  economic  interpretation  of  the  forecast.3  Although 
most  of  the  central  bank  work  typically  devotes  around  a  single  core  model,  alternative 
macroeconometric  or  DSGE  models  of  differing  size  or  with  different  regional  coverage  are  also 
employed. 
Additionally, a number of econometric time series models with little explicit economic content are used 
for short-term forecasting, as they can be used to employ higher-frequency data and different datasets 
than the traditional macroeconometric or DSGE models. 
Finally, ‘judgement’ in terms of outside-model information is additionally used. 
How  are  these  forecasts  used  in  practice?  In  general,  forecasts  from  different  types  of  models  are 
simultaneously taken into account in monetary policy practice. As an example, the Bank of England 
has recently developed a suite of short-term forecasting models for GDP containing, among others, 
large-scale  factor  models  and  non-linear  models.4  Forecasting  results  for  combined  forecasts  with 
these  models  are  reported  in  addition  to  the  forecasts  obtained  by  the  Bank  of  England  Quarterly 
Model (BEQM). In a recent study by the Bank of Sweden, both a non-theoretical BVAR and a DSGE 
model  are  used  for  forecasting  and  policy  analysis.5  These  examples  show  that  not  in  all  cases  a 
singlemodel approach is followed, but rather a ‘suite-of-models’ approach. 
Arguments in favour of the suite-of-models approach 
2.2  
What are the reasons for central banks following these multi-model approaches? Why is it important to 
apply a variety of models in central banks rather than only a few, especially for forecasting? 
                                                      
2   See the overview  article Clements  and Hendry  (2005),  Guest Editors’ Introduction: Information in Economic Forecasting, 
Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 67, issue s1, p. 714. 
3   See Issing (2004), p. 730. 
4   See Kapetanios, Labhard, and Price (2005). 
5   See Adolfson, Andersson, Lindé, Villani, and Vredin (2005). 
2 
 BIS Review 36/2006
1) Information loss: Using only one specification or model implies that some indicators and information 
are left aside and ignored for policy decisions. There are good reasons for thinking that this may not 
be a good strategy.6
In  applied  econometrics  typically  alternative  specifications  are  initially  tried,  and  the  specification, 
estimation and testing steps are re-iterated a number of times.7 In this way, a ‘good’ forecasting model 
is obtained by an extensive specification search. By checking a large number of possible models, and 
choosing  exclusively  the  best-performing  one,  specifications  with  only  slightly  inferior  empirical 
performance  are  subsequently  ignored  in  the  forecast  comparison.  As  a  consequence,  there  is  the 
danger that a good forecast performance is less the result of the model’s actual forecasting ability, but 
more so just luck in the selection procedure. Better testing procedures should consider more general 
specification search criteria such as “the benchmark’s forecast performance should not be inferior to 
any  alternative  forecast”.  Forecast  comparison  tests  considering  this  general  requirement  have 
recently been proposed by White (2000) and Hansen (2005), and take into account a large number of 
candidate models for forecasting.8
A similar idea is adopted in the ‘model confidence set’ (MCS) approach proposed by Hansen, Lunde 
and Nason (2003). This procedure represents a general approach to model selection which allows for 
finding a group (set) of forecasting models. This is appealing because it often cannot be ruled out a 
priori that more than one of the competing model is equally good.9 * 
Therefore,  a  sensible  solution  in  the  forecasting  model  selection  context  is  to  consider  many 
competing models, and not just a few. 
2) Model uncertainty: Policymakers face a wide range of uncertainty, and so do modellers. There is 
considerable model uncertainty, and there is no consensus among policymakers concerning the one 
true model. As an example, consider the different approaches to modeling expectations; some authors 
favour  backward-looking  models  while  others  prefer  forward-looking  models,  and  a  third  camp 
advocates hybrid models. Therefore, model equations may be misspecified in terms of functional form 
or omitted variables. Additionally, structural breaks have been identified as crucial sources of forecast 
failure. Finally, data uncertainty might affect models in different ways. 
Information  loss  and  model  uncertainty  are  closely  interdependent:  Models  are,  by  definition,  a 
reduction  of  reality.  For  example,  single  models  can  capture  only  a  few  aspects  of  the  monetary 
transmission  mechanism.  Since  many  transmission  channels  are  likely  to  matter  in  reality,  a  “one 
model fits all” approach seems inappropriate. 
3) Forecast pooling performs well in empirical applications: Forecast combination methods often work 
well, and, in particular, better than singlemodel forecasts. Recent examples of the empirical success of 
forecast  pooling  are  Stock  and  Watson  (2004)  and  Marcellino  (2004).  Intriguingly,  the  combination 
methods  with  the  lowest  forecast  errors  are  the  simplest  –  for  example,  with  equal  weights.  This 
indicates that estimating forecast weights might be difficult in practice, but in itself again is probably 
method sensitive. 
Forecast pooling may be particularly useful under structural changes or breaks and misspecification: 
Following theoretical considerations, combinations of forecasts are unnecessary when forecasts use 
the correct conditional expectation in a weakly-stationary process. In other words, a departure from 
perfect knowledge is necessary to explain gains from combination, see Clements and Hendry (2002) 
and Timmermann (2005): 
                                                      
6   See Granger and Jeon (2004), pp. 324-5. 
7   See Spanos (2001). 
8   Taking into account more than one benchmark model makes the null of equal forecast accuracy harder to reject. See, for 
example, White (2000), table 1, p. 1113. 
9   Construction of an MCS involves a sequence of tests for equal predictive ability. This restricts the set of candidate models 
by deleting models that are found to be significantly inferior, and the set of remaining models is the MCS. An MCS can be 
used to construct combination forecasts by pooling the forecasts of the models in the MCS. If the number of models in the 
MCS is large, a reasonable way to proceed is to weigh the individual forecasts equally. The reason for this is that the MCS 
consists precisely of the models that cannot be rejected as being equally good. See Hansen, Lunde and Nason (2003), p. 
841. 
BIS Review 36/2006 
 3
•  A  pro-diversification  argument  states  that  some  combination  of  two-model  forecasts  might 
perform  better  than  either  alone,  if  the  two  models  provide  partial,  but  not  overlapping, 
explanations.10 
•  Owing  to  model  uncertainty,  using  the  correct  conditional  expectation  for  forecasting  is 
unrealistic, and, in reality, departures from the correct model may be expected to be the rule 
rather than the exception. 
If  structural  breaks  occur,  forecasts  from  individual  models  may  be  affected  differently, 
possibly on account of differing degrees of misspecification. Combinations of forecasts might 
then outperform forecasts from individual models.11  
 To summarize: There are good reasons why monetary policy pursues fullinformation strategies and 
“looks at everything” in terms of a broad set of information from data and models. The recent sizable 
literature  on  robust  policies  in  various  model  environments  also  emphasises  the  merits  of  model 
combination and averaging.12  
Therefore,  selecting  a  single  model  for  monetary  policy  may  be  inappropriate,  since  conditioning 
monetary policy decisions on one model ignores the role of model uncertainty. It also disregards the 
favourable empirical results from the forecast combination literature, and thus leaves aside potentially 
important information. 
Eurosystem forecasting 
3  
The Governing Council of the Eurosystem bases its comprehensive assessment of the risks to price 
stability  and  its  policy  decisions  on  a  broad  set  of  information  provided  by  two  analytical  tools:  the 
economic analysis and the monetary analysis. 
The monetary analysis assesses medium to long-term developments in inflation based on the close 
relationship  between  money  and  prices  over  long  horizons.  Monetary  analysis  takes  into  account 
developments in a wide range of monetary indicators including M3, its components and counterparts, 
notably credit, and measures of excess liquidity.  
The  economic  analysis  identifies  short  to  medium-term  risks  to  price  stability.  It  includes  regular 
monitoring  of  a  broad  set  of  non-monetary  economic  and  financial  variables,  such  as  labour  costs, 
fiscal policy statistics and financial market indicators.13  
Additionally, the projections of key macroeconomic variables carried out by Eurosystem staff are an 
integral part of the economic analysis. Moreover, a range of non-central bank forecasts are taken into 
consideration.  Forecasts,  however,  are  not  an  all-encompassing  tool  for  the  conduct  of  monetary 
policy in the Eurosystem. 
The monetary and economic analyses provide complementary analytical frameworks, and, by means 
of cross-checking, they support the robustness of the Governing Council’s assessment of risks to price 
stability. 
Eurosystem forecasts are carried out under the sole responsibility of the Eurosystem staff, and not of 
the Governing Council. This makes the forecasts different from those of other central banks, such as 
the  forecasts  of  the  Bank  of  England,  where  the  MPC  is  responsible  for  the  forecasts  and  their 
assumptions. 
                                                      
10   See Timmermann (2005), p. 3. 
11   See Clements and Hendry (2002). 
12   For example, Brock, Durlauf and West (2003, 2006) propose a model averaging approach that derives optimal policy given 
a policy maker’s preferences – for example, a loss function – and given a variety of possibly relevant models affecting the 
central bank’s target values. Apart from forecast averaging, a multiple model approach helps to address other issues where 
model uncertainty matters. For example, a policymaker may be interested in policies whose effects are relatively insensitive 
to which model is the correct one. 
13   See Issing (2004), p. 725. 
4 
 BIS Review 36/2006
The  regular  staff  projections  are  carried  out  as  a  collaboration  between  the  ECB  and  the  national 
central  banks  of  the  euro  area.  This  ensures  the  full  consideration  of  all  information  and  expertise 
available in the Eurosystem for forecasting, in addition to aggregate information at the area-wide level. 
Empirical  results  from  the  forecasting  literature  also  support  the  argument  that  disaggregated 
information in terms of national time series is more useful for forecasting than aggregated information 
(area-wide time series) in the euro area.14  
Concerning the forecast methods, various approaches are employed, and the Eurosystem pursues a 
suite-of-models approach. Regarding the level of aggregation, the Eurosystem employs econometric 
models  for  single  euro  area  member  countries  in  addition  to  area-wide  approaches.  Traditional 
structural macroeconometric models still play a key role in forecasting – for example, the Area-wide-
model (AWM) of the ECB – and the econometric models of the euro-area central banks.  
Recently,  DSGE  models  have  been  developed  in  the  Eurosystem.  Some  of  these  models  are  still 
under construction and some are already used for policy simulations. However, they have not been 
widely used for forecasting so far. 
In  addition,  Eurosystem  staff  makes  use  of  time  series  models  for  shortterm  forecasting,  such  as 
different VAR models and large factor models. 
However, Eurosystem forecasts are not fully model-based. In the forecast exercises conducted by the 
Eurosystem,  a  complex  interaction  of  information  takes  place  between  models  and  judgmental 
information from outside the models. 
3.1   The role of short-term interest rates in central bank projections 
One  practical  difficulty  in  forecast  exercises  is  the  appropriate  conditioning  of  the  forecasts.  A 
particularly  subtle  problem  for  central  banks  concerns  the  appropriate  choice  of  a  consistent  short-
term  interest-rate  projection.  This  topic  plays  a  key  role  in  the  recent  discussion  on  central  bank 
forecasting. The short-term rate is the policy instrument under the control of the central bank; via the 
expectation  channel,  its  future  path  influences  current  economic  circumstances  and  decisions. 
Specifying a trajectory of future rates in today’s projections is therefore a delicate problem with regard 
to  the  signals  about  the  future  course  of  monetary  policy  given  to  outside  observers.  There  are 
basically three ways of specifying the future interest rate path. 
Firstly, a constant short-term interest rate (CIR) assumption can be employed. The inflation projection 
being higher (lower) than the inflation target at some given horizon has been interpreted as indicating 
that,  sooner  or  later,  the  instrument  rate  needs  to  be  raised  (lowered).15  An  advantage  of  this 
assumption is that it can easily be communicated. CIR is an obviously technical assumption with no 
risk of central bank commitment to follow the assumed constant interest rate path. 
One drawback is that many current asset prices depend on market expectations of the future short-
term interest rate path – the most prominent example being the long-term interest rate which, via the 
term structure, depends on expectations of future short term rates. And, typically, the market prices of 
these assets are used as other inputs in projection exercises rather than the hypothetical asset prices 
that would result if market participants actually expected a constant interest rate. Hence, the forecasts 
are of a hybrid nature as they use the CIR together with inputs which are inconsistent with the CIR 
assumption. 
Secondly,  an  alternative  is  using  the  market  expectations  of  future  shortterm  interest  rates,  the  so-
called market interest rates approach (MIR), where these are typically derived from the yield curve. 
Compared  with  the  CIR,  the  MIR  assumption  in  principle  preserves  a  higher  degree  of  internal 
consistency as it is in line with the other asset price inputs for the forecasts. Therefore, it could be 
expected to be a better estimate of future outcomes than projections based on the CIR assumption, 
while remaining a technical assumption and not a policy commitment on the part of the central bank as 
regards the future evolution of its policy rate. 
                                                      
14   See Marcellino, Stock and Watson (2004). 
15   See Svensson (2005). 
BIS Review 36/2006 
 5
Until now, the Eurosystem forecasts have been carried out under the assumptions of a CIR. Starting in 
June  2006,  Eurosystem  and  ECB  staff  macroeconomic  projections  will  be  based  on  the  technical 
assumption that short-term market interest rates will move in line with market expectations and thus 
follow the MIR approach.16  
Note  that  the  change  to  MIR  is  of  a  purely  technical  nature.  It  should  not  be  misunderstood  as  a 
commitment of future interest rate policy to the rates assumed in the projections. The MIR is being 
introduced in order to bring about a further improvement in the quality and internal consistency of the 
macroeconomic  projections,  and  does  not  imply  any  change  in  the  monetary  policy  strategy  of  the 
Eurosystem  or  in  the  role  of  projections  within  it.  The  Governing  Council  will  continue  to  base  its 
assessment of the risks to price stability and its policy decisions on a broad set of information provided 
by the economic and monetary analyses. 
A third possible concept to treat the short-term rate in central bank’s projections is the ‘own instrument 
projection’.  It  reflects  the central  bank’s  own  assumed  interest  rate  path (OIR),  i.e.  the  interest  rate 
path  that  is  supposed  to  achieve  the  central  bank’s  objectives  best  under  certain  model-  and 
judgment-based assumptions concerning the functioning of the economy. 
The  OIR  approach  necessitates  the  commitment  of  the  decision-making  body  to  this  conditional 
forecast. Given that the Eurosystem staff projections are under the sole responsibility of the staff, and 
not the Governing Council, the adoption of a OIR forecast is no viable option for the Eurosystem. 
Moreover, although the OIR has the appealing property of being fully consistent with the central bank’s 
targets and  other  inputs  there  are several  problems with  this  approach.  They can  explain why  only 
very  few  central  banks  are  pursuing  this  alternative.  The  OIR  is  highly  dependent  on  the  specific 
analytical  framework  from  which  it  is  derived;  in  particular,  a  core  forward-looking  model  and  a 
monetary policy loss function. In light of additional model-uncertainty and the necessary integration of 
judgment  in  the  forecasting  process  the  optimal  interest  rate  is  therefore  surrounded  by  difficult-to-
quantify uncertainties which make it somewhat problematic to communicate. Moreover, the OIR might 
be  interpreted  as  an  unconditional  commitment  to  the  future  path.  Therefore,  communicating  the 
conditional nature of the assumption is more demanding than for the other two assumptions. 
Future challenges for Eurosystem forecasting 
3.2  
Looking  to  the  future,  the  Eurosystem  will  face  various  challenges  with  respect  to  forecasting.  Of 
course, in order to provide the best possible forecasts as inputs for monetary policy decisions, there is 
a  constant  need  for  the  use  of  the  latest  forecast  methods  in  the  Eurosystem  macroeconomic 
projection exercises. For this purpose, extensive evaluation studies of recently developed forecasting 
methods are necessary, which might lead to extensions of the forecasting toolkit where appropriate. 
In  this  regard,  an  important  question  will  be  how  to  integrate  new  approaches  into  the  forecasting 
procedures.  For  example:  What  are  the  benefits  and  risks  of  recently  developed  DSGE  models  for 
forecasting – and for policy analysis? Can they be integrated into the forecasting procedures, and how 
can the results be communicated? 
Moreover, another central direction for future work might be the adoption of formal forecast and model 
combination  methods  to  take  account  of  model  uncertainty  in  an  effective  manner  and  to  make 
efficient  use  of  the  large  datasets  that  are  nowadays  available  for  forecasting  at  central  banks. 
Research projects on dimension reduction using model selection, large factor modelling or systematic 
forecast and model combination are already under way and might also play an important role in the 
future. 
These topics are particularly useful for short-term economic forecasting in the Eurosystem in order to 
identify short to medium-term risks to price stability under the economic analysis. 
With  regard  to  longer-term  horizons  and  forecasting,  two  possible  innovations  may  be  considered 
valuable for future work. 
                                                      
16   ECB (2006) 
6 
 BIS Review 36/2006
Firstly,  owing  to  the  well-established  empirical  relationship  between  money  and  future  price 
developments,17 money-based inflation forecasts could be envisaged as an additional tool to support 
the monetary analysis of future risks to price stability. 
Secondly, conditional on implementing the former it might also be worth investigating the usefulness of 
model averaging approaches for refining the overall formal background of the ECB strategy. 
As discussed earlier, the ultimate goal of the Eurosystem’s two-pillar strategy is the efficient utilisation 
of  available  information  for  monetary  policy  decisions  under  the  monetary  and  economic  analyses. 
One  possible  extension  might  be  found  in  a  more  strongly  formalised  combined  assessment  of  the 
information  included  in  both  pillars  for  future  inflation  developments  at  various  time  horizons  (short, 
medium and long-term).  
Of  course,  the  advantages  and  pitfalls  of  a  more  formalised  forecasting  combination  have  to  be 
investigated thoroughly, and research activities are needed for that. 
Bundesbank forecasting within the Eurosystem 
4  
The  Bundesbank,  as  part  of  the  Eurosystem,  carries  out  forecasts  on  a  regular  basis  for  the  key 
German macroeconomic variables. These forecasts are an input for the Eurosystem staff projections, 
where the national predictions are discussed and aggregated with other national forecasts into area-
wide forecasts. Furthermore, the forecasts serve as quantitative background information for explaining 
monetary policy on a national level, and for comments on economic and fiscal policy issues. 
From  a  methodological  viewpoint,  forecasts  are  carried  out  as  a  combination  of  model-based 
forecasting  and  judgmental  forecasting.  The  core  model  for  policy  forecasting  is  the  structural 
macroeconometric model, which is used in the Eurosystem staff projection exercises. 
To date, only the Bundesbank model has served as the main model forecasting tool, but further steps 
towards  a  suite-of-models  approach  are  being  explored  and  likely  to  be  implemented  in  the  near 
future. 
Current research projects aim at developing DSGE models for policy simulation. However, owing to 
the  limited  forecast  accuracy  of  these  models  so  far,  they  will  probably  serve  only  as  a  tool  for 
analysing  particular  policy-relevant  issues  apart  from  being  used,  for  now,  in  regular  forecast 
exercises. 
Short-term forecasting in the Bundesbank is carried out with bridge equations and other time series 
models.  However,  in  order  to  enhance  these  models,  efforts  are  being  made  to  develop  models 
suitable  for  forecasting  in  real  time  –  in  particular,  large  factor  models  and  VAR  models  and  their 
applications in real time. 
Moreover, the Bundesbank is devoting considerable research activities to the further development of 
the  monetary  analysis.  In  particular,  ongoing  research  projects  are  investigating  the  information 
content of various monetary aggregates for future inflation. 
Outlook for the conference 
5  
As  you  can  see,  topics  concerning  forecasting  methodology  are  always  at  the  top  of  the  research 
agenda for Eurosystem central banks. I have highlighted some aspects that lie at the heart of each 
and  every  central  bank  engaged  in  forecasting,  and  I  have  mentioned  a  number  of  issues  that  are 
particularly relevant to the state of play in the Eurosystem in general and the Bundesbank in particular. 
Of course, there are still more open questions than issues resolved. But if it were the other way round, 
conferences  like  this  would  be  superfluous.  In  this  respect,  we  look  forward  to  hearing  of  new 
approaches during this conference. 
I wish you stimulating discussions and a productive meeting. Thank you for your attention. 
                                                      
17   See, for example, the various approaches used to establish the role of money for future inflation by Gerlach and Svensson 
(2003), Gerlach (2004), Gerlach-Kristen (2005), and Hofmann (2006). 
BIS Review 36/2006 
 7
