Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview with Der Standard, De Standaard, La Tribune, 
Süddeutsche Zeitung and L'Echo 
An  interview  with  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  conducted  by        
Ms  Birgit  Baumann  (Der  Standard),  Mr  Luc  Coppens  (De  Standaard),  Ms  Isabelle  Croizard  (La 
Tribune), Ms Helga Einecke (Süddeutsche Zeitung) and Ms Catherine Mommaerts (L'Echo), published 
on 15 March 2006. 
 After the second ECB rate hike, you repeated that monetary policy was still accommodating. At 
what  level  do  interest  rates  become  neutral,  i.e.  when  they  neither  stimulate  nor  brake 
economic activity.  
When I reported on the decision of the ECB’s Governing Council to raise the interest rates I said that 
our decision reflected our assessment at that time. It is still our assessment. Our assessment is clear. 
We did not decide ex ante a series of monthly increases of rates as has been done by other central 
banks.  The  Governing  Council  assesses  the  risks  to  price  stability  and  does  what  is  necessary  to 
counter these risks when they increase. We do not refer to the notion of a theoretical “neutral rate”. 
We refer to our mandate, which is to deliver price stability and be credible in delivering price stability 
over time. It is what the Treaty calls on us to do and what the people of Europe are very clearly asking 
us to do. By doing so, we are also contributing to a financial environment which is very favourable to 
growth  and  job  creation  in  the  euro  area.  When  I  say  that  our  monetary  policy  stance  is 
accommodating, it can be confirmed by a number of observations: we have real short-term interest 
rates which are very close to zero; nominal short-term interest rates are the lowest in the euro area 
since the Second World War, for example the German Bundesbank never went lower than 2.5%; there 
is abundant liquidity in the euro area with monetary aggregates growing twice as fast as the growth in 
GDP. 
Businessmen complain that the ECB’s rate hikes came too early and might put the economic 
recovery of the euro area at risk. How can the ECB cope with that criticism?  
What  we  are  doing  is  what  our  mandate  commands  us  to  do.  But  our  mandate  is  not  at  all  in 
contradiction with growth and job creation. I will tell you why: in order to preserve a level of medium 
and  long-term  market  interest  rates  that  is  exceptionally  favourable  to  growth  and  job  creation,  we 
have to solidly anchor inflation expectations at a level that is fully in line with our definition of price 
stability.  We do  that  precisely  by  demonstrating  to observers,  investors,  savers and our  313  million 
fellow citizens of the euro area that we do whatever is necessary to deliver price stability. If we were 
not credible in doing so, all our medium and long-term market interest rates would be much higher. 
This  is  well  understood  by  European  and  global  observers.  By  delivering  price  stability  we  also 
contribute to reinforcing consumer confidence. We are telling consumers: “look, we are protecting and 
preserving  your  present  and  future  purchasing  power’’.  To  sum  up,  what  we  are  doing,  i.e.  being 
faithful to our mandate, allows the present euro area recovery to be sustainable in the medium and 
long run.  
The growth rate of Europe now seems unable to reach its potential. Should the ECB therefore 
become more than a financial watchdog?  
Our  present  assessment  is  that  the  current  trend  in  the  growth  rate  in  the  euro  area  is  around  its 
potential growth rate, taking into account some volatility in the quarterly figures. We will see whether 
economic  growth  will  accelerate,  or  whether  we  will  have  to  cope  with  other,  new  shocks.  We  are 
constantly assessing the situation in a pragmatic way, based on the facts and the new information that 
we receive. Let me add something which is important: a good monetary policy is a necessary condition 
for  growth  and  job  creation,  but  is  not  sufficient  in  itself.  We  also  need  a  sound  fiscal  policy,  bold 
structural reforms and appropriate monitoring of competitive indicators. This is the responsibility of all 
the other stakeholders which have a part in the overall result.  
The political leaders gave a very sharp reaction to your first rate hike in December, but not to 
the second in March. Did you convince them in the meantime or how do you explain that?  
The ECB is totally and fiercely independent, as you can read in the Treaty on European Union. Its 
credibility is based upon this independence. That credibility is our most precious asset and permits us 
BIS Review 20/2006 
 1
today  to  have  exceptionally  favourable  medium  and  long-term  interest  rates.  I  trust  that  this  is 
increasingly well understood by all our partners in the euro area. 
Did the recovery in Germany help the ECB Governing Council to decide on the last rate hike?  
As you know, we look at the situation of the euro area as a whole. The significantly positive signals in 
various German surveys are important, because Germany is the largest national economy of the euro 
area.  We  will  see  how  the  present  period  of  recovery  develops.  We  have  quite  a  number  of  good 
signals. These signals are encouraging for the euro area and confirm a trend for the recovery that is 
likely to be around our growth potential. That said, we are very pragmatic. We look at all the facts, 
figures and data, and stand ready to incorporate them in our future assessment.  
What risks to price stability do you see, with the exception of oil prices?  
We  see  a  number  of  risks.  Some  of  them  are  associated  with  the  increasing  prices  of  oil  and 
commodities.  These  increases  are  progressively  incorporated  in  the  prices  of  other  goods  and 
services that are energy intensive. We have another set of risks, which are associated with indirect 
taxes and increases in administered prices. Furthermore, we have the risk of “second round” effects. 
This means that economic agents may incorporate in their price setting the wrong assumption that the 
higher headline inflation due to oil price increases will last in the medium and long run. These risks of 
“second  round”  effects  are  particularly  significant  as  regards  wages  and  salaries.  We  are  there 
precisely  to  ensure  price  stability  in  the  medium  term.  To  date,  we  have  not  seen  these  risks 
materialise,  but  we  have  to  prevent  them.  Once  the  second  round  effects  materialise,  it  is too  late. 
Signals  for  risks  in  the  medium  to  long  term  can  be  deducted  from  our  monetary  analysis.  For 
example, loans to the private sector are growing quite rapidly.  
You said you are not committed to a series of rate hikes, but two hikes do not make a cycle. 
Can we expect a scenario similar to that from 1999 to 2000, with seven rate hikes in a row?  
We have not decided ex ante a series of rate hikes. It is important to convey this message, because 
otherwise observers might think that we have decided to raise rates at every meeting, as has been 
done by another important central bank. At the same time, I said that we never embark on any pre-
commitment  –  we  will  do  what  is  necessary  to  counter  the  risks  that  we  identify.  That  is  why  we 
increased rates in December, why we did not in January and February, and why we did increase rates 
in March. I don’t want to say anything else. One thing is for sure: all observers have understood that 
we  did  not  decide  a  priori  to  increase  rates  and  that  we  will  do  what  is  necessary  to  ensure  price 
stability. And they trust us. This trust is perhaps our most precious asset. 
Can we today speak of a housing market bubble in the euro area?  
The development of loans for financing housing forms part of the information which we receive from 
the monetary analysis and which we monitor closely. If you take the full body of the whole euro area 
you have a level of outstanding credit for housing which is very dynamic, exceeding 11% growth on a 
yearly  basis.  That  figure  is  posted  despite  the  fact  that  the  German  real  estate  market  remains 
depressed. That means that, in part of the euro area, there is an even more rapid development of the 
situation. So it calls for very close monitoring. At this stage, I will sum up our present understanding of 
the situation: it is something that is important to monitor closely. It was naturally part of the information 
we took into account when we decided to increase rates during our last meeting. But I would also add 
that, at the level of the euro area as a whole, all economies taken into account, I wouldn’t say that we 
are  presently  alarmed,  diagnosing  the  immediate  danger  of  a  bubble.  I  would  say  that  we  have 
information that calls for very close monitoring and we will continue to follow these developments very 
carefully. 
But you have some differences between countries. How can you cope with that?  
Again, at the level of the Governing Council of the ECB we have only one instrument, which is the 
single monetary policy. If there are situations that are different from country to country, as is the case, 
other instruments, in particular at national levels, are in the hands of the governments, the parliaments 
and, in some cases, the national central banks of the countries concerned. However, it is clear that, as 
far as we are concerned, in that domain, as well as in others, we only have the single monetary policy 
as an instrument.  
What is your appraisal of the seven years since the euro was launched? When do you think it 
best played its role as a monetary shield?  
2 
 BIS Review 20/2006
The euro has been an incredible success. Human nature is such that when you have a big success, 
you  tend  to  forget  it.  The  success  has  been  such  that  we  have  been  able  to  deliver  to  313  million 
people the level of monetary confidence, of monetary credibility, of low medium and long-term market 
interest rates that previously were the privilege of only part of the euro area. All that was considered by 
many  impossible  “ex  ante”.  I  have  participated  in  the  run  up  to  the  euro  and  I  have  a  very  vivid 
memory of what many observers believed even in 1997 or 1998: the fact that we could succeed in 
benchmarking the euro on the most credible currencies of the euro area was considered as a quasi 
impossible endeavour. We succeeded and we met the promise which was made by all the authorities, 
including  central  banks,  to  the  people  that  the  euro  could  be  as  good,  as  solid  and  as  credible  a 
currency as their previous national currencies. I am proud, as was my predecessor Wim Duisenberg, 
to be able to go to all the countries in the euro area and tell people: “you have a currency which has 
fulfilled the promise that was made”. 
The launch of the euro was supposed to accelerate the process of economic union and fiscal 
harmonisation. How do you explain the lack of progress and, worse, the apparent rejection of 
the euro by many of the larger new Member States of the European Union?  
Let me remind you of some figures. Today, 25 countries are members of the EU and, quite soon, there 
will be 27. Of these 25 countries, only two have an “opt out” clause as regards the euro. In the future, 
25 out of the 27 countries will not have an “opt out” clause. And out of the two economies that have an 
opt out clause – the UK and Denmark – Denmark follows very closely the monetary policy of the euro 
area. Now let me give you some figures on the Exchange Rate Mechanism 2. When I first arrived at 
the head of the ECB, there was just one participating currency, the Danish krone. Now, the number of 
participating currencies is eight. I do not observe a frozen situation, quite the contrary. The euro has 
facilitated the completion of the single market and is also pushing in the direction of structural reforms 
that are a major endeavour for Europeans in general. It does not mean that we are fully satisfied with 
the present situation. It is clear that in the domain of structural reforms, we have to do more, much 
more.  We  gave  our  strong  backing  to  the  initiatives  taken  recently  by  the  European  Commission, 
under the leadership of Mr Barroso, to re-launch the Lisbon Agenda.  
If you look at those countries that have implemented well and fully their structural reforms, you see 
that  they  are  success  stories.  Ireland,  in  particular,  is  a  remarkable  success  story,  as  regards  full 
employment and GDP per capita. Denmark, which is de facto in the euro area, has made structural 
reforms  in  the  labour  market,  which  have  proved  very  efficient.  We  are  fully  backing  this  trend  of 
reforms. It is very important to communicate as efficiently as possible and to convince public opinion 
that this is a successful way to fight unemployment and promote growth. 
Part  of  the  needed  structural  reforms  are  sector-based  and  imply  cross-border  mergers  and 
acquisitions. Are you completely discouraged, for example, by the French government’s recent 
attitude  in  the  Suez-Gaz  de  France  case  and  Dominique  de  Villepin’s  call  for  economic 
patriotism?  
The ECB’s Governing Council didn’t discuss any particular dossier relating to cross-border mergers 
and  acquisitions.  In  the  past,  the  Governing  Council  always  referred  to  the  full  completion  of  the 
European  single  market.  As  a  matter  of  principle,  the  Governing  Council  thinks  that  there  is  an 
opportunity cost associated with the non-completion of the single market. Let’s not forget that it is not a 
new endeavour. The Single Act launched the endeavour for a single market in the mid-1980s. In 1958, 
when the Treaty of Rome was ratified, the idea was to produce a common market of the size of the 
USA to benefit from economies of scale. The ambition was already clear 50 years ago: free circulation 
of men and women, goods and services and capital in the European Union.  
Austrian Finance Minister Karl-Heinz Grasser, who is chair of ECOFIN during the first half of 
2006, claims that all EU Member States should achieve balanced budgets by 2010, what do you 
think about that?  
It is a good goal. We have always called for the rigorous implementation of the Stability and Growth 
Pact. You will remember that there were calls to drastically change the rules in this domain, and even 
by some to abandon the pact. We have always said that the Pact is a crucial element in the EMU. The 
Stability and Growth Pact is very much the “E’’ in EMU. We have no federal government, we have no 
federal budget, but we have a single currency. In order to be coherent, the EMU needs a stability and 
growth  pact.  The  three  percent  threshold,  which  I  am  proud  of  having  introduced  myself  in  the 
negotiations,  is  not  only  mentioned  in  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  but  is  also  referred  to  in  the 
Treaty. I often have to answer the question, whether more than three percent would not be opportune 
in  difficult  situations  where  an  economy  could  use  that  extra  push.  That  would  be  the  Keynesian 
BIS Review 20/2006 
 3
argument: the more you spend, the more you activate the economy. But besides that argument, there 
is what economists call the “Ricardian effect’’. David Ricardo rightly stated that the greater the deficit 
becomes, the more investors and consumers alike start to realise that such a deficit is not sustainable 
in  the  longer  run.  Somebody  will  have  to  pay  for  it,  either  through  higher  market  interest  rates  or 
through tax increases. Entrepreneurs become nervous and slow down their investments, consumers 
start saving more and spending less. So the economy slows down and jobs are lost. The more the 
budget goes into the red, the stronger this Ricardian effect becomes, and the more it outweighs the 
Keynesian arguments for deficit spending. That is why the stability pact is also a growth pact. 
Slovenia is the only new EU Member State that is ready for the euro. Do you think it can join in 
2007 as expected?  
We will see. I don’t want to anticipate the result of the reports that the ECB and the Commission will 
publish in May. We have to check whether the criteria stipulated in the Maastricht Treaty are fulfilled 
on a sustainable basis. 
After seven years, do you have any arguments left to convince the British to join the euro ?  
It is up to the British people to decide. As you know, in the past, the British Prime Minister said very 
clearly that it is in the interest of Britain to join when the time comes. I’m also convinced of this. When 
you compare Britain and Ireland, you can see that there are good arguments. However, even without 
the UK, we number 313 million people in the euro area. 
With Otmar Issing’s departure, the last pioneer of the first ECB-Management is leaving. What 
has been done in your institution in the last eight years and what challenges lie ahead of you?  
Otmar Issing has been and is a marvellous member of the Executive Board. Our institution, the ECB, 
has  been  designed  to  be  credible  over  time  irrespective  of  staff  changes.  The  ECB  is  credible 
according  to  all  the  information  we  extract  from  observers,  market  participants  and  the  financial 
sphere. The successive members of the Executive Board are themselves part of the continuity of the 
institution. I am confident that this trust is solidly based.  
Do  you  think  Lucas  Papademos  would  be  a  marvellous  successor  to  Otmar  Issing  as  Chief 
Economist?  
We will take together, the six of us, the decision for the responsibilities in the Executive Board, when 
time comes, with our new colleague.  
The Federal Reserve System has a new Chairman, Ben Bernanke. What kind of man is he and 
do you expect to have the same relationship with him as you had with his predecessor, Alan 
Greenspan?  
It is very important that we have a very close relationship with the Federal Reserve System. It has 
been the case consistently over the past years. At the time of the terrorist attacks in the United States 
on 11 September 2001, I mentioned several times that we had an exceptional and confident real-time 
dialogue with the Federal Reserve System, which permitted us to take the appropriate decisions as 
regards  the  potential  liquidity  risks  that  existed  in  both  the  euro  and  the  dollar  on  our  side  of  the 
Atlantic. That kind of immediate decision on the very afternoon of the terrorist attacks was possible 
only because the degree of mutual confidence and companionship between us is very high. I had a 
very good relationship with Alan Greenspan. We met very often because the various “G’s” (G10, G7, 
G20) meet regularly. We have a special brotherhood of central banks which is important. I have myself 
the privilege of presently being Chairman of the G10 and I am the direct witness of this very close and 
confident relationship between central bankers. Ben Bernanke’s appointment has been extraordinarily 
well received by the global community, all observers and market participants. I have full confidence 
that we’ll continue to have the very same, very close and friendly relationship with the Federal Reserve 
System. 
Do you think that the Federal Reserve System and Congress are ready to seriously discuss the 
opportunity of having an inflation target?  
The fact that the question has been mentioned with the main argument that it could help to anchor 
inflation expectations is an idea that we like, as you know. But I don’t want to comment in any respect 
on decisions that are of the responsibility of the Federal Reserve System’s Open Market Committee 
and of its Chairman, Ben Bernanke. 
4 
 BIS Review 20/2006
