Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Towards a shared vision for capital market reforms 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines,  at  the 
Testimonial Luncheon of the AB Capital and Investment Corporation, Makati City, 1 March 2006. 
 Distinguished  directors,  officers  and  staff  of  the  AB  Capital  and  Investment  Corporation  led  by 
Chairman  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  Ramon  R.  Del  rosario,  Jr.;  President  and  Chief  Operating 
Officer  Francis  M.  Varela;  former  President  Filomeno  G.  Francisco;  ladies  and  gentlemen:  Good 
afternoon!  
Congratulations on your 25th year anniversary! It is indeed an honor for me to join all of you today as 
you celebrate this momentous occasion.  
For  more  than  two  decades,  AB  Capital  and  Investment  Corporation  has  positioned  itself  as  a 
prominent player in the capital market industry. Specifically, you have carved your place in corporate 
finance, fixed-income securities dealership, stock brokerage and fund management. You also hold a 
creditable  track  record  in  equity  and  debt  securities  underwriting,  having  acted  as  issue  manager 
and/or  lead  underwriter  for  several  of  the  country’s  most  prestigious  and  most  successful  debt  and 
equity offerings. It’s no wonder you have earned various local and international distinctions for your 
financial  savvy  backed  by  a  solid  financial  standing,  as  well  as  for  your  significant  contributions  to 
capital market development.  
I am positive that you owe much of this success to the competence and foresight of your leaders and 
the dedication and zeal of your workforce.  
In the pursuit of your institutional aspirations, you also have significantly contributed to our shared goal 
of  promoting  stability  and  efficiency  in  the  Philippine  financial  system  for  a  sustainable  economic 
growth. In return, let me take this opportunity to share with you our continuing reform initiatives which 
could be useful guideposts in fine-tuning your chosen path.  
The economy at a glance  
To put things in perspective, let me start with an overview of the economy.  
In 2005, the economy proved its resilience and fundamental strength, despite the prevailing difficult 
macroeconomic conditions.  
The country’s economic performance is benefiting directly from improving fiscal discipline and sound 
monetary policies.  
For 2006, we expect to keep the momentum going. We realize, of course, that sustaining economic 
growth over the long term would depend, to a large extent, on the resilience of the financial system 
which forms the backbone of the economy. 
Thus, we are taking parallel actions on key fronts.  
The promotion of a sound and stable financial system is the centerpiece of this agenda. Within this 
framework, the development of the Philippine capital market is being given high priority alongside the 
continuous reform of the banking system.  
Capital market initiatives  
Already underway is a series of reforms in the Philippine capital market intended to: create a sound 
market  infrastructure,  enhance  transparency  and  market  discipline  mechanisms,  promote  greater 
investor protection, and strengthen the legal and regulatory framework.  
Toward this end, the following are some of our key contributions: 
BIS Review 15/2006 
 1
Delivery of securities  
In July 2003, the BSP issued regulations mandating the proper delivery of securities by dealer banks 
and non-banks to the investor. This is meant to promote transparency and discourage proliferation of 
manipulative practices. 
Accreditation of third party custodians  
The BSP subsequently issued regulations on the pre-qualification criteria for banks and NBFIs that will 
operate as securities custodians and defined the functions and responsibilities of each. It is important 
that  we  develop  the  custodian  as  an  important  agent  in  the  capital  market  that  can  facilitate  the 
lending and borrowing of securities. 
Market infrastructures  
The  BSP  also  supported  private  sector-led  initiatives  to  establish  a  fixed  income  exchange  (fie) 
intended  to  improve  the  current  market  infrastructure.  The  fie  centralizes  trading  of  securities  for 
enhanced transparency and efficient price discovery.  
At  present,  transparent  pricing  has  been  achieved  for  the  interdealer  market,  as  quotations  are 
available on a per security basis, and executions are at the best bid and offer. In the future, we hope 
to  see  efficient  price  discovery  for  the  common  investor  in  the  public  market  phase,  as  price  and 
trading data will be made available on a timely basis.  
Expansion of the menu of financial products  
The domestic capital market remains shallow and underdeveloped. In response, the BSP has issued 
various  circulars  diversifying  the  menu  of  financial  products  available  in  the  capital  market.  Traded 
papers  like  unsecured  subordinated  debts  (as  tier  2  supplementary  capital),  long-term  negotiable 
certificates  of  deposits  or  LTNCDs,  documented  repos,  and  securitization  structures  create  market-
oriented opportunities for banks and other players and deepen the capital market. Recently, we have 
issued circular 503, amending the guidelines on risk-based capital framework to include Hybrid Tier I 
instruments  as  part  of  qualifying  capital.  Hybrid  capital  instruments  that  have  equity-like  features 
enable  them  to  absorb  losses  similar  to  common  equity.  However,  these  instruments  must  be 
perpetual and redeemable by the issuer subject to prior BSP approval.  
Moreover, we have also started revitalizing the trust business to widen investor base with the gradual 
phase out of Common Trust Fund (CTF) for a better product called Unit Investment Trust Fund (UITF). 
Uitfs  enhance  the  credibility  of  pooled  funds  to  investors  as  the  value  of  investments  is  mark-to-
market, paving the way for long-term investment opportunities. 
Credit rating agencies  
We  are  encouraging  the  entry  of  more  rating  agencies.  Rating  agencies  play  an  important  role  in 
guiding  investors  towards  informed  decision-making  and  in  ensuring  the  proper  disclosure  of 
investment information. Accordingly, we have issued circulars which set the criteria for accreditation of 
domestic  and  international  credit  rating  agencies.  To  date,  the  BSP  has  authorized  one  domestic 
credit rating agency to issue ratings for bank supervisory purposes. Likewise, we have recognized one 
internationally  accepted  credit  rating  agency  with  a  representative  office  in  the  Philippines  to 
undertake local or national credit ratings.  
Legal and regulatory framework  
We are also advocating the passage of key legislative measures that will spur the development of the 
capital market and strengthen the regulatory framework.  
A key priority is the approval of the extension of the Special Purpose Vehicle (sPV) law for another two 
years to complete the cleanup of Non-Performing assets (NPAs) in the banking system and restore 
credit supply to the economy.  
2 
 BIS Review 15/2006
Following a succession of asset dispositions under SPV I, Bnks’ NPL/NPA ratios declined to single-
digit levels. As of end-December 2005, NPL/NPA ratio of the commercial banking system stood at 8.5 
percent and 8.6 percent, respectively.1  
We will also continue to lobby for the enactment of the credit information system act that will establish 
a central credit information system for improved discipline in the credit process. Credit bureaus will be 
able  to  serve  as  a  reliable  source  of  information  to  allow  lenders  to  accurately  evaluate  risks  and 
select between creditworthy and poor-quality borrowers.  
Another  vital  legislation  is  the  Revised  Investment  Company  Act  (RICA)  that  will  establish  a 
comprehensive  regulatory  framework  to  enable  investment  companies  to  play  a  key  role  in  capital 
formation. Moreover, this bill is aimed at protecting the interests of the investing public by preventing 
the misuse of customer funds.  
Other legislative measures that we would like to see enacted in the near term are the Personal Equity 
Retirement Account (PERA), the Pre-Need Code and the Corporate Recovery Act.  
With these reforms in various stages of implementation and others more that are in the pipeline, we 
can expect better prospects for the growth of the Philippine capital market.  
Undoubtedly, the continuing support of all financial industry players will ensure for us greater success 
in this endeavor.  
As a final note, I call on you to assist us in fostering an environment conducive to a vibrant domestic 
capital market. You are, undoubtedly, one of the major players in the capital market today. We will be 
relying on your experience in helping provide order and depth in the market.  
Although the road ahead is considerably tough, I am confident that AB Capital - armed with vision, a 
strong  resolve  and  with  sound  leadership  at  the  helm  -  will  be  more  than  prepared  to  meet  the 
challenge.  
Let us all do our share in responding to the call for building a deep, dynamic and liquid capital market - 
a precondition for achieving sustainable economic growth.  
Once again, happy anniversary and I wish you all more success in the years to come! 
                                                      
1   Comparatively lower than the 12.7 percent NPL ratio and 11.4 percent NPA ratio as of end-December 2004. 
BIS Review 15/2006 
 3
