Baboo R Gujadhur: Preparations for implementation of Basel II 
Introductory remarks by Mr Baboo R Gujadhur, First Deputy Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at the 
Seminar on Basel II, organised by KPMG, Mauritius, Port Louis, 25 – 26 May 2006. 
 Mr. Wilfrid Koon, Senior Partner 
Colleagues from KPMG Mauritius & South Africa 
Distinguished Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Good  Morning.  This  is  just  a  short  speech  to  get  you  started  on  the  2-Day  Seminar  on  Basel  II 
organized by KPMG, Mauritius. I must say at the outset that I am very pleased with KPMG’s initiative 
to host this Seminar, which comes as no surprise being given that the firm is closely associated with 
the banking sector as auditors of banks. But the firm also needs to be commended for being the first 
among the auditing firms to organize a Seminar on Basel II for our local banking industry and for the 
audit profession. 
First, a few words to set out the reasons for Basel II. The Capital Accord of 1988, now referred to as 
Basel  I,  was  a  major  step  forward  in  so  far  as  it  embodied  the  principle  that  regulatory  capital 
requirements should be based on risks being taken by each individual bank. Important as it was in this 
regard, Basel I with its rather crude method of assigning fixed risk weights to particular assets, failed to 
capture the responsiveness of capital requirements to risk. In a world that became increasingly prone 
to a serious risk of systemic failure, as illustrated by the East Asian crisis and other subsequent events 
including  the  LTCM  crisis,  a  more  risk-sensitive  and  comprehensive  framework  for  assessing  bank 
capital adequacy was called for, especially for large internationally active banks involved in complex 
transactions. 
After many years of discussion and several rounds of consultation, including with non G-10 countries, 
the Basel Committee came up with a new framework of principles for supervising the largest and most 
complex banking institutions. This has become known as Basel II. The core objective of Basel II is to 
promote the stability of the financial system by setting out the parameters on which to base the safe 
and sound operation of banks. 
By  definition,  financial  intermediaries  are  here  to  take  different  levels  of  risk  which  they  manage 
differently  from  each  other.  Banks  remain  at  the  heart  of  this  system  of  financial  intermediation, 
whether  at  the  individual  country  or  international  level.  As  such,  their  safety  and  soundness  has 
implications for financial stability, for consumers of financial services, for banks across the board, for 
regulators and for entire economies. In very simple language, Basel II sets out therefore a rigorous 
framework  tying  the  amount  of  capital  which  a  bank  is  required  to  maintain  with  its  specific  risk 
measurement  and  risk  management  capabilities  in  as  much  as  capital  is  seen  as  the  last  line  of 
defence a bank has recourse to in the event of unexpected loss from risk-taking. 
Even  though  Basel  II  was  intended  originally  to  provide  a  capital  adequacy  framework  for 
internationally active banks, it was clear that, for diverse reasons, a number of countries and banks of 
various  sizes  and  importance,  would  eventually  embrace  its  principles  for  determination  of  capital 
adequacy. Several options – the Simple Standardized, the Standardized, Foundation and Advanced 
approaches – have accordingly been formulated in the menu of options available to accommodate a 
progressive adoption of Basel II. One of the direct impacts of Basel II adoption will be the wide scale 
use  of  quality  information,  data warehousing  and credit  risk  modelling with a view  to  improving  risk 
management by banks. 
Whichever  approach  is  adopted,  the  regulator  and  the  external  auditor  as  well  as  Board  and 
Management  of  banks,  all  have  a  duty  to  exercise  oversignt  over  the  processes  of  capital 
determination and, hence the precise risks being taken necessitating specific capital charges. In this 
context, a system of consistent regulatory practices has to be aligned with the way banks are run and 
managed and, in this sense, Basel II creates the scope for regulators to adapt over time to innovations 
taking place in the banks and the markets. Unless they apprehend fully concepts underlying processes 
for the estimation of Probability of Default (PD), Loss given Default (LGD), Exposure at Default (EAD) 
and  the  parameters  employed  to  calculate  risk  of  loss  based  on  these  concepts,  inadequacies  will 
surface  up  since  the  supervisory  validation  process  will  not  be  up  to  the  mark  in  such  a  case. 
BIS Review 54/2006 
 1
Conscious  of  this  factor,  we  have  been  earnestly  raising  at  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  regulatory 
capabilities to meet this challenge. I would like to say in this context that we have a fully motivated and 
competent professional team of regulators at the Bank who have been receiving for the last year and a 
half the necessary training to deliver effectively on this assignment. 
The key role that regulators have to play under Pillar 2 and the importance of public disclosure and 
accountability  under  Pillar  3  have  generally  not  received  the  attention  they  deserve  in  the  Basel  II 
context. It is absolutely necessary to re-emphasize the critical importance of these two pillars in the 
Basel II implementation process. We are conscious that a whole process of prudential re-adaptation is 
called for in this respect by both banks and regulators. I may add that we are well on course, fully 
aware that Basel II is more than a simple framework for fixing an amount of capital consistent with the 
specific risks taken by a bank. 
In fact, Basel II is expected to create a whole range of positive spinoffs. Among others, it will help put 
in place a wider framework for supervision and regulation to be conducted on a consolidated basis. 
Supervision  will  become  increasingly  more  risk  focused  and  that,  not  with  respect  to  Basel  II 
implementation alone, but along with a re-focussing of other prudential rules as set out in the Basel 
Core Principles. Moreover, a system is expected to evolve out of Basel II that will enable intervention 
on the markets much before a crisis sets in because the whole framework is intended to avoid having 
to take action before any wide scale financial distress is at the doorstep. Care will also be taken to 
ensure that costs of regulation and supervision do not weigh down on the benefits of efficient private 
market operation in the implementation of the associated regulatory rules. All these will add value and, 
hopefully, lighten the overall burden of financial regulation while promoting overall financial stability at 
the same time. We have therefore to look into a framework of benefits and market efficiencies to be 
gained  beyond  ordinary  Basel  II  considerations.  Those  benefits  will  emerge  after  Basel  II  becomes 
part of the reality and gives rise to a new thinking about what may be called a more even level playing 
field than what prevails cur rently at the national and international levels . 
It is for these reasons and to be really effective that the Bank of Mauritius has adopted, together with 
banks,  a  consultative  and  participative  approach  for  Basel  II  implementation.  The  target  date  for 
implementation has tentatively been set for beginning 2008. Much work has been done already at the 
level of the Basel II Implementation Committee. Proposal drafts on work done have been circulated for 
views and comments from the industry as a prelude to progressive Basel II implementation in the form 
of  guidelines  issued  to  the  industry.  It is  not  intended  to  impose  any specific  Basel  II  approach but 
banks are being encouraged from the start to go for an approach – such as the Internal Ratings Based 
Approach  –  by  which  they  will  effectively  add  value  now  and  in  the  longer  term  to  the  inherent 
capabilities of their institutions. All this is being done without losing sight of the investments banks are 
making or have already made to progress towards that goal by first adopting the simpler approaches 
of Basel II. 
I  hope  I  have  given  you a  broad  background  in  these  introductory  remarks  to  set  the stage  for  the 
Seminar.  I  am  confident  that  close  cooperation  by  various  stakeholders  and  specialized  resource 
persons including creditors, regulators, risk management strategists, financial analysts and credit risk 
modelers,  will  go  a  long  way  to  make  for  the  efficient  and  productive  implementation  of  Basel  II  in 
Mauritius. To that end, this Seminar represents an important contribution and I take the opportunity to 
praise KPMG once again for taking the initiative. 
I thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 54/2006
