Caleb M Fundanga: Barclays Bank home loan product 
Vote of thanks by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the official launch of the 
Barclays Bank home loan product, Lusaka, 25 January 2006. 
  The Minister of Finance and National Planning, Hon. Ng’andu Peter Magande M.P.  
The  Board  Chairman  of  Barclays  Bank  Zambia  PLC,  Mr  Hakainde  Hichilema  and  Board 
Members present here today  
The Acting Managing Director Barclays Bank Zambia PLC Mr Daniel Nel,  
Barclays Bank Zambia PLC staff,  
Distinguished Invited Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen  
Lack of long term finance  
High interest rates necessitated by among other things high inflation levels in Zambia  
Poor credit culture among our people.  
Lack of a more active secondary financial market  
• 
• 
• 
I feel greatly honoured to be invited to give a vote of thanks to the Honourable minister’s speech at the 
launch of the Barclays Bank Home loan product. 
On behalf of Bank of Zambia and indeed on my own behalf, I would like to congratulate Barclays Bank 
Plc Zambia for leading the way in establishing long-term finance for the real estate sector. 
Distinguished invited guests, its just a few months ago that I was invited to talk to an audience on the 
theme, “Investment opportunities in the Zambia real estate business: The role of Bank of Zambia” at a 
workshop on Investment Opportunities in Zambia – Integrating African Property Markets. 
I  remember  telling  the  audience  then  that  although  the  share  of  the  real  estate  sector  in  GDP  has 
been  increasing  over  the  years,  it  could  perform  even  better  if  certain  issues  were  addressed.  I 
particularly mentioned the following as impediments to real estate sector development: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
The  picture  was  not  promising  for  the  real  estate  sector  and  the  only  positive  economic  variable  I 
remember mentioning as helping the real estate sector was the exchange rate of the Kwacha that has 
been stable against major currencies since July 2003 when the Bank of Zambia introduced the broad-
based inter-bank foreign exchange system (IFES). 
Distinguished guests, today I feel honoured to tell you that most of the issues I raised a few months 
ago as impending real estate sector development are now being addressed. 
First,  the  exchange  rate  of  the  Kwacha  against  major  international  currencies  has  continued  to 
improve drastically.  
Second, the issue of lack of long-term finance, an issue a few months ago has been resolved today 
with the announcement by Barclays Bank to offer home loans. 
Third,  the  issue  of  high  interest  rates  necessitated  by  among  other  things  high  inflation  levels  in 
Zambia. As at end December 2005, annual inflation was at 15.9% and is expected to go down further.  
Fourth, the issue of poor credit culture among our people. Again I am happy to inform you that the 
central bank in partnership with the Bankers Association of Zambia are in the process of developing 
credit reference bureau guidelines and will in the near future issue licences to deserving companies.  
Lastly, but not the least, the issue of lack of an effective secondary financial market in Zambia is being 
addressed with Commencement of work on the Financial Sector Development Plan (FSDP).  
Let me join the Honourable Minister of Finance in wishing Barclays Bank Zambia PLC the very best of 
success with the launch of the Home Loan product. 
I thank you!! 
BIS Review 6/2006 
 1
