Paul A Acquah: Evaluating the banking system in Ghana 
Keynote address by Dr Paul A Acquah, Governor of the Bank of Ghana, at the Fifth Banking Awards 
Ceremony, Accra, 6 May 2006. 
 Mr. Chairman, 
Honourable Ministers of State, 
Executives of Corporate Initiative Ghana, 
Captains of Industry, 
Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
1. Thank you very much for the invitation to be the Guest of Honour and Keynote Speaker for this 
edition of the Ghana Banking Awards event. My understanding is that this is the fifth in the series of 
banking awards and judging by the array of personalities assembled, it would be right to say that this 
event has come of age and would remain an expected event on the annual corporate calendar. 
2.  Mr.  Chairman,  today’s  event  is  truly  important  and  very  much  welcome.  First  of  all  it  is  purely  a 
private  sector  initiative,  largely  driven  by  consumers  of  the  products  and  services  of  the  banking 
industry,  and  designed  not  only  to  recognize  excellent  banking  service  delivery  but  also  to  foster 
competition  among  banking  service  providers.  Secondly,  I  know  that  this  event  has  over  the  years 
urged banks on to invest in their capacity to deliver superior services either to keep their leadership 
position(s) or to attain such leadership in the various areas. Thirdly, the event can be seen as a forum 
where market participants, the consumers of banking services, cast their votes openly with regard to 
their  perceptions  and  assessments  of  the  quality  of  the  services  they  receive  from  individual 
component banks that constitute the financial system. This type of consumer assessment is of special 
interest  also  to  the  central  bank,  as  the  regulator  responsible  for  maintaining  the  stability  and 
soundness of the industry, and confidence in the financial system as a whole.  
3.  The  public  has  a  legitimate  and  fundamental  interest  in  an  efficient,  sound,  liquid  and  well-
functioning  banking  system,  that  is  well-regulated  within  a  stable  macroeconomic  environment.  A 
banking  system  that  is  effective  in  mobilizing  resources  and  channeling  them  into  productive 
investments and in support of growth.  
4.  Mr.  Chairman,  as  with  most  developing  countries  that  have  pursued  economic  and  structural 
reforms, Ghana has been undergoing a process of financial sector restructuring and transformation as 
an integral part of a comprehensive strategy for some time.  
It is fair to say that we have moved from the history of severe distress and dysfunction in the banking 
system, illiquidity and insolvency, interest rate controls and credit rationing to a market-based regime. 
As part of the process, policies and measures were directed at improving the regulatory framework 
and strengthening bank supervision to ensure increased efficiency and profitability of banks. A policy 
environment of volatile and generally high 
1.  inflation,  large  exchange  rate  swings,  and  negative  real  interest  rates  over  extended  periods 
resulted  in  an  unsustainable  portfolio  of  non-performing  assets  on  the  books  of  many  commercial 
banks that had to be cleaned out. 
2. Heavy domestic borrowing by government to finance deficits and a growing domestic debt burden 
crowded  out  private  sector  finance. Faced  with  an  ample  supply  of  relatively  low-risk,  high  return 
government  paper,  banks  and  other  financial  institutions  have  had  little  incentive  to  engage  in  –  or 
develop the capacity for – lending and equity finance for the private sector. The debt-interest rate and 
price  dynamics  of  the  past  has  fostered  a  short-term  perspective  among  both  savers  and  lending 
institutions.  And  one  consequence  has  been  very  limited  access  by  small  and  medium-sized 
enterprises to credit.  
3. Mr. Chairman, in the current regime of macroeconomic stability, banks are in a position to efficiently 
play their primary role as financial intermediaries in the economic growth process, channeling funds 
from savers to borrowers for investment. Today, macroeconomic stability is being increasingly taken 
for granted and it is no wonder therefore that the focus of the debate in recent times has shifted to how 
 BIS Review 75/2006 
 1
to accelerate growth and create employment. At the centre of that debate is a critical role for banks 
and other financial intermediaries, and the need for a vibrant domestic capital market.  
4.  Effective  intermediation  requires  that  banks  mobilize  all  available  financial  resources  and  deploy 
them  in  income-generating  economic  activities.  Banks  must  expand  credit  to  the  productive  private 
sector  to  support  international  trade,  including  sub-regional  trade.  Although  there  has  been  some 
increase in real credit in the last few years, small and medium-scale enterprises still have considerable 
difficulty accessing credit. 
5.  Mr.  Chairman,  since  the  theme  of  this  award  ceremony  is  efficiency  and  competitiveness  in  the 
banking industry, let me now turn my attention to initiatives that we have pursued in that regard. Some 
of  these  initiatives  include  the  movement  to  universal  banking,  the  adoption  of  an  open  licensing 
system,  and  the  modernization  of  the  payments  system,  including  establishing  a  central  securities 
depository and the passage of supportive laws. 
6. Universal banking, which involves the removal of restrictions on banking activity, was introduced to 
allow banks to choose the type of banking services they would like to offer in line with their capital, risk 
appetite and business orientation. It removes for instance, the monopoly that was given to commercial 
banks in the area of retail banking. It creates room for diversification of the range of financial services 
that  a  bank  can  provide.  It  allows  merchant  banks  for  example  to  compete  for  retail  deposits.  This 
process  would  lead  to  branch  network  expansion,  increasing  banking  penetration,  and  also 
competition for deposits at the retail level. 
Universal banking also comes with a higher capital requirement, 70 billion cedis, and this will ensure 
that  banks  are  sufficiently  capitalized  to  take  on  additional  risk.  Banks  are  also  free  to  take  on  all 
aspects of banking, retail,  
1. corporate, etc, or they can choose to specialize in a particular segment. Universal banking would 
therefore make our banks stronger, capital wise and therefore capable of undertaking intermediation at 
a higher level. 
2.  Along  with  universal  banking,  the  central  bank  has  also  adopted  an  open  but  selective  licensing 
policy,  which  allows  the  entry  of  new  banks.  The  addition  of  new  banks  will  encourage  faster 
modernization of banking operations and efficiency of the financial system, the better to support the 
growth  and  diversification  of  the  financial  service  industry.  Competition  should  positively  affect  the 
tariffs banks charge for their products and services, lower lending rates in line with credit risks, and 
make credit accessible to all sectors in the economy. We continue to promote rural banking to improve 
financial intermediation in the rural areas of the country where banking penetration is still low. 
3.  Mr.  Chairman,  we  are  aware  that  while  the  entry  of  new  banks  would  increase  competition, 
excessive numbers within the system could dilute the franchise value of banks and increase instability. 
Entry  therefore  has  to  be  selective,  well-managed,  and  paced  over  time  and  clear  exit  rules  and 
prudential supervision vigorously enforced to safeguard systemic stability. 
4. Mr. Chairman, the Bank of Ghana has also undertaken a number of reforms of the payment system, 
including the passage of a Payments Systems Act in 2003 and the introduction of the Real Time Gross 
settlement System, which has created an environment for safe, sound, secure and timely payments. 
While  the  clearing  cycle  for  paper  instruments  has  improved  tremendously,  the  central  bank  would 
soon  switch  to  the  Codeline  Clearing  and  Cheque  Truncation  System  together  with  an  Automated 
Clearing House in line with current trends in cheque processing technology. We are also pursuing a 
policy to be supported by Ghana’s Millenium Challenge Account, of integrating all 120 rural banks into 
the  national  payments  system  through  a  Wide  Area  Network  and  supported  by  a  rural  bank 
computerization and capacity-building program.  
5. The Bank has also spearheaded the establishment of the Central Securities Depository (CSD) for 
electronic documentation of all securities, which ensures virtually instantaneous security of title. It is 
expected  that  listings  on  the  Stock  Exchange  would  migrate  to  the  CSD.  As  banks  increasingly 
engage in universal banking, capital market activities would become important and the integration of 
the  banking  and  capital  market  operations  would  be  facilitated  by  these  payment  and  depository 
systems. 
Mr.  Chairman,  it  is  clear  that  the  central  bank  has  been  putting  in  place  the  payments  system 
infrastructure that would facilitate a competitive, efficient banking sector. And the banks on their part 
have  been  introducing  new  services  and  modernizing  their  systems.  We  notice,  however,  that 
competition  is  not  well  reflected  in  the  pricing  of  banks’  services  and  there  is  a  general  feeling  of 
2 
 BIS Review 75/2006
 market  participants  that  banks  are  over-pricing  risks  in  the  economy  judged  by  real  interest  rate 
spreads;  this  may  be  as  a  result  of  information  asymmetry.  Yet  corporate  banking  responsibility 
requires that banks deliver 
1. efficient services at competitive rates. In view of this, we are working to put in place another piece of 
infrastructure, the Credit Reporting Bill to underpin the establishment of Credit reference bureaux. The 
draft bill should be passed into law this year. It should facilitate credit risk assessment and foster a 
culture of repayment of loans. 
2.  Mr.  Chairman,  as  we  honour  banks  for  excellence,  let  me  at  the  risk  of  dampening  some  of  the 
exuberance  on  display,  by  noting  that  the  consumer  complaints  unit  at  the  Bank  of  Ghana  has 
received and dealt with a number of complaints by customers of banks. These complaints normally 
border on unfair banking practices and include; high interest charges on loans and overdrafts, high 
bank  charges  on  transactions,  non-payment  of  interest  on  savings  accounts,  delays  in  crediting 
interest  on  treasury  bills,  and  high  initial  deposit  and  minimum  operating  balances.  I  hope  that  the 
recipients of the various awards are not that much guilty of such practices.  
3. Mr. Chairman, global developments in regulation and supervision of banking is shifting to a focus on 
risk  and  the  holding  of  commensurate  level  of  capital.  Basel  II,  the  new  capital  framework  to  be 
implemented in 2007 by the advanced countries, is a risk-based framework.  
4.  For  our  banking  system  to  remain  competitive,  the  players  must  understand  the  risks  they 
undertake and be able to measure and manage them profitably. In line with that we are re-orienting 
our supervisory focus away from just compliance with norms to a system of risk-based supervision. 
This will involve re-orienting our approach towards implementing a risk-based supervision process. In 
this framework our supervisory effort will be directed towards how well banks assess their risks and 
how actively they are managing these risks and their capital, thereby minimizing systemic problems for 
the entire banking system. 
5. Mr. Chairman, as you may be aware, the end of this year is the deadline for all banks to become 
compliant  with  the  mandatory  capital  level  for  a  universal  banking  license.  Over  the  years  some 
progress has been made in banks re-aligning their capital with that minimum, but a number of banks 
are yet to get there. It is my hope that these banks would explore all the options, including mergers 
and listing on the exchange to raise the additional capital for re-licensing. Attaining an enhanced level 
of capital is crucial for competition in the banking industry, both locally and sub-regionally. 
6.  Mr.  Chairman,  the  theme  for  this  evening’s  event  ‘An  Efficient  Banking  Sector  for  Competitive 
Advantage in the Sub-Region’ is indeed very appropriate. The Ghanaian banking system must aim to 
re-position itself to support the strategy of moving to middle-income status and to compete in the wider 
global  sub-regional  and  even  global  market.  The  central  bank  will  continue  to  support  the  financial 
services  sector  through  appropriate  policy  initiatives  and  legal  framework.  In  this  regard,  the  new 
foreign exchange bill as well as the anti-money laundering bill, which would be passed into law this 
year, should serve to underpin the competitive edge of Ghanaian banks and the financial system in an 
increasingly competitive global environment.  
1.  Mr.  Chairman,  in  conclusion,  the  initiative  of  banking  awards  to  encourage  competition  and 
efficiency in the banking industry is a worthy one. I hope that the banks that have won awards today 
would be spurred on to further excellence. I also hope that other banks would take a cue from this and 
work harder in the ensuing years, so that they also can become award winners. And the industry as a 
whole will continue to enjoy the growing confidence of all stakeholders. 
2. Mr. Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen, I thank you all for the invitation to be part of this event and 
for your attention.  
Thank you.  
 BIS Review 75/2006 
 3
