M R Pridiyathorn Devakula: The changing value of Thai society  
Keynote speech by Mr M R Pridiyathorn Devakula, Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the ‘Horizon’s 
Night’, Bangkok, 19 May 2006. 
 Mr. President,  
Distinguished Guests,  
Ladies and Gentleman, 
On the occasion of the 21st anniversary of the Graduate School of Business of Assumption University, 
I would like to express my warmest congratulations to the Assumption University for the long years of 
services  in  producing  many  qualified  graduates  for  the  country,  thus  contributing  to  our  continued 
development in this very competitive global environment.  
When Brother Bancha invited me to deliver an address on any subject I see fit, I had to ponder long 
and  hard  on  what  would  be  an  appropriate  topic  for  the  celebration  of  the  Business  School.  Your 
organizing committee proposed that I talk about my concern on the recent development in the Thai 
society that I have voiced publicly during the New Year, and that is on the Changing Value of the Thai 
society. I am not sure whether the subject will suit tonight’s celebration, but I promise that I will do my 
best not to spoil your festive mood. 
As our economy grows, we have become influenced more and more by Western values and ways of 
thinking.  This has inevitably led to various changes in our behaviour and day-to-day life. 
One such example is the recent rapid expansion in credit card businesses which could be potentially 
harmful to the Thai society, if not supervised appropriately.  If all credit card holders graduated from 
Business  School  such  as  yours,  or  if  people  earned  enough  income  to  pay  their  own  bills,  or  if 
everyone had adequate financial literacy to properly understand and assess his or her own ability to 
pay and service debt, we would have nothing to worry about. The point is we are not talking about the 
educated or the financially literate group of our society. We are talking about the grass root level. It 
appears that this group has become the target of non-bank credit card companies, most of which are 
foreign–owned. They have targeted those at very low-income levels–people earning as little as 6,000 
baht per month. With their own disposable incomes barely enough to pay for daily living expenses, 
credit cards provide them with an extra source of funds and the ability to satisfy their pent-up demand 
for many items which would otherwise not be within their reach. 
However, after a few big ticket purchases, situations often arise where their income is insufficient to 
cover upcoming installments. This problem is compounded by very tough debt collection procedures 
for borrowers who are unable to pay. Finally their purchased merchandises would be repossessed and 
their high debt levels sometimes lead to job losses.  
Historically, the Bank of Thailand had no authority to regulate these non-bank credit-card companies, 
due  to  their  status  as  non-deposit-taking  institutions.  However,  as  we  continued  to  witness  the 
potential  danger  of  these  companies’  behavior,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  decided  to  step  in.  After 
requesting and receiving the Government endorsement on this course of action, the Bank of Thailand 
is  now  entrusted  with  the  oversight  role  of  all  credit  card  providers,  including  non-deposit-taking 
companies. Since November 2002, the Bank of Thailand has issued circulars to regulate the provision 
of credit card services. A minimum income requirement for cardholders has been set at 15,000 baht, 
and  a  cap  on  the  maximum  interest  rate  charged  set  at  18%  per  annum.  This  initial  action  has 
somewhat slowed the expansion of credit card businesses; however, further measures were needed.  
In  April  2004,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  revised  regulations  to  raise  the  minimum  amount  of  monthly 
payments from no less than 5% to 10% of outstanding debt, and shorten the term for debt payment 
from  20  to  10  months.  The  increase  in  the  minimum  monthly  payment  to  10%  aims  to  prevent 
cardholders from spending more than their ability to repay, as well as help pace their purchasing of 
items in order to prevent an excessive debt repayment burden in the future.  
After the second regulatory revision, the annual growth rate of credit outstanding for installments of 
credit cards issued by commercial banks declined from 40% to 17 %, a rate which may be less likely 
to create problems. 
BIS Review 43/2006 
 1
With  more  stringent  supervision  in  the  credit  card  business  by  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  a  new 
phenomenon  has  arisen:  growth  in  the  personal  loan  business,  particularly  since  2003.  This  has 
proliferated  in  various  types  of  institutions,  including  commercial  banks  -  especially  foreign-owned 
commercial  banks,  and  existing  credit  card  companies.  In  addition,  new  foreign-owned  non-bank 
companies,  registered  as  limited  companies  and  not  as  financial  institutions,  can  undertake  the 
business of lending to individuals, without requiring approval from the Bank of Thailand, as they are 
not  deposit-taking  institutions.  These  companies  have  opened  branches  in  many  major  provinces 
throughout the country. In many cases, these businesses rent a shop-house as an office to provide 
personal loans to low-income borrowers, for example, at around 4,000 baht per month. 
While Thai commercial banks charged interest on personal loans at the rate between 12 - 24%  p.a., 
foreign  banks  charged    between  12  to  46%  per  annum,  and  foreign-owned  non-bank  companies 
charged  an  even  higher  rate  of  12-58%  per  annum.  Charges  by  non-bank  companies  sometimes 
seem misleading as they split the monthly interest charge into two parts: one part called interest rate, 
and the remaining part called fee. But their fee calculations are done in the same way as interest rate 
charges.  For  example,  one  non-bank  company  charges  an  interest  of  0.99%  per  month  plus  a 
service  fee  of  3.98%  per  month.  Many  borrowers,  who  do  not  fully  understand  this  financial 
technique, misunderstand that they have to pay a one-time fee of 3.99% and an interest rate of 0.99% 
each month, which seems quite reasonable. In reality, however, such a company charges an effective 
rate of up to 58% per annum. Only when they begin their debt payment, would they realize that out of 
a total loan of 10,000 baht, and a monthly installment of 600 baht every month, they would need up to 
eight years to repay the aggregate amount of debt!  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The Bank of Thailand has also sought for the expansion of our regulatory framework to oversee the 
personal loan business. The Ministry of Finance has issued a notification giving authority to the Bank 
of Thailand on July 2005 to set the ceiling on interest rates at 28% per annum. Every enterprise now 
needs  to  register  for  a  license  and  bring  its  ceiling  rate  down  to  no  more  than  28%  per  annum. 
Likewise,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  has  urged  these  licensed  operators  to  clearly  and  transparently 
disclose  the  computation  of  their  interest  rate  calculation  in  order  to  prevent  confusion  among 
consumers.  Currently,  we  are  monitoring  closely  the  situation  of  consumer  loans.  If  any  further 
problems arise, the Bank of Thailand will not hesitate to take appropriate action. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The  proliferation  of  credit  card  and  personal  loan  businesses  have  provided  greater  opportunity  for 
people to spend more on necessary items before they start to save. This way of life would do no harm 
if individuals exercised self-control on their spending and were able to evaluate their capability to meet 
the expense of each installment. However, the effect of this easier means of payment is more likely to 
stimulate people to buy at the wrong time. Not surprisingly, the “save now, pay later” culture has been 
reversed. In the United States, the “pay now, save later” culture has worked for the US economy, as 
people have better job opportunities. We should not promote such culture in our economy because 
generally people, especially those in the provinces, cannot easily earn extra income to pay for their 
increased debt burdens. This is why I try to tell people that we should not adopt the Western way of 
“pay now, save later” mentality too rapidly, or allow this mentality to become a norm in our society; 
otherwise a host of problems would  arise. 
Credit card and personal loan business still have benefits for consumers in terms of their convenience, 
particularly for those customers who have financial literacy and self-control. However, there is a need 
to control and supervise this business to prevent retail customers from overspending and, at the same 
time, prevent the operators from overcharging interest rates and fees.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Let me bring you to the second issue that concerns me even more than the change in value placed on 
our saving culture. Recently I notice that business and economy are putting greater emphasis on size 
and growth. People get excited with large investment projects; such as the newly opened 12 billion 
baht shopping complex. People admire big businesses with large earnings and profits, and businesses 
that  achieve  high  rates  of  growth  and  expansion.  Investors  in  stock  market  are  interested  in 
businesses that are merging in order to gain size, increase their market share, and squeeze out their 
smaller  rivals.  In  some  cases,  this  leads  to  monopolistic  power,  with  ability  to  take  even  more 
advantage of their customers and consumers.  
2 
 BIS Review 43/2006
The younger generation places importance on success measured by numbers and quantity rather than 
quality,  value,  and  merit.  The  government,  which  is  supposed  to  be  a  role  model  for  the  public  in 
general, seems to be concerned only with high GDP growth rates – the higher the better. Issues such 
as mega projects and the rally in the stock index are more welcomed. All success factors are tied-in 
with increases in monetary value, or in other words, “only money matters”. 
Under this environment of “only money matters”, and with growth and profit as key determinants of 
success,  the  business  sector  naturally  strives  to  achieve  these  goals  without  regard  to  what  is 
destroyed or lost along the way. 
For example, many tourist destinations have been created at the expense of local natural habitats and 
environments. In order to minimize their own costs, industrial factories release untreated wastewater 
into our waterways, creating adverse consequences for our communities. In the retail sales business, 
Western  influences  have  attracted  us  to  large  chain  stores  and  franchises,  such  as  Tesco-Lotus 
supermarkets  or  7-11  convenience  stores.  At  the  same  time,  traditional  family-run  businesses  and 
mom-and-pop stores are fast disappearing. The intimate and warm relationship between customer and 
shopkeeper, and sense of community has also disappeared with this new phenomenon. In its place 
are  brightly-lit  neon  hyper  stores,  which  while  luxurious  and  comfortable,  lack  the  human  touch  of 
familiar  faced  shop-owners.  Throughout  the  nation,  the  livelihood  of  the  owners  of  these  family-run 
stores has been taken away, and profits accumulated with a few large chains and franchises. Shop 
owners who previously ran their own businesses have no option but to become employees of these 
large corporations instead. 
This situation has arisen because we have opened our society to Western culture and influence. We 
have stood by and watched small, family-run shops fight a battle against the large chain stores with 
incomparable financial standing – a battle they are sure to lose. If authorities recognize the importance 
of the distribution of income as well as the distribution of opportunities, these family-run businesses 
would  be  able  to  continue  with  their  livelihoods,  and  large  multinational  corporations  could  be 
prevented from overwhelming these small businesses. 
The process of globalization will bring about access to new technologies, which will help improve the 
efficiency of our various economic sectors. But in the meantime, the process of globalization opens 
our  economy  to  the  possibility  of  large  multinational  corporations  taking  over  local  businesses.  We 
should welcome globalization in as much as it helps us enhance efficiency, reduce costs, and improve 
competitiveness,  in  the  business  which  has  to  compete  in  the  international  arena.  The  sake  of 
efficiency,  however,  should  not  be  a reason  to  allow  large  enterprises  to  take  over  businesses  that 
produce products or provide services for domestic and local consumers, if it has a detrimental effect of 
destroying jobs and livelihoods of these people or the local customs and ways of life.  
The traditional mom-and-pop stores have no impact on our competitiveness at the international level; 
they do not need to rely on “know how” of the western model of trade to improve their efficiency, which 
is usually at the expense of tradition. We can now only hope that authorities will not allow the impact of 
globalization,  brought  about  through  hasty  FTAs,  to  destroy  the  livelihoods  of  local  people  in  small 
businesses, such as barbers, restaurants, truck drivers, and farming.   
The  process  of  globalization,  which  began  with  the  industrialized  nations  of  the  West,  has  had 
important influence on our values, as I have mentioned earlier. If our government is in favor of this 
creed of globalization without reservation, there will be no one to stop globalization from eventually 
overtaking our local businesses. More importantly, social values which give us a sense of satisfaction 
and  happiness  will  be  gradually  eroded.  It  is  up  to  the  government,  who  is  tasked  with  the 
management  of  the  country,  to  selectively  choose  which  technology  to  be  brought  in  to  improve 
efficiency,  and  only  where  necessary  and  appropriate.  They  should  take  heed  not  to  allow  new 
developments to overwhelm local traditions and livelihoods. Only then will globalization not change the 
existing traditional social values.   
Ladies and Gentleman 
The  last  item  I  would  like  to  touch  upon  today  is  another  related  issue  befitting  today’s  theme  of 
Changing Value of Thai Society, and that is the measure of economic development and prosperity. 
Today’s  measure  focuses  almost  exclusively  on  GDP  growth  figures.  Actually,  there  are  MANY 
measurement  of  economic  development,  such  as  employment,  per  capita  income,  and  income 
distribution, but it appears that the government focuses almost exclusively on GDP growth figures.  
Quantitative-oriented national leaders focus on this measure - so much so that any activities that will 
help  boost  GDP  growth  are  given  priority  over  all  other  concerns.  Importance  and  priority  are  also 
BIS Review 43/2006 
 3
being  placed  on  large  economic  and  investment  projects,  overlooking  social  development  and 
preservation. Their scope becomes myopic, focusing on short-term investments with immediate results 
and effect on GDP growth figures in the next quarter, rather than on longer-term projects which foster 
education and preservation of cultural heritage.   
It is an undisputable fact that in the case of Thailand, we have focused our energy in promoting growth 
in industrial production to achieve economic growth and development. One effect has been a rapid 
depletion of our natural resources. Deforestation resulting from logging and other industries for short-
term economic gain is a stark example (on this may I add that we are lucky that some visionaries in 
previous governments realized these dangers and declared a forest closed-door policy which helped 
stop deforestation).  
What  seems  to  be  the  inevitable  consequences  of  a  solely  GDP-driven  growth  strategy  include 
problems of water shortages, which we now see repeatedly on a yearly basis. More worryingly, this 
trend seems to be intensifying each year as the demand for water continues to rise and is projected to 
double  within  twenty  years  (with  current  rates  of  population  and  economic  growth).  These  coming 
water shortages have begun to take effect on manufacturing industries; but the more worrying impact 
has been on villages and communities with limited ability to reserve water. At the same time, opposite, 
extreme  events  have  also  occurred,  such  as  destructive  seasonal  floods.  Recently,  bouts  of 
intermittent drought and flood have both caused much destruction.   
In addition, the expansion of large cities and construction which has interfered with natural drainage 
routes, such as in the case of Had Yai or the natural water drainage on the Eastern side of Bangkok, 
are good examples of economic development which have intensified the problem of flooding. 
The tourism industry is another sector that has seen remarkable growth and has helped sustain high 
rates of GDP growth. But in the past, such tourism growth has been to no small degree at the expense 
of our natural environment and destruction of our natural resources. In some places, the environment 
and natural ecosystem have been put off-balance. Natural scenery which has been part of our national 
identity and drawn tourists to our country has been diminished, or in some cases ruined.  
To prevent these problems from getting out of hand, our country’s development should be undertaken 
in a way that does not place importance on GDP growth at the expense of all else, but aims to strike a 
balance  between  GDP  growth  and  the  preservation  and  conservation  of  natural  resources  and  the 
environment.  Rapid  development  should  not  be  undertaken  unless  the  environment  and  natural 
resources  are  able  to  sustain  and  support  such  development.    The  public  needs  to  have  greater 
interest in resource management, particularly water management, in order to allow sustainable use, 
alongside the growing needs from agriculture and industry. We need to restore nature and the natural 
balance of the environment, which can thrive in parallel with the growing economy, increased tourism 
demands, as well as improved living standards for all Thais in general. 
Hence, in order for economic development to continue in the right direction, development should not 
be  measured  solely  by  GDP  growth,  but  by  other  development  indicators  as  well.  There  has  been 
increasing discussion on the concept of Green GDP, although this has not yet been put into practice.  
[In  Bhutan,  instead  of  adopting  traditional  GDP  measures,  the  Bhutanese  have  adopted  “Gross 
National Happiness”, or GNH as their development philosophy. In recognition that human happiness is 
a composite of both the material and non-material needs, GNH is meant to address this. GNH is a 
more comprehensive measure that incorporates economic development, environmental preservation, 
cultural promotion, and good governance.] It is a shame that such an understanding of the intricacies 
of development and human satisfaction are not more widely understood and appreciated. 
As  for  Thailand,  we  may  begin  to  foster  this  philosophy  through  adopting  a  more  diverse  array  of 
measures of development and success. Agencies such as the NESDB should publicly announce and 
raise awareness of the diverse aspects of development, success, and prosperity. For example, these 
indicators  can  include  rates  of  water accumulation  for  use  and amount  available  in  reservoirs  each 
year, the number of villages that face water shortages each year, increase (or decrease) in forested 
areas, ratios of industrial factories with substandard water treatment procedures, oil dependency ratios 
of  the  industrial  sector,  or  teacher-to-student  ratios,  to  name  a  few.  Our  country’s  leaders  need  to 
commit to certain goals and targets that are clearly and publicly announced. The public’s perception 
that growth and development is reflected only in growth of GDP should be corrected. 
Listening to me today, I am sure many of you may think that my visions are only a dream that will be 
hard pressed to find their way into reality. I do admit that many of these proposals will be difficult to put 
in place in practice, but they are not impossible. They are actions which we need to push towards, and 
4 
 BIS Review 43/2006
at  the  soonest.  I  have  discussed  these  issues  in  other  venues  and  fora  and  with  many  positive 
reactions. And I will continue to speak on this topic to convince more people of its importance. I hope 
that this persistence will one day show results, whereby our country’s leaders and administrators truly 
understand the need to change their way of thinking. I firmly believe that this dream is truly within our 
reach.  
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 43/2006 
 5
