Yves Mersch: Bridge Forum Dialogue 
Introduction  by  Mr  Yves  Mersch,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Luxembourg,  to  the  speech  by 
Vaclav  Klaus,  President  of  the  Czech  Republic,  at  the  Bridge  Forum  Dialogue  conference, 
Luxembourg, 8 March 2006. 
 Mr. President, 
Your Excellencies, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Dear Friends, 
In the Bridge Forum Dialogue, we are most honoured to have with us, this evening, as guest speaker 
the Head of State of the Czech Republic. We, in Luxembourg, have a special place in our hearts for 
the  Czech  Republic  dating  back  to  the  period  when  the  House  of  Luxembourg  and  Bohemia  were 
united between 1310 and 1437. 
Vaclav  Klaus  is  such  an  eminent  figure  that  it  is  almost  unnecessary  to  introduce  him.  So,  just  a 
minimum  of  facts  to  refresh  our  memories.  His  academic  field  is  economics  which  he  studied  in 
Prague, and later, taking advantage of a period of relative liberalization, under Communist rule, in Italy 
and the United States. Later, he taught economics at the Charles University and the Prague University 
of Economics. 
In his political career Mr. Klaus has been, successively, Finance Minister of the former Czechoslovakia 
and  then  Prime  Minister,  Chairman  of  the  Parliament  and,  since  February  2003,  President  of  the 
Czech  Republic.  He  played  a  leading  role  in  the  "Velvet  separation"  of  the  Czech  and  Slovak 
Republics. 
President  Klaus  has  written  more  than  20  books  on  political,  economic  and  social  themes  and  has 
received many prizes and honorary doctorates all over the world. 
Mr. Klaus has chosen as the title of his speech "Some doubts about the EU’s ever-closer future". He is 
known  to  be  an  excellent,  even  charismatic,  speaker  and  he  is  fearless  in  expounding  his  own 
personal vision of Europe. 
I have studied a number of recent speeches in which Mr. Klaus has set out his vision of Europe. The 
points I shall make are not aimed at contradicting our distinguished speaker but merely at stimulating 
the debate. 
As a small country, Luxembourg is staunchly expressing its confidence in further European integration 
and is deeply attached to the welfare state. As such but also as a seat of the European institutions, we 
are following the debate about "our Europe" with great interest and the polls show that people in this 
spot of Europe are better informed about and more aware of European matters than elsewhere. 
President Klaus has strong views on Europe and begs to differ from mainstream thinking, but on the 
European constitution he believes that "a new constitutional document will have to be created". 
Reading  through  his  most  recent  publications,  it  seems  to  me  that  President  Klaus’s  views  are 
anchored in a two-pillar philosophy (like the ECB policy strategy) 
  the first pillar is the traditional divide between the individual and the collectivity, or the private 
sphere and the public sphere, and  
the second pillar is the appropriate level at which to deliver public goods, the European level 
or the national one.  
On the first pillar he describes himself "as a conservative economist and politician… reading Mises, 
Hayek or Friedman and … being their follower and true believer". 
As such his views have been compared with those of former Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher who 
also  opposed  conservative  liberalism  to  mainstream  conservative  ideas  embedded  in  the  idea  of  a 
social  market  economy.  President  Klaus  considers  that  this  latter  thinking  leads  to  "a  European 
BIS Review 18/2006 
 1
in  culturally  or  ethnically  homogenous  societies  as  opposed 
paternalistic,  overregulated  welfare  state"  and  that  "extensive  regulation  of  economic  activities  has 
structural similarities with the communist past". 
He writes that “slow economic growth, high unemployment, loss of competitiveness, the aging of the 
European population, the crises of pension systems or of health-care systems, the insufficient quality 
of  education,  the  problem  of  immigration  and  multiculturalism  all  have  their  roots  in  this  freedom-
constraining welfare system. 
These views are more often reflected among economic observers. Martin Wolf recently wrote in the 
Financial  Times:  “There  is  something  rotten  in  the  welfare  state  of  Europe.  The  time  has  come  for 
Europeans to ask themselves the unthinkable: can their vaunted social model endure"? Wolf speaks 
of "the hypertrophy of the state" which is "maternal, protective, but also infantilising: its high taxes and 
benefits discourage anybody from doing too well, while ensuring that nobody does badly. Its services 
are available to all, but are also mediocre and inflexible." We are in the trap, Hayek denounced: the 
view that society can be rationally planned and directed. 
Our  question,  as  pragmatists,  is:  Can  the  system  be  mended?  Is  the  Lisbon  agenda  not  an 
appropriate response? Is there no middle ground between the invisible hand that creates very visible 
wounds and a stifling overregulation unable to deliver growth and jobs? 
What about the Nordic model combining welfare state and growth? What does history teach us? Is 
communism not rooted in the excesses of unrestricted economic freedom? How do we best prevent 
economic, social and even political difficulties in this respect? But the same question is valid for the 
second  pillar  of  President  Klaus’s  thinking:  what  is  the  appropriate  level  of  public  intervention:  the 
nation state or the European level? 
President  Klaus  believes 
to 
multiculturalism. Therefore a Parliament can only be legitimate at the level of a nation, which does not 
exist  in  Europe.  As  a  consequence  supranational  institutions  are  not  democratic.  “The  European 
preoccupation with Europe is connected with the fact that Europeans were made to believe that the 
era of nation states is over and that, because of omnipresent externalities and because of artificially 
built belief in the importance and inevitability of continental-wide public goods, Europe must be unified 
and therefore organized, constructed, controlled and regulated from above, said Mr. Klaus in a recent 
visit to India. 
Giving more power to the European Parliament is an illusion. “Softening the rules and relying on the 
offer  of  variable  geometry  would  be  a  mistake.  Such  procedures  already  exist  (Euro,  Schengen, 
defense, many temporary exceptions) and have always been something of a ratchet. 
While the idea of European federalism certainly has followers in every European nation, at the level of 
decision-makers,  the  prevalence  of  nation  states  seems  to  be  unquestioned  in  the  present 
perspective. The long-term objectives are more open, and one has to admit that European integration 
is  seen  as  a  dynamic  difficult  to  stop.  In  a  speech  "Small  countries  and  Europe  –  90  years  after 
Masaryk", you quote Tomas Garregue Masaryk who stressed that "history is a process of integration, 
but at the same time of disintegration". In a globalised world are there really no common goods that 
are better delivered at a supranational level? Have education, security, health research, for example, 
not a European dimension? How can nation states react or accompany economic agents in activities 
which are less and less linked to the nation state? 
Is the real debate not better encapsulated in a clearer consensus on subsidiarity? 
Are the present boundaries in Europe representative of homogenous nation states? What do we do 
about emerging regionalism? 
Again,  as  with  the  first  pillar,  what  can  we  learn  from  the  history  of  our  continent  which  has 
experienced different models: domination of one nation state over Europe, more or less holy alliances 
among the biggest, stifling coalitions, anarchy of a myriad of small states etc. 
The  present  model,  based  on  fitting  together  certain  areas  of  policy  making,  retaining  others  and 
giving a proportionally larger say in decision-making to smaller countries is two generations old. Did it 
serve  us  well  or  do  we  have  to  roll  it  back?  The  chief  economist  of  the  London  based  Centre  for 
European  Reform,  Katinka  Barysch,  questions  whether  in  the  current  political  climate,  EU  member 
states would be ready to reaffirm their support for the “four freedoms of capital, goods, services and 
people, which President Klaus strongly endorses. 
President Klaus, you said your vision is not about closing ourselves in. 
2 
 BIS Review 18/2006
Is protectionism not the most imminent danger? Barysch argues that "the nature of the single market 
and competition has changed since enlargement", pointing out that the much wider gulf between high-
wage and low-wage countries has fuelled fears among workers in old Europe. 
President Klaus, few have been able to stimulate our thinking about our socio-economic and political 
environment in a way you do. You abhor intellectual cosiness. We are eager to listen to you. 
We have a fascinating evening before us, especially since President Klaus has kindly agreed to reply 
to questions at the end of his speech. 
Mr. Klaus, you have the floor. 
BIS Review 18/2006 
 3
