Hermann Remsperger: The Monetary Stability Foundation  
Speech  by  Professor  Dr  Hermann  Remsperger,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank and Chairman of the Council of the Monetary Stability Foundation, at the third conference 
of the Monetary Stability Foundation, “Challenges to the financial system – ageing and low growth”, 
Frankfurt, 7 July 2006.  
 Ladies and gentlemen  
I would like to warmly welcome you to the third conference of the Monetary Stability Foundation. As 
previously we have organised this conference in cooperation with the Federal Ministry of Finance and 
the Deutsche Bundesbank.  
In  his  introduction,  the  Bundesbank’s  President,  Professor  Axel  Weber,  will  go  into  the  specific 
subjects of our conference. In my capacity as the Chairman of the Council, I just want to make a few 
remarks about the Monetary Stability Foundation itself.  
The  Monetary  Stability  Foundation  was  set  up  as  a  Federal  institution  under  public  law  by  Act  of 
Parliament at the beginning of 2002. Its endowment capital amounted to DM 100 million or €51 million. 
The capital was raised from the profits which the Bundesbank made from the sale of DM 1 gold coins 
in July 2001. The coins were designed to commemorate the special role and history of the Deutsche 
Mark.  
The gold required to mint the coins was taken from the Bundesbank’s reserves. As the book value of 
the gold used was lower than the market value at which the gold coins were sold, a profit of €94 million 
was  made.  €43  million  were  used  to  finance  the  restoration  of  the  Museum  Island  in  Berlin.  The 
remaining €51 million were given to the Foundation.  
It is the Foundation’s task to promote public awareness of the importance of monetary stability. For 
this purpose, it supports economic and legal research in the field of money and finance. This includes 
all  aspects  of  monetary  policy  and  financial  stability.  In  this  sense  it  also  covers  the  issues  of 
globalisation and the interaction of monetary and fiscal policy.  
The Foundation has now more or less completed its start-up and development stages. This process 
initially  involved  designing  its  strategy  and  fixing  the  policy  instruments.  During  this  period,  the 
Foundation inevitably had only a minor public presence. The most important decisions have now been 
made and implemented, which means that the Foundation is fully operational.  
The Foundation will use about €1 million out of its income to finance the new Institute for Monetary 
and  Financial  Stability  which  is  linked  to  Frankfurt  University.  At  this  research  institute,  three 
departments will work together in the area of monetary stability, focusing on its economic, business 
and legal aspects.  
I  hope  that  the  interaction  with  the  University  will  lead  to  the  emergence  of  an  internationally 
competitive centre of excellence here in Frankfurt. It should set trends and introduce new ideas not 
only in the academic sphere, but also in giving policy advice.  
Two of three professors have already been appointed. I therefore would like to extend an especially 
warm  welcome  to  Professor  Inderst  and  Professor  Siekmann,  who  will  both  be  speaking  at  our 
conference. Professor Siekmann has already started his work here in Frankfurt. Professor Inderst will 
begin in October.  
So you might say that the third conference of the Monetary Stability Foundation heralds the launch of 
a new research institution in Frankfurt. Together with other faculties and institutes our new Institute for 
Monetary and Financial Stability will form an important link between the University and the banking 
community. This may also benefit Frankfurt as a financial centre.  
The Foundation will also provide limited support for other projects of up to €500,000 a year. In 2005, 
for  example,  a  project  was  awarded  to  the  well  known  Kiel  Institute.  The  aim  of  this  project  is  to 
develop macroeconomic stress tests in order to prevent systemic risks in the financial system.  
BIS Review 67/2006 
 1
Just  last  week we  decided  to  launch a programme  to  support  about  fifteen  post-graduate students, 
whose work will focus on the fields of monetary and financial market economics or monetary, currency 
and central bank law.  
Last  but  not  least,  the  Foundation  will  continue  to  subsidise  conferences  and  smaller  research 
projects. This will ensure that other academic centres besides Frankfurt also benefit from our support.  
As you can see, ladies and gentlemen, the Foundation is involved in a wide range of activities. We try 
to intensify the link between academic research and its practical application. I think that the topic of 
this third Foundation conference is a good example of this.  
I would now like to give the floor to the President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, Professor Axel Weber.  
Thank you very much for your attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 67/2006
