Jean-Claude Trichet: Activism and alertness in monetary policy 
Lecture  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  on  “Activism  and 
alertness in monetary policy,” at the conference on “Central Banks in the 21st Century” organised by 
the Bank of Spain, Madrid, 8 June 2006. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Since 1 January 1999, the day on which it officially became the monetary authority of the euro area, 
the ECB has changed its policy rate, the rate on its main refinancing operations, 18 times. Over the 
same period, the Federal Reserve System has made 35 changes. The easing cycle that started on 
both sides of the Atlantic – and of the Channel – in 2001 saw a cumulative reduction in the policy rate 
of 275 basis points in the euro area, accomplished in a sequence of seven moves. The ECB started to 
reverse  that  cycle  in  December  last  year  and  has  since  changed  its  policy  in  a  sequence  of  three 
steps. In the United States, the same easing phase saw 13 reductions, with a total loosening of 550 
basis points, and was first reversed in June 2004. Since then, the Federal Reserve has hiked its target 
rate 16 times in continuous steps. 
I thought I would take advantage of the opportunity afforded by this impressive programme to revisit a 
theme on which I have reflected in the past: “activism” in monetary policy. Is there a univocal definition 
of  this  notion?  Can  “activism”  be  quantified  by  simple  statistics  such  as  the  frequency  and  size  of 
policy  moves?  Can  a  central  bank  be  “active”  while  moving  its  policy  rate  in  a  measured  and 
observationally cautious way? Was the ECB active enough in responding to the evolving state of the 
euro  area  economy?  The  few  facts  that  I  have  recounted  seem  to  suggest  otherwise.  I  will  try  to 
convince you that the contrary is true.  
I will offer some provisional answers on the basis of what I believe I have learned thus far. I suspect, 
though,  that  the  passing  of  time  and  further  analysis  of  the  euro  area  economy  will  be  needed  to 
deepen our understanding of this issue.  
My definition of activism in monetary policy is, I believe, conventional: activism is the strategic attitude 
of a central bank that is constantly endeavouring to be faithful to its objective. In the case of the ECB, 
it  is  the  constant  striving  to  keep  inflation  close  to  its  arithmetic objective,  and  to  take all the  steps 
needed to check nascent inflationary pressures while at the same time trying to minimise unnecessary 
macroeconomic disruptions in the process. “Activist” is an attribute that applies to a strategy, not to a 
policy path.  
My answer to the question of whether or not activism can be measured by simple statistics is negative. 
Strategic  activism  in  monetary  policy  cannot  be  quantified  in  simple  terms,  not  in  abstraction  from 
knowledge of the key structural forces and economic relationships that govern the functioning of our 
systems at any point in time. When evaluating the appropriateness of their action, central banks do not 
have  the  luxury  of  linking  policy  to  a  handful  of  summary  statistics.  They  engage  in  a  complicated 
process of signal extraction from a wealth of diffuse data and events. They calibrate decisions to the 
key structural parameters of the economy in which monetary policy has to function, to the nature of the 
shocks to which the economy is typically prone. The path of policy is adjusted accordingly.  
The ECB’s strategy is as active as it needs to be to fulfil our mandate. I would claim that clarity about 
the objective of our policy afforded considerable latitude for action in the early years of the decade, 
and a remarkable leverage over market conditions more recently. This has happened despite repeated 
unfavourable  shocks  in  the  former  period  and  apparent  policy  inaction  in  the  latter.  Always,  our 
strategy and the information coming from the real economy, as well as from the sphere of monetary 
aggregates, much more than our words, have shaped market expectations beyond the very near term, 
a sign that the complex analysis required to predict our judgement has not materially impeded market 
participants in responding meaningfully to incoming data. 
BIS Review 53/2006 
 1
 Policy activism and economic dynamism 
To frame the issue, let us consider a stereotypical monetary policy reaction function that has a short-
term  interest rate  on  the  left  and a  number  of  observable reaction  variables  on  the right.  Think,  for 
example, of any kind of reaction functions that econometricians and expert observers often use – and 
sometimes abuse – to compare monetary policy strategies. In essence, they all encapsulate a simple 
rule of  thumb:  raise  the  policy  rate  if  anticipated  inflation  is  higher  than  the  objective and there are 
signs  that  the  economy  is  operating  above  capacity.  An  additional  condition  for  ensuring 
macroeconomic  stability  that  applies  to  these  rules  is  that  the  reaction  in  the  nominal  rate  must  be 
strong  enough  for  the  real  rate  to  be  varied pro-cyclically:  when  inflation  expectations  rise,  and  the 
economy expands above potential, real monetary conditions have to be tightened.  
I  choose  this  way  of  framing  the  issue  primarily  because  it  is  widely  used  by  our  observers,  and 
because  it  is  sufficiently  concise  to  be  easily  understood.  But,  before  launching  into  the  analysis,  I 
should  add  that,  precisely  because  it  is  simple  and  pedagogical,  this  framework  is  also  a  very 
incomplete description of our policy behaviour. Overall, because it does not capture the very essence 
of the two-pillar strategy, based on an economic assessment of medium-term risks to price stability, on 
the  one  hand,  and  a  cross-checking  based  on  medium  to  longer-term  risks  assessed  though  our 
monetary analysis, on the other. Also, because such representations of our policy are not sufficiently 
state-contingent, whereas my colleagues and I are far from being exclusively guided by mechanical 
configurations of indicators, but are very interested in the contingencies, and finally take our decisions 
on  the  basis  of  synthetic  judgement  enlightened  by  multiple  experiences.  As  I  often  say,  collegial 
wisdom is of the essence in central banking. This underscores the tension between describing policy 
simply and implementing policy simply: simple descriptions of policy need not – and indeed never do – 
mean simple policy behaviour.  
Assuming  that  the  parameters  attached  to  the  various  indicator  variables  in  the  reaction  function 
indeed  capture  the  deep  strategic  preferences  of  the  central  bank,  empirical  estimates  of  these 
coefficients are often used to quantify the strength with which the central bank intends to respond to 
the  state  of  the  economy.  In  other  words,  these  estimated  parameters  are  sometimes  viewed  as 
objective measures of strategic “activism” in monetary policy.  
A central bank would qualify as strategically more passive – or less active – than another central bank 
if  the  estimated  coefficient  attached  to  inflation  expectations  in  deviation  from  the  central  bank’s 
objective, and the estimated coefficient penalising the indicator of macroeconomic slack, turned out to 
be smaller. Why would this central bank qualify as more “passive”? Because, for given variances of 
inflation and real activity, this central bank would indeed be inclined to take more moderate action in 
response to changes in the outlook. It would move its policy rate by narrower margins – and perhaps 
2 
 BIS Review 53/2006
more  infrequently  –  than  its  more  “activist”  counterpart.  Moreover,  as  analysts  typically  append  a 
partial adjustment mechanism to the representation of how the central bank interest rate responds to 
the economic state, there is an additional source of “activism” – or “passivity” – that would emerge 
from  these  simple  empirics.  This  is  the  inertia  coefficient  attached  to  the  lagged  interest  rate 
dependent  variable,  which  in  these  rules  moderates  the  pace  of  reaction  of  the  policy  rate  to  its 
fundamental determinants.  
In any case, in the naive theory of this world, plain comparison of the frequencies of policy moves and 
the  size  of  interest  rate  adjustments  would  suffice  to  tell  the  strategies  of  these  two  central  banks 
apart. A smoother policy path would signal a “more passive” strategy. 
But of course the world is not that simple, and in fact there are serious pitfalls lurking behind strategic 
inferences  drawn  on  the  basis  of  comparisons  of  variances  in  policy  rates.  It  is  not  too  difficult  to 
portray situations in which such inferences could be highly misleading. I will give three examples, all 
relaxing one important qualification upon which my earlier example was predicated: the assumption 
that our two central banks are confronted with the same economic environment.  
First, imagine two central banks which are equally responsive to economic conditions: in the reaction-
rule  jargon  that  I  am  using  here,  these  are  two  central  banks  that  share  exactly  the  same  reaction 
parameters. But one central bank now faces a less dynamic economy than its counterpart. By “less 
dynamic” I mean an economy that – as a matter of regularity – is hit by shocks of smaller magnitude 
which tend to fade away more gradually. Here, reaction parameters are the same – by hypothesis – 
but  the  reaction  variables  fluctuate  at  different  speeds.  All  other things  being equal,  the  patterns  of 
adjustment of the policy rate that the same rule would induce in the two economies would be likely to 
look very different. The central bank operating in the less dynamic economy would in all likelihood be 
observed to adjust interest rates along a more moderate path. The other central bank would appear 
more reactive. But any strategic implications drawn from the variance in the two policy paths would be 
purely illusionary. The smoother course of policy would not reveal any deep-seated strategic inertia: it 
would  only  reflect  the  same  response  to  shocks  with  quite  different  dynamic  properties.  Monetary 
policy would appear “passive” because the economy itself was evolving slowly.1
A  second  example  again  considers  two  identical  central  banks,  now  facing  shocks  of  a  different 
nature. One central bank predominantly faces demand shocks, which result in persistent departures 
from trend growth. This statistical pattern has symmetric and durable effects on output and inflation 
and  thus  presents  a  relatively  straightforward  monetary  policy  problem  under  the  rule  that  I  am 
postulating  here  for  simplicity.  As  both  reaction  variables  –  forecasted  inflation  and  output  –  would 
frequently move in tandem, the policy rate of this central bank would have to be changed frequently 
and forcefully in the same direction to offset the shock. But what would happen in the other economy, 
if it – unlike the first – were more prone to supply shocks? Experience suggests that supply shocks 
yield  sharp  transitory  increases  in  inflation,  possibly  followed  by  smaller,  more  permanent  “second-
round” effects, though the longer-run impact on inflation is obviously significantly determined by the 
response  of  monetary  policy.  Given  the  transitory  nature  of  the  initial  inflation  bursts,  the  simple 
hypothetical  rule  –  which  incorporates  the  reaction  to  expected  inflation  –  would  advise  the  central 
bank  to  “look  through”  the  immediate  disturbance  and  change  policy  only  to  the  extent  needed  to 
offset  the  anticipated  more  permanent  effects  of  the  shock  on  inflation  in  subsequent  quarters.  Its 
policy rate, again, would be observed to be less variable. What is important to note is that the same 
rule – equally active strategies – would support two different patterns of observed policy behaviour in 
different economic environments. 
The  third  case  is  perhaps  the  most  interesting  of  all.  Here  exogenous  shocks  are  identical,  but 
economic structures differ. Different transmission mechanisms therefore propagate the same shocks 
with  lags  that  vary  between  the  two  economies.  The  first  economy  has  more  rigid  adjustment 
mechanisms: price-setters and wage-negotiators are more sluggish than those in the other economy 
in  processing  economic  news  –  including  changes  in  the  stance  of  monetary  policy  –  and  bringing 
them to bear on their decisions. What is the source of those rigidities in the first economy? There can 
be many reasons for rigidity. Perhaps labour practices and contractual institutions – dating from the 
early  post-war  decades  when  the  economy  was  heavily  regulated  –  induce  distortions  in  large 
                                                      
1   A similar interpretation of “interest rate inertia” – the tendency of central banks to adjust rates in the same direction and in 
small  steps  –  can  be  found  in  G.  Rudebusch,  “Term  structure  evidence  on  interest  rate  smoothing  and  monetary  policy 
inertia”, Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 49 (pp. 1161-1187), 2002. 
BIS Review 53/2006 
 3
segments of the labour market. This stands in the way of an efficient matching of skills and productive 
capabilities.  Perhaps  tight  regulatory  restraint  on  business  and  statutory  inhibitions  discourage 
innovation and impede a faster response to new shocks and new opportunities. Whatever the source 
of  rigidity,  the  observational  result  is  that  prices  and  wages  in  the  first  economy  reflect  changes  in 
fundamentals with considerable lags.  
How should monetary policy respond to shocks in these conditions? Note that I am moving away from 
the  naive  world  of  simple  policy  rules  and  am  taking  a  step  further  into  the  –  admittedly  no  less 
conjectural  –  realm  of  optimal  policy  design.  The  answer  to  my  question  depends  critically  on  the 
inflation  process  that  we  postulate.  We  know  that  when  inflation  expectations  are  well-anchored 
around the inflation objective of the central bank, the evolution of inflation over time is influenced by 
the  numerical  objective  of  policy  more  than  by  the  history  of  inflation  itself.  We  can  state  this 
differently, saying that when the economy internalises the central bank’s objective firmly, the inflation 
process becomes less persistent and more forward-looking. If inflation expectations are well-anchored, 
a shock to inflation in the recent past is likely to have a lesser impact on inflation in the future. One 
reason  for  this  is  that  the  shock  will  not  encourage  workers  to  bargain  for  commensurate  rises  in 
nominal wages to protect the real value of earnings. Equally, firms would certainly resist such potential 
bargaining. All such parties and other price-setters will anticipate that the central bank will ultimately 
drive  inflation  back  to  its  pre-shock  level.  Hence,  they  will  tend  to  treat  past  inflationary  shocks  as 
transitory and inconsequential for the future outlook. 
In  the  first  economy  in  this  example,  where  prices  are  sticky  and  inflation  expectations  are  well-
anchored, monetary policy can be more patient and focused on the medium term when confronting a 
cost-push shock. Again, as in the other two examples, it is likely to be observed to change policy less 
aggressively  in  the  face  of  an  unexpected  shock  to  headline  inflation.  But  this  seeming  “patience”, 
once again, does not signal inertia, “passivity” or neglect for macroeconomic conditions. It reflects a 
careful calibration of the policy course to the structural peculiarities of the underlying economy. First 
and  foremost,  the  policy  response  to  the  inflationary  shock  will  be  less  persistent  because  the 
inflationary consequences of the shock will be more promptly reabsorbed in the first place. Second, 
with stickier prices, a change in the nominal policy rate of a given size will have a stronger impact on 
the  real  rate,  which  is  all  that  matters  when  it  comes  to  measuring  the  stance  of  policy.  In  these 
conditions, a more moderate policy path is not a cause of instability. In fact, it is the very precondition 
for avoiding the dangers of over-steering, of accidentally destabilising the economy.  
Of course, the thought experiments that I have been sharing with you so far are only as useful as the 
rules  or  the  optimality  benchmarks  with  which  real-world  behaviour  has  been  compared.  And  I  am 
certainly not the only one here who believes that simple reaction rules – or monetary policy optimality 
exercises, for that matter – cannot serve as the ultimate test for actual policy behaviour. But I hope I 
have  conveyed  one  notion.  Even  in  the  over-simplified  world  of  my  canonical  examples,  where  the 
macroeconomic state can be adequately described by a handful of facts, where these facts are reliably 
condensed  in  summary  indicators  –  which,  too,  are  immune  from  sampling  errors  and  statistical 
revisions2 – and where policy algorithms are an acceptable description of policy choices, even in that 
conjectural world the variability of the policy instrument would not be a sufficient statistic with which to 
judge monetary policy strategies. In particular, even in that world, a slower-moving, structurally more 
rigid economy would support an observationally more moderate policy course. 
In the real world, as I will try to explain next, that observationally moderate path for policy receives an 
even stronger justification.  
Facts and policy in the euro area 
My  emphasis  on  a  structurally  more  rigid  and  less  dynamic  economy  periodically  facing  adverse 
supply shocks is, of course, deliberate. That laboratory case resembles the euro area that I know. I will 
organise  my  interpretation  of  stylised  facts  about  the  euro  area  in  the  recent  past  into  three  broad 
categories: shocks, structures and monetary policy.  
                                                      
2  
Of course, in the actual practice of monetary policy, uncertainty about the data is extremely pervasive. We are even 
uncertain about the current economic situation as economic data are received with a lag, are typically subject to multiple 
revisions, and in any case can only roughly and partially depict the underlying economic reality.  
4 
 BIS Review 53/2006
Shocks 
One reason the euro area resembles my third example is that, compared with the United States, it 
seems to be subject to demand shocks of smaller magnitude but to be more frequently hit by supply 
shocks.3 In the last ten years this shock pattern seems to have grown even more pronounced, despite 
globalisation  and  a  generalised  shift  towards  closer  international  economic  integration.4  This  is 
nowhere more evident than in the anatomy of the boom-bust cycle that spanned the decade starting in 
1995 in the two economies. In the United States, the run-up phase was significantly propelled – as we 
know  with  hindsight  –  by  overly  optimistic  views  about  long-run  earnings  growth  and,  notably, 
exaggerated  beliefs  in  the  profitability  of  emerging  technologies.  But  the  strength  in  business 
investment that the boom brought with it also had important implications for the supply side of the US 
economy, through its influence on the rate of increase in labour productivity and thus the economy’s 
sustainable level of potential output. ECB staff calculations estimate that the contribution to the growth 
of output per hour worked coming from capital deepening doubled in the United States in the course of 
the  1990s.  Subsequently  –  and  despite  the  sharp  reappraisal  of  those  expectations  and  the 
unprecedented drop in business investment that followed the market collapse in 2000 – it stabilised at 
the elevated levels that it had reached at the turn of the millennium. Since then, remarkably, capital 
deepening  has  been  replaced,  as  the  main  engine  of  output  per  hour  growth,  by  extraordinary 
advancements in total factor productivity (TFP). Arguably, US firms have been able to meet expanding 
demand with a more efficient organisation of the production processes.  
The  same  ten-year  episode  had  a  distinctly  different  face  in  the  euro  area.  The  stock  market 
appreciation – comparable in size to that seen in the United States – went hand in hand with a decline, 
not  a  rise,  in  the  contribution  of  capital  to  measured  productivity.  And  a  contemporaneous  steady 
decline in TFP throughout the decade has reinforced, rather than offset, the diminishing contribution of 
capital.5 The euro area seems to have had its fair share of stock market turbulence, without enjoying 
the side benefit of improved supply conditions. 
The  slowdown  in  trend  productivity  has  been  a  primary  determinant  of  the  weak  economic 
performance  of  the  euro  area.  By  depressing  income  growth  prospects  and  by  reducing  the 
prospective return on capital, it has held back consumption spending and business investment, which 
has been further curtailed to some extent by the ongoing demographic shift towards a more elderly 
population.6  Rapidly  decelerating  productivity  was  one  force  behind  the  counter-cyclical  rebound  in 
unit labour costs that we observed during the early part of the new millennium. [See Figure 2].  
This surge in unit labour costs was atypical, if contrasted with the way in which unit labour costs in the 
United  States  elastically  responded  to  the  downturn  with  a  sharp  decline,  and  it  represented  an 
ongoing source of inflationary pressures. Adverse underlying developments in productivity have made 
it more difficult for our firms to smooth through the volatility of the many non-wage cost disturbances 
that  they  have  encountered  since  1999.  This  lesser  degree  of  resilience  has  kept  the  evolution  of 
inflation  –  and  real  activity  as  well  –  constantly  vulnerable  to  unexpected  shocks,  such  as  the 
increases in the prices of energy and beef – to name only two – which have been brought about by 
                                                      
3   See, for example, the structural comparative analysis in F. Smets and R. Wouters, “Comparing shocks and frictions in US 
and euro area business cycles: a Bayesian DSGE approach”, Journal of Applied Econometrics, 20(1), January 2005. 
4   This  is  a  well-known,  if  certainly  surprising,  fact.  See,  for  example,  J.  Stock  and  M.  Watson,  “Has  the  business  cycle 
changed? Evidence and explanations”, paper presented at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Symposium “Monetary 
Policy and Uncertainty,” Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 28-30 2003. 
5   See  G.  Gomez-Salvador,  A.  Musso,  M.  Stocker  and  J.  Turunen,  “Labour  productivity  developments  in  the  euro  area”, 
forthcoming  as  an  ECB  Occasional  Paper.  They  report  that  the  average  contribution  of  capital  to  measured  productivity 
growth in the United States was 0.6 percentage point in the first half of the 1990s, increasing to 1.1 percentage points in the 
second half of the decade and stabilising at 1.0 percentage point on average between 2000 and 2004. In the euro area, the 
trend was reversed: a contribution of 1 percentage point in the first half of the 1990s became 0.4 percentage point and 0.6 
percentage  point,  respectively,  in  the  second  half  of  the  1990s  and  in  the  first  five  years  of  this  century.  The  TFP 
contribution, calculated on the basis of the Solow residual, tripled in the United States from the early 1990s to 1.6 percent on 
average in 2000-2004, but halved in the euro area from 1.3 to 0.6 percent in the same period. Correcting the euro area TFP 
measures mentioned above for variable capital utilisation does not change the picture. In fact, such correction would shift 
the start of the slowdown in productivity to the mid-1990s. 
6   As the share of the population that is of working age declines, the rise in the capital stock needed to equip the labour force 
decreases. Lower rates of investment in some member countries may also reflect some relocation of production to China 
and other newly industrialised countries (where investment rates have been quite high in recent years). 
BIS Review 53/2006 
 5
adverse  changes  in  supply  conditions.7  Note  that  inflation  [Figure  3]  edged  higher  in  the  downturn 
phase and remained at elevated levels thereafter, at a time when the accumulating margin of slack in 
labour  and  product  markets  could  in  fact  have  been  expected  to  reduce  price  pressures.  Again, 
compare these developments with the sharp disinflation which occurred, during the same period, in 
the United States. 
Of  course,  we  cannot  directly  observe  full  capacity  of  either  labour  or  other  production  factors. 
Consequently,  we  can  never  be  certain  about  the  level  of  activity  that  would  represent  the  full 
utilisation  of  available  resources,  and  even  less  so  about  the  strength  of  the  relationship  that  links 
utilisation and inflation. However, I hope that I have demonstrated that this connection is seemingly 
weak in the euro area, probably weaker than across the Atlantic.  
 
 
                                                       
7   The cluster of large unanticipated supply shocks that have implications for the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices that is 
the focus of the ECB’s inflation analysis includes a strong and persistent increase in the price of oil and natural gas in 2000 
and  again  after  2004;  increases  in  unprocessed  food  prices  associated  with  the  outbreak  of  BSE  and  foot-and-mouth 
disease in 2001; and rises in administered prices and tobacco taxes announced in late 2004. 
6 
 BIS Review 53/2006
 Structures 
This structural feature brings me to the second category of my remarks: the structure of the economy 
on  this  side  of  the  Atlantic.  I  will  concentrate  on  two  factors  that  critically  affect  the  relationship 
between inflation and the fundamental shocks that drive the economy and determine its state: price 
flexibility and the anchoring of price-setting.  
Extensive empirical research on price flexibility and inflation persistence in the euro area has recently 
been produced in a concerted effort that has occupied staff of the ECB and of the entire European 
System  of  Central  Banks.8  It  comes  to  two  main  conclusions.  First,  in  the  euro  area,  prices  are 
distinctly less flexible than, say, in the United States. Prices change infrequently: the average duration 
of a consumer price spell – a measure of the time that it takes for retailers to reprice their products – is 
13  months  [Table  1].  According  to  surveys,  it  is  11  months  for  producers.  In  the  United  States, 
comparable  figures  indicate  durations  of  less  than  7  months  and  slightly  more  than  8  months 
respectively.9  
  
                                                      
8   See E. Dhyne, L. Alvarez, H. Le Bihan, G. Veronese, D. Dias, J. Hoffmann, N. Jonker, P. Lünnemann, F. Rumler and J. 
Vilmunen, “Price-setting in the euro area: some stylised facts from individual consumer price data”, ECB Working Paper No 
524, 2005. The paper reports that the average duration of CPI price spells in the euro area is 4.3 quarters. By comparison, 
M.  Bils  and  P.  Klenow,  in  “Some  evidence  on  the  importance  of  sticky  prices”,  Journal  of  Political  Economy  112,  2005, 
calculate that the average duration of CPI prices in the United States is 2.2 quarters. Other Phillips curve-based analyses 
broadly confirm these results. For the euro area, see J. Gali, M. Gertler and D. Lopez-Salido, “European inflation dynamics”, 
European  Economic  Review  45(7),  2001,  and  J.  Gali,  M.  Gertler  and  D.  Lopez-Salido,  “Erratum”,  European  Economic 
Review 47(4), 2003. 
9   Abstracting  from  methodological  differences  in  price-collecting  procedures  across  statistical  institutes,  differences  in  the 
frequency of price adjustments can be due to various causes. Differences in the degree of competition, especially in the 
services sector, may be a factor, particularly given evidence that the divergence of such frequencies is most pronounced in 
that sector. Another factor that is often cited is the fact that small corner shops, which change their prices less frequently 
than supermarkets, have a higher market share in euro area countries than in the United States. 
BIS Review 53/2006 
 7
Table 1: Measures of price stickiness for the euro area and the United States  
 they  make 
to  a  shock 
in  prices.  Conversely, 
the  burden  of  adjustment 
Sources: For the CPI in the euro area, Dhyne et al. (2005), Bils and Klenow (2004) in the US. For the PPI, Vermeulen et al. 
(2005).  Surveys:  Fabiani  et  al.  (2005)  for  the  euro  area,  Blinder  et  al.  (1998)  for  the  US.  New  Keynesian  Phillips  Curve: 
Estimates in Galí et al. (2001, 2003) refer to the GDP deflator and are converted from original quarterly figures.  
More  infrequent  price  revisions  make  the  setting  of  prices  less  responsive  to  economic  news, 
including, as I already pointed out, changes in monetary conditions. In general, sticky price revision 
processes  reduce  the  odds  that  the  imbalances  created  by  economic  shocks  can  be  rectified  by 
adjustments 
fall 
disproportionately  on  changes  in  output,  incomes  and  employment.  Also,  stickier  prices  tend  –  all 
other  things  being  equal  –  to  increase  the  persistence  of  inflation.  This  is  because  the  impact  of  a 
shock that today modifies firms’ real cost conditions tends to be spread out over an extended future, 
as staggered price adjustments catch up only slowly with the changed underlying circumstances.  
Despite sluggish price-setting mechanisms, however, inflation persistence in the euro area is low by 
international  standards.  This  is  the  second  important  finding  of  the  new  body  of  evidence  that  I 
mentioned: an inflationary shock dissipates quickly in the euro area despite rigidities, and inflation has 
a tendency to return to its long-run norm reasonably quickly. The half-life of the effect of a shock to 
inflation is considerably less than one year, which is close to the figure that one obtains, for example, 
for the United States, again notwithstanding vastly different patterns of price-updating practices across 
the two areas.  
What  explains  this  apparently  inconsistent  evidence?  Another  ECB  study,  estimating  a  structural 
model on euro area and US data, goes some way towards reconciling empirical stickiness in prices 
and  low  persistence  in  inflation  on  the basis  of  a  model  of  inflation  determination  that  features  real 
costs and expectations.10 As I said before, even if price sluggishness introduces persistence into the 
inflation process – which in itself tends to perpetuate past inflation pressures into the future – some of 
that  persistence  can  be  undone  if  the  expectations  of  price  and  wage-setters  are  focused  on  the 
objective of the central bank. Indeed, this study finds that the influence of the ECB’s inflation objective 
on the evolution over time of inflation outweighs the influence of past shocks, and thus at least partly 
compensates for the added inertia resulting from a more rigid economic structure. We are pleased to 
observe that analysis of survey-based measures of inflation expectations suggests that central bank 
leverage on expectations has become much stronger since the establishment of the euro.11
                                                      
10   See L. Christiano, R. Motto and M. Rostagno, “Financial factors in business cycles”, presented at the IMF-IRF Conference 
on  DSGE  Modelling  at  Policymaking  Institutions:  Progress  and  Prospects  hosted  by  the  Federal  Reserve  Board  of 
Governors (Washington, 2-3 December 2005). 
11   The consumer survey on inflation expectations compiled by the European Commission is a good barometer of the sensitivity 
of short-term inflation expectations to recent inflation dynamics. Results are presented in terms of the difference between 
the percentage of respondents who believe prices will increase and the percentage of respondents who believe that they will 
decrease or stabilise. Prior to the euro cash changeover there was a tight relationship between this qualitative indicator and 
actual inflation developments, with a correlation coefficient close to 1. However, since the cash changeover, the correlation 
between the two series has dropped to 0.4.  
8 
 BIS Review 53/2006
Monetary policy 
Having reviewed structures and shocks, I now move on to the third aspect of my discussion of the 
euro area: monetary policy. Did considerations pertaining to the nature of the shocks that occurred in 
the  recent  past  and  to  the  structural  peculiarities  of  the  euro  area  play  any  role  in  positioning  the 
stance of monetary policy? Can they go some way towards explaining the observationally moderate 
path  that  the  policy  rate  has  followed  in  the  euro  area?  Did  the  smoother  path  of  our  policy  rate 
impede a smooth adjustment of the euro area to the shocks that have hit the global economy in the 
recent past? Finally, does low inflation persistence provide reason for complacency?  
When the ECB in early 2001 initiated the easing cycle that we started to reverse in December last 
year,  this  was  done  on  the  heels  of  significant  adverse  supply  shocks,  relatively  strong  wage 
dynamics,  and  headline  inflation  rates  at  levels  unseen  in  Europe  since  the  late  phases  of 
convergence to the new currency. Yet the Governing Council judged that our commitment to attaining 
price stability, in line with our official definition, through our monetary policy strategy was sufficiently 
credible  for  us  to  take  that  easing  decision  without  running  the  risk  of  destabilising  inflation 
expectations. That conviction was reinforced by a rapidly deteriorating outlook and by reassuring signs 
that  inflation  expectations  discounted  a  scenario  in  which  inflation  would  settle  in  the  zone  of  price 
stability in the medium term. The rapid softening of activity that  we saw coming and the increasing 
odds that the recovery would not materialise soon – we believed – would validate ex post the inflation 
expectations and make the threat of renewed inflation considerably weaker. Information extracted from 
monetary trends supported our prediction of subdued inflation looking into the more distant future.  
Monetary accommodation was quicker and, in retrospect, far more persistent than could have been 
predicted on the basis of the policy regularities on record. In the end, monetary action amounted to an 
interest  rate  reduction  of  275  basis  points,  bringing  the  policy  rate  to  a  level  which  was  below  the 
lowest  intervention  rate  of  the  central  banks  of  an  overwhelming  majority  of  member  countries, 
including Germany, during the last 50 years. It is all the more remarkable that we were able to follow 
such a historically unseen trajectory for our vast continental economy, the euro area, given that the 
individual countries had very diverse and mixed legacies as regards past monetary credibility. 
It is difficult to work out a convincing counterfactual: what would have happened if the reaction of the 
ECB had been more in line with the patterns of policy behaviour established in the past, rather than 
the more forceful action we took. However, structural – if model-specific – analysis of the mix of the 
macroeconomic shocks that have hit the euro area since 2001 reveals with hindsight that the extra 
monetary policy stimulus that we introduced has been critical in avoiding a deeper and more enduring 
recession here and on a global scale.  
I judge that the policy course was carefully calibrated to the structural characteristics of the euro area 
transmission  mechanism,  some  features  of  which  I  tried  to  outline  earlier.  We  were  guided,  in 
particular, by the understanding that a central bank operating in a relatively rigid economy is able to 
deliver  the  same  quantum  of  monetary  accommodation  by  adjusting  its  policy  instrument  in  more 
moderate steps than in a relatively more flexible economy. Under the structural conditions that prevail 
in our economy, a more aggressive easing would have introduced unwelcome volatility in both inflation 
and  output  that  would  have  necessitated  corrective,  countervailing  action  further  down  the  road.12 
Certainly, as I will argue shortly, the ECB would not have maintained the nominal and real policy rate 
at  the  low  levels  at  which  they  were  held  for  more  than  two  years  without  consistent  signs  that 
expectations were well-anchored and inflationary shocks were being quickly reabsorbed. 
Alertness and active communication 
No  central  bank  represented  in  this  room,  or  elsewhere,  can  reasonably  spell  out  in  advance  its 
reaction to every conceivable contingency. This means that surprises in our behaviour can never be 
                                                      
12   Counterfactual  simulations  based  on  a  large-scale  estimated  dynamic  general  equilibrium  model  of  the  euro  area  have 
quantified the implications of alternative policy scenarios. This analysis reaches two conclusions. First, the loss in GDP that 
would have been associated with a situation in which the ECB did not deviate from the estimated reaction rule embedded in 
the model – and thus monetary policy in the euro area followed a tighter course – would have come close to 1% per annum 
on average since 2001. Second, had the ECB followed a more aggressive policy easing, one resembling the sharp rate 
reduction engineered by the Federal Reserve in the United States, the standard deviation of inflation would have tripled and 
the standard deviation of output doubled since 2001. The model used is documented in Christiano et al cited above.  
BIS Review 53/2006 
 9
ruled  out,  notably  in  the  face  of  potent  shocks.  In  particular,  we  might  be  confronted  with  new 
occurrences  of  risks  which  could  force  us  to  take  bold  steps  that  our  observers  could  not  have 
predicted  by  extrapolating  from  our  past  history  of  policy  conduct.  To  some  extent,  this  is  what 
occurred over the earlier phase of the international economic downturn: we took sizeable risks in the 
direction of “activism”.  
What  were  those  risks?  First,  in  an  economy  as  rigid  as  the  euro  area,  it  might  well  be  true  that 
temporary imbalances between demand and potential supply are slow to show through convincingly to 
inflation. But if and when they finally do, they would be more costly to correct.13 So, monetary policy 
should be sufficiently alert to any threats to the outlook for price stability, so that it does not find itself 
reacting belatedly – and with less chance of success – to trends that have long been underway.  
Second, it is true that the expectation that inflation will not come loose from its anchor affords some 
short-term  flexibility  to  respond  to  economic  disturbances  –  with  a  view  to  ensuring  more  balanced 
macroeconomic conditions in the longer term. But that flexibility only lasts as long as economic agents 
and the public are confident that the opportunity will not be misused. And we just do not know enough 
about the way policy actions influence expectations and how sensitive central banks’ credibility is to 
short-run departures from low inflation to warrant experimenting. Occasional monetary policy activism, 
as  circumstances  require,  is  not  the  same  as  fine-tuning.  Fine-tuning  –  if  I  may  twist  a  phrase 
borrowed from Alan Blinder and Ricardo Reis – cannot be resurrected.14 Building and maintaining a 
reputation  for  prudent  policy  involves  commitment  to  a  systematic  strategy:  that  is,  following  a 
recurrent pattern of behaviour, so that stable expectations are consistently validated ex post.  
During the extended period of policy accommodation, we were able to steer expectations effectively 
without explicit action, proof that markets accept as true the ultimate motives of policy that we profess. 
In those instances in which expectations displayed signs of overreaction to current events – such as 
surging oil prices – our renewed emphasis in communication on our objective, on the vigilance and 
determination that we would apply to enforce it, on our steady alertness, provided effective resistance 
to  inordinate  developments.  Importantly,  signalling  vigilance  proved  instrumental  in  reaching  a 
common understanding with the markets: the ECB, though observationally inactive, was at any time 
ready to start action. Our policy course was rightly seen as always contingent on the arrival of new 
information.  Given  the  information  available  each  time  the  Governing  Council  meets,  the  standing 
assumption in the markets should always be that the policy decision is aimed at positioning the stance 
of  policy  appropriately.  No  history  of  past  monetary  policy  decisions  could  ever  be  taken  as  an 
indication  of  a  commitment,  on  our  side,  to  enact  a  sequence  of  interest  rate  moves  in  the  future. 
Unconditional  –  or  “quasi-unconditional”  –  talk  about  future  policy  would  have  impaired  the  difficult 
balance that we maintained between supportive credit conditions and persistently anchored inflation 
expectations. Active emphasis in communication upon “alertness” required keeping all options open to 
a – possibly quick – change in policy. Pre-commitment to a policy path would certainly have made that 
reversal of policy difficult to execute and/or to justify, and therefore non-credible.  
The  markets  seem  to  have  internalised  these  strategic  principles  with  an  increasing  degree  of 
precision. Incoming data which, since the autumn of 2005, have indicated more persuasive signs of a 
recovery  in  an  environment  of  abundant  liquidity  and  elevated  commodity  prices  were  correctly 
mapped  into  expectations  that  the  stance  then  prevailing  would  not  be  consistent  with  controlling 
inflation  over  the  medium  term.  Markets  anticipated  in  good  time  that  the  ECB  would  soon  begin 
reversing the extra easing that had been put in place.  
In retrospect, market expectations have aligned well with our intentions. Since December, consistent 
with our remit to be alert and pre-emptive, the monetary policy of the ECB has been perceived to be in 
a mode of progressive withdrawal of monetary accommodation. Indeed, this withdrawal has been and 
remains conditional on the evolution of our analysis with respect to our objective of price stability, but it 
has not been predicated on any single short-term indicator of the macroeconomic state. In the last few 
months,  the  ECB  has  not  measured  the  state  of  the  economy  by  the  strength  or  weakness  of  any 
particular  piece  of  incoming  news.  It  has  continued  to  extract  the  macroeconomic  trend  from  the 
                                                      
13   Another way to state this notion is that in an economy such as the euro area, where prices and wages are as rigid as they 
prove to be, the “sacrifice ratio” is probably large. This means that the action required to counter inflation – when inflationary 
pressures actually emerge – would be more forceful. 
14   See A. Blinder and R. Reis, “Understanding the Greenspan Standard”, paper presented at the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Kansas City Symposium “The Greenspan Era: Lessons for the Future”, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 25-27 2005. 
10 
 BIS Review 53/2006
wealth of cumulative evidence accruing – from month to month – from the economic and the monetary 
side. In both cases, the medium-term orientation of its monitoring activity has been preserved. Two 
examples: as regards our economic analysis, when looking at the underlying trend of growth of the 
European economy, we judged in the second half of last year that we were experiencing a recovery 
with the trend progressively approaching potential. We judged that the short-term volatility observed in 
important indicators, including the quarterly growth figure for the fourth quarter of 2005, did not call into 
question the medium-term growth prospects and therefore the associated gradual increase of risks to 
price stability. Another example can be extracted from our monetary analysis: consistent indications 
that broad money growth was increasingly due to its most liquid components has contributed in recent 
months to a gradual tilt of the balance of risks perceived to be signalled by our monetary analysis. It 
was not the behaviour of aggregate M3 per se which altered the outlook for price stability. It was the 
realisation  that  the  structural  force  at  work  behind  persistently  abundant  liquidity  was  becoming 
increasingly connected with final spending and pricing decisions.  
As I said at the start, the complexity of the analysis required to predict our moves has not materially 
impeded market participants in responding meaningfully to incoming data. The understanding of our 
strategy and the information coming from the real economy, as well as from the sphere of monetary 
aggregates, have shaped market expectations beyond the very near term. I attribute this satisfactory 
result to our policy framework, which features a primary, sharply-defined objective and a systematic 
reaction to events whenever the objective is perceived to be at risk.  
Concluding remarks 
I  am  sometimes  asked  the  following  question:  “You  are  in  the  process  of  increasing  rates.  Is  your 
judgement that your rates today are significantly lower than they should be? What then is the level of 
the “neutral rate” that you would judge it appropriate to reach (as rapidly as possible)?” 
My response to such questions would be the following. First, we are not in a position that we would 
judge “abnormal”, in the sense that we would have to increase as rapidly as possible our interest rates 
up  to  the  “normal”  level.  We  are  in  a  process  of  progressively  withdrawing  the  present  degree  of 
monetary accommodation commensurate with the risks to price stability that we perceive, associated 
in  particular  with  the  present  development  of  the  economic  recovery.  To  the  extent  that  we  never 
previously  pre-committed  to  unconditional  moves  and  we  have  always  adhered  to  the  posture  of 
steady alertness which is at the heart of our strategy, our monetary policy stance should and does – to 
the best of our own comprehensive, deep and candid assessment of the situation – at any time makes 
it possible to cope with the risks we see for price stability in a medium-term perspective. Then, in a 
dynamic perspective, our refusal of unconditional pre-commitments, our position of permanent, steady 
alertness and our strategy help focus our policy upon being permanently at the “correct level” in terms 
of attaining our primary goal in a medium-term perspective.  
Second,  from  a  central  bank’s  perspective,  the  Wicksellian  concept  of  a  “neutral  rate”  is  more 
particularly useful in the event that the central bank has – for whatever reason – moved its rates far 
away from the policy stance that it would judge appropriate ici et maintenant, here and now. As you 
can see, in my view, this cannot be the case for the Governing Council of the ECB. 
Third,  one  can  be  sure  that  we  will  continue  to  analyse  the  situation  very  carefully  on  an  ongoing 
basis.  It  is  clear  that  if  our  main  scenario  is  confirmed  over  time,  a  further  withdrawal  of  monetary 
accommodation will be appropriate. We do not specify ex ante a sequence of policy actions, as I have 
said clearly since last December. The appropriate policy stance will always depend on information on 
the economic and monetary side and on the source and dynamic properties of the underlying shocks 
that will hit the economy and we will always remain alert. It is the combination of events and data, 
some  expected,  others  unexpected,  that  will  be  analysed  and  will  permit  us  to  define  our  future 
trajectory.  
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 53/2006 
 11
