Jean-Claude Trichet: EMU after seven years - successes and challenges 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Frankfurt 
Chamber of Industry and Commerce, Frankfurt am Main, 5 May 2006. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Es ist eine große Freude für mich, heute auf Ihrer Konferenz über meine Ansichten und Erfahrungen 
zur  Europäischen  Wirtschafts-  und  Währungsunion  und  zum  Euro  sprechen  zu  dürfen. 
Selbstverständlich  ist  mir  bewusst,  dass  der  Deutsche  Industrie-  und  Handelskammertag  (DIHK) 
immer  ein  starker  Befürworter  der  Währungsunion  und  allgemein  des  europäischen 
Integrationsprozesses war. Lassen Sie mich den weiteren Vortrag nun in Englisch halten.[It is a great 
pleasure for me to speak today at this conference about my views on and experience of Economic and 
Monetary  Union  in  Europe  and  the  euro.  I  am  fully  aware  that  the  Deutscher  Industrie  und 
Handelskammertag (DIHK) has always been a strong supporter of the EMU and, more generally, of 
the European unification process. Before continuing, please let me switch into English.] 
In the first part of my talk today I shall elaborate on the reasons why I think that the single currency 
and  the  single  monetary  policy  introduced  more  than  seven  years  ago  have  worked  very  well. 
Nevertheless,  past  success  is  not  an  excuse  to  overlook  the  challenges  that  lie  ahead  of  us  all, 
policymakers and social partners. In the second part of my speech I shall thus try to make clear how, 
in my view, these future challenges imply an urgent need for action and reform going forward. And 
finally,  I  will  discuss  how  such  reforms  support  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  and  the  adjustment 
mechanism in the euro area. 
But let me start with the first years of EMU. 
A credible and transparent new monetary policy framework 
At  the  time  of  the  introduction  of  the  euro,  a  completely  new  monetary  policy  framework  was 
introduced in Europe, with the European Central Bank (ECB) conducting a single monetary policy for 
the  entire  euro  area,  consisting  of  eleven  and  soon  twelve  countries  and  more  than  300  million 
citizens. The most remarkable aspect of this new endeavour is that since the very beginning the ECB 
and  the  euro  managed  to  inherit  the  high  level  of  credibility  already  achieved  by  the  most  stable 
national  currencies,  which  had  been  earned  during  many  years  of  successful,  stability-oriented 
monetary policy. It should not be underestimated that at the time of the introduction of the euro, all 
along the yield curve, market interest rates on instruments denominated in euro became aligned with 
the lowest – and not with the average – rates prevailing prior to the euro; the historically low level of 
short,  medium  and  long-term  market  interest  rates  was  unthinkable  in  some  countries  which  had 
experienced much higher interest rates in the past. At the same time, the creation of a single currency 
put an end to the high volatility and realignments of exchange rates among euro area countries which 
used to significantly distort their relative competitiveness. 
The  successful  implementation  of  the  single  monetary  policy  in  the  euro  area  is  rooted  in  the 
institutional framework enshrined in the Treaty establishing the European Community as well as in the 
effectiveness of the ECB’s monetary policy strategy. 
With regard to the key institutional provisions, the ECB has been given a clear mandate, namely to 
pursue the primary objective of maintaining price stability, and its independence is fully guaranteed by 
the Treaty. Furthermore, principles for pursuing sound fiscal policies are enshrined in the Treaty; the 
Stability and Growth Pact implements these principles via regulations. 
Turning  to  the  monetary  policy  strategy,  it  is  based  on  the  definition  of  price  stability  and  on  a 
comprehensive two-pillar approach involving both an economic and a monetary analysis. The precise 
definition  of  price  stability  for  the  euro  area  showed  full  continuity  with  the  national  central  banks’ 
previous definitions of price stability and thus ensured that inflation expectations for the new currency 
would be the same as for the most credible national currencies immediately before the setting up of 
the euro. Our commitment to monitoring monetary developments and cross-checking the results of this 
analysis  with  the  results  of  the  economic  analysis  helps  to  frame  the  ECB’s  daily  assessment  and 
monetary policy conduct in a medium-term perspective that provides strong support to the anchoring 
BIS Review 36/2006 
 1
of long-term inflation expectations. Over time we have deepened our monetary and economic analysis 
and we publicly explained in considerable detail the principles which govern our monetary policy. This 
includes issues such as the relationship between asset prices, fiscal policy or cross-country diversity, 
on the one hand, and monetary policy, on the other. 
It is my conviction that the public and in particular financial markets have over time understood very 
well  how  the  ECB  conducts  its  monetary  policy.  This  has  helped  us  to  achieve  a  high  level  of 
predictability  of  policy,  which  signals  a  high  degree  of  transparency.  This  is  particularly  rewarding, 
considering that part of our job is devoted to explaining and discussing our actions and our concept to 
the public. Transparency is not only a precondition for accountability, but also a crucial aspect of a 
successful monetary policy, as it makes policy more effective. In this regard, allow me to stress that 
the  ECB  was  the  first  major  central  bank  to  introduce  on  a  monthly  basis  a  press  conference 
displaying in detail the diagnosis and the monetary policy decisions of the Governing Council to the 
public only a few hours after the end of the relevant meeting. 
All of these factors have contributed to the high degree of credibility enjoyed by the ECB’s monetary 
policy and thus to price stability and the successful anchoring of inflation expectations. But credibility is 
never gained once and for all. It has to be permanently preserved and enhanced. That is why the ECB 
pays the utmost attention to monitoring inflation expectations. 
Price stability contributes to low macroeconomic volatility in the euro area 
In our short history, we have had to face substantial challenges and economic shocks. Just think of the 
economic consequences of the terrorist attacks in September 2001, the sharp decline of equity prices 
at the beginning of this decade and the substantial increases in oil prices. 
Against  this  background,  our  track  record  since  1999  in  terms  of  price  developments  and  inflation 
expectations bears testimony to the ECB’s ability to deliver a monetary policy that is in continuity with 
the best practices inherited from the national central banks of the euro area. As you know, the ECB 
aims to maintain price stability by keeping inflation rates below, but close to 2% over the medium term. 
Since the launch of the euro back in 1999, the inflation rate in the euro area has been on average 
slightly above 2%. We are of course not satisfied with inflation above 2%. In this context it is important 
that, since 1999, average long-term inflation expectations – as measured, for example, by Consensus 
Economics forecasts or the Survey of Professional Forecasters – have been at a level consistent with 
price stability, i.e. below, but close to, 2%. The steadiness of inflation expectations over such a long 
period  of  time,  during  which,  as  mentioned,  many  unforeseen  events  impacted  on  the  euro  area 
inflation  rate,  demonstrates  that  markets  and  private  agents  perceive  the  ECB  as  being  fully 
committed to maintaining price stability in the euro area.  
The  process  towards  Monetary  Union  and  the  stability-oriented  monetary  policy  of  the  ECB  have 
improved the welfare of euro area citizens, both directly by maintaining price stability and indirectly by 
contributing to lower volatility and uncertainty of macroeconomic developments. First, in concomitance 
with  the  intra-euro  area  convergence  process  in  the  1990s,  inflation  volatility  almost  halved.  The 
volatility of quarterly changes of HICP inflation in the euro area (measured as the standard deviation) 
fell from around 0.6 percentage point during the 1980s to around 0.3 percentage point in the 1990s. 
Over  the  last  seven  years,  inflation  volatility  has  only  been  0.2  percentage  point,  in  spite  of  major 
inflationary  shocks  during  this  period.  And  the  average  volatility  of  long-term  consensus  inflation 
expectations  has  also  declined  substantially,  by  four-fifths,  from  almost  0.5  percentage  point  in  the 
1990s to less than 0.1 percentage point in recent years. 
Lower  volatility  of  actual  and  expected  inflation  reduces  consumer  and  investor  uncertainty  and 
thereby benefits all citizens. Stable inflation expectations and a high degree of confidence on the part 
of financial market participants in monetary policy should, over time, also lead to a reduction in the 
volatility  of  longer-term  interest  rates,  and  thus  also  to  lower  risk  premia.  Indeed,  we  have  seen  a 
substantial decline in the volatility of long-term interest rates. In the 1990s, for example, the standard 
deviation of long-term interest rates (on the basis of monthly data) was around 2 percentage points; in 
the past seven years, this measure has fallen to around 0.7 percentage point.  
Anchoring  inflation  expectations  is  not  only  important  for  maintaining  low  medium  and  long-term 
market  interest  rates,  it  is  also  crucial  for  reducing  macroeconomic  fluctuations  in  response  to 
economic shocks. It is welcome if wage and price-setters in the euro area incorporate an inflation rate 
which  is  in  line  with  our  definition  of  price  stability.  Indeed,  less  indexation  of  wages  and  prices  to 
current  and  past  inflation  would  tend  to  contribute  to  lower  volatility  of  employment  and  output  in 
2 
 BIS Review 36/2006
response  to  macroeconomic  shocks.  Under  current  circumstances,  this  implies  that  higher  inflation 
due to oil price shocks and higher indirect taxes should not be included in wage contracts. Otherwise 
unemployment and inflationary pressures would increase. 
It is sometimes argued that a policy aimed at price stability could lead to higher unemployment and 
increased macroeconomic volatility. It will not surprise you that I do not agree with this view. To the 
contrary, not only reforms that enhance the flexibility of markets, but also credible monetary policy and 
well-anchored  inflation  expectations,  over  time,  contribute  to  job  creation  and  to  dampening 
macroeconomic fluctuations. And indeed, the achievements in the area of monetary stability have not 
come  at  the  cost  of  higher  unemployment.  Despite  remaining  at  still  unacceptably  high  levels, 
especially in some euro area countries, the unemployment rate in the whole euro area has averaged 
around 8½% over the past seven years, which is more than one percentage point lower, on average, 
than  in  the  1990s.  Furthermore,  annual  employment  growth  (in  terms  of  persons  employed)  has 
doubled from an average of around 0.5% in the 1980s and 1990s to around 1.2% since the start of the 
single monetary policy. Moreover, in recent years the volatility of some real variables has also declined 
relative to the averages observed during the 1980s and 1990s. For example, the volatility (in terms of 
standard  deviation)  of  quarter-on-quarter  percentage  changes  of  real  GDP  growth  has  fallen  from 
around 0.5 percentage point in the 1990s to around 0.4 percentage point in the last seven years. The 
volatility  of  employment  growth  has  also  fallen  from  over  0.3  percentage  point  in  the  1990s  to  0.2 
percentage point since 1999.  
The challenges ahead: reforming the structure of the euro area economy 
A  fair  assessment  of  the  last  seven-and-a-half  years  of  economic  developments  in  Europe  cannot 
avoid  taking  into  account  the  fact  that  despite  the  success  of  EMU,  output  growth  has  been 
disappointing. A major reason has been that labour productivity growth has been weak since the mid-
1990s.  In  my  view,  this  is,  together  with  too  high  unemployment  and  the  implications  of  population 
ageing, the main economic problem that policy-makers are currently facing in the euro area. I will now 
illustrate  this  issue  in  more  detail  and  thereafter  argue  that  the  solution  requires  a  stepping-up  of 
structural  reforms  aimed  at  increasing  the  as  yet  insufficient  flexibility  and  dynamism  of  some  euro 
area economies.  
Since the launch of the Lisbon strategy in 2000, the average annual real GDP growth rate for the euro 
area has averaged 1.8%, thus remaining below its main competitors. In the last fifteen years per capita 
income growth in the euro area has been relatively subdued and systematically lower than in other 
developed  economies  like  the  US.  Furthermore,  the  employment  rate  in  2005,  at  64%,  remains 
considerably lower than the employment rate in the US, where it stood at 71% in 2005. 
The  main  factor  behind  these  developments  is  the  disappointingly  low  trend  in  hourly  labour 
productivity growth in the euro area, which declined to an average 1.2% over the period 2000-2004, 
down from 1.8% during the 1990s and 2.4% during the 1980s. By contrast, in the US hourly labour 
productivity growth accelerated to an average of 2.8% over the period 2000-2004, which is more than 
double as high as in the euro area. 
The  lack  of  sufficient  flexibility  in  labour  and  product  markets  in  Europe  is,  in  my  view,  a  major 
determinant of the sluggish economic growth and of the still high unemployment in the euro area.  
I will therefore now turn to structural reforms that have the potential to increase both euro area labour 
productivity  growth  and  labour  utilisation,  and  therefore  also  the  long-run  growth  potential  of  the 
economy.  
Without aiming to be exhaustive, I should like to highlight some of the key priorities for reform in three 
main  areas,  namely  getting  people  into  work  by  enhancing  the  functioning  and  the  flexibility  of  the 
labour market, increasing competition in product markets and unlocking business potential by creating 
an entrepreneurial-friendly economic environment.  
Finally, I shall address the main fiscal policy challenges and in particular the implications of population 
ageing in the euro area for the sustainability of pension and healthcare systems. 
First of all, well-functioning labour markets set the right incentives for households which take decisions 
concerning  their  participation  in  the  production  process  by  entering  the  labour  market  and  actively 
searching  for  a  job.  Some  observers  have  argued  that  European  households prefer  to  work  less  in 
comparison  with,  for  example,  US  households,  thus  attributing  the  relatively  low  participation  in  the 
labour market to some deep behavioural motivation or preferences. In my view, this argument is not 
BIS Review 36/2006 
 3
satisfactory. The low labour participation rates in the euro area are significantly influenced by structural 
distortions  like  the  legal  and  regulatory  environment,  the  tax  systems  and  social  institutions.  For 
example, marginal tax rates that are too high discourage labour market entry and have a downward 
effect  on  average  hours  worked.  Moreover,  restrictions  on  the  maximum  number  of  hours  worked, 
imposed either by social partners’ agreements or by law, are also often not in line with preferences of 
a number of individual employees. Furthermore, benefit systems that are too generous discourage job 
search and early retirement schemes encourage early withdrawal from the labour market. Rigidities 
caused by regulations, in particular wage rigidity and a high degree of job protection for older workers, 
reduce the incentives for firms to hire people in this age group. Indeed, in 2005 the employment rate 
for workers aged 55-64 in the euro area was just two-thirds of the corresponding figure in the US. In 
addition, female labour force participation rates in the euro area could also be supported by specific 
measures,  like  the  adequate  provision  of  childcare  facilities,  aiming  at  reconciling  motherhood  with 
professional  life.  Finally,  a  more  extensive  use  of  flexible  forms  of  work  such  as  part-time  and 
temporary work may also provide further working incentives for those categories of workers that would 
not find it feasible to become full-time employed.1  
I do not deny that much has been done in the last ten years in those European countries that have 
joined  the  euro  area.  In  many  countries  labour  market  institutions,  for  example,  have  become  less 
rigid. This has helped to maintain wage moderation across the euro area and has helped monetary 
policy  to  maintain  price  stability.  Furthermore,  the  liberalisation  and  the  increase  in  competition  in 
some sectors have already brought significant benefits in terms of lower prices for some goods and 
services. 
However, it is my firm opinion that much remains to be done in order to address the structural difficulty 
of the euro area economies to achieve a satisfactory level of productivity. 
Beyond  the  reform  of  tax  system  and  labour  market  regulations,  it  is  crucial  to  improve  the  labour 
force’s level of education and expertise. This will allow for an efficient allocation of workers between 
sectors and firms as well as facilitate product innovation and the adoption of new technologies.2 The 
last  decades  have  seen  an  enormous  increase  in  the  level  of  educational  attainment  of  new 
generations  in  the  euro  area.  Nevertheless,  meeting  the  challenges  of  technological  progress  and 
preserving  the  labour  force’s  employability  and  flexibility  require  that  human  capital  continuously 
adjusts to labour market needs through improved education and training as well as lifelong learning. 
We need to think of market-oriented measures which enhance the incentives of firms, employees and 
unemployed people to invest in education and knowledge. 
Structural  measures  aiming  at  increasing  labour  supply,  however,  would  not  solve  the  serious 
unemployment problem in the euro area, which requires the fostering of labour demand through higher 
wage flexibility and adjustments to the level of employment protection legislation, in particular where 
this legislation impedes the hiring of younger and older workers. 
Second,  increasing  competition  in  an  effort  to  establish  efficient  and  well-functioning  product  and 
service markets is another prerequisite for higher medium to long-term growth. A lack of competition 
harms productivity trends by limiting production efficiency and by reducing the incentive to innovate. 
Restrictions on competition also hinder job creation. In the EU, it is crucial to build on the experience 
of  several  network  industries  that  are  now  fully  or  largely  open  to  competition.  For  example,  the 
extensive liberalisation of the telecommunication sector in the course of the 1990s led hourly labour 
productivity  in  that sector  to  grow  on average by 8.5%  in  the  euro area over  the  period 1996-2003 
compared with 6.9% in the US.3 If liberalisation and higher competition are pursued in other services 
sectors, it is very likely that such excellent productivity growth performances can be repeated. And to 
the extent that nominal wage moderation is ensured conditions for job creation are enhanced. 
In this respect, it is crucial that policies aimed at increasing the level of competition and at liberalising 
the  product  markets  include  the  extension  and  deepening  of  the  EU  internal  market.  The  internal 
market  policies  have already  contributed  to  an  increase  in  employment  and real  income  in  the  EU. 
However,  there  is  much  more  potential  that  could  be  exploited,  especially  in  the  services-related 
                                                      
1   See, for example, V. Genre, R. Gomez-Salvador and A. Lamo (2005), “European women: Why do(n’t) they work?”, ECB 
Working Paper Series, No 454, March. 
2   See G. Schwerdt and J. Turunen (2006), “Growth in euro area labour quality”, ECB Working Paper Series, No 575, January. 
3   Groningen Growth and Development Centre (GGDC) database of Groningen University. 
4 
 BIS Review 36/2006
activities, which represent around 70% of nominal value added and employment in the euro area and 
where labour productivity is particularly disappointing in comparison with the US. The directive aimed 
at  a  free  market  for  services  in  the  European  Union  which  is  currently  being  prepared  is  thus  very 
important.4 However, it would be desirable that Member States improve their record of existing internal 
market legislation and proactively ensure that the number of internal market infringements is kept to a 
minimum. 
The  third  prerequisite  for  higher  growth  in  the  euro  area  is  the  unlocking  of  business  potential  by 
creating an entrepreneur-friendly economic environment. This includes lowering costs and constraints 
imposed by public sector administrations on existing firms and business start-ups. According to the 
World Bank, in 2004 the average cost of starting a business with up to 50 employees in the euro area 
(excluding  Luxembourg)  is  estimated  to  have  been  around  ten  times  higher  than  in  the  US. 
Furthermore, today it takes on average 27 days to set up a new business in the euro area5 compared 
with 5 days in the US.6 In this respect, it is important that European governments and EU institutions 
follow up on the recent call of the European Council for the establishment of “one-stop” arrangements 
in each Member State which would allow the setting-up of a company in one week by end-2007.  
Furthermore,  to  fully  exploit  productivity  potential,  the  labour  and  product  market  reforms  just 
mentioned  need  to  be  accompanied  by  policies  that  help  to  diffuse  innovation  and  technological 
change.  This  includes,  inter  alia,  measures  to  support  innovation  through  higher  investment  in 
research and development in order to reach the target of 3% of GDP by 2010 that Europe has set 
itself.  
Turning  to  the  challenges  pertaining  to  fiscal  aspects  of  EMU,  I  would  start  by  stressing  why 
maintaining  sound  fiscal  positions  is  important.  The  sustainability  of  fiscal  policies  reduces  the 
uncertainty  surrounding  long-term  economic  decisions,  thus  reducing  risk  premia  on  borrowing  and 
lending rates, and fostering higher investment and consumption. Hence, it is of the utmost importance 
that national governments continue to proceed along the virtuous fiscal policy path that they took in 
the 1990s, when the convergence process led the average deficit ratio in the euro area to decline to 
2.6% in 1997 from about 5% in 1990. More recently, the euro area average deficit ratio has remained 
below the values recorded in the 1980s and 1990s. As a consequence, the long-run increasing trend 
in the debt ratio, which more than doubled from 34.2% in 1980 to 74.7% in 1997, has been halted. 
Overall, the fiscal policy framework was successful in reducing average fiscal deficits in the euro area 
and halting the trend increase in the debt ratio. This framework, as laid down in the Maastricht Treaty 
and the Stability and Growth Pact, ensures that fiscal discipline is maintained in EMU. In this respect, 
it  must  be  admitted  that  a  number  of  governments  still  need  to  correct  large  fiscal  imbalances  and 
improve the structure of public finances. Moreover, national institutions for fiscal policy-making should 
support the fiscal commitments under the EU framework. Finally, governments must prepare now for 
the fiscal burden arising from demographic ageing that in the long run will put a substantial burden on 
public finances. In a recent report by the Economic Policy Committee, it has been projected that if the 
implications of ageing are not addressed by structural changes, public expenditure could increase by 
up to 10% of GDP in the euro area by 2050. 
This will occur directly through the impact on public pension and healthcare expenditure as well as via 
the  growth-dampening  effects  of  a  gradually  shrinking  share  of  the  labour  force  in  the  population. 
Hence,  governments  need  to  take  pre-emptive  action  today  before  expenditure  pressures  start  to 
increase rapidly after 2010. In many countries, this requires reducing current debt ratios and reforming 
public pension and healthcare systems. This, in conjunction with reforms that aim at increasing labour 
market  participation  and  lowering  unemployment,  will  allow  the  euro  area  to  cope  with  population 
ageing and to maintain a sustainable fiscal position whereby the tax burden is reasonable and does 
not impede sustained growth. 
                                                      
4   See also ECB (2006), “Competition, productivity and prices in the euro area services sector”, ECB Occasional Paper Series, 
No 44. 
5   Unweighted average. Figures range respectively from lows of 8 and 11 days in France and the Netherlands to highs of 47 
and 54 days in Spain and Portugal. 
6   Data collected from the Doing Business database maintained by World Bank (www.doingbusiness.org). 
BIS Review 36/2006 
 5
Structural reforms support the ECB’s monetary policy and also enhance the intra-euro area 
adjustment mechanism 
As a welcome side-effect, the structural reforms that I just discussed also have a positive impact on 
the conduct of monetary policy in the euro area.  
From  the  euro  area  point  of  view,  structural  changes  which  enhance  flexibility,  job  creation  and 
potential  growth  tend  to  facilitate  monetary  policy  and  increase  its  effectiveness.  A  more  flexible 
economic environment helps the labour and product markets to better adjust to economic shocks and 
to respond to policy actions more quickly. For example, more flexible labour markets may imply that 
negative supply shocks are absorbed with a less pronounced increase in inflationary pressures. This, 
in turn, allows monetary policy to react less strongly. Furthermore, in the case of a cyclical downturn 
caused  by  a  temporary  lack  of  demand,  flexible  markets  and,  in  particular,  wages  normally  allow 
monetary policy to lower policy rates more or faster as inflationary pressures decline more quickly in 
an economic downturn.  
Furthermore, enhancing the single market as well as the structural flexibility of the euro area national 
economies  will  also  facilitate  the  ECB’s  single  monetary  policy  by  improving  the  functioning  of  the 
intra-euro area adjustment mechanism.  
If there are situations of excess demand, or overheating, in one region of the euro area and, at the 
same time, there is a lack of demand, or under-utilisation of capacity, in another region of the euro 
area,  a  well  functioning  adjustment  mechanism  ensures  that  such  divergences  do  not  become  too 
persistent and do not lead to an unwelcome dispersion of countries’ business cycle positions.  
To be sure, the available empirical evidence on output growth and inflation differentials within the euro 
area  shows  that  the  magnitude  of  inflation  and  output  growth  differentials  across  the  euro  area 
countries is not exceptional and is comparable to that in the United States.  
In addition, it appears that cyclical synchronisation in the euro area is relatively high. 
However, contrary to the experience of the US regions, output growth and inflation differentials in the 
euro area have been rather persistent and seem to be largely driven by persistent positive or negative 
deviations from the euro area averages. Over the last ten years, the performance of euro area national 
economies in terms of real GDP growth rates has been polarised, with a group of countries growing 
persistently  at  lower  rates  than  the  euro  area  average  and  another  group  growing  persistently  at 
higher  rates.  These  trend  deviations  reflect  in  particular  differences  in  the  potential  growth.  In  turn, 
these differences can be very much related to the different degree of market flexibility in each single 
country and to the structural reforms that have been implemented in the past. 
Hence, structural reforms are needed that help to reduce output growth differentials in two ways: first, 
by increasing potential growth, especially in those euro area countries that have shown a persistently 
low  growth  performance;  and  second,  by  enhancing  the  functioning  of  the  key  channels  or 
mechanisms  of  adjustment  within  the  euro  area,  namely  the  trade  channel  and  the  risk  sharing 
channel.  
I have discussed the impact of reforms on productivity and potential output growth one minute ago. Let 
me now elaborate on the second issue by giving you some examples of how structural reforms could 
improve the adjustment mechanism within the euro area.  
First and foremost, it is important to increase price and wage flexibility within the euro area in order to 
allow firms to quickly adjust their cost and price structure to the changing demand conditions for their 
products. For example, following a negative demand shock in one country, a lack of competition and 
the  related  rigidities  of  wages  and  prices  –  including  stickiness  of  nominal  wages  and  excessive 
protection – would hinder the market adjustment that entails lower prices and costs for domestically 
produced services and goods. In this case, the real exchange rate (or the trade) channel cannot work 
effectively  and  higher  unemployment  and  other  regional  disparities  could  be  persistent.  However, 
increasing  the  flexibility  of  the  national  economies,  while  necessary,  may  not  be  fully  sufficient  to 
ensure that the adjustment to asymmetric shocks does not generate unwelcome inflation and output 
growth differentials. To reduce the persistence of low capacity utilisation and higher unemployment in 
the  regions  hit  by  a  negative  shock,  it  is  important  to  foster  competition  and  trade  across  national 
borders. Firms and workers in the slow-growing regions with under-utilised capacity would then find it 
easier  to  supply  their  goods  and  services  in  fast-growing,  overheating  regions.  Enhancing  cross-
border trade and competition would thus contribute over time to a smoother and quicker “reallocation 
of excess demand” across the euro area countries and in this way allow the euro area to adjust to 
6 
 BIS Review 36/2006
asymmetric shocks and different national policies with less pronounced and less persistent swings in 
relative wages and in relative unemployment.  
Another important area for reform relates to the progress in creating conditions which allow a market 
and competition-based process of enhanced integration and efficiency of financial markets across the 
euro  area.  To  be  sure,  the  money  market  is  already  very  well  integrated.  This  is  crucial  for  a  swift 
implementation of the single monetary policy, since only an integrated interbank market can ensure 
that central bank liquidity is evenly distributed and the level of short-term interest rates across the euro 
area is homogeneous. Furthermore, the level of integration of the euro area government bond markets 
is  also  very  high,  mainly  due  to  the  disappearance  of  intra-euro  area  exchange  rate  risk  and  the 
convergence of inflation expectations across countries by the time the euro was introduced. Finally, 
the corporate bond market in the euro area is fairly well integrated in the sense that the country of 
issuance is only of marginal importance in explaining yield differentials.  
Leaving aside stock markets where the integration across the euro area, measured by the reaction of 
individual markets to euro area-wide factors and news, is an ongoing process, one major area where 
further  integration  is  warranted  is  the  retail  banking  industry.  The  Eurosystem,  together  with  the 
European Commission, supports the initiative by the European Payments Council to create a Single 
Euro  Payments  Area  (SEPA),  in  which  European  citizens  should  be  able  to  make  payments 
throughout the euro area from a single bank account using a single set of payment instruments as 
easily and safely as in the national context today.  
Enhanced  financial  integration  and  portfolio  diversification  should  tend  to  make  financial  structures 
more  similar  and  reduce  firms’  and  households’  exposure  to  regional  shocks.  In  particular,  it  would 
help  to  mitigate  the  adverse  consequences  of  a  downturn  in  the  economic  activity  of  a  particular 
country or region within the euro area. In this way, enhancing conditions for cross-border investment 
and  financial  integration  and  the  related  increased  portfolio  diversification  would  imply  that  original 
asymmetric shocks and trends have more homogeneous effects on real income across the euro area. 
This would limit one possible source of unwelcome inflation and income differentials.  
Conclusion 
Let me now conclude. I have explained today that EMU and a credible monetary policy benefit euro 
area citizens and create great opportunities for job creation. A good monetary policy is a prerequisite 
for  sustainable  growth  and  job  creation  but  cannot,  alone,  guarantee  full  success.  Other  conditions 
have to be met. It cannot be stressed enough that a high degree of flexibility in all markets, as well as 
further progress in terms of financial and economic integration, are also preconditions for job creation, 
prosperity and growth.  
Regulations or laws that hinder competition between existing firms and the entry of new competitors 
tend to support excess prices, incomes and profits in those sectors that are protected. Of course, the 
costs  of  such  protection  have  to  be  borne  by  consumers  in  the  form  of  overly  high  prices,  by  the 
unemployed  in  the  form  of  fewer  opportunities  for  new  jobs  and  by  most  workers  as  reduced 
productivity growth undermines prospects for real wage increases.  
Indeed, the more successful the structural measures aiming at increasing productivity growth are, the 
more jobs will be created at current wage levels.  
I am fully aware that it is often not easy to implement structural reforms and consolidate government 
budgets  because  public  opinion  is  sometimes  not  fully  convinced  or  aware  that  everybody  would 
benefit  from  these  reforms.  The  ECB  considers  itself  part  of  the  necessary  process  of  awareness 
rising, of tireless explanation. For this reason I have spent some time today discussing this issue. 
I thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 36/2006 
 7
