Axel A Weber: The role of money in the monetary policy of the Eurosystem 
Remarks by Mr Axel A Weber, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the panel discussion: ECB 
monetary policy: the first seven years, at an ECB colloquium held in honour of Otmar Issing: Monetary 
policy: a journey from theory to practice, Frankfurt, 16 March 2006. 
 It is a great pleasure for me to participate in this colloquium to honour the work of Otmar Issing. My 
brief remarks will focus on the role of money in the monetary policy framework of the Eurosystem.  
The  appropriate  role  of  money  in  monetary  policy  is  a  question  to  which  Otmar  has  made  an 
invaluable contribution  not  only  during his  tenure  at  the  ECB  but  throughout  his  whole  professional 
career:  
•  as an academic since 1960  
•  as a member of the German Council of Economic Experts 1988-1990  
•  as a member of the board of Deutsche Bundesbank and its chief economist 1990-1998  
•  and as board member and chief economist of the ECB since 1998  
As President of the Deutsche Bundesbank I would like to take this unique opportunity to pay my tribute 
to Otmar- both in a personal capacity and on behalf of the institution.  
The  role  of  money  in  the  design  of  monetary  policy  in  the  euro  area  has  been  one  of  the  more 
criticised aspects in our monetary policy strategy.  
From a theoretical point of view, the New–Keynesian approach, which forms the current paradigm in 
monetary economics, by and large doubts the relevance of money to monetary policy making in an 
environment in which central banks predominantly use a short-term interest rate to achieve their goals.  
In addition, though from a theoretical less radical point of view, market participants often criticise that 
the contribution of the monetary analysis to the decision-making process of the Governing Council is 
not as obvious as it should be.  
I will argue in my following remarks that both criticisms are unjustified in view of the challenging task of 
conducting monetary policy in real time in an uncertain environment.  
First  of  all,  there  is  a  general  consensus  that  “inflation  is  a  monetary  phenomenon”  –  as  Milton 
Friedman put it; a central bank that aims at price stability therefore simply cannot afford to completely 
discard  monetary  indicators;  and  what  I  learn  from  more  recent  deliberations  of  central  banks  that 
traditionally  have  a  more critical  attitude  towards the  use  of  monetary  indicators  – such  as  e.g.  the 
Bank of England – confirms my assessment.  
However,  how  exactly  monetary  analysis  is  implemented  and  how  it  is  used  for  monetary  policy 
decisions depends crucially on the empirical relationship between monetary aggregates, inflation and 
other macroeconomic variables of interest.  
The question can be put in simple terms: How monetarist should one be? And my simple and agnostic 
answer is: as monetarist as the empirical evidence supports.  
There is a well-established long-run relationship between money growth and inflation in the euro area: 
monetary  aggregates  in  the  euro  area  prove  to  have  explanatory  power  for  longer-term  inflationary 
developments. This is documented, not least, by current research carried out in the Bundesbank.  
As long as these relationships hold, there are convincing empirical reasons for paying close attention 
to monetary developments in the policy making process.  
Beyond this issue, there are further conceptual reasons why money should matter: It offers a suitable 
longer term perspective for internal decision-making and external communication, and thus enhances 
credibility.  Of  course,  this  latter  point  is  of  general  importance  for  central  banks  but  it  has  been 
especially important for the Eurosystem and its monetary policy at the beginning of the third stage of 
EMU.  In  1999  the  Eurosystem  did  not  possess  its  own  established  track  record.  Thus,  a  strategy 
making use of the empirically established long-term relationship between money growth and inflation 
was especially important to gain and secure credibility right from the outset of EMU.  
BIS Review 21/2006 
 1
And all this is irrespective of questions as to whether there is an active role for money to play in the 
transmission mechanism, i.e. whether money is exogenous or endogenous.  
This  brings  me  back  to  the  more  academic  criticism  that  stems  from  the  New-Keynesian  school  of 
thought.  Despite  all  the  undoubted  merits  of  such  an  approach  –  sound  theoretical  principles, 
microfoundations, general equilibrium character – it also has its shortcomings.  
Firstly, the transmission mechanism is specified too leanly and mechanistically.  
For example, one prominent channel for the role of money in this class of models is a real-balance 
effect – something that is empirically difficult to verify and arguably too simplistic in the present-day 
world of financial markets. 
Some years ago, in the controversy between monetarists and Keynesians Allan Meltzer argued that: 
“The difference between the Keynesians and us is less in the nature of the process than in the range 
of assets considered“. Applied to the current environment, those words have not lost much relevance.  
Furthermore, the New-Keynesian approach is a natural extension of the real business cycle framework 
to a world with nominal rigidities. As such, it focuses on short-term deviations of the relevant variables 
from trend. The empirical evidence for the correlation between money and inflation, however, is of a 
low-frequency nature. In other words, it is more relevant to the trend behaviour of inflation.  
In  a  nutshell,  given  the  empirical  evidence,  it  seems  that  the  New-Keynesian  framework  is  missing 
something  important  in  the  working-mechanisms  of  the  economy  and  the  inflation  generating 
processes that govern it. Something that is– at least - empirically captured by the information content 
of monetary aggregates.  
Moreover, the merits of analysing monetary developments in a broad framework encompassing credit 
dynamics  allows  to  extract  valuable  information  with  regard  to  possible  financial  market  tensions 
caused by the build-up of asset price bubbles.  
In  the  light  of  these  considerations  it  is  not  so  much  a  question  of  whether  monetary  policy  in  the 
Eurosystem should pay close attention to monetary aggregates. The more relevant issue is how this 
should best be done, that is, how monetary aggregates should feature in the monetary policy design.  
Here, the challenging task for monetary analysis is how to separate in real time the noise in the short-
run  development  of  monetary  aggregates  from  the  part  of  monetary  dynamics  that  signals  risks  to 
future price stability.  
Monetary  analysis,  properly  understood  and  implemented,  can  not  be  a  mechanical  forecasting 
exercise. It has to take into account the possibilities of money demand shocks injecting noise into the 
liquidity-inflation nexus or possible structural shifts in money demand relations.  
Up-to-date  monetary  analysis  should  be  a  broadly-based  approach  and  an  ongoing  intellectual 
endeavour. And this is precisely how monetary analysis has developed over the past few years in the 
Eurosystem.  In  an  environment  of  high  financial  uncertainty  it  has  identified  large  liquidity  shocks 
which led to significant portfolio shifts in liquid and secure bank deposits. And it has derived a toolbox 
of liquidity measures signalling possible excess liquidity.  
Applying this toolbox has allowed to separate liquidity developments rooted predominantly in financial 
uncertainties  from  developments  signalling  more  imminent  inflation  risks.  For  example  the  actual 
strong increase in the money stock M3 which is accompanied by very low level of interest rates and a 
strong rise in loans to the private sector.  
All in all, an elaborate analysis of monetary aggregates as well as their components and counterparts 
is a useful tool for monetary policymakers. It has clearly the potential to enhance the robustness of our 
judgments  about  future  economic  developments.  In  the  past  few  years,  academic  research  has 
emphasised  the  advantages  of  robust  analytical  tools  for  appropriate  policy  responses  in  an 
environment  of  prevailing  uncertainty  –  something  that  has  always  been  known  by  practitioners  of 
central banking.  
However,  besides  this  longer-term  nature  of  the  relationship  between  monetary  developments  and 
inflation, there is the need to take into account also other and more short-term risks to price stability. 
This is the core of the economic analysis in the strategy of the Eurosystem.  
Given the different time horizons of the economic and monetary analysis I think that the demands that 
are sometimes brought-up in the public debate to merge the two pillars are not convincing. There is no 
existing model that would allow to integrate the multitude of economic information that is relevant for 
2 
 BIS Review 21/2006
monetary policy in one coherent theoretical structure. This is especially relevant for the integration of 
monetary  aggregates  into  traditional  macroeconomic  and  macroeconometric  models.  Insofar, 
proposals to merge the two pillars are ill-founded. The ultimate goal of the two-pillar structure is the 
efficient utilisation of available information for monetary policy decisions and communication. However, 
one  possible  approach  with  regard  to  the  information  gained  through  the  lens of  the  economic  and 
monetary analysis might be found in a stronger formalised combined assessment of the information 
included in both pillars for future inflation developments. This is in a sense what the cross-checking is 
all  about.  Of  course,  the  merits  of  a  more  formalised  forecasting  combination  would  have  to  be 
weighted against any possible loss of information that might be associated with it.  
This brings me to another criticism that is sometimes voiced, namely that monetary developments are 
not regarded as being informative about the Eurosystem’s monetary policy decisions. In my view, this 
criticism is unjustified:  
Firstly, the very nature of the information content of the monetary analysis has to take into account its 
role as a cross-checking device and its focus on longer-term risks to price stability. 
Secondly,  in  an  environment  of  heightened  financial  market  uncertainty  actual  monetary  dynamics 
may to a large part be driven by noise which does not necessitate a monetary policy reaction. The 
portfolio-shift adjustment of money growth in the post 2001 period can be seen as an example.  
By the way: The role of money in our policy decisions has been analysed in recent empirical research; 
on that issue which found a kind of non-linear relationship between monetary developments and policy 
reaction. Such threshold effects in my view deserve further empirical investigation.  
Let me conclude by saying that the experience of the first seven years of EMU has shown:  
•    that  the  monetary  analysis  plays  an  important  role  in  our  policy  strategy  and  our  policy 
decisions  
that  the  monetary  analysis  is  a  challenging  and  evolving  exercise  given  today’s  financial 
market dynamics  
 •  but that, even in such an environment, money has an empirically justified informative role.  
BIS Review 21/2006 
 3
