Mohamed S Fofana: Banking developments in Sierra Leone 
Statement  by  Mr  Mohamed  S  Fofana,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Sierra  Leone,  at  the 
launching ceremony of the new Guaranty Trust Bank logo, Freetown, 28 July 2006. 
 Mr Chairman,  
Hon Vice President, Solomon E Berewa,  
Hon Ministers,  
Board of Directors,  
Management and Staff of the Guaranty Trust Bank (SL) Ltd,  
Distinguished Ladies & Gentlemen  
I  am  pleased  to  be  here  with  you  this  morning  at  the  launching  ceremony  of  the  new  logo  of 
Guaranty Trust Bank (SL) Limited. We are all aware that change is inevitable in a dynamic world. 
And that change itself is dynamic, which is why we are all gathered here today.  
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen, a logo is a symbol or trademark designed for the clear and 
easy  recognition  of  an  institution  by  both  its  clients  and  its  competitors.  We  in  the  Banking 
industry,  as  indeed  the  nation  in  general,  have  come  to  identify  Guaranty  Trust  Bank  with  a 
particular  logo  in  the  recent  past.  The  change  from  the  old  logo,  which  is  two  small  squares 
flanking Guaranty Trust, to a new logo, which is a big orange square with a small white square at 
the top right side and GT Bank inscribed at the bottom of the orange square, is welcomed by the 
Bank of Sierra Leone. The features of the new logo, which are orange - representing passion for 
people  and  the  drive  for  excellence,  white  -  representing  commitment  to  integrity  and 
professionalism, and the squares - representing stability and dependability, are all symbols of the 
bank’s  commitment  to  growth,  prudent  and  efficient  service  delivery  to  our  country,  as  well  as 
customer care.  
Mr  Chairman,  since  the  Guaranty  Trust  Bank  (SL)  Limited  commenced  operations  in  January 
2002 after the successful take over of the First Merchant Bank PLC Nigeria, it has consistently 
improved  its  performance  and  expanded  its  operations  in  the  country;  notably  with  the 
 
May  2006,  Guaranty  Trust  Bank’s  total  assets 
establishment  of  three  branches.  As  at  31st
amounted to Le47.05 billion and shareholders’ funds stood at Le5.84 billion. Loans granted to 
various sectors of the economy have also gone up to Le9.16 billion. All of these are significant 
and commendable achievements in a short time.  
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen, over the last couple of years, the bank has committed itself 
to  the  provision  of  efficient  banking  services  to  the  people  of  Sierra  Leone.  It  has  introduced 
among  other  things,  money  gram  money  transfer,  which  is  one  of  the  fastest  means  of 
transferring  money  into  and  out  of  Sierra  Leone,  and  has  also  introduced  mobile  banking 
services.  This  last  development  has  given  its  customers  the  opportunity  to  access  and  initiate 
transactions on their accounts from anywhere and at any time of the day.  
In  the  bank’s  drive  for  excellence  and  customer  satisfaction,  the  Bank  of  Sierra  Leone  has 
continued and will continue to create the enabling environment for safe and sound banking. For 
instance,  in  collaboration  with  other  stakeholders,  the  Bank  of  Sierra  Leone  is  putting  in  place 
measures to implement all provisions of the Anti-Money Laundering Act so as to prevent money 
launderers using our financial system for their criminal activities. A recently concluded workshop 
organised by UNODC/GIABA//Bank of Sierra Leone succeeded in drafting a National Anti-Money 
Laundering Strategy with the aim of providing a framework for an Anti-Money Laundering regime 
that  will  ensure  effective  crime  prevention  and  detection,  and  at  the  same  time  avoid  creating 
excessive burden on the financial system and its users. 
The workshop attracted various stakeholders, including the Association of Commercial Bankers in 
Sierra Leone to which GTB is an active member.  
The  Bank  of  Sierra  Leone  shall  continue  to  maintain  the  open  door  policy  and  encourage 
dialogue in the process of ensuring a sound and stable financial system.  
BIS Review 79/2006 
 1
Mr Chairman, Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen, allow me to close this brief remarks by once 
again congratulating the Board, Management and staff of the Guaranty Trust Bank (SL) Limited 
for another step taken to enhance the public image of the bank.  
I thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 79/2006
