Ardian Fullani: Financial policy issues of deposit insurance schemes in South-
East Europe 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the regional technical seminar on 
“Financial Policy Issues of Deposit Insurance Schemes in South-East Europe”, Tirana, 30 May 2006.  
 Distinguished participants, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  is  my  pleasure  to  open  the  proceedings  of  this  regional  seminar  on  “Financial  Policy  Issues  of 
Deposit Insurance Schemes in South-East Europe”. I thank the Convergence Program of the World 
Bank and the Deposit Insurance Agency for the cooperation. I am convinced that this seminar will be 
valuable for exchanging new experience and ideas in fulfilling the missions of your institutions. 
First of all allow me to emphasize that the banking system is important not only for being an integral 
part of the financial system but also for the stability it brings to a country, moving its economy forwards 
and leading to economic growth. 
The  Bank  of  Albania,  as  the  country’s  central  bank,  has  the  main  target  to  maintain  price  stability. 
Along  with  this  target,  the  Bank  of  Albania  is  exclusively  responsible  for  licensing  and  supervising 
commercial banks and some other non-bank institutions involved mainly in micro-credit and in foreign 
exchange business. The legal and regulatory ground of banking supervision is already complete and 
we  are  constantly  working  for  its  improvement.  Also,  the  supervisory  practice  complies  with  best 
standards in this direction, aiming at being oriented according to banking activity risk, being efficient 
and proactive. 
The  supervisory  activity,  along  with  prevention  of  extreme  cases of  insured  institutions’  bankruptcy, 
carries  out  also  the  administration of  such  institutions,  in  cases when  they  fail  irrecoverably.  In  this 
stage,  the  role  and  contribution  of  the  Deposit  Insurance  Agency,  until  that  moment  “invisible”, 
appears  with  the  whole  magnitude  and  importance.  It  is  indispensable  not  only  in  terms  of  treating 
depositors that have had savings at the bankrupt institution, but also in the “calming down” effect for 
all the depositors of the banking system. 
In fact, the world experience has indicated that the deposit insurance function of the customers of the 
banking  system  is  an  important  instrument  in  the  framework  of  maintaining  the  banking  system 
sustainability  and  keeping  public  confidence  in  it.  The  timely  payment  of  the  deposit  value  at  the 
insured amount, in the case of a bank’s bankruptcy, allows responsible authorities to be focused on 
the  procedures  intending  the  isolation  of  the  case  and  the  recovery  of  the  values  of  the  bankrupt 
institution. 
The  activity  of  responsible  deposit  insurance  institutions  has  different  characteristics  in  different 
countries. Their legal framework provides responsibilities that are limited only in the role of the payer 
of the available fund and other cases, when responsibilities are extended further, up to the recovery of 
the insured institutions’ values that have gone bankrupt. These different characteristics also determine 
in essence: 
•  The way the insurance institution is established and functions, 
•  The way the insurance fund is managed and the forms the institution possesses for increasing 
its value in extraordinary cases, which is the level of the contribution amount by the insured 
institutions  in  ratio  to  the  objectives  for  increasing  the  insurance  fund  and  for  raising  the 
covering capacities; 
•  Relation to insured institutions; 
•  The role of the state in the insurance institution’s capital; 
•  Requirements  with  regards  to  necessary  human  resources  and  objectives  on  the  intended 
level of personnel’s expertise; 
•  The way the banks and foreign bank branches are insured; 
   1/3 
•  The  way  of  determining  the  payment  of  the  insurance  contribution  on  the  basis  of  insured 
institutions risk profile, etc. 
In general, it can be stated that all these elements depend on: 
•  The moment the responsible deposit insurance institution is put into function, as in the case of 
the Albanian experience; 
•  The degree of banking market development; 
•  The way of its integration and of banking institutions’ integration into more developed markets; 
•  The development degree of financial markets in general; 
•  The  level  of  legal  and  regulatory  framework completeness  and  perfection  (not  only  the  one 
closely related to deposit insurance); and 
•  The level of public education in relation to services provided by the banking industry and by 
the financial market in general. 
The  more  advanced  we  are  in  the  above  developments,  the  higher  in  quality  and  number  are  the 
alternatives  that  allow  the  responsible  deposit  insurance  institution  a  major  role  in  administration  of 
crises the insured institutions may be faced with. 
In  fact,  besides  the  “wealth”  they  provide  in  approximation  of  deposit  insurance  practices  in  the 
banking activity, the above changes in the legal framework and in the practices of deposit insurance 
activity, lay down the need of a more general harmonization, in regional level and maybe even further. 
In this way, we would prevent any legal stipulations, which in practice may prove to be non-functional 
or at high cost.  
I would like to emphasize once more that the whole legal framework of the banking system is a topic 
largely  discussed  nowadays,  not  only  in  Albania,  but  in  international  levels  as  well.  Nowadays,  risk 
management  has  turned  into  a  primary  issue  and  is  in  the  focus  of  national  and  international 
institutions. In this way, regulatory systems are advised to be reviewed and elaborated to be better 
adapted to current developments and to financial system’s perspectives. The financial system does 
not  operate  in  the  vacuum.  It  functions  under  real  conditions  and  our  task  is  to  adapt  to  best 
experiences.  I  think  our  task  is  to  identify  the  best  practices  and  to  try  to  adjust  them  to  the  real 
conditions of our economy, because by adjusting them to the whole regulatory framework and banking 
activity, we come to a motif and motivation: the European Community. 
I am confident that you will use this seminar to find out joint elements in the activity of your institutions, 
as  well  as  to  identify  the  distinctions.  I  think  it  would  be  valuable  to  identify  also  the  cases  that 
represent  what  is  regarded  as  the  “best  practice”  in  deposit  insurance  area.  In  this  way,  it  would 
contribute to the achievement of the objective to standardize the regional insurance practices and to 
create a clearer vision on the insurance activity performance in the future. 
The activity of the Albanian Deposit Insurance Agency is new. As such, its capability of operating in 
extreme cases is not proved yet. Nevertheless, efforts are made constantly for fulfilling the necessary 
legal framework and procedures, covering all possible directions of its activity. Simultaneously, there is 
worked  in  terms  of  organizing  the  structure,  increasing  the  institution’s  staff  number  and  training. 
Emphasis is laid on the DIA’s cooperation with the Bank of Albania, the supervisory authority, so that 
the DIA carries out its functions effectively. At the same time, the relation with the Ministry of Finance 
is taken into consideration in organizing the Deposit Insurance Agency’s structure, so as to have the 
solid presence of the state in it. The forms of this cooperation are numerous, but all of them should be 
first consolidated under normal conditions of the banking system activity. The main elements of this 
cooperation are: 
•  Exchange of information on supervisory practices and observance of regulatory requirements 
by the insured entities; 
•  Organization of joint trainings in getting acquainted with respective functions; 
•  Acquaintance with and discussion on manuals and procedures requiring the commitment of 
both institutions in certain cases, and the testing of these procedures. 
The Bank of Albania and the Deposit Insurance Agency are working for enhancing this cooperation 
constantly. 
   2/3 
A number of legal and regulatory alterations that are being prepared in parallel by both our institutions, 
and the exchange of information, as well as more frequent contacts between both institutions serve 
this  purpose.  It  is  aimed  at  adopting  best  practices  in  this  area,  and  at  implementing  the 
recommendations  given  by  specialized  assessments  of  international  financial  institutions  that  assist 
this process. 
Allow  me  to  state  once  more  that  the  Bank  of  Albania  is  completely  committed  to  provide  all  the 
necessary assistance for strengthening the capacities of the Deposit Insurance Agency in Albania, in 
view of its very important mission. 
I wish good proceedings to this seminar. 
 
   3/3 
