Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Building a robust Islamic financial system  
Keynote  address  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia,  at  the  2nd 
International Conference on Islamic Banking, Kuala Lumpur, 7 February 2006. 
 Let me first of all extend a warm welcome to the participants of this Second International Conference 
on Islamic Banking: Risk Management, Regulation and Supervision, jointly organized by the Islamic 
Research  and  Training  Institute  (IRTI)  of  the  Islamic  Development  Bank  and  the  Islamic  Financial 
Services  Board  (IFSB).  This  forum  has  an  important  role  of  not  only  fostering  the  dissemination  of 
knowledge  and  exchange  of  experiences  on  the  subject  of  risk  management,  regulation  and 
supervision,  in  facilitating  a  better  understanding  on  the  issues  confronting  us,  and  thus  contribute 
towards advancing forward the development of the industry. Effective risk management capabilities is 
particularly important in this more challenging global financial environment of heightened uncertainties 
and  increased  potential  for  financial  vulnerabilities.  And  an  effective  regulation  and  supervision  will 
ensure the soundness and stability of the system. 
In  the  recent  decade,  the  Islamic  financial  system  has  experienced  remarkable  growth  and 
transformation,  demonstrating  its  potential  as  a  competitive  form  of  financial  intermediation.  Today, 
Islamic finance represents a multi-billion dollar industry with a comprehensive range of products and 
services,  serving  a  broad  spectrum  of  consumers  and  businesses  that  extends  beyond  the  Muslim 
world.  
In developing the Islamic financial system, it is important to focus on the appropriate pre-requisites that 
will  facilitate  its  efficient  evolution.  Fundamental  to  this  is  the  development  of  the  institutions,  the 
markets,  the  range  of  financial  products  and  services  and  having  in  place  the  accounting,  legal, 
regulatory,  supervisory  and  shariah  frameworks,  as  well  as,  for  the  monetary  authority  to  have  the 
capacity to manage its financial policies within this context.  
With the development of these respective components having made significant progress, we are now 
seeing the Islamic financial services industry enter a new phase of development. Following increased 
liberalisation,  the  progress  in  the  development  of  the  international  financial  architecture  for  Islamic 
finance and the increased innovation resulting in the development of new products and services, the 
international dimension of Islamic finance is becoming increasingly more significant.  
Islamic  financial  institutions  are  now  also  venturing  their  operations  beyond  their  domestic  borders. 
Islamic-based  papers  are  also  being  issued  in  international  financial  markets,  generating  significant 
interest from global investors. The international financial architecture for the development of Islamic 
finance  has  also  been  strengthened  with  the  establishment  of  the  international  boards  to  set  the 
accounting  and  prudential  standards.  These  developments  have  cumulatively  evolved  the  Islamic 
financial system to increasingly become an integral component of the international financial system. 
The Malaysian experience has been to evolve a comprehensive domestic Islamic financial system that 
is diversified in terms of its institutions, markets and players. The strategy has been to institute the 
entire financial system chain to ensure the efficient functioning of the system. The initiatives include 
establishing  the  required  financial  institutions  including,  the  Islamic  banking  institutions,  takaful 
companies, the non-banking institutions and developing the Islamic money and capital markets. These 
respective components have recently been progressively liberalized in terms of allowing for the entry 
of new foreign players and in terms of increasing the potential for foreign participation in the domestic 
financial markets. In addition, both these domestic and foreign operations have been encouraged to 
tap on regional and international business opportunities. As a result, this has strengthened the cross-
border  financial  inter-linkages,  prompting  greater  international  integration.  To  ensure  the  robust 
functioning of the system, these developments are supported by a strong regulatory and supervisory 
framework reinforced by the legal and Shariah framework and the payment and settlement systems.  
While  the  positive  growth  and  developments  in  the  Islamic  financial  system  have  brought  about 
expanded  opportunities,  the  financial  liberalization  and  technological  advancement  have  brought 
about  increased  competition  and  greater  innovation  in  the  development  of  products  and  services, 
operational processes and delivery channels. These developments have contributed to increasing the 
risk profile of the institutions. These new risks are generally more complex and have more profound 
systemic  implications  to  the  financial  system.  This  has  increased  the  need  for  strengthened  risk 
BIS Review 8/2006 
 1
management  capabilities  by  the  industry  and  for  greater  attention  to  this  aspect  by  regulators  and 
supervisors in promoting the stability and integrity of the financial system. Of importance is to ensure 
an understanding and awareness of the risks inherent in Islamic banking activities. The challenge is to 
ensure that each component that supports the risk mitigation requirements, comprising the framework 
and institutional infrastructures, legal, regulatory, supervisory as well as the Shariah infrastructures are 
in place. 
My  remarks  this  morning  will  focus  on  the  challenges  of  risk  management  in  Islamic  financial 
institutions, and the roles of effective regulation and supervision in this context as part of the efforts to 
promote the development of a robust and sound Islamic financial system.  
In  Islamic  banking,  the  management  of  risks  becomes  more  challenging  due  to  its  peculiar  risk 
characteristics and the requirement for compliance to Shariah principles. While the Basel II initiatives 
on the identification of credit, market and operational risks can be assimilated into Islamic banking, the 
initiatives  have  to  be  complemented  with  consideration  of  the  other  dimensions  of  risks  that  are 
inherent in the Islamic financial transactions. The risk management infrastructure in Islamic financial 
institutions  needs  to  identify,  unbundle,  measure,  control  and  monitor  all  the  specific  risks  in  the 
Islamic financial transactions and instruments. This is to ensure that the systems and controls will be 
effective in the quantification and management of the risks arising from the operations. 
New  innovations  in  technology  would  be  particularly  important  to  enhance  the  potential  to  manage 
risks. In addition, as the returns in Islamic banking are uncertain and can only be ascertained on an 
ex-post basis, well-developed IT systems would be necessary to enable Islamic banking institutions to 
make projections on future returns so as to reduce the degree of uncertainty in the returns to be paid 
to  the  depositors.  This  would  also  strengthen  the  potential  competitiveness  of  the  Islamic  financial 
services industry. 
Another facet to risk management is the need for the Islamic banking industry to develop a derivatives 
market. In the current increasingly uncertain global financial environment, investors need to be in a 
position to mitigate and manage these emerging new risks. Islamic banking institutions, in particular, 
have  to  a  large  extent  long-term  assets  which  include  long-term  Islamic  housing  mortgages  and 
Islamic  financial  instruments,  that  are  funded  by  short-term  deposits,  thus  giving  rise  to  a  maturity 
mismatch  between  the  assets  and  liabilities.  There  is  therefore  a  need  for  the  development  of  a 
broader  range  of  Islamic  financial  market  instruments  to  provide  the  industry  with  effective  risk 
mitigating instruments.  
In addition to the derivatives market, the Islamic financial system also needs deeper and more efficient 
money and capital markets to facilitate sound asset and liability, and liquidity management by Islamic 
financial  institutions.  In  this  regard,  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  will  issue  Sukuk  al-Ijarah,  to  meet  the 
requirements of participants in the Islamic money market.  
At  the  core  of  a  strong  Islamic  financial  system  in  any  jurisdiction,  there  needs  to  be  a  strong 
regulatory  framework  which  enforces  the  standards  for  capital  adequacy,  ensures  effective  risk 
management practices, financial disclosure and governance, reinforced by a strong Shariah and legal 
framework.  Shariah  principles  serve  as  a  self-regulating  mechanism  that  protects  Islamic  financial 
institutions from unproductive, speculative and unethical activities, given the prohibition of interest or 
usury in banking business, and the requirement that all financial transactions are to be accompanied 
by genuine trade and business-related transactions and the prohibition from the involvement in illegal 
and unethical activities. The regulatory framework in which Islamic banking operates is thus able to 
draw on the strength of the Shariah injunctions, to reinforce financial soundness and stability of the 
Islamic banking system.  
In Malaysia, Islamic banking institutions are required to have a Shariah Committee council within their 
respective institutions to ensure that products and services to be introduced are Shariah-compliant. In 
addition,  emphasis  is  also  placed  on  the  internal  audit  function  to  ensure  that  all  transactions 
undertaken by Islamic banking institutions are in compliance with the Shariah principles.  
In designing and implementing financial regulation and supervision for Islamic banking institutions, the 
challenge  is  to  enforce  a  framework  that  takes  into  account  the  unique  characteristics  of  Islamic 
banking business, without being a regulatory burden and restricting its growth potential or providing 
arbitrage opportunities between the conventional and Islamic financial systems. This is important to 
ensure the stability of the overall financial system.  
In  building  a  sound  prudential  framework  for  Islamic  banking,  aligning  the  regulatory  capital 
requirements  to  the  underlying  risks,  requires  dichotomization  of  the  risk  intricacies  in  the  Islamic 
2 
 BIS Review 8/2006
banking asset portfolio, given the asset structure of Islamic banking institutions, such as the diverse 
spectrum of Islamic financing structures, which range from low-risk sales and lease-based modes to 
the higher risk equity-based modes of finance. The intricacy in profiling the risk in Islamic banking is 
further increased as the risks may transform from one type of risk to another at the various stages of 
the contract. For example, in the diminishing Mu-sya-ra-kah contract, the Islamic financial institution 
initially  acts  as  a  joint-owner  of  the  asset,  but  the  asset  ownership  will  be  transferred  fully  to  the 
customer at the conclusion of the contract. In this regard, the Islamic financial institution is exposed to 
higher  market  and  impairment  risks  at  the  initial  part  of  the  transactions  initially  compared  with  the 
exposure  during  the  later  stage  of  the  contract.  At  the  same  time,  the  amount  of  repayment  by 
customers  represents  the  credit  risk  to  the  Islamic  financial  institution.  As  each  of  these  respective 
parts of the transaction has a distinct intrinsic characteristic, it would entail different degrees of credit, 
market  and  operational  risks.  In  this  regard,  in  formulating  prudential  standards  for  Islamic  banking 
institutions, there is a need to have an accurate assessment of the various risk variants underlying the 
alternative parts of the transaction to determine the capital adequacy requirement. 
Similarly,  the  liability  structure  of  the  Islamic  banks  is  characterized  by  two  distinct  categories  of 
deposits: the demand deposits which are not subject to the risk associated with the banking business 
and for which the principal is guaranteed, and the investment deposits which involve risks and hence, 
eligible  to  share  the  profits  earned  from  the  banking  business.  Given  that  the  returns  are  not  pre-
determined, profit-sharing depositors of Islamic banking institutions, as the capital provider will have to 
bear any of the losses. This places a higher degree of fiduciary risk on the Islamic financial institutions 
in ensuring that the investment deposits funds are managed in the most effective and efficient manner. 
This is further compounded by competition in managing the liquidity in the system. The profit share 
distributed needs to be competitive relative to that earned and paid by the conventional banks. This is 
important to avoid a shift of deposits and to retain the funds in the system. 
A central feature of the regulatory framework for Islamic financial institutions is financial transparency 
and  disclosure.  Market conduct  disclosure and  customer  relationship  management  form  the  core  of 
these principles. Addressing the information asymmetry between Islamic banking institutions and the 
depositors is of vital importance. Under the Mu-da-ra-bah principles, there is a need for disclosure by 
Islamic financial institutions to investors on how the funds are being managed so as to provide the 
assurance that the underlying business operations, the risk profile and the risk control mechanisms 
are in place. In Malaysia, this has been addressed through the establishment of an effective rate of 
return framework, which provides a standard methodology for deriving the rate of return on deposits. 
The Profit Equalisation Reserve has been provided in the rate of return framework for Islamic financial 
institutions,  which  serves  as  a  mechanism  to  mitigate  the  impact  of  the  fluctuations  in  the  rates  of 
return. The reserve is appropriated from the gross income and is shared by both the depositors and 
the  banking  institution.  Given  the  dual  banking  environment,  as  the  one  in  Malaysia,  the  ability  to 
maximize  risk-adjusted  returns  on  investment  and  sustain  stable  and  competitive  returns  is  an 
important element in ensuring the competitiveness of the Islamic banking system. From the regulatory 
perspective,  the  rate  of  return  framework  provides  a  means  of  assessing  the  efficiency  of  Islamic 
banking institutions, its profitability, management competency and fairness. To further protect Islamic 
depositors, the Malaysia Deposit Insurance Corporation has established a separate deposit insurance 
scheme based on Islamic principles.  
Disclosure of the true and fair value of the Islamic banking operations in the financial statements is 
also essential for depositors to undertake a true and fair assessment of the bank's performance. The 
enhanced  financial  disclosures  need  to  be  complemented  with  customer  education  and  awareness 
programs  to  elevate  the  level  of  financial  literacy  among  the  consumers  and  businesses.  Towards 
achieving  this  objective,  consumer  education  programs have been  conducted,  providing  information 
among others, on the unique characteristics of Islamic banking and finance, Islamic financial products 
and services and the underlying Shariah principles and concepts. Enhanced consumer awareness is 
expected to strengthen the role of market discipline in driving the Islamic financial institutions towards 
strict  Shariah  compliance,  enhanced  operational  efficiency,  and  strengthened  risk  management 
infrastructures and practices.  
In  Malaysia,  Islamic  banks  and  conventional  banks  with  Islamic  banking  windows  observe  similar 
prudential standards as imposed on conventional banks such as the minimum risk weighted capital 
ratio  (RWCR),  standards  for  corporate  governance  and  risk  management,  financial  disclosures  and 
know  your  customer  policy.  The  principles  of  prudent  management  and  enhanced  operational 
efficiency are inculcated through the minimum risk weighted capital adequacy requirement. Corporate 
governance  standards  have  been  enforced  through  specific  guidelines  on  the  code  of  conduct  for 
BIS Review 8/2006 
 3
directors,  officers  and  employees  of  the  banking  institutions  and  guidelines  on  the  directorship  and 
prohibition of loans to directors, staff and their selected corporations. In addition, strict compliance with 
the  tenets  of  Shariah  would  also  ensure  that  the  Islamic  financial  institutions  are  managed  on  the 
basis of a high degree of prudence, ethics and integrity. 
The  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  has  enhanced  its  capital  regulation  to  include 
operational risk in the computation of capital adequacy, in addition to credit and market risks. The task 
of formulating a framework that addresses the peculiar risks associated with Islamic banking is being 
undertaken by the Islamic Financial Services Board (IFSB), which serves as an international standard-
setting body for regulatory and supervisory agencies. Its mandate is to develop prudential, regulatory 
and  disclosure  standards  for  Islamic  finance,  and  promote  uniformity  in  the  best  practices  on  the 
governance of Islamic financial institutions worldwide. In this respect, the IFSB has recently issued two 
prudential  standards  on  risk  management  and  capital  adequacy  for  institutions  offering  Islamic 
financial  services,  which  are  recommended  for  implementation  in  2007.  The  IFSB  has  also  made 
progress  in  developing  three  other  standards  on  corporate  governance,  transparency  and  market 
discipline, and the supervisory review process to be released in due course. 
A key challenge in managing operational risk in Islamic banking is ensuring Shariah compliance. Bank 
supervisors  in  their  assessment  would  need  to  give  due  attention  to  the  adequacy  of  the  financial 
institutions'  board  and  management  oversight,  policies,  procedures  and  limits,  risk  measurement, 
monitoring  and  management  information  systems,  and  internal  controls.  The  risk  management 
standards issued by the IFSB would serve as a guide to bank supervisors in this regard.  
Notwithstanding the significant progress made so far, there are still outstanding issues confronting the 
Islamic  financial  system  today,  particularly  the  different  interpretations  of  the  Shariah  injunctions. 
Internationally,  there  continue  to  be  debates  among  Shariah  scholars  on  the  compliance  to  the 
Shariah  principles.  In  Malaysia,  the  National  Shariah  Council  on  Islamic  Banking  and  Takaful  has 
invited prominent international Shariah scholars to participate in the deliberations as its members. The 
move is expected to help bridge the gaps in the interpretations of Shariah injunctions in relation to the 
conduct  of  Islamic  banking  business  among  the  Shariah  scholars  in  different  parts  of  the  world. 
Another forum through which the differences in the interpretations is being addressed is regular and 
continuous dialogue sessions by the scholars. A RM200 million endowment fund has been established 
by Malaysia to support the role of the international community of Shariah scholars in developing global 
Islamic banking and finance.  
The  development  of  a  vibrant  Islamic  banking  sector  cannot  be  achieved  without  the  support  of 
appropriate human capital development. Underpinning the success of Islamic banking system is the 
strengthening of research and intellectual capacity in the sphere of finance and Shariah. The Islamic 
banking industry needs to be equipped with a new breed of innovators, risk managers, regulators and 
supervisors who have the right blend of knowledge of finance and the understanding of the Shariah. 
For this purpose, Malaysia has established the International Centre for Education in Islamic Finance 
(INCEIF),  which  will  commence  operations  in  March  2006,  aimed  at  developing  talents  in  Islamic 
finance. INCEIF will offer professional certification programs in Islamic finance and will forge strategic 
alliances  with  domestic  and  foreign  institutions  of  higher  education  to  offer  Masters  and  PhD. 
programs in Islamic finance in specific areas of specialisation. 
As we advance forward, changes in the financial landscape will continue to accelerate and the level of 
complexity and sophistication in the financial markets will further intensify. Islamic banking institutions 
will  need  to  reinvent  themselves  to  meet  the  emerging  issues,  challenges  and  opportunities.  The 
regulatory and supervisory approach and the methodologies to be applied must continue to evolve in 
order to remain effective and relevant. In addition, given the global dimension of the Islamic financial 
products and services, and the increasing interdependence of financial markets, efforts by individual 
countries  to  strengthen  risk  management  practices  needs  to  be  matched  by  efforts  to  enhance  the 
safeguards at the international level.  
The future prospect of the Islamic banking industry thus depends on the combined cumulative efforts 
by  the  industry,  regulators,  the  market  participants  and  the  international  community.  The  collective 
efforts needs to be coordinated to maximise the potential of the industry. Setting shared vision and 
common goals to be achieved would be an important first step. Of greater importance are the actions 
that needs to be taken to realise these goals. It will be the actions and initiatives which we take today 
that will contribute towards achieving the future that we aspire. 
On this note, I wish you a successful and productive conference. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 8/2006
