Hamad Al-Sayari: A brief overview of the Saudi Arabian banking sector 
Speech by His Excellency Hamad Al-Sayari, Governor of the Saudi Arabian Monetary Agency, at the 
opening of a branch of the National Bank of Kuwait, Jeddah, 6 May 2006.  
 Dear Audience, 
It gives me great pleasure to be here tonight to inaugurate the branch of the National Bank of Kuwait 
(NBK)  in  Jeddah,  a  city  which  has  long  been  known  for  embracing  the  business  sector  due  to  its 
closeness to the sacred places and its unique location on the Red Sea. The commencement of NBK of 
its banking operations in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia marks further consolidation of cordial relations 
between the two brotherly countries (Saudi Arabia and Kuwait). This is one of the fruits of mutual Gulf 
work which the leaderships of the two countries are keen to enhance. 
Dear Brothers, 
The inauguration of NBK branch comes at a time when the Kingdom is witnessing robust economic 
performance.  In  2005,  the  Saudi  economy  grew  in  real  terms  by  6.5  percent;  the  private  sector 
registered a real growth of 6.6 percent. What is reassuring is that the private sector has become the 
main impetus of the Saudi economy. Its average growth rate for the past years stood at 5.3 percent. 
This is an incarnation of the wise measures adopted by the government under the leadership of the 
Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques to carry out more structural reforms (institutional and regulatory) 
which we have begun to feel their positive effects in all aspects of economy. 
It will be appropriate here to say a few words about the dynamic and crucial role played by the banking 
sector in the Kingdom, which is manifested in the substantial increase in the credit extended to the 
private  sector  which  grew by  29  percent  annually  during  2003  – 2005;  and  it  amounted  to  Rls  436 
billion at the end of 2005. As a result of the expansion in banking business, the assets of the banking 
sector increased by 14.4 percent annually during the past three years (2003 – 2005). At the end of the 
first quarter of 2006, they stood at Rls 797.4 billion, constituting about 70 percent of the Kingdom’s 
economy. Deposits with the banking sector rose by 13.7 percent annually during the past three years, 
and they amounted to Rls 521.5 billion at the end of the first quarter of 2006. 
The  positive  indicators  of  the  banking  sector  which  rest  on  the  robust  fundamentals  of  the  Saudi 
economy have prepared an appropriate environment for banks to adapt to successive, regional and 
international changes during the previous period. Banks operating in the Kingdom have been able to 
overcome the crises that hit other economies, and have been able to benefit from banks’ experiences 
and  modern  banking  technology.  This  is  reflected  in  the  diversity  of  banking  services  and  products 
offered in the Kingdom and their highly advanced level. 
Currently, 15 banks are operating in the Kingdom with a network of 1,251 branches at the end of the 
first quarter of 2006, including the branches of Gulf and foreign banks such as the Gulf International 
Bank, the Emirates Bank, BNP Paribas and Deutsche Bank which was opened last week. In addition, 
licenses were granted to several Gulf and foreign banks to open branches in the Kingdom. Also, the 
establishment of a Saudi bank with a paid-up capital of Rls 15 billion has been approved. Preparations 
are currently underway on finalizing the procedures of its establishment under the name of “Bank Al-
Enma”. 
On this occasion, I congratulate the NBK on the commencement of its operation in the Kingdom, and I 
wish the Bank and its staff good luck and success. 
BIS Review 70/2006 
 1
