Pierre Duguay: Productivity, terms of trade and economic adjustment 
Remarks by Mr Pierre Duguay, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Canadian Association 
for Business Economics, Kingston, Ontario, 28 August 2006. 
 Good evening. It is a pleasure and an honour to speak to you this evening, at the start of a conference 
that  has  a  long  and  distinguished  tradition  among  Canadian  business  economists.  I  hope  that  my 
remarks will spur some fruitful discussion, and I look forward to your reflections tomorrow on Canada's 
"low-productivity conundrum."  
The Bank of Canada is keenly interested in productivity -for a number of reasons. Productivity gains 
are  a  key  determinant  of  growth  in  potential  output  and,  hence,  of  Canada's  sustainable  pace  of 
non-inflationary economic expansion. Productivity also affects marginal costs, a key driver of prices. 
And  productivity  differences  across  sectors  and  across  countries  have  implications  for  the  real 
exchange rate.1  
More  generally,  increasing  productivity  is  fundamental  to  raising  living  standards  and  therefore 
deserves the attention of policy-makers, business people, and citizens. And it seems fair to say that 
productivity will become even more important as the Canadian population ages and as China, India, 
and other emerging-market countries increase their presence in the world economy. At the same time, 
it's important to realize that the expansion of trade with these countries provides new opportunities for 
increases in productivity and real income. 
I will touch on productivity in my remarks this evening, but I would like to focus on another issue that 
also has a direct bearing on our standard of living - namely, our terms of trade, that is, the prices we 
get for our exports relative to the prices we pay for our imports. When the prices of what we sell in 
world markets go up, or the prices of what we buy from the rest of the world go down, we are richer as 
a  country.  But  changes  in  our  terms  of  trade  mean  more  than  changes  in  real  income  and  wealth. 
They  also  have  significant  implications  for  the  allocation  of  resources  within  the  economy.  And  our 
economic welfare depends, in large measure, on how well and how swiftly we adjust to such changes 
in  economic  circumstances.  The  past  three  and  a  half  years  have  been  marked  by  a  significant 
improvement  in  Canada's  terms  of  trade.  This  has  also  been  a  period  of  particularly  intense 
adjustment. I want to talk about this adjustment process and the link to our standard of living.  
I will begin by drawing attention to the distinction that must be made, in an open economy, between 
real income and real output. I will then review the adjustment of the Canadian economy to the recent 
sharp rise in our terms of trade and suggest some general implications for productivity and potential 
output. After this, I'll say a few words about the Bank of Canada's new economic model, ToTEM, and 
conclude with some comments on the Bank's outlook for the Canadian economy. 
Productivity, terms of trade, and living standards 
There  is  no  doubt  that  advances  in  productivity  underpin  improvements  in  our  standard  of  living. 
However,  in  an  open  economy,  real  income  depends  not  only  on  the  volume  of  output,  but  on  the 
trading value of that output, that is, on the terms of trade. Moreover, domestic production is not the 
only  source  of  income,  and  not  all  income  from  domestic  production  accrues  to  residents.  The 
tendency  to  identify  standard  of  living  with  real  gross  domestic  product  (GDP)  per  capita  overlooks 
these important dimensions. 
In  my  view,  a  better  indicator  of  the  standard  of  living  would  be  gross  national  product  (GNP)  per 
capita  deflated  by  domestic  demand  prices.2  By  focusing  on  GNP  rather  than  GDP,  this  measure 
includes Canadians' earnings from abroad and excludes non-residents' income earned in Canada. By 
                                                      
1   See,  for  example,  R.  Lafrance  and  L.L.  Schembri.  1999-2000.  "The  Exchange  Rate,  Productivity,  and  the  Standard  of 
Living." Bank of Canada Review (Winter) 17-28. 
2   A similar view has been put forward by U. Kohli. 2005. "Switzerland's growth deficit: A real problem - but only half as bad as 
it looks." Available at http://www.snb.ch/d/download/referate/ref_050304_koh.pdf. 
BIS Review 77/2006 
 1
from  emerging-market  economies  have  resulted 
deflating GNP by the price index for domestic purchases rather than by the GDP deflator - the price of 
domestic output - it captures the terms-of-trade effect.  
It is instructive to compare this measure of real income with that of GDP per capita over the past 35 
years (Chart 1). While the two measures move broadly in sync for most of this extended period, they 
have diverged since 2003. Since then, and for the first time in 25 years, real income per capita has 
grown consistently faster than real output per capita. From 2002 to 2005, the average annual growth 
of real income per capita was 3.6 per cent, compared with growth in real output per capita of 1.7 per 
cent. This gain in real income reflects an improvement both in our terms of trade and in the balance on 
cross-border investment income.  
The substantial rise in real commodity prices since the beginning of 2003 and the reduced prices for 
imported  consumer  goods 
in  a  significant 
improvement in our terms of trade, and generated large gains in real income.3 These gains, which are 
reflected in higher prices for domestic output relative to those for domestic purchases, account for 1.6 
percentage points of the 3.6 per cent annual growth in real income since 2002.  
In addition, current-dollar GNP has grown more rapidly than current-dollar GDP since 1999, as foreign 
investment income accruing to Canadians has risen more than Canadian investment income accruing 
to non-residents. This factor has contributed 0.3 percentage points to average annual growth in real 
income since 2002. It reflects both the decline in Canada's net international indebtedness - the result 
of a stream of current account surpluses in recent years - and the effect of a stronger Canadian dollar 
on the servicing of U.S.-dollar-denominated debt.  
The measure of real income advocated here - GNP divided by the domestic demand deflator - is more 
comprehensive, more intuitive, and easier to compute than the related concept of "command GDP," 
which has attracted some attention lately. Command GDP takes terms-of-trade changes into account 
by deflating current-dollar exports by the import price index (Chart 2). It equals real income only when 
the trade balance and the current account balance are both at zero.4  
To be sure, real GDP has other drawbacks as a measure of living standards, and these drawbacks 
apply equally to the measure of real income derived from GNP. For example, both are measures of 
gross,  rather  than  net,  output  or  income  -  they  don't  make  allowance  for  depreciation  of  capital  or 
degradation of the environment. Furthermore, they ignore non-marketed services produced by public 
infrastructure, and make no allowance for the distribution of income among Canadians. But the point I 
want  to  highlight  this  evening  is  that  improved  terms  of  trade  and  a  strengthened  net  foreign 
investment  position  have  resulted  in  a  significant  -  and  easily  measured  -  increase  in  the  real  per 
capita income of Canadians in the aggregate, and thus in our standard of living.  
Of  course,  the  income  gains  generated  by  an  improvement  in  the  terms of  trade,  particularly  those 
associated with swings in commodity prices, may not be as durable as those generated by advances 
in  productivity.  But  the  income  gains  associated  with  declining  import  prices  that  come  from  the 
productivity gains achieved by our trading partners are no different than those generated by increases 
in domestic productivity. So, while accounting for the open-economy dimension doesn't diminish the 
importance of increased productivity to our standard of living, it does underscore that living standards 
are affected by a number of factors in addition to productivity gains, and that living standards benefit 
from increases in both domestic and foreign productivity.  
I  should  add that  these  inadequacies of  real  GDP  as  a  measure  of  real  income  do  not  in  any  way 
diminish its relevance to monetary policy. From a monetary policy perspective, real income matters 
primarily as a driver of domestic demand. But when it comes to assessing the pressures of aggregate 
demand on capacity - a key component of inflation dynamics - it is real GDP that matters.  
I would now like to turn to how Canada has fared in adjusting to the recent terms-of-trade shock. 
                                                      
3   The trend decline in the relative price of imported machinery and equipment has also contributed to the rise in Canada's 
terms of trade, but this is not a recent development. 
4   Let gy, gq, and gz be growth in real income, real GDP, and command GDP, respectively; gPd, gPx, and gPm, the rates of 
increase in domestic demand, export, and import prices; X and M, nominal exports and imports, and dN, the change in net 
foreign investment income (N = GNP - GDP).  
It 
(GDP/GNP)  + 
                                     = gz (GDP/GNP) + (gPm - gPd) (X - M)/GNP + dN/GNP, since gz = gq + (gPx - gPm) X/GDP.  
(M/GNP)  +  dN/GNP 
that  gy  =  gq 
(X/GNP) 
-  gPd) 
-  gPd) 
follows 
(gPm 
(gPx 
   2 
 BIS Review 77/2006
Adjusting to changes in the terms of trade 
As I noted, the recent rise in Canada's terms of trade stems from two main sources: reduced prices for 
imports, especially from emerging-market countries such as China and India, and substantially higher 
prices for many of our commodity exports due to strong global demand, particularly from Asia. This 
improvement in our terms of trade may last for some time, if prices of commodities in futures markets 
are any indication. It has increased real wealth and income, and thus fuelled increased spending by 
consumers, governments, and businesses. 
A further outcome has been a rapid and substantial appreciation of the Canadian dollar against the 
U.S. dollar and, indeed, against many other currencies. The stronger Canadian dollar has tempered 
the pressure of increased domestic spending on aggregate demand by dampening net exports, thus 
helping  to  keep  overall  supply  and  demand  in  balance,  and  inflation  pressures  in  check.  At  the 
aggregate level, then, the flexible exchange rate has been playing its classic role of "shock absorber." 
However, from a sectoral perspective, the sharp rise in the exchange rate has signalled the need for 
prompt adjustment. It has intensified the pressure on many manufacturers, who were already facing 
stiff  competition  from  producers  in emerging-market countries.  It  has  reduced their  export revenues 
and lowered the prices of competing imports, even as the prices of many raw material inputs were 
rising.  
Large, sustained changes in the terms of trade - whether in a favourable or unfavourable direction - 
can  cause  stress  and  dislocation.  They  can  lead  to  significant  shifts  in  production  and  employment 
among sectors of the economy, resulting in a loss of jobs in some industries and growth in others. In 
macroeconomic terms, terms-of-trade shocks trigger a shift of resources to activities generating higher 
income.  From  that  perspective,  postponing  adjustment  would  mean  forgoing  the  potential  income 
gains that the reallocation of resources can bring. Adjustment is always difficult - but it is vital to our 
economic prosperity.  
Some observers regard the adjustment to the recent rise in Canada's terms of trade as a form of the 
"Dutch disease."5 But from a macroeconomic point of view, the reallocation of resources is a sign of 
health,  not  disease  -  it  is  the  sign  of  a  vibrant,  dynamic  economy  adjusting  to  significant  shifts  in 
demand by putting resources to their most profitable use.6 To make the most of our opportunities as a 
trading nation, we need to adjust as quickly and effectively as possible to changes in global economic 
circumstances.  
There  are  indications  that  Canadians  are  doing  just  that.  With  profitability  especially  strong  in  the 
energy  and  mining  sectors,  as  well  as  in  most  sectors  with  low  exposure  to  international  trade, 
businesses  and  investors  have  been  quick  to  seize  the  new  opportunities  presented  by  the 
improvement in our terms of trade. We've seen strong growth in capital spending and employment in 
these sectors. A surge in investment in machinery and equipment across the economy suggests that 
firms  are  taking  advantage  of  the  stronger  exchange  rate  (which  reduces  the  cost  of  imported 
machinery  and  equipment)  to  improve  their  productivity  and  enhance  their  competitiveness.  Many 
manufacturers  are  taking  advantage  of  lower-cost  imported  inputs  or  shifting  their  focus  to  higher-
value-added production.  
Labour  is  also  adjusting  to  the  terms-of-trade  shock.  The  evidence  shows  that  labour  markets  in 
Canada  are  relatively  flexible,  which  helps  the  country  adjust  to  labour-demand  shocks.7  While 
employment has decreased markedly in manufacturing since 2004, it has grown strongly in non-farm 
primary  industries,  in  construction,  and  in  other  sectors  that  are  driven  by  the  strength  in  domestic 
demand  -  for  example,  finance,  insurance,  real  estate,  and  health  and  education  services.  These 
developments have involved a sharp increase in net migration of labour to Alberta from other parts of 
the  country.  Employment  growth  in  Ontario  and  Quebec  has  moderated  a  bit,  but  still  averaged  a 
relatively robust 1.3 per cent from July 2004 to July 2006.  
                                                      
5   The Economist coined this term in 1977 to describe the adverse effect that large-scale natural gas development in the North 
Sea had on Dutch manufacturing through a real appreciation of the guilder. 
6   An excellent general equilibrium analysis of booms in the resource sector can be found in W.M. Corden. 1994. "Booming 
Sector and Dutch Disease Economics: Survey and Consolidation." Oxford Economic Papers, New Series 36(3): 359-80. 
7   T.  Bayoumi,  B.  Sutton,  and  A.  Swiston.  2006.  "Shocking  Aspects  of  Canadian  Labor  Markets."  IMF  Working  Paper  No. 
06/83. 
BIS Review 77/2006 
 3
Overall,  the  Canadian  economy  has  been  adjusting  rather  well,  though  not  without  pain,  to  a 
significant  change  in  economic  circumstances.  However,  the  adjustment  is  not  over  yet,  and 
challenges remain. There are still barriers to labour mobility and to interprovincial trade, and pressures 
are building on housing markets and infrastructure in regions of strong growth - most notably, Alberta. 
These are reflected in intensified labour shortages and differentiated pressures on wages and housing 
prices.  Because  governments  receive  a  significant  share  of  increased  commodity-related  revenues, 
they have the power to alleviate, but also to magnify, some of these pressures. 
Let me now turn to the implications of a terms-of-trade shock for labour productivity and for potential 
output. 
Implications for labour productivity and potential output 
A  change  in  the  terms  of  trade  can  affect  labour  productivity  through  two  main  "channels":  the 
exchange rate and the reallocation of resources across sectors. 
The currency appreciation associated with an improvement in the terms of trade lowers the relative 
price  of  imported  physical  capital,  particularly  machinery  and  equipment,  and  encourages  the 
substitution of capital for labour, which should contribute to higher labour productivity over time, other 
things being equal.  
While  the  effect  of  the  reallocation  of  resources  on  real  income  is  always  positive,  its  effect  on 
aggregate  labour  productivity  is  less  clear.  For  one  thing,  the  rise  in  commodity  prices  can  be 
expected to lower productivity in the primary sector, as higher-cost - that is, less-productive - activities 
become  more  profitable.  On  the  other  hand,  the  reallocation  of  capital  and  labour  away  from  the 
production of manufactured goods toward the production of commodities should raise overall labour 
productivity, since labour productivity levels are higher in the more capital-intensive primary sector. As 
for  the  shift  from  tradables  to  non-tradables,  no  generalization  is  possible,  since  the  non-tradable, 
services sector is very broad and very diverse, with some industries (like finance and wholesale trade) 
showing high productivity levels and others (like retail trade) showing much lower productivity levels. 
At any rate, these are long-run effects. 
In  the  short  run,  the  adjustment  process  can  be  expected  to  exert  a  transitory  drag  on  productivity 
growth. For instance, workers with skills tied to a particular industry may require retraining in order to 
become fully functional in areas of the economy that are expanding. Once in new jobs, it may take 
them  some  time  to  develop  the  firm-specific  skills  often  associated  with  productivity  gains. 
Furthermore, investment in new machinery and equipment may involve new technology, which may 
necessitate retraining or reorganization of the workplace before the full productivity gains materialize.8  
Now, to the extent that a terms-of-trade shock affects productivity growth, there will also be an effect 
on the growth of potential output. If I were to generalize about the likely effects of the current terms-of-
trade  shock  on  potential  output  through  productivity,  I  would  say  that  we  would  expect  to  see  an 
increase in the long run, but a possible dampening in the short run, owing to transitional dislocation 
costs. The gain over time would come primarily from the "capital deepening" that results from changes 
in the relative costs of labour and capital and from increased exploration in the primary sector. While 
closed mines can be re-opened fairly quickly, regulatory requirements and the time it takes to build 
infrastructure  mean  that  it  can  take  more  than  a  decade  for  a  new  mine  to  go  from  exploration  to 
production. Thus, the rise in potential output from this latter source will occur slowly.  
Modeling changes in the terms of trade 
The Bank's interest in understanding how terms-of-trade movements play out in the economy is not 
new. For decades, the Bank of Canada has monitored the effect of swings in the terms of trade on real 
income  and  on  the  external  value  of  the  Canadian  dollar.  Over  the  years,  we  have  built  models  to 
study  how  changes  in  the  terms  of  trade  and  the  subsequent  economic  adjustment  affect  the 
                                                      
8   See, for example, D. Leung. 2004. "The Effect of Adjustment Costs and Organizational Change on Productivity in Canada: 
Evidence from Aggregate Data." Bank of Canada Working Paper No. 2004-1. 
4 
 BIS Review 77/2006
economy.9  But  it  is  only  recently  that  Bank  staff  have  formally  incorporated  a  separate  commodity 
sector into our main projection model, ToTEM. 
In  contrast  to  the  Bank's  previous  model,  which  treated  economic  activity  as  a  single  aggregate,10 
ToTEM - which stands for Terms of Trade Economic Model - makes explicit the distinction between 
raw  materials  or  commodities,  and  manufactured  goods.  This  distinction  is  crucial  for  two  reasons. 
First, commodity production represents a sizable proportion, some 11 per cent, of Canadian GDP,11 
and commodity exports account for nearly 45 per cent of the dollar value of our total exports. Second, 
the commodity sector and the manufacturing sector are characterized by different technologies and 
different competitive structures, which have important implications for the behaviour of inflation. For 
instance,  the  production  of  commodities  is  more  capital-intensive  and  more  price-inelastic  than  the 
production  of  other  goods  and  services.  Moreover,  commodity  prices  are  set  in  world  markets, 
whereas manufactured goods are subject to product differentiation and to a greater degree of price-
setting influence by firms. 
In  ToTEM,  the  key  driver  of  consumer  prices  is  the  marginal  cost  of  producing  consumer  goods. 
Consumer goods are produced using four inputs: labour, capital, an imported intermediate good, and 
commodities.  In  this  framework,  the  marginal  cost  can  be  expressed  as  a  function  of  labour  costs 
(including the costs of hiring and training), as well as the price of imported intermediate goods, the 
price of commodity inputs, the price of investment goods, and the rate of capacity utilization.  
ToTEM is a clear improvement over the previous model in its ability to capture the response of the 
Canadian economy and the Canadian dollar to changes in commodity prices. That's all I'll say about 
ToTEM  for  now.  But  this  fall  we'll  be  publishing  an  article  in  the  Bank  of  Canada  Review  that  will 
discuss this new model in some detail.  
Let me now turn to the outlook for the Canadian economy as we at the Bank see it. 
Outlook for the Canadian economy  
The  Canadian  economy  continues  to  adjust  to  major  global  developments.  In  the  Monetary  Policy 
Report Update, released last month, the Canadian economy was judged to be operating just above its 
production  capacity  and  was  projected  to  return  to  capacity  by  the  end  of  2008,  reflecting  some 
anticipated moderation in U.S. economic growth and the effects of past increases in interest rates and 
the exchange rate in Canada. 
The level of the policy interest rate was judged, at the time, to be consistent with achieving the inflation 
target  over  the  medium  term.  CPI  inflation  was  expected  to  return  to  our  2  per  cent  target  in  the 
second half of 2007. Core inflation was projected to remain at 2 per cent throughout the projection 
period. 
In our Update, we said that the upside risk to Canadian output and inflation related primarily to the 
momentum of household spending and housing prices. It was judged to be roughly offset by the risk 
that the U.S. economy would grow more slowly than expected, thus reducing demand for Canadian 
exports. 
Information received since July suggests that real GDP growth for the second quarter may have been 
slightly weaker than anticipated in our Update. But the underlying trends in the economy appear to be 
in line with the broad thrust of our July projection in terms of both output and inflation. 
Finally, with the recently released July CPI now showing the effect of the 1 per cent reduction in the 
GST, I would like to remind you that, in setting monetary policy, the Bank's approach continues to be 
to look through any direct impact on inflation from changes in indirect taxes. In this context, core CPI, 
                                                      
9   See,  for  example,  T.  Macklem.  1993.  "Terms  of  Trade  Disturbances  and  Fiscal  Policy  in  a  Small  Open  Economy."  The 
Economic  Journal  103:  916-36;  also  D.  Longworth.  1980.  "The  terms  of  trade:  The  Canadian  experience  in  the  1970s." 
Bank of Canada Review (January) 13-25. 
10   See  S.  Poloz,  D.  Rose,  and  R.  Tetlow.  1994.  "The  Bank  of  Canada's  New  Quarterly  Projection  Model  (QPM):  An 
Introduction." Bank of Canada Review (Autumn) 23-38. 
11   Value added in agriculture, fishing and trapping, mining, and a number of resource-based manufacturing industries (wood 
products,  paper  and  allied  products,  primary  metal  products,  petroleum  and  coal  products,  and  chemical  products)  as  a 
percentage of GDP, in 1997 constant dollars. 
BIS Review 77/2006 
 5
which excludes the effect of changes in indirect taxes, is an important indicator of the underlying trend 
of inflation. 
Conclusion 
Allow me to conclude. As a trading nation in a global economy, Canada will continue to experience 
changes in its terms of trade. It is important to understand the effects of such changes, given their 
implications for both aggregate supply and aggregate demand, and for our standard of living. 
Movements  in  our  terms  of  trade  present  important  challenges  and  opportunities  for  Canadian 
businesses, individuals, and governments. Although adjusting to economic change is never easy, how 
we  respond  to  change  has  a  real  impact  on  our  economic  well-being.  The  speed  with  which  we 
respond,  the  ways  in  which  we  deal  with  the  challenges,  and  the  extent  to  which  we  seize  the 
opportunities, are all profoundly important. 
Over the past few years, Canada has responded rather well to a dramatic change in its terms of trade. 
Sound monetary policy has helped in two ways. Low and stable inflation has provided an important 
element of certainty in a time of rapid change. And monetary policy has helped to facilitate adjustment 
by supporting aggregate demand to keep the economy near its full potential and inflation on target. A 
strong world economy has also helped, making the adjustment process somewhat easier. But much of 
the success of this far-reaching adjustment is also a testament to the flexibility of Canadian workers 
and businesses. 
 
 6 
 BIS Review 77/2006
 BIS Review 77/2006 
 7
