Stefan Ingves: The inflation target and monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Stefan  Ingves,  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  to  the  Swedish  Economics 
Association, Stockholm, 4 April 2006. 
 Introduction 
Discussing  monetary  policy  at  the  Swedish  Economics  Association  has  become  something  of  a 
tradition. I very much appreciate being invited to initiate this evening’s debate and I hope you will find 
the discussion stimulating. 
I would like to take the opportunity to discuss the general foundations for monetary policy. I will mainly 
focus on how a policy of inflation targeting can and should take into account developments in the real 
economy. 
From time to time it is claimed in the general debate that the Riksbank's inflation target needs to be 
supplemented  by  various  targets  for  the  real  economy,  such  as  capacity  utilisation  or  employment. 
Those who advocate this appear to argue that our inflation target means that the Riksbank focuses 
solely on price developments. This was true to some extent when the inflation target was still a fairly 
new concept. The primary objective of monetary policy was then to establish confidence that inflation 
would really be kept at a low level. 
The  fact  that  there  is  a  discussion  of  these  issues  now,  may  be  because  we  have  not  always 
discussed the various considerations we make as directly as we do now. There has been a gradual 
development  in  our  reasoning  on  monetary  policy.  Monetary  policy  is  no  exact  science  and  the 
Riksbank is a learning organisation. Our way of thinking has developed both as we and other central 
banks have gained greater experience and as further progress is made in economic research. From 
this perspective it is also reasonable to make a fresh start, so to speak, from time to time and to report 
in a collected manner on how we Executive Board members reason when formulating monetary policy. 
I would like to emphasise that this involves describing the principles for how we currently reason. It is 
not a question of a fundamentally new method of conducting monetary policy. 
My main message is: 
•  The inflation-targeting policy is conducted with consideration to the real economy.  
•  There has been a gradual development in our reasoning on monetary policy.  
•  We have abandoned the policy rule that was based on the assumption of a constant repo rate 
in our forecasts.  
•  The forecasts of inflation are now based on an assumption that the repo rate will follow market 
expectations.  
•  Large fluctuations in asset prices entail risks that we must take into account. 
Inflation target and consideration of the real economy 
The monetary policy objective laid down by Parliament is to maintain price stability. The Riksbank has 
chosen to define the target as keeping the annual rate of increase in the consumer price index, CPI, at 
2  per  cent,  but  it  does  not  mean  that  the  development  of  this  index  is  the  only  factor  on  which 
monetary policy is based. 
Various  measures  of  underlying  inflation  are  often  used  to  justify  the  system  used.  What  these 
measures have in common is that they use the CPI but remove various price components that have 
historically shown  substantial  fluctuations.  One such measure,  UND1X,  has been  given  a particular 
status.  In  this  measure  the  effects  of  changes  in  indirect  taxes  and  subsidies  as  well  as  mortgage 
interest expenditure have been excluded. In the long term, the difference between the increase in the 
CPI and the increase in UND1X is slight. However, in the short term, inflation develops slightly more 
evenly  according  to  UND1X  than  according  to  CPI  as  a  whole.  The  bases  for  the  monetary  policy 
decisions are therefore often easier to explain when the inflation forecasts follow UND1X than when 
they follow CPI. 
BIS Review 29/2006 
 1
The fact that the objective of monetary policy has been given as low, stable inflation is because in the 
long  term,  this  is  the  only  factor  of  the  economy  that  monetary  policy  can  influence.  Long-term 
developments in growth and employment are not affected by changes in the interest rate. They are 
determined by factors such as productivity and the supply of labour and capital, as well as the way the 
labour  market  –  and  the  economy  as  a  whole  –  functions.  Monetary  policy’s  most  important 
contribution is to act to ensure that the macroeconomic environment remains as stable and predictable 
as possible. 
At  the  same  time,  monetary  policy  has  some  effect  on  short-term  fluctuations  in  production  and 
employment. It is usually considered desirable to have not only stable prices, but also as stable an 
economy as possible. One important question is therefore how monetary policy can contribute to this. 
The  preliminary  work  to  the  new  Sveriges  Riksbank  Act  considered  it  natural  that  monetary  policy 
could not be formulated merely in relation to price stability. The working group that produced the new 
act  considered  that  the  Riksbank  should,  without  neglecting  the  long-term  price  stability  objective, 
support  the  economic  policy  objectives  of  sustainable  growth  and  high  employment.  However,  the 
group  also  saw  this  as  a  natural  consequence  of  the  Riksbank  being  a  public  authority  under  the 
Riksdag. It was thus unnecessary to confirm by law any objectives other than price stability. The group 
also considered that it would be inappropriate to have several statutory objectives, as monetary policy 
is a blunt instrument and cannot affect, for instance, how growth and employment develop in the long 
term. In other words, the question has never been whether monetary policy should consider the real 
economy, but rather how this can best be done without neglecting the price stability objective. 
In practice, monetary policy takes the real economy into account in that we do not aim to bring inflation 
back on target as quickly as possible in every situation. When there is a deviation from target – which 
happens most of the time – our ambition is normally to return inflation to target within a time period of 
two years. One reason why we look ahead in this way is that monetary policy’s effects are exerted with 
a time lag. But the two-year horizon is also motivated by considerations to developments in the real 
economy. This creates some scope for trade offs in the inflation-targeting policy. Let me explain. 
If we were only concerned with inflation, we would always want to bring inflation back on target as 
quickly as possible. On many occasions it would be possible to attain the target sooner than within two 
years. But we would then need to change the interest rate in larger stages and more often. This type 
of policy would risk leading to unwanted fluctuations in the real economy. 
This applies in particular to the situations where inflation has deviated from target as a result of supply 
shocks. These could be, for instance, sudden increases in companies’ production costs due to soaring 
commodity prices and/or energy prices. The result could then be that inflation would rise above the 
target, while economic activity would be weak. The reverse can also occur - a fall in production costs 
could  lead  to  inflation  being  lower  than  the  target,  while  capacity  utilisation  was  higher  than  is 
sustainable  in  the  long  term.  If  monetary  policy  were  to  aim  at  bringing  inflation  back  on  target  as 
quickly as possible in these situations, it would further reinforce the fluctuations in the real economy. 
When economic developments are instead mainly driven by changes in demand, the conflict between 
the price stability target and the ambition to subdue fluctuations in the economy is not as clear. If, for 
instance,  demand  falls,  the  result  will  normally  be  that  inflationary  pressures  also  decline.  An 
expansionary monetary policy can in this situation contribute to stabilising both inflation and activity in 
the  real  economy.  There  may  then  be  justification  for  aiming  to  attain  the  inflation  target  within  a 
shorter period than two years. 
Of course, in practice it is not always easy to distinguish what shocks the economy has suffered and 
with an active monetary policy there is always a risk to reinforce, rather than subdue, fluctuations in 
the  real  economy.  The  fact  that  it  also  takes  time  before  the  full  effects  of  monetary  policy  have 
become visible and that it is uncertain how much scope there is for monetary policy stimulation also 
makes it more difficult to implement the policy. One therefore should not expect monetary policy to be 
able to fine tune economic activity to any great extent. 
This description of what monetary policy can and cannot achieve is currently an accepted view that is 
well  documented  in  the  research  field  of  flexible  inflation  targeting1.  However,  it  is  not  possible  to 
justify theoretically that the central bank should aim to bring inflation on target within a particular set 
                                                      
1   See,  for  instance,  Svensson,  Lars  E.O.  (2003),  “Monetary  Policy  and  Real  Stabilization”,  NBER  Working  Papers  9486, 
National Bureau of Economic Research. 
2 
 BIS Review 29/2006
time period.  But then the usual theoretical models for inflation targeting do not take into account the 
credibility aspects. If the economic agents are very uncertain as to how the central bank intends to 
manage  target  deviations,  this  may  in  the  long  run  reduce  confidence  in  the  inflation  target.  It  is 
therefore important to also include these aspects in practical considerations. One means of ensuring 
confidence in the inflation target is for the central bank to specify in advance what length of deviations 
from target can normally be accepted. This is how the two-year horizon should be regarded; it sets this 
type  of  limit  and  states  how  much  consideration  we  can  normally  give  to  developments  in  the  real 
economy. 
Flexibility in monetary policy should certainly not be allowed to reduce confidence in the inflation target 
in the long term, and this is why the Riksbank has chosen, in normal circumstances, to bring inflation 
back on target within a two-year horizon. 
At  the  same  time,  it  is  not  feasible  to  set  restrictions  on  monetary  policy  that  will  always  be  one 
hundred  per  cent  binding,  regardless  of  the  economic  situation.  There  may  –  exceptionally  –  be 
situations where the consequences of bringing inflation back on target within two years may lead to 
unacceptable fluctuations in economic activity. When the Riksbank judges that such a situation has 
arisen, it should make this quite clear. It should be specified in Inflation Reports and in connection with 
monetary policy decisions that we expect inflation to deviate from target for a longer period than two 
years, why this is the case and when we expect the target to be attained. 
Increased clarity on the principles guiding monetary policy 
These principles as to how monetary policy is formulated are in many ways an accepted reasoning for 
those who have followed the monetary policy discussion in Sweden and in other countries that apply 
inflation  targeting.  However,  there  have  also,  as  I  mentioned  earlier,  been  some  changes  in  recent 
years that are worth highlighting. 
As it is a question of a gradual development of our work, the extent of what can be regarded as new 
elements  depends  on  how  far  back  one  looks.  A  point  of  comparison  that  feels  natural  is  the 
clarification of the Riksbank’s monetary policy strategy published in 19992.  
The difference between then and now is that the Riksbank can now go a little further with regard to 
how  we  communicate  the  consideration  that  monetary  policy  gives  to  the  real  economy.  I  do  not 
consider it particularly strange that there have been changes on this point. The possibility to formulate 
monetary policy based not only on inflation prospects but also on how production and employment will 
develop has come about because the inflation target is today firmly anchored in the economy. This 
confidence is still – looking back in a long-term historical perspective – a relatively new element of the 
Swedish economy. 
The fact that shocks have been so common in the supply side of the economy in recent years has also 
made it more important to clarify our view of how monetary policy should deal with the trade offs that 
then arise. Events have included price effects from mad cows and shocks on energy markets as well 
as  unexpected  shifts  in  productivity.  I  do  not  wish  to  comment  on  whether  supply  shocks  have  in 
general been more frequent in recent years, but developments have nevertheless made it clear that 
changes  in  inflation  that  are  not  primarily  due  to  traditional  cyclical  fluctuations  are  something  that 
monetary policy has to face regularly, not merely in exceptional cases. 
The clarification from 1999 can be regarded as one step on the path towards more nuanced inflation 
targeting.  At  that  time  there  was  a  fairly  indirect  discussion  of  the  need  to  consider  real  economic 
developments. The argument was that monetary policy did not need to try to parry temporary price 
shocks. The fact that the Riksbank worked with a two-year perspective was then justified by the fact 
that monetary policy’s impact comes after a time lag. 
In the description of our method of working I have just given, I emphasised that monetary policy in the 
short  run  often  concerns  trade  offs  between  stabilising  inflation  and  the  real  economy.  As  I  have 
already  noted,  the  fact  that  the  Riksbank  should  take  into  consideration  how  economic  activity 
develops receives support in the preliminary work to the new Sveriges Riksbank Act. 
                                                      
2   See the memorandum “The Riksbank’s inflation target – clarification and evaluation”, 4 February 1999, registration number 
1999-00351  DIR,  or  Heikensten,  L.  (1999),  “The  Riksbank’s  inflation  target  –  clarification  and  evaluation”,  Sveriges 
Riksbank Quarterly Review, 1999:1. 
BIS Review 29/2006 
 3
Communication regarding monetary policy 
As  monetary  policy  is  to  a  large  degree  concerned  with  making  decisions  under  uncertainty,  it  is 
important  that  we  are  always  as  open  and  clear  as  possible  regarding  the  basis  for  interest  rate 
decisions.  The  intentions  behind  monetary  policy  must  be  understood  and  accepted  in  order  to 
preserve the legitimacy of our activities and our actions. A well-balanced application of the inflation-
targeting policy makes it particularly important to clearly explain the motives behind monetary policy 
decisions.  There  should  be  no  grounds  for  suspicion  that  the  considerations  taken  are  used  in  an 
arbitrary manner. 
The  Riksbank  communicates  its  monetary  policy  in  a  number  of  different  ways,  including  press 
releases  and  minutes  of  monetary  policy  meetings,  press  conferences  and  not  least  our  Inflation 
Reports. The Inflation Reports contain our analyses of the deviations from the inflation target that have 
occurred, and forecasts for when inflation is expected to be back on target, given a particular monetary 
policy  stance.  This  may  sound  obvious,  but  let  us  play  with  the  idea  that  we  didn’t  publish  our 
forecasts,  as  not  all  central  banks  do  so.  Then  it  would  not  have  been  possible  to  evaluate  and 
discuss our forecasts or the basis for our decisions. In other words, openness is a necessary condition 
for a worthwhile debate on monetary policy. 
Until fairly recently, the Riksbank’s inflation forecasts were based on an assumption that the repo rate 
would remain constant throughout the forecast period. The inflation forecasts are now instead based 
on an assumption that the repo rate will develop in line with expectations in the financial markets3. The 
interest rate assumptions on which the forecasts are based thus become more realistic. It has also 
made it easier for us to relate to the entire interest rate path when communicating monetary policy 
rather  than  keeping  to  the  most  recent  decision.  This  is  a  step  towards  greater  openness.  It  is 
important  that  the  Riksbank  should  say  how  inflation  should  be  brought  back  to  the  target.  In  the 
debate on monetary policy it is good to have greater focus on interest rate policy in the slightly longer 
term  rather  than  on  the  current  interest  rate  decision.  This  leads  to  a  better  discussion  of  the 
considerations with which monetary policy is normally faced. 
The assumption that the repo rate will develop in line with expectations in the financial markets should 
not be interpreted as a stance with regard to which interest rate path the Riksbank considers to be 
most desirable, just as the assumption of a constant repo rate was no reflection of this. If the forecasts 
of inflation two years ahead are on target, it means that the interest rate path expected by the market 
could be a desirable path for the repo rate. However, we must also evaluate the course for inflation 
and the real economy that the interest rate path is expected to entail. The monetary policy decisions 
and how we regard market expectations are based on a total assessment of these courses of events. 
Personally, I think the time is right to go one step further and publish our own interest rate path. My 
experiences of increased transparency have been only positive. 
As  we  have  gone  over  to  the  new  interest  rate  assumption,  it  has  been  a  natural  progression  to 
abandon  the  simple  policy  rule  that  was  previously  used  to  explain  monetary  policy  and  relied  on 
forecasts  based  on  a  constant  repo  rate.  One  purpose  of  the  rule  was  that  it  would  be  simple  to 
understand.  However,  it  often  did  not  provide  a  sufficiently  good  description  of  the  monetary  policy 
considerations. For instance, the policy rule did not give any guidance as to how the Riksbank views 
future interest rate developments. The gradual shift in the policy towards – within the framework of the 
price stability objective – also taking into account fluctuations in economic activity meant that this focus 
on inflation at a particular point in time could be overinterpreted. It is the entire path for inflation and 
the real economy that is actually important in the monetary policy decisions, not merely the levels at 
the two-year horizon. Nor is it possible to ignore what happens beyond this horizon. The world will not 
come to an end in two years’ time. 
Interest rate and inflation forecasts can be interpreted in the same way as before to the extent that if 
the forecast for inflation two years ahead is above the target, it will normally mean that the repo rate 
will  need  to  be  adjusted at  a  faster  rate  than  market  expectations  assume.  The  reverse  applies,  of 
                                                      
3   More exactly, it is assumed that the repo rate will follow implied forward rates, which can be gathered from the yield curve 
for debt securities with different durations. Implied forward rates do not exactly reflect market expectations of future repo 
rates  as  a  result  of  the  existence  of  term  premiums  and  other  forms  of  risk  adjustment,  but  they  provide  a  good 
approximation. For a more detailed description, see the box “Longer-term forecasts under the assumption that the repo rate 
evolves  in  line  with  implied  forward  rates”  in  Inflation  Report  2005:2  and  Alsterlind,  J.  &  Dillén,  H.,  “Monetary  policy 
expectations and forward premia”, Sveriges Riksbank Economic Review, 2005:2. 
4 
 BIS Review 29/2006
course,  if  the  forecast  indicates  that  inflation  is  below  target.  However,  the  exact  rate  at  which  the 
interest rate should be adjusted will be affected by the entire inflation path and by developments in the 
real economy. 
Let me tie in this reasoning to the situation at our most recent monetary policy meeting. The fact that 
inflation was low and was expected to remain low over a fairly long period of time could have indicated 
slightly more expansionary monetary policy than the market was expecting, even though inflation was 
expected to be close to target two years ahead. However, at the same time we needed to consider 
that growth in the economy was expected to be robust and that a continued expansionary monetary 
policy  risked  leading  to  overheating  in  the  economy.  The  overall  assessment  was  that  the  best 
alternative was to raise the interest rate. 
Some current monetary policy issues 
I now intend to take up a couple of current issues that have recently arisen in the debate on monetary 
policy. The purpose of this is to discuss how they can be regarded in the light of the general reasoning 
on monetary policy that I have just explained. 
Problems in determining the level of capacity utilisation 
The first issue concerns how monetary policy’s endeavour to contribute to stable real economic growth 
can be explained in more concrete terms. Some advocate that the Riksbank should be clearer than it 
is now with regard to what is considered a desirable path for the real economy over the coming years.  
I wish to point out here that the discussion on real economy considerations taken in monetary policy 
does not mean that we should supplement our price stability target with a growth target. This may be a 
semantic issue for some people; what is the difference between consideration and a target. To speak 
in general terms of a target for the real economy would send the wrong signals. The Riksbank has a 
statutory objective for monetary policy and that is to maintain price stability. In addition, we attempt to 
set the interest rate in such a way that monetary policy – given the price stability target – contributes to 
subduing short-term fluctuations in the real economy. There is no reason to change this. 
It is a precarious task to try to quantify what level can be considered normal for capacity utilisation. 
Estimates of the output gap - that is, the difference between actual output and equilibrium output – can 
vary  considerably  depending  on  what  method  is  used.  This  means,  for  instance,  that  attempts  to 
estimate the amount of spare resources on the basis of an analysis of the labour market can provide 
an  entirely  different  picture  than  when  only  GDP  data  are  used  to  calculate  the  output  gap. 
Developments  in  recent  years,  with  strong  production  growth  and  falling  or  only  slightly  rising 
employment are examples of how contradictory the signals can be. 
One  weakness  in  this  context  is  that  production  data  is  revised  regularly.  This  makes  it  particularly 
difficult to estimate the amount of spare capacity there is in the economy at present. The picture of 
how  high capacity  utilisation was  at a particular  point  in  time can  look different  when new  data are 
received  and  earlier  outcomes  are  revised.  One  example  worth  mentioning  is  that  the  first  data 
regarding GDP growth in Sweden during the first quarter of 2005 was 1.4 per cent, while the most 
recent calculations indicate that the figure was actually 2.1 per cent. 
The fact that there is considerable uncertainty regarding such a central variable as capacity utilisation 
is,  of  course,  a  problem.  Everything  would  be  much  simpler  if  it  were  possible  to  quantify  capacity 
utilisation in the same way as inflation can be measured. However, as it is not possible, I believe it is 
wise not to pretend to have this knowledge. For similar reasons, precise money supply measures have 
also been abandoned. 
Our forecasts of growth and inflation must nevertheless essentially be based on a view of the position 
of the economy with regard to a situation with normal capacity utilisation. In practice, a large amount of 
information from different sources must be weighed together to make an overall assessment. We can 
then use our forecasts and what we believe we know of monetary policy's effects in the short term and 
in the slightly longer term and then mark out the approximate path. 
BIS Review 29/2006 
 5
Connections to the credit expansion and house prices 
Much  of  what  I  have  described  so  far  is  largely  an  accepted  view  of  how  monetary  policy  with  an 
inflation target should be conducted, although there may of course be differing opinions as to how the 
policy  should  be  formulated  in  more  detail.  I  intend  to  conclude  by  touching  on  a  slightly  more 
controversial subject; namely the interaction between asset prices and a stable real economy with low 
inflation. 
Credit volumes and asset prices are studied in the regular monetary policy analysis, as they affect, 
and  are  affected  by,  fluctuations  in  inflation  and  economic  activity.  Higher  asset  prices  lead,  for 
instance, to positive wealth effects, which in turn affect households’ choice between consumption and 
saving, and thereby total demand in the economy and inflation. 
On  top  of  this,  it  is  complicated  to  capture  the  risks  in  the  usual  forecast  work  as  a  result  of  large 
fluctuations in asset prices. For instance, it is difficult to quantify the risks linked to an unusually rapid 
increase in house prices and indebtedness over a long period of time. These risks may actually be 
beyond the normal forecast horizon, but nevertheless be so serious, if they were realised, that there is 
justification for taking them into account in some way. 
In recent years, house prices and household borrowing have increased rapidly, partly as a result of 
low interest rates. We have stated that we feel some concern that this development may go too far, 
with a risk of severe adjustments in the future. One risk is that a sharp brake in house prices could 
lead to households perceiving their debt burden to be too high, and that they would therefore quickly 
increase their saving. This could lead to a severe decline in demand in the economy and in inflation. In 
the considerations behind our decision on the interest rate at the beginning of the year, we considered 
these  risks  to  be  one  reason  for  not  postponing  an  increase  by  a  few  months  -  which  I  otherwise 
believe would have been fully possible given the forecasts we otherwise make and the precision of 
these forecasts. 
I would not like to claim that this is necessarily always the optimum means of managing this type of 
risk in monetary policy considerations. The relationship between credit volume and asset prices on the 
one hand and monetary policy and the real economy on the other hand has not yet been sufficiently 
mapped to be able to draw any clear policy conclusions. In addition, our experience of deregulated 
financial markets is still limited to a small number of economic cycles. At the same time, we cannot 
ignore the risks to future inflation and economic activity with which we believe that developments in the 
housing market are connected. As I said, the world will not come to an end in two years’ time. The fact 
that we do not have any definite answers regarding the effects of a rapid credit boom in my opinion 
should not prevent us from acting in a manner that will at least not aggravate the risks. 
Summary 
Let me conclude by summarising my main message here this evening. 
•  There has been a gradual development in our reasoning on monetary policy. Compared with 
the clarification on the Riksbank’s monetary policy strategy published in 1999, we can now go 
slightly  further  with  regard  to  how  we  communicate  the  considerations  of  the  real  economy 
taken when conducting monetary policy.  
•  When we make decisions on the repo rate we also try – given our overall objective to maintain 
price stability – to subdue fluctuations in the real economy.  
•  This  is  done  by  not  aiming  to  bring  inflation  back  on  target  as  quickly  as  possible  in  every 
single  situation.  When  there  is  a  deviation  from  target,  our  ambition  is  normally  to  return 
inflation to target within a time period of two years.  
•  We no longer apply the simple policy rule that relied on forecasts based on a constant repo 
rate. This rule, among other things, contributed to excessive focus on the two-year horizon in 
relation to the development of inflation over time.  
•  The forecasts of inflation are now based on an assumption that the repo rate will develop in 
line with market expectations. This new assumption makes it easier for us to refer to the entire 
interest rate path in our communication of monetary policy.  
•  Large  fluctuations  in  asset  prices  entail  risks  that  we  must  take  into  account,  even  if  the 
theoretical analysis of the significance of the asset prices has not yet been fully developed. 
6 
 BIS Review 29/2006
