Mohd Razif bin Abd Kadir: Malaysia’s position as an international Islamic 
financial centre
Closing keynote address by Mr Mohd Razif bin Abd Kadir, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of 
Malaysia,  at  the  Malaysian  Islamic  Finance  -  Issuers  and  Investors  Forum  2006,  Kuala  Lumpur, 
15 August 2006. 
 It  is  my  pleasure  to  be  here  at  the  end  of  the  two-day  Malaysian  Islamic  Finance  -  Issuers  and 
Investors  Forum  2006.  The  joint  hosting  of  this  Forum  by  Bank  Negara  Malaysia,  the  Securities 
Commission, Labuan Offshore Financial Services Authority (LOFSA) and Bursa Malaysia is testimony 
to the strong cooperation and close collaboration of the key regulatory and market authorities in the 
financial services sector in Malaysia. I would regard the Forum as a successful one. The 14 sessions 
and the 54 distinguished panellists and 8 moderators from various backgrounds and experience have 
deliberated and focused on issues that are relevant to both the issuers and investors, who are among 
the key stakeholders of Islamic finance.  
My closing remarks today will centre on summarising the issues and suggestions that have been put 
forward  to  further  enhance  Malaysia's  position  as  an  international  Islamic  financial  centre,  and  to 
reiterate and reaffirm the strong commitment of the Government and the relevant regulatory agencies 
to spearhead this MIFC initiative.  
In many of the sessions, Malaysia has been recognised as having in place a strong foundation and the 
right pre-requisites to become an effective and efficient Islamic financial hub. Among them are: 
i. 
ii. 
23 years of experience in regulating and developing the Islamic financial system. 
strong Islamic financial institutions comprising 12 Islamic banks. Of this, 3 are foreign Islamic 
financial institutions and 7 are Islamic subsidiaries of banking groups. There are also several 
Islamic windows of conventional banking institutions which are also lead arrangers of Islamic 
financial instruments. In the takaful industry, there are 9 takaful operators. 
a  strong  Islamic  capital  market  with  89  Islamic  unit  trust  funds,  85  percent  of  Bursa 
Malaysia's  counters  are  Shariah  approved  counters  and  46 percent  of  the  corporate bond 
market are Islamic bonds or sukuks. 
a  well  established  and  comprehensive  regulatory  and  Shariah  governance  framework  in 
accordance with best practices, together with a tax neutrality policy. 
a comprehensive legal and Shariah infrastructure. 
well endowed with the critical mass and a wide array of Islamic products and services. 
Talent development infrastructure. 
a  vibrant  and  active  secondary  market  trading  of  the  Islamic  money  and  capital  markets 
equipped with the state-of-the-art technology. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
viii. 
We are now at the cross-road in the development of Islamic finance. We realise that we are strong at 
the  domestic  level,  and  we  now  need  to  strategise  to  elevate  the  industry  to  the  next  phase  of 
development. During the keynote address yesterday, Governor has launched Malaysia International 
Islamic  Financial  Centre  (MIFC)  for  the  offering  of  Islamic  financial  products  and  services  in 
international  currencies  from  anywhere  in  Malaysia.  These  ground-breaking  initiatives  are  aimed  at 
providing  operational  flexibility,  cost  effectiveness  and  conducive  environment  for  Islamic  finance 
business in international currencies : 
i. 
grant approval  under  the existing  Islamic  banks  and  takaful  licence  to set  up  International 
Currency Business Units within these institutions. 
issuance  of  new  conditional  licences  for  the  setting  up  of  International  Islamic  Banks  and 
International Takaful Operators under the Islamic Banking Act and Takaful Act respectively 
to qualified foreign and Malaysian financial institutions to conduct business in international 
currencies. 
ii. 
BIS Review 75/2006 
 1
iii. 
Labuan  offshore  Islamic  banks  and  the  Islamic  divisions  of  offshore  banks  as  well  as 
offshore takaful operators have been given greater flexibility in their business operations to 
open operation offices anywhere in Malaysia with minimal presence in Labuan. 
The  Government  is  finalising  an  attractive  tax  package  to  ensure  our  competitiveness  in  the  global 
market place. This policy should be capitalised by the existing Islamic financial institutions in Malaysia, 
as well as for the new players to take the opportunity to establish their presence in Malaysia.  
We  realised  that  a  successful  Islamic  financial  centre  cannot  depend  on  low  cost  alone  but  much 
depending  on  the  overall  efficiency  in  the  delivery  system.  To  ensure  this,  the  MIFC  Executive 
Committee  comprising  a  high-powered  group  of  28  top  officials  from  the  relevant  Ministries, 
Government  Departments  and  Agencies,  the  key  financial  and  market  regulators,  and  industry 
representatives from the banking and takaful sectors has been set up. 
This committee will provide direction and address any impediments in a speedy and cohesive manner. 
It will function as a one-stop body and will leverage on all the Government machineries and apparatus 
to facilitate the smooth implementation of the MIFC initiatives. The secretariat to this MIFC Executive 
Committee is Bank Negara Malaysia. 
I like to share with you some of the initiatives that we are going to take to address and confront the 
issues on converging Shariah interpretations. All of us must endeavour to promote the harmonisation 
of Shariah interpretations as this will greatly enhance the markets, products and liquidity. Continuous 
dialogues need to be stepped up, and Bank Negara Malaysia stands ready to provide leadership in 
this area. We have convened strategic dialogues among scholars within this region and globally. The 
next  international  dialogue  will  be  held  in  November  this  year.  To  further  promote  talent,  depth  of 
research in emerging issues and greater product innovation, scholarships and research grants will be 
awarded. In this regard, the RM200 million Shariah Scholars Fund that was established last year will 
be capitalised. 
On convergence of Shariah interpretation, let me reiterate what the Governor has said at the keynote 
address yesterday. The MIFC will adopt a stance of mutual recognition and appreciate the differences 
in ijtihad or reasoning based on analysis and logical inference so long as it is approved by recognised 
Shariah  advisers.  Convergence  should  not  be  taken  as  a  single  step  towards  harmonisation  of 
interpretation. At the same time, we must also allow diversity in Shariah interpretation as to support 
product innovations to meet the needs of the industry. 
Over the last two days, we have heard about the need to accelerate talent development, which is key 
to the future progress of the industry. In this respect, the International Centre for Education in Islamic 
Finance  or  INCEIF  offers  the  world's  first  professional  certification  program  in  Islamic  finance.  The 
response  has  been  over-whelming.  To  complement  talent  development,  a  set  of  incentives  will  be 
formulated to attract the best foreign talents to work in the MIFC. 
The adoption of best practices in the regulatory standard by the Islamic financial institutions will be key 
in  sustaining  their  soundness  and  resilience.  In  this  regard,  IFSB  has  developed  the  required 
regulatory  and  prudential  standards,  in  which  Malaysia  will  adopt  these  standards,  and  continue  to 
provide the leadership in the implementation of these standards. 
Malaysia's  strength  in  the  Islamic  capital  market  can  be  further  leveraged  upon  by  issuers  and 
investors as a platform for origination, trading and distribution of Islamic financial instruments.  
The  benefits  of  being  a  financial  centre  are  tremendous.  Besides  enhancing  services  sector 
contribution to GDP, it will create job opportunities, contribute towards promoting greater cross border 
investment and trade flows, better quality and diversified products and services, and strengthen further 
the global economic and financial inter-linkages among countries. 
Malaysia  has  come  a  long  way  since  it  first  introduced  Islamic  finance  in  the  1980s.  We  are  now 
embarking  on  the  next  stage  of  development.  The  MIFC  initiatives  that  were  announced  yesterday 
would  propel  Malaysia  into  becoming  a  vibrant,  innovative  and  competitive  international  Islamic 
financial services industry supported by high calibre human talent, world-class infrastructure and best 
international standards. Building on what we have, we need to create a global brand to be promoted 
more aggressively in the global arena. This will be key to penetrate markets as well as to attract global 
players  to  our  shores,  henceforth  enhancing  the  viability  and  sustainability  of  Malaysia's  Islamic 
financial  system.  Malaysia  will  embark on  more strategic  promotional  and  marketing efforts  through 
greater collaboration and smart partnership. MIFC WILL BE OUR GLOBAL BRAND. 
2 
 BIS Review 75/2006
On this note, on behalf of the hosts and organisers, I would like to thank the distinguished panellists 
and moderators, media and the respected audience for making this Forum a success, and  
I hereby declare the forum officially closed. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 75/2006 
 3
