Jean-Claude Trichet: Testimony at the Economic and Monetary Affairs 
Committee of the European Parliament 
Testimony by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the Economic and 
Monetary Affairs Committee of the European Parliament, Brussels, 20 December 2006. 
 Madame  la  présidente,  Mesdames  et  Messieurs  les  membres  de  la  Commission  économique  et 
monétaire, je me réjouis de paraître devant votre Commission aujourd’hui et de poursuivre ainsi notre 
dialogue régulier. Je commencerai mon intervention par une évaluation de la situation économique et 
monétaire. 
Anschließend  möchte  ich  auf  zwei  Themen  näher  eingehen:  Erstens,  auf  den  Zusammenhang 
zwischen Produktivität, Potentialwachstum and Geldpolitik. Zweitens, auf das Geldmengenwachstum 
in verschiedenen Abgrenzungen und dessen Einfluss auf das Preisgeschehen. 
Economic and monetary issues 
At the time of my previous appearance before the European Parliament in October, I described how 
the data then available had served to confirm our assessment that economic growth in the euro area 
was becoming more broadly based and increasingly supported by domestic demand. In addition, the 
cross-checking  of  our  economic and  monetary  analyses  underlined  the  existence  of  upside  risks  to 
price stability over the medium to longer term. In order to contain such upside risks to price stability 
and preserve the firm anchoring of longer-term inflation expectations, on 7 December the Governing 
Council of the ECB decided to increase key ECB interest rates by 25 basis points. Let me explain the 
assessment underlying this decision and the outlook for the economy and risks to price stability. 
Starting  with  the  economic  analysis,  the  main  indicators  of  economic  activity  that  have  become 
available over the past few months confirm the Governing Council’s assessment that economic activity 
has continued to expand robustly, albeit moderating somewhat from the very strong rates seen in the 
first half of the year. According to Eurostat’s first estimate, the quarter-on-quarter growth rate of real 
GDP in the euro area for the third quarter of 2006 was 0.5%, driven mainly by domestic demand. This 
confirms  the  anticipated  broadening  of  the  recovery  and  points  to  the  increasingly  self-sustaining 
nature  of  economic  expansion  in  the  euro  area.  This  assessment  is  also  in  line  with  available 
information for the fourth quarter. 
Looking ahead to next year, the conditions remain in place for the euro area economy to grow solidly 
at rates around potential, with some volatility in the quarterly growth rates likely to emerge around the 
turn of the year on account of the impact of changes in indirect taxes in a large euro area country. 
Overall,  global  growth  has  become  geographically  more  balanced  and  remains  robust,  providing 
support for euro area exports. Investment is expected to remain dynamic, benefiting from an extended 
period of very favourable financing conditions, balance sheet restructuring, accumulated and ongoing 
strong  earnings,  and  gains  in  business  efficiency.  Consumption should  also  strengthen  further  over 
time  as  employment  conditions  continue  to  improve.  This  outlook  for  economic  developments  is 
reflected in the new Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections (2.5 % to 2.9 % in 2006, 1.7 % to 
2.7 % in 2007, 1.8 % to 2.8 % in 2008) and is also in line with recent forecasts made by international 
organisations.  
The risks surrounding the outlook of sustained economic growth close to potential lie on the downside 
and relate mainly to the possibility of a renewed increase in oil prices, fears of a rise in protectionist 
pressures, and concerns about possible disorderly developments owing to global imbalances.  
Turning to the price developments, annual HICP inflation rose to 1.9% in November 2006, from 1.6% 
in October. The lower annual HICP inflation rates recorded in the previous months mainly reflected the 
significant declines in crude oil prices from August onwards, as well as base effects. While the outlook 
for energy prices remains uncertain, overall inflation rates are likely to increase again in early 2007 
and then hover around 2% in the course of that year and in 2008, also reflecting the impact of higher 
indirect taxes. The Eurosystem staff projections point to a rate of inflation of 2.1 % to 2.3 % in 2006, 
1.5 % to 2.5 % in 2007 and 1.3 % to 2.5 % in 2008.  
BIS Review 126/2006 
 1
This  outlook  for  price  developments  remains  subject  to  upside  risks,  stemming  in  particular  from  a 
stronger  than  expected  pass-through  of  previous  oil  price  increases,  as  well  as  the  possibility  of 
renewed  oil  price  increases  and  of  additional  increases  in  administered  prices  and  indirect  taxes 
beyond those announced and decided thus far. More fundamentally, given the favourable momentum 
of real GDP growth observed over the past few quarters and the positive signs from labour markets, 
wage developments could be stronger than currently expected. 
Turning to developments in the monetary aggregates and credit, annual M3 growth was unchanged at 
8.5%  in  October,  remaining  close  to  the  highest  rates  observed  since  the  introduction  of  the  euro. 
Increasing interest rates have exerted some influence over monetary developments in recent months, 
although as yet mainly by triggering shifts among the components of M3 rather than constraining the 
expansion of M3 itself.  
Taking  the  appropriate  medium  to  longer-term  perspective,  the  latest  developments  are  consistent 
with  a  continuation  of  the  persistent  upward  trend  in  the  underlying  rate  of  monetary  expansion, 
identified  by  the  ECB’s  monetary  analysis  since  mid-2004.  Furthermore,  following  several  years  of 
robust  monetary  growth,  the  liquidity  situation  in  the  euro  area  is  ample  by  all  plausible  measures. 
Continued strong monetary and credit growth in an environment of ample liquidity point to upside risks 
to price stability over the medium to longer term. Monetary developments therefore continue to require 
very  careful  monitoring,  particularly  against  the  background  of  improved  economic  conditions  and 
continued strong property market developments in many parts of the euro area. 
To sum up, annual inflation rates are projected to hover around 2% in the coming two years, with risks 
to this outlook remaining on the upside. In addition, given the ongoing strength of monetary and credit 
growth in an environment of ample liquidity, a cross-check of the outcome of the economic analysis 
with that of the monetary analysis supports the assessment that upside risks to price stability prevail 
over the medium to long term.  
As  I  said  on December 7,  our  decision  to  increase key  ECB  interest rates  by  25  basis points  on  7 
December contributes to ensuring that medium to longer-term inflation expectations in the euro area 
remain solidly anchored at levels consistent with price stability, which is a prerequisite for monetary 
policy  to  make  an  ongoing  contribution  towards  supporting  sustainable  economic  growth  and  job 
creation in the euro area. Indeed, acting in a firm and timely manner to ensure price stability in the 
medium term is warranted. The Governing Council will therefore monitor very closely all developments 
so that risks to price stability over the medium term do not materialise. 
As  regards  fiscal  policy,  the  Commission’s  autumn forecasts  point  to  improving  fiscal  balances,  but 
this  can only  partly  be  attributed  to  progress  in structural consolidation,  as  higher  economic  growth 
and  revenue windfalls  are playing  an  important  role.  Moreover,  in  a  number of  countries  with  fiscal 
imbalances, adjustment efforts still fall short of what is needed to meet their respective medium-term 
objectives  in  a  timely  manner.  It  is  therefore  crucial  that  forthcoming  updates  of  the  stability 
programmes make sufficient headway towards safe budgetary positions in the countries concerned. 
For all countries it is paramount that pro-cyclical policies be avoided in the current economic upswing.  
Productivity, growth potential and monetary policy 
Over the last fifteen years the euro area has witnessed an almost steady deceleration in the growth 
rate of labour productivity. This deceleration can be explained by underlying developments, some of 
which  are  welcome,  whereas  others  are  less  favourable.  First,  it  is  the  effect  of  some  welcome 
progress in labour market reforms and wage moderation over the last decade. Although it is seldom 
stressed in public discourses, these measures have contributed to remarkable results. Over the last 
eight years (the period in which the single monetary policy has been in place), employment has risen 
by 9.2 percentage points and the unemployment rate has declined by 1.9 percentage points. Let me 
also stress that if I compare the 8 years after the euro was set up with the 8 years before the euro, we 
created 11.73 million jobs after the euro and only 2.65 million jobs before the euro. Second, and less 
welcome, the decline in productivity is partly the result of capital investments not keeping up with the 
pace  of  job  creation.  The  still  existing  rigidities  in  product  and  labour  markets  that  impair  effective 
competition and flexibility, and more generally the presence of regulatory restraints on business, have 
prevented firms from investing more strongly in the adoption of new information and communication 
technologies, which could be effective tools to reduce costs and improve productivity. 
Ultimately,  the  growth  rate  of  the  actively  working  population  and  the  pace  at  which  technological 
progress is implemented in the production process are the critical determinants of the growth rate of 
2 
 BIS Review 126/2006
potential output. It is extremely important, especially at this juncture, to strengthen the reforms aimed 
at increasing employment, fostering competition in the product markets and creating an environment 
favourable to the development and implementation of new concepts and technologies. All individuals 
need  to  have  the  opportunity  to  get  appropriate  training.  In  a  knowledge  economy  the  wealth  and 
prosperity of European citizens depend on their education, training and skills and the extent to which 
these skills can flourish in a flexible economy open to innovation and change. 
There  are  sometimes  calls  upon  the  central  bank  for  more  expansionary  monetary  policy  as  an 
incentive  to  increase  productivity.  I  shall  make  two  points  on  this.  First,  monetary  policy  cannot 
enhance the trend growth rate of productivity and potential output. A loose monetary policy would just 
create high inflation and inject volatility into the economy. On the contrary, a monetary policy geared to 
delivering low and stable inflation contributes to creating a favourable macroeconomic environment for 
employment creation and investment decisions. Price stability reduces interest rate premia, and thus 
the cost of capital, and allows wage and price-setters to focus on productivity, costs and competitive 
factors,  rather  than  wasting  resources  on  protecting  themselves  against  uncertainty  about  future 
inflation. Second, the negative productivity developments I have just discussed have not only been a 
drag  on  economic  activity,  they  have  also  put  significant  temporary  upward  pressure  on  inflation, 
especially after 2001. The increase of unit labour costs due to mediocre productivity, combined with 
other  supply  shocks  such  as  oil  price  increases,  have  contributed  to  a  level  of  inflation  over  the 
threshold of our definition of price stability of less than 2%. Had we not had a highly credible monetary 
policy, we would not have been able to anchor solidly medium and long-term inflationary expectations 
in the euro area and we would have had to pay a significant price in terms of growth and job creation.  
Developments in monetary aggregates and their impact on inflation 
Let me now turn to the important role played by the monetary analysis in the ECB’s monetary policy 
strategy and interest rate decisions. As you know, we are cross-checking the results of our economic 
analysis with those of our monetary analysis. Allow me to recall that the strong long-term relationship 
between monetary growth and inflation is one of the best documented empirical findings in economic 
literature. Many studies have documented this relationship in the euro area, demonstrating that it is 
particularly close over longer horizons. I will add that the national currencies that had the highest level 
of credibility prior to the introduction of the euro and against which the Euro has been benchmarked, 
all relied on a monetary policy framework embodying a role for monetary analysis. Given the ECB’s 
mandate to maintain price stability, the necessarily medium-term orientation of its strategy to do so 
and the continuity between the most credible national currencies and the Euro, assigning an important 
role to the analysis of monetary developments is both necessary and very useful. The monetary pillar 
of  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  concept  has  contributed  importantly  to  the  success  of  our  monetary 
policy and to the anchoring of long-term inflation expectations.  
In  recent  years,  money  has  grown  strongly  while,  at  the  same  time,  inflation  developments  have 
remained  under  control.  This  begs  the  question  of  how  the  ECB  has  interpreted  strong  monetary 
growth. The ECB has always emphasised the broad-based nature of its monetary analysis. In order to 
distil  the  policy-relevant  “signal”  about  risks  to  price  stability  from  the  monetary  data,  the  inevitable 
“noise” in shorter-term movements needs to be identified and removed. To do so, the ECB employs a 
variety  of  instruments,  such  as  analysis  of  the  components  and  counterparts  of  money,  and  other 
economic and financial data as necessary, as well as statistical and econometric models.  
The  practical  side  of  this  signal  extraction  problem  in  the  euro  area  can  be  illustrated  by  the 
experience  between  2001  and  2003.  Financial  and  geopolitical  uncertainty  at  that  time  triggered 
portfolio  shifts  into  safe  and  liquid  monetary  assets.  Since  these  shifts  reflected  portfolio  behaviour 
rather  than  an  accumulation  of  transaction  balances,  the  ensuing  strong  monetary  expansion  was 
assessed by the Governing Council not to pose risks to price stability under the prevailing economic 
conditions. On this basis, strong monetary growth of the M3 measure during that period was analysed 
as  relatively  benign  in  terms  of  inflationary  risks,  in  line  with  the  information  extracted  from  the 
economic analysis.  
This example illustrates how the ECB has eschewed a mechanical interpretation of the development 
of M3. Rather, the ECB has sought to explain monetary developments in a comprehensive manner, 
extract from these developments the policy-relevant signal about the medium to long-term outlook for 
inflation, and set interest rates in a manner that addresses the risks to price stability revealed by this 
analysis as well as by the complementary economic analysis. 
BIS Review 126/2006 
 3
Since  mid-2004,  monetary  growth  in  the  euro  area  has  been  of  a  different  nature  to  that  observed 
between  2001  and  2003.  In  particular,  the  strengthening  of  M3  growth  has  been  driven  by  the  low 
level  of  interest  rates  rather  than  portfolio  shifts  into  money.  This  has  been  reflected  in  the  strong 
contribution that the most liquid components, such as currency and overnight deposits, have made to 
M3 growth. Moreover, strong money growth has been primarily driven by a rapid expansion of loans to 
the private sector, underpinned by the economic recovery. Taking the appropriate medium- to longer-
term perspective, the continued expansion of money and credit through the course of 2005 gave an 
intensifying indication of increasing risks to price stability, fully in line with the results of our economic 
analysis, and vindicating our orientation to progressively increase interest rates by 150 basis points 
from December 2005 onwards. 
I thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 126/2006
