Caleb M Fundanga: The Bank of Zambia’s management development 
programme for managers 
Remarks  by  Dr  Caleb  M  Fundanga,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Zambia,  at  the  opening  of  the 
Management Development Programme for Managers, Livingstone, 4-15 December 2006. 
 • Director – Human Resources 
• Assistant Director – Organisation Development 
• The Consultants 
• Participants 
• Ladies and Gentlemen 
I welcome you all to this Management Development Programme. 
Management  development  programmes  are  crucial  not  only  to  Staff  development  but  also  to  the 
realisation of the Bank of Zambia vision. As you are aware, our vision is “To be a world class central 
bank”.  Our  vision  can  only  be  realised  if  the  performance  of  our  employees  measures  up  to  world 
class standards, because it is employees who make an institution what it is. In other words, we can not 
have a world class central bank without world class employees. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: I would like to refer you to our strategic plan document. You will note that in 
its values statement, the Bank states that employees of the Bank of Zambia shall at all times endeavor 
to direct their efforts towards the achievement of the mission of the Bank by consistently following the 
values  encapsulated  in  the  BoZ  Way.  You  will  also  note  that  the  Bank  has,  in  turn,  undertaken  to 
support  employees  by,  inter-alia,  continuously  enhancing  the  capacity  of  the  Bank  through  the 
development of all staff. This reflects the realisation by the Bank that without world-class employees, 
its aspiration to be a world class central bank as stated in its vision statement cannot be attained. For 
the  Bank  therefore,  this  programme  is  important  because  it  is  a  step  taken  towards  enhancing  the 
skills of our staff to world class standards and is a commitment to attaining our vision. 
The programme you have come to participate in is unique in two respects. First, this programme is 
tailor-made  or  specifically  designed  for  Bank  of  Zambia  staff.  Second,  it  focuses  on  middle 
management which is a reflection of the importance that the Bank places on the role that its middle 
managers play in helping it achieve its vision and mission. 
The programme has been designed to impart general management knowledge and skills to you our 
middle  managers  which  will  enhance  your  leadership  and  managerial  abilities.  The  programme  is 
designed  to  provide  you  with  the  tools  that  will  enable  you  to  contribute  effectively  towards  the 
management of the Bank and also to prepare you for succession as and when opportunities arise. 
The  first  module  you  will  learn  is  on  the  Functions  of  the  Board  of  the  Bank  of  Zambia.  This  was 
included  to  provide  you  with  an  understanding  of  the  relevance  of  the  Board  to  our  strategic  plan 
management process and ultimately to your job. 
Second, you will have a module on good corporate governance. Without wishing to preempt what you 
shall be taught, I wish to only explain that good corporate governance is one of our strategic objectives 
and its inclusion as a strategic objective reflects our commitment to align our operations with world 
best practices, consistent with our vision ‘to be a world class central bank’. 
The module on Risk Management was included to provide you with knowledge that will enable you 
appreciate why the Bank has introduced the Risk Management Department. 
Director - Risk Management will do a presentation during which he will explain what risk management 
is all about and its relevance to Bank of Zambia. 
Finally, the inclusion of a module on the Core Functions of the Bank of Zambia is designed to provide 
you  with  knowledge  on  the  operations  for  which  the  Bank  was  established.  This  is  important  for  a 
number of reasons. 
First, we want to have a cadre of enlightened and well informed managers who will portray a positive 
image of the Bank and reflect our standing as a world-class Bank. As managers, you have to have a 
reasonable understanding of how the Bank’s core activities departments operate and are organised. 
Second, as managers, especially as “world-class” employees, you are also expected, by the public, to 
BIS Review 125/2006 
 1
have a reasonable grasp of issues pertaining to core operations of the Bank. This may sound pretty 
obvious, but I know that there are many of our managers who have no idea how some of our core 
departments function and cannot intelligently explain our role in the economy. This reflects badly on 
the Bank with regard to the calibre of its staff. The third point is that your understanding of core and 
other departments operations for that matter will facilitate staff rotation, a policy to which the Bank is 
commited.  Finally,  and  most  importantly,  an  understanding  of  core  functions  enables  you  to  better 
understand and appreciate the mission of the Bank. This in turn facilitates a better understanding of 
the strategic plan. 
In closing, I wish to say that I know that the Bank has come a long way and has demonstrated marked 
improvements in the way that it conducts its operations and in the quality of its management. Director 
– Human Resources will show in his presentation on the change process in the Bank. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 125/2006
