Mario Draghi: Luigi Einaudi and economic freedom 
Address  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Italy,  at  the  presentation  of  the  book  Luigi 
Einaudi: Selected Economic Essays, Italian Embassy, London, 17 October 2006. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Let me thank the Ente Einaudi for the taking the initiative of having a selection of Luigi Einaudi’s works 
translated  and  thus  introduced  to  a  non-Italian  public.  I  should  like  to  congratulate  the  editors  – 
Riccardo Faucci, Luca Einaudi and Roberto Marchionatti – the translators and all other contributors for 
a job magnificently done. 
Luigi Einaudi had a long, very active life. When he published his first essay in 1893, Giuseppe Verdi 
had just completed his Falstaff; when he died, aged 87, Federico Fellini had just shocked Italians – 
and possibly even Britons – with La Dolce Vita. 
A key actor in Italian public life, he passionately believed in the interaction between Italian, European 
and American intellectual circles. He was friend to people like Hayek, Huizinga and Röpke; he was 
instrumental in getting many authors translated into Italian, among them Beveridge, and he carried on 
an intense activity as a consultant of the Rockefeller Foundation, with great benefit for many young 
Italians  who  could  study  in  British  and  American  universities,  even  during  the  Fascist  time.  During 
three decades he was The Economist’s correspondent from Italy, so that it was also through his eyes 
that politicians and business leaders of the world perceived Italian affairs. 
Einaudi is certainly difficult to sum up in a phrase. He was in turn economist, historian, journalist, wine 
maker,  bibliophile,  central  banker,  politician,  statesman.  He  has  left  literally  thousands  of  pieces  of 
writing. If I have to single out the one reason why he made such a profound mark on the intellectual 
and  political  history  of  Italy,  that  is  his  faith  in  a  fundamental  idea:  man  is  fallible;  lawmakers  and 
planners are no less fallible than other humans; legislative and administrative commands often fail to 
attain  their  goals  or  have  unintended  consequences;  man  must  be  free  to  experiment,  to  try  new 
solutions for old problems. He extolled “the beauty of the struggle”: between people, ideas and market 
players,  even  between  social  classes;  individual  and  collective  effort  and  competition  engender 
progress; excessive regulation, forced collectivism and decisions from above hinder it. All institutional 
arrangements that foster human creativity he would praise; but when confronted with arrangements, 
legal or otherwise, that block evolution, he would carefully, fastidiously analyse them, and then expose 
their failings. He advocated a legal system based on a few, simple laws and unbending application. 
Despite  his  intellectual  authority,  he  did  not  always,  or  perhaps  even  often,  succeed  in  persuading 
legislators and policymakers in his time. For most of his life his voice was that of a respected minority. 
Recognition usually came later. But the lesson has only been half-learnt and the issue is almost as 
alive now as it was in Einaudi’s time: the delusive quest for the perfect regulation and the perfect plan 
still goes on in much of Europe. 
A professor, but not an inhabitant of the ivory tower: to the very end of his life Einaudi was extremely 
curious about real economic and political life. To cite just a few topics from a much more extensive list, 
he  collected  information  on,  and  wrote  in  newspapers  about,  union  demands,  capital  taxation, 
agricultural prices, steel production, monetary policy, foreign trade, bank raiders. He always made a 
point of linking theory with facts. He was a clear, persuasive writer. Which is not just, I believe, a gift of 
nature, but mostly the result of caring about the subject one writes about. 
Though  firm  in  his  fundamental  convictions  about  economic  and  political  liberalism,  he  was  not  a 
doctrinaire;  his  position  can  be  described  as  optimism,  not  naïveté,  about  the  market.  He  often 
repeated that laissez faire is not a scientific principle, but just a convenient rule taught by experience. 
Certainly  subsequent  developments  of  welfare  economics  have  made  us  more  sensitive  to 
externalities  and  to  market  failures  than  he  ever  was.  However,  he  also  was  well  aware  of  the 
importance of the legal framework and a proper regulation for the markets’ well functioning. He deeply 
believed in equality of opportunities, and accepted a degree of income redistribution. 
He  observed  that  stumbling  blocks  to  innovation  (he  called  them  “trincee”,  trenches),  while  found 
everywhere,  were  especially  plentiful  in  Italy:  tariffs  against  foreign  commodities,  rules  barring  new 
competitors  from  entering  established  trades,  laws  that  put  obstacles  in  the  way  of  new  trades  or 
BIS Review 99/2006 
 1
commodities,  cartel  agreements  among  producers  to  limit  competition  and  innovation:  all  to  the 
detriment of the consumer. A recurring theme in his writings is the denunciation of private monopolies 
and of any attempts, by private firms, to restrict markets. However, in Italy he saw the state itself as 
the main source of market restrictions: the dominating positions of many firms were, more often than 
not, the product of laws and regulations. In 1947, as a member of the Constituent Assembly of the new 
Italian Republic (of which he was to become the first full President), he proposed an anti-monopoly 
clause for the Constitution: 
La legge non è strumento di formazione di monopoli economici; ed ove questi esistano li sottopone a 
pubblico controllo a mezzo di amministrazione pubblica delegata o diretta. 
[The law shall not be a means to form economic monopolies, and such monopolies as may exist shall 
be subjected to public control through delegated or direct public administration]  
His  proposal  was  rejected  on  flimsy  arguments,  and  antitrust  legislation  eventually  came,  well  after 
Einaudi’s death. But the alliance between public bodies and private interests to carve out privileges 
has bedevilled Italy to this day. 
He applied his convictions about the power of market forces to the banking sector. In a 1935 article 
that is partly included in the selection, he showed his distrust for the views of a fictitious character, the 
“rationaliser”, who wanted to regulate from above the banking industry all the way down to dictating 
what the number of banks should be. He also had little sympathy for the many restrictions on banks’ 
activity (on area, sector, type of credit) which were not to disappear in Italy until the 1990s. On banking 
supervision he favoured a flexible approach and disliked rigid administrative rules: “If the regulation 
really regulates, it only prevents the good transactions and does not prohibit the bad”, he wrote. This 
resonates with certain main themes in the evolution of supervisory activity in recent times. 
Much impetus for market-oriented reforms in Italy eventually came from European institutions. Europe 
was,  indeed,  a  recurring  theme  in  his  writings  from  very  early  days.  He  supported  a  European 
federation  immediately  after  the  First  World  War.  From  the  columns  of  the  Corriere  della  Sera  he 
argued,  under  the  pen-name  “Junius”,  that  the  League  of  Nations  would  be  ineffective  because  it 
depended  on  the  will  of  individual  states,  and  advocated  the  creation  of  a  federation  of  European 
nations. The articles went virtually unnoticed at the time. 
In the final years of the Second World War, he started to write again on the same theme. What should 
a European federation do? His views were ambivalent in a way reminiscent of today’s debate. Einaudi 
is absolutely clear about the urgent need for “unifying some economic matters”, among these money. 
“Devolution  to  the  federation  of  the  regulation  of  money  and  money  surrogates  appears  to  be 
uncontroversial”, he writes. (It took a mere 45 years for this “uncontroversial” item to materialise). He 
goes  on  to  list  the  advantages  of  European  monetary  union  in  terms  unmistakably  similar  to  those 
used  in  the  debate  on  the  euro  that  took  place  almost  half  a  century  later.  The  main  virtue  of  a 
monetary union lies in its doing away with the monetary sovereignty of national states, which “boiled 
down often to the right to falsify money” via inflation, or hyper-inflation. 
On the political aspects his views are less clear-cut. He does not want member states to renounce 
political  independence,  a  step  for  which  “our  spirits  are  not  prepared”.  But  following  the  tragic 
experience of war, he comes down squarely in favour of a fully unified “army, navy and air force”, and 
of clearly defined federal legislative and executive bodies. These are boldly integrationist views, even 
by today’s standards. 
In 1939 Einaudi’s thoughts on Europe came to the attention of two careful readers who would later 
play  a  key  role  in  European  federalism.  Ernesto  Rossi  and  Altiero  Spinelli  –  the  first  a  friend  and 
student of Einaudi’s, the second a former Communist party member – had been imprisoned by the 
Fascist  government  for  10  years,  and  later  exiled  to  the  tiny  Mediterranean  island  of  Ventotene. 
Spinelli was at once fascinated by the “Junius” articles; Rossi managed to get through to him material 
on the debate on federalism in England, including works of Lionel Robbins. We may say that Einaudi 
contributed  indirectly  to  the  birth,  in  1941,  of  the  Manifesto  di  Ventotene,  a  cornerstone  of  the 
European political federalist movement. 
I cannot refrain from briefly recalling Einaudi’s role in ending post-war inflation and opening the way to 
a long period of sustained growth and stability. The monetary stabilisation of 1947 bore his mark and 
is an enduring legacy left by Einaudi as a policymaker. Economic historians still debate the respective 
roles  that  Einaudi  himself  and  Donato  Menichella,  the  then  Director-General  of  the  Bank  of  Italy, 
played in devising the stabilisation plan. Whatever the details, it is clear that Einaudi, as Governor of 
the Bank of Italy first, then as Budget Minister and deputy Prime Minister, took prime responsibility. 
2 
 BIS Review 99/2006
Even if he had not had any policymaking role, Luigi Einaudi would be remembered as a communicator 
and  educator.  In  fact,  his  very  success  as  a  policymaker  owes  much  to  his  clear,  effective  way  of 
speaking  to  the  general  public,  at  a  time  when  this  was  very  unusual.  His  frank  and  direct  style  of 
communication, his choice of explaining, in plain language, policy decisions in a special final chapter 
of the Bank’s annual report, were at the time a significant advance towards greater accountability of 
monetary policy. 
Sixty years ago Einaudi gave his last speech as the Governor of the Bank of Italy. In the new Italian 
democracy  it  was  under  his  leadership  that  the  Bank  of  Italy,  already  a  well-respected  institution, 
started shaping its special role in Italy, unique among central banks, a role upheld by all of Einaudi’s 
successors:  that  of  a  trusted,  independent  advisor  to  Parliament,  the  Government  and  the  public 
opinion. 
BIS Review 99/2006 
 3
