Jens Thomsen: European bond markets before and after the euro 
Speech by Mr Jens Thomsen, Member of the Board of Governors of the National Bank of Denmark 
and  Chairman  of  the  EFC-subcommittee  on  EU  Government  Bonds  and  Bills  Markets,  at  the 
European Government Bond Summit, Brussels, 25 October 2006. 
 My remarks will focus on reflections related to the integration process that the European bond markets 
has  experienced  in  the  post-EMU  era.  In  particular,  I  will  highlight  the  successful  evolution  of 
European government bond markets following the introduction of the common currency. 
The establishment of the European Monetary Union on January 1, 1999, paved the way for a more 
integrated European bond market. In the pre-EMU era, different euro area countries' government bond 
yields  differed  substantially.  As  an  example,  yield  spreads  against  Germany  in  the  10-year 
government  bond  segment  ranged  up  to  700  bp  in  the  1990's  (see  slide  1).  Yield  spreads  were 
however expected to decline along with the introduction of the euro primarily due to the elimination of 
exchange rate risk. 
Prior  to  1999,  attempts  were  made  to  anticipate  the  magnitude  of  the  post-1999  yield  spreads 
between EMU member states. Sparsely evidence from other currency areas provided some insight in 
relation to such anticipations. The provincial bond market in Canada was one such candidate area to 
use  for  comparison  as  the  Canadian  provinces  had  some  similar  characteristics  to  the  forthcoming 
EMU countries, including no explicit rules for mutual or federal bail out. The spreads between bonds 
issued by different Canadian provinces and Canadian government bonds were much lower than euro 
area  spreads  prior  to  the  euro  ranging  "only"  up  to  60  bp.  Notwithstanding  declining  spreads,  the 
Canadian  evidence  indicated  that  the  euro  area  spreads  would  not  completely  disappear  (see 
slide 2).1
Considering the post-1999 era in retrospect, the euro area spreads have indeed declined significantly 
since the introduction of the euro (see slide 3). In fact, euro area spreads are small today and actually 
lower  than  the  ones  observed  between  Canadian  provinces.  This  may  be  due  to  a  higher  level  of 
liquidity in the EMU countries' issues as well as somewhat better credit ratings among EMU countries. 
Regarding  the  credit  ratings,  they  may  be  influenced  by  the  generally  larger  tax  bases  of  central 
governments in addition to lower labour mobility in Europe which causes tax bases to be more secure. 
The convergences of yields among euro area countries have not yet been observed as markedly for 
the 10 new EU member states even though ERM2 members clearly have experienced lower spreads 
(see slide 4, Lithuania and Slovakia are ERM2 members). 
The large decline in the euro area yield spreads reflects the increasing integration of European fixed 
income market that has taken place since 1999. The market integration process can be viewed from 
four dimensions. 
Firstly, the fact that the European government bond market consists of many issuers contrary to the 
corresponding  US  market  implies  that  the  European  market  is  more  divided  per  se.  However,  the 
development of a comprehensive network of electronic trading platforms has mitigated this issue, i.e. 
the predominant part of the EMU issuers is today connected by the same system (see slide 5). 
Secondly, the establishment of primary dealer networks in all EMU countries has, among other things 
(e.g. securing liquidity), enhanced the integration of the bond market. A quick glance at various EMU 
countries'  lists'  of  official primary  dealers, shows  that  a  large  part  of  primary  dealers  are  present in 
almost every government bond market, indicating a high level of market integration across countries 
(see slide 6). 
Thirdly, a harmonization of market conventions as well as national tax treatments has occurred since 
the  introduction  of  the  euro.  E.g.  conventions  in  government  bonds  and  T-bills  markets  concerning 
settlement  date,  definition  of  business  days  and  day  count  basis,  coupon  frequency  and  coupon 
calculation methods are almost completely harmonized across euro area countries today (see slide 7 
                                                      
1   See "Yield Differentials in the Future EMU", Monetary Review, May 1997, Danmarks Nationalbank, for a pre-1999 analysis 
of expected EMU spreads based on evidence from Canadian provinces. 
BIS Review 122/2006 
 1
and  8).  This  has  made  the  European  fixed  income  market  more  transparent  and  accessible  for 
international investors. 
Fourthly, product development has also contributed to the market integration process. For example the 
euro-denominated interest rate swap (IRS) market has grown to become the largest in the world in 
absolute terms. In relative terms, the euro-denominated IRS market is today about twice the size of 
the USD-denominated IRS market (see slide 9). As a result of the very liquid IRS market, fixed income 
instruments across the euro area are today typically priced using the standardized euro swap curve in 
combination with  yield  curves stemming  from  heterogeneous government  bonds. Consequently,  the 
euro-denominated IRS market has obtained a similar benchmark role as the one held by US treasuries 
in  the  USD-denominated  market,  with  respect  to  the  pricing  of  fixed  income  instruments.  The 
emergence of a liquid swap curve has thereby served to further alleviate the issue of fragmentation in 
the European fixed income. 
The small yield spreads that still exist today between EMU member states are primarily attributable to 
differences in liquidity and credit risk between issuers. Consequently, the EMU era has drawn more 
attention to these two factors. Regarding credit risk, increased focus may have served to increase the 
disciplinary effect of the financial markets on policy makers. An inspection of the relationship between 
the development of national debt-to-GDP ratios and sovereign yield spreads relative to Germany 1999 
–  2006,  indicates  that  the  improved  creditworthiness  of  the  EMU  member  states  since  1999  can 
explain  some  of  the  decline  in  the  spreads  (see  slide  10).  However,  credit  risk  is  only  one  of  the 
factors that determine the size of the spreads and should therefore not be viewed in isolation. 
In  order  to  examine  the  role  of  respectively  credit  risk  and  liquidity  embedded  in  the  current  yield 
spreads across EMU countries, one may use prices on credit default swaps (CDS) to split up the yield 
spread  between  credit  risk  and  liquidity.  The  fact  that  the  price  of  a  CDS  approximately  equals  the 
credit risk premium of the underlying bond makes this possible. 
Under the assumption that the yield spread between the EMU-members purely can be explained by 
differences in credit risk and liquidity, the liquidity risk premium may be defined as the residual of the 
yield spread after deducting the credit risk premium (see slide 11). The calculation shows that the yield 
spreads  today  only  are  affected  noticeable  by  credit  risk  for  Greece,  Italy  and  Portugal,  whereas 
liquidity primarily plays a role for the smaller issuers. 
In  addition  to  the  government  bond  market,  the  introduction  of  the  euro  also  formed  expectations 
concerning a development of the euro-denominated corporate bond market. Though this market has 
increased fairly much in terms of total outstanding in the post-1999 period, the corporate bond market 
continues  to  account  for  a  small  fraction  of  the  euro-zone  debt  market  (see  slide  12).  Corporate 
finance traditions in Europe favouring the banking model may be one explanation for this. It should be 
recognised that well developed mortgage markets make a strong contribution to debt security markets 
in a number of European countries. 
Nevertheless,  an  increasing  number  of  entities  outside  the  euro-zone  issue  bonds  denominated  in 
euro. Indeed, the role of the euro in the international debt security markets has increased substantially 
since 1999. For broadly defined international debt securities (i.e. securities either issued outside the 
respective currency area or issued within the currency area and targeted at the international financial 
markets), the euro account for a global share of 47 percent compared with a share of 37 percent for 
the US dollar. The euro's share has risen by 18 percentage points since January 1999. The high share 
of  the  international  market  compared  to  the  size  of  the  national  segment  reflects  the  high  relative 
importance of the international financial markets for the euro (see slide 13). 
The establishment of well functioning European government bond markets is an important contribution 
to the European single market supporting an efficient allocation of resources and economic growth. 
The  contribution  from  the  government  bond  market  in  the  euro  area  should  therefore  not  be 
underestimated. 
2 
 BIS Review 122/2006
     BIS Review 122/2006 
 3
  4 
    BIS Review 122/2006
     BIS Review 122/2006 
 5
  6 
    BIS Review 122/2006
     BIS Review 122/2006 
 7
 8 
    BIS Review 122/2006
 BIS Review 122/2006 
 9
