Stefan Ingves: Comments on “An evaluation of Swedish monetary policy 
1995-2005” 
Speech  by  Mr  Stefan  Ingves,  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  the  Riksdag  Committee  on 
Finance, Stockholm, 30 November 2006. 
 Thank  you  for  the  invitation  to  come  here!  I  would  like  to  begin  by  thanking  the  authors,  Professor 
Giavazzi and Professor Mishkin, for an interesting and comprehensive report. As we at the Riksbank 
have said earlier, we consider it a very good initiative by the Committee on Finance to commission two 
highly qualified external experts to make an evaluation of the monetary policy conducted over the past 
decade. 
As the Riksbank has an independent position, it is important that monetary policy should be regularly 
examined  and  evaluated.  The  Committee  on  Finance  makes  its  own  evaluation  of  monetary  policy 
every year, but I nevertheless think it is a good idea to occasionally supplement these evaluations with 
reports made by external experts. It is a particular advantage that two foreign academics have carried 
out the examination. This gives an outside perspective on Swedish developments, which can be very 
valuable. 
As you can see, the report is fairly comprehensive and it is therefore impossible for me to mention all 
of the aspects that are covered. Let me just say as an overall comment that I feel the report has been 
very  pleasant  reading.  Although  the  authors  express  criticism  on  some  points,  it  is  clear  that  their 
overall impression of Swedish monetary policy is very positive. For instance, it is very pleasing that the 
evaluation gives such high marks to the efforts we have made to improve the analytical base for our 
forecasts and for monetary policy. Our ambition has been to use the latest and best scientific methods 
in  our  analyses  and  we  have  therefore  continuously  updated  our  working  methods.  It  is  therefore 
particularly  satisfactory  that  the  authors  observe  in  their  conclusion  that  "the  Riksbank  compares 
favourably with the best central banks in the world". 
However,  we  must  not  rest  on  our  laurels.  Conducting  monetary  policy  is  associated  with  great 
uncertainty,  not  least  because  developments  in  the  economy  often  follow  different  paths  than 
anticipated.  We  must  therefore  always  take  heed  of  constructive  criticism,  continue  to  hone  our 
analyses and test new approaches with an open mind. However, after this evaluation I feel fortified in 
my opinion that we are on the right track. 
Recommendations in the evaluation 
As I do not have much time at my disposal, I shall concentrate my comments on the recommendations 
in  the  report  as  to  how  monetary  policy  and  its  framework  could  be  improved.  Three  of  the 
recommendations  are  aimed  at  the  Riksdag  and  the  Government  and  concern  the  forms  for  the 
monetary  policy  debate  and  the  appointment  of  the  members  of  the  Executive  Board.  As  these 
recommendations are not directed at the Riksbank, I will refrain from commenting on them. 
With  regard  to  the  recommendations  aimed  at  the  Riksbank,  I  shall  first  comment  on  some 
suggestions  on  which  I  agree  with  the  authors.  This  applies,  I  can  say  now,  to  most  of  their 
suggestions.  I  will  then  also  take  up  a  couple  of  points  on  which  I  do  not  entirely  agree  with  the 
conclusions drawn by the authors. 
One of the recommendations given is that the Riksbank should make it clear in its Inflation Report that 
the  flexibility  of  our  inflation-targeting  policy  means  that  we  attempt  to  subdue  fluctuations  in  both 
inflation and the real economy. This is a point I agree with, but in my opinion we have actually already 
done so. With effect from the second Inflation Report this year, we have a special box explaining how 
the  Riksbank  has  scope  when  setting  interest  rates  to  give  consideration  to  developments  in  both 
inflation  and  the  real  economy.  The  box  is  an  extract  from  a  document  entitled  “Monetary  policy  in 
Sweden”, which we published in May this year. The fact that inflation targeting gives consideration to 
the stability of both inflation and the real economy is moreover something we have long emphasised in 
speeches and other forms of communication. However, it is probably fair to say that we have gradually 
become clearer on this point, as we have learnt more about how inflation-targeting policy should be 
conducted. 
BIS Review 117/2006 
 1
Another recommendation in the evaluation is that the Riksbank should base its forecasts on its own 
assessment  of  which  repo  rate  path  is  appropriate;  that  is,  that  we  should  take  a  step  further 
compared to our current method. At present, we base our forecasts on the development of the repo 
rate  expected  by  the  financial  markets.  Professors  Giavazzi  and  Mishkin  give  several  reasons  why 
they  advocate  that  the  Riksbank  should  present  its  own  interest  rate  forecasts.  Perhaps  the  most 
important reason is that this would show most clearly what the Riksbank’s own expectations of future 
monetary policy are. This would make it easier for companies and households to plan for the future. 
This  point  of  view  is  easy  to  agree  with,  and  I  have  expressed  similar  thoughts  myself  in  various 
speeches. We are currently considering and working on how this might be achieved. 
Compensating for earlier deviations from target 
As  I  mentioned  to  begin  with,  there  are  a  couple  of  points  where  I  do  not  agree  entirely  with  the 
authors’ conclusions. One such point is how the Riksbank should act if inflation has been below, or 
above, target for a long period of time. Professors Giavazzi and Mishkin suggest that if inflation has 
been below target for a long period of time, monetary policy should partly compensate for this by being 
extra expansionary in the future. 
As I understand it, the background to this is the developments in recent years, when inflation has been 
below the target. Here it is worth pointing out that when inflation has been below target level for a long 
period of time, there have been good explanations for this. The most recent episode has mainly been 
due to the fact that productivity growth has been surprisingly high. As was observed in the evaluation, 
this was something that most forecasters missed. 
The  authors  put  forward  two  arguments  in  favour  of  monetary  policy  compensating  for  persistent 
deviations from the inflation target. The first is based on the assumption that deviations from target 
may be a sign that the analysis and forecasting models used by the Riksbank tend to over-estimate 
inflation. Of course, we are constantly working on ways of improving our assessments and trying to 
learn from forecasting errors we have made. If our analysis and forecasting models do not function 
satisfactorily, we must attempt to correct the deficiencies. In my opinion, this would be a more natural 
measure than compensating for forecasting errors by means of an extra expansionary policy. 
The second argument is based on the idea that it might be beneficial to express the target in terms of 
a path for price levels instead of in the form of a target for the inflation rate. The difference from an 
inflation  target,  which  may  be  considered  rather  subtle,  is  that  if  the  inflation  target  is  not  met,  it  is 
regarded as a “bygone” under the current strategy. This is to say, if inflation is for instance below the 
target for a long period of time, one does not need to compensate for this by then allowing inflation to 
be above the target for a period of time. Instead, one looks ahead and aims to bring inflation back in 
line with the target of 2 per cent. 
If  one  instead  has  a  target  path  for  the  price  level,  if  prices  are  below  the  path  this  must  be 
counteracted by more rapid inflation during a period of time to enable a return to the path prices were 
following before the deviation. If the intention is that prices should increase by 2 per cent, but over a 
period of time they have increased by less than this, the rate of price increase must be higher than 2 
per cent for a period in order to return to the original price level path. 
The  advantages  and  disadvantages  of  a  price  level  target  have  been  debated  considerably  in 
research and are also discussed in the evaluation. One example of an advantage of having a price 
level target is that it provides more guidance than an inflation target with regard to the price level far 
into the future. As I understand it, the authors do not appear to be advocating a pure price level target, 
rather  some  form  of  hybrid.  In  concrete  terms,  this  means,  if  I  interpret  rightly,  that  the  Riksbank 
should retain its inflation target but still to some extent compensate for the deviations from target that 
have arisen by deliberately allowing inflation to go above the target for a time. 
Here I can imagine a number of practical objections. I believe, for instance, that it would not be an 
easy task to convey the message to the general public that as inflation had been, say, below target for 
a period of time, the Riksbank would endeavour to bring inflation up to, say, around 3 per cent for a 
period of perhaps a year. In my opinion, this could lead to considerable confusion with regard to the 
status of the 2 per cent target. There is a risk that it could be perceived as the Riksbank beginning to 
work with inflation targets that vary over time, which could also be said to be the case. I believe that in 
this type of world it would be more difficult to anchor expectations of future inflation. 
2 
 BIS Review 117/2006
The authors claim that this method of conducting monetary policy would only entail a minor change in 
the current policy. I do not really agree with this. I consider that it would be a fairly major change in a 
system that, all in all, has been proved to work well. It would in any case be a much greater change 
than the ones we have made so far, such as abandoning the assumption of an unchanged repo rate 
and our earlier simple policy rule. Bearing in mind that the Riksbank, as is also noted in the report, has 
not  found  it  entirely  easy  to  communicate  these  relatively  limited  changes  in  its  monetary  policy 
system, 
this  change  as  minor.  
However,  I  am  not  saying  that  changes  in  the  monetary  policy  strategy,  for  instance  in  the  way 
suggested by Giavazzi and Mishkin, will never be considered. But we do need further analysis and 
debate before this can be considered in Sweden. 
is  somewhat  surprising 
the  authors  consider 
that 
it 
Monetary policy and house prices 
Another  point  where  I  have  some  doubts  is  whether  house  prices  should  be  taken  into  account  in 
monetary  policy.  The  specific  recommendation  given  in  the  evaluation  is  that  the  Riksbank  should 
clarify that house prices, like other asset prices, are not independent targets for monetary policy. 
In  my  opinion,  this  is  a  message  that  we  have  tried  hard  to  convey  recently,  which  has  also  been 
noted in the evaluation. I and other members of the Executive Board have explained, for instance, in 
several speeches that if prices in the housing market have had an effect on our interest rate decisions, 
this has not been a reflection of the inflation target being downgraded in any way or that we now have 
a special target for house prices. The reason is that we believe this the best way to safeguard what we 
have been set to safeguard – stability in the real economy and inflation. 
It  is  claimed in  the  evaluation  that  the  Riksbank  was  initially  unclear with  regard  to  the  reasons  for 
allowing house prices to affect interest rate decisions and that this meant some people had interpreted 
it to mean that we had introduced a further target in addition to our inflation target. I believe there is 
some truth in this criticism. We could probably have been clearer at an earlier stage than we were 
regarding  the  reasons  for  taking  house  prices  into  account  in  our  interest  rate  decisions.  Then  we 
would  perhaps  also  have  been  able  to  avoid  some  of  the  misunderstandings  that  have  evidently 
arisen. 
Now I believe that the criticism made in the evaluation concerns not only to what extent we have been 
unclear about whether we regard house prices as an independent target – which we accordingly do 
not.  It  also  appears  to  stem  from  the  authors  having  a  somewhat  different  view  than  the  Riksbank 
regarding  how  house  prices  should  be  considered  in  monetary  policy.  The  authors  argue  that 
monetary  policy  should  react  to  a  rapid  price  increase  in  the  housing  market  only  if  such  a  price 
increase is expected to lead via normal channels to problems such as overheating and excessively 
high inflation. 
This  method  of  reasoning  is  not  without  problems.  A  rapid  increase  in  house prices  and  lending  to 
households may entail risks in the long term, which are difficult to quantify and capture in conventional 
forecasts for the economy a couple of years ahead. If prices and the increase in borrowing were to 
some extent based on unrealistic expectations of how house prices and interest rates will develop in 
future, there is a risk of a fairly substantial correction in expectations and prices further ahead. The 
consequence of such a correction might be that the economy developed weakly over a long period of 
time. It would also have effects on inflation. 
It may be necessary to take these risks into account in monetary policy decisions in a different way 
than in the normal approach, where the forecasts for inflation and the real economy for the next two 
years serve as the foundation. This can be done, for instance, by beginning a phase of interest rate 
increases slightly earlier than would otherwise have been the case. Of course, the hope is that this will 
contribute  to  a  smoother  adjustment  process  for  house  prices  and  thereby  to  a  more  stable 
development of inflation and the real economy. 
Let me say, to round off my contribution on this subject, that there are some questions here that are 
still debated among central banks and within the academic world. As yet, there is no consensus as to 
how monetary policy should be used to manage risks related to rapidly rising house and asset prices. I 
would also like to emphasise that, all in all, I do not see any major differences between the Riksbank’s 
view and the authors’ view. The approach we have chosen has in practice only meant a marginally 
different timing of our interest rate decisions. Given this, the fairly strong focus in the evaluation on the 
Riksbank’s way of managing house prices appears slightly exaggerated, but I agree with the criticism 
that we should have communicated our actions more clearly. 
BIS Review 117/2006 
 3
Conclusion 
Let  me  conclude  my  comments  on  the  report.  It  is  an  important  document  that  the  authors  have 
produced. I have put some time into arguing against a couple of the proposals, but I once again would 
like to emphasise that I agree with the authors on most of what they have written. We will of course 
closely  examine  the  criticism  that  has  been  raised.  However,  I  hope  that  the  fact  that  the  report  is 
critical  on  a  few  points  will  not  overshadow  the  overall  message  –  namely  that  Swedish  monetary 
policy has worked well. 
Thank you! 
4 
 BIS Review 117/2006
