Hans Georg Fabritius: The new TARGET2 system and recent developments 
in European securities settlement  
Welcoming address and keynote speech by Dr Hans Georg Fabritius, Member of the Executive Board 
of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the TARGET2 conference, Frankfurt am Main, 15 November 2006.  
 Good morning ladies and gentlemen, I would like to welcome you very warmly to the Bundesbank’s 
TARGET2 conference organised as part of Euro Finance Week.  
Today’s conference will focus on two topics: the new TARGET2 system, launching in exactly 369 days 
from now, and recent developments in European securities settlement. Both are key components of 
Europe's financial infrastructure and constitute a primary duty for a central bank: namely, to ensure 
that payment and securities settlement are both efficient and secure.  
Central banks can achieve these objectives by assuming various roles including operating their own 
systems,  acting  as  a  catalyst  and  performing  an  oversight  function.  A  not  insignificant  number  of 
experts  expect  central  banks  to  withdraw  from  operational  activities  in  the  long  term  and  limit 
themselves  to  overseeing  private  payment  and  securities  settlement  systems.  Proponents  of  a  less 
active role for central banks have a motto: “Let the market decide”. They believe that, as public bodies, 
central  banks  should  concentrate  on  ensuring  an  efficient  operational  framework.  Otherwise,  as 
“authorities”  and  “monopolists  of  central  bank  money”,  they  risk  distorting  private  competition  and 
hence restricting it.  
However, the question we need to ask ourselves is this: in a competitive economy with a stable private 
sector, why should central banks operate their own systems at all?  
I 
Central  banks  do  have  a  monopoly  over  the  supply  of  central  bank  money.  Even  though  the  term 
monopoly rightly has negative connotations, one thing is clear: in this context, it makes perfect sense. 
Total  control  over  the  provision  of  central  bank  money  is  key  to  modern  monetary  policy  and  is 
therefore essential if we are to achieve our primary task of safeguarding monetary stability. In addition, 
central  bank  money  is  also  a  byword  for  security  and  liquidity.  In  other  words,  no  credit  risk  and 
maximum  availability.  This  also  makes  central  bank  money  especially  suitable  for  settling  financial 
obligations, particularly individual payments and securities transactions.  
The necessary systems must remain under the control of the central banks. Monetary policy aside, 
there are a number of other reasons why this is the case.  
• 
First, it allows us to make a significant contribution to financial stability. In times of crisis, it is 
particularly important to react rapidly and discreetly. This is ensured by operating our own 
system ensuring full control over our accounts and the provision of liquidity. In addition, we 
attach  high  importance  to  a  comprehensive  range  of  contingency  provisions;  think,  for 
example, of TARGET2’s innovative business continuity concept.  
Second, we ensure that market participants have open and competitively neutral access to 
central  bank  money.  Moreover,  this  guarantees  that  our  systems  are  widely  and  directly 
accessible. A total of 1,000 institutions across Europe are directly connected to TARGET2 
and many thousands more indirectly.  
Third,  offering  our  own  system  allows  us  to  make  a  direct  contribution  to  security  and 
efficiency.  It  was  mainly  central  banks  that  helped  to  bring  the  idea  of  real-time  gross 
settlement  to  fruition.  That  said,  in  addition  to  speed  and  security,  the  Bundesbank,  in 
particular, has attached great importance to liquidity efficiency as well (think of Euro Access 
Frankfurt).  
Fourth, it enables us to avoid liquidity fragmentation. I think it would be counterproductive to 
split up central bank liquidity by allowing other entities to manage our accounts. The principal 
benefit of TARGET2 is plain for all to see: all central bank liquidity throughout the euro area 
   BIS Review 111/2006 
 1
will  be  combined  in  a  single  technical  platform  which,  in  turn,  will  make  it  easier  for 
participants to manage their liquidity.  
Some countries use shared operator models where the settlement systems are owned jointly by banks 
and/or central banks. However, I believe that this should be done only in very specific cases where the 
market structure and the legal framework make it appropriate.  
II 
Ladies and gentlemen, even if central banks are monopolists of central bank money, they must still 
face competition.  
Market participants are not obliged to use central banks’ systems. That’s why there is always a choice 
between settling in central bank money (in TARGET2, for example) or in commercial money (as in the 
EURO1 system). For obvious reasons, TARGET is, however, compulsory for settling monetary policy 
operations.  
Moreover,  our  systems  are  not  developed  in  a  distant  “ivory  tower”,  nor  are  they  decreed  to  the 
market. In order to ensure that they are actually being used, market participants are actively involved 
in the design of our systems.  
plus
One  only  needs  to  remember  the  great  success  experienced  when  developing  RTGS
,  which 
incidentally  now  contributes  about  50%  of  the  whole  TARGET  volume.  Without  the  support  of  the 
banking industry we would not have managed to successfully establish this system in the market in 
such a short time.  
The  European  banking  industry  is  likewise  intensively  involved  in  TARGET2.  Indeed,  if  it  were  not 
strongly  requested  by  the banking  industry,  the  Single  Shared  Platform would  still be nothing  but  a 
distant dream. And it is also clear that we will only be able to realise TARGET2 Securities with the 
active involvement and constructive cooperation of the banks and the central securities depositories 
(CSDs).  
TARGET2 Securities should not be understood as a hostile or, indeed, friendly takeover of the CSDs’ 
business by the Eurosystem. The main issue here is also our core function, ie settlement in central 
bank  money.  The  Eurosystem has  no intention of using  TARGET2 securities  to set  up  a European 
central  securities  depository.  In  this  respect  TARGET2  Securities  differs  from  the  US  FEDWIRE 
Securities  System  which  is  a  fully-fledged  central  securities  depository  though  only  for  government 
paper.  
In Europe, the CSDs will retain full responsibility for the safe custody and administration of securities 
and for relationships with their customers. However, TARGET2 Securities demands that, in technical 
terms,  the  maintaining  of  securities  accounts  also  be  effectively  transferred  to  the  Eurosystem 
platform.  
Given the fact that if for reasons of security and efficiency the integration of securities and central bank 
money  accounts  is  required  there  are  just  two  options.  Either  the  central  banks  “outsource”  their 
money accounts to the various CSDs or the CSDs shift their securities accounts to the Eurosystem.  
For the reasons I mentioned at the start of this speech, the second approach is the clear favourite. 
However,  I  would  like  to  emphasise  again  that  using  TARGET2  Securities  will  make  sure  that  the 
proven, clear delineation of responsibilities in the market will remain intact, ie central banks provide the 
settlement in central bank money, CSDs are the owners and custodians of securities accounts.  
Naturally,  we  must  also  bear  in  mind  economic  considerations  when  providing  settlement  services. 
This prevents “public” money from being “wasted” and guarantees that it will be used sensibly. At the 
same time, it enables us to tackle any potential competitive distortion.  
Take,  for  example,  TARGET2:  it  will  not  only  meet  user  demands  but  will  also  ensure  cost-
effectiveness. The idea to establish a single technical platform for TARGET2 translates into exploiting 
economies of scale and achieving cost reductions.  
Cost-effectiveness  also  means  making  maximum  use  of  the  synergies  the  Eurosystem  has  to  offer 
with  regard  to  TARGET2  Securities  as  well.  This,  in  turn,  means  that  the  present  operators  of 
TARGET2  -  the  Banque  de  France,  the  Banca  d’Italia  and  the  Bundesbank  –  want  one  single 
technical platform for TARGET2 Securities and TARGET2. To put it simply, in our view the creation of 
2 
 BIS Review 111/2006
a second settlement platform within the Eurosystem in addition to TARGET2 would serve no economic 
purpose and would only make liquidity management more difficult.  
Naturally,  I  would  also  like  to  mention  the  principle  of  cost  recovery.  Fundamentally,  we  pursue  a 
policy  where  the  prices  paid  are  sufficient  to  cover  costs  so  that  at  the  end  of  the  day  users 
themselves finance the services being provided. There are, however, two aspects to be considered.  
On the one hand, payment systems and settlement systems are infrastructures with a high share of 
fixed costs. It follows that in order to successfully recover costs a certain settlement volume is crucial. 
Reasonable unit costs – also beneficial for the participants – are the consequence of economies of 
scale  by  means  of  corresponding  volume  effects.  Here,  we  share  a  common  aim  with  users.  The 
equation  is  simple:  a  20%  rise  in  the  volume  of  TARGET2  would  result  in  a  further  reduction  in 
average costs by just over a fifth!  
On  the  other  hand,  infrastructures  can  also  generate  external  effects  with  which  the  individual 
participant  will  not  have  reckoned.  These  might  be  a  particularly  secure  gross  settlement  or  a 
particularly high quality of contingency provisions. Full application of the cost recovery principle could 
prompt banks to resort more often to less expensive private systems.  
As  a  consequence,  external  effects  have  to  be  considered  when  setting  prices.  However,  such 
deviations  from  the  general  cost recovery  principle would  have  to  be well-founded because  of  their 
potential implications regarding competition.  
III 
Ladies and gentlemen, do you really think that central banks are crowding private competitors out of 
the  market  with  state  intervention?  I  believe  that,  with  TARGET2  and  TARGET2  Securities,  this 
statement can easily be refuted. Central banks are by no means acting in an anti-competitive way. On 
the  contrary,  they  are,  in  fact,  stimulating  competition  by  providing  a  neutral  basis  infrastructure  in 
central bank money for CSDs, banks and other service providers competing in the market.  
Take the planned Single Shared Platform in TARGET2 for instance. Here we are breaking new ground 
by  moving  away  from  the  networking  of  national  markets  to  create  an  integrated  single  European 
market. The advantages of this are obvious.  
• 
Firstly, the harmonisation of services and prices will create a level playing field for all banks 
across Europe.  
Secondly,  the  standardisation  in  connection  with  TARGET2  promotes  a  more  efficient 
structuring  of  the  business  processes.  It  enables  participating  banks,  especially  credit 
institutions  active  across  Europe,  to  consolidate  their  internal  system  landscape  and  it 
creates a leeway to offer customers a better range of services. In future, priority payments 
will be executed more quickly, securely and more effectively.  
Thirdly,  the  extensive  settlement  opportunities  for  ancillary  systems  provide  for  greater 
efficiency  in  terms  of  procedures  and  liquidity  and  also  for  greater  security.  Furthermore, 
TARGET2  creates  optimal  settlement  opportunities  with  cross-border  access  to  other 
systems.  
  The issue of competition is more controversial in the case of TARGET2 Securities. Although here too, 
I firmly believe that – owing to the settlement of securities transactions in central bank money on a 
single platform – we are ultimately more likely to significantly stimulate competition rather than restrict 
it.  Just  like  TARGET2,  TARGET2  Securities  represents  an  integration  of  the  basic  settlement 
infrastructure in Europe.  
The  various  settlement  markets  in  Europe  are  still  very  fragmented.  In  this  respect,  I  see  certain 
parallels with the discussions regarding the Single Euro Payments Area in retail payments. As a result, 
there  are  clear  price  differences  between  securities  settlement  systems.  Moreover,  cross-border 
transactions, which require interaction between various systems, are also relatively expensive.  
What positive contribution can TARGET2 Securities make in this respect? First and foremost, I believe 
that it will reduce costs and abolish some Giovannini barriers. In other words, TARGET2 Securities 
stands for:  
• 
harmonisation of technical interfaces, primarily in the area of settlements  
BIS Review 111/2006 
 3
 Europe-wide finality of securities trades  
interoperability  between  central  securities  depositories,  that  is  to  say  the  settlement  of 
transactions between different service providers will be simplified and more transparent. In 
future,  it will be  possible  to  settle cross-border  transactions  just as easily and securely as 
national transactions. The country in which the securities are held will no longer be an issue 
for the settlement of securities.  
In  this  respect,  I  believe  that  TARGET2  Securities  could  enhance  other  initiatives  rather  than 
contradict  them.  These  initiatives,  eg  the  Code  of  Conduct,  will  also  result  in  a  more  efficient 
settlement of securities in Europe.  
TARGET2 Securities offers a high degree of efficiency as an integrated settlement model and, owing 
to the consolidation of the settlement, it will ensure economies of scale and greater cost efficiency. 
TARGET2  Securities  stands  for  competitive  neutrality  and,  in  our  view,  avoids  the  outsourcing  of 
central bank account management. It also sets the benchmark for alternative proposals that may be 
put forward by private companies.  
IV 
Are  central  banks  faced  with  a  conflict  of  interests  in  their  function  as  both  system  operators  and 
overseers? This question has already been adequately discussed and convincingly answered in the 
context of TARGET.  
Even  if  conflicts  of  interest  were  to  arise,  we  counteract  these  by  applying  international  oversight 
standards and by keeping a strict separation of our various roles. The general public is also aware of 
this separation of functions.  
The discussion regarding possible conflicts of interest is, of course, always brought up again whenever 
central banks, using their own oversight authority for example, would try to enforce the use of their 
own systems. This would be fundamentally problematic like any approach to prescribe the usage of a 
specific market infrastructure by means of the oversight function or by other regulatory powers.  
I do not think that it would be a wise decision for us to withdraw from our role as service provider and 
to restrict ourselves to the pure oversight function. In my opinion, this would not be beneficial to our 
objectives  in  payments  and  financial  stability.  It  would  also  be  contrary  to  experience  in  other 
countries, such as in the United States and Japan. The role of a central bank would then ultimately be 
guided by a different model in which the regulatory aspect could become much more significant.  
This means, however, that we should take care of the economic and functional viability of  our own 
systems. Otherwise, the political significance of our systems and our role could be put into question. 
Therefore,  it  would  be  very  unfortunate  if  activity  in  our  own  systems  were  to  be  eroded  by  an 
increased  provision  of  central  bank  liquidity  to  other  systems.  I  am,  however,  confident  that  with 
TARGET2 and TARGET2 Securities, we are providing a convincing answer in all respects to the issue 
of the operational involvement of central banks.  
V 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  “we  are  living  in  a  system  where  you  are  either  on  the  wheel  or  under  it”. 
 
century, and yet they 
These are not my words but those of a great German philosopher from the 19th
are still as relevant as ever. Applied to central banks, the underlying message is that we must act as 
the wheel and ensure momentum by means of our own systems. And to ensure that we do not end up 
under the wheels, we have to take on the competition.  
4 
 BIS Review 111/2006
