David Dodge: The global economic landscape and the implications for Ontario 
Remarks  by  Mr  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  2006  Ontario  Economic 
Leadership Summit, Niagara-on-the-Lake, Ontario, 25 October 2006.  
 The Ontario Economic Summit is an important event, and I do wish I could have attended, not only so 
that I could deliver my remarks in person, but so that I could listen to the various discussions that will 
take  place  over  the  course  of  the  next  two  days.  You  will  be  discussing  topics  that  are  central  to 
Ontario's future economic prospects. How can we develop human capital to its fullest potential, and 
retain that capital? How can we foster research, innovation, and commercialization in this province? 
How can we improve Ontario's competitiveness in the global marketplace? As policy-makers, labour, 
and business leaders, how we answer these questions will go a long way in determining the economic 
well-being of our citizens in the years ahead. 
My  purpose  this  morning  is  to  set  the  scene  for  your  discussions  of  these  questions.  I  will  start  by 
reviewing the outlook for the global economy as set out in the Bank's Monetary Policy Report, which 
we  published  last  week.  I  will  then  look  at  how  global  developments  can  be  expected  to  affect  the 
Canadian  economy  in  general  and  the  Ontario  economy  in  particular.  Following  that,  I'll  say  a  few 
words about the themes of the conference and about a couple of the policies that I see as important to 
securing  Ontario's  economic  future.  Finally,  I  will  be  happy  to  take  your  questions  and  hear  your 
comments for the remainder of my time with you this morning. 
The global economic landscape 
Let me begin with the outlook for the global economy as a whole, before turning to the implications for 
Canada  and  for  Ontario,  in  particular.  Certainly,  the  headline  numbers  for  the  global  economy  are 
encouraging.  The  strong  growth  of  recent  years  appears  set  to  continue.  The  Bank's  base-case 
projection is for real growth in the global economy of 5.1 per cent this year, moderating slightly to 4.5 
per cent by 2008. 
However,  these  numbers  mask  some  important  differences  in  the  growth  prospects  of  different 
regions. Growth in Asia continues to be very strong, led by the economies of China and India. Indeed, 
the Chinese authorities have their hands full trying to hold growth at a more sustainable pace. Growth 
in other emerging markets is coming from areas such as South America and Africa, which bodes well 
for the future of these regions. At the same time, it is very encouraging that stronger domestic demand 
growth is finally taking hold in Europe and Japan.  
But  after  several  years  of  strong  expansion,  the  U.S.  economy  is  cooling  down,  restrained  by  a 
pullback in the housing sector and slowing demand for automobiles. After growing at a 5.6 per cent 
annual rate in the first quarter, U.S. economic growth slowed to just 2.9 per cent in the second quarter, 
and may well have slowed to less than 2 per cent in the third quarter of 2006. Earlier this year, the 
Bank had projected that the U.S. economy would begin to slow, but the pullback we are seeing now is 
larger, and coming sooner, than we had expected. In our Report last week, we updated our projection 
to say that U.S. growth should average 2 to 2.5 per cent in the second half of this year and the first 
half of 2007. Activity should then recover to above three per cent growth in the second half of next 
year and throughout 2008. 
I  don't  want  to  minimize  what  we  see  happening  in  the  United  States.  But  I  think  it  is  important  to 
recognize this slowdown for what it is - a necessary cyclical correction in the U.S. economy. In our 
view,  this  is  likely  to  be  a  temporary  slowing  of  growth,  not  a  contraction.  When  our  forecast  is 
expressed  on  an  average  annual  basis,  it  perhaps  does  a  better  job  of  illustrating  the  mild  and 
temporary nature of this slowdown. We are expecting 3.3 per cent growth for 2006 overall in the U.S. 
economy, 2.6 per cent growth in 2007, and 3.2 per cent in 2008. 
In our base-case projection, we do not see the pullback in the housing and auto sectors spreading in a 
major way to U.S. consumption more broadly, or to business investment. Nor should the slowdown be 
very prolonged. Currently, this is a reasonable assumption. There are no signs of any systemic stress 
in financial markets or among financial institutions in the United States. Nor is there anything in the 
economic data to suggest that the pullback in these two sectors is spreading. Indeed, the Beige Book 
BIS Review 101/2006 
 1
published by the U.S. Federal Reserve made this same point two weeks ago, although I recognize that 
this fact is cold comfort to those Ontarians whose livelihood is closely linked to the fortunes of the U.S. 
housing and auto sectors. Of course, there is a risk that this projection could turn out to be wrong, and 
I'll return to this risk in a few minutes. 
Let me make one more point about the global economy before turning to the domestic outlook. For 
some  time  now,  policy-makers  have  been  worried  about  global  imbalances;  that  is,  the  very  large 
current account deficit in the United States, which is mirrored by current account surpluses in Asia and 
major oil-exporting countries. The increase in demand we are now seeing outside North America, and 
the slowing in the U.S. economy, is certainly helpful in terms of bringing about a gradual resolution of 
imbalances, and reducing the risk of an abrupt, disorderly resolution. The Bank's base-case projection 
assumes that this gradual, orderly resolution will take place. That said, it is important for policy-makers 
to  continue  to  take  appropriate  measures  that  allow  market-based  adjustments  to  take  place  both 
within and across their domestic economies. If markets can be confident that these measures will be 
taken,  it  will  reduce  the  risk  of  a  sudden  swing  in  market  sentiment  and  a  disorderly  resolution  of 
imbalances. 
The outlook for Canada 
Now let me turn to the outlook for the Canadian economy as a whole, before looking specifically at 
Ontario.  With  the  U.S.  economy  slowing  more  abruptly  than  had  been  expected,  Canadian  GDP 
growth fell short of expectations in the second and third quarters. After expanding at a 3.6 per cent 
annual rate in the first quarter of this year, the economy grew by only 2 per cent in the second quarter. 
When Statistics Canada publishes the third-quarter figure at the end of November, we expect roughly 
the same 2 per cent number. 
As we look ahead, consumer spending should remain solid for the rest of this year and right through 
the  end  of  2008,  thanks  to  continued  gains  in  disposable  income  and  increases  in  household  net 
worth. However, housing investment should decline slightly in 2007 and 2008, following many years of 
extraordinarily strong growth. The Bank expects business investment to remain solid as firms react to 
capacity  constraints,  and  to  the  expected  high  prices  for  energy  and  metals,  continued  favourable 
financing  conditions,  and  high  levels  of  cash  flow.  In  terms  of  governments,  the  Bank  continues  to 
assume that this sector will operate in rough balance over time. This implies that the large surpluses 
seen recently will not persist and that governments will bring their books into balance. 
Once again, it is important to think of this as a mild, and likely short-lived, cyclical slowdown. The Bank 
projects final domestic demand to grow by 4.2 per cent in 2006, by 3.2 per cent next year, and by 2.8 
per cent in 2008. However, slowing U.S. growth will have a clear impact on growth in the Canadian 
economy in the near term. The Bank is projecting that net exports will subtract 1.3 percentage points 
from growth this year and 0.7 percentage points next year, and that net exports will not contribute to 
growth in 2008. Overall, the Bank projects 2.8 per cent growth of real GDP in 2006, slowing to 2.5 per 
cent in 2007, but coming back up to 2.8 per cent in 2008. 
In our Report last week, we said that the Bank currently judges that the economy is operating with a 
slight amount of excess demand. Our projection for growth implies that this excess demand would be 
eliminated  by  mid-2007,  and  that  the  economy  should  then  remain  near  its  production  potential 
through to the end of 2008. 
Overall, the Canadian economy has performed remarkably well when you consider that it is continuing 
to adjust to a number of powerful global forces. These include the rise to prominence of China and 
India, which has led to both stronger global demand for many Canadian goods and services, as well 
as increased competition for some Canadian firms. In turn, strong global demand has led to increases 
in most, but not all, commodity prices, and to an associated rise in the Canadian-dollar exchange rate. 
All of this has occurred at a time when central banks around the world have been withdrawing liquidity 
from the global economy.  
Of  course,  economic  adjustment  is  easier  said  than  done.  And  it  is  important  to  acknowledge  that 
adjustment is often very difficult on an individual level. Still, taken as a whole, the Canadian economy 
continues  to  adjust  quite  well.  However,  recent  sluggish  growth  in  labour  productivity  has  led  us  to 
reduce our estimate of potential growth from 3 per cent to 2.8 per cent over the period to the end of 
2008. 
2 
 BIS Review 101/2006
The Bank's projection is that core inflation should remain slightly above 2 per cent over the next few 
months, before returning to 2 per cent in the second half of 2007, and remaining there through 2008. 
As for total inflation, it will continue to be affected by the cut in the Goods and Services Tax and trends 
in energy markets. We expect total inflation to remain below our 2 per cent target, averaging around 
1.5  per  cent,  from  the  fourth  quarter  of  this  year  to  the  end  of  the  second  quarter  of  next  year. 
Following that, total inflation should remain near 2 per cent until the end of 2008. 
Now let me say a few words about the risks to our projection. The risks, both on the upside and the 
downside, appear to be a little bit greater than they were earlier this year. The main risk on the upside 
continues to relate to the momentum in household spending and housing prices. Household income 
continues to grow, consumer credit growth is currently quite high, and house prices have been rising 
sharply.  These  three  factors  could  lead  to  higher  consumption  than  we  expect,  which  would  put 
upward pressure on inflation. In addition, the strong growth in prices and wages now seen in Western 
Canada could also spread to other regions. On the downside, the main risk is that the U.S. slowdown 
could be deeper and last longer than we expect. This would imply lower demand for Canadian exports 
and broader weakness across our economy. The Bank judges that these risks to its inflation forecast 
are roughly balanced. And the current level of the target for the overnight rate is judged, at this time, to 
be consistent with achieving the inflation target over the medium term. 
Implications for Ontario 
Having laid out the Bank's projections, I will now look at the implications for Ontario's economy. There 
are  really  two  sets  of  issues  here.  The  first  relates  to  the  implications  of  the  short-term  cyclical 
downturn. The second relates to the longer-term structural challenges facing Ontario. Let me address 
these in turn. 
It is clear that the cyclical pullback in the U.S. housing and auto sectors is causing particular difficulties 
for Ontario. Given the degree of integration of the Ontario and U.S. economies, this province will feel a 
significant impact from the U.S. downturn throughout the second half of this year and the first half of 
2007.  When  you  consider  that  automotive  products  made  up  44  per  cent  of  Ontario's  merchandise 
exports last year, it is clear that the U.S. downturn will likely affect Ontario more severely than other 
provinces.  Related  manufacturing  industries  could  also  continue  to  face  serious  challenges.  But  I 
remind you that roughly 70 per cent of Ontario's economic activity comes from the service sector, and 
that sector remains in good shape. Overall, Ontario may well underperform the Canadian average for 
the  balance  of  this  year  and  in  2007.  Nevertheless,  modest  growth  in  Ontario's  economy  should 
persist. 
Those  are  some  of  the  short-term  issues  facing  Ontario.  Now  I  want  to  say  a  bit  more  about  the 
longer-term  structural  issues  facing  some  of  Ontario's  industries.  The  forest  industry,  including  pulp 
and  paper,  is  facing  a  number  of  structural  challenges.  These  include  increasing  competition  from 
places  such  as  Brazil  and  Indonesia,  as  well  as  a  flat  or  declining  global  demand  for  newsprint.  In 
addition, wood costs in eastern Canada have risen faster than elsewhere, adding to the challenges. In 
terms of automobiles, there is an ongoing shift in the structural demand for motor vehicles within North 
America.  Although  Ontario  has  been  making  adjustments  in  response  to  these  changes,  more  are 
needed. And the prospects for other industries, where value added has traditionally been rather low, 
will also continue to be limited in the face of intense competition from Asia and elsewhere. Here, I am 
thinking of industries such as furniture, clothing, and textiles. 
However,  while  acknowledging  these  structural  challenges,  we  should  remember  the  importance  of 
Ontario's healthy service sector. The prospects for many service industries, including those with high 
value added such as financial and business services, remain very positive, and these should continue 
to support the Ontario economy for some time to come. 
But  no  matter  which  sector  we  are  talking  about,  we  should  also  remember  that  the  importance  of 
improving  efficiency  is  paramount.  And  so  it  is  encouraging  that  firms  in  the  province  have  been 
investing in machinery and equipment, most often with a goal of improving efficiency and productivity. 
We all need to improve efficiency, and this means that policy-makers need to pay particular attention 
to improving the efficiency of our financial markets. And, as I've said in many other speeches, policy-
makers have a particular need to keep efficiency in mind, both in terms of fostering competition and 
improving our regulatory framework, throughout the economy.  
BIS Review 101/2006 
 3
Policy priorities for Ontario 
I'd be happy to say more about the need to improve efficiency in our question and answer session. But 
before I turn the floor back over to you, let me close with some comments about two of the issues you 
will be discussing over the next few days - developing human capital and improving infrastructure.  
Ultimately,  the  strength  of  our  economy  depends  on  the  skills  of  its  workforce.  To  maximize  these 
skills,  we  need  to  take  a  truly  lifelong  approach  to  learning  and  to  skills  development.  There  is  no 
single approach or policy that will do the trick. Skills development must be a priority for everyone - for 
parents, for students, for workers, for governments, and for employers.  
Having a highly skilled workforce begins with parents. They need to do their best to get their children 
ready to learn by the time they enter school. There is clear evidence that early childhood development 
is vitally important in preparing children for their years at school. But parents need support in this role, 
and governments need to do their part in providing this support. Public investment in early childhood 
education has a high payoff. 
This  role  for  governments  continues  during  the  school  years.  The  public  sector  must  invest  in 
improving the effectiveness of education. To be clear, the point is not to keep children in school longer. 
Rather, the point is to make sure that children actually are acquiring necessary skills while they are in 
the classroom. 
Of  course,  post-secondary  education  is  critical  to  the  development  of  our  workforce.  At  the  college 
level, we need to see more close co-operation between colleges and employers in order to integrate 
learning  with  the  work  environment.  In  this  way,  we  can  maximize  the  relevance  of  education,  and 
students can receive valuable experience in genuine workplaces that employ the most modern and 
advanced  technology.  I  have  seen  good  examples  of  this  kind  of  co-operation  between  Humber 
College and firms in sectors such as design, merchandising, and high-end manufacturing. These are 
positive steps, but we need to see many more of them. 
The need to focus on skills development continues through to the post graduate level. We have seen 
how research centres can grow to become the centre of gravity for economic development in a certain 
sector.  The  obvious  example  in  Ontario  is  the  close  connection  between  Waterloo,  Research  In 
Motion, and quantum computing. This type of partnership helps to build comparative advantages for 
Ontario, and the province needs to develop more of them, quickly. 
Outside of the academic world, it is crucial that, as employers, we take seriously our responsibilities to 
invest in the skills of our workers. I spoke about this issue at length last year in a speech at Humber 
College,  so  I  won't  spend  a  lot  of  time  repeating  those  points.  Instead,  I'd  invite  you  to  read  those 
remarks, which can be found on the Bank of Canada's website. 
The last point I would make about skills development is that we need to keep demographic pressures 
in mind. The population is aging, and we will soon face the challenge of how to make more effective 
use of the skills of workers in their sixties, and even beyond. We will need to examine employment 
incentives, work environments, and other issues to ensure that older workers who wish to contribute to 
the labour force can still do so. 
Aside from developing the skills of our workforce, we also need to remove as many barriers to mobility 
as possible. As I've noted, economic restructuring is happening in Ontario, as it is across the country 
and around the world. To take full advantage of this restructuring, people need to be able to move. To 
this end, I was encouraged to see Ontario signal its desire to join the Investment and Labour Mobility 
Agreement  between  Alberta  and  British  Columbia  -  this  would  be  a  very  helpful  step  by  all  three 
governments. 
It  is  also  important  to  recognize  that  skills  gained  in  one  industry  may  well  be  easily  transferred  to 
another  industry,  with  only  a  small  amount  of  additional  training.  It  is  important  for  businesses  and 
policy-makers  to  focus  on  this  and  not  allow  occupational  licensing  requirements  to  act  as  an 
unnecessary barrier to the transfer of labour. 
And  of  course,  it  is  extremely  important  that  we  take  steps  to  maximize  the  contributions  of  skilled 
immigrants to Canada. We need to find ways to smooth the process of recognizing foreign training and 
credentials, and supplement them to meet the needs of the Canadian economy, so these highly skilled 
people can take their place in the workforce. 
I have focused on the development of human resources in this section because it is a necessary - 
though not sufficient - condition for Ontario's future prosperity. In this vein, I'm glad to see there will be 
4 
 BIS Review 101/2006
discussion of the Irish experience, as that country's remarkable success was predicated on developing 
a skilled and adaptable workforce. 
While policies to get the most out of our "human" infrastructure are important, we also need to develop 
our physical infrastructure in order to reach our full potential. This critical infrastructure includes public 
assets,  such  as  highways,  public  transit  and  transportation  facilities,  power,  waterworks  and  waste 
water, schools, hospitals, and other facilities. It also includes private infrastructure, such as pipelines, 
rail,  and  telecommunications  networks.  Having  modern,  reliable  infrastructure  in  place  allows 
businesses  to  invest  with  greater  certainty,  thus  furthering  the  ability  to  adjust  and  compete  in  a 
changing  global  economy.  Ontario  needs  public  policies  that  can  support  both  public  and  private 
investment in infrastructure so that firms can become more productive. 
The  key  questions  here  are  how  to  improve  the  efficiency  of  infrastructure  investment,  and  how  to 
finance  that  investment.  There  is  evidence  from other countries  that  public-private  partnerships  can 
both  increase  the  efficiency  of  investments  and  support  their  financing.  Now  is  the  right  time  to 
encourage partnerships between the Government of Ontario and private providers, given the climate 
of  low  nominal  interest  rates  and  the  presence  of  large  pension  funds  that  are  searching  for  these 
kinds of investment opportunities. Of course, the most efficient and timely allocation of resources for 
infrastructure occurs when the incentives are right. And it is true that the hardest incentive to get right 
is proper pricing. A lack of pricing that appropriately reflects demand and supply conditions may be 
one  reason  why  there  have  been  relatively  few  PPP  infrastructure  projects  in  Canada.  But  new 
technologies  provide  new  opportunities  to  gauge  demand  for  public  services,  and  to  price  them 
accordingly. Clearly, though, if public-private partnerships are to deliver on their promise, it is essential 
that  the  risks  be  appropriately  shared  between  governments  and  the  private  provider.  And  I  do 
recognize that constructing appropriate risk-sharing arrangements is not easy. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. I have set out the Bank's projections for a strong global economy, although near-
term weakness in the U.S. economy will lead to some slowing in Ontario. But this slowing should not 
be prolonged. The real challenge for policy-makers is to address the long-term structural issues facing 
Ontario's economy. 
Today, I've stressed the importance of human resources development and infrastructure. But I know 
there are other crucial issues to discuss. So let me now turn it back over to you, so I can take your 
questions and hear your comments. 
BIS Review 101/2006 
 5
