Niklaus Blattner: Global trends in financial market infrastructures and their 
significance for financial stability 
Introductory  remarks  by  Mr  Niklaus  Blattner,  Vice-Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss 
National Bank, at the end-of-year media news conference, Zurich, 14 December 2006. 
 Developments  at  banks  and  financial  markets  are  subject  to  extensive  daily  media  analysis  and 
commentary.  By  contrast,  financial  market  infrastructures,  i.e.  stock  exchanges,  payment  and 
securities settlement systems, only rarely make the headlines. I have decided to shift the focus today 
and concentrate on financial market infrastructures. In particular, I wish to highlight some interesting 
global trends and assess how these trends impact on the stability of the financial system.  
internationalisation  of 
Internationalisation of financial market infrastructures 
Traditionally, most financial market infrastructures have a strong national focus. This made sense as 
long  as  the  financial  markets  also  had  a  strong  domestic  focus.  However,  the  deregulation  and 
liberalisation of financial markets and the associated increase in cross-border financial flows resulted 
in  a  widening  gap  between  financial  markets  and  financial  market  infrastructures,  with  the  latter 
remaining  constrained  within  national  bounds.  More 
financial  market 
infrastructures became inevitable in order to avoid a loss of competitiveness due to inefficiencies. This 
process of opening up market infrastructures still continues today. 
We  can  differentiate  between  different  types  of  internationalisation.  First,  direct  access  to 
infrastructures that used to be reserved exclusively to domestic participants is now being granted more 
frequently  to  foreign  participants  as  well.  Swiss  Interbank  Clearing,  for  example,  has  admitted 
participants  from  abroad  since  the  late  1990s.  Second,  the  consolidation  of  infrastructures  is  in  full 
swing,  especially  in  Europe.  In  some  cases,  consolidation  takes  place  through  mergers  between 
formerly  independent  systems.  For  example,  Euroclear  group  integrated  the  formerly  independent 
central  securities  depositories  of  the  Netherlands,  Belgium,  France  and  the  UK.  In  other  instances, 
consolidation takes a less direct form. National infrastructures may, for example, set up mutual links to 
facilitate  trade,  i.e.  the  settlement  of  cross-border  transactions.  The  internationalisation  of  stock 
markets has also made it possible to trade an increasing number of stocks on several different trading 
platforms. And finally, we have also witnessed the emergence of a few completely new infrastructures 
which  have  adopted  an  international  –  and  in  some  cases  even  global  –  focus  from  the  outset.  A 
classic  example  is  the  Continuous  Linked  Settlement  (CLS)  system,  which  was  designed  for  the 
settlement of foreign exchange transactions and started operations just over four years ago. It now 
settles transactions in as many as 15 currencies. 
But  how  has  the  opening  up  of  trading  centres  and  settlement  channels,  which  traditionally  had  a 
domestic focus, impacted on financial stability? On the one hand, it is obvious that the adjustment of 
the financial market infrastructures to the special features of global financial markets may contribute to 
reducing risks related to the settlement of cross-border transactions. For example, the risk associated 
with  traditional  foreign  exchange  transaction  settlements  (Herstatt  risk)  can  be  largely  eliminated 
through CLS. On the other hand, the growing interconnection and internationalisation of infrastructures 
result in new kinds of transmission channels (often cross-border), through which the credit or liquidity 
problems of individual market participants can spread to other participants. In the new environment, 
operational  problems  experienced  within  individual  financial  market  infrastructures  can  also  spread 
much more rapidly to a larger number of players. 
A working group is currently dealing with precisely these issues. It was set up by the Committee on 
Payment and Settlement Systems (CPSS) of the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) and one of 
the participants is the SNB. What is already clear is that the advantages of internationalisation clearly 
outweigh  the  drawbacks  so  far.  Any  threats  to  financial  stability  would  have  to  be  countered  by 
modifications to the systems’ architecture, the applicable rules and oversight. 
BIS Review 123/2006 
 1
Tentative adjustment to market developments 
While  financial  market  infrastructures  were  internationalised  quite  rapidly,  they  repeatedly  lagged 
behind the deregulation of the financial markets. In today’s environment, it is possible for innovative 
financial  products  to  gain  popularity  quickly  and  to  achieve  enormous  trading  volumes  shortly  after 
their introduction. A recent example is the rapid growth in the market for credit derivatives. While the 
trading  volume  of  credit  derivatives  absolutely  exploded  in  the  last  decade,  the  efficiency  of  the 
transaction  confirmation  and  settlement  processes  for  a  long  time  left  much  to  be  desired.  As  a 
consequence, 
transactions  grew  steadily.  This 
development  resulted  in  higher  risks,  since  the  failure  to  confirm  a  transaction  jeopardises  its 
enforceability,  i.e.  the  possibility  to  net  it  with  other  transactions.  This,  in  turn,  can  lead  to  financial 
intermediaries incorrectly measuring and controlling their market and counterparty risks. 
In  the  aforementioned  example  relating  to  credit  derivatives,  the  US  Federal  Reserve  and  other 
leading bank supervisors had to intervene just over a year ago to oblige market participants to rapidly 
reduce  the  confirmation  backlog  and  to  promote  the  introduction  of  more  efficient  cross-sector 
procedures. Market participants should not focus exclusively on the lucrative trading aspect of future 
innovations, but they must also speed up the development of convincing solutions for the processing 
of these new transactions. Otherwise, financial stability will be jeopardised. 
the  backlog  of  concluded,  yet  unconfirmed 
traditional 
financial  market 
Financial market infrastructures and banks increasingly share roles 
infrastructures  and  banks  –  which  was 
Differentiating  between 
straightforward  20  years  ago  –  is  becoming  increasingly  difficult.  On  the  one  hand,  the  major 
international banks, in particular, provide services that one would normally allocate to financial market 
infrastructures. For instance, their customer base is so large that it is possible for them to conclude 
and settle trade orders outside the stock exchange. The same holds true for the settlement of payment 
transactions:  the  larger  a  bank,  the  more  payments  it  can  settle  directly  through  its  own  systems. 
These ‘in-house systems’ compete with the actual interbank payment system, especially if the banks’ 
customers are banks themselves. 
On the other hand, operators of financial market infrastructures are expanding into the core business 
of banks. For example, a number of central securities depositories and their participants are providing 
loans  and  liquidity  facilities.  Although  this  is  done  primarily  to  facilitate  the  settlement  of  securities 
transactions, the line of demarcation from traditional financial intermediation is becoming increasingly 
blurred.  Also,  by  granting remote  access  or by  establishing  more efficient  connections  between  the 
individual  central  securities  depositories,  they  are  offering  serious  competition  to  the  traditional 
custodians. 
Technological  progress  has  been  the  driving  force  behind  this  blurring  of  roles  between  financial 
market infrastructures and banks. Technology has enabled large banks to break into the operational 
field of infrastructure operators without much additional expenditure. Indeed, they have been virtually 
obliged to do so, in order to utilise their IT platforms to full capacity and to run them efficiently. On the 
demand  side,  the  smaller  financial  institutions  also  benefit.  As  they  outsource  their  back  office 
functions to larger banks or specialised institutions, they can better focus on their core business. The 
infrastructure operators, in turn, are finding themselves in a situation where hardly anyone is willing to 
pay for traditional transaction services that have taken on a commodity character. Consequently, they 
are  diversifying  and  providing  services  that  generate  a  higher  added  value.  Those  infrastructure 
operators  that  are  organised  as  profit-oriented  public  companies,  in  particular,  are  likely  to  further 
intensify competition with the banks in the future. 
This development is confronting the regulators with new challenges. Many supervisory and oversight 
authorities still pursue an institution-based approach. In other words, they apply different criteria to the 
same functions, depending on whether these functions are exercised by a bank, on the one hand, or 
by a stock exchange or central securities depository, on the other. Furthermore, banks and financial 
market infrastructures are mostly supervised or overseen by different authorities. The same applies to 
Switzerland.  This  brings  with  it  the  risk  that  regulatory  differences  are  deliberately  exploited.  The 
question of whether financial market regulation needs to focus more on the function rather than on the 
institution so as to limit regulatory arbitrage would have to be examined. Regulation would then not be 
based on the legal status of an institution but on the functions actually exercised. 
2 
 BIS Review 123/2006
Conclusion 
The picture I have given you of developments in the field of financial market infrastructures is by no 
means complete. Other developments that should be mentioned are the tendency nowadays to attach 
greater  significance  to  measures  relating  to  contingency  planning  and  crisis  management,  or  the 
growing  movement  towards  organising  financial  market  infrastructures  as  profit-oriented  public 
companies observed in many countries. In Europe, in particular, there is pressure to consolidate the 
strongly fragmented infrastructure environment. This dynamic development challenges the operators 
of  financial  market  infrastructures  in  particular.  The  decision-makers  at  the  Swiss  financial  market 
infrastructures – SWX Swiss Exchange, SIS group and Telekurs group – also have to decide how they 
want to position themselves strategically. This is no easy task considering that the stakeholders often 
pursue differing interests. In addition, there are various potential conflicts, for example between the 
objective of exploiting economies of scale as much as possible – which might only be possible through 
cross-border cooperation – and the objective of maintaining independence.  
BIS Review 123/2006 
 3
