T T Mboweni: Monetary policy decision making in an uncertain international 
economic environment 
Address by Mr T T Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at a business breakfast 
organised  by 
the  Graduate  School  of  Business,  University  of  Kwazulu-Natal,  Durban, 
2 November 2006.  
Honoured guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
 Introduction 
1.  
Thank you for the opportunity to address you in Kwazulu-Natal. I should note that my presence here is 
due  to  the  persistence  of  Dr  Singh  who  has  been  berating  me  for  some  time  for  neglecting  your 
province. It is indeed true that it has been some time since I have made a public address in Kwazulu-
Natal but I can assure you that this has not been by design. 
My address today relates to recent international economic developments and how they impact on our 
own monetary policy decision making. South Africa is very much part of the global village and as such 
is  heavily  influenced  by  international  economic  developments.  Many  of  these  developments  have 
resulted  in  increased  uncertainty  and  risks.  The  emergence  of  China  as  an  economic  powerhouse 
means that the world is a different place to what it was just a decade ago. Most parts of the world have 
also been experiencing a period of robust world growth, but while it may be true that every cloud has a 
silver  lining,  sometimes  a  silver  lining  may  have  a  cloud.  In  some  respects  this  holds  true  for  the 
current  world  growth  performance.  Some  of  the  current  uncertainties  relate  to  the  issues  of  global 
imbalances,  asset  price  movements,  oil  prices  and  tighter  conditions  in  financial  markets.  These 
issues add to the uncertainty within which monetary policy has to be conducted.  
World economic growth 
2.  
In  the  recent  World  Economic  Outlook  published  by  the  International  Monetary  Fund,  the  global 
economic  environment  is  characterised  by  economic  activity  that  has  exceeded  expectations,  and 
signs of a build-up of inflationary pressures. These pressures originally emanated from oil and other 
commodity  prices,  but  more  recently  have  been  a  result  of  emerging  capacity  constraints.  Central 
banks have responded by generally tightening monetary policies. Global imbalances however remain 
large. The balance of risks to the global outlook is seen to be biased to the downside, and although a 
benign market-led process of unwinding of global imbalances is seen to be the most likely outcome, 
the potential for a disorderly unwinding remains. 
Estimates by the IMF show that world growth has averaged 4,2 per cent since 2000, as compared to 
3,2  per  cent  for  the  preceding  decade.  Current  projections  indicate  that  the  economic  expansion  is 
likely to continue with growth rates being very close to 5 per cent in 2006 and 2007. In fact, the global 
expansion since the turn of the 21st century ranks amongst the highest since the early 1970s.  
While  the  global  expansion  has  in  general been  broad  based,  the  improved growth  performance  of 
developing  and  emerging  economies  relative  to  those  of  developed  economies  has  been  most 
noteworthy. For example, in 2005, emerging economies accounted for more than half of total world 
gross domestic product (GDP) in purchasing-power parity terms; around 43 per cent of world exports; 
about 70 per cent of the world’s foreign exchange reserves, half of the world’s energy consumption 
and around 80 per cent of the growth of oil demand in the past five years.  
China was the fastest growing economy over the last few years and in 2005 the country became the 
world’s  fourth  largest  economy  (at  market  exchange  rates)  after  the  United  States,  Japan  and 
Germany. It is the second largest economy in purchasing power parity terms after the United States. 
China  is  becoming  increasingly  important  in  the world economy by  a wide  range of  measures.  The 
country’s average contribution to global GDP growth in purchasing-power-parity terms, for example, 
has increased from 9,5 per cent in the 1980s to 18,0 per cent in the 1990s and further to 24,5 per cent 
in the six years to 2005. The United States’ average contribution to global growth, on the other hand, 
BIS Review 103/2006 
 1
has decreased from 23,3 per cent in the 1980s to 20,2 per cent in the 1990s and further to 16,3 per 
cent since 2000.  
Chinese  economic  growth  has  been  accompanied  by  an  increase  in  the  demand  for  raw  materials 
which, in turn, has reinforced the boom in commodity prices. For example, China accounts for 40 per 
cent  and  33  per  cent  of  the  world  demand  for  cement  and  coal  respectively.  Furthermore  Chinese 
demand accounts for over 20 per cent of steel, copper and aluminium.  
The emergence of China means that the world economy is probably less dependent on the US for 
overall global growth. It used to be said that if the United States sneezes, then the rest of the world 
catches  a  cold.  Although  a  slowdown  in  the  US  will  have  implications  for  the  world  economy,  the 
global economy may not be as susceptible to a US slowdown as it was a decade or so ago when the 
US  cycle  was  almost  synonymous  with  the  global  cycle.  Today,  the  outlook  for  world  growth  and 
commodity prices is also dependent on the growth outlook in Asia in general and China in particular. 
Global  growth  has  implications  for  our  own  monetary  policy  through  a  number  of  channels.  Higher 
global  growth  may,  in  the  absence  of  productivity  growth,  result  in  either  higher  world  inflation  or 
tighter monetary policies in high growth economies. At the same time, strong world growth is generally 
positive  for  commodity  prices,  which  may  cause  the  rand  to  be  stronger.  Often  the  implications  of 
world growth developments for monetary policy are far from clear, and this underlines the uncertainties 
we face. 
Global imbalances 
3.  
Although the world economy may have achieved a degree of immunity from cyclical downturns in the 
United States, it is probably still true to say that if the US had to catch a cold, the rest of the world 
would  run  the  risk  of  catching  a  bad  case  of  flu.  The  possible  disorderly  unwinding  of  global 
imbalances  is  a  case  in  point.  The  main  manifestations  of  the  global  imbalances  are  the  current 
account deficit in the United States and the current account surpluses in a number of Asian economies 
and the oil exporting economies.  
The dominant view in the market appears to be that it is not a question of if, but rather when and how 
the  adjustment  will  take place.  As  I  noted  earlier,  the  IMF  view  is  that  although  there  is a  risk  of  a 
disorderly adjustment, a smooth market-led adjustment is the most likely outcome. By contrast, in the 
2005 annual report of the Bank for International Settlements it was noted that the unwinding of the 
imbalances could be uncomfortable, either through profound market turbulence or a protracted period 
of slow world growth.  
A  number  of  solutions  to  the  problem  of  global  imbalances  have  been  proposed.  In  his  keynote 
address  to  the  recent  conference  on  macroeconomic  challenges  that  was  organised  by  the  Bank, 
Professor David Llewellyn argued that none of the proposed solutions would be sufficient on their own, 
and that unless a number of solutions were implemented concurrently, a negative outcome was more 
likely. In his view, the required adjustment includes increased savings in the US including a reduction 
in the fiscal deficit; reduced savings in China, combined with improved social security safety nets in 
that  country;  a  move  away  from  the  dollar  peg  by  Asian  economies  and  a  depreciation  of  the  US 
dollar; and a rise in aggregate demand in Japan and the euro area, accompanied by structural reform 
in the latter. 
Unfortunately there does not appear to be a co-ordinating mechanism to bring about the adjustment, 
and it is also unclear how long these imbalances will persist. The persistence has already confounded 
a number of analysts who have been predicting a major readjustment of the US dollar for at least the 
past 4 years.  
Going  forward,  there  is  always  the  concern  that  the  underlying  international  imbalances  could  be 
resolved through a significant realignment of global exchange rates. Estimates of how much exchange 
rates  would have  to  adjust  vary  greatly.  In  2005,  Obstfeld  and Rogoff  for  example,  argued  that  the 
dollar adjustment could exceed 30 per cent. An adjustment of this order of magnitude will inevitably 
impact on the rand, but it is not clear whether under these circumstances the rand would find itself 
moving with the dollar, or in the opposite direction. Much will depend on how world growth and risk 
perceptions are affected in such a scenario. 
Whether or not there will be an orderly or disorderly unwinding of these imbalances, there is very little 
that some economies such as South Africa can do to pre-empt these effects. The onus is on the large 
2 
 BIS Review 103/2006
industrialised  countries  to  try  and  ensure  an  orderly  adjustment  or  to  minimise  the  negative 
consequences that may ensue in the wake of a disorderly resolution.  
International interest rate and inflation developments 
4. 
At the beginning of the 1990s, world inflation averaged around 30 per cent compared to an estimated 
3,8  per  cent  in  2006.  In  1992  there  were  44  countries  with  inflation  rates  in  excess  of  40  per  cent 
compared to 3 in 2003. At the Jackson Hole conference organised by the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Kansas City in 2003, one of the issues that was hotly debated was the cause of this decline. Central 
bankers  of  course  claimed  the  credit,  arguing  that  it  was  because  of  more  disciplined  monetary 
policies. Others however argued that it was the forces of globalisation and the emergence of China. As 
one  commentator  observed,  it  reads  a  bit  like  an  Agatha  Christie  mystery.  The  questions  are,  who 
killed the victim, how was the victim killed, and is the victim really dead? 
I think it is true to say that monetary policy has become more disciplined in the 1990s, but globalisation 
has  probably  played  its  part  as  well.  There  is  no  doubt  that  China  has  had  an  impact  despite  the 
upward  pressure  on  commodity  prices.  For  example,  footwear  and  clothing  prices,  which  have  a 
weight of just over 4 per cent in our CPIX, have been falling since October 2003. In the year to date, 
footwear  and  clothing  prices  have  fallen  by  6,6  per  cent.  There  is  no  doubt  that  this  has  had  a 
moderating effect on our domestic inflation.  
Recently there have been signs that the victim has been showing signs of life, and world inflation has 
risen somewhat, although the IMF still expects world inflation to remain under control and to average 
3,7 per cent next year. Some of the pressures are a result of rising international oil prices, although 
more  recently  high  levels  of  capacity  utilisation  and  strong  consumer  demand  have  also  been 
observed. Consequently we have seen a general monetary policy tightening cycle globally. In the past 
year for example, most industrialised and emerging market central banks have raised interest rates at 
some point. 
We are often asked if we follow the world interest rate cycle. There is not a simple interest rate cycle. 
Interest rates in the United States, the United Kingdom and the euro area have not followed exactly 
the same path. We do not and cannot slavishly follow international interest rate developments. The 
fact  that  we  have  adjusted  our  monetary  policy  stance  recently  is  not  in  response  to  interest  rate 
developments abroad. Our interest rate decisions are determined by the domestic inflation outlook. Of 
course, this outlook in turn may be affected in some instances by the same factors that may cause 
monetary policies to be tightened in general, but this is not necessarily the case. 
Asset prices and international liquidity 
5.  
Much has been said in the past few years about the impact of increased international liquidity which is 
in part a consequence of the global imbalances. Stock markets and property markets around the world 
have reached record highs and emerging market spreads have narrowed significantly. South African 
equity and property prices have also reached record highs. The question that is often raised in this 
context  is  whether  the  market  is  correctly  pricing  risk,  and  whether  the  system  is  vulnerable  to  a 
reversal.  
Our asset markets have a significant degree of participation by non-residents. For example, since the 
beginning  of  2006  to  26  October,  non-resident  net  purchases  of  South  African  bonds  and  equities 
totaled R20,8 billion and R64,7 billion respectively. However, as an open emerging-market economy 
we  are  always  vulnerable  to  changes  in  international  sentiment  which  may  have  little  to  do  with 
domestic  economic  developments.  The  appetite  for  South  African  financial  assets  is,  to  a  certain 
extent, influenced by developments in global bond and equity markets.  
Asset  price  developments  have  important  implications  for  monetary  policy  although  the  appropriate 
response is far from clear. The wealth effects that are generated by high asset prices have an impact 
on consumer demand and, therefore, potentially on inflation. Various issues emerge here. Firstly, it is 
not always easy to recognise a bubble. Secondly, there is the question of whether or not monetary 
policy  should  try  and  prick  asset  price  bubbles  in  order  to  avoid  the  consequences  of  the  bubble 
popping at even higher levels with the attendant risks to financial stability. 
Generally the response of central banks has been to argue that the best monetary policy can do is to 
try and anticipate the impacts of asset price movements on inflation, and to react in the same way that 
BIS Review 103/2006 
 3
we react to any factor that can cause inflation to rise beyond the inflation target. This is in essence our 
approach  as well.  However  in  most countries  there  is  not  a  full  understanding  of  how  these  wealth 
effects affect the inflation process and the transmission mechanism of monetary policy. 
International oil prices 
6.  
In  any  discussion  of  international  developments  we  cannot  ignore  the  oil  price.  As  we  all  know, 
international oil prices have increased significantly over the past few years. It is almost unbelievable 
that the price of Brent crude was around US$11 per barrel in January 1999. By January 2004 Brent 
crude oil prices had exceeded US$30 per barrel and had subsequently reached a high of around $80 
per barrel during August 2006. Since then there has been some moderation and the price has fallen to 
current levels of below US$60 per barrel. The causes of these increases have been the tight supply 
and demand conditions in the market, as well as periodic bouts of geopolitical tensions. 
The increases in oil prices have had a significant impact on domestic petrol prices. During 2006 for 
example, the price of 95 octane petrol in Gauteng increased from R5,49 per litre in January to peak at 
R7,04 per litre in August. Fortunately, as a result of falling international prices, we have experienced 
three successive declines totaling R1,07. 
The  contribution  of  transport  costs  to  CPIX  inflation  provides  an  indication  of  the  direct  inflationary 
impact of petrol price increases. This has averaged around 15 per cent of the overall monthly increase 
in the CPIX during 2005 and around 17 per cent during the first 9 months of this year. We also saw 
that  for  most  of  2004  and  2005,  most  of  the  volatility  observed  in  CPIX  inflation  was  directly 
attributable to petrol price movements. More recently, other factors have also been exerting upward 
pressure on CPIX inflation. 
We have often emphasised that it is not the first round effects of oil price increases, that is, the direct 
impact on petrol prices, but rather the second round effects that are of primary concern for monetary 
policy purposes. While there is little we can do about first round effects, we have to ensure that these 
effects do not adversely affect inflationary expectations and become more generalised and stimulate 
inflationary impacts across the economy. If sustained, the recent decline in oil prices augurs well for 
inflationary developments going forward. Nevertheless, given the underlying market conditions and the 
vulnerability of oil prices to geopolitical tensions, these lower prices cannot be taken for granted and oil 
prices continue to pose an upside risk to our inflation outlook. 
Conclusion 
7. 
Monetary  policy  has  to  be  formulated  against  the  backdrop  of  increasingly  integrated  goods  and 
financial  markets.  This  increases  the  uncertainty  surrounding  the  workings  of  the  monetary 
transmission mechanism. Monetary policy making becomes more complicated since the nature and 
extent of influence of exogenous shocks on the domestic economy is difficult to determine in advance. 
With highly integrated money and capital markets, changes in sentiment, whether justified or not, can 
have  profound  implications  for  our  economy.  Similarly,  changes  in  growth  prospects  in  the 
industrialised countries or emerging Asian economies will also affect us. The exact nature and timing 
of  these  developments  are  always  uncertain.  As  is  often  said  in  monetary  policy  circles,  the  only 
certainty is uncertainty. This is highly applicable to the uncertain impact of international developments 
on domestic monetary policy. 
I thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 103/2006
