Erkki Liikanen: Finland, EMU and euro 
Speech  by  Mr  Erkki  Liikanen,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Finland,  at  the  International  Bankers'  Club, 
Luxembourg, 1 December 2006.  
 Introduction  
Finland joined the euro area among the first eleven countries in 1999. The EMU and the introduction 
of  the  euro  marked  a  major  step  towards  deeper  integration  within  the  EU,  and  have  affected  the 
Finnish economy and economic policies in many respects.  
In the debate before the euro, it was recognised that the EMU and the euro would bring many benefits 
in terms of economic efficiency, but its impact on economic stability in Finland was open to dispute.  
Finland  was  different  from  other  potential  EMU  countries  and  the  question  was:  Could  the  single 
monetary policy be suitable for the Finnish economy?  
In this presentation, I will walk you through this "asymmetry discussion", which at the time received a 
great deal of attention in Finland, and then discuss the performance of the Finnish economy during the 
eight years we have now been in the EMU.  
to 
Doubts before the start of the monetary union: macroeconomic stability  
Before we joined the EMU, there was a lively and intensive debate about its pros and cons. Economic 
efficiency, benefits, such as less uncertainty over exchange rates, lower costs of currency exchange, 
more price comparability and greater competition, as well as more efficient money and other financial 
markets, were recognised.  
But opinions were sharply divided as to the impact of the monetary union on economic stability.  
On one hand, some believed that the EMU and the single monetary policy could improve the credibility 
of  monetary  policy.  In  so  far  as  the  traditional  Finnish  problem  of  inflationary  pressure  and  eroding 
competitiveness  was  due 
insufficient  credibility  of  monetary  policy,  price  stability  and 
competitiveness could be better in EMU than before. It was also expected that interest rates would be 
more stable - and on average lower - in the monetary union than under autonomous monetary policy.  
On the other hand, much attention was devoted to the so-called asymmetry of the Finnish economy. 
While  macroeconomic  trends  in  the  core  EU  countries  such  as  Germany,  France  and  the  Benelux 
countries usually were broadly similar, economic developments in Finland diverged a lot. There were 
differences in the timing of macroeconomic fluctuations, and the amplitude of fluctuations was greater 
in Finland than elsewhere.  
As the single monetary policy was to be tuned according to the economic situation of the whole euro 
area, it was feared that its stance could be inappropriate or even grossly inappropriate for the Finnish 
economy.  
The following reasons were put forward for the asymmetry of the Finnish economy vis-à-vis the other 
euro countries:  
The Finnish production and foreign trade were concentrated in a narrow group of industries. The share 
of the paper and pulp industries was still large. These industries are prone to cyclical fluctuations in 
both prices and quantities. In the 1990s the share of ICT industries grew rapidly, largely driven by the 
success of one company, Nokia. Thereby, the Finnish economy became sensitive to developments in 
the telecom sector, although this was not fully understood at the time of the "asymmetry debate".  
Only one third of our exports went to the euro area, so Finland was also vulnerable to disturbances 
from other countries. There was a particular concern about exchange rate movements: it was feared 
that the movements of the US dollar and other currencies vis-à-vis the euro would have a strong effect 
on the competitiveness of Finnish production.  
The traditional tool used to deal with competitiveness problems, the devaluation of the markka, was no 
longer  available  in  the  monetary  union.  To  the  opponents  of  the  monetary  union,  this  was  the  key 
BIS Review 120/2006 
 1
argument,  in  particular  if  our  important  trading  partners  Sweden  and  the  UK  remained  outside  the 
currency union – or even outside the exchange rate mechanism ERM II – as it in fact happened.  
The fears of asymmetric shocks were intensified by the still-fresh memory of the exceptionally deep 
economic and financial crisis suffered by Finland in the early 1990s. The crisis was preceded by an 
economic boom in the late 1980s driven partly by the liberalization of financial markets. The collapse 
of trade with the Soviet Union, an increase in interest rates in Europe, and problems of holding on to a 
fixed  exchange  rate  regime  set  the  scene  for  an  economic  depression  and  a  banking  crisis.  Other 
EMU countries were also in recession in the early 1990s, but the depth of Finland's recession was 
exceptional.  
Finland joined ERM 1996 and introduced the euro with 10 other member states in 1999.  
The  final  choice  to  participate  in  the  monetary  union  was  motivated  partly  by  economic,  partly  by 
political considerations. It was believed that the benefits of the monetary union in terms of economic 
efficiency  and  credible  monetary  policy  would  outweigh  its  costs,  including  the  loss  of  independent 
monetary policy.  
However,  political  motives  were  at  least  as  important  as  economic  motives.  Finland  wanted  to  sit 
around all the tables where decisions were to be made and be part of the 'inner circle', if that kind of 
club were to emerge inside the EU.  
Politically,  the  decision  to  participate  was  not  an  easy  one.  Our  Nordic  neighbours  had  taken  a 
different  course.  And  originally  the  public  opinion  was  clearly  against  participation.  In  autumn  1996 
about half of all EU citizens supported the euro and only one third were against it. But in Finland a big 
majority,  62%  were  against  the  euro,  only  29%  supported  it.  As  discussions  advanced  and  the 
government took a clear position, acceptance of the euro started to increase. By 2001 it was as high 
as 72%.   
Finland's experience of the monetary union  
We  now  have  almost  eight  years'  experience  of  the  monetary  union.  Interestingly,  many  of  the 
asymmetric  shocks  feared  by  the  opponents  to  Finland's  adoption  of  the  euro  have  already  been 
realised over this relatively short period.  
The ICT industry experienced a strong boom-bust cycle around the turn of the century. In Finland the 
downturn of the cycle was reflected more in growth expectations and asset prices than in production 
quantities. The Helsinki Stock Exchange price index, which is dominated by the ICT industry, tripled 
between early 1999 and early 2000, compared with an increase of DJ Euro Stoxx of about 50% over 
the  same  period.  Thereafter,  both  indices  fell.  By  early  2003  the  decline  was  about  75%  for  the 
Helsinki index and about 60% for the DJ Euro Stoxx.  
The exchange rate of the euro vis-à-vis the dollar first depreciated nearly 30% and then appreciated 
by 50%. Moreover, the price of oil has multiplied during the existence of the euro.  
Contrary to the EMU opponents' expectations, neither the positive external shock experienced at the 
turn of the century nor the initial depreciation of the euro served to push Finland's economy into an 
inflationary spiral, and the Finnish economy was also able to weather the recession of the ICT industry 
and the appreciation of the euro rather painlessly.  
The Finnish inflation rate, which was brought under control during the inflation targeting regime before 
EMU, has been broadly in line with the EMU average since 1999. After 2000 it has remained, for the 
most  time,  within  the  range  of  the  ECB's  definition  for  price  stability.  In  recent  years,  the  rate  of 
inflation in Finland has in fact been among the lowest in the whole EU.  
The GDP growth in Finland has fluctuated more or less in tandem with the GDP growth of the euro 
area, but the average rate of growth has been about one percentage point higher in Finland than in 
the euro area.  
Factors explaining Finland's macroeconomic performance  
The performance of the Finnish economy reflects both cyclical and structural factors.   
2 
 BIS Review 120/2006
in 
invested 
Economic growth has returned to normal rates after the crisis of the early 1990s, and the pick-up effect 
was still felt in output growth in the early years in EMU. Unfortunately, the rate of unemployment is still 
relatively high, although we are now far from the record levels seen in the early 1990s.  
In recent years, demand has increased rapidly outside the euro area, and the Finnish export industry 
and the whole economy have benefited from the openness of the economy. At the same time, global 
competition and productivity increases have kept price increases of manufactured export and import 
goods in check, containing inflationary impulses from strong demand.  
Inflation targeting and successful fiscal consolidation together with Finland's entry into the EU in 1995 
all  contributed  to  the  fact  that  low  inflation  had  become  expected  and  accepted  already  before  the 
beginning of EMU. Clear nominal anchor to inflation expectations and increased competition in product 
markets  have  contributed  to  a  profound  change  in  price  and  wage  setting  behaviour  and  made 
possible relatively rapid growth without inflation.  
But perhaps I can mention three particular factors, which are related and explain an important part of 
the growth performance of the last 10 years.  
First,  there  has  been,  since  the  1980s,  a  consistent  commitment  by  decision  makers  to  foster 
innovation-driven  economy.  The  successive  governments  have 
research  and 
development. The  research  and  development  expenditure  in  Finland  is  3.5%  of  GDP,  highest  in 
Europe with Sweden and on the level of the United States. The government pays 1/3 and the private 
sector 2/3.  
An important part of the research has focused on the ICT. Finland and the Finnish companies have 
also been active participants in EU research programs.  
Second,  free  trade  is  a  prerequisite  for  growth  in  a  small  country.  You  cannot  have  companies  of 
important size without it. Competition in domestic markets is also critical. Only a competitive market 
makes innovation possible. As a small open economy Finland has adopted a pragmatic approach to 
economic policy issues and often been less resistant to economic reform and deregulation than some 
of the larger EU countries.  
The  economic  crisis  of  the  early1990s  contributed  to  the  realisation  that  reforms  were  needed. 
Governments  of  various  political  coalitions  have  tried  to  keep  the  business  climate  favourable.  The 
liberalisation of capital markets and the following rapid increase in risk financing gave stimulus to the 
growth, diversification and internationalisation of the ICT sector and the whole economy.  
Third and related factor behind the developments in Finland is the rise of the ICT industry. It explains 
an important part Finland's rapid productivity growth since the 1990s.  
An  important  milestone  in  the  rise  of  the  ICT  cluster  was  the  early  liberalisation  of  the 
telecommunication  sector  in  Finland,  where  heightened  competition  drove  prices  down  and  led  to 
mass markets for wireless communication, providing a test laboratory for the equipment industry.  
Standardisation among the Nordic countries and in particular the common Nordic NMT standard gave 
an early start for the internationalisation of the mobile telecommunication industry.  
Later GSM standard was a result of a European research and standardisation effort and opening of 
the telecoms market in Europe gave access to new entrants in telecoms services. And new companies 
were  able  to  take  advantage  of  these  opportunities.  And  mass market  for wireless communications 
was created in Europe.  
So telecom industries and telecom services accelerated the productivity growth.  
Here,  at  the  Bankers  club,  I  also  want  to  pay  attention  to  changes  in  the  banking  sector.  A  major 
restructuring  took  place  after  the  crisis  in  early  1990s.  The  number  of  the  bank  employees  and 
branches was reduced to a half. Due to competitive pressure the banks had to change their business 
models. The earlier IT investments were put in efficient use, new IT and Internet-based services took 
off.  The  productivity  of  the  banking  sector  accelerated  and  contributed  essentially  to  the  Finnish 
growth performance.  
On education  
Entering  a  phase  of  innovation-driven  development  has  presupposed  the  interplay  of  several 
fundamental  factors,  including  efficient  educational  system,  a  consistent  and  predictable  policy 
BIS Review 120/2006 
 3
environment, and a sound basic infrastructure. Most of these preconditions were in place before the 
1990s.  
In  particular,  the  establishment  of  a  comprehensive  school  system  in  1972-75  has  helped  mobilise 
human resources effectively in the whole population.  
The efficiency of the schooling system has been reflected in the OECD's Programme for International 
Student Assessments (PISA), which measures the knowledge and skills of 15-year-old students. In the 
last assessment in 2003, Finland kept its lead place in reading but was now in the top also in sciences 
and  second  after  Hong  Kong  in  mathematics.  Finland's  performance  in  the  PISA  ratings  has  often 
been  referred  to  as  an  example  which  shows  that  it  is  possible  to  provide  both  high  quality  and 
equitable learning outcomes.  
The share of working age population with higher education is higher in Finland than in other Member 
States, with the exception of Ireland, even though not as high as in the US. In 2000, 32%, of the total 
workforce  in  Finland  had  achieved  tertiary  education,  while  the  EU15  average  was  24%.  Educated 
labour  force  has  fostered  innovation  and  increased  the  innovation  absorption  capacity.  Supply  of 
science and technology graduates has helped to maintain the salaries of researchers and engineers in 
the ITC-cluster moderate, in spite of strong demand.  
Strong current account and international diversification of investment portfolios  
The growth of the ICT industry is reflected in the current account, which has been in surplus since 
1994. The emergence of large current account surpluses is a marked difference with the past.  
Besides competitive open sector and strong growth of exports, the current account surpluses reflect a 
rather subdued growth of domestic demand after the crisis of the early 1990s. The corporate sector 
adopted a more cautious investment policy line by reducing its debt exposure and increasing its buffer 
stocks. The general government sector has been in surplus for years.  
As  a  consequence  of  international  diversification  of  investors'  portfolios,  non-residents'  holdings  of 
shares in the Finnish Stock Exchange rose to over 70% of the total market capitalisation in 2000.  
This greatly reduced the exposure of the Finnish economy to the ICT asset price bubble at the turn of 
the century, as the main ownership risks were born by foreign investors.  
Prudent fiscal policy  
As to economic policies, after the crisis in the early 1990s there was a clear need to adopt policies 
which would be compatible with the free movement of capital across national borders. Broad support 
has  developed  for  stability  oriented  fiscal  policy  as  a  basis  for  more  long-term  stable  economic 
development. In line with this, public finances were consolidated. In recent years fiscal policy has been 
effectively based on explicit policy rules such as spending limits covering the whole electoral term.  
As a result of prudent fiscal policies, the general government sector is in surplus. The surplus ratio is 
on the level of 2–3% and is expected to remain so.  
Established social dialogue  
Established social dialogue has been helpful in the implementation of some reforms. Recently a major 
pension reform was agreed between employees, employers and the government. In the reform, which 
has  already  been  implemented,  two  early-retirement  schemes  were  abolished.  There  will  be  a 
longevity coefficient linking pensions to life expectancy, and benefits will be calculated on the basis of 
the  whole  lifetime  income  and  not  the  last  working  years  only,  as  earlier.  This  has  improved  the 
stability of the financing of the pensions, but challenges still remain.  
Collective  wage  agreements  play  a  relatively  prominent  role  in  shaping  the  relationship  between 
employee and employer. The agreements have contributed to relatively moderate wage increases and 
low inflation while also compressing wage differentials. The challenge for the future is how to retain 
wage moderation and take into account the productivity differences between industries and firms.  
4 
 BIS Review 120/2006
Risks and policy challenges  
Needless to say, all is not that rosy and there are significant risks and policy challenges in the horizon.  
I will mention just two of them.  
First, one concern is the terms of trade, which, in recent years, have deteriorated and according to 
forecasts  will  continue  to  do  so.  The  prices  for  ICT  products  are  globally  falling,  due  to  technology 
developments and competition. Also the price developments in the forestry sector have been rather 
weak.  
The challenge is to keep productivity growth high and also to add value into our exports.  
Second,  problems  are  also  mounting  on  the  horizon  in  public  finances  as  the  population  is  ageing 
earlier in Finland than in other industrialised countries. This is due to a high baby-boom in 1945-1950. 
Expenditure  on  pensions  and  other  welfare  services  increases  as  the  population  ages,  and  at  the 
same time, the room for financing extra expenditure by rising taxation is limited.  
So we have a major challenge to improve the productivity of the public services.  
Conclusion  
All in all, in its early years, Finnish EMU membership seems to have fulfilled most of its promises and 
avoided  most  of  its  risks.  There  have  been  benefits  in  terms  of  economic  efficiency  and  monetary 
policy  credibility,  as  predicted,  and  there  is  no  evidence  that  the  macroeconomic  stability  of  the 
economy should have deteriorated, rather the opposite.  
In spite of asymmetric shocks, Finland's rate of inflation has been among the lowest in the EU at the 
same  time  as  its  GDP  has  grown  at  above  the  euro  area  average  growth  rate.  This  favourable 
performance is due to the factors I described. Now it is important to avoid any complacence.  
BIS Review 120/2006 
 5
