Ewart S Williams: Investment strategies in an uncertain world 
Address  by  Mr  Ewart  S  Williams,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Trinidad  and  Tobago,  at  the 
Business Insight Caribbean Investor Conference, Port-of-Spain, 1 December 2006. 
 Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. Let me first thank the organizers, Business Insight Limited, for 
inviting me to this very interesting conference which focuses on “Investment Strategies in an Uncertain 
World”.  The  media  release  couple  days  ago  observed  that  the  Conference  was  prompted  by  the 
significant declines experienced in the stock markets of Trinidad and Tobago, Jamaica and Barbados 
over the last two years and noted that investors and market practitioners were looking for answers. 
I saw from the programme that there was a discussion this morning on the evolution of the market in 
Trinidad and Tobago and it may well be that you have already solved the problem. I hope it is not too 
late to give my take on the matter and discuss some options, which in my view, could ease some of 
the current pension funds restrictions while maintaining prudential standards to protect the workers’ 
savings. 
Let me first give the background to the current issue. 
Since  its  inception  in  1981  there  has  been  little  growth  in  the  number  of  companies  listed  on  the 
Trinidad  and  Tobago  Stock  Exchange.  In  1981  there  were  thirty-five  listed  companies  with  a  total 
market capitalization of $2.3 billion. Twenty-five years later, there are thirty-two listed companies with 
a market capitalization of approximately $110 million. 
It is estimated that institutional investors (largely pension funds) account for about ninety percent of 
total demand in a market in which only about twenty-two percent of shares are actively traded – the 
remainder having been bought to hold. 
Since it was established in 1981, the value of stock market capitalization in Trinidad and Tobago has 
grown by over 50 times and much of the increase has taken place since 2002. In that year market 
capitalization was $48 billion and this grew to a peak $120 billion in mid 2005 before falling to $107 
billion at end of 2005. Since then market capitalization has declined by a further 18 percent. 
When  the  IMF  conducted  its  financial  sector  review  in  mid-2005,  prior  to  the  slide  in  the  market,  it 
observed that, “the sharp increase in stock market capitalization was not reflected in earnings”. From a 
sample of 13 firms, representing some 60 percent of market capitalization, stock prices between 2001 
and mid-2005 rose 1.5 times while earnings per share increased 0.5 times. For conglomerates, stock 
prices increased almost 2.5 times, while earnings per share increased by 0.6 times. 
The IMF experts suggested that such large spreads were usually due to the weaknesses in market 
infrastructure and the fact that share prices have been driven up by speculative demand. In the case 
of  Trinidad  and  Tobago  market,  they  pointed  to  the  poor  supply  of  stocks,  a  trading  system  that 
allowed  significant  price  increases  on  unmatched  bids,  highly  illiquid  stocks  and  a  tendency  for 
institutional investors to buy and hold stocks rather than trade. 
The Central Bank assumed regulatory control of the insurance industry and private pension funds in 
June 2004: by end 2004, the Bank wrote to the pension plans reminding them of the fifty percent limit 
for  equity  holdings.  At  that  time  some  42  out  of  204  active  pension  plans  had  exceeded  the  fifty 
percent  limit  and  their  average  holdings  were  fifty-eight  percent.  It  is  estimated  (on  the  basis  of 
incomplete information) that by end December 2005, about 11 pension plans still had equity holdings 
in excess of fifty percent of total assets and that as of September 2006, two plans remain in excess. 
There is no doubt that the stocks sell-off by pension funds contributed to the decline in stock prices. 
From January 2005 to September 2006 net sales by pension funds amounted to about $700 million. 
However, some other factors would certainly have contributed to the decline in the market. In the first 
case the market was due for a correction, following the increases in stock prices which could not be 
justified by the earnings performance of the various companies. 
Second, the introduction of electronic trading in March 2005, by making price movements dependent 
on actual trades, as opposed to “bids” would have had a dampening effect on stock prices. 
BIS Review 119/2006 
 1
Be that as it may, the fact is that the stock market index declined by about thirty percent between its 
high  point  in  mid-2005  and  end-September  2006.  This  sharp  decline  in  stock  prices  has  caused 
widespread concern among market participants as well as the public at large and a call for an increase 
in the limit on investments in equities. 
It is useful to understand the history behind the fifty percent limit that now exists for pension funds. In 
order  to  mitigate  the  volatility  associated  with  equity  investments,  the  drafters  of  the  Insurance  Act 
proposed  broad  investment  limits  to  ensure  that  the  portfolio  of  a  pension  plan  will  follow  a  certain 
prescribed “risk-averse” structure. Consistent with this philosophy, it was stipulated that no pension 
plan could invest more than forty percent of its assets directly in equities. This limit was increased to 
fifty  percent  in  November  2000  in  order  to  accommodate  new  public  offerings  resulting  from  the 
Government’s divestment programme (NFM and NEL). 
Statutory  limitations  imposed  on  institutional  investors  are  in  no  way  peculiar  to  the  region.  The 
majority of OECD countries have limits for equity as an asset class in their pension fund regulation. 
Recently, the EU introduced a prescribed limit of seventy percent of assets for equity investment, in 
combination  with  the  Prudent  Person  Approach.  Notwithstanding,  higher  legal  limits,  actual  equity 
holdings by pension funds in most countries are seldom above 30-40 percent. 
In  recent  times,  the  trend  has  been  to  reduce  equity  exposure  in  light  of  poor  stock  market 
performance. It is interesting to note that this is being done even in markets that are more efficient and 
liquid than ours. 
While there are no legally prescribed limits, actual equity holding of pension funds in Jamaica have 
averaged around twenty-six percent of total pension fund assets; the ratio for a range of Latin America 
countries is between four and thirty percent. In these countries, the investments of choice for pension 
funds are government securities. The rationale for the investment pattern is that pension liabilities 
span many years and require reasonably predictable cash flows. This makes them less suited to the 
risky volatile returns that are typical of equity markets and more suited to the assured cash flows of 
government securities. 
In  supporting  an  increased  limit  for  equities,  pension  fund  managers  point  to  the  lack  of  alternative 
investments.  And  that’s  largely  true.  With  the  government  budget  in  chronic  surplus,  the  supply  of 
government  debt  has  been  declining  (in  terms  of  GDP),  and  there  continues  to  be  a  dearth  of 
corporate bonds. Pension funds are allowed to invest up to twenty percent of total assets in real estate 
but this window has not been utilised (holdings of real estate now average one percent of total pension 
fund assets). Pension funds are allowed up to twenty percent of total assets in foreign investments but 
this also has not been fully utilized, with foreign investments averaging only about nine percent of total 
assets. 
The Government’s plan for the reform of the financial sector includes the preparation of new pension 
legislation. The Bank has already begun preliminary work on a new Pension Act which is expected to 
be  completed,  after  consultation  with  all  relevant  stakeholders,  in  the  next  eighteen  months  to  two 
years. 
In the meanwhile, the Bank has been discussing with stakeholders the challenges now being faced by 
pension funds and which are contributing to stagnation in the stock market. 
The proposals that have emerged from our discussions fit into three categories: 
(i) 
Noting that pension plans have exceeded that fifty percent limit because of the sharp use in 
equity prices, some stakeholders advocate valuing equities at original cost with a premium 
adjustment of, say 25 percent. 
This approach has several practical difficulties in that the valuation basis for the same equity 
will differ according to the time of purchase. There are also practical difficulties involved in 
retrieving  data  on  historical  costs.  Perhaps  more  importantly,  however,  this  proposed 
valuation  procedure  goes  against  the  current  dominant  trend  (best  practice)  of  market 
valuation. 
There is also a proposal for increasing the limit from the current 50 percent to 60 percent. 
While this has the merit of simplicity, it has serious drawbacks in failing to recognize that a 
fifty percent equity limit is already too high for pension plans that are underfunded and that 
lack even rudimentary investment policies and guidelines. 
(ii) 
(iii) 
The third option which has much support, uses the principles of the investment regime now 
applicable to insurance companies. 
The main elements of this option are: 
(a) 
(b) 
Define  a  funding  threshold  of  one  hundred  and  fifty  (150)  percent  of  pension 
liabilities to which the fifty percent equity limit is applicable. Put differently, all plans 
with a surplus of less than fifty percent of pension liabilities will remain subject to 
the equity limit of fifty percent. 
Plans with a funding ratio in excess of one hundred and fifty percent will be allowed 
to invest in equities beyond the fifty percent limit. Put another way, trustees will be 
able  to  make  additional  equity  investments  with  any  surplus  in  excess  of  fifty 
percent of pension liabilities (up to a maximum level, to be determined). 
The  merit  of  this  option  is  that  it  provides  the  additional  room  to  wellfunded  pension  plans.  The 
additional equity is really financed out of pension fund’s surplus after providing a buffer, equivalent to 
fifty percent of pension liabilities. 
As  you  may  know,  the  investment  regime  for  insurance  companies  allows  for  fifty  percent  of  the 
statutory fund to be held in equities. However, the statutory fund must only be sufficient to cover policy 
holder’s liabilities and thus any excess or surplus assets are not subject any limits, but need to be 
An  examination  of  thirty-seven  pension  plans  which  account  for  eightyfive  percent  of  total  equity 
investments  of  pension  funds  indicate  that  there  are  about  10  plans  which  are  way  below  the  50 
percent equity limit, and which could potentially invest about $1.1 billion in equities, if they so chose. 
They have not done so because of their own investment preferences. This proposed scheme would 
free up another $1.5 billion for equity investments. This amount compares with $700 million which was 
taken out of the equity market by pension funds since the end of 2005. 
In our discussions with the stakeholders it was felt that pension funds desirous of making use of this 
option should (i) prepare an investment policy, in accordance with the Central Bank’s guidelines on 
Prudent Person Approach to Investment and Lending which was issued in May 2005; and (ii) submit 
quarterly reports to the Central Bank. 
The  proposed  approach  –  which  is  a  liability-based  approach  –  is  not  without  its  implementation 
problems. 
A major implementation challenge will be to ensure the accuracy of the liability data and consequently 
the calculation of the pension fund’s surplus, on an ongoing basis. Liability information will always be 
out of date given that investment management operates on a continuous basis but actuarial valuations 
are done at fixed dates, typically once every three years. 
It  will  be  very  costly  (and  a  major  challenge)  to  require  annual  actuarial  valuations.  However,  a 
possible  fall-back  will  be  to  operate  on  the  basis  of  estimated  annual  liability  figures  (following  the 
three-year actuarial exercise), based on the assumptions utilized to produce IAS 19 figures (that’s the 
calculation of the pension surplus that feeds into the sponsoring company’s annual balance sheet). 
One would need to examine the feasibility and implications of using this estimation procedure more 
carefully. 
Another issue is that as of now, there is no standardized actuarial regime in Trinidad and Tobago, for 
pension  funds.  Actuarial  liabilities  depend  on  the  actuarial  methods  and  assumptions  used  to 
determine them and as you know, there is a range of acceptable methods and assumptions. This has 
important consequences if liability values are used as a basis for equity limits. 
Let me end with some thoughts on considerations to be taken into account in the preparation of the 
permanent investment regime for pension funds (the new legislation that we expect to have in place in 
a period of eighteen months to two years). 
The current orthodoxy is that pension plans should be free to invest as much or as little as they want in 
equities provided that it is done on a “prudent person” basis and is done within the framework of a 
proper  investment  policy.  This  investment  policy  should  take  into  account  the  plan’s  liability  profile, 
funding level and the risk tolerance of the plan’s sponsor – in terms of the sponsor’s willingness and 
ability to increase contributions if the investment policy does not deliver. Such a policy would then be 
based on input from the trustee, sponsor, management committee and actuary. 
BIS Review 119/2006 
 3
While this is attractive in principle, there are practical issues. For example, if there are no limits on 
local  equity  purchases  in  a  small  stock  market  like  Trinidad  and  Tobago,  the  imbalance  between 
demand and supply of equities could push prices beyond levels justified by the fundamentals (as has 
happened hare over the last few years). 
A second practical issue is whether there should be limits on foreign investments. The current thinking 
in industrialized countries is that the absence of limits on international investments allows for superior 
performance in terms of risk and return. In a small developing country like Trinidad and Tobago, there 
are practical considerations of the effect that unfettered overseas investment would have on exchange 
markets and the exchange rates. 
Whatever investment regime is finally decided upon for the long term, its efficiency and sustainability 
will  ultimately  depend  on  (i)  a  significant  increase  in  the  range  of  available  domestic  investments 
(including  government  securities  and  private  bonds);  increasing  liquidity  in  the  stock  market  by 
encouraging more listings providing inducements for trading as opposed to the current system of “buy 
and hold” and reducing the dependence of the stock market on institutional investors. 
These are tough but winnable challenges. 
The  Bank  will  continue  to  discuss  these  issues  with  stakeholders  with  a  view  to  agreeing  on  a 
temporary investment regime early in the New Year. 
