Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Focus on human capital development in Malaysia 
Welcoming remarks by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the INCEIF 
Strategic Partnership 2006, Kuala Lumpur, 14 December 2006. 
 Yang  Berhormat,  Dato'  Mustapa  Mohamed,  Minister  of  Higher  Education,  Distinguished  Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is my great pleasure and honour to welcome you to INCEIF Strategic Partnership in conjunction with 
the signing of Memorandum of Understanding between INCEIF and nine institutions of higher learning 
in Malaysia. This occasion is of particular significance as, on this day, with the grace of Allah, we are 
laying the foundation for the promotion of collaborative efforts in human capital development which will 
benefit the Islamic financial services industry. 
Against an environment of a rapidly evolving Islamic financial industry and the growing significance of 
Islamic  financial  institutions  globally,  human  intellectual  capital  has  become  the  defining  factor  in 
sustaining the performance and competitiveness of the Islamic financial industry. Indeed, the fast pace 
of  innovation  in  global  financial  services  in  general  and  in  the  Islamic  financial  services  sector  in 
particular, demands new expertise and skills. In this environment, the creation of a substantial pool of 
talent  is  indispensable  for  the  future  growth  of  Islamic  finance.  In  this  regard,  Malaysia  has  placed 
strong focus on human capital development through training and education.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The  establishment  of  the  International  Centre  for  Education  in  Islamic  Finance  (INCEIF)  reflects 
Malaysia's continuous effort and commitment towards development of a progressive Islamic financial 
industry by developing and enhancing human intellectual capital in Islamic finance. These efforts will 
also reinforce the efforts to position Malaysia as an international Islamic financial centre (MIFC). 
Since  its  establishment  in  March  this  year,  INCEIF  has  made  significant  progress.  To  date,  I  am 
pleased to announce that INCEIF has now more than 600 registered students with 26 per cent of them 
coming from 21 countries. As a move to develop and encourage research in Islamic Finance, INCEIF 
is offering research grants for ongoing as well as new research projects. Grants are available on a 
competitive  basis  and  I  am  pleased  to  note  that  the  research  grant  to  be  awarded  today  covers  a 
broad  range  of  areas  ranging  from  Islamic  financing,  product  innovation,  risk  management  and 
governance.  
In establishing a world class centre for education and training in Islamic finance, of importance, is the 
combined  collaborative  efforts  among  industry  players,  researchers,  academicians  and  Shariah 
scholars.  The  critical  shortage  of  available  technical  talent  in  the  Islamic  financial  industry  can  be 
addressed if all the relevant participants to the Islamic financial sector - the industry, the regulators, 
the  market  participants and  the  academia  are willing  to  forge  their  efforts  together  on  a  continuous 
basis  to  elevate  the  performance  level  of  Islamic  finance.  Today,  we  are  paving  the  way  for  closer 
collaboration between INCEIF and the institutions of higher learning in Malaysia to realise our common 
objective  of  developing  the  pool  of  expertise  in  Islamic  finance.  This  collaborative  move,  would 
establish a network of mutual co-operation and collaboration that would strengthen the efforts between 
the institutions of higher learning in the areas of curriculum development, research, training, exchange 
of  ideas  and  information,  and  resources  in  Islamic  finance.  This  partnership  in  connecting  the 
knowledge communities in Malaysia needs to be developed and maintained on a long-term basis.  
Entering  into  strategic  alliances  with  institutions  of  higher  learning,  Islamic  financial  institutions  and 
other  organisations  would  create  greater  synergy,  which  may  bring  about  new  approaches,  new 
technologies and new areas of specialization. Collaborative efforts between INCEIF and institutions of 
higher  learning  in  particular,  would  strengthen  the  ability  to  leverage  on  the  respective  institutions' 
expertise in research. The introduction of new research findings in Islamic financial engineering could 
pave the way for increased innovation of new products. This would contribute towards broadening and 
deepening  Islamic  financial  markets  and  thus  strengthen  the  overall  development  of  the  Islamic 
financial industry. In addition, active collaboration between academic researchers and the practitioners 
will enable the practical application of research findings.  
BIS Review 125/2006 
 1
One of the strategic steps that INCEIF has initiated is the forging into strategic alliances with the five 
takaful  operators  to  collaborate  in  promoting  and  undertaking  research,  development,  training  and 
education in Islamic finance. In the international arena, INCEIF has also established strategic alliances 
with  the  Islamic  Research  and  Training  Institute  (IRTI)  of  the  Islamic  Development  Bank,  Lembaga 
Pengembangan  Perbankan  Indonesia  (LPPI)  of  Bank  Indonesia,  National  Institute  of  Banking  and 
Finance (NIBAF) of State Bank of Pakistan and Ceylinco Sussex Business School, Sri Lanka, among 
others. INCEIF is also in the midst of finalising its collaborative efforts with organisations in the United 
Arab Emirates, Kuwait, Bahrain and Qatar.  
Initiatives have also been taken to enhance the pool of talent is in the field of Shariah. This has been 
done  by  awarding  research  grants  and  scholarships  to  deserving  outstanding  candidates.  This 
initiative will be funded by the Shariah Endowment Fund which was announced in August this year. 
The applications for the Shariah Scholarship Award and the Shariah Research Grant for 2006 are still 
open to qualified candidates until the end of the year.  
Apart  from  this,  many  other  initiatives  have  been  taken  by  the  relevant  bodies  in  Malaysia  to 
strengthen  talent  development  at  all  levels  in  Islamic  finance.  At  the  strategic  leadership  level, 
Malaysia  has  established  the  International  Centre  for  Leadership  in  Finance  or  ICLIF  as  part  of  an 
effort  to  spearhead  the  development  of  a  new  generation  of  world  class  leaders  in  the  financial 
services  sector  including  Islamic  finance  towards  high  performance  and  excellence.  In  the 
development of technical expertise, the Islamic Banking and Finance Institute Malaysia (IBFIM), the 
industry training arm, has played an active role in producing well-trained and high calibre individuals 
with the necessary skills in Islamic finance. IBFIM offers advisory, training and consultancy services on 
Islamic banking and finance and organise seminars, workshops and conferences to create awareness 
and  training  to  meet  specific  requirements  of  the  industry.  The  programmes  on  offer  include  the 
fundamental  aspects  of  Shariah,  Islamic  banking  and  takaful  and  risk  management  in  Islamic 
financing. IBFIM has been working closely with the industry to ensure that their training and education 
programmes are tailored to meet the changing needs of the industry.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
In  conclusion,  the  future  success  of  Islamic  finance  will  depend  on  the  co-ordinated  and  concerted 
collaborative  efforts  of  all  stakeholders,  namely  the  Islamic  finance  practitioners,  educators  and 
researchers.  In  this  regard,  all  parties  should  put  in  relentless  efforts  to  continuously  promote  the 
development of Islamic finance into one which is progressive, dynamic, responsive and sustainable. 
While  the  increasingly  more  competitive  prevailing  environment  raises  the  pressures  to  produce 
immediate-term results, it is the investment in human capital and in research and development that will 
secure the long-term sustainability of the industry.  
With the grace of Allah, and with the support of all those involved in Islamic finance, it is our hope that 
INCEIF will make a meaningful contribution to the future development of Islamic finance for the benefit 
of the ummah.  
In closing, once again, I would like to express our deepest appreciation to the Yang Berhormat Dato' 
Mustapa  Mohamed,  Minister  of  Higher  Education  for  gracing  this  occasion  and  for  accepting  to 
witness INCEIF partnership with nine institutions of higher learning. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 125/2006
