Svein Gjedrem: The economic outlook and monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), for Norges Bank’s 
regional network, Oslo, 9 November 2006. 
The text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation. The address is based on the assessments presented at Norges 
Bank’s press conference following the Executive Board’s monetary policy meeting on 1 November and Inflation Report 3/06. 
The 
Charts in pdf-format can be found on the Norges Bank’s website. 
 for 
the 
tendency  survey 
third  quarter  shows 
The economic situation 
The world economy is currently experiencing its strongest continuous upturn since the early 1970s. 
This  has  contributed  to  solid  growth  in  the  Norwegian  economy.  Norway’s  terms  of  trade  have 
improved by nearly 30% since 2000, and activity in the export industry is very high. Globalisation has 
resulted  in  a  low  rise  in  prices  for  imported  consumer  goods  at  the  same  time  as  strong  growth  in 
demand for commodities and semi-finished goods has led to high prices for many Norwegian export 
goods.  The  terms  of  trade  for  traditional  goods and  services  have  also  improved,  albeit  to  a  lesser 
degree than for overall trade.  
So far in the cyclical upturn, the mainland economy has grown by an average of close to 4 per cent 
annually.  Current  information  about  economic  developments  indicates  that  the  cyclical  upturn  is 
continuing.  Corporate  sector  profitability  is  solid.  Companies  are  borrowing  and  investing.  There  is 
strong growth in employment, unemployment has fallen markedly, and household demand continues 
to rise. Capacity utilisation in the business sector is high and a growing number of enterprises are now 
facing constraints.  
Statistics  Norway’s  business 
that  Norwegian 
manufacturing is optimistic about the prospects ahead. A clear majority of industrial leaders assess the 
general  outlook  as  more  positive  in  the  short-term  than  in  the  third  quarter.  A  majority  of  industrial 
leaders are considering an increase in investment. A shortage of skilled labour is posing a mounting 
challenge to manufacturing in the period ahead.  
This  picture  is  consistent  with  information  from  the  company  contacts  in  Norges  Bank’s  regional 
network. In the August round of interviews, 59 per cent of the companies reported capacity problems, 
and this share has increased since the previous round.  
Output and employment are increasing in all sectors. Pressures are particularly strong in the building 
and construction sector and some corporate services. The rise in prices is moderate in retail trade. It 
also appears that extensive use of foreign contract labour, particularly in some manufacturing sectors 
and building and construction, is curbing wage growth.  
An  increasing  number  of  our  company  contacts  report  labour  shortages,  particularly  a  shortage  of 
engineers,  project  managers,  transport  workers  and  skilled  labour  in  corporate  services.  Labour 
shortages are also beginning to emerge in retail trade and household services.  
High  demand  for  labour  has  resulted  in  a  marked  decline  in  unemployment  so  far  this  year. 
Unemployment is now in line with the unemployment level during the previous expansion at the end of 
the 1990s. Registered unemployment was 2.3 per cent of the labour force in October. Unemployment 
has declined for all occupational groups, and has been most pronounced in manufacturing, building 
and construction and the engineering and ICT sectors.  
There are probably limitations to how much the supply of Norwegian labour can increase in the period 
ahead.  Labour  participation  rates  are  high,  particularly  when  taking  into  account  demographic 
developments. Developments in the labour market are similar to those observed prior to the period of 
accelerating  wage  and  cost  inflation  that  started  in  1998,  but  wage  growth  so  far  has  been  fairly 
moderate. Several factors may have contributed to this. An increase in inward labour migration and 
the opportunities provided by an international labour market may have prompted participants in local 
and centralised wage negotiations to place greater emphasis on the considerably higher wage level in 
Norway relative to our trading partners and on potential job vulnerability.  
Foreign  companies  with  contracts  in  Norway  account  for  a  substantial  share  of  inward  labour 
migration.  Labour  inflows  from  the  new  EU  member  states  still  appear  to  be  growing,  with  the 
construction industry absorbing a particularly large share. In 2006, the number of persons employed 
BIS Review 108/2006 
 1
from new EU member states who are not resident in Norway is estimated at close to 30 000, i.e. an 
increase of 12,000 since 2005. Inward labour migration has reduced bottlenecks in some industries. 
However, despite increased labour market flexibility, the risk of higher growth in labour costs is now 
rising.  
Over the past six months, there have been increasing indications of labour shortages in the Norwegian 
economy. A rise in sickness absence and an increasing number of persons on disability benefits are 
pushing  down  production  capacity  this  year.  In  view  of  the  tightening  taking  place  in  the  Swedish 
labour market, there may be reason to expect a reduction in the supply of labour from Sweden. Inward 
labour  migration  to  Norway  has  taken  place  in  a  period  with  high  unemployment  in  large  parts  of 
Europe. We have assumed that slower growth in the Norwegian economy and increased demand for 
labour in other parts of the Nordic region and in the new EU member states will gradually stabilise the 
number of foreign workers on short-term assignments in Norway.  
In spite of solid corporate profitability and an unemployment level that has earlier triggered markedly 
higher wage growth, real wage growth from 2005 to 2006 will probably be moderate. Nevertheless, 
unemployment  fell  rapidly  through  the  summer.  The  main  agreements  in  the  centralised  wage 
settlements  had  then  been  concluded.  The  social  partners  may  therefore  have  assumed  that  the 
labour market would be less tight than currently implied by employment and unemployment figures. 
Some groups negotiate wages locally in the autumn. Wage growth may be higher than average for 
these  groups.  Systematic  information  about  these  negotiations  is  limited,  however,  before  the  first 
months of 2007. In the last rounds of interviews with our regional network, an increasing number of 
companies reported that wage growth in 2006 will be higher than budgeted early this year.  
The level of unemployment that is consistent with stable real wage growth is uncertain and probably 
varies over time. We have assumed that increased economic integration across countries, both in the 
form  of  an  increase  in  inward  labour  migration  and  intensified  competition  in  product  markets,  may 
have a dampening effect on wage demands for a given level of unemployment. In the period ahead, a 
tight labour market is expected to result in higher real wage growth. Nevertheless, it is assumed that 
labour inflows will have a dampening impact on wage demands, so that real wage growth will be a little 
lower in the next few years than in previous periods of equally low unemployment.  
The  upward  pressure  on  price  and  wage  inflation  given  the  level  of  current  resource  utilisation,  as 
reflected in the output gap, is estimated to be lower than in the previous expansion even though the 
unemployment  rate  is  at  approximately  the  same  low  level.  This  is  due  in  part  to  high  productivity 
growth in recent years.  
Growth in disposable income has been high in recent years. Lower interest expenses and relatively 
high real wage growth have resulted in an increase in household purchasing power. The rise in house 
prices  may  also  have  fuelled  growth  in  private  consumption.  With  high  growth  in  employment  and 
falling unemployment, consumption growth is expected to be high in the period to the end of the year 
and into next year. As the interest rate level gradually normalises, household interest expenses will 
increase. Household interest-bearing debt is approximately NOK 1300 billion. According to our interest 
rate forecast, which I will return to later, the interest rate in 2008 will be more than 2 percentage points 
higher than in 2006. Such an interest rate increase will have a pre-tax effect on household income of 
roughly NOK 25 billion.  
Combined with projected lower employment growth and higher inflation, this might reduce growth in 
household purchasing power in the years ahead. Higher wage growth would have the opposite effect. 
Overall, moderate growth in household purchasing power is expected to result in lower consumption 
growth in the period ahead.  
A continued rise in house prices may contribute to sustaining consumption growth. House prices have 
increased  further  this  autumn,  and  the  twelve-month  rise  moved  up  to  18.2  per  cent  in  October. 
Residential construction is still high. In 2005, the number of housing starts was the highest since the 
beginning of the 1980s. It appears that growth will be high again this year, but somewhat lower than in 
recent years. A number of contacts in Norges Bank’s regional network report high demand for new 
dwellings, and order backlogs for residential construction are still exhibiting solid growth.  
A  gradual  increase  in  the  interest  rate  will  probably  curb  activity  in  the  housing  market.  Housing 
investment is expected to grow through this year, albeit less rapidly than last year. Housing investment 
growth  will  thereafter  moderate  further,  and  may  fall  somewhat  towards  the  end  of  the  projection 
period. House price inflation is expected to slow.  
2 
 BIS Review 108/2006
Household indebtedness has increased in tandem with high activity in the housing market. Growth in 
household  debt  (C2)  has  abated  somewhat  in  recent  months,  but  remains  at  a  high  level.  Higher 
interest rates and lower house price inflation will curb growth in household debt in the next few years. 
Intensified  competition  and  adaptation  to  new  capital  adequacy  rules  in  the  financial  sector  have 
squeezed banks’ lending margins. This may have curbed the impact of higher policy rates on house 
price inflation.  
Growth in credit to mainland enterprises has also shown a sharp increase over the past year, partly 
reflecting  increased  fixed  investment.  With  prospects  of  continued  high  capacity  utilisation  in  the 
Norwegian economy, solid profitability, ample liquidity and a high level of optimism among enterprises, 
strong  growth  in  investment  is  expected  again  this  year.  As  economic  growth  gradually  slows, 
investment growth is also expected to moderate.  
Property management companies account for nearly 40 per cent of banks’ lending to the corporate 
sector. Activity in the commercial property market reached a very high level in 2005. The vacancy rate 
in Oslo has diminished steadily for two consecutive years and stood at 8 per cent in January 2006. In 
the  course  of  2005,  office  rental  prices  began  to  pick  up  in  the  largest  Norwegian  cities,  with 
considerable variation within the various quality and location segments.  
The rise in consumer prices has also edged up since the beginning of the cyclical upturn. The year-on-
year rise in the consumer price index (CPI) was 2.6 per cent in September.  
Energy products such as electricity and oil have put upward pressure on inflation over the past year. 
Electricity  prices,  including  grid  rent  and  taxes,  were  48  per  cent  higher  in  August  than  one  year 
earlier,  while  petrol  prices  were  1  per  cent  higher.  Since  the  beginning  of  2001,  the  rise  in  energy 
prices has been over 7 per cent on average.  
Variations in energy prices may also lead to wide monthly variations in consumer price inflation. As a 
result of high electricity prices, the rise in CPI inflation will remain steady though 2006. Energy prices 
are expected to fall in the spring of 2007, dampening the rise in CPI inflation.  
The  rise  in  prices  for  non-energy  goods  has  been  moderate  in  recent  years.  Price  impulses  from 
imported  consumer  goods  have  been  particularly  weak.  Their  contribution  to  inflation  has  been 
negative virtually every year since the mid-1990s, partly reflecting increased trade, a shift in imports 
towards low-cost countries and a substantial improvement in distribution efficiency in Norway. Price 
impulses  from  imported  consumer  goods  are  expected  to  continue  to  exert  downward  pressure  on 
inflation for some time ahead, albeit to a lesser extent than in previous years.  
The rise in prices for domestically produced goods and services pushed up CPI inflation until this year, 
but since the beginning of the year this measure of inflation has edged down again. The 12-month rise 
in  prices  for  goods  and  services  produced  in  Norway,  excluding  energy,  was  1.3  per  cent  in 
September. The reduction in day-care rates in January this year has pushed down domestic inflation 
by an estimated 0.3 per cent over the past year.  
The rise in prices has been lower than expected for both goods and services. It seems that strong 
competition  between  various  producers  within  the  food  industry  and  the  construction  industry  has 
curbed  inflation.  In  addition,  productivity  growth  in retail  trade  has  been  high  in  the  past  few  years. 
Intensified competition may also have restrained the rise in prices for banking and insurance services.  
Continued strong competition, both foreign and domestic, and high productivity growth in recent years 
will probably contribute to curbing domestic inflation in 2007. Several factors, however, point to higher 
inflation  in  the  period  ahead,  but  the  rise  in  prices  will  probably  pick  up  somewhat  later  than  the 
historical relationship between inflation and capacity utilisation in the economy would suggest.  
Capacity  utilisation  in  the  Norwegian  economy  is  picking  up.  This  will  contribute  to  a  higher  rise  in 
prices  for  domestically  produced  goods  and  services.  A  tighter  labour  market  will  probably  lead  to 
higher wage growth in the coming years. There are also signs that productivity growth, which has been 
strong, will slow now, which must be expected when the cyclical upturn has lasted for a long period.  
Driving forces ahead 
The level of activity in the world economy is high. Global growth from 2004 to 2006 was the strongest 
recorded since the early 1970s. Continued solid growth among our trading partners is in prospect, and 
short-term interest rates are expected to rise in Sweden, Denmark, the UK and the euro area. After 
expanding at a strong pace over several years, the US economy is now showing signs of a slowdown. 
BIS Review 108/2006 
 3
Nevertheless, growth in the world economy is expected to remain firm. At the same time, the risk of an 
impending slowdown in global growth has increased. There are considerable uncertainties associated 
with the effect of a possible economic slowdown in the US on the global economy.  
Signs  of  slower  growth  in  the  US  are  emerging  primarily  in  the  housing  market.  Historically, 
developments  in  the  housing  market  have  been  closely  related  to  the  general  pace  of  economic 
growth.  Weaker  developments  in  the  housing  market  are  expected  to  influence  growth  through  a 
number of channels.  
Lower  house  sales  will  curb  housing  investment,  which  accounts  for  a  good  5  per  cent  of  GDP. 
Residential construction has been important for employment in recent years. The turnover time has 
risen markedly and prices and housing starts have fallen.  
High energy prices have so far pushed up inflation among our trading partners. In the US, general cost 
inflation has also been rising. In other countries, energy prices have only been passed on to a limited 
extent to other prices so that core inflation is still moderate and stable. The fall in oil prices through the 
autumn may curb inflation in the period ahead.  
In isolation, lower energy prices might result in lower interest rates than otherwise and contribute more 
directly  to  growth  in  total  demand  in  many  countries.  The  price  fall  is  related  primarily  to  reduced 
uncertainty about the supply of oil. A number of the risk factors that pushed up oil prices this summer, 
such  as  the  conflict  in  the  Middle  East  and  reduced  production  in  Nigeria  and  the  US,  have  been 
reduced.  In  addition,  global  oil  stocks  are  high  and  OPEC  has  announced  that  they  will  reduce 
production,  which  will  increase  spare  production  capacity  correspondingly.  The  fall  in  prices  is  also 
due  in  part  to  lower  demand  and  increased  supply  of  alternative  energy  sources  following  several 
years of high oil prices. In addition, slower growth in the US may reduce the pressure on prices for 
energy and other commodities.  
Oil prices are of importance for the activity level in the Norwegian economy and for central government 
revenues. In spite of lower oil prices recently, Brent Blend futures prices may indicate that oil prices 
will remain high several years ahead. Nevertheless, it is important to be aware that futures prices do 
not  provide  particularly  reliable  indications  about  oil  price  developments.  One  to  two  years  ahead, 
markets  are  thin  and  option  prices  indicate  that  market  participants  are  very  uncertain  about  future 
price developments.  
High  growth  in  the  global  economy  has  also  pushed  up  prices  for  non-oil  commodities.  Rising 
commodity  prices  and  buoyant  activity  in  markets  that  are  important  for  Norway  have  generated 
growth  impulses  to  the  Norwegian  economy.  Since  May  this  year,  commodity  prices  have  varied 
widely, but on the whole have edged up since end-June.  
Petroleum  investment  has  reached  a  high  level  after  three  years  of  strong  growth.  Owing  to  large 
projects like Ormen Lange, Snøhvit and Statfjord late phase development, total investment may come 
to around NOK 100bn in 2006. The level of investment is assumed to remain high next year, before 
declining somewhat the following year when Ormen Lange and Snøhvit are scheduled for completion. 
Continued high oil prices are expected to contribute to high investment both in exploration and in fields 
in  operation  in  the  years  ahead.  The  recent  fall  in  oil  prices  will  probably  have  little  effect  on 
investment  plans.  The  price  estimates  underlying  companies’  investment  decisions  remain  low 
compared with both spot and futures prices for oil.  
Information from our regional network suggests that petroleum investment is providing considerable 
impulses to activity in Norway’s coastal regions. According to the network, suppliers to the petroleum 
industry  are  expecting  continued  strong  growth  over  the  next  few  months.  Statistic  Norway’s 
investment intensions survey for oil and gas activities confirms the impression of positive expectations 
for 2006 and 2007.  
There  are  prospects  of  strong  growth  in  the  Government  Pension  Fund  -  Global.  Given  our 
assumption  for  oil  price  developments  ahead  (oil  futures),  spending  in  line  with  the  expected  real 
return on the Fund implies that the structural, non-oil deficit may increase by close to NOK 15 billion at 
2006 prices in both 2008 and 2009. With a period of strong expansion in the Norwegian economy, 
somewhat lower petroleum revenue spending may be in line with the fiscal rule.  
Strong  growth  in  the  Norwegian  economy  is  boosting  tax  revenues  and  reducing  spending  on 
unemployment  benefits.  Over  a  three-year  period,  the  economic  turnaround  has  strengthened  the 
budget by about NOK 30 billion. In the structural budget deficit, which is the basis for formulating fiscal 
4 
 BIS Review 108/2006
policy, adjustments are made for such cyclical deviations. Fiscal policy that is expansionary during a 
downturn and contractionary when the economy is experiencing a boom has a stabilising effect.  
Our projections are based on the assumption that the central government budget will generate some 
stimulus to total demand and output in 2008 and 2009, but somewhat less than the expected return on 
the Fund would imply.  
The path for domestic and external interest rates does not imply considerable changes in the krone 
exchange rate. Neither the appreciation of the krone last spring, nor the depreciation this autumn can 
be  explained  to  any  appreciable  extent  by  changes  in  interest  rate  expectations.  Historically,  the 
relationship between oil prices and the krone exchange rate has been unstable. In some periods, oil 
prices have been important for developments in the krone exchange rate, while in other periods there 
has been no clear relationship. In August, oil prices fell at the same time as the krone depreciated.  
Interest rates are still low among many of our trading partners, in spite of the interest rate increases in 
several  countries  as  a  result  of  rising  energy  prices  and  higher  consumer  price  inflation.  In  the 
November  Inflation  Report,  Norges  Bank  assumes  that  money  market  rates  among  our  trading 
partners will gradually increase over the next few years. Slower growth in the US has contributed to 
expectations that the rate tightening cycle is nearing an end and that the policy rate will be lowered in 
the course of next summer.  
Our interest rate projections are based on the assumption that external and domestic interest rates will 
rise to a somewhat higher level in the longer term than implied by forward interest rates.  
Monetary policy assessments and strategy 
Monetary policy in Norway is oriented towards low and stable inflation, with annual consumer price 
inflation of close to 2.5 per cent over time. In its conduct of monetary policy, Norges Bank operates a 
flexible inflation targeting regime, so that weight is given to both variability in inflation and variability in 
output and employment.  
At Norges Bank’s Executive Board meeting of 1 November, the sight deposit rate was raised by 0.25 
percentage point to 3.25 per cent.  
The Executive Board described the background for the decision as follows:  
• 
Underlying inflation has been lower than projected in recent months. Nevertheless, several 
factors  point  to  higher  inflation  ahead.  Capacity  utilisation  is  high  and  there  is  little  spare 
capacity  in  the  Norwegian  economy.  Employment  is  rapidly  rising  and  unemployment  has 
exhibited  a  marked  decline.  There  are  signs  of  higher  wage  growth  and  expectations  of 
rising  inflation.  At  the  same  time,  the  krone  exchange  rate  has  depreciated  from  strong 
values.  
The interest rate path presented in Inflation Report 3/06 will provide a reasonable balance 
between the objective of bringing up inflation towards target and the objective of stabilising 
developments in output and employment, conditional on the information currently available to 
Norges Bank.  
Monetary policy influences the economy with a lag. Over several years, interest rates have 
been considerably lower than what Norges Bank considers to be a neutral level. The interest 
rate  may  gradually  be  raised  to  a  more  normal  level  at  a  somewhat  faster  pace  than 
envisaged  earlier,  although  it  is  unlikely  that  rates  will  be  raised  at  every  monetary  policy 
meeting. Based on Norges Bank’s current assessment, the interest rate will thus continue to 
be raised in small, not too frequent steps if economic developments are broadly in line with 
projections.  
The  sight  deposit  rate  should  be  in  the  interval  3¼  -  4¼  per  cent  in  the  period  to  the 
publication  of  the  next  Inflation  Report  on  15  March  2007,  conditional  on  economic 
developments  that  are  broadly  in  line  with  the  projections.  New  information  may  reveal 
aspects of economic developments that indicate that the Norwegian economy is moving on a 
different  path  than  projected.  On  the  one  hand,  major  shifts  in  trade  patterns,  strong 
competition,  weaker  global  growth  or  a  stronger  krone  exchange  rate  may  result  in  low 
inflation. On the other hand, low real interest rates or a further depreciation of the krone may 
lead to a higher-than-projected rise in output and inflation. 
   BIS Review 108/2006 
 5
Projections  are  uncertain.  Disturbances  in  the  economy  will  affect  interest  rate  developments.  This 
reduces the uncertainty about developments in prices and output.  
Monetary policy cannot fine-tune economic developments, but it can prevent the largest effects from 
occurring when the economy is exposed to disturbances. In some situations, it may be appropriate to 
guard  against  particularly  adverse  developments.  In  the  baseline  scenario,  the  interest  rate  is 
gradually  raised  to  a  more  normal  level.  Norges  Bank  continuously  assesses  the  effects  of  interest 
rate changes and other new information concerning economic developments.  
Thank you for your attention.  
6 
 BIS Review 108/2006
