Michael C Bonello: Validating Malta’s strategy to create an international 
financial centre 
Remarks  by  Mr  Michael  C  Bonello,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malta,  at  the  opening  of  the 
Mediterranean Bank plc, Valletta, 29 September 2006. 
 I should first of all like to thank the management of Mediterranean Bank plc for inviting me to officiate 
at  the  opening  of  these  premises.  Mediterranean  Bank  is  a  welcome  addition  to  Malta’s  growing 
financial  sector.  Its  focus  on  private  banking,  in  particular  on  portfolio  and  wealth  management 
services, represents a niche activity which offers much scope for further development. 
On this occasion I would like to reflect on two particularly significant aspects of Mediterranean Bank’s 
decision to locate in Malta with a view to servicing clients in the Mediterranean basin. 
The first is that it represents a further validation of Malta’s strategy to create an international financial 
centre as a major pillar of its economy. Here, I would like to salute the vision and pragmatism of those 
politicians  and  technocrats  who  in  the  early  1990s  steered  this  project  to  a  successful  conclusion. 
Today, financial intermediation activities alone directly contribute between 6% and 7% of the country’s 
GDP. This success is a unique example of what a bipartisan approach to strategic economic choices 
can achieve. It should indeed serve as an encouragement to our political leaders to tackle to-day’s 
much needed reforms in a similar manner. 
Allow me to recall some facts to underline the impressive growth of the financial sector. There has 
been steady expansion all along, but especially since EU membership. 31 new licences for financial 
services operators were issued during 2004, 93 in 2005 and a further 61 up to June of this year. 
Membership  of  the  EU  is  contributing  to  this  growth  also  as  a  result  of  the  adoption  of  the  single 
passport  regulations  and  the  right  to  provide  cross-border  services.  There  are  99  institutions  with 
passporting rights in Malta today, and two Maltese credit institutions have passporting rights in the EU. 
The banking sector is composed of 18 banks, of which 6 are domestic and 12 foreign controlled. The 
combined balance sheet of the domestic banks has grown by an average annual rate of 7% in the 
past two-an-a-half years and their assets to GDP ratio, at 280%, is comparable to the average for the 
euro area. For the entire banking system, this ratio is closer to 750%. 
In  the  area  of  investment  services,  there  are  currently  21  professional  investment  funds  targeting 
institutional investors and high net worth customers, and 66 sub-funds, with a total net asset value of 
Lm1.22 billion. 
The  number  of  local  collective  investment  schemes  (CISs)  stands  at  14,  with  52  sub-funds,  and 
shareholders’ funds total over Lm0.5 billion. 
The insurance sector has also been growing rapidly of late, with four new licences being issued during 
the first half of 2006. To date, there are 33 insurance principals registered in Malta, 16 of them are 
foreign companies offering their services through insurance agents. 
Passporting rights have been well availed of in this sector, too, and the total number of Notifications for 
European  Insurance  Undertakings  to  carry  on  business  in  Malta  under  the  Freedom  to  Provide 
Services directive now stands at 204. 
The other reflection I would like to share with you is inspired by an interview given recently by the CEO 
of Mediterranean Bank to a local economic magazine, in which Malta was referred to as ‘a secure EU 
jurisdiction’. In this same context it was stated that ‘Malta’s stability is an important part of its appeal as 
a banking location’. 
While such accolades are indeed welcome, they do not come entirely as a surprise. For when Malta’s 
financial  legislation  was  overhauled  in  1994,  and  when  EU  legislation  was  later  transposed  in 
anticipation of EU membership, an intended by-product was indeed the incorporation of the highest 
international standards and best practices into Maltese financial laws and regulations. 
This  was  accompanied  by  a  strengthening  of  the  institutional  framework  for  the  regulation  and 
oversight of the financial system. In 2002 the Malta Financial Services Authority (MFSA) became the 
single regulator for financial services when it took over the responsibility for the banking sector from 
BIS Review 92/2006 
 1
the Central Bank of Malta (CBM). The Bank then assumed responsibility for ensuring the stability of 
the entire financial system. 
A year later Malta volunteered to undergo a Financial Sector Assessment Programme (FSAP) by the 
IMF and the World Bank. After a thorough examination by a team of international experts, our financial 
system  was  certified  as  being  healthy,  well  supervised  in  the  context  of  a  comprehensive  legal 
framework, and strongly compliant with most of the relevant international standards and codes. 
We cannot, of course, afford to be complacent. A good reputation takes time and considerable effort to 
earn,  but  can  easily  be  lost.  It  is  the  joint  responsibility  of  the  CBM  and  the  MFSA,  the  credit 
institutions  and  the  other  financial  service  providers,  and  of  all  market  participants,  including  the 
financial lawyers and accountants, to ensure that Malta’s financial centre remains synonymous with 
integrity, efficiency and reasonable costs. 
I  emphasize  this  point  because  the  recent  rapid  growth  in  the  depth  and  breadth  of  the  financial 
sector, and the expectation of further expansion, has sometimes given rise to behaviour - such as the 
use  of  aggressive  methods  to  induce  prospective  customers  to  buy  financial  products  and  services 
and the resort to misleading advertising - which stretches the interpretation of our laws and regulations 
close to their limit. There should be no doubt in anybody’s mind that the CBM and the MFSA, acting in 
the common interest, will continue to exercise their respective responsibilities with diligence and rigour 
to ensure the integrity and stability of the financial system. 
In conclusion, I would like to wish Mediterranean Bank success in their Malta venture and to express 
the hope that their presence here will also serve to enhance the reputation of our financial centre. 
2 
 BIS Review 92/2006
