Michael C Bonello: Policy challenges beyond the euro  
Speech by Mr Michael C Bonello, Governor of the Central Bank of Malta, at the Annual Dinner of the 
Malta Institute of Financial Services, Saint Julian’s, 17 November 2006. 
 I should first of all like to thank you, Mr President, and your Council for the opportunity to share my 
thoughts  once  again  with  such  a  distinguished  audience.  Before  I  do  so,  however,  I  would  like  to 
commend  the  Institute  of  Financial  Services  (IFS)  for  its  admirable  capacity  to  reinvent  itself  in 
response  to  the  changing  demands  of  the  marketplace.  This  year,  for  example,  the  Institute  has 
renamed itself as the IFS School of Finance. I have discovered that this apparently cosmetic change 
has a very significant meaning, in that the Institute in the UK is now empowered to award degrees. IFS 
Malta, on its part, has extended its reach beyond our shores and is cooperating with the Romanian 
Banking Institute in the delivery of one of its academic programmes in that soon-to-be EU member 
country. I am sure all your other guests will join me in wishing you and your Council every success in 
your continuing efforts to promote higher professional standards in the financial sector. 
Since Malta joined the EU in 2004, and particularly since the Maltese lira entered ERM II last year, the 
Central  Bank  of  Malta  has  been  making  the  case for  an  early adoption  of  the  euro.  That  goal  now 
seems to be within reach, thanks in no small way to the Government’s steadfast commitment to fiscal 
consolidation. The achievement of a political consensus on the euro is also a welcome development. 
The main remaining challenge is to meet the inflation criterion. 
Tonight I shall argue that the euro is a necessary, but not a sufficient condition for faster growth. More 
specifically,  unless  we  establish  limits  on  how  much  we  consume  and,  within  limits  set  by  the 
economy’s earning capacity, allocate a greater proportion of the national income to investment, the 
advantages of euro area membership cannot be fully realized. It is time for the country to disown an 
unfortunate legacy of its colonial past that is best reflected in the notion that it is possible to spend 
more without first producing more. To this day, political discourse contains frequent references to tax 
reductions and subsidies, when it should be rallying popular support for the need to strengthen the 
country’s capacity to generate wealth on a sustainable basis. 
The benefits of euro area membership 
As I have said, the adoption of the euro should enhance the economy’s potential to grow faster. The 
elimination of exchange rate risk and currency conversion costs should result in increased trade, while 
the lower interest rate and inflation environment of the euro area should make for reduced business 
costs  and  greater  macroeconomic  stability.  Combined  with  the  fiscal  discipline  associated  with 
monetary union, this is expected to translate into higher credit ratings and better investment prospects. 
From  a  central  banker’s  viewpoint,  moreover,  a  key  benefit  of  euro  area  membership  will  be  the 
elimination  of  the  costs  inherent  in  managing  a  small,  vulnerable  currency  like  the  Maltese  lira  and 
their replacement by the greater security and credibility afforded by a strong international currency.  
Euro adoption necessary but not sufficient 
Viewed  from  this  perspective,  therefore,  the  euro  is  but  one  element  in  a  continuum  of  changes 
necessary to enhance the international competitiveness of the Maltese economy. The benefits of the 
single currency will not suffice, especially in the presence of downside risks to global growth such as 
higher  oil  prices,  a  potentially  disorderly  unwinding  of  current  account  imbalances  and  the  rise  of 
protectionism. Although the ongoing preoccupation with the level of the external reserves will cease 
once  we  join  the  euro  area,  moreover,  any  imbalance  between  what  we  buy  and  sell  abroad  will 
continue  to  cause  the  depletion  of  assets  or  the  accumulation  of  liabilities,  and  be  reflected  in  the 
country’s  international  investment  position.  Any  loss  of  competitiveness,  therefore,  will  still  result  in 
slower growth. 
BIS Review 113/2006 
 1
Raising productivity a key challenge 
In  setting  out  to  overcome  this  challenge,  a  primary  objective  should  be  the  correction  of  existing 
macroeconomic imbalances. Output growth must, therefore, match spending growth more closely, and 
a key element in bridging that gap is increased productivity. 
Put differently, since we are price takers in the markets that matter, notably those for electronics and 
tourism,  we  must  have  a  cost  structure  that  does  not  discourage  investment.  Domestic  inputs, 
particularly  labour,  must  be  competitively  priced.  And  since  the  cost  of  labour  in  Malta  is  relatively 
high, we must increase the value of output per employee. Once again, the only way forward is through 
productivity growth. 
In this regard, there is much room for improvement. The level of productivity has remained roughly 
unchanged since 2001, while it is projected to increase at an annual rate of only 1% to 2% in 2007 and 
2008. For a country that is highly dependent on exports, this is not good enough when many of our 
competitors are achieving faster productivity growth. 
Faced with this situation, we would do well to reflect on the experience of others. In France, a recent 
McKinsey report showed how industrial productivity gains slowed sharply in the last five years, causing 
the country to miss the opportunity to create an estimated 700,000 jobs. As for the reasons, a report 
by  the  Camdessus  expert  group  in  2005  identified  two  major  obstacles  to  growth:  first,  not  enough 
people work, and those who do work, do not work long enough, due in part to the introduction of a 
35-hour working week; second, the heavy State has become a costly drag on the economy. 
Malta faces a similar predicament for much the same reasons. For example, the labour participation 
rate is still low at 58% compared with an EU average of 70%; and the Maltese will have worked seven 
fewer days this year than the Dutch, who work longest, and three days fewer than the EU average, 
despite  the  abolition  of  the  practice  of compensation  for  a  holiday  that  falls on  the weekend.  Since 
independence,  moreover,  successive  governments  have  bequeathed  a  legacy  of  welfare  schemes 
and free public services that have not only distorted incentives and encouraged waste and abuse, but 
are also largely unsustainable. It is no wonder, therefore, that the Government absorbs almost half of 
the GDP, the tenth highest percentage in the EU. The concept of value for money, moreover, does not 
always prevail in public sector procurement1.  
Let  me  mention  just  two  examples  of  resource  misallocation.  The  first  is  the  absence  of  fees  for 
government-supplied health care. One can, for example, obtain expensive medicines or have a heart 
by-pass  operation  for  free,  regardless  of  one’s  capacity  to  pay.  Not  surprisingly,  the  budgetary 
allocation  for  medicines  and  surgical  materials  alone  is  forecast  to  increase  by  13%  next  year  to 
Lm21.5 million. The sustainability of the public health system is imperiled by the very manner in which 
it is financed. Sooner or later, the ability to provide free services to those who truly deserve them will 
itself come under threat. In this context, the parallel commitments of the major political parties to the 
continued  provision  of  free  health  services  for  all  and  to  prudent  fiscal  policies  are  not  easy  to 
reconcile. 
Much the same can be said of higher education, which is characterized by a student subsidy system 
that  is  probably  unique.  The  University  of  Malta  and  MCAST  have  together  been  allocated  Lm15.5 
million for 2007, compared with no less than Lm8 million budgeted for students’ maintenance grants. 
Funds  that  would  permit  these  institutions  to  offer  better  quality  programmes,  and  in  the  process 
hopefully raise the number of science and technology graduates from its current inadequate level, are 
instead paid to students regardless of their financial means. 
Changes needed in the pattern of resource allocation 
This  generous  approach  to  the  management  of  public  finances  has  meant  that  recurrent  revenue, 
although higher year after year, has often not been able to keep up with recurrent expenditure. For 
example,  in  2005  expenditure  amounted  to  41%  of  GDP,  roughly  matching  revenue  at  42%.  As  a 
                                                      
1   A  recent  paper  on  public  sector  efficiency  in  the  new  EU  Member  States  gives  Malta  a  relatively  high  score  in  terms  of 
public sector performance that measures outcomes. However, when performance is related to the inputs used to gauge the 
efficiency of the State, Malta ranks 21st in a pool of 24 countries including all 10 new Member States, Greece, Portugal, 
Ireland and a number of emerging market economies. Antonio Afonso, Ludger Schuknecht and Vito Tanzi, Public Sector 
Efficiency: Evidence for New EU Member Sates and Emerging Markets. ECB Working Paper No 581 (2006). 
2 
 BIS Review 113/2006
result,  the  6%  of  GDP  allocated  to  capital  spending  had  to  be  funded  almost  entirely  by  additional 
borrowing,  which  gives  rise  to  further  debt-servicing  costs.  Repeated  year  after  year,  this  pattern 
pushed the debt/GDP ratio steadily upwards to a peak of 75% in 2004. 
This tendency for recurrent revenue to be matched by recurrent expenditure in the context of fiscal 
retrenchment  has  had  a  crowding-out  effect  on  investment,  and  partly  explains  why  the  country’s 
investment/GDP ratio has been static at best in recent years. A more telling indicator of the relatively 
small  investment  in  productivity-enhancing  activities  is  the  share  of  GDP  devoted  to  R&D,  0.6%  in 
2004, compared with an average EU ratio of about 2%. 
It  is  doubtful  whether  the  existing  pattern  of  resource  allocation  is  conducive  to  the  desired 
improvement in Malta’s international competitiveness. The latter can only be achieved by increasing 
the size, flexibility and skill level of the labour force, while simultaneously creating an institutional and 
physical infrastructure more likely to attract high value-added foreign direct investment. And since the 
State must play a leading role in this effort, the question of financing arises spontaneously. 
Now  in  the  context  of  a  fiscal  consolidation  process  that  has  not  yet  run  its  full  course,  increasing 
recurrent  spending  beyond  the  natural  creep  caused  by  existing  commitments  such  as  pensions  is 
clearly  not  an  option.  Such  spending  is  already  equivalent  to  47%  of  GDP.  The  same  applies  to 
taxation, which stands at 36% of GDP. The only way forward is to pursue the medium-term objective 
of a balanced budget over the business cycle by reducing recurrent expenditure, by redistributing the 
resources available and by making the most efficient use possible of both domestic and EU funds. 
An  additional  advantage  of  lower  spending  commitments  is  that  this  would  make  further  tax  cuts 
possible that would, in turn, stimulate private initiative and investment. 
The course of action I am suggesting, therefore, would bring the country’s spending priorities more 
closely  into  line  with  its  Lisbon  Strategy  goals.  If  Malta  is  to  move  up  the  value  chain,  it  must 
acknowledge  global  realities.  It  is  clear,  for  example,  that  there  are  increasing  rewards  from 
innovation; and that ICT has become a major driver of economic growth. A growing proportion of world 
manufactured products, moreover, are in the high-tech category, 28% in 2000, double the percentage 
twenty years earlier; and knowledge intensive services are the largest source of employment growth in 
the EU15, with over 7 million new jobs created between 1997 and 20022. These trends should leave 
us in no doubt as to the direction in which the wind is blowing. 
Financing the necessary investment 
So  where  is  the  money  to  be  found  to  promote  improved  higher  education  and  ICT-related  skills, 
entrepreneurship  and  innovation,  or  to  be  able  to  offer  foreign  investors  custom-built  premises  at 
relatively short notice and of the standard they have come to expect, when almost 80% of recurrent 
Government  expenditure  goes  on  transfer  payments  and  wages?  As  for  the  remainder,  there  is  no 
room for discretionary cuts either: almost 9% represent interest payments on the public debt, and the 
balance is spent on essential supplies. Since EU funds alone will not be sufficient, the solution must 
encompass a further contraction of the public sector and a rethinking of the philosophy behind social 
spending programmes and other transfer payments. 
Compensation  of  public  sector  employees  has  been  stable  at  36%  of  recurrent  expenditure.  As  a 
proportion  of  GDP,  it  peaked  at  just  over  15%  in  2004 and  is projected  to  decline  to  13%  in  2008, 
reflecting  moderate  wage  increases  and  a  declining  workforce.  It  is  important  that  these  trends 
continue. 
As for transfer payments, these account for some 40% of total recurrent expenditure. Social spending 
alone absorbs a third of the total. Growth in this area over time has been driven by the perceived need 
to preserve the social fabric and by demographic pressures. In the process, however, sight has been 
lost  of  the  original  objective.  We  have  to  ask  whether  today’s  blanket  approach  to  welfare,  higher 
education and health is promoting a culture of reliance on the State rather than the encouragement of 
private  initiative.  Our  system  does  not  focus  exclusively  on  those  who  are  truly  in  need,  but  also 
provides a cushion for higher income earners, at the cost, however, of a heavier fiscal burden. 
                                                      
2   Swedish  Ministry  of  Finance  and  H.  M.  Treasury  Social  Bridges:  Meeting  the  Challenges  of  Globalisation,  London  and 
Stockholm, April 2006. 
BIS Review 113/2006 
 3
Social programmes must be sustainable 
The time has, therefore, come for a radical reform that reconciles the objective of social cohesion with 
financial sustainability. Non-essential transfer payments should be reduced, especially those that are 
of a universal nature and do not address a proven need. The introduction of means testing must be 
seriously  considered,  accompanied  by  continued  efforts  to  reduce  tax  evasion.  The  criteria  for  the 
granting of certain benefits should be tightened further. The underlying objective should be to promote 
a culture of self-help and efficiency. 
In the field of higher education, for example, since an academic qualification enhances the student’s 
income-earning potential, I believe a strong case can be made for at least the partial replacement of 
grants with loans for students from a better-off financial background, with a repayment schedule that 
provides for moratoria to suit the post-graduation realities of the particular student. What the typical 
student expects from higher education in terms of quality will increase once he or she is contributing to 
its  financing,  and  higher  expectations  are  known  to  be  one  of  the  drivers  of  an  improvement  in 
standards. 
Anyone  who  perceives  something  sinister  in  these  proposals  might  look  up  a  recent  study  by 
economist  Andre  Sapir.  Using  a  fairly  well-established  typology,  Sapir  grouped  the  EU15  into  four 
main  social  models,  the  Continentals,  Nordics,  Mediterraneans  and  the  Anglo-Saxons,  and  then 
estimated  the  efficiency  and  equity  of  each.  He  shows  that  there  does  not  need  to  be  a  trade-off 
between efficiency and equity. Just as importantly, however, he underlines that efficiency is always 
necessary for sustainability3.  
How do other countries approach this challenge? The experience of Singapore, which is twice as well 
off  as  Malta  on  a  per  capita  GDP  basis,  is  instructive.  There,  undergraduate  education  is  heavily 
subsidized by the government, but the remaining cost is borne by the student. The student’s annual 
contribution  ranges  from  the  equivalent  of  Lm1,300  for  an  engineering  degree  to  Lm3,800  for  a 
medical degree.  
There  are,  however,  means  for  the  student  to  finance  this  co-payment  through  borrowing  from  the 
Central Provident Fund. This is a social security savings plan funded by contributions from employers 
and employees, and which go into three accounts. Let me mention two of them. One is the Ordinary 
Account, which can be drawn upon to pay for the family’s educational expenses, or to buy a house. 
Another account, the Medisave Account, can be used for hospital and other medical expenses, or to 
participate in the MediShield insurance programme. Under this scheme the patient pays a deductible 
amount and is required to make a co-payment. The system encourages efficiency, because medical 
practitioners and hospitals must compete for patients. 
Other areas susceptible to reform 
As  these  examples  show,  it  only  takes  some  imagination  and  a  clear  sense  of  purpose  to  devise 
mechanisms that promote a more efficient use of resources. But it is not just in the areas of welfare, 
higher  education  and  health  that  a  policy  review  is  needed.  Take  transportation,  for  example. 
Restrictive  practices  at  the  harbour  raise  costs  by  pushing  up  the  price  of  imports  and  lower  our 
competitiveness by increasing the cost of exports. It is rather ironic that decades after the abolition of 
hereditary  titles,  and  at  a  time  when  the  merits  of  free  markets  and  competition  are  widely 
acknowledged,  Malta  sanctions  the  inheritance  of  licences  and  protects  monopolies  not  only  in  the 
harbour, but throughout the public transport system. 
More  generally,  if  investment  is  to  be  channelled  to  productive  activities  that  generate  the  highest 
return, profit signals should not be distorted by monopolistic market structures, subsidies or protection. 
The need for a consensual approach to reforms 
Mr President, I am aware that the thrust of my remarks challenges the continued existence of what 
have  come  to  be  perceived  as  acquired  rights.  They  might  have  been  acquired,  but  they  are  often 
                                                      
3   Sapir,  A.  “Globalisation  and  the  reform  of  social  models”.  Background  document  for  a  presentation  at  ECOFIN  Informal 
Meeting in Manchester, 9 September 2005. 
4 
 BIS Review 113/2006
neither economically viable nor affordable. Trying to persuade public opinion to come to terms with 
such  economic  realities  is,  however,  a  central  bank  governor’s  responsibility.  My  concern  is  not 
without  foundation,  for  the  challenge  to  the  sustainability  of  our  current  ways  comes  with  a  precise 
timeline. It is likely that Malta’s eligibility for EU structural funds will decline after 2013, and the burden 
of an ageing population in terms of health and pension expenditures will be much heavier than it is 
today. It will, therefore, be imperative to have invested massively and wisely in the meantime such that 
the economy will be generating sufficient wealth and, therefore, tax revenues to bridge any budgetary 
shortfall.  
My conclusions are supported by both theory and experience. In the neo-classical growth model the 
rates of saving and investment are the fundamental determinants of living standards in the long run. In 
other  words,  countries  that  save  or  invest  more  than  others  will  enjoy  a  higher  per  capita  income. 
Newer  growth  theories  go  beyond  this  and  distinguish  between  two  types  of  capital,  physical  and 
human. Empirical evidence clearly shows that differences in living standards across countries can be 
explained by differences in investment in human capital. Unfortunately, advice on the importance of 
saving  and  investment  often  goes  unheeded  because  higher  saving  entails  lower  consumption.  In 
other words, prosperity tomorrow can only be achieved by making sacrifices today. 
Even if this lesson is not fully taken on board, the need for continued fiscal prudence will ensure that 
choices between alternative uses of public funds will have to be made more frequently, and spending 
cuts made in sensitive areas. Such decisions would be taken much faster and more effectively if a 
bipartisan  approach  were  adopted.  Other  countries  in  Europe  have  taken  this  road,  but  there  are 
precedents in Malta too. The financial services legislation, for example, was adopted unanimously by 
Parliament.  The  impressive  growth  of  the  financial  sector  indeed  testifies  to  what  a  bipartisan 
approach to strategic economic choices can achieve. The national consensus on the adoption of the 
euro  is  another  example.  It  would  greatly  strengthen  the  economy’s  capacity  to  benefit  from 
membership of the euro area if this consensus were extended to a recognition of the need to increase 
the share of government revenue devoted to investment in the country’s future. 
Mr  President,  I  make  no  claim  to  originality  in  voicing  these  concerns.  In  a  recent  letter  to  a  local 
newspaper, a Mr V. Spiteri wrote, 
“Vague promises and assurances that if we vote for one side instead of the other we can retain free 
medical care, retire at 61, afford to eat out more often, take at least one holiday abroad and drive a 
new car, is a dream we would do well to wake up from”. 
How very true! Higher living standards cannot be created by politicians out of thin air. As one of my 
predecessors, Mr Lino Spiteri, wrote recently, 
“They don’t make magic wands that work any more.” 
In the real world, a key precondition for prosperity is higher productivity. It should, therefore, be our 
common  task,  but  particularly  that  of  the  political  class,  to  promote  policies  and  practices  that  are 
conducive to a more efficient use of the nation’s scarce resources. 
BIS Review 113/2006 
 5
