Nout Wellink: Goals and strategies of the Basel Committee 
Remarks  by  Dr  Nout  Wellink,  President  of  the  Netherlands  Bank  and  Chairman  of  the  Basel 
Committee on Banking Supervision, at the High Level Meeting on the Implementation of Basel II in 
Asia and Other Regional Supervisory Priorities, Hong Kong, 11 December 2006.  
 Introduction  
I.  
Thank you very much for the opportunity to address this important meeting on the implementation of 
Basel II in Asia and other regional supervisory priorities. I would like to thank the Hong Kong Monetary 
Authority  for  hosting  this  event,  and  congratulate  the  FSI  and  EMEAP  on  putting  together  such  an 
impressive conference program. Hong Kong is a dynamic city in this rapidly growing region, so I can 
think of no better place to discuss the changes that are taking place in banking and supervision.  
What I would like to do this morning is talk briefly about the goals of the Basel Committee, outline the 
strategy and work program the Committee has in place to achieve those goals, and then provide some 
concluding thoughts.  
Goals of the Committee  
II.  
As the new Chairman of the Basel Committee, I think it is appropriate at this time for me to step back 
and consider the broad goals and strategies of the Committee. I would like to start by sharing with you 
today  the  Committee’s  objectives  as  I  see  them.  In  my  view,  the  Committee  has  three  broad 
objectives. One, to provide a forum for dialogue and information exchange among supervisors. Two, to 
promote improvements in bank risk management practices and the framework for banking supervision. 
And three, to promote mechanisms for pragmatic implementation of the principles developed by the 
Committee.  
Turning to the first objective, a core goal of the Committee has always been to provide a forum for 
dialogue  and  information  exchange.  This  helps  to  promote  supervisory  co-operation,  greater 
consistency, and a level playing field for an increasingly global banking industry. Information sharing 
and  dialogue  also  has  a  much  broader  aim,  however.  That  is  to  provide  the  Committee  with  the 
context  and  perspective  needed  to  develop  policies  and  practices  that  most  effectively  promote  a 
robust banking and financial system.  
The second objective of the Committee is perhaps most visible to the broader community. With the 
insight  gained  from  information  sharing  about  developments  in  risk  management,  supervision  and 
financial  markets,  the  Committee  promotes  improvements  in  these  areas.  In  this  regard,  the 
Committee  seeks  to  develop  and  promote  proportionate  responses  to  the  issues  identified  using  a 
range of tools. This may include undertaking further fundamental research, preparing range-of-practice 
papers, or where necessary developing new policies or guidance.  
Third, as you know, the policy guidance developed and promoted by the Basel Committee is based on 
consensus  rather  than  on  formal  international  legal  agreements.  An  important  objective  of  the 
Committee  therefore  is  to  promote  credible,  practical  and  flexible  mechanisms  to  achieve  effective 
policy  implementation  in  a  wide  range  of  countries.  The  successful  implementation  of  international 
policies requires processes and mechanisms that engage non-Committee supervisors, other sectors 
and the industry throughout the lifecycle of any initiative.  
With those objectives in mind, I would now like to discuss how the Committee’s strategy is working 
towards achieving those goals.  
The Committee’s strategy and work program  
III.  
The  Committee’s  strategy  has  four  interrelated  and  reinforcing  elements.  The  first  element  of  the 
strategy is to maintain a strong capital foundation. That strong foundation is enhanced by the Basel II 
Framework, which many countries are now in the process of implementing. Secondly, the Committee 
reinforces  the  strong  capital  foundation  by  promoting  other  infrastructure  needed  for  sound 
supervision.  Thirdly,  the  Committee  develops  policy  responses  that  are  proportionate  and  flexible. 
BIS Review 122/2006 
 1
Fourthly, the Committee is deepening and expanding its outreach to non-Committee supervisors, to 
other sectors, and to the industry.  
Strong capital foundation  
It should not come as a big surprise to you that implementation of the Basel II Framework is one of the 
highest  priorities  on  our  current  work  program.  Integrating  an  effective  approach  to  supervision, 
incentives  for  banks  to  improve  their  risk  management  and  measurement,  and  risk-based  capital 
requirements  are  fundamental  objectives  of  Basel  II.  By  definition,  we  don’t  know  where  the  next 
economic or financial shock will come from. Our focus, therefore, is on the important role of capital as 
a key shock-absorber for individual banks, and for the banking system more generally, no matter what 
the next shock entails.  
The implementation of Basel II reflects the reality that simple risk measures, such as those embodied 
in Basel I are, for the largest and most complex banking organisations, no longer very meaningful. A 
strong  capital  foundation  requires  a  risk-sensitive  capital  framework  that  is  flexible  to  adapt  to 
innovation.  Moreover,  it  should  promote  improvements  in  bank  risk  management  and  supervisory 
practices,  and  enhance  transparency  and  market  discipline.  The  three  pillars of  Basel  II  have  been 
developed with those goals in mind.  
I would also like to emphasise that the choices that individual countries make with respect to the timing 
of  implementation  of  Basel  II,  and  the  menu  of  options  available  in  Basel  II,  should  consider  the 
development of their banking and supervisory systems, and financial markets. This leads me to my 
next point – the importance of other supporting infrastructure.  
Other supporting infrastructure  
For risk management  and  supervision to  be effective  and  efficient,  it  is  not  sufficient  to  just  have  a 
sound  capital  framework.  The  second  element  of  the  Committee’s  strategy  is  to  get  the  basic 
supporting  infrastructure  in  place.  The  development  of  the  Core  Principles  for  Effective  Banking 
Supervision, the Committee’s liaison with international accounting bodies, and the Committee’s work 
on  cross-sectoral  bodies  such  as  the  Joint  Forum  are  examples  of  our  efforts  to  promote  the 
fundamental infrastructure needed for a sound banking system and for effective supervision.  
Building the foundations for effective supervision and promoting the prudence and integrity of financial 
accounts  are  an  integral  part  of  the  Committee’s  current  work.  A  sound  system  of  accounting  and 
provisioning  underpins  the  integrity  of  risk  measures,  capital  adequacy  and  meaningful  market 
discipline.  
Moreover, as many of you here would know too well, it is not enough to just focus our attention on the 
implications  of  our  policies  for  banks  as  the  traditional  lines  between  the  various  financial  sectors 
become less clear. It is therefore important to understand the implications of market developments and 
supervisory changes on non-bank financial institutions and financial markets more generally.  
Supervision is not all about sophisticated modelling approaches. Rather it is about understanding the 
risks  that  a  bank  faces  and  promoting  better  management  of  those  risks.  Used  appropriately, 
advanced modelling approaches can help a bank to refine and sharpen its ability to measure, monitor 
and control risk. Used inappropriately however, and  without an understanding of the limitations and 
assumptions built into such models, the costs may be greater than the benefits. In this respect, I view 
the infrastructure supporting the capital foundation as vitally important.  
An initiative that the Committee will begin work on is the so-called “definition of capital”. Over the past 
decade we have witnessed significant advances in the way banks manage their economic capital, as 
well  as  the  development  of  new  and  innovative  capital  instruments.  The  definition  of  capital  topic 
highlights  the  importance  of  the  supporting  legal  and  accounting  infrastructure,  and  the  need  to 
understand market dynamics within and across jurisdictions. At this stage, the Committee’s work in 
this area will focus on a stocktaking of the issues.  
Proportionate policy and flexible frameworks  
The third element of the Committee’s strategy is to promote proportionate policy responses, and to 
develop  flexible  policy  frameworks.  The  Committee  promotes  a  range  of  supervisory  methods  and 
advocates  proportionality  in  supervisory  approaches.  The  supervisory  tools  may  include  better 
2 
 BIS Review 122/2006
regulation, supervisory guidance, or range-of-practice papers. In addition, in some cases, industry-led 
solutions may be the best approach.  
To  respond  to  the  accelerating  pace  of  financial  innovation  and  globalisation  we  need  flexible 
frameworks.  Both  the  Core  Principles  and  Basel  II  are  examples  of  global  standards  that  were 
developed for local application. Both initiatives are flexible and responsive to innovation. For example, 
Basel II provides a menu of options to suit institutions with a range of complexity. Moreover, the more 
advanced  approaches  are  based  on  the  modelling  approaches  developed  by  advanced  banks  – 
allowing regulatory and banking models to develop together.  
Over the past ten years, we have observed significant changes in international capital flows, greater 
reliance on market funding in many jurisdictions, and banks becoming more active buyers and sellers 
of  complex  financial  instruments.  In  light  of  the  central  role  that  banks  play  in  providing  liquidity,  I 
believe that liquidity risk management is an area where it would be appropriate for the Committee to 
do  some  exploratory  work.  I  believe  there  is  much  that  can  be  gained  from  sharing  information  on 
supervisory approaches to assessing liquidity, and bank tools for managing liquidity, particularly during 
stress scenarios.  
In  this  and  all  cases,  I  expect  that  the  Committee’s  response  will  be  proportionate  to  the  risks 
identified,  and  that  the  policy  tools  that  the  Committee  employs  will  be  designed  to  achieve  the 
maximum benefit for the least cost. I also expect the Committee will consult widely in the process of 
developing its views on the issues and then deliberating on possible responses.  
the  growing 
to  accommodate 
Proactive outreach  
This  brings  me  to  the  fourth  element  of  the  Committee’s  strategy,  which  is  to  engage  in  proactive 
outreach.  This  encompasses  outreach  to  non-Committee  countries,  to  the  industry  and  to  other 
sectors.  
The Committee’s dialogue with non-Committee member countries is an extremely important element 
of its strategy. This stems from the need to promote the development of sound supervisory practices in 
developing  markets  and 
importance  and  sophistication  of 
non-Committee  member  banks,  supervisors  and  markets.  In  addition,  it  is  critical  that  we  address 
home-host coordination issues that arise with the growth of cross-border banking. These trends, and 
the resulting need for dialogue, are quite clear when we look at the growing and changing financial 
landscape and the increasing trend towards market liberalisation in the Asian region.  
As  an  indication  of  the  importance  the  Committee  places  on  its  outreach  strategy,  at  its  October 
meeting in Merida the Committee agreed to the establishment of the International Liaison Group (ILG). 
This group will replace the Core Principles Liaison Group, which with the completion of the revised 
Core Principles had completed its mandate. The new ILG will report directly to the Committee, and 
allow  for  broad  supervisory  dialogue  on  a  range  of  issues.  The  ILG  will  provide  a  platform  for 
non-member countries to contribute to new Committee initiatives early in the process, and to develop 
new  proposals.  The  ILG  will  also  initiate  its  own  work  streams  on  issues  that  are  of  interest  to  the 
broad supervisory community.  
I should also highlight the important relationship the Committee has with the FSI, which provides an 
outstanding program of training events and tools for supervisors around the globe. Members of the 
Committee and its Secretariat have been actively involved in FSI events since its founding, and we 
see this as a key element of outreach and dialogue to the wider supervisory community.  
By engaging in dialogue at a range of levels - within the supervisory community, with the industry, with 
representatives  from  other  sectors,  and  also  with  other  interested  parties  -  the  Committee  aims  to 
identify  and  address  the  most  important  risk  issues.  This  process  of  filtering  issues  may  lead  the 
Committee  to  consider  new  initiatives  from  time  to  time.  However,  in  most  cases  the  exchange  of 
information and ideas on a given topic, and making more transparent to industry the range of practices 
we see in a rapidly developing area, may be the most important outcomes.  
Concluding thoughts  
IV. 
I would like to conclude by summarising the main themes of my talk. The committee’s goals are, in my 
view, to provide a forum for information sharing, to promote improvements in risk management and 
BIS Review 122/2006 
 3
banking  supervision,  and  to  promote  mechanisms  that  facilitate  consistent  local  implementation  of 
global policies and principles.  
The Committee has a multi-faceted strategy to achieve its goals, which is developed within the context 
of developments in international banking and financial markets. The strategy and work program that 
the  Committee  has  in  place  are  built  around  the  cornerstone  of  a  strong  capital  framework.  This  is 
supported by other fundamental infrastructure, which includes strong accounting; the Core Principles 
for  Effective  Banking  Supervision  and  cross  sector  collaboration.  Proportionality  and  flexibility  are 
overarching  themes  that  permeate  our  policy  work.  Finally,  the  Committee’s  strategy  of  proactive 
outreach and dialogue is critical to the long-run success of the work undertaken today.  
Thank you.  
4 
 BIS Review 122/2006
