Guillermo Ortiz: The participation of international banks in emerging 
economies 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Guillermo  Ortiz,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mexico,  at  the  14th  International 
Conference of Banking Supervisors, Mérida, Mexico, 5 October 2006. 
 I  would  like  to  thank  the  Comisión  Nacional  Bancaria  y  de  Valores  and  the  Basel  Committee  on 
Banking Supervision for their invitation to address  this important group of bank supervisors from all 
over the world. 
I  would  like  to  focus  my  remarks  on  some  of  the  challenges  that  supervisors  face  in  the  evolving 
financial landscape. In particular, I would like to follow two lines of thought: 
• 
First,  the  impacts  on  emerging  economies  of  the  globalization  of  financial  markets  and 
institutions, and 
Second, the increasing relation between commerce and banking. 
• 
As we all know, banks are special. They constitute the nervous system of the economy. They facilitate 
the channeling of resources from depositors to investors and provide households and companies with 
access to the payment system. 
Given  the  important  role  that  banks  play  in  an  economy,  they  enjoy  the  protection  of  the  so-called 
safety net, which usually includes a deposit insurance scheme and access to liquidity from a central 
bank.  And  because  banks  operate  in  this  special  environment,  financial  authorities  pay  particular 
attention to their regulation and supervision. 
Authorities have a natural tendency to over regulate, since as we all know, regulation is not provided 
through  market  processes.  However,  regulatory  regimes  play  an  important  role  in  determining  the 
efficiency and stability of financial systems, which, in turn, influence overall economic performance. 
Hence, it is important to achieve just the right dose of regulation - not too much, not too little, which is 
exceedingly difficult to do. To facilitate this process, financial authorities must have a clear and limited 
set of objectives and roles. 
There are three commonly identified objectives for the regulators and supervisors of financial systems: 
• 
• 
• 
Usually bank supervisors concentrate on the first of these objectives, while central banks look after the 
second, and consumer protection agencies, the third. However, the three of them are closely related. 
To succeed in any of them, it is important to consider the impact of any policy measure on the other 
two. 
Sound financial institutions 
A stable financial system 
And consumer protection. 
Characteristics of the financial landscape 
I.  
The  world  financial  landscape  has  evolved  rapidly  in  the  last  few  decades.  The  globalization  of 
financial markets and institutions implies that the reallocation of capital and the transmission of price 
shocks across markets and geographic regions proceed much faster than before. 
Financial institutions are increasingly expanding overseas. There are several factors that explain this 
phenomenon. 
• 
The nature of cross-border banking evolved after the foreign-exchange crises and sovereign 
defaults of the 1980s. Banks are increasingly trying to mitigate transfer and exchange-rate 
risks by funding their activities in the same location where there are doing business. 
Technological  advances  in  communications  and  computing  capacity  facilitate  the  fast 
processing of information to price risks in different sectors and regions. 
 BIS Review 95/2006 
 1
  There  is  an  emphasis  on  tapping  the  profitable  household  sector,  which  requires  a  local 
consumer  retail  base  and  thus  a  “bricks  and  mortar”  presence.  It  is  in  emerging  markets 
where the growth potential of consumer and mortgage credit lies. 
Economies  of  scale  and  the  replication  of  successful  home-grown  business  lines  and 
products abroad present enormous advantages. 
Banks need to gain size to prevent unfriendly takeovers. 
• 
Whatever  the  reason,  the  presence  of  foreign  banks  has  been  increasing  especially  in  developing 
countries where on average they now account for 40% of total bank assets. 
Foreign penetration in banking systems varies largely among countries. Foreign banks own more than 
80% of banking assets in Mexico, Poland, Hungary, Bulgaria, and Estonia, but only 20% in Brazil. 
More  recently,  there  has  been  penetration  by  banks  from  developing  countries  in  banking  systems 
from other developing countries. According to the World Bank, 27% of developing countries’ foreign 
banks are owned by banks established in other developing countries. 
Challenges for emerging economies’ supervisors 
II.  
There seems to be ample agreement about the benefits of globalization as well as the challenges that 
this new landscape poses to financial authorities. 
Among the benefits derived from the entry of foreign banks in emerging economies are improvements 
in  efficiency,  and  the  introduction  of  new  products  and  technologies,  as  well  as  a  reduction  in 
connected lending practices. 
In this presentation, I would like to highlight some of the challenges faced by regulators, supervisors, 
and central banks from emerging economies. In particular, I will refer briefly to the impact of a foreign 
bank presence with regard to: 
i) 
ii) 
iii) 
iv) 
v) 
the soundness of local banks 
local market discipline 
the impact of foreign regulations on domestic markets 
the resolution of troubled global banks, and 
competition in domestic financial markets. 
The soundness of local banks 
i)  
The overseas expansion of international banks can take place through the establishment of branches 
and subsidiaries. I would like to concentrate on the latter since it is the prevailing legal form used by 
large banks, and it is also the only possibility for a foreign financial institution to establish a presence in 
the Mexican market. 
As  we  all  know,  subsidiaries  are  locally  incorporated  and  legally  independent  from  their  parents. 
Nevertheless,  international  banks  increasingly  manage  their  subsidiaries  as  if  they  were  branches. 
They  allocate  their  capital  and  business  lines  across  the  whole  group  to  those  areas  that  offer  the 
most attractive risk/return profile. However, they keep their legal responsibilities limited to the capital 
invested in each individual unit. 
The  way  in  which  international  banks  are  managed  could  lead  to  decisions  that  are  good  for  the 
international bank but not necessarily positive for the subsidiary. We can provide some examples to 
illustrate this. 
• 
There is a growing tendency to book some transactions where funding and regulatory costs 
are  lower.  Although  this  makes  sense  from  the  international  banks’  perspective,  it  shifts 
revenues away from the local banks where the business is originated with, among others, 
obvious fiscal implications. 
International  banks  usually  establish  individual  limits  to  credit  exposure  in  each  foreign 
country,  according  to  the  sensitivity  of  the  overall  portfolio.  Thus,  subsidiaries  sometimes 
have to reduce their local exposures, even though these exposures are also financed locally. 
BIS Review 95/2006
 2 
  International banks are also increasingly inclined to adopt matrix reporting arrangements by 
which local treasurers, comptrollers, and risk managers report directly to their parent bank’s 
counterparts rather than to the local CEOs. Bank directors and managers are usually long-
career  employees  of  the  parent  bank.  In  some  cases  local  CEOs  are  some  sort  of 
ambassadors with few operational responsibilities. 
This concentration of decision-making powers and rewards at the parent level should be a matter of 
concern for financial authorities since the parent bank does not have parallel legal responsibilities over 
their subsidiaries. 
The Basel Committee has revised its guidelines on corporate governance in banking organizations. 
One key area of progress relates precisely to the responsibilities of the subsidiaries’ board of directors. 
The Basel Committee gave the board of subsidiaries a responsibility for the protection of the interest of 
its depositors. However, it is an open question whether local boards will always have the incentives to 
proceed as prescribed by the Committee, given that they also have to look after the interest of the 
single shareholder. 
One potential way to get local managers to look first to the subsidiaries’ best interest could be to widen 
the ownership structure of subsidiaries. Having minority shareholders would encourage decision taking 
in  the  subsidiaries’  best  interest.  This  leads  me  to  the  second  challenge  I  want  to  discuss:  market 
discipline. 
Market discipline 
market signals – in the form of prices – that reflect market perceptions 
instruments to enforce discipline, and 
research carried out by independent analysts. 
ii)  
The  need  to  encourage  market  discipline  as  a  supplement  to  the  work  of  supervisors  is  widely 
recognized  at  the  international  level.  However,  there  are  at  least  three  requirements  for  market 
discipline to work effectively in addition to the disclosure of information: 
• 
• 
• 
The acquisition of local banks by global financial entities often results in the delisting of local banks 
from  stock  exchanges.  When  financial  institutions  are  not  listed  or  when  they  do  not  have  a 
reasonable amount of subordinated outstanding debt, market participants are deprived of independent 
analysis and price signals. 
The  obvious  regulatory  response  would  be  to  require  subsidiaries  to  disclose  the  same  amount  of 
information as if they were listed. However, the publication of relevant and timely information is only 
one of the requirements for market discipline to work effectively. 
It has been argued that most large international banks are widely held and are thus subject to market 
discipline.  As  a  corollary,  their  subsidiaries  will  be  subject  to  the  same  discipline.  However,  this  is 
clearly not the case. 
There are some measures that would be useful in addressing these challenges. One of these, which I 
have already proposed, is to require large local banks to list a percentage of their equity, say 30%, on 
local stock markets. 
This proposal has three advantages: 
• 
First,  the  presence  of  minority  shareholders  in  the  capital  structure  and  on  the  boards  of 
large subsidiaries helps to deter parent banks from making decisions that may go against the 
best interests of the subsidiary. 
Second,  the  existence  of  minority  shareholders  also  gives  relevance  to  the  work  of 
independent board members. 
Third, the presence of minority shareholders facilitates the listing on local stock exchanges of 
large  subsidiaries.  A  public  listing  provides  market  participants  with  price  signals  and 
instruments with which to exercise discipline. 
  I welcome the decision of the organizers to dedicate a session later this morning to discuss this issue 
BIS Review 95/2006 
 3
Impacts of foreign regulations on domestic financial markets 
iii) 
Regulatory differences among home countries could have adverse impacts on host country markets. 
When a local bank is a subsidiary of a foreign one, it has to observe both, the local regulation and the 
regulations of the jurisdiction where its parent bank is incorporated. 
In  general,  we  would  expect  the  stricter  regulation  to  prevail.  Nevertheless,  subsidiaries  have  to 
consolidate  their  books  with  those  of  their  parent  banks.  This  means  that  business  and  trading 
decisions  are  taken  with  close  regard  to  their  impacts  on  the  parent  banks’  balance  sheets.  This 
situation can have important adverse effects on local markets. These effects will be accentuated with 
the implementation of Basel II. 
In addition to the widely mentioned concept of the definition of default in different 
countries, I can give you an example: capital adequacy rules usually establish a 
zero risk weight on local sovereign claims denominated and funded in domestic 
currency. 
Nevertheless, the new capital accord establishes risk weights on sovereign claims 
based on ratings provided by external credit assessment institutions or by internal 
rating methodologies. 
Although  the  accord  gives  national  supervisors  discretion  to  apply  lower  risk 
weights to their domestic banks, it is very likely that subsidiaries of foreign banks 
will apply the capital weights established by their parent banks and by their home 
countries. 
Should this happen, it will increase the financing costs of host countries’ sovereign 
debt denominated and funded in domestic currency. 
The resolution of a troubled global bank 
iv) 
The conflicts of interest that may arise when an international bank runs into trouble have been widely 
analyzed in recent years and will be an important topic at this meeting. 
We  do  not  have  yet  any  common  understanding  on  how  to  deal  with  or  resolve  the  failure  of  an 
international bank. Neither do we have a common jurisdiction or a supranational legal court to resolve 
legal disputes. 
Important  efforts  have  been  made  to  identify  the  information  that  needs  to  be  shared  among 
supervisors if such a crisis arises. However, the failure of an international bank could easily lead to 
conflicts  among  the  various  parties  involved,  as  their  interests  will  diverge  considerably.  These 
conflicts could make the attainment of reasonable and fair solutions extremely difficult. 
These  conflicts  could  be  particularly  significant  if  the  relative  sizes  of  the  international  bank  and  its 
subsidiaries are substantially different. 
• 
The authorities of the country where the international bank is licensed will not be very keen 
on  supporting  subsidiaries  overseas,  even  if  they  are  relatively  important  for  the  local 
country. 
On the other hand, local authorities could find it politically impossible to use public resources 
to support a foreign-owned bank. 
If the troubled bank experiences liquidity problems, who should be responsible for providing 
liquidity? The central bank of the jurisdiction where the troubled subsidiary is incorporated, or 
the one of the country of the parent bank? 
Will the central bank of the subsidiary provide liquidity when it is evident that the subsidiary’s 
business was run by the parent? 
   It  is  of  the  essence  to  encourage  cooperation  frameworks  among  supervisors,  central  banks,  and 
finance ministries from countries involved in extensive cross-border banking. Such frameworks should 
not be limited to the exchange of financial information. They must include agreements over procedures 
and the establishment of standards for the division of responsibilities. 
In order to improve the effectiveness of crisis management plans, European Union and Scandinavian 
countries  have  been  conducting  crisis  simulation  exercises.  It  is  important  that  countries  in  other 
4 
 BIS Review 95/2006
regions with large subsidiaries start to conduct simulation exercises with the authorities of countries 
where the parents are located. 
Competition 
v) 
As  mentioned,  the  expansion  of  international  banks  often  takes  place  through  the  acquisition  of 
existing financial entities rather than the establishment of new ones. This method of entry leaves the 
structure of local markets largely untouched. Efficiency gains brought about by foreign management 
and expertise very often result in higher profits, but not consumer benefits. 
The  financial  authorities  in  Mexico  have  taken  important  steps  to  foster  competition  in  the  banking 
system by: 
• 
• 
promoting more transparency and disclosure, 
reducing  the  regulatory  requirements  for  non-bank  banks  when  they  have  no  ownership 
relations with regulated financial entities and 
finally,  by  allowing  new  entrants  into  the  banking  system.  Among  them  we  have  some 
commercial firms establishing banks. 
 Allowing commercial firms, especially in the retail sector, to own banks might bring many benefits to 
consumers,  as  well  as  a  set  of  new  challenges  for  regulators  and  supervisors.  I  would  like  to 
concentrate on this issue in the last part of my speech. 
Commercial firms as owners of banks 
III.  
In  a  country  where  the  financial  industry  is  highly  concentrated  and  where  important  sectors  of  the 
population do not have access to these services, the entry of commercial firms into the banking sector 
can bring many benefits to consumers. 
In order to compete effectively in a highly concentrated industry, new entrants must have an extended 
physical  presence  and  a  well-established  consumer  base,  which  many  retail  commercial  firms  in 
Mexico already enjoy. We expect these commercial firms to be able to exploit their economies of scale 
for the benefit of their consumers, contributing to a more competitive environment. 
However,  the  participation  of  commercial  firms  as  bank  owners  entails  a  series  of  new  risks  and 
challenges for both regulators and supervisors. These risks already receive attention in the literature 
on mixing banking and commerce. 
One  concern  is  the  potential  abuse  of  the  safety  net  by  commercial  firms  that  own  a  bank.  The 
conflicts of interest and potential transfer of risks between a bank and its commercial firm owner are 
well documented in the literature, and as we all know, are also difficult to regulate and supervise. 
Early this year Alan Greenspan raised this issue when he stressed the fact that large organizations 
increasingly  manage  their  businesses  on  an  integrated  basis  with  little  regard  for  the  corporate 
boundaries that typically define the jurisdictions of supervisors.1
 For this reason, supervisors cannot 
properly monitor risks that cross legal entities, as some of them are not subject to financial regulation 
and supervision. 
There are some measures that diminish the transfer of risks from a commercial firm to its bank: 
i) 
First, by limiting related-party transactions between the bank and its commercial firm owner 
and requiring that their relations are conducted at market prices, 
Second, by aligning the incentives of banks’ board members and managers. For example by 
requiring that the majority of banks’ board members remain independent from the controlling 
firm or other affiliates of the conglomerate. And 
third,  through  the  analyses  and  risk  assessments  of  the  financial  positions  of  the  entire 
group. In order to gain a meaningful idea of the risks of a large conglomerate, some financial 
authorities  have  suggested  that  supervision  must  cover  the  relevant  risk  positions  of  the 
ii) 
iii) 
                                                      
1  
Letter to Congressman James A. Leach, January 20, 2006. Board of Governors of The Federal Reserve System. 
BIS Review 95/2006 
 5
entire group. This constitutes a formidable challenge. Legal amendments would have to be 
made to compile basic management information on financial condition and risk exposures of 
the group as a whole. 
It is also important to send a clear message that the bank will be able to stand alone if the commercial 
owner gets into trouble, and thus banks’ depositors and creditors do not need to run for the exit. 
Other  conflicts  of  interest  likely  to  surface  when  commercial  firms  become  bank  owners  are  the 
anticompetitive  practices  that  commercial  firms  may  conduct  once  they  have  a  bank.  For  instance, 
commercial firms may require their suppliers to have their financial services arranged by their banks. 
Banks  belonging  to  a  commercial  firm  may  also  engage  in  tied  selling  practices  by,  for  example, 
extending consumer credit only for purchases made in the commercial retailer. 
Finally, we should be very careful with the protection of personal data to prevent the non-authorized 
transfer of personal information (bank secrecy). 
Final remarks 
Embracing globalization brings both benefits and challenges. The evolution of the financial industry in 
Mexico constitutes a good example. Openness to foreign direct investment in the financial system was 
essential to recapitalize the banking sector and increase efficiency. It also brought other benefits, such 
as new technologies and products, and advanced risk management techniques. 
However, it is important that the authorities continue to foster competition through transparency and 
disclosure, as well as new entrants to the system without increasing the risks to it. 
6 
 BIS Review 95/2006
