Lucas Papademos: ECB Financial Stability Review December 2006 
Opening remarks by Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice President of the European Central Bank, at the press 
briefing  on  the  occasion  of  the  publication  of  the  December  2006  ECB  Financial  Stability  Review, 
Frankfurt am Main, 11 December 2006. 
 Introduction  
I. 
Welcome  to  this  press  conference  for  the  fifth  issue  of  the  ECB’s  semi-annual  Financial  Stability 
Review which is being published today.  
The financial stability assessment contained in the December 2006 issue of the Review is based on 
close collaboration between ECB staff and the ESCB Banking Supervision Committee. In addition, this 
particular issue draws upon information that was obtained from a series of informal discussions that 
were held with investment banks, hedge funds and credit rating agencies. It reflects information that 
was available up to 3 November 2006. 
This issue of the Review broadly follows the structure that was adopted in previous issues, although 
the assessment of the hedge fund sector is now included in the first Chapter in an expanded section 
on global financial institutions.  
Some thematic financial stability topics are addressed in a total of 16 boxes and there are also five 
Special Feature articles in this issue. These are concerned with the following topics: (i) a methodology 
for identifying a set of large and complex banking groups for financial system stability assessment; (ii) 
an  analysis  of  the  information  content  of  credit  default  swap  index  tranches  for  financial  stability 
assessment;  (iii)  a  methodology  for  analysing  episodes  of  dynamic  credit  growth  in  Central  and 
Eastern Europe; (iv) an assessment of systemic risk in the insurance sector and (v) a review of the EU 
arrangements for financial crisis management.  
In presenting the main findings of the analysis, I will broadly follow the structure of the Review – as 
outlined on slide 2. In particular, I will discuss the main sources of risk and vulnerability for euro area 
financial stability we have identified in: (i) the external environment; (ii) global and euro area financial 
markets; (iii) the euro area corporate and household sectors and (iv) euro area financial institutions. 
Then I will conclude with an overall assessment of the outlook.  
BIS Review 121/2006 
  1
Developments since the June 2006 assessment  
II.  
Before  doing  this,  let  me  start  by  recalling  our  assessment  of  last  May  when  the  June  FSR  was 
finalised  and  what  has  happened  since  then.  In  May,  several  vulnerabilities  had  been  assessed  as 
being capable of posing material risks to the euro area financial system. Given these vulnerabilities, 
there  had  been  some  concern  that  the  shift  to  less  accommodative  monetary  policies  in  the  major 
economies and the occurrence of a number of shocks could have resulted in disorderly adjustments in 
asset prices by exposing “stretched” asset valuations in some markets and “overextended” balance 
sheets. This did not happen.  
The  gradual  shift  to  less  accommodative  monetary  policies  in  all  major  economies  proceeded 
smoothly. The system endured several shocks over the past six months. For instance, there was a 
bout  of  volatility  across  a  broad  range  of  financial  markets  during  May  and  June  but  the  markets 
comfortably absorbed the disturbances and no major financial institution was significantly impacted by 
the event.  
It should also be recalled that there had been some anxiety that disruptive asset price dynamics could 
have  been  triggered  by  an  idiosyncratic  collapse  of  a  large  hedge  fund.  However,  the  plunge  into 
financial distress in September 2006 of Amaranth Advisors had little discernible impact on markets.  
Against this background, in the euro area over the past six months, conditions for raising funds in the 
credit and equity markets remained favourable, there was a further and broad-based improvement in 
the profitability of banks, and the balance sheets of insurance companies were strengthened further. 
In addition, key financial infrastructures – including payment systems such as TARGET, and securities 
clearing and settlement systems – remained robust and continued operating smoothly.  
III.  
Overview of the main risks and vulnerabilities  
External environment  
III.1 
Turning  to  the  current  assessment  and  starting  with  the  external  environment,  a  global  source  of 
medium-term  risk  for  the  stability  of  financial  systems  continues  to  be  the  large  global  financial 
imbalances, despite some rebalancing of global growth patterns and recent declines in oil prices [see 
slide 3].  
While there are indications that global financial imbalances have been widening at a slower pace than 
before, they are not expected to narrow significantly in the short term. The prolonged accumulation of 
expanding US current account deficits has been a source of unease because the financing of these 
deficits  relies  on  the  continuation  of  capital  inflows  from  surplus  emerging  market  economies  and 
oil-producing countries [see chart on the left of slide 3].  
Commodity price swings, especially in the oil markets, can also pose risks for financial stability through 
various channels both indirectly and directly. Indirect effects pass through macroeconomic channels 
as high and volatile oil price levels pose risks for economic growth and inflation with potential adverse 
effects on asset prices. As regards direct effects, there are indications that speculative activity in the 
markets for derivatives on oil as well as in other non-oil commodities has been increasing. An example 
of  the  risks  that  can  be  posed  by  such  activity  in  non-oil  commodities  markets  was  the  episode 
involving the Amaranth Advisors hedge fund that collapsed in September. The fund ran into difficulties 
after its leveraged bets in the natural gas futures market – which had been predicated on expectations 
of hurricane frequency and intensity that did not materialise – suddenly turned sour.  
Regarding  oil  spot  prices,  after  reaching  new  historical  highs  in  early  August,  they  subsequently 
declined  substantially  but  have  remained  at  high  levels.  The  decline  was  mainly  attributable  to  a 
reduction in geopolitical tensions, a receding threat of hurricanes in the Gulf of Mexico and an easing 
of  petrol  market  tightness.  All  of  these  factors  led  to  a  decline  in  speculative  positions  which 
contributed to the rather abrupt downward adjustment in the price of oil. Looking forward, the implied 
probability distribution of future oil prices, extracted from options contracts, indicates that considerable 
uncertainty surrounds near-term oil futures prices, with very wide confidence intervals. Moreover, the 
balance of risks is tilted towards the upside [see chart on the right of slide 3].  
 
2 
 BIS Review 121/2006
 Global and euro area financial markets  
III.2 
When assessing the potential risks in the global and euro area financial markets, two main sources 
of  vulnerability  can  be  identified.  The  first  concerns  the  persistently  low  levels  of  long-term  interest 
rates and credit spreads which have been associated with a “pricing for perfection” in corporate sector 
capital  (credit)  markets  and  emerging  economy  debt  markets  in  the  sense  that  valuations  in  these 
markets appear to be based on very favourable expectations regarding future economic outcomes and 
low risk premia. The second concerns the growth in the volume and complexity of credit derivatives 
markets, coupled with the increasing presence of hedge funds in these markets.  
An  abundance  of  liquidity  in  global  financial  markets,  although  its  rate  of  growth  has  moderated, 
together with very high saving rates in some emerging market regions relative to domestic investment 
opportunities  partly  explain  why  long-term  interest  rates  and  credit  spreads  have  been  remarkably 
unperturbed  by  the  shift  to  less  accommodative  monetary  policies  in  the  G3  economies  and  the 
resulting withdrawal of global liquidity. Rising short-term interest rates have instead produced flatter, or 
inverted, market yield curves in the six months following the finalisation of the June 2006 FSR. [see 
chart on the left of slide 4] The renewed “conundrum” of low long-term government bond yields seems, 
in part, related to very low risk premia. It should also be noted that several demand-related factors, 
such as bond purchases by euro area insurance corporations and pension funds, might have played 
some role in keeping long-term bond yields at low levels, although it is difficult to quantify the impact 
with precision.  
As already noted, the bout of volatility across a broad range of financial markets during May and June 
2006  was  comfortably  absorbed  both  by  markets  and  institutions.  However,  to  the  extent  that  the 
“search  for  yield”  in  a  low  interest  rate  environment  has  led  to  this  “pricing  for  perfection”  in  other 
financial markets, long-term rates and risk premia could have been driven too low especially in credit 
markets and those of emerging market economies [see chart on the right of slide 4]. This means that 
valuations  in  these  markets  could  prove  vulnerable  to  several  potential  unanticipated  adverse 
disturbances including a renewed spike in oil prices, a pick-up in the demand by non-financial firms for 
external  funds  should  profitability  weaken,  or  a  change  in  global  asset  allocation.  Such  triggering 
events could have the potential to bring about possible abrupt increases in bond yields, spreads and 
risk premia across mature and emerging capital markets.  
BIS Review 121/2006 
 3
If a triggering event of sufficient severity were to occur, it could bring about an abrupt increase in long-
term  yields,  and  credit  and  equity  risk  premia  across  mature  capital  markets  and  emerging  market 
economies. This would imply significant asset portfolio losses for banks and other financial institutions. 
More importantly, it could also raise the counterparty risks some banks face vis-à-vis hedge funds in 
case it would trigger a cluster of hedge fund failures.  
 As to the second issue for financial markets, credit derivatives markets have been growing at an 
exponential  rate  over  recent  years,  not  only  in  terms  of  size  but  also  in  terms  of  the  complexity  of 
products. [see slide 5] The development of these markets is undoubtedly contributing to the efficiency 
and stability of the financial system by allowing financial intermediaries to measure and manage their 
 4 
 BIS Review 121/2006
credit risks more efficiently and effectively, primarily by buying protection in the credit default swaps 
(CDS) market.  
At the same time, there have been concerns that rapidly increasing credit risk transfer (CRT) activity 
may be leading to concentrations of risk among agents who might not be able to bear it in a more 
challenging environment, particularly in the case of the more complex structured credit products where 
investors may have been attracted by high short-term returns.  
In 2003, the Banking Supervision Committee undertook an important survey on CRT activity. But so 
much has happened since then – especially in terms of the substantial growth of the market and the 
increasing participation of hedge funds in taking on credit risk exposures – that at the current juncture, 
the available data are insufficient to make a sound assessment of these risks. Should current trends 
continue, they will imply fundamental changes in the methods for assessing the ability of the financial 
system to cope with unexpected credit cycle deterioration.  
After the finalisation of the June 2006 FSR, some hedge funds endured financial losses, mainly as a 
consequence of turbulence in financial markets during May and June. Subsequently, there were some 
highly publicised adverse developments in the hedge fund sector related to the collapse of Amaranth 
Advisors, a large multi-strategy fund. Nevertheless, the hedge fund sector continued to benefit from 
steadily increasing investor demand. [see slide 6] 
Capital under management by hedge funds has been growing very rapidly and has reached close to 
one trillion US dollars. [see chart on the left of slide 6] Given this size of the sector, a growing concern 
is that trades are becoming increasingly crowded. Higher correlation of hedge fund returns could be an 
indication of this. During the first half of 2006, correlations among and within hedge fund strategies 
remained relatively stable.  
It is noteworthy that the collapse of Amaranth Advisors in September did not lead to wider turbulence, 
despite  the  fact  that  the  total  loss  experienced  by  the  fund  was  much  larger  than  that  incurred  by 
LTCM in 1998. The ability of the system to absorb the shock demonstrated that the hedge fund sector 
has  become  more  mature  and  has  the  ability  to  repair  itself  in  the  event  of  idiosyncratic  distress. 
However,  it  should  also  be  recalled  that  this  event  occurred  against  a  backdrop  of  rather  benign 
market conditions, and it cannot be excluded that in a more challenging market environment, such as 
that which characterised markets after the Russian crisis in August 1998, the impact of such an event 
could have been more disruptive.  
 BIS Review 121/2006 
 5
New  risks  have  emerged related  to what  could be  called  a  “triangle”  of  vulnerability  connecting  the 
state of the credit cycle (which could deteriorate in the future), credit derivatives and hedge funds [see 
slide 7]. On the one hand, a marked adverse turn in the credit cycle, triggered either by a large and 
unexpected credit  event,  such  as  the collapse  of  a  large corporation,  or  by  a cluster  of  defaults  by 
smaller and highly leveraged low-quality corporations, could lead to substantial payment obligations 
for counterparties which have provided credit risk protection. If these counterparties were found not to 
be in a position to sustain the losses, credit risk “insurance” might not be available when claims are 
ultimately made. On the other hand, if the functioning of the credit risk transfer market were impaired, 
for  instance  if  financial  market  volatility  rose  unexpectedly,  this  could  have  an  adverse  impact  as 
banks  might  not  then  be  able  to  lay-off  their  credit  risk  in  the  way  they  have  become  accustomed 
which could, in turn, induce greater caution in their lending to lower quality borrowers in particular.  
  Euro area corporate and household sectors  
III.3  
Turning to developments in the euro area corporate sector, over the past six months there have been 
mounting  signs  that  an  adverse  turn  in  the  credit  cycle  seems  increasingly  likely,  driven  by  factors 
such as rising leverage ratios, a further tightening of monetary conditions and expectations of a future 
slowdown in the pace of profit growth. 
A favourable economic environment together with the persistently low cost of issuing corporate sector 
debt  and  greater  investor  appetite  for  lower  quality  credit  have  created  conditions  that  have  been 
conducive to a surge in global merger and acquisition (M&A) activity [see chart on the left of slide 8], 
and in particular of leveraged buy-outs (LBOs). Such transactions have become an important source 
of growth in leveraged loans.1 [see chart on the right of slide 8] The rapid growth in the value of LBO 
transactions has taken European leveraged loan issuance beyond levels last seen at the height of the 
telecom boom of the late 1990s. At the same time, the average degree of leverage in these loans – 
measured by debt-to-EBITDA ratios2 – has increased substantially. As a result, the credit quality of 
                                                      
1   Different market organizations and lenders define leveraged loans in different ways; however there are two broad ways to 
classify loans as leveraged or nonleveraged. The first is based on credit ratings, and the second is based on a loan’s initial 
interest rate spread over LIBOR. The extent to which a credit is leveraged reflects, other things being equal, the leverage 
ratios of a borrower with higher ratios resulting in higher spreads or lower credit ratings. 
2   EBITDA stands foe Earnings before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation, and Amortization. 
6 
 BIS Review 121/2006
issuing companies has deteriorated. It cannot be excluded that certain features of the leveraged loan 
markets,  such  as  debtor-friendly  re-payment  structures  and  an  increasing  tendency  by  lenders  to 
accept  breaches  of  loan  covenants,  could  have  contributed  to  a  perpetuation  of  the  benign  credit 
cycle,  while  at  the  same  time  increasing  the  risk  of  clusters  of  defaults  in  the  event  that  liquidity 
conditions deteriorate.  
 Because of the high yields they offer, leveraged loans have become popular assets for inclusion in 
complex structured credit derivatives products and the riskiest parts of them are often sold to hedge 
funds. Disturbances in the leveraged loan market could therefore also trigger spill-over effects via the 
aforementioned “triangle”.  
 BIS Review 121/2006 
  7
Looking ahead, rapidly rising leverage, the increasing recourse to short-term funding and the surging 
interest payment burden have left firms’ balance sheets vulnerable to adverse disturbances. [see slide 
9] Although the increase in euro area corporate sector leverage should be considered in conjunction 
with the continued strength of profitability, it seems nevertheless to have contributed to deterioration in 
some  yardsticks  of  credit  quality.  These  include  a  higher  proportion  of  rating  agency  downgrade 
actions than upgrades and a rising number of firms being placed on review for a rating downgrade vis-
à-vis  firms  facing  a  possible  rating  upgrade.  This  seems  to  be  at  least  partly  related  to  the 
aforementioned  growing  LBO,  as  well  as  share  buyback,  activity  both  of  which  can  weaken  the 
position of existing corporate debt holders and increase the affected firms’ vulnerability to changes in 
financing conditions. 
A significant deterioration in corporate sector credit quality would not only imply greater loan losses for 
banks, but could also trigger an asset price adjustment in credit markets, especially if the frequency of 
unexpected idiosyncratic corporate defaults were to rise.  
Euro area household sector leverage has reached unprecedented heights. Thus, past experience is 
not relevant for assessing its sustainability. Although household sector debt ratios in the euro area on 
average  have  remained  lower  than  those  in  other  mature  economies,  risks  are  not  evenly  spread 
across the euro area. Indeed, there are continuing concerns regarding balance sheet vulnerabilities in 
countries where debt-ratios are well above the euro area average, especially if debt is predominantly 
financed at variable interest rates. [see chart on the left of slide 10] 
Regarding  risks  to  household  income,  survey  evidence  reveals  that  euro  area  households  have 
become less pessimistic concerning their future employment prospects but have remained pessimistic 
about  their  financial  outlook.  [see  chart  on  the  right  of  slide  10]  All  in  all,  however,  considering  the 
outlook  for  economic  growth,  the  likelihood  of  a  decrease  in  household  income  in  the  near  term  is 
judged to be low. 
On the asset side of euro area household sector balance sheets, price-to-rent ratios in some countries 
suggest that a slowdown in the pace of future house price inflation, or even a correction, cannot be 
excluded. Banks in many Member States appear, by and large, to have carefully managed the risks 
inherent in the collateral used to secure mortgages, even though signs of intensifying competition may 
have led to a loosening of credit standards. This means that euro area households would probably 
have to bear the brunt of any property price reversal.  
 
8 
  BIS Review 121/2006
Euro area financial institutions  
III.4  
Turning to developments in the euro area banking sector, the analysis of the sector in this issue of 
the Review focuses on the performance of, and outlook for, a set of large and complex banking groups 
(LCBGs).  The  methodology  used  to  identify  these  institutions,  which  is  far  more  rigorous  than  the 
methods used in the past, is explained in detail in Special Feature A.  
The latest data show that the financial condition of euro area LCBGs continued to improve in 2005 and 
the  first  half  of  2006  consolidating  the  already  steady  improvement  that  had  been  underway  since 
2003.  [see  slide  11]  The  broad-based  strengthening  of  profitability  was  driven  by  lending  growth, 
which  compensated  for  the  further  erosion  in  lending  margins  as  a  result  of  intense  competition. 
Non-interest  sources  of  income  also contributed  to bottom-line. At  the  same time,  cost-containment 
continued  and  loan  impairment  charges  declined  further.  Solvency  ratios  of  euro  area  LCBGs 
remained  comfortable  despite  declining  slightly  in  the  first  half  of  2006,  which  was  due  to  a  rise  in 
risk-weighted assets. From a financial stability perspective, it is encouraging that those institutions with 
the lowest capital ratios in the past also improved in the first six months of 2006. 
 The assessment of credit risks is becoming complicated by recourse to CRT markets. For instance, 
the  impact  of  a  potential  turn  in  the  credit  cycle  on  banks  might  be  more  muted  than  in  earlier 
downturns, albeit not necessarily on other parts of the financial system since the risks themselves do 
not disappear. Other risks facing the banking sector mainly relate to interest rate risks, where the flat 
yield curve environment limits banks returns in their core business. There is a concern that this could 
encourage  them  to  seek  more  risky  ventures  in  an  effort  to  boost  profits,  resulting  in  increased 
operational and counterparty risks from their growing exposure to unregulated financial institutions. 
Notwithstanding  the  risks  identified,  market  analysts  are  expecting  that  the  profitability  of  euro  area 
LCBGs is likely to strengthen further in the short term, underpinned by a favourable economic outlook 
and benign credit conditions. [see slide 12]  
Forward-looking market indicators for the credit risk of euro area LCBGs reflect this broadly positive 
assessment. For instance, the distance-to-default indicator continued to rise, including for the weakest 
banks. While this may reflect the low probability assigned by market participants to the materialisation 
of the risks and vulnerabilities identified by our analysis, it could also signify a favourable assessment 
of the shock-absorbing capacity of the banking system, supported by comfortable solvency ratios and 
improved risk management.  
Euro area insurance firms have placed greater focus on risk management, risk-adjusted pricing and 
core profitability, all of which have continued to support a positive outlook for the sector, especially for 
BIS Review 121/2006 
 9
large firms. Ongoing improvements in asset liability management, together with an overall optimisation 
of the capital structure have underpinned a generally positive assessment by market participants, as 
witnessed by the recent moderate over-performance of the insurance index relative to the broad stock 
index. [see slide 13] 
   However,  there  are  a  number  of  risks  facing  the  industry  in  the  period  ahead.  For  the  non-life 
insurance sub-sector, increased competition is likely to weigh further on underwriting income, which 
could  drive  further  consolidation  within  the  sub-sector.  For  the  life  insurance  sub-sector,  ongoing 
10 
 BIS Review 121/2006
challenges  include  the  closing  of  balance  sheet  mismatches  in  an  environment  of  persistently  low 
long-term interest rates and the effective management of longevity risk.  
Overall assessment  
IV.  
Let me now turn to the overall assessment. [see slide 14] The central scenario for euro area financial 
stability remains broadly favourable. This is assessment is based on the following four factors:  
First,  the  resilience  of  the  system  was  confirmed  by  its  ability  to  comfortably  absorb  some  adverse 
disturbances;  
Second,  global  economic  activity  is  becoming  more  evenly  balanced  and  the  gradual  shift  to  less 
accommodative monetary policies is proceeding smoothly; 
Third, the credit quality of the key counterparties of banks – households and firms – generally remains 
high and;  
Fourth, euro area banks (LCBGs) are very profitable, their solvency ratios are comfortable and risk 
management continues to improve.  
Nevertheless,  some  previously  identified  sources  of  risk  and  vulnerability  have  grown,  and  their 
relative likelihood could have changed. [see slide 15] 
First, a global source of medium-term risk for the stability of the financial system continues to be the 
large  global  financial  imbalances,  despite  some  rebalancing  of  global  growth  patterns  and  recent 
declines in oil prices.  
Second, in global and euro area financial markets long-term yields and credit spreads remain very low, 
and thus vulnerable to a reappraisal of risk. At the same time, important risks may be developing – 
although they are extremely difficult to quantify – related to credit risk transfer markets in which hedge 
funds have become increasingly present.  
Third, concerning sectoral risks in the euro area, there has been rapid re-leveraging in some parts of 
the  corporate  sector,  induced  in  part  by  a  surge  in  LBO  activity,  and  household  sector  financial 
imbalances continue to grow and are especially sizeable in a number of countries. 
 
BIS Review 121/2006 
  11
For  these  reasons,  the  comforting  central  outlook  for  financial  stability  should  not  give  rise  to 
complacency because there are several possible low-probability but potentially high-impact events that 
could occur and that would, if they were to crystallise, create material risks for financial stability.  
Thank you very much for your attention. 
 12 
 BIS Review 121/2006
