Panayotis Thomopoulos: Supervision of credit and financial institutions – 
structure of the Greek banking system 
Speech by Mr Panayotis Thomopoulos, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Greece, at the Euromoney 
Conference “Greece’s rapidly changing banking sector”, Athens, 1-2 November 2006. 
 First, I would like to thank you for inviting me to this interesting conference. 
Before proceeding with issues concerning the structure of the banking system, I would like to say a 
few words about the Greek economy. Disciplined by the requirements of EMU membership, Greece 
succeeded in bringing inflation down from around 16%, where it was for most of the first half of the 
1990s, to an average just above 3% since 2000. GDP growth, by contrast, rose from an annual rate of 
less than 1% for about 15 years up to the 1990s to almost 4% over the last ten years. This represents 
a  rate which is  twice  the euro-zone  average.  Finally,  the  fiscal deficit  also  fell  significantly from  the 
double digit figures experienced in the early 1990s. In short, the Greek economy was transformed by 
euro area entry. Subsequently it was aided by the advantages flowing from the stable macroeconomic 
environment and low interest rates of the euro area, as well as from the Olympic Games in 2004. 
On the supply side, liberalization and privatizations as well as a reinvigorated private entrepreneurial 
spirit have been the principal driving forces. This spirit has manifested itself in the re-orientation from 
an inward to an outward looking economy, especially after joining the euro area in 2001. Greece is 
now  fully  espousing  globalisation,  and  its  overall  beneficial  effects  more  than  outweigh  the  severe 
damage inflicted on a few traditional Greek industries, such as textiles. The financial sector has been 
the avant-garde of the globalisation process in Greece and has followed, albeit with some delay, the 
path  laid  by  euro  area  financial  institutions 
in  speeding  up  consolidation,  integration  and 
internationalisation. 
Indeed,  the  Greek  banking  sector  has  transformed  itself  in  15  years  from  a  highly  regulated  and 
inward looking one into a competitive and dynamic sector that is now a basic pillar for the successful 
economic performance. Since its gradual deregulation in the 90s reaching full liberalization in 2003, 
when the last regulations concerning consumer credit were abolished, it has been transformed to one 
of  the  most  competitive,  outward  looking  sectors  in  the  Greek  economy,  with  its  assets  increasing 
more than fourfold in the last ten years. The release, after the euro area entry, of the high obligatory 
reserves (12%) held at the Bank of Greece, easier access to the main international financial markets 
and to the ECB refinancing facilities as well as the sizeable growth in Greek national income increased 
considerably  the  lending  capacity  of  the  Greek  banking  sector,  underpinning  its  expansion.  The 
average  rate  of  growth  of  bank  lending  to  the  private  sector  (corporates  and  households)  has 
exceeded  20%  since  2000,  almost  three  times  the  annual  growth  of  nominal  GDP,  with  lending  to 
households growing at over 30% on average. Such a high rate of growth, also stimulated by low euro 
area interest rates, has contributed importantly to the significant rise in the standard of living of the 
Greek  population  and  to  the  fast  rate  of  growth  of  GDP.  Indeed,  a  significant  proportion  of  bank 
lending  has  been  financing  private  investment,  and  has  thus  contributed  to  the  growth  of  potential 
capacity. 
Today  there  are  62  banks  operating  in  Greece,  of  which  22  are  commercial  banks,  16  cooperative 
banks,  23  foreign  branches  and  one  special  credit  institution  (the  Loans  and  Consignments  Fund 
which is exempt from the provisions of Banking Law 2075/92). The banking sector plays a dominant 
role in the financial sector, since it accounts for approximately 85% of total financial sector assets; if 
we include the financial subsidiaries of the banks as well, that is, insurance companies, mutual funds, 
brokerage  houses etc,  the  figure  is  close  to  95%.  Its  importance  is also  underlined  by  the fact  that 
banks with their subsidiaries represent about 1/3 of the capitalisation of the Athens Stock Exchange, 
and the evolution of share prices in the banking sector has a proportionately greater impact on the 
general index of the stock exchange. 
Within the banking sector, commercial banks have a market share of around 85%. Foreign branches 
account for around 10%, the Loans and Consignment Fund 3.5%, while cooperative banks represent 
less than 1%. The degree of concentration of the Greek banking sector is somewhat above the euro 
area  average,  even  if we exclude  Germany  with  its  more  than  2000  mainly small  local banks;  it  is, 
however, around the average of countries of a broadly similar size. 
BIS Review 104/2006 
 1
The five largest banks control 66% of the banking system assets, which is lower than the 85% of the 
Netherlands  and  Belgium,  close  to  the  69%  of  Portugal,  but  above  the  45%  of  Austria.  Financial 
liberalization, the facility with which capital was raised in the Athens Stock Exchange until 2000, and 
favourable  prospects  for  continuing  high  profit  rates  encouraged  the  creation  of  numerous  private 
banks especially in the period up to 2001 and was followed by a scramble for market shares both by 
new and old private banks. This resulted in a major card reshuffling of the financial system. Whereas 
until  the  mid-1990s  one  state  controlled  bank  –  the  NBG  –  (including  its  subsidiary  the  National 
Mortgage Bank) had a market share of almost 50% and, as such, was effectively the market maker, 
to-day its domestic market share is 23%, closely followed by two private banks with a market share of 
18% each and two others with 10% each. If we include subsidiaries and branches abroad the largest 
bank’s share – the NBG – is higher but it is still far below that of 10-12 years ago. The more even 
distribution of market shares does not leave much room for anti-competitive practices. I would like to 
note  that  not  only  there  is  a  better  distribution  of  market  shares  today  but  also,  reflecting  strong 
competition, the ranking has significantly changed: banks with a market share of 18% today had less 
than  10%  in  1995  and  a  couple  with  double-digit  markets  shares  in  1995  have  now  a  single-digit 
market  share.  Foreign  financial  institutions  are  also  present,  especially  in  the  wholesale  banking 
sector,  and  they  constitute  a  challenge  for  the  better.  As  in  most  European  countries,  the  Greek 
banking  landscape  can  now  be  characterized  as  highly  competitive.  This  is  also  underlined  by  the 
sometimes aggressive advertisements by individual banks trying to take away other banks’ customers, 
by offering very advantageous loan terms, especially to those who regroup their dispersed accounts 
among different banks in one bank.  
In  the  very  competitive  international  environment,  and  especially  after  joining  the  euro  area  with  its 
unified  money  market,  the  small  size  of  Greek  banks  was  an  important  handicap  that  banks 
themselves perceived as being a serious threat to their longer-run existence. Effectively they thought 
that either they would be an easy prey for larger foreign banks or they would be unable to compete 
with the larger European banks, which had much lower operating costs. In 1998, among the first 100 
EU banks, there was only one Greek bank and it occupied the 78th place. A wave of Mergers and 
Acquisitions (M&As) started towards the end of the 1990s and is still continuing, and which was also 
aided by the privatization process. Today, the Greek banking system occupies a place in Europe that 
corresponds to the size of the country with three Greek banks being among the 100 largest EU banks; 
furthermore the first Greek bank moved from its 78th place before 2000 up to the 63rd place. 
The Bank of Greece, for its part, has been continuously encouraging both the creation of larger and 
more  efficient  financial  institutions  through  M&As  as  well  as  greater  foreign  presence  in  the  Greek 
financial market. Its aim is to strengthen competitive forces, encouraging banks to adopt best practices 
and modern management techniques, introduce new bank products and lower the cost of borrowing. 
This, together with the rapid expansion of the Greek banking sector abroad, should help to gradually 
establish  Athens as a  regional  financial  hub.  This  is,  I  think,  a  realistic goal but  it  does have  some 
prerequisites: Greek banks for their part need to accelerate their process of modernization, especially 
by rapidly expanding the use of low cost electronic means of payments, and increasing the offer of 
sophisticated bank products, while improving their risk management techniques in line with Basel II. 
In the course of 2006 the key driver of structural developments has been the full or partial privatization 
of  state-controlled  institutions.  Emporiki  Bank  was  acquired  by  Credit  Agricole,  while  the  Postal 
Savings Bank was granted a banking license in conjunction with an Initial Public Offering (IPO) on the 
Athens Stock Exchange. In the last 10 years, the National Bank of Greece has been gradually cutting 
loose from state control. To this end, the appointment of professional managers and the last capital 
increase, which led to a dilution of the state’s shareholding, have been decisive factors. As a result, 
the share of directly state-controlled institutions declined further to about 13% of total banking system 
assets from about 80% some 10-12 years ago. These developments are expected to further enhance 
competition to the benefit of the Greek consumer. 
Concurrently, the consolidation among private medium-sized banks continued. Marfin Popular Bank is 
emerging as an important player, after the participation of Dubai Financial in its share capital and the 
planned triple merger between Marfin Bank, Egnatia Bank and Laiki Bank (Cyprus). Proton, which is 
focused on investment banking, is also acquiring a retail bank to expand into retail banking activities. 
Greece,  at  present,  is  primarily  a  retail  banking  market;  but,  gradually,  as  Greek  banks’  networks 
abroad increase, Greek banks will also serve the growing number of Greek multinational firms both in 
their  domestic  activities  and  abroad.  Thus  the  shift  towards  wholesale  and  investment  banking  is 
expected to gather strength. 
2 
 BIS Review 104/2006
Competition is rather intense and a variety of new products are entering the market across the whole 
gambit of the banking portfolio. However, financial innovation is more pronounced in mortgage loans, 
where demand for credit has been particularly strong: mortgage loans continued to grow at over 30% 
per annum in the first half of 2006. Many banks, many more than in most EU countries, offer mortgage 
loans  “à  la  carte”  according  to  the  possibility  of  repayment  by  the  borrower.  Initially,  interest-only 
mortgage loans were introduced where the borrower pays, typically for a period up to 1/3 of the total 
duration of the loan, only interest. Then, mortgages with an initial grace period, during which no capital 
payments are made, appeared. Later, came mortgage loans with embedded flexibility in repayment, 
where monthly installments can be increased, reduced or skipped and the duration of the loan can be 
adjusted. Finally, foreign currency mortgage loans are being offered (initially in Yen, recently in Swiss 
franc), while many banks have securitized a significant part of their mortgage loans. The increasing 
wealth  of  the  upper  income  categories  has  also  led  to  the  establishment  of  private  banking 
departments which offer very sophisticated structured products to their wealthy clients. 
The  Greek  banking  system  is  in  good  health,  and  this  was  verified  by  the  detailed  examination  it 
underwent  during  the  Financial  Sector  Assessment  Program  which  we  undertook  last  year  (2005) 
under the auspices of the International Monetary Fund. In the context of this exercise, a stress test 
was  conducted  which  showed  that  in  general  the  Greek  banking  system  can  withstand  various 
adverse economic situations contemplated by the scenarios. Even in the worst case scenario, where it 
was  assumed  that  the  probability  of  default  increased  by  60%,  the  resulting  fall  in  the  Capital 
Adequacy Ratio (CAR) was just over 1 percentage point. As the overall CAR is around 13%, even a 1 
percentage point reduction, or slightly more, leaves it at quite satisfactory levels. 
Profitability in the Greek banking sector is above EU averages, something which is partly explained by 
cyclical factors (in 2005 the return on equity in Greece was 17% compared to 12% for medium sized 
banks  in  the  EU).  The  non-Performing  Loans  ratio  (NPLs),  although  still  higher  than  European 
averages, has declined to 6.3% in 2005 from 7.1% in 2004 due to increased write-offs. We have to 
note that this relatively high ratio is partly accounted for by a couple of medium sized banks, which 
are,  however,  in  the  process  of  cleaning  up  their  bad  loan  portfolio.  The  Bank  of  Greece  also 
encourages the banks to write-off doubtful loans timely and we are, therefore, confident that the NPL 
ratio would converge to the EU average sometime in the next few years. In addition, it should be noted 
that the provision coverage ratio, which stood at 61.5% in 2005, is quite satisfactory, and given the 
long tradition of collateralized lending, as banks ask for real estate security, the loss-given-default rate 
is relatively low. However, even if the relatively high ratio of NPL does not represent a short-term risk, 
the  Bank  of  Greece  closely  monitors  the  fast  rate  of  growth  of  credit  of  individual  banks  and  their 
progress in reducing their NPLs. 
Even if there is no immediate risk and though the household debt to GDP ratio at 38% is much below 
the euro area average of close to 60%, a Central bank has to err on the side of caution and address 
all longer term issues that might undermine the soundness of the banking system. To this end, the 
Bank  of  Greece  has  lately  introduced  a  series  of  measures:  some  of  them  have  resulted  in  higher 
capital  adequacy  ratios  by  imposing  on  certain  banks  a  minimum  CAR  above  the  8%,  in  higher 
provisioning  coefficients,  especially  for  consumer  loans,  in  speeding  up  write  offs  of  NPLs,  and  we 
have explicitly limited annual debt repayment to 30-40% of household income. At the same time and in 
line with the new philosophy of Basel II, in April 2006 the Bank addressed more fundamental problems 
by  imposing  new  and  more  efficient  rules  pertaining  to  internal  control  systems,  and  all  associated 
functions:  internal  audit,  risk  management,  flow  of  information  to  the  top  echelons,  compliance 
functions,  governance as well  as  measures  aimed  at  improving  decision  making  and procedures  in 
credit disbursements. 
The  growth  outlook  of  the  Greek  banking  sector  remains  favourable,  first  as  profits  continue  to 
increase, and second the Greek economy is underbanked by any measure used. This underlines the 
still great potential for further growth. Population per branch, at 3.100, is 20% more than the euro area 
average;  population  per  employee  is  181,  25%  above  the  euro  area  average;  and  assets  per 
employee amount to €4.600, 65% below the euro area average. Moreover, Greek banks are still far 
from reaping all the economies of scale and scope that modern banking systems provide. Banks are 
largely  dependent  on  cash  and  make  very  little  use  of  electronic  means  of  payments  –  the  use  of 
electronic  fund  transfers  and  direct  debits  is  about  90%  below  the  euro  area  average.  In  addition, 
because of the reluctance to use electronic fund transfer services, Greeks are obliged to keep a great 
number of accounts with different banks, e.g. an average Greek has 2.6 overnight deposits, by far the 
highest number of bank accounts per inhabitant in the euro area, and twice the euro area average. 
This results in a high cost both to the individual and to the bank. However, as from 2008 this situation 
BIS Review 104/2006 
 3
will  have  to  change  with  the  introduction  of  the  Single  European  Payments  Area  (SEPA).  Indeed, 
Greek  banks  and  DIAS –the  electronic  retail  payment  system– are working  together  to be ready  to 
exploit the advantages of SEPA by 2008 and thus reduce considerably the high cost of a cash based 
banking  system  while  providing  more  upgraded  electronic  fund  transfer  and  direct  debit  services  to 
their clients. 
The  Greek  banking  sector  also  faces  a  number  of  additional  challenges;  it  has  to  apply  all  new 
regulations,  mechanisms  and  the  risk  based  methods  required  by  the  new  capital  adequacy 
framework known as Basel II, while expanding rapidly both in Greece and abroad. At the same time, it 
has  to  integrate  as  quickly  as  possible  its  subsidiaries  and  branches  in  South  Eastern  European 
countries, where the environment still differs considerably from that of the average euro area country. 
The implementation of the new framework requires substantial effort from both credit institutions and 
supervisory authorities. This is especially true for internationally-active banking groups, irrespective of 
the  approach  they  are  planning  to  implement.  However,  one  should  keep  in  mind  that  the  Basel  II 
framework is effectively accelerating a process that had or should have started earlier and would be 
necessary even if the new framework had not been introduced. The new framework was designed by 
the Basel Committee of Banking Supervisors for “internationally-active” banks. It provides a number of 
options  in  terms  of  the  methods  used  for  the  estimation  of  capital  requirements  under  Pillar  I.  It  is 
worth noting that even the simpler ones, especially the standardized approach for the estimation of 
capital requirements for credit risk, requires a degree of sophistication in terms of systems and data 
that very small banks may find it difficult to fully fulfill at short notice. 
Basel  II  rather  than  being  a  new  framework  for  the  estimation  of  capital  requirements  is  a  new 
framework for the organization and corporate governance of risk management as well as, and this is 
even more important for the Bank of Greece, for the streamlining of banking supervision. It is essential 
that  supervision,  without  overlooking  the  legal  responsibilities  of  supervisors  and  their  particular 
concerns, follows or rather adjusts its methods to some extent to the management methods of banking 
groups.  Past  are  the  days  that  a  supervisory  authority  monitored  a  few  simplistic  types  of  credit. 
Nowadays,  banks  provide  different  forms  of  credit  with  many  more  risks  than  before  and  invest  in 
complex products which required very strong internal control mechanisms that previously did not exist. 
In addition, Basel II highlighted the need for the enhancement of cooperation between home and host 
supervisors. The Bank of Greece, as a supervisor involved in the supervision of consolidated banking 
groups,  has already  organized  a  “college  of  supervisors”  among  the  supervisors  of  the  neighboring 
countries in order to accommodate their particular interests in the Basel II implementation process and 
we  exchange  views  regularly  on  the  situation  of  banks  with  cross-border  business.  Gradually  a 
common supervisory culture will have to be established.  
I have already mentioned the expansion of Greek banks in the neighboring countries since the early 
90s with the result that that Greek banks’ share in the banking sector of our neighbors is now around 
20%. Although the presence of Greek banks is not limited to the wider region, it is in this area that it is 
most important in terms of both size and local market share. They have some 1200 branches with a 
total number of employees over 16000 in South East Europe and, if we include some other countries, 
primarily Cyprus and Turkey, the number is close to 27000; these are significant numbers for a region 
which is underbanked. In around 8 years time, may be up to one-half of the profits of certain large 
Greek banks will be derived from their operations abroad and the rank of the Greek banks in the list of 
the European banks will continue to improve. 
All four major private Greek banking groups have been engaged in recent acquisitions abroad. EFG 
Eurobank  Ergasias  SA  acquired  Turkey’s  Tekfenbank  AS  in  May  and  bought  a  Ukrainian  lender  in 
July. It is also opening branches in Poland. Alpha Bank SA is also looking at countries of the wider 
region where it has not yet a presence. Piraeus Bank SA bought the Egyptian Commercial Bank last 
year,  the  first  Greek  banking  purchase  in  the  Arab  world’s  most-populous  nation.  But  the  most 
significant  acquisition  is  that  of  the  National  Bank  of  Greece  which  bought  a  controlling  stake  in 
Turkey’s  Finansbank  AS.  That  is  the  biggest  takeover  ever  by  a  Greek  company  outside  its  home 
market. Furthermore, the NBG also expanded its presence in Serbia acquiring a medium-sized local 
bank. 
As I have already said, the contribution of South East Europe, including Turkey and Romania, to the 
profitability of Greek banks is expected to increase in the future. However, in order to achieve this they 
have to integrate their new acquisitions smoothly into their systems and culture; this is by no means an 
easy task. We at the Bank of Greece make sure that banks that expand their activities abroad not only 
have enough capital but also have the organizational structure to support such an expansion. As many 
4 
 BIS Review 104/2006
of you probably know any acquisition of a credit or financial institution abroad and any expansion of 
branch network has to be approved by the Bank of Greece after a thorough assessment of its capital 
base and its internal control and risk management system. This is not only a regulatory requirement 
but also a business necessity in order to accurately monitor risks and thus maintain their competitive 
position in what is a very sought after market. 
BIS Review 104/2006 
 5
