Peter Pang: Hong Kong Mortgage Corporation mortgage-backed securities 
issues  
Speech  by  Mr  Peter  Pang,  Deputy  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority  and 
Executive Director of the Hong Kong Mortgage Corporation Limited, at the signing ceremony for the 
HK$2  billion  mortgage-backed  securities  issue  drawn  under  the  US$3  billion  Mortgage-Backed 
Securitisation Programme Bauhinia MBS Limited, Hong Kong, 27 November 2006. 
 Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen, 
Let me first extend to all of you a very warm welcome to today's signing ceremony. Today's issue of 
mortgage-backed securities (MBS) under the Bauhinia Mortgage-Backed Securitisation Programme of 
the Hong Kong Mortgage Corporation (HKMC) is unique in two ways. 
First, this is the first time the HKMC has sponsored an MBS issue as a triple-A rated institution. On 30 
October,  Moody's  announced  the  upgrade  of  the  HKMC's  domestic  currency  rating  to  Aaa  and  the 
HKMC's foreign currency rating to Aa1. The HKMC has therefore made history as the first entity in 
Hong Kong, and so far the only one, to have a triple-A rating. 
The upgrade in credit ratings reflects the financial strength of the HKMC and the strong support of the 
Hong  Kong  SAR  Government  for  the  Corporation.  With  this  strong  credit  rating,  the  HKMC  is  well 
positioned  to  play  a  more  active  and  strategic  role  in  promoting  the  development  of  the  debt  and 
securitisation markets in Hong Kong. 
Secondly, today's issue of two billion dollars marks the launch of the first-ever partially un-guaranteed 
MBS sponsored by the HKMC. 
The  nine  MBS  issues  sponsored  by  the  HKMC  so  far,  totalling  $11  billion  dollars,  have  all  been 
guaranteed by the HKMC. These issues were all welcomed by investors. The HKMC prides itself on 
being a financial institution that spearheads product innovation in Hong Kong's capital markets. For 
this  issue,  after  consulting  the  market,  the  HKMC  has  decided  to  adopt  a  MBS  structure  along  the 
lines  of  a  Collateralised  Mortgage  Obligation.  The  CMO  structure  divides  the  pool  of  underlying 
mortgage  assets  into  credit  tranches  or  classes  with  different  tenors  and  interest  rates  to  suit  the 
appetites of a wider range of investors in Hong Kong and the region. 
In today's two billion dollars MBS issue, the Class A portion accounts for 87% of the issue and does 
not  carry  any  guarantee.  Class  B  accounts  for  13%  of  the  issue  and  is  guaranteed  by  the  HKMC. 
Class A has been assigned a triple-A rating by both Moody's and S&P's. The award of this top rating 
to Class A reflects the good credit quality of the underlying mortgage pool and the credit enhancement 
through subordination provided by Class B, which absorbs the first loss in the mortgage pool. The low 
level of subordination at 13% reflects the high quality of the collateral, the innovative structuring of the 
issue  and  market's  confidence  in  the  HKMC's  ability  to  manage  the  credit  risk  of  the  mortgage 
portfolio. 
While there have been other un-guaranteed MBS transactions in Hong Kong, today's issue sponsored 
by the HKMC is the largest un-guaranteed Hong Kong dollar MBS in Hong Kong. Moreover, it is the 
first-ever un-guaranteed Hong Kong dollar MBS that carries a triple-A rating. I believe that the HKMC's 
introduction of  triple-A-rated  MBS  through  credit  tranching  will  become a  benchmark  for  other  MBS 
issuers in Hong Kong. 
With  today's  MBS  issue,  the  HKMC  now  accounts  for  about  a  quarter  of  the  total  securitisation 
transactions in Hong Kong in the past ten years and is the largest issuer of asset-backed securities in 
Hong Kong. For the future, the Corporation has plans to expand the scope of its business to cover 
non-mortgage assets and selected overseas markets – as always, in a prudent commercial manner. 
These new business initiatives will help to further broaden the local debt market, and strengthen Hong 
Kong's role as an international financial centre and funding hub in the region. 
We are grateful for the enthusiastic response of the banks joining the management group for this issue 
and  find  it  very  encouraging.  We  are  also  very  pleased  to  learn  that  a  diverse  group  of  investors 
including retirement funds, insurance companies, banks and other institutional investors have shown a 
keen interest in the issue. 
BIS Review 116/2006 
 1
Let me conclude by thanking HSBC, the sole arranger and lead manager, for their highly professional 
work to make this issue a great success. I would also like to thank the Co-lead Managers, DZ BANK 
AG,  Hong  Kong  Branch,  ICBC  (Asia)  and  BMO  Capital  Markets  Corp  and  Co-Managers,  ANZ 
Investment Bank and Commonwealth Bank of Australia, for managing and distributing the issue. 
I  look  forward  to  your  continuing  support  of  our  Corporation  and  its  debt  issuance  activities.  Thank 
you. 
2 
 BIS Review 116/2006
