Hamad Al-Sayari: The “Banker” program in Saudi Arabia  
Speech by His Excellency Hamad Al-Sayari, Governor of the Saudi Arabian Monetary Agency, in the 
Inauguration  Ceremony  of  The  "Banker"  Program,  at 
Institute  of  Banking,  Riyadh, 
28 November 2006. 
the 
 Dear Brothers, 
I am pleased to welcome you all on this occasion in which we celebrate reaping another fruit of the 
joint  cooperation  between  the  Saudi  Arabian  Monetary  Agency  and  the  banks  operating  in  the 
Kingdom,  namely,  the  "Banker"  program.  I  would  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  thank  all  the 
participating  banks  and  the  Institute  of  Banking  for  their  support  and  efforts  for  organizing  and 
executing this ambitious program which aims at meeting the growing needs of the banking sector and 
qualifying job-seekers of the Saudi youth.  
As you know, the banking sector has witnessed over the past few years accelerated developments 
due to the economic growth seen by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. These developments have posed a 
great  challenge  to  the  banks  and  financial  institutions  as  they  had  to  expedite  the  provision  and 
diversification of financial services to meet the increasing needs of the domestic market.  
The development of financial institutions must, undoubtedly, be paralleled with development in human 
resources. This, in turn, requires plans for training and qualifying cadres to enable financial institutions 
to undertake their important role in serving the national economy.  
Since  its  inception,  SAMA  has  supported  banks  to  develop  human  resources  by  establishing  the 
Institute of Banking, which contributes to training and qualifying a large number of national cadres in 
the  financial  services  sector.  The  Institute  continues  to  professionally  exercise  this  role  and  make 
efforts  to  cope  with  the  developments  in  the  financial  and  banking  sector  by  providing  information 
solutions and diverse educational programs consistent with individual bank needs.  
The  Institute's  programs  have  covered  important  banking  fields,  such  as  treasury,  investment  and 
credit, and contributed effectively to developing and qualifying national cadres. Thus, Saudization in 
the banking sector exceeded 85 percent by the end of the first half of 2006. 
Dear Audience, 
These developments, which have diversified and expanded the services provided in the Saudi market, 
have given rise to substantial challenges to financial institutions. One of the most important challenges 
is to provide a sufficient number of qualified human resources to meet the needs of these institutions. 
Despite  the  employment  efforts  made  by  banks  to  cope  with  this  expansion,  and  though  4,246 
employees were appointed during the first half of 2006, the total needs of these institutions are still not 
satisfied. 
Hence, SAMA has promptly exerted expeditious efforts in search for solutions to these challenges. To 
this end, it has instructed the Institute of Banking to study the situation and propose practical solutions 
to help banks bridge such gap over both the short and long terms. 
The  "Banker"  program  comes  as  a  solution  complementary  to  the  study  programs  arranged  by 
educational institutions, and a parallel to the banks' direct efforts in attracting and employing national 
cadres. 
We are gathering here today to celebrate the opening of the first course of this integrated program, 
which hopefully will provide the financial institutions with needed human resources, and offer good job 
opportunities for the youth of our homeland. 
In  conclusion,  I  can  only  reiterate  my  thanks  to  all  those  who  contributed  to  accomplishing  the 
"Banker" program, which I hope will continue to successfully achieve the objectives for which it has 
been established.  
Thank you for listening.  
BIS Review 125/2006 
 1
