Davíð Oddsson: Recent economic and financial developments in Iceland 
Speech by Mr Davíð Oddsson, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Central Bank of Iceland, at 
a seminar organised by the Iceland Chamber of Commerce, Reykjavik, 7 November 2006. 
 I would like to thank the Iceland Chamber of Commerce for giving me the opportunity to say a few 
words  here  as  has  become  customary  at  this  time  of  year,  following  the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland’s 
interest rate decision and the publication of Monetary Bulletin. That publication provides indications of 
the position and outlook at the end of this year and what is to be expected over the forecast horizon of 
the  next  two  years.  Of  course  the  Bank’s  long-term  forecasts  are  presented  with  due  humility  and 
respect  towards  the  uncertainties  that  time  may  bring.  Something  of  a  milestone  was  reached  on 
November 2 when the Board of Governors of the Central Bank decided to leave the policy interest rate 
unchanged  at  least  until  the  next  interest  rate  decision  day,  which  was  in  fact  brought  forward  to 
December 21. The last decision marked an end to 17 successive hikes on interest rate decision days. 
At this juncture it is uncertain whether a real turning point has been reached, because the decision 
was presented more as a deferral of a rise in the policy rate than as an end to the hike process. In 
other words,  the  data  available  to  the Central  Bank  supported  raising  the  policy  rate still  further.  In 
itself, comparing the long-term forecasts with the inflation target would have justified raising the policy 
rate  rather  than  leaving  it  unchanged.  And  subsequently  some  people  have  asked:  Given  the 
probability and arguments supporting such a decision, why wait? However, the Governors referred to 
the  more  benign  short-term  and  long-term  inflation  outlook  since  the  publication  of  the  previous 
forecast [in July] and that in many important respects it seemed more positive than was considered 
likely then. Inflation developments were more favourable than expected. Wage rises and wage drift 
were also lower and housing market activity more subdued than had been projected. In addition, oil 
prices have been on the decrease and credit growth has slowed down. In view of these developments, 
although in many ways they involve only short-term changes in indicators that are known to be volatile, 
the Governors felt there was ample reason to wait, at least for the time being. 
A large amount of information will of course reach the Board of Governors before December 21. If the 
pointers  continue  in  this  direction,  there  may  conceivably  be  no  need  to  increase  further  what  is 
already undeniably a tight monetary stance. On the other hand, if nothing of particular note is reported, 
the analysis at hand when the current interest rate decision was made will determine the decision on 
December 21 and a policy rate hike could be in the offing. As far as can be seen, there is reasonable 
consensus on the Central Bank’s decision among the main observers in Iceland and abroad. People 
may well question and in fact some already have the Bank’s grounds for its concerns and its strongly 
worded  message,  bearing  in  mind  the  short-term  and  long-term  downturn  in  inflation,  slower  credit 
growth, lower oil prices and substantially less wage drift than was feared. The answers are obvious 
from  the  Bank’s  core  writings  on  these  issues.  They  show  that  a  tight  monetary  stance  must  be 
maintained for longer than would seem to be generally expected. 
Inflation has certainly slowed down but it is still running high and will continue to do so, and for quite a 
while  will  remain  incompatible  with  the  target  and  main  tasks  assigned  to  the  Bank.  Almost 
everywhere  we  look,  strong  pressures  persist  in  the  economy.  The  labour  market  is  greatly 
overstretched and labour demand is enormous. This has been met with heavy imports of labour and it 
is questionable whether such a swift influx is necessarily beneficial or healthy for Iceland in the long 
run, despite making the battle with inflation easier for the moment. In the banking sector, credit growth 
remains robust even though it is now slower than at the peak, and is still unsustainable in the long 
term. Now that the banks have fortunately managed to secure medium-term funding, the risk is that 
they  will  become  more  complacent  and  ease  their  restraint.  Such  signs  seem  to  be  emerging.  The 
housing  market  appears  to  be  picking  up  again  and  household  and  business  sentiment  is  still  very 
upbeat. Finally, Iceland’s current account deficit relative to GDP is presently the widest in the world. 
And  while  it  is  forecast  to  shrink  next  year,  the  deficit  will  remain  large  and  eventually  have  to  be 
settled.  Funding  the  accumulated  deficit  will  leave  the  economy  highly  dependent  on  investors  and 
creditors  in  the  markets,  with  precious  little  scope  for  manoeuvre.  Thus  the  Icelandic  economy  is 
exposed to potential shocks which may prove tough to tackle. 
The  Treasury  is  in  a  strong  position  and  has  achieved  much  in  recent  years.  But  according  to  a 
familiar pattern, the Treasury may be less willing than usual to proceed cautiously at this stage of the 
electoral term, and it too is showing signs of easing which may drive demand and stoke the flames of 
inflation.  Such  criticism  must  of  course  be  qualified  by  the  Treasury’s  impressive  record  in  paying 
down its debt in recent years to establish a completely new and favourable balance of interest flows 
from  which  Iceland  will  benefit  for  a  very  long  time.  Recently  the  Treasury’s  deposit  in  the  Central 
Bank has amounted to around 100 b.kr., earning it handsome interest revenues. The Government has 
announced  that  it  has  agreed  to  Central  Bank  proposals  for  almost  doubling  the  foreign  reserves, 
which will be followed by talks on strengthening the Bank’s capital position. There were no specific 
reasons for these measures, which are merely aimed to adjust the Central Bank’s position to reflect 
Iceland’s rapidly expanding economy and financial sector. The idea for building up the reserves was 
aired at the Central Bank’s annual meeting in March this year, so it should not come as a surprise. 
Given the scenario I have been describing, the Board of Governors seems to have ample justification 
for  taking  this  pause  to  consider  the  position  carefully  and  decide  the  next  steps,  not  only  with 
reference to the more positive assumptions that have now emerged since the July forecast, but also 
by examining the risks I have mentioned. If the current outlook holds and everyone stays alert and 
strong, inflation will be brought down over a relatively short period. The most important consideration 
is  to  achieve  a  satisfactory  course  for  the  exchange  rate,  whereby  the  current  account  deficit  will 
primarily be reduced by increased exports, decreased imports of capital goods and a sufficiently tight 
stance to deter consumers from spending on other imports. The other and much less favourable way 
to adjust the current account would be through a sharp currency depreciation. Such action would have 
many uncomfortable side-effects which are well known. As yet, the former option is much more likely 
namely a soft landing. 
A soft landing after one of the sharpest upswings ever would represent a success confirming beyond 
all doubt that the Icelandic economy is highly adaptable and can respond more quickly than larger and 
more  cumbersome  systems,  and  that  the  largest  investment  in  the  country’s  history  followed  by 
restructuring of the banking sector and housing market has not proved too much of a challenge for 
economic policy. It would be going to far to call such an outcome a miracle, but it would certainly be 
satisfying. Because over this same short period, enormous assets have been built up in Iceland. The 
infrastructure  of  the  economy,  and  know-how  within  it  and  in  the  main  business  sectors  have  all 
strengthened,  and  Iceland’s  competitiveness  and  potential  for  expansion  at  home  and  abroad  have 
improved enormously. The old cliché of Iceland’s undiversified economy which also happened to be a 
fact is a thing of the past. 
