European Central Bank: Press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt 
am Main, 7 December 2006. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Vice-President  and  I  are  very  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  today’s  press 
conference. Let me report on the outcome of our meeting, which was also attended by the President of 
the Eurogroup, Prime Minister Juncker, and Commissioner Almunia. 
At  today’s  meeting,  we  decided  to  increase  the  key  ECB  interest  rates  by  25  basis  points.  This 
decision  reflects  the  upside  risks  to  price  stability  over  the  medium  term  that  we  have  identified 
through both our economic and monetary analyses. Today’s decision will contribute to ensuring that 
medium  to  longer-term  inflation  expectations  in  the  euro  area  remain  solidly  anchored  at  levels 
consistent with price stability. Such anchoring is a prerequisite for monetary policy to make an ongoing 
contribution towards supporting sustainable economic growth and job creation in the euro area. After 
today’s increase, our monetary policy continues to be accommodative, with the key ECB interest rates 
remaining at low levels, money and credit growth strong, and liquidity in the euro area ample by all 
plausible  measures.  Therefore,  looking  ahead,  acting  in  a  firm  and  timely  manner  to  ensure  price 
stability  in  the  medium  term  is  warranted.  The  Governing  Council  will  monitor  very  closely  all 
developments so that risks to price stability over the medium term do not materialise. 
Turning first to the economic analysis, according to Eurostat’s first estimate, the quarter-on-quarter 
growth rate of real GDP in the euro area for the third quarter of 2006 was 0.5%. The data thus confirm 
our assessment that economic activity continued to expand robustly, while moderating from the very 
strong rates seen in the first half of the year. Domestic demand remained the main driver of economic 
growth in the third quarter, confirming the anticipated broadening of the recovery and pointing to the 
increasingly  self-sustaining  nature  of  economic  expansion  in  the  euro  area.  The  information  on 
economic  activity  from  various  confidence  surveys  and  indicator-based  estimates  supports  the 
assessment that robust economic growth has continued in the fourth quarter of this year. 
Looking ahead, the conditions remain in place for the euro area economy to grow at solid rates around 
potential. While some volatility in the quarterly growth rates is likely to emerge around the turn of the 
year, associated with the impact of changes in indirect taxes in a large euro area country, the medium-
term outlook for economic activity remains favourable. As regards the external environment, economic 
growth has become more balanced across regions. Helped in part by lower oil prices, global growth is 
robust,  thereby  providing  support  for  euro  area  exports.  Domestic  demand  in  the  euro  area  is 
expected to maintain its relatively strong momentum. Investment should remain dynamic, benefiting 
from  an  extended  period  of  very  favourable  financing  conditions,  balance  sheet  restructuring, 
accumulated and ongoing strong earnings, and gains in business efficiency. Consumption should also 
strengthen  further  over  time,  in  line  with  developments  in  real  disposable  income,  as  employment 
conditions continue to improve. 
This outlook is also reflected in the new Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections. The projections 
foresee average annual real GDP growth in a range between 2.5% and 2.9% in 2006, between 1.7% 
and  2.7%  in  2007  and  between  1.8%  and  2.8%  in  2008.  Most  recent  forecasts  by  international 
organisations give a broadly similar picture. In comparison with the September ECB staff projections, 
the  ranges  projected  for  real  GDP  growth  in  2006  and  2007  have  been  revised  upwards,  largely 
reflecting the assumption of lower energy prices and their impact on real disposable income. 
In the Governing Council’s view, the risks surrounding this broadly favourable outlook for economic 
growth  over  the  projection  horizon  lie  on  the downside.  The  main  risks relate  to  the possibility  of  a 
renewed  increase  in  oil  prices,  fears  of  a  rise  in  protectionist  pressures,  especially  after  the 
suspension of the Doha round of trade talks, and concerns about possible disorderly developments 
owing to global imbalances.  
As regards price developments, according to Eurostat’s flash estimate, annual HICP inflation rose to 
1.8% in November 2006, from 1.6% in October and 1.7% in September. While no detailed breakdown 
of the November HICP data is available as of yet, the lower annual HICP inflation rates recorded in the 
two previous months reflected mainly the significant declines in crude oil prices from August onwards, 
as well as base effects. While the outlook for energy prices remains uncertain, on the basis of the oil 
BIS Review 120/2006 
 1
prices currently implied by the futures market overall inflation rates are likely to increase again in early 
2007 and then hover around 2% in the course of that year, also reflecting the impact of higher indirect 
taxes.  
The December Eurosystem staff projections see annual HICP inflation at between 2.1% and 2.3% in 
2006, between 1.5% and 2.5% in 2007 and between 1.3% and 2.5% in 2008. Most recent forecasts by 
international  organisations  give  a  broadly  similar  picture.  Compared  with  the  September  2006  ECB 
staff projections, the ranges for 2006 and 2007 are somewhat lower, largely reflecting the assumption 
of lower energy prices. In this context, let me remind you of the conditional nature of these projections, 
which  are  based  on  a  series  of  technical  assumptions,  including  market  expectations  for  short  and 
long-term interest rates as well as for oil and non-energy commodity prices.  
In the Governing Council’s view, the outlook for price developments remains subject to upside risks, 
stemming  in  particular  from  a  pass-through  of  previous  oil  price  increases  which  is  stronger  than 
assumed  in  the  baseline  scenario,  the  possibility  of  renewed  oil  price  increases  and  additional 
increases  in  administered  prices  and  indirect  taxes  beyond  those  announced  and  decided  thus  far. 
More fundamentally, given the favourable momentum of real GDP growth observed over the past few 
quarters  and  the  positive  signs  from  labour  markets,  wage  developments  could  be  stronger  than 
currently  expected.  Therefore,  it  is  crucial  that  the  social  partners  continue  to  meet  their 
responsibilities. Wage agreements should take into account productivity developments in connection 
with the still high level of unemployment and positions in price competitiveness. It is also important that 
wage settlements move away from automatic, backward-looking indexation mechanisms. 
Turning to the monetary analysis, annual M3 growth was unchanged at 8.5% in October, remaining 
close to the highest rates observed since the introduction of the euro, which points to inflationary risks 
at medium to longer horizons. Increasing interest rates have exerted some influence over monetary 
developments in recent months, although as yet mainly by triggering shifts among the components of 
M3 rather than constraining the expansion of M3 itself. In particular, the annual growth rate of M1 has 
moderated  somewhat,  reflecting  shifts  from  overnight  deposits  into  other  components  of  M3  which 
offer more market-related returns.  
More generally, the rate of monetary and credit expansion remains rapid, reflecting the low level of 
interest rates and the strengthening of economic activity in the euro area. In particular, loans to the 
private  sector  continue  to  grow  at  double-digit  rates  on  an  annual  basis,  their  dynamism  remaining 
broadly based across the household and corporate sectors. In the context of rising interest rates, the 
growth of household borrowing has shown signs of stabilisation in recent months, albeit at very high 
growth  rates.  By  contrast,  the  growth  of  borrowing  by  non-financial  corporations  continues  to  trend 
upwards and has now reached rates of over 12% on an annual basis, the highest seen since the early 
1990s. Thus, when the counterparts of M3 are considered, the main driver of strong monetary growth 
remains the expansion of credit to the private sector. 
Taking  a  medium  to  longer-term  perspective,  the  latest  developments  are  consistent  with  a 
continuation of the persistent upward trend in the underlying rate of monetary expansion, identified by 
the ECB’s monetary analysis since mid-2004. Furthermore, following several years of robust monetary 
growth, the liquidity situation in the euro area is ample by all plausible measures. Continued strong 
monetary and credit growth in an environment of ample liquidity point to upside risks to price stability 
over  the  medium  to  longer  term.  Monetary  developments  therefore  continue  to  require  very  careful 
monitoring, particularly against the background of improved economic conditions and continued strong 
property market developments in many parts of the euro area. 
To sum up, annual inflation rates are projected to hover around 2% in the coming two years, with risks 
to this outlook remaining on the upside. In addition, given the ongoing marked dynamism of monetary 
and credit growth in an environment of ample liquidity, a cross-check of the outcome of the economic 
analysis with that of the monetary analysis supports the assessment that upside risks to price stability 
prevail over the medium to long term. It is essential that inflation expectations remain firmly anchored 
at  levels  consistent  with  price  stability.  Indeed,  acting  in  a  firm  and  timely  manner  to  ensure  price 
stability in the medium term is warranted. The Governing Council will therefore monitor very closely all 
developments so that risks to price stability over the medium term do not materialise.  
As regards fiscal policy, the European Commission’s autumn forecasts suggest that deficits will fall 
below  3%  of  GDP  in  most  euro  area  countries  by  2007.  This  is  welcome.  However,  the  projected 
improvements  in  fiscal  balances  can  only  partly  be  attributed  to  substantial  progress  in  structural 
consolidation,  as  higher  economic  growth  and  revenue  windfalls  are  playing  an  important  role. 
Moreover, in a number of countries with fiscal imbalances, adjustment efforts still fall short of what is 
2 
 BIS Review 120/2006
needed  to  meet  their  respective  medium-term  objectives  in  a  timely  manner  and  thus  fulfil  the 
requirements of the revised Stability and Growth Pact. This is of major concern. It is therefore crucial 
that forthcoming updates of the stability programmes not only envisage significant progress towards 
the correction of excessive deficits in a sustainable manner but also make sufficient headway towards 
safe budgetary positions in the countries concerned. For all countries it is paramount that pro-cyclical 
policies  be  avoided  in  the  current  economic  upswing.  More  progress  is  also  needed  with  fiscal 
structural reform as part of a comprehensive medium-term strategy to improve economic incentives 
and the soundness of social security systems. This would be a crucial contribution of fiscal policies to 
economic growth and fiscal sustainability as well as to confidence in the revised Stability and Growth 
Pact. 
As regards structural reforms, the Governing Council welcomed the 2006 progress reports submitted 
by EU Member States on their 2005-08 national reform programmes, in line with the renewed Lisbon 
Strategy. Although it is encouraging that many concrete reform steps are being taken or are planned, 
there  is  still  a  considerable  way  to  go  to  make  the  euro  area  a  more  dynamic  economy,  which  is 
crucial to meeting the challenges of globalisation, population ageing and rapid technological change. 
Reform measures should foster more integrated, flexible and competitive economies in the euro area, 
thus  allowing  more  efficient  adjustment  processes  and  a  stronger  resilience  to  shocks.  These  are 
essential conditions for the substantial benefits of the single currency to be better exploited and for the 
economic performance to improve in both the euro area as a whole and in each member state.  
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
BIS Review 120/2006 
 3
