Rakesh Mohan: Economic growth, financial deepening and financial inclusion 
Address by Dr Rakesh Mohan, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Annual Bankers' 
Conference 2006, Hyderabad, 3 November 2006. 
This draws heavily on my earlier lecture on a similar subject at the FICCI-IBA Conference in Mumbai on 26 September 2006. 
 Introduction 
I.  
I  would  like  to  thank  the  Indian  Banks  Association  and  the  Andhra  Bank  for  inviting  me  to  this 
Conference,  which  has  become  an  annual  feature  of  the  calendar  for  bankers  and  financial  sector 
professionals.  
In view of the theme of the conference, viz., 'Inclusive Growth – A New Challenge', I thought it would 
be appropriate to place financial inclusion within the broad context of economic growth. There is yet 
another motivation for choosing the theme. What is the big change that has taken place in India since 
2004? The Indian growth story has been steadily coming of age and the performance of the Indian 
economy  has  attracted  worldwide attention.  The  Indian  growth  story  is now  mentioned  in  the  same 
breath as that of China. The economy has been averaging a growth rate of more than 8.0 per cent 
during  the  last  three  years.  The  recently  released  numbers  from  CSO  have  placed  the  first  quarter 
growth (April to June, 2006) at 8.9 per cent, more than the overall growth rate of 8.0 per cent reiterated 
recently by the Reserve Bank in its Mid-Term Review.  
On an earlier occasion in this forum, in its earlier avatar as BECON in December 2002, I had noted the 
slow  growth  of  credit  and  taken  to  task  that  audience  of  bankers  as  ‘lazy  bankers’  (Mohan,  2002). 
Fortunately,  you  seem  to  have  taken  this  observation  seriously  and  non-food  credit  growth  from 
2002-03 to 2005-06 averaged 28.8 per cent. This growth shows little sign of abating in the current year 
when it has recorded a growth of over 30.0 percent. The growth in broad money since 2002-03 has 
averaged 16.2 per cent, which during the present year has been of the order of 19.0 per cent. These 
trends  signal  further  that  India  is  on  a  high  economic  growth  path  accompanied  by  financial 
deepening.  
A new concern has emerged in the process: that of financial inclusion. Moreover, the Government of 
India  has  also  expressed  its  explicit  concern  on  the  issue  of  overall  inclusion  in  the  development 
process through its various initiatives such as the Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme, the Bharat 
Nirman  programme,  the  Sarva  Shiksha  Abhiyan,  and  the  like.  A  committee  on  financial  inclusion 
(Chairman: Dr. C. Rangarajan) has also been constituted by the Government of India in June 2006 to 
recommend a strategy to achieve higher financial inclusion in the country.  
Likewise,  enabling  access  to  a  greater  number  of  the  population  to  the  structured  and  organised 
financial system has explicitly been on the agenda of the Reserve Bank since 2004. Unlike several 
central  banks,  which  focus  solely  on  inflation,  many  developed  and  emerging  economies,  including 
ours,  focus  also  on  growth.  There  is  currently  a  clear  perception  that  there  are  a  vast  number  of 
people,  potential  entrepreneurs,  small  enterprises  and  others,  who  are  excluded  from  the  financial 
sector, which leads to their marginalisation and denial of opportunity for them to grow and prosper. 
The  Reserve  Bank  has  therefore  introduced  various  new  measures  to  encourage  the  expansion  of 
financial coverage in the country. Not only is financial inclusion essential because of its implications for 
the welfare of citizens but it needs to be stressed that it has to be an explicit strategy for fostering 
faster  economic  growth  in  a  more  inclusive  fashion.  It  is  in  this  context  that  I  thought  it  would  be 
appropriate  to  place  the  strategy  of  financial  inclusion  in  the  wider context  of  economic  growth and 
financial deepening.  
My ideas on this topic are organised along the following lines. To begin with, I shall dwell upon the 
process of growth and financial deepening in India. This will be followed by definitional aspects and 
some evidence from the experience of other countries, with regard to financial inclusion. Thereafter, 
the  focus  would  be  on  interlinking  the  relevance  of  financial  inclusion  in  our  economy,  which  has 
entered a high growth orbit, with the rural economy. The penultimate section focuses on the role being 
played by the Reserve Bank in this regard. My concluding thoughts would be in the nature of issues 
that have a bearing on financial inclusion.  
BIS Review 113/2006 
 1
Economic growth  
II. 
The growth trend of the Indian economy over the last few years appears to indicate the beginning of a 
new phase of higher growth. From an average growth rate of around 6.0 per cent for a quarter of a 
century, the growth rate has accelerated to 8.1 per cent over the last few years. Along with declining 
population growth, this suggests high growth in per capita income in excess of 6 per cent in recent 
years, and perhaps approaching 7 per cent, which would lead to doubling of per capita income every 
ten years. Most importantly, the current growth process is not a flash in the pan and is exhibiting signs 
of sustainability along with financial stability, notwithstanding the pressures from unforeseen external 
shocks.  
On the savings front, the increasing trend in gross domestic saving as a proportion of GDP witnessed 
since the early 2000s has also continued unabated. The gross domestic savings rate has improved 
from 23.6 per cent of GDP in 2001-02 to 29.1 per cent in 2004-05, led by a turnaround of 4.2 per cent 
in public saving, from a dis-saving of 2.2 per cent of GDP in 2001-02 to a saving of 2.0 per cent in 
2004-05, mainly reflecting the fiscal consolidation process. Household savings continue to grow and 
increased corporate savings reflect their healthy growth in profitability. The encouraging sign of a pick 
up  in  investment  has  also  strengthened  unhindered.  Along  with  the  improvements  in  savings  and 
investment rates, there has also been a marked lowering of inflation from 7.8 per cent in the 1990s to 
4.7  per cent in  recent  years. With such  healthy increases  in savings  and  investment rates financial 
intermediation is assuming increasing importance (Annex Table 1).  
Alongside these improvements there has also been a resurgence of manufacturing activity. There had 
been  noted  stagnation  in  manufacturing  during  1997-2003.  Overall  industrial  recovery  set  in  during 
2002-03 and this has been sustained since then on the back of healthy growth in domestic demand, 
along with that of exports supported by high world economic growth, increasing capacity utilisation, 
augmentation of capacity, and positive business and consumer confidence. But there is little evidence 
of significant growth in manufacturing employment leading to emerging doubts in the inclusive nature 
of this growth. 
The  current  high  industrial  growth  is  reflected  in  the  acceleration  in  growth  of  bank  credit  in  recent 
years. Average growth in non-food credit between 1970 and 2000 had been 16.9 per cent, which had 
been seen as evidence of finance led industrialisation by some (Bell, 2001). In the period of industrial 
slowdown, 1998 to 2002, annual growth in non-food credit had also slowed to 14.5 per cent - leading 
to  my  comment  on  "lazy  banking".  In  recent  years,  during  2002-03  to  2005-06,  this  growth  has 
accelerated significantly to 28.8 per cent, possibly signalling financial deepening of the system. 
Much  of  this  recent  expansion  in  non-food  credit  has  been  fuelled  by  an  increase  in  retail  credit. 
During the same period, 2002-03 to 2005-06 annual growth in retail credit was 46 per cent: its share in 
overall  bank  credit  consequently  increased  from  6.4  per  cent  in  1990-91  to  25.5  per  cent  in  2005-
2006. Earlier, most of bank credit had gone to the industrial corporate sector. Hence this shift to retail 
credit can also be seen as a move toward financial deepening, and one that itself fuels industrial and 
overall economic growth through expansion of greater demand for consumer goods. 
The  high  industrial  growth  is  also  corroborated  by  the  record  of  very  healthy  performance  of  the 
corporate sector, which has recorded unusually high profit growth over the past three years: over 40 
per cent growth in profit after tax for 11 successive quarters from Q3 2002-03 to Q1 2005-06. Although 
this growth has slowed somewhat in the last four quarters, it continues to be high, between 25 and 35 
per cent. Corporate sector savings have grown from 4.4 per cent of GDP in 1999-2002 to 5.3 per cent 
in 2004-05. Hence, the probability of continued high corporate growth in terms of output is made more 
likely by the availability of high retained earnings, burgeoning valuations, and continued productivity 
growth. 
All  these  developments  point  to  overall  financial  deepening  but,  once  again,  one  has  to  ask  the 
question whether such performance extends to small and medium enterprises also and, whether there 
has  also  been  extension  of  financial  intermediation  for  such  enterprises,  raising  issues  of  financial 
inclusion. 
The high industrial and credit growth of recent years has also been supported by high trade growth in 
both merchandise goods and services. Merchandise exports have grown from 5.8 per cent of GDP in 
1990-91 to about 13.1 per cent in 2005-06; and gross invisible receipts have grown from 2.4 per cent 
to  11.5  per  cent  of  GDP.  If  we  take  gross  trade,  the  sum  of  both  current  account  receipts  and 
payments, as a proportion of GDP as an index of the openness of the economy, this has increased 
from 19.2 per cent in 1990-91 to 49.5 per cent in 2005-06. Since all such receipts and payments pass 
2 
 BIS Review 113/2006
through  the  banking  system,  this  increasing  openness  of  the  economy  has  also  added  to  financial 
deepening, while aiding the acceleration in economic growth (Annex Table 2). 
The  high  credit  growth  witnessed  in  recent  years  has,  however,  not  been  matched  by  adequate 
deposit growth. The growth in deposits since 2001-02 has been far lower than that required to support 
overall  credit  expansion  (Graph  1).  Banks  have  been  financing  much  of  the  incremental  credit 
expansion by unwinding their surplus investments in government securities. What deposit growth that 
has been observed is, moreover, concentrated in the larger cities: presumably it has been helped by 
the high corporate profitability leading to high corporate cash balances. The trend therefore indicates 
that  while  banks  may  have  been  proactive  in  credit deployment,  their  focus  on  deposit  mobilisation 
may have been less than adequate. The indication that deposit growth in non metro areas has been 
slow could also mean that financial inclusion may have suffered. We also need to understand that if 
deposit growth does not match credit growth, excess demand would inevitably lead to increases in real 
interest rates leading to further possibility of financial exclusion. 
Graph 1: Growth in aggregate deposits and credit 
Overall, it is clear from the recent performance of the economy and that of the financial sector that a 
good deal of financial sector growth has accompanied the recent acceleration of economic growth. We 
also observe that a good part of credit growth has gone towards financing consumption and housing 
which  suggests  widening  of  the  financial  system.  But  deposit  growth  has  been  slow,  particularly 
outside metro areas, leading to questions concerning financial deepening and inclusion.  
 Financial deepening 
III. 
There is a general consensus among economists that financial development spurs economic growth. 
Theoretically,  financial  development  creates  enabling  conditions  for  growth  through  either  a  supply-
leading  (financial  development  spurs  growth)  or  a  demand-following  (growth  generates  demand  for 
financial products) channel. A large body of empirical research supports the view that development of 
the financial system contributes to economic growth (Rajan and Zingales, 2003). Empirical evidence 
consistently  emphasises  the  nexus  between  finance  and  growth,  though  the  issue  of  direction  of 
causality  is  more  difficult  to  determine.  At  the  cross-country  level,  evidence  indicates  that  various 
measures of financial development (including assets of the financial intermediaries, liquid liabilities of 
financial  institutions,  domestic  credit  to  private  sector,  stock  and  bond  market  capitalisation)  are 
robustly and positively related to economic growth (King and Levine, 1993; Levine and Zervos, 1998). 
Other  studies  establish  a  positive  relationship  between  financial  development  and  growth  at  the 
industry level (Rajan and Zingales, 1998). Even the recent endogenous growth literature, building on 
'learning by doing' processes, assigns a special role to finance (Aghion and Hewitt, 1998 and 2005).  
BIS Review 113/2006 
 3
A developed financial system broadens access to funds; conversely, in an underdeveloped financial 
system, access to funds is limited and people are constrained by the availability of their own funds and 
have to resort to high cost informal sources such as money lenders. Lower the availability of funds and 
higher their cost, fewer would be the economic activities that can be financed and hence lower the 
resulting economic growth. 
Some  of  the  recent  concerns on  financial  inclusion  have  emanated  from  the results  of  the  All-India 
Debt and Investment Survey (AIDIS), 2002. Over a period of 40 years, the share of non-institutional 
sources of credit in sources of credit for cultivator households had declined sharply from about 93 per 
cent in 1951 to about 30 per cent in 1991, with the share of money lenders having declined from 69.7 
per cent to 17.5 per cent. In 2002, the AIDIS revealed, however, that the share of money lenders had 
again increased to 27 per cent, while that of non-institutional sources overall rose to 39 per cent (Table 
1).  In  other  words,  notwithstanding  the  outreach  of  banking,  the  formal  credit  system  has  not  been 
able to adequately penetrate the informal financial markets; rather it seems to have shrunk in some 
respects in recent years. 
Coincidentally,  it  is  also  true  that  the  rate  of  agricultural  growth  during  the  last  decade  has  slowed 
down  and  it  is  particularly  striking  in  respect  of  foodgrains  production.  Since  the  green  revolution, 
banks have been mainly focused on financing crop loans connected largely with food grains. There is, 
therefore,  reason  to  believe  that  financial  exclusion  may  actually  have  increased  in  the  rural  areas 
over the last 10-15 years. 
 One  of  the  key  features  of  financial  deepening  is  that  it  accelerates  economic  growth  through  the 
expansion  of  access  to  those  who  do  not  have  adequate  finance  themselves.  Typically,  in  an 
underdeveloped  financial  system,  it  is  the  incumbents  who  have  better  access  to  financial  services 
through  relationship  banking.  Moreover,  incumbents  also  finance  their  growth  through  internal 
resource  generation.  Thus,  in  an  underdeveloped  financial  system,  growth  is  constrained  to  the 
expansion potential of incumbents. In mature financial systems on the other hand, financial institutions 
develop appraisal techniques, and information gathering and sharing mechanisms, which then enable 
banks to even finance those activities or firms that are at the margin, thereby leading to their growth-
inducing productive activities in addition to the incumbents. It is this availability of external finance to 
budding  entrepreneurs  and  small  firms  that  enables  new  entry,  while  also  providing  competition  to 
incumbents and consequently encouraging entrepreneurship and productivity. 
What  has  been  the  case  in  India?  As  I  mentioned  earlier,  the  incredible  corporate  profit  growth,  in 
excess of 40 per cent for almost three years consecutively, would suggest that there should have been 
massive new entry to whittle down profitability to more moderate levels. This, however, does not seem 
to be the case on the ground yet with corporate profitability still growing at an annual rate of around 35 
per cent during April-June 2006. That entry of new firms has possibly been limited is also indicated by 
the fact that among the different categories of credit growth, lending to SMEs has been the lowest, 
though there are some signs of higher growth in recent months. 
4 
 BIS Review 113/2006
There are, however, other signs of financial deepening (Mohan, 2004). According to one indicator of 
financial deepening, the ratio of bank assets to GDP, financial depth in India was among the lowest in 
the world (Barth, Caprio and Levine, 2001). Comparable cross-country data indicated that in 2001, this 
ratio, at 48 per cent for India, was lower than those prevalent in Asian economies such as Indonesia 
(101 per cent), Korea (98 per cent), Philippines (91 per cent), Malaysia (166 per cent) and much lower 
than developed economies, such as UK (311 per cent), France (147 per cent) and Germany (313 per 
cent). In India, while the ratio of bank assets to GDP has increased significantly to a shade over 80 per 
cent in 2005-06 – obviously a consequence of the high credit growth in recent years - it is still lower 
than  other  emerging  countries.  In  absolute  terms,  the  annual  expansion  in  non-food  credit  has 
increased  from  Rs.64,302  crore  in  2001-02  to  Rs.3,54,193  crore  in  2005-06,  while  retail  credit  has 
increased  from  around  Rs.16,000  crore  to  Rs.1,09,129  crore.  So,  it  needs  to  be  recognised  that 
financial deepening has been taking place on an accelerated pace on a macro basis in recent years, 
that banking productivity has improved significantly, and that bankers have clearly been very busy. 
Whereas banks have clearly taken to heart my remarks on "lazy banking" on the asset creation side, 
they  have  not  matched  this  creditable  performance  on  the  liability  side.  Dare  I  repeat  the  same 
expression!  
An  important  question  that  arises  logically  is:  has  commensurate  financial  deepening  been  taking 
place at the micro-level? There is sufficient anecdotal evidence to suggest that the poor or less well-off 
people find it difficult to open a bank account in any area – rural, urban or semi-urban. Thus, not only 
is the common individual deprived of access to banks for generating savings or availing credit, but so 
is the financial system of resources commensurate with the burgeoning growth of incomes all over the 
country. It is this very feature that the process of financial inclusion seeks to address. This is an aspect 
to which I turn next.  
Financial inclusion 
IV. 
I  begin  by  looking  at  exactly  the  opposite  of  financial  inclusion,  i.e.,  financial  exclusion.  Broadly 
defined,  financial  exclusion  signifies  the  lack  of  access  by  certain  segments  of  the  society  to 
appropriate,  low-cost,  fair  and  safe  financial  products  and  services  from  mainstream  providers. 
Financial  exclusion  is  thus  a  key  policy  concern,  because  the  options  for  operating  a  household 
budget,  or  a  micro/small  enterprise,  without  mainstream  financial  services  can  often  be  expensive. 
This  process  becomes  self-reinforcing  and  can  often  be  an  important  factor  in  social  exclusion, 
especially for communities with limited access to financial products, particularly in rural areas.  
Two  major  factors  have  often  been  cited  as  the  consequences  of  financial  exclusion.  First,  it 
complicates day-to-day cash flow management - being financially excluded means households, and 
micro and small enterprises deal entirely in cash and are susceptible to irregular cash flows. Second, 
lack of financial planning and security in the absence of access to bank accounts and other saving 
opportunities for people in the unorganised sector limit their options for providing for themselves for 
their old age. From the macroeconomic standpoint, being without formal savings can be problematic in 
two respects. First, people who save by informal means rarely benefit from the interest rate and tax 
advantages that people using formal methods of savings enjoy. Second, informal saving channels are 
much less secure than formal saving facilities. Those who can afford it least suffer the highest risk. 
The resultant lack of savings and saving avenues means recourse to non-formal lenders, like money 
lenders. This, in turn, could lead to two adverse consequences – a) exposure to higher interest rates 
charged by formal lenders; and b) the inability of customers to service the loans or to repay them. As 
loans  from  non-formal  lenders  are  often  secured  against  the  borrower’s  property,  this  raises  the 
problem  of  inter-linkage  between  two  apparently  separate  markets.  Judged  in  this  specific  context, 
financial exclusion is a serious concern among low-income households, mainly located in rural areas. 
Once  access  to  financial  institutions  improves,  inclusion  affords  several  benefits  to  the  consumer, 
regulator and the economy alike. Establishment of an account relationship can pave the way for the 
customer to avail the benefits of a variety of financial products, which are not only standardised, but 
are  also  provided  by  institutions  that  are  regulated  and  supervised  by  credible  regulators,  and  are 
hence safer. The bank accounts can also be used for multiple purposes, such as, making small value 
remittances at low cost and making purchases on credit. Furthermore, the regulator benefits, as the 
audit  trail  is  available  and  transactions  are  conducted  transparently  in  a  medium  that  can  be 
monitored. The economy benefits, as greater financial resources become transparently available for 
efficient intermediation and allocation, for uses that have the highest returns. In other words, the single 
BIS Review 113/2006 
 5
gateway of a banking account can be used for several purposes and represents a beneficial situation 
for all the economic units in the country.  
In addition, I would like to flag an important perspective. Improvements in rural infrastructure in terms 
of  availability  of  electricity,  improvement  in  connectivity  through  provision  of  rural  roads  and 
telecommunications,  and  construction  of  warehouses,  are  expected  to  lead  to  better  overall  supply 
chain management, enhance productivity of physical resources in the rural areas and greater addition 
in agriculture. These developments would lead to much greater demand for banking activity in rural 
areas. The two-fold implications of these developments for the banking sector are apparent. First, with 
higher financing needs of such new activities vis-a-vis traditional ones, the overall financing intensity of 
agriculture  is  likely  to  experience  a  manifold  rise.  Second,  along  with  growth  in  rural  infrastructure, 
there is also likely to be an increase in rural non-farm activities, such as repair activities, education, 
housing, restaurants and medical services. These activities, both traditional and emerging ventures, 
would be available for financing by the banking sector. 
Thus,  as  the  economy  begins  to  grow  rapidly,  the  rate  of  financial  intermediation  is  expected  to 
increase  further.  In  other words,  the  banking system  will  be  expected  to  increasingly provide  larger 
quantum  of  funds  to  existing  and  emerging  enterprises.  And  without  adequate  deposit  growth, 
however, credit expansion might not be sustainable over the medium-term, without putting immense 
pressure on real interest rates and impacting the overall stability of the financial system. 
International experience 
Typically, countries with low levels of income inequality tend to have lower levels of financial exclusion, 
while high levels of exclusion are associated with the least equal ones. In Sweden, for example, lower 
than two per cent of adults did not have an account in 2000 and in Germany, the figure was around 
three per cent (Kempson, 2006). In comparison, less than four per cent of adults in Canada and five 
per  cent  in  Belgium,  lacked  a  bank  account  (Buckland  et  al,  2005).  Countries  with  high  levels  of 
inequality record higher levels of banking exclusion. To illustrate, in Portugal, about 17 per cent of the 
adult population had no account of any kind in 2000 (Kempson, 2006). 
The  policy  responses  to  such  exclusion  have  been  varied  (Box  1).  In  Sweden,  for  example,  banks 
cannot refuse to open a saving or deposit account under Section 2 of the Banking Business Act of 
1987; in France, Article 58 of the Banking Act, 1984 recognised the principle of the right to a bank 
account; in the US, federal government introduced the Community Reinvestment Act in 1997, partly in 
response  to  concerns  about  bank  branch  closures  in  low-income  neighbourhoods.  Under  this 
legislation,  federal  bank  regulatory  agencies  rate  banks  on  their  efforts  to  serve  low-income 
communities. These early legislations were designed to ensure access to a deposit account but did 
not  spell out  the  nature  of  banking services  that should  be  on  offer.  Refinements  in  this  area  have 
actually  taken  place  in  the  latter  half  of  the  1990s,  resulting  partly  from  a  wider  concern  regarding 
social  exclusion  (Caskey  et  al,  2006,  Kempson  et  al,  2000).  It  may,  thus,  be  noted  that  financial 
inclusion is a concern even in developed countries and legislative or regulatory measure to achieve it 
are a common feature.  
6 
 BIS Review 113/2006
Present situation in India 
I would like to share with you certain data that highlight my concern on financial exclusion. The share 
of  deposits  and  credit  in  rural  and  semi-urban  areas  is  on  the  decline.  In  contrast,  the  share  in 
metropolitan  areas  is  rising.  The  share  of  credit  is  lower  than  that  of  deposits  in  all  regions  except 
metropolitan, implying that resources get intermediated into metropolitan areas (Table 2). This in itself 
may not necessarily be undesirable or unexpected if resources are being intermediated to their best 
uses. However, they do provide some indication for concern and for the need for more investigation.  
 BIS Review 113/2006 
 7
 
The total number of saving accounts, considered to be a better indicator of banking penetration than 
other deposit accounts, as per cent of number of households, was 137 in rural areas and 244 in the 
urban areas on the eve of reforms in 1991. By 2005, despite the reforms, the differential continues to 
be  similar.  In  the  case  of  credit  accounts,  the  situation  has  deteriorated  for  rural  households  while 
showing  significant  improvement  in  the  urban  areas  (Table  3),  corroborating  the  very  significant 
increase in retail credit. 
  Total deposits, as per cent of GDP, increased from 32.2 in 1991 to 47.1 in 2005 in rural areas and 
from 37.3 to 61.2 in urban areas. Similarly, credit extended, as per cent of GDP, increased from 17.3 
to 22.3 in rural and from 24.8 to 45.0 in urban areas (Table 4). In terms of banking penetration, the 
number of deposit and credit accounts of scheduled commercial banks as per cent of adult population 
are significantly lower in the rural areas as compared with the urban areas (Table 5).  
8 
 BIS Review 113/2006
  Even  in  terms  of  financial  widening,  the  scope  for  improvement  remains.  In  terms  of  regional 
dis-aggregation  since  1991,  population  per  bank  office  has  increased  in  rural  areas  from  13,462  in 
1991 to 16,650 in 2005 and, as expected, declined in the urban areas from 14,484 to 13,619 over the 
period.  Three  regions,  North-Eastern,  East  and  Central  have  higher  population  per  office  than  the 
all-India  average  and  it  has  increased  significantly  in  the  rural  areas  in  2005  over  1991  (Table  6). 
Consequently, compared to an all-India average of 29.9 savings accounts per 100 persons in 1991, 
virtually all of the states in the Eastern and North-Eastern regions and several pockets in the Central 
region had figures lower than this average. In the rural areas, Northern and Southern region are above 
the  all-India  average  while  in  the  urban  areas,  Northern  and  Western  region  dominate.  In  terms  of 
BIS Review 113/2006 
 9
number  of  credit  accounts  per  100  persons,  the  Southern  States,  both  in  rural  and  urban  areas 
perform above the all-India average.  
Thus, the apparent implication emerging from the above data reveals that the rural areas are not being 
served  adequately  by  banks.  This  suggests  that  banks  need  to  make  efforts  to  mobilise  resources 
from the rural sector, where as discussed earlier, scope for increase in business is emerging. Further, 
if the banks are to balance their overall deposit mobilisation and credit extension, as generally robust 
banking  practice  would  imply,  then  they  would  need  to  devise  imaginative  ways  to  mop  up  the 
resources, particularly in rural areas.  
 Rural economy - growth, production patterns and credit extension 
V.  
It is instructive to examine the rural economy in a bit more detail. Although the share of agriculture in 
overall GDP has declined from around 35.8 per cent in 1980-81 to less than 19.9 per cent at present, 
the fall in the proportion of population dependent on the sector has been limited (Table 7). In other 
words,  a  majority  of  the  workforce  is  still  dependent  on  agriculture,  while  the  GDP  growth  due  to 
agriculture is marginally above the rate of growth of the population, in contrast to a strong growth rate 
in the non-agriculture sector. 
10 
 BIS Review 113/2006
  The slowdown in agriculture in recent years is characterised by the stagnation in domestic production 
in case of commodities like wheat, sugar and pulses. There has been a marked deceleration in the 
share of cereals in total production (agriculture and allied) from 31.7 per cent in 1960-61 to 24.1 per 
cent  in  2004-05  (Table  8).  On  the  other  hand,  the  share  of  other  segments  such  as  livestock  and 
fishing, and non-cereals are recording a significant increase. There has been a silent revolution over 
the last 20 years, unnoticed by researchers and policy makers alike. The value of output of non cereal 
vegetarian food and of non-vegetarian food (livestock and fishing) is each higher than that of cereals. 
In principle, these activities should be more credit intensive. It is, therefore, of utmost importance that 
our  image  of  what  is  agriculture,  changes  from  that  of  simple  rice  and  wheat  to  a  more  complex 
structure,  so  that  policy  makers  can  assign  due  importance  to  the  sector  and  respond  accordingly 
(Mohan, 2006). 
Apart from non-cereal food production, service and manufacturing activities have also been growing 
faster  in  rural  areas.  There  are  new  supply  chain  activities:  sorting,  grading,  storage,  cold  storage, 
transportation, food processing, and the like. All are in the cash economy and potentially in need of 
credit. In fact, it is estimated that agriculture now accounts for less than half of rural GDP: an epochal 
change  that  took  place  some  time  in  the  late  1990s.  So  "rural"  can  no  longer  be  equated  with 
agriculture.  The  consequence  is  that  rural  per  capita  income  has  probably  been  growing  at  a  rate 
similar to that of urban per capital income. 
There is also good evidence (NCAER) of the dramatic changes in consumption and income growth 
and  distribution  patterns  in  the  rural  economy.  As  classified  consistently  by  NCAER,  keeping  real 
income cut offs constant, the proportion of households classified as "low income" in rural areas has 
fallen from about two thirds in the early 1990s to only about a quarter now. At the same time, those 
classified as middle income households have risen from a third to almost 70 per cent now (NCAER, 
2003). Hence, there should have been a surge in financial savings in rural areas: but we do not see 
evidence of this in the number or proportion of households that have bank accounts. 
The  banking  system  needs  to  adjust  to  the  realities  in  the  rural  sector.  There  is  evidence  they  are 
finding it difficult. As the ratio of agricultural GDP to total GDP declines, agricultural credit to total GDP 
BIS Review 113/2006 
 11
would also decline. However, this is not observed from the data (Table 9). In recent years a concern 
over the falling share of agricultural credit as a proportion of total credit has been expressed. The data 
reveal that agriculture credit as a ratio of total credit has also been rising in the recent years but is still 
below the level of 1970s. 
The  existing  agricultural  credit  system,  as  indicated  earlier,  is  geared  to  the  needs  of  food  grain 
production. It is gratifying to note that agriculture credit has not fallen as a proportion of agricultural 
GDP  despite  the  share  of  food  grain  production  declining  as  a  proportion  of  total  agricultural 
production. In fact, according to available data, agricultural credit has been rising in recent years as a 
share of both the value of inputs and the value of outputs (Table 10).  
Moreover, long-term credit as a share of private investment has also been rising in the 1990s (Table 
11). The balance of evidence also suggests that non-performing loans (NPLs) in agriculture are not 
higher  than  in  other  sectors,  more  specifically  those  in  small-scale  industries  (SSIs).  To  illustrate, 
NPLs in agriculture - both for public as well as private banks – were lower than those in the SSIs as at 
end-March 2005 (Mohan, 2006).  
  12 
 BIS Review 113/2006
In  addition  to  the  above  data  analysis,  I  must  mention  that  non-institutional  agricultural  credit  has 
declined from over 92.7 per cent in 1950s to 38.9 per cent in 2002. Thus, nationalisation of banks and 
their increased geographical expansion into rural areas certainly made a difference but there is scope 
for improvement. 
The rising economic activity in rural areas driven by the growth of newer activities such as horticulture, 
floriculture,  organic  farming,  genetic  engineering,  food  processing  and  packaging  –  all  of  which  are 
cash intensive - would necessitate increased banking facilities. In view of the evidence of a pick-up in 
consumer financing in rural areas, there is also a need to streamline the supply chain to deliver credit 
at  the  lowest  cost  to  the  ultimate  user  in  the  rural  areas,  to  the  benefit  of  both  the  bank  and  the 
borrower. And, as is the case for most developing countries, bank credit will be the key driver towards 
financing emerging activities.  
 Strategy for bank credit 
VI.  
There  has  been  a  long  history  of  concern  regarding  agricultural  credit.  The  increase  in  share  of 
institutional  credit  to  agriculture  has  been  rather  slow.  It  has  clearly  been  found  difficult  to  extend 
institutional credit in rural areas. Some of the important reasons pertained to risk perception, costs of 
its assessment and management, lack of rural infrastructure, and vast geographical spread of the rural 
areas with more than half a million villages, some sparsely populated. 
Lending to small borrowers dispersed over vast expenses of geographical areas naturally involve high 
transaction  costs.  The  strategy  that  evolved  after  considerable  experimentation  was  to  provide  for 
directed credit  to  priority  sectors  that  have  primarily  included  agriculture  and small scale  industries. 
This  was  also  the  key  reason  for  nationalisation  of  banks.  That  this  strategy  has  been  relatively 
successful is borne out by the data (Table 1), but it may have reached its limit, as also demonstrated 
by the deterioration in the reach of formal credit in the 1990s. 
The key issue now is how to mainstream rural credit from institutional sources so as to achieve wider 
coverage,  expand  financial  inclusion  and  promote  economic  growth.  Increasingly,  banks  and  other 
financial intermediaries have to see the extension of rural credit as a business opportunity and not as 
an obligation to do forced directed lending. 
One strategy that is achieving great popularity and wide acceptance is that of micro finance, as best 
exemplified  by  the  success  of  the  Bangladesh  Grameen  Bank,  which  has  now  also  achieved  even 
greater recognition through the award of the Nobel Peace Prize to Mohammad Yunus. But most micro 
finance is not only for crops, but for other lending, in both rural and urban areas. The main issue is that 
of reducing transaction costs for both the lender and the borrower. 
For  banks,  micro  finance  agencies  and  other  financial  intermediaries  to  look  at  rural  lending  as 
business opportunities, much more information generation has to be done so that they recognise and 
understand  the  many  different  activities  that  take  place  in  the  rural  economy  in  addition  to  crop 
agriculture. Non cereal foods, non-food agriculture, service activities, construction and housing, rural 
retail activities, will all increasing levels of formal financing channels that are easy to access. This will 
need innovation in risk assessment, reduction in transaction costs, the search for new credit channels, 
and the use of cheaper information technology for delivery and collection systems. 
The  task  of  policy-makers  in  designing  an  appropriate  package  of  measures  becomes  more 
challenging considering the fact that the new growth areas of agriculture are characterised by a high 
BIS Review 113/2006 
 13
degree  of  heterogeneity,  unlike  in  the  case  of  traditional  crops  such  as  rice  and  wheat.  There  is  a 
multiplicity  of  varieties  that  can  be  produced  in  each  of  these  product  groups;  production  is  often 
regionally  concentrated;  the  production  and  marketing  conditions  differ  significantly;  and  the  input 
requirements are equally heterogeneous. Hence, policies and programmes that are to be attuned to 
support  higher  productivity  and  production  in  these  areas  need  to  be  much  more  regionally 
disaggregated  and  knowledge  intensive.  A  key  difference  in  approach  would  have  to  be  the  much 
greater involvement of region-specific market participants, and of private sector suppliers in all these 
activities, and credit suppliers ranging from public sector banks, co-operative banks, the new private 
sector banks and micro-credit suppliers, especially self-help groups. 
To  finance  all  these  new  activities,  which  will  aid  and  accelerate  economic  growth  tremendously, 
banks will clearly need to step up their efforts in generating deposits as well from the many currently 
underserved households and small businesses.  
Role of RBI 
VII.  
Historically,  the  Reserve  Bank  and  the  Government  of  India  have  been  making  efforts  to  increase 
banking  penetration  in  the  country.  Some  of  these  measures  include  the  creation  of  State  Bank  of 
India in 1955; nationalisation of commercial banks in 1969 and 1980; initiating the Lead Bank Scheme 
in 1970; establishing regional rural banks (RRBs) in 1975; introducing a Self-help Group (SHG)-Bank 
Linkage Programme in 1992 and formulating the Kisan Credit Card scheme in 2001. Notwithstanding 
these improvements, financial inclusion found a place in policy documents only very recently. In the 
Annual Policy of the Reserve Bank for 2004-05, the Governor, Dr. Reddy observed and I quote – 
There has been expansion, greater competition and diversification of ownership of banks leading to 
both enhanced efficiency and systemic resilience in the banking sector. However, there are legitimate 
concerns in regard to the banking practices that tend to exclude rather than attract vast sections of 
population, in particular pensioners, self-employed and those employed in unorganised sector. While 
commercial  considerations  are  no  doubt  important,  the  banks  have  been  bestowed  with  several 
privileges, especially of seeking public deposits on a highly leveraged basis, and consequently they 
should be obliged to provide banking services to all segments of the population, on equitable basis. 
Pursuant  to  this,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  undertaken  a  number  of  measures  with  the  objective  of 
attracting  the  financially  excluded  population  into  the  structured  financial  system.  These  measures, 
mainly, are in the nature of code of ethics and voluntary charters to promote greater financial access 
(Box 2).  
14 
 BIS Review 113/2006
 in  banks, 
including  constitution  of  customer  service  centers.  Based  on 
 
The  Reserve  Bank  has  also  been  periodically  issuing  guidelines  on  public  grievance  redressal 
mechanism 
the 
recommendations  of  a  Committee  on  Procedures  and  Performance  Audit  of  Public  Services  for 
ensuring improvements in quality of service rendered, banks were advised to constitute a Customer 
Service Committee of the Board. In the Reserve Bank, the Customer Service Department has recently 
been constituted to, inter alia, serve as the interface between customers and banks.  
On a broader plane, the Reserve Bank has been adopting a two-pronged strategy to generate greater 
awareness and expand the reach of banking services – which can be termed as empowerment and 
protection.  As  regards  the  former,  financial  inclusion  is  the  first  stage  of  the  process.  This  is 
strengthened by inculcating awareness among the masses through financial education. Concurrently, 
an  advisory  mechanism  in  the  form  of  credit  counseling  is  being  encouraged  to  help  distressed 
borrowers and bring them within the fold of formal finance. As regards protection, a Banking Codes 
and  Standards  Board  of  India  has  been  established  recently  to  ensure  a  comprehensive  code  of 
conduct  for  minimum  standards  of  banking  services  to  be  offered  by  banks.  The  revised  Banking 
Ombudsman Scheme has been put in place to redress deficiencies in customer service by banks.  
BIS Review 113/2006 
 15
Concluding remarks 
VIII.  
The  economy  is  presently  in  a  phase  of  rapidly  rising  incomes,  rural  and  urban,  arising  from  an 
expansion of extant economic activities as well as the creation of new activities. Corporate profitability 
has exhibited sustainable trends and consumer incomes are increasing rapidly, riding on the growth 
momentum. All of these developments suggest that the demand for financial services, both for savings 
as well as production purposes, will be greater than has been the case in the past, and there will be 
many new entrants in need of financial services who have not hitherto been served. At present our 
financial depth is much lower than that of other Asian countries, though it has picked up in the recent 
past.  While  there  is  evidence  of  an  increase  in  financial  deepening,  particularly  during  the  present 
decade,  the  increase  in  the  breadth  and  coverage  of  formal  finance  has  been  less  than  adequate. 
Deepening the financial system and widening its reach is crucial for both accelerating growth and for 
equitable distribution, given the present stage of development of our country.  
There has been a burst of entrepreneurship across the country, spanning rural, semi-urban and urban 
areas. This has to be nurtured and financed. It is only through growth of enterprises across all sizes 
that competition will be fostered. A small entrepreneur today will be a big entrepreneur tomorrow, and 
might well become a multinational enterprise eventually if given the comfort of financial support. But 
we also have to understand that there will be failures as well as successes. Banks will therefore have 
to tone up their risk assessment and risk management capacities, and provide for these failures as 
part  of  their  risk  management.  Despite  the  risk,  financing  of  first  time  entrepreneurs  is  a  must  for 
financial inclusion and growth. 
The  Parliament  passed  the  Credit  Information  Bureau  Act  last  year  and  the  guidelines  for  its 
implementation  will  be  released  shortly.  This  should  enable,  over  time,  the  availability  of  credit 
histories of both individuals and small businesses, which will help significantly in reducing transactions 
and information costs for banks. It will also help in spreading the credit culture among borrowers. It 
should help banks greatly in assessing and managing risk at low cost. 
As poverty levels decline and households have greater levels of discretionary incomes, they will be 
first time financial savers. They will, therefore, need to have easy access to formal financial systems to 
get into the banking habit. Banks will need to innovate and devise newer methods of including such 
customers  into  their  fold.  The  importance  of  'no-frills'  account  and  expanding  the  range  of  identity 
documents that is acceptable to open an account without sacrificing objectivity of the process in this 
milieu can never be over-emphasised. Banks will need to go to their customers, rather than the other 
way around. 
The micro-credit and the Self Help Group movements are in their infancy but are gathering force. More 
innovation in the form of business facilitators and correspondents will be needed for banks to increase 
their  outreach  for  banks  to  ensure  financial  inclusion.  New  entrants  to  the  banking  system  need 
households at their doorstep.  
To conclude, I wish to stress that with increasing liberalisation and higher economic growth, the role of 
banking sector is poised to increase in the financing pattern of economic activities within the country. 
To meet the growing credit demand, the banks need to mobilise resources from a wider deposit base 
and  extend  credit 
increasing 
commercialisation  of  agriculture  and  rural  activities  should  generate  greener  pastures,  and  banks 
should  examine  the  benefits  of  increasing  penetration  therein.  Financial  inclusion  will  strengthen 
financial  deepening  and  provide  resources  to  the  banks  to  expand  credit  delivery.  Thus,  financial 
inclusion  will  lead  to  financial  development  in  our  country  which  will  help  to  accelerate  economic 
growth.  
Thank you. 
financed  by  banks.  The 
to  activities  hitherto  not 
trend  of 
References 
Aghion, P., and P. Howitt (1998): Endogenous Growth Theory, MIT Press.  
Aghion, P., and P. Howitt (2005): Appropriate Growth Policy: A Unifying Framework, The 2005 Joseph 
Schumpeter Lecture, European Economic Association, Amsterdam. 
Barth, J., G. Caprio and R. Levine (2001): The Regulation and Supervision of Banks around the World: 
A New Database, World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 2588. Washington DC.  
16 
 BIS Review 113/2006
Bell,  C.  (2001):  'Post-independence  India:  A  Case  of  Finance-led  Industrialisation',  Journal  of 
Development Economics 65, 153-75.  
Buckland, J., and B. Guenther (2005): 'There Are No Banks Here, Financial and Insurance Exclusion 
in Winnipeg’ North End', Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada (September). 
Caskey, J. P., C. R. Duran, C. R. and T. M. Solo (2006): 'The Urban Unbanked in Mexico and the 
United States', World Bank Policy research Wprking Paper 3835. 
Connolly,  C.,  and  K.Hajaj  (2001):  'Financial  Services  and  Social  Exclusion',  Financial  Services 
Consumer Policy Center, University of New South Wales. 
Government of India: Economic Survey (various years), Government of India New Delhi.  
HM Treasury (1999): Access to Financial services. London: HM Treasury. 
Kempson, E. (2006): 'Policy Level Response to Financial Exclusion in Developed Economies: Lessons 
for Developing Countries', paper presented at the conference, Access to Finance: Building Inclusive 
Financial Systems, World Bank, Washington, D.C. 
Kempson,  E.,  J.  Caskey,  C.  Whyley  and  S.  Collard  (2000):  In  or  Out?  London:  Financial  Services 
Authority. 
King, R.G. and R. Levine (1993): Finance and Growth: Schumpeter might be right, Quarterly Journal 
of Economics 108, 717-37. 
Levine, R. and S. Zervos (1998): Stock Markets, Banks and Economic Growth, American Economic 
Review 88, 537-58. 
Mohan,  R.  (2002):  'Transforming  Indian  Banking:  In  Search  of  a  Better  Tomorrow',  RBI  Bulletin 
(January). 
Mohan, R. (2004): 'Financial Sector Reforms in India: Policies and Performance Analysis', RBI Bulletin 
(October). 
Mohan,  R.  (2006):  'Agricultural  Credit  in  India:  Status,  Issues  and  Future  Agenda',  Economic  and 
Political Weekly (March), pp.1013-23.  
NCAER (2003): India market Demographics Report 2002, New Delhi: NCAER. 
Rajan, R.G. and L. Zingales (1998): 'Financial Dependence and Growth', American Economic Review 
88, 559-86. 
Rajan, R.G. and L. Zingales (2003): Saving Capitalism from Capitalists, Crown Business, New York. 
Reserve Bank of India (2004): Report of the Advisory Committee on Flow of Credit to Agriculture and 
Related Activities from Banking System (Chairman: V. S. Vyas). RBI, Mumbai.  
 
BIS Review 113/2006 
 17
  18 
 BIS Review 113/2006
