Toshihiko Fukui: Recent developments in economic activity in Japan 
Summary  of  a  speech  by  Mr  Toshihiko  Fukui,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  a  meeting  with 
business leaders, Osaka, 27 November 2006. 
 Today I will explain the Bank of Japan's view regarding recent developments in economic activity and 
prices and the basic thinking behind its conduct of monetary policy. In addition, I will touch upon the 
issues facing Japan's financial system.  
Introduction 
Today I will explain the Bank of Japan's view regarding recent developments in economic activity and 
prices and the basic thinking behind its conduct of monetary policy. In addition, I will touch upon the 
issues facing Japan's financial system.  
The current situation and the outlook for economic activity and prices 
I. 
Japan's economy has been expanding moderately. The current phase of economic recovery began in 
January  2002.  By  the  end  of  November,  the  economy  will  have  experienced  a  long  economic 
expansion that has lasted for four years and ten months. This sustained period of economic expansion 
is likely to continue. 
Recent economic indicators have shown mixed developments. For example, while the results of the 
Family Income and Expenditure Survey and machinery orders were weak, the preliminary estimate of 
real  GDP  growth  turned  out  to  exceed  market  expectations,  recording  2.0  percent  in  the  July-
September  quarter  on  an  annualized  quarter-on-quarter  basis.  These  mixed  results  seem  to  have 
introduced  some  volatility  into  market  participants'  view  of  the  current  economic  situation.  The 
important  point  at  this  juncture  is  to  examine  whether  these  indicators  as  a  whole  suggest  any 
changes in the fundamental mechanisms underlying economic activity and prices. 
In the latest Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices (the Outlook Report), which was released at the 
end of October, the Bank made public its projection for the next two years or so. The Bank projected 
that the economy was likely to experience a sustained period of expansion with domestic and external 
demand increasing and the positive influence of the strength in the corporate sector feeding through 
into the household sector. Although economic indicators have shown mixed developments since the 
Bank released its projection, the Bank considers that they do not suggest a change in the mechanisms 
underlying the economy. The Bank will continue to confirm this by carefully assessing various relevant 
economic indicators as well as microeconomic information. 
Let me touch upon a few important factors in this regard. The first factor is developments in overseas 
economies, especially the U.S. economy. The pace of U.S. economic growth has been decelerating 
recently due mainly to the decrease in housing investment. The advance estimates of real GDP for the 
July-September  quarter  increased  at  an  annual  rate  of  1.6  percent  on  a  quarter-on-quarter  basis. 
Business fixed investment has continued to increase against the background of high corporate profits, 
and  the  deceleration  in  the  growth  of  private  consumption  has  been  moderate  supported  by  the 
increase in household income and the drop in gasoline prices. Therefore, the U.S. economy is likely to 
realize a soft landing and to move toward sustainable growth. However, it is important to continue to 
pay  attention  to  the  extent  of  adjustment  in  housing  prices  and  whether  this  affects  private 
consumption,  as  these  factors  could  impact  on  production  and  exports  in  Japanese  industries,  for 
example, in the IT-related industry. Upside risks should also be watched closely, such as the risk of 
inflation expectations rising in the U.S. economy, given that the rate of resource utilization is high. 
Taking a look at the global economy as a whole, the Chinese economy continues to expand strongly, 
and in the euro area, the momentum of economic recovery is becoming more evident. Oil-producing 
countries, such as those in the Middle East, continue to experience an economic boom. The global 
economy is likely to keep expanding even in the face of a modest slowdown in the U.S. economy, as 
expansion in other economies may be expected to offset it. 
BIS Review 115/2006 
 1
The second factor is whether strong corporate performance will continue. Corporate profits continue to 
be high as indicated in the semiannual book closings for the first half of fiscal 2006, and business fixed 
investment  continues  to  increase.  Although  machinery  orders,  a  leading  indicator  of  business  fixed 
investment, declined substantially in the July-September quarter, this does not indicate a change in 
the  underlying  trend of  business  fixed  investment, because  the  decline was  partly  a reaction  to  the 
sharp  increase  in  the  previous  quarter  and  is  largely  attributable  to  the  fall  in  orders  for  cellular 
phones. The uptrend in corporate profits and business fixed investment is evident in the September 
Tankan  (Short-Term  Economic  Survey  of  Enterprises  in  Japan)  as  well  as  in  the  results  of  various 
surveys conducted on small firms. However, the Bank does not consider the current state of business 
fixed investment indicative of overheating. The recent growth in business fixed investment has been 
supported by the fact that firms are factoring the ongoing rapid growth of the global market into their 
business strategies, and at the same time are still displaying a strong tendency to evaluate investment 
profitability strictly. Given that financial conditions continue to be extremely accommodative, however, 
attention  should  be  paid  to  the  risk  of  a  further  acceleration  of  firms'  investment  leading  to  an 
excessive build-up of capital stock. Whatever the case, the Bank will further examine developments in 
the corporate sector based on data such as the upcoming December Tankan. 
The third important factor is the extent to which the positive influence of the strength in the corporate 
sector continues to feed through into the household sector. The number of employees has been rising 
at  an  annual  rate  of  1.0-2.0  percent  driven  by  the  strength  in  corporate  activity.  Looking  at 
developments  in  wages  per  worker,  while  regular  payments  have  been  flat  year  on  year,  special 
payments and overtime payments continue to rise, and as a result wages per worker have been rising 
moderately.  In  this  situation,  private  consumption,  especially  outlays  for  services  and  durable 
consumer  goods,  continues  to  trend  upward.  The  preliminary  estimates  of  real  GDP  for  the  July-
September quarter indicated a decrease in private consumption by 0.7 percent on a quarter-on-quarter 
basis,  but  this  seems  to  have  been  attributable  to  the  substantial  decline  in  consumer  spending 
reported  in  the  Family  Income  and  Expenditure  Survey,  which  provides  the  basic  statistics  for 
consumer spending. It should be noted that figures in the Family Income and Expenditure Survey were 
considerably  weaker  than  sales  statistics  and  other  statistics  related  to  consumption.  Still,  even 
allowing  for  this,  private  consumption  was  somewhat  weak  in  the  July-September  quarter,  and 
therefore the Bank will watch closely developments in private consumption from the autumn onward so 
as to check whether this weakness was due to temporary factors, such as unfavorable weather and 
the tax rise in tobacco products. 
Lastly, in relation to this point, developments in wages and prices are important factors that need to be 
watched  closely.  The  Bank  expects  the  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in  the  consumer  price  index 
(CPI;  excluding  fresh  food,  on  a  nationwide  basis)  to  rise  gradually  with  the  output  gap  remaining 
positive and expanding at a moderate pace while downward pressure from declining unit labor costs 
(labor costs per unit of output) weakens. 
If,  in  contrast  with  past  experience,  productivity  keeps rising with wage  increases  lagging behind  in 
spite of the prolonged economic expansion, there may be no upward shift in the inflation rate. Despite 
the steady tightening of labor market conditions, the rate of increase in wages has remained moderate 
so  far  because,  while  employers  faced  with  intensified  global  competition  are  maintaining  their 
restraint on labor costs, employees, having experienced a severe employment situation, continue to 
prefer stable employment to a wage increase. Although the population of those 15 years old and over 
has  been  leveling  off,  the  number  of  employees  has  been  increasing  steadily.  If  the  number  of 
employees  keeps  increasing  in  line  with  the  continuing  economic  expansion,  a  further  tightening  of 
labor  market conditions will  become  inevitable.  In  this situation,  it  is natural  to  assume  that  upward 
pressure  on  wages  including  regular  payments  will  increase  gradually.  However,  since  the  point  at 
which this will happen is not clear, developments in wages and the underlying trend in prices continue 
to require close monitoring.  
Conduct of monetary policy 
II.  
I would like to touch on the Bank's thinking regarding the conduct of monetary policy based on the 
assessment of economic activity and prices I have just referred to. 
With  regard  to  the  future  course  of  monetary  policy,  as  long  as  economic  activity  and  prices  are 
expected to develop in line with the Bank's projection in the Outlook Report, the Bank will adjust the 
level  of  interest  rates  gradually  in  the  light  of  developments  in  economic  activity  and  prices,  while 
maintaining  the  accommodative  financial  conditions  ensuing  from  very  low  interest  rates  for  some 
2 
 BIS Review 115/2006
time.  As  I  have  stated  repeatedly,  the  adjustment  process  will  proceed  gradually.  This  will  avoid 
impeding the expansion of Japan's economy, and will instead facilitate the realization of sustainable 
economic expansion. 
The  specific  timing  of  the  move  will  be  decided  based  on  careful  assessment  of  developments  in 
economic activity and prices and thorough discussion of the issue among members at each Monetary 
Policy  Meeting.  In  making  such  decisions,  the  Bank  will  carefully  examine  individual  economic 
indicators as well as other relevant information in light of the mechanisms underlying economic activity 
and prices indicated in the October Outlook Report and assess whether economic activity and prices 
will develop in line with the Bank's projection.  
Issues facing Japan's financial system 
III.  
Next, let me turn to Japan's financial system. 
Japanese financial institutions have finally overcome the nonperforming-loan (NPL) problem they had 
been wrestling with since the bursting of the asset price bubble in the 1990s. In addition, the capital 
base of Japanese financial institutions has strengthened and Japan's financial system has regained its 
stability. 
In such circumstances, financial institutions are ever more focused on developing and offering a wider 
range of financial services closely tailored to customer needs. For example, banks have increased the 
variety of financial products offered over the counter, such as investment trusts and private pension 
policies in addition to conventional bank deposits, and sales of such products have expanded. They 
have also been more innovative in designing new types of residential mortgage loan products, and as 
a result, residential mortgage loans have come to account for about a quarter of all bank loans, up 
from around 10 percent in the 1990s. Finally, the variety of commercial loan products has increased. 
Banks have increased their syndicated loans and have started to offer small-sized non-collateralized 
business loans to small and medium-sized firms using the so-called "credit scoring model," a statistical 
credit examination method. 
Along with efforts to overcome the NPL problem, financial institutions have been preparing themselves 
to develop innovative lines of business. Smooth implementation of such new business lines requires 
financial institutions to accurately identify and assess the risks inherent to each new business and then 
to manage those risks accordingly. Specifically, financial institutions will need to employ the advanced 
risk management techniques that have been rapidly developed in recent years so as to appropriately 
manage the various risks involved in each new business area, for example, credit risks, market risks, 
and operational risks, and thereby achieve sound business management and enhance profitability. 
Competition among financial institutions to provide various financial services and develop advanced 
risk  management  techniques  will  not  only  strengthen  financial  institutions'  ability  to  provide  value-
added  services  but  also  enhance  the  functioning  of  financial  markets,  thus  leading  to  increased 
financial  system  stability.  Enhancing  the  functioning  of  financial  markets  is  also  very  important  for 
firms. This will not only increase the efficiency with which firms can raise and invest funds, but will also 
promote business restructuring, which has been increasing among Japanese firms, as well as facilitate 
balance-sheet adjustments. The U.S. economy has been growing for some time now - a fact due in no 
small part to the increased productivity accompanying innovations in information and communication 
technology  and  the  improved  flexibility  in  the  business  management  of  firms  made  possible  by  the 
deepening  and  expansion  of  financial  markets.  Similarly  in  Japan,  strengthening  the  business 
management of financial institutions and further enhancement of the functioning of financial markets 
are essential in invigorating the economy. 
The  Bank  will  continue  to  make  full  use  of  occasions  such  as  its  on-site  examinations,  off-site 
monitoring, and various seminars hosted by the Center for Advanced Financial Technology to support 
the  initiatives  of  financial  institutions  to  strengthen  their  business  management.  Through  such 
activities,  we  intend  to  promote  financial  institutions'  initiatives  to  develop  and  offer  new  financial 
services, thus making a greater contribution to regional economies.  
Closing remarks 
As I have explained, Japan's economy is expanding moderately. Looking at the economic situation in 
the  Kansai  region,  corporate  activity  has  increased  due  partly  to  strong  exports,  and  a  resulting 
BIS Review 115/2006 
 3
improvement in corporate profits is being observed, not only at large firms but also at small firms. In 
order for Japan's economy to continue sustainable growth in the face of various challenges including 
the  declining  population,  it  is  crucial  for  all  regions  and  industries  to  persist  with  their  efforts  to 
innovate. Since, along with the Tokai and Kanto regions, the Kansai region is pulling Japan's economy 
forward, I fully anticipate that your originality and inventiveness will continue to play a leading role. As 
for the Bank, it will continue to support the economy from the monetary side to achieve sustainable 
economic growth with price stability.  
4 
 BIS Review 115/2006
