David Longworth: The Canadian economy and financial markets in perspective 
Remarks by Mr David Longworth, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the World Hedge Funds 
Summit, Vaughan, Ontario, 8 November 2006. 
 Good morning. It's a pleasure to join you at this important gathering. 
The hedge fund industry has been growing so quickly that meetings like this one are welcome - they 
provide a chance to step back and look at context and trends. And that's what I propose to do this 
morning. Specifically, I'd like to speak about volatility in both the real economy and in financial markets 
and discuss how it has been affected by monetary policy and financial innovation. 
Of course, there's money to be made from the volatility of financial assets. Hedge funds, like other 
financial  market  participants,  try  to  profit  from  price  movements.  Hedge  funds  are  also  a  source  of 
financial innovation and market liquidity. From the perspective of a central banker, I can say that on 
balance, at most times, hedge funds make markets more liquid and efficient. And in all likelihood, this 
has contributed to reducing financial volatility, at least in some important markets.  
In  Canada,  as  in  other  parts  of  the  world,  there  has  been  a  significant  decline  in  macroeconomic 
volatility since the early 1980s. Over roughly the same time period, there has also been a reduction in 
the volatility of fixed-income markets. On the other hand, we have not seen a parallel decline in the 
volatility  in  the  prices  of  other  assets  such  as  equities  and  housing,  which,  as  Kenneth  Rogoff  and 
others have noted, raises some interesting questions.1  
This  morning  I'd  like  to  look  at  these  trends  and  discuss some of  the  factors  -  especially monetary 
policy  and  financial  innovation  -  that  have  been  driving  them.  But  first,  I  think  it  would  be  useful  to 
explain in what sense volatility matters, and where the interest of the public and the central bank lies. 
I'll leave time at the end of my remarks for comments and questions.  
Why volatility matters 
Central  banks  value  stability.  The  Bank  of  Canada's  ultimate  goal  is  to  contribute  to  the  maximum 
economic growth that can be sustained over time, and thus to rising living standards for Canadians. 
The best way to achieve this goal, we've learned from experience, is to keep inflation low and stable. 
Low and stable inflation not only helps to mitigate fluctuations in production and employment, but also 
allows output levels to reach their sustainable maximum. 
While central banks are best known for their monetary policy work, we also have a very large stake in 
the  stability  of  the  financial  system.  Importantly,  financial  instability  can  take  a  serious  toll  on  the 
economy.  During  the  Asian  crisis  of  the  late  1990s,  for  example,  financial  instability  led  to  large 
declines in real output in a number of countries, as banks failed and there was contagion across the 
region.  When  financial  markets  are  excessively  volatile,  investment  decisions  are  more  difficult  to 
make, risks are harder to assess, and business investment in plant and equipment is inhibited. Central 
banks  also  value  financial  stability  because  monetary  policy  is  transmitted  through  the  financial 
system.  As  a  participant  in  the  financial  system,  the  Bank  of  Canada  relies  on  efficient  markets  to 
effectively transmit changes in its policy rate through the economy. 
I should clarify what kinds of financial volatility are of concern to a central bank. Generally speaking, 
prompt adjustment in the prices of assets to new information is to be expected. Most of the time, these 
changes reflect the appropriate pricing and transferring of risk as circumstances change. When prices 
do  not  accurately  reflect  changing  circumstances,  however,  resources  are  likely  to  be  misallocated 
and efficiency suffers. Moreover, when volatility increases sharply in such a situation, and becomes 
pervasive  across  financial  markets,  the  financial  system  can  become  impaired.  That  is,  it  becomes 
less capable of enabling price discovery, allocating credit, transferring risk, settling claims, or providing 
market  liquidity.  If  the  financial system were  to  lose  any  of  these capabilities because  of  excessive 
volatility,  the  Bank  of  Canada  would  be  concerned,  mainly  because  of  the  potential  for  detrimental 
                                                      
1   See, for example, Kenneth Rogoff. 2006. "Impact of Globalization on Monetary Policy." 
BIS Review 107/2006 
 1
economic consequences. As a central bank, we tend not to worry about financial volatility for its own 
sake, but about the potential financial instability and economic cost of excessive financial volatility. 
So,  in  a  nutshell,  both  macroeconomic  and  financial  stability  are  needed  to  sustain  maximum 
economic growth over the long term. Excessive volatility in either economic or financial variables can 
exact a toll on the economy.  
Let's turn now to what's been going on in the macroeconomic landscape over the past few decades. 
Trends in macroeconomic volatility 
In 1991, the Bank of Canada and the federal government introduced an explicit inflation target - the 
most significant change in Canadian monetary policy in many years.  
In addition to helping achieve the important end goal of low and stable inflation, the inflation target has 
entailed  three  additional  benefits.  First,  success  in  achieving  the  target  has  anchored  inflation 
expectations,  which  in  turn  helps  to  keep  inflation  low  and  to  stabilize  the  economy.  Second,  an 
explicit  inflation  target  has  made  the  central  bank  more  accountable,  since  it  provides  a  concrete 
objective to account for. Third, this accountability for a clear target has in turn encouraged the central 
bank  to  be  more  transparent  in  its  operations  and  communications.  I'll  elaborate  on  the  role  of 
increased transparency later in my remarks.  
Since 1995, the inflation target has been the 2 per cent midpoint of a 1 to 3 per cent control range. 
And since that time, inflation has, in fact, been close to 2 per cent. I think this chart tells a clear and 
interesting story. 
  As you can see, inflation in Canada was high and variable in the 1970s and early 1980s, and then 
declined  in  the  mid-1980s  and  again  after  1991.  CPI  inflation  averaged  8.1  per  cent  from  1971  to 
1980,  6.0  per  cent  from  1981  to  1990,  and  2.1  per  cent  from  1991,  when  the  inflation  target  was 
introduced, to the present. I should add that many other countries have also seen a sustained decline 
in inflation over the past decade and a half. 
2 
 BIS Review 107/2006
In Canada, the variability of inflation, measured by its standard deviation, declined in tandem with the 
rate  of  inflation.  This  pattern  of  declining  volatility  was  equally  true  for  core  inflation  and  other 
underlying measures of inflation. 
Low, stable, and - I should emphasize - predictable inflation tends to support sustainable economic 
growth. Let me elaborate on this idea by pointing to three of the macroeconomic benefits that accrued 
in the 1990s as inflation declined and stabilized close to the 2 per cent target. First, owing to greater 
certainty about the inflation outlook, there was a decline in the variability of relative wages, and thus a 
better  allocation  of  labour.  Second,  we  saw  longer  labour  and  financial  contracts,  with  lower 
transaction  and  bargaining  costs  for  firms  and  households,  and  a  reduction  in  time  lost  to  labour 
disputes. Third, there was a reduced need for individuals and businesses to protect themselves from 
unexpected inflation, resulting in a more appropriate allocation of resources. 
Now let's look at output.  
 
One of the most noteworthy macroeconomic stories in recent years has been a significant reduction in 
the  variability  of  output  across  most  G7  countries,  a  trend  that  has  come  to  be  called  the  "Great 
Moderation."  
In Canada, the data show that the variability of quarterly real GDP growth declined from the 1980s to 
the 1990s, and has remained low this decade. Note that the chart shows output growth itself, not its 
volatility. And I should add that this decline in volatility is actually further progress in a significant, long-
term decline in the volatility of GDP that has taken place - with a few interruptions - since the 1920s. 
In the past 25 years, we've also witnessed lower variability in the output gap - the difference between 
actual  output  and  the  economy's  capacity  to  produce  in  a  sustainable  fashion  -  and  in  the 
unemployment rate. Overall, the business cycle appears to have become less pronounced and, since 
1991, Canada has avoided a recession. 
What's  been  driving  this  reduction  in  the  variability  of  output?  Some  research  has  emphasized  the 
increased competition that has come with globalization, and improved inventory control, particularly in 
the  durable  goods  industries.  It's  also  likely  that  improved  financial  products  for  households  have 
played a role, allowing for smoother growth in consumption. But a key factor has been better monetary 
BIS Review 107/2006 
 3
policy - the monetary policy that has delivered the low and stable inflation we've experienced since the 
early 1990s.  
I'll turn now to trends in financial volatility over the same period. 
Trends in financial volatility 
Here, we could start with a question: To what extent has the decline in macroeconomic volatility over 
the past 25 years been matched by a decline in financial volatility? The answer is that it depends on 
which market we look at. In brief, the volatility of fixed-income markets has declined significantly, but 
the volatility of other financial assets has not. 
The decline of volatility in fixed-income markets is what economic theory would predict. A reduction in 
the level and variability of inflation should lead to lower interest-rate volatility, especially further out the 
term structure. As well, an economy in which output is less volatile should tend to have lower interest 
rate volatility. 
Let's look at the volatility of 90-day commercial paper rates since 1981.2  
 
From the early 1980s to the early 1990s, volatility at the short end of the market fell by more than half. 
Since  1995,  when  the  Bank  began  targeting  inflation  at  the  midpoint  of  a  1  to  3  per  cent  inflation-
control  range,  volatility  for  short-term  interest  rate  instruments  has  fallen  further,  and  since  the  late 
1990s, it has remained in a historically low range.  
                                                      
2   Volatility here refers to the second moment of the distribution of financial returns. The volatility of returns in Charts 3 to 6 has 
been  computed  using  the  exponentially  weighted,  moving-average-of-squared-returns  methodology  suggested  by 
RiskMetrics. Returns for equities are calculated as the log difference in the level of the S&P/TSX Composite Index. Returns 
for bonds are approximated by multiplying the negative of the duration of the bond by the change in the benchmark bond's 
yield to maturity. Returns for commercial paper are calculated as the log difference of the price of the instrument, which is 
calculated as the inverse of one plus the commercial paper rate. 
4 
 BIS Review 107/2006
I should add that although the decline in the volatility of short-term rates was almost certainly driven by 
the decline in the level and the variability of inflation, the most recent period was also likely influenced 
by changes in the way the Bank implements monetary policy. I'm referring to increased transparency 
and improved communication, which, all else being equal, should mitigate interest rate volatility. Since 
introducing  an  inflation  target,  the  Bank  of  Canada  has  become  increasingly  open  and  transparent 
about its views in its Monetary Policy Reports and Updates, press releases, and speeches.  
At the end of the year 2000, the Bank introduced "fixed announcement dates." That is, we started to 
make  our  policy  rate  announcements  eight  times  a  year  on  a  fixed  schedule.  This  schedule  has 
reduced uncertainty in financial markets about the timing of policy actions, and has helped to direct 
attention to the medium-term perspective of monetary policy. This focus has in turn allowed us to more 
effectively  communicate  our  views  on  the  future  path  of  inflation.  Of  course,  reduced  market 
uncertainty  should,  in  principle,  lead  to  a  decline  in  volatility.  And  the  focus  on  macroeconomic 
fundamentals over the medium term helps market participants and the public to better understand the 
Bank's assessment of the balance of forces that affect inflation in Canada and hence to anticipate the 
direction of monetary policy. Our research tends to confirm that the fixed announcement date process 
has, in fact, enabled financial markets to better price fixed-income instruments.3  
Now, let's look at volatility at the longer end of the market. 
 
The volatility of the returns for benchmark Government of Canada 10-year bonds has also declined 
substantially  over  the  period,  as  is  evident  in  the  chart.  The  past  two  years  have  been  marked  by 
                                                      
3   Research on the effect of the fixed announcement date process includes: Nicolas Parent (2002-2003, "Transparency and 
the Response of Interest Rates to the Publication of Macroeconomic Data," Bank of Canada Review [Winter 2002-2003] 29-
34), who discovered that the publication of Canadian macroeconomic data has had a greater impact on Canadian short-
term interest rates following the introduction of fixed announcement dates; Grahame Johnson (2003, "Measuring Interest 
Rate Expectations in Canada," Bank of Canada Review [Summer 2003] 17-27), who found that current money-market yields 
have  become  better  predictors  of  future  overnight  interest  rates;  and  Jason  Andreou  (2005,  "Estimating  the  Impact  of 
Monetary Policy Surprises on Fixed-Income Markets," Bank of Canada Review [Summer 2005] 11-19), who showed that 
there have been fewer surprises in target overnight interest rates, and that the impact of any surprise in the target interest 
rate on longer-term interest rates has diminished. 
BIS Review 107/2006 
 5
sustained low volatility. Lower interest rates and reduced volatility have certainly benefited Canadian 
borrowers, and, by extension, improved the investment climate. 
 
Although both U.S. and Canadian 10-year benchmark bonds show a trend decline in volatility since 
the early 1980s, in the past six years or so, the volatility of Canadian 10-year bonds has been lower 
than that of their U.S. equivalent. The explicit inflation target in Canada may well be anchoring inflation 
expectations here more strongly than in the United States. Improved Canadian fiscal policy since the 
mid-1990s has also played a role in the relative decline in volatility in Canada, as the upside risk to the 
future path of the debt-to-GDP ratio has diminished. 
However,  when  we  turn  to  other  asset  markets  -  particularly  equities,  but  also  house  prices  and 
currency - we don't see any significant trend decline in volatility. The fact that there has not been a 
significant downward trend in stock market volatility or in the volatility of other financial assets - against 
a backdrop of lower macroeconomic volatility - is a bit of a puzzle. Let's look at the volatility of the 
Toronto Stock Exchange. 
6 
 BIS Review 107/2006
 
As you can see, there is no clear trend in the volatility of the S&P/TSX composite index over the past 
25 years, although the past two years, on average, do show a reduced level of volatility. This recent 
decline in volatility has also been seen in the equity indexes of many other countries. 
But as the chart shows, Canada has experienced similarly low levels of stock market volatility in the 
past,  only  to  see  it  rebound  to  the  high  levels  previously  experienced.  The  recent  decline  in  stock 
market volatility may presage a longer period of reduced volatility - but it's too early to tell. In fact, as 
Kenneth Rogoff points out in a recent paper, a decline in short-run business-cycle volatility may not 
necessarily lead to a decline in asset-price volatility.4 Equity returns, he points out, should depend on 
long-run  expected  growth  and  volatility,  and  long-run  expected  volatility  -  that  is  to  say,  uncertainty 
about long-run growth rates - does not necessarily diminish in proportion to reductions in business-
cycle volatility. Moreover, lower interest rates and lower risk premiums may make prices for long-term 
assets, such as stocks and housing, more sensitive to perceived changes in both risk and in the path 
of future interest rates, thus making these prices more variable. This possibility may, in fact, offset any 
reduction  in  financial  market  volatility  that  would  otherwise  stem  from  reduced  macroeconomic 
volatility. 
So far, I've focused on the impact that monetary policy and the decline in macroeconomic volatility has 
had  on  the  volatility  of  bond  markets.  But  other  structural  factors  in  financial  markets  have  also 
affected financial market volatility. 
Financial market structural factors affecting volatility 
Over the past 25 years, and especially in the past decade, we've seen a good deal of financial and 
technological  innovation  in  financial  markets.  This  innovation  can,  over  time,  help  to  increase 
efficiency and reduce volatility. Let me mention four aspects that are likely to prove important. 
                                                      
4   Rogoff, op. cit. 
BIS Review 107/2006 
 7
First, innovations in electronic trading and in back-office systems have resulted in lower trading costs 
and increased price transparency and competition, and, in the end, resulted in greater liquidity. Debt 
and  equity  markets  have  seen  sharp  rises  in  turnover.  Increased  market  liquidity  tends  to  place 
downward pressure on volatility - prices become less sensitive to large transactions and absorb news 
more easily. Trading in Government of Canada bonds, to take one example, is at an all-time high, and 
bid-ask spreads on these bonds are the narrowest ever experienced. 
Second,  we've  seen  important  improvements  in  risk  management  at  banks  and  other  financial 
institutions.  Substantial  progress  has  been  made  in  identifying  and  controlling  the  concentration  of 
exposure to specific risks, especially market risk and credit risk. 
Third,  the  introduction  of  derivative  instruments,  such  as  credit  derivatives,  has  allowed  a  better 
distribution of risk across the system, as well as better risk management by institutions. 
And  fourth,  there's  been  an  increased  use  of  active  arbitrage  strategies  by  a  growing  number  of 
players,  which  brings  me  back  to  hedge  funds.  As  I  said  earlier,  hedge  funds  have  had  a  largely 
positive impact on the efficiency of financial markets in Canada. But before I elaborate on this, I would 
like to step back and say a few words about the concerns that hedge funds could potentially pose for a 
central bank.  
Given our role in promoting financial stability, it would be fair to say that any concerns we might have 
about the impact of hedge funds would stem largely from our concern about systemic risk. Potential 
concerns fall into two main categories. 
First is the possibility that hedge funds could simultaneously implement similar investment strategies 
that  exacerbate  movements  of  prices  away  from  fundamentals,  potentially  leading  to  financial 
problems for other investing institutions. However, the increasing number of good-sized hedge funds 
that  employ  different  investment  styles  or  strategies  -  including  styles  that  assume  that  prices  will 
return to fundamentals - is an important mitigating factor in this regard. In other words, the world is 
very different than it was at the time of the Long-Term Capital Management (LTCM) crisis in 1998. 
A second potential concern is that counterparties could become overexposed to hedge funds. In their 
prime brokerage businesses, the banks are directly exposed to hedge funds. If several large hedge 
funds experienced simultaneous losses stemming from moves in market prices, the banks might suffer 
significant credit losses. And these losses could lead to a rise in systemic risk and, perhaps, a crisis 
characterized  by  a  blurring  of  market,  credit,  and  liquidity  risks,  all  magnified  by  leverage.  Prime 
brokers are now much more aware of the risks than at the time of LTCM, and are carefully monitoring 
their  risk  exposures.  Moreover,  banking  supervisors  around  the  world,  including  the  Office  of  the 
Superintendent of Financial Institutions here in Canada, are well aware of the need to stay on top of 
the banks' risk-management practices in this area. 
Potential  systemic  concerns  continue  to  be  monitored  by  central  banks  and  other  public-policy 
institutions,  and  there  appears  to  be  no  reason  to  sound  the  alarm  on  these  concerns  at  this  time 
because of the mitigating factors that I've mentioned. 
Another issue of broad interest relates to investor protection. It concerns the disclosure practices of 
hedge  funds,  as  well  as  disclosure  related  to  hedge-fund-based  investment  products,  particularly 
those  sold  to  retail  investors.  This  important  issue  is  being  examined  in  Canada  by  the  provincial 
securities commissions.  
Overall, then, given the Bank's strong interest in promoting the efficiency and stability of the financial 
system, our focus with regard to hedge funds is the systemic nature of any risk. When it comes to 
supervision and investor protection, we rely on other bodies. Having said that, let me quickly add that it 
is  important  for  all  these  agencies  to  share  information  effectively,  something  we  strive  to  do  in 
Canada. 
So,  how  do hedge  funds  benefit  financial  markets?  First,  it's  useful  to  note  that  the  largely  positive 
influence of hedge funds stems from their sophistication, their size, the diversity of their objectives and 
strategies, and the instruments they use.  
Hedge  funds  add  to  the  depth  and  liquidity  of  Canadian  financial  markets.  And  the  ability  of  hedge 
funds  to  use  leverage  and  their  tendency  to  actively  trade  greatly  amplifies  their  presence  in  the 
markets,  and  further  adds  to  liquidity.  Moreover,  the  variety  of  arbitrage  strategies  and  instruments 
employed  by  hedge  funds  not  only  makes  markets  more  complete,  but  also  makes  prices  more 
reflective  of  underlying  fundamentals.  These  prices  in  turn  provide  better  signals  for  others  to  act 
upon. And of course to the extent that an investment decision is actually a hedge, risks become more 
8 
 BIS Review 107/2006
effectively  managed.  The  overall  effect  of  increased  liquidity  and  more  effectively  managed  risk 
should, in principle, be lower volatility. 
Now,  by  their  very  nature,  these  structural  factors  would  tend  to  have  an  enduring  impact  on  the 
reduction of volatility. Cyclical factors, however, may also have played a role in reducing the volatility 
of  equity  markets  -  and  possibly  fixed-income  markets  as  well  -  in  the  past  couple  of  years.  This 
suggests that at least part of the decline may be reversed in the future. As a recent BIS paper points 
out, "to the extent that cyclical factors played a role in containing volatility, some increase should be 
expected in the event of a [possible] slowdown in the global economy."5  
In plain English, we've seen robust growth in the global economy in recent years. Volatility typically 
rises at turning points. If growth in the global economy were to slow appreciably, we would likely see 
increased uncertainty and a rise in financial market volatility.  
All  this  to  say  that  it  is  too  early  to  know  the  extent  to  which  the  effects  of  lower  macroeconomic 
volatility and financial innovations will endure, and whether the recent decline in stock market volatility 
is the beginning of a trend in markets outside of fixed income, or whether it is largely due to cyclical 
factors. 
Conclusion 
Volatility  is  a  fact  of  life  in  both  the  real  economy  and  financial  markets.  But  a  reduction  in  the 
variability of output, inflation, and interest rates is generally to be welcomed. What is still unclear is 
whether we will see further declines in the volatility of rates on long-term bonds and of equity prices as 
markets adjust to the decline in macroeconomic volatility that we have already seen, and as financial 
innovations and technological improvements continue to be introduced and adopted. 
What  you  can  be  sure  of  is  the  Bank  of  Canada's  commitment  to  low  and  stable  inflation  and  to 
promoting the stability and efficiency of the Canadian financial system. Lower macroeconomic volatility 
has been hard won and has helped to sustain steady economic growth.  
I'd be happy now to respond to your questions and comments. 
                                                      
5   BIS Paper No. 29. August 2006. "The recent behaviour of financial market volatility." 
BIS Review 107/2006 
 9
