Toshiro Muto: Recent conduct of Japanese monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Toshiro  Muto,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the  Yomiuri  International 
Economic Society, Tokyo, 21 July 2006. 
 Introduction 
At the Monetary Policy Meeting (MPM) held on July 13 and 14, 2006, the Bank of Japan changed the 
guideline for money market operations and decided to keep the uncollateralized overnight call rate at 
around 0.25 percent. This was the first policy change since March this year when we abandoned the 
quantitative easing policy and announced the "Introduction of a New Framework for the Conduct of 
Monetary Policy." 
This action demonstrates that the Bank has returned to pursuing a monetary policy in which it controls 
interest rates both in name and in deed. Today, I would like to explain the background to the policy 
change and, by picking up on some key issues, discuss in detail the framework of interest rate control 
and how its effects feed through into the economy. 
I.  
The current state and outlook for the Japanese economy 
Sustained economic recovery 
A.  
The  Bank  publishes  its  economic  outlook  that  covers  a  period  of  about  one  year  and  a  half  to  two 
years in its semiannual Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices (hereafter the Outlook Report). In the 
April 2006 Outlook Report, we presented our view that, through fiscal 2007, the Japanese economy is 
likely  to  experience  a  sustained  period  of  expansion  under  price  stability.  Economic  developments 
since then seem to indicate that the economy is moving broadly in line with this projection. 
The  expansion  of  overseas  economies  is  broadening  in  extent.  In  the  United  States,  the  pace  of 
economic expansion has moderated somewhat, reflecting recent decreases in housing investment and 
slowing  growth  in  household  expenditure  and  employment.  These  developments,  however,  can  be 
seen  as  part  of  the  process  of  adjustment  toward  stable  growth.  In  Europe,  the  momentum  for 
economic  recovery  is  picking  up  gradually,  as  exports  and  production  are  growing  and  household 
expenditure  has  also  firmed.  In  China  and  other  newly  industrialized  countries  in  East  Asia,  strong 
economic expansion is continuing on the back of further progress in the international division of the 
production process, in terms of both scale and quality, as a result of economic globalization. Against 
this background of overseas economic expansion, Japan's exports are increasing at a steady pace. 
Turning to developments in domestic demand, business fixed investment is showing steady growth. 
According  to  the  June  Tankan  (Short-Term  Economic  Survey  of  Enterprises  in  Japan),  corporate 
profits have  increased  for the  fourth consecutive  year since  fiscal  2002 and,  taken  as  a whole,  are 
expected to continue to increase in fiscal 2006, although the influence of higher raw material prices is 
being  observed  in  some  sections  of  materials  industries.  Given  the  increase  in  corporate  profits, 
business  fixed  investment  plans  for  fiscal  2006  are  displaying  high  growth,  matching  the  growth 
recorded  in  fiscal  2005.  This  steady  growth  in  business  fixed  investment  is  attributable  not  only  to 
growth in demand at home and abroad and high levels of corporate profits, but also to the dispelling of 
excess liabilities and a rise in the capital utilization ratio, as well as the increasing obsolescence of 
existing capital equipment. 
The positive effects of favorable corporate profits are being passed through to the household sector. 
Looking  at  the  employment  and  income  situation,  the  ratio  of  job  offers  to  applicants  is  being 
maintained  somewhat  above  1.00,  and  the  unemployment  rate  has  come  down  to  4.0  percent. 
Household income remains on a gradual increasing trend, while related indicators suggest that labor 
market  conditions  are  tightening.  Households'  expectations  regarding  the  employment  and  income 
situation  have  been  gradually  revised  upward,  and  as  a  result  consumer  sentiment  is  generally 
positive.  
Some considerable fluctuation has been observed in financial markets since mid-May, as evidenced 
by the decline in stock prices. Such declines have been seen not only in Japan but in other major as 
BIS Review 96/2006 
 1
well  as  emerging  economies,  making  it  a  global  phenomenon.  The  adjustment  in  stock  prices  may 
reflect a reevaluation of risk profiles by market participants, as central banks have adjusted the degree 
of their monetary easing in response to economic and price developments. Also pointed out is growing 
uncertainty as to whether the world economy, including the United States, will be able to realize steady 
growth while maintaining a grip on inflation. The swings in financial markets, however, do not seem to 
imply any significant change in the economic fundamentals underpinning the world economy, which is 
likely to continue expanding. Nevertheless, we intend to keep a close eye on developments in financial 
markets and their influence on economic activity, including the economic impact of recently increased 
geopolitical risks. 
Changes in price conditions 
B. 
With the economy experiencing sustained growth, conditions surrounding prices have also improved. 
The  current  phase  of  economic  recovery  has  already  lasted  for  over  four  years,  and  if  continued 
through October, it will match the Izanagi boom - to date the longest phase of economic expansion in 
the  postwar  era.  As  a  result  of  this  sustained  recovery,  the  estimated  "output  gap,"  that  is,  the 
difference  between  actual  aggregate  demand  and  the  economy's  potential  supply  capacity,  is  now 
registering a situation of excess demand. According to the June Tankan, the perception among firms 
of having excess production capacity has dissipated for the first time in some ten years. As for the 
employment  situation,  not  only  is  the  labor  market  as  a  whole  less  slack  but  some  shortages  are 
becoming apparent, reflecting an improved overall balance between demand and supply. 
With  the  output  gap  pointing  to  an  excess  of  aggregate  demand  over  supply,  wages  are  on  a 
moderate upward trend and are expected to rise further in the future. So far, unit labor costs, that is, 
labor costs required to produce one unit of product, have been dropping substantially on the back of 
decreasing wages. The result has been a situation in which even when the output gap contracts and 
excess  supply  diminishes,  this  does  not  feed  through  into  increased  prices.  Although  the  growth  in 
productivity  is  expected  to  continue  putting  downward  pressure  on  prices,  the  decline  in  unit  labor 
costs  is  likely  to  narrow  since  wages  are  increasing  moderately,  and  this  will  eventually  lead  to  a 
moderate rise in prices.  
Given this change in price conditions, various surveys indicate that firms and households are revising 
their  forecasts  for  prices  upward.  According  to  the  Bank's  Opinion  Survey  on  the  General  Public's 
Views and Behavior, which asks households to give specific numbers to reflect their expectations of 
future price conditions, the average of the expected inflation rate for the next five years has increased 
to 2 percent from around 1 percent in previous surveys.  
With respect to price indices, domestic corporate goods prices recorded a year-on-year increase of 3.3 
percent  in  May  and  June,  reflecting  higher crude  oil  and  other  international commodity  prices.  This 
rate of increase surpasses that in early 1990, when the consumption tax was raised, and is the highest 
recorded  since  early  1981.  The  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  consumer  price  index  (CPI; 
nationwide basis, excluding fresh food) has also been positive since the end of last year, and in the 
figure  for  May,  the  latest  available,  posted  a  0.6  percent  increase.  Although this  reflects  the  rise  in 
petroleum  product  prices,  the  degree  to  which  this  factor  has  been  contributing  has  not  increased. 
Rather,  the  prices  of  a  growing  number  of  items  other  than  petroleum  products  are  rising,  as 
evidenced in the upward revision seen in some services prices, a phenomenon often observed at the 
turn of the fiscal year. It is these broader price rises which can be identified as the main factor behind 
the upward trend in the CPI. The year-on-year rate of change in the CPI is expected to stay positive, 
as the output gap continues to register excess demand. Although the year-on-year rate of change in 
the CPI is likely to be revised somewhat downward due to the rebasing of the index in August, the 
current assessment of a positive rate of price change is unlikely to be affected. 
Interim assessment of the outlook for economic activity and prices 
C.  
At the MPM held on July 13 and 14, we examined the current condition of the economy and prices and 
conducted a midterm review of the outlook for economic activity and prices through fiscal 2007, with a 
view  to  assessing whether  economic and  price  conditions are  likely  to  follow the  path stated  in  the 
Outlook Report. As a result of this examination, we concluded that economic developments are likely 
to be broadly in line with the outlook described in the Outlook Report. As for prices, the year-on-year 
rate of change in domestic corporate goods prices in fiscal 2006 is likely to be higher than projected in 
the Outlook Report, reflecting the rise in prices of crude oil and other international commodities, but in 
2 
 BIS Review 96/2006
fiscal  2007  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  is  likely  be  around  the  level  predicted  in  the  Outlook 
Report.  The  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  (nationwide  basis,  excluding  fresh  food)  is  expected  to  stay 
within the range given in the outlook through fiscal 2007. 
II.  
The aim of the Bank's policy change in July 
Examination from two perspectives 
A.  
Let me now describe the aim of the recent policy change in light of the outlook for economic activity 
and prices. 
In March 2006, the Bank introduced the "New Framework for the Conduct of Monetary Policy." At that 
time,  we  stated  our  intention  to  review  economic  and  price  conditions  from  two  perspectives  when 
making  decisions  on  monetary  policy.  The  first  perspective  involves  examining  whether  the  outlook 
deemed most likely for the economy and prices over the next one to two years is consistent with a 
path of sustainable growth under price stability. Then, in the second perspective, we examine various 
risks relevant to the conduct of monetary policy over the longer term, and consider how these may 
impact on our aim of realizing sustainable growth with price stability. 
In terms of the first perspective, Japan's economy is likely to achieve sustainable growth with price 
stability. However, as I will discuss later, such an outlook presumes that market participants and firms 
have, to some extent, factored future changes in monetary policy into their managerial decisions. For 
the economy to develop in line with the projection in the Outlook Report, therefore, some adjustments 
in the level of the policy interest rate seem necessary. Turning to the second perspective, although no 
risks  of  emerging  excesses,  such  as  in  business  fixed  investment,  have  been  detected  to  date,  it 
should  be  noted  that  the  stimulative  impact  of  the  current  easy  monetary  policy  is  gaining  strength 
along with the steady improvement in economic conditions. Should this impact strengthen further, we 
may  well  observe  the  economic  growth  rate  temporarily  deviating  significantly  above  our  projection 
due to accelerated business fixed investment, given that the slack in the economy has already been 
taken  up.  In  such  a  case,  excess  buildup  of  capital  stock  may  eventually  require  economic 
adjustments.  In  the  long  run,  this  would  lead  to  unwarranted  fluctuations  in  economic  activity  and 
increase the risk of a large swing in prices. 
We also need to carefully watch other risk factors affecting economic activity, such as higher crude oil 
prices, and their possible consequences for overseas economies. The risk of Japan's economy falling 
back into a vicious cycle of deflation and deteriorating economic activity, however, seems smaller than 
before  given  the  return  of  stability  and  confidence  in  the  financial  system  and  the  dispelling  of 
excesses in the corporate sector, namely, in capital stock, labor holdings, and levels of debt. In the 
late  1990s,  after  the  bubble  era,  Japan's  economy  experienced  two  recovery  phases,  which  were 
derailed by external shocks. The recessions that followed were deep. In hindsight, the depth of these 
recessions could well have been aggravated by excess holdings of capital stock, labor, and debt in the 
corporate sector as well as the fragility of the financial system - the other side of the same coin - all of 
which  exert  downward  pressure  on  the  economy.  During  the  current  recovery  phase,  however, 
economic recession has not occurred, although temporary losses of recovery momentum have been 
seen. In the summer of 2004, for example, adjustments in IT-related industries caused the economy to 
enter  a  soft  patch  which  lasted  for  nearly  a  year.  Eventually,  however,  the  economy  regained  its 
recovery momentum. Such incidents suggest that the current recovery phase is quite different from its 
predecessors in the 1990s, exhibiting greater durability in the face of shocks. 
Change in the guideline for monetary market operations 
B.  
At the MPM held on July 13 and 14, the Bank decided to change the guideline for its money market 
operations in the intermeeting period to "encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at 
around  0.25  percent."  We  judged,  after  examining  the  economic  and  price  situation  from  the  two 
perspectives outlined above, that an adjustment in the interest rate level was appropriate in order to 
keep the economy on a desirable path. Such a change, in our view, will contribute to ensuring price 
stability and achieving sustainable economic growth in the medium to long term. 
This  policy  change  was  made  on  the  basis  of  an  economic  and  price  forecast,  which  remained 
unchanged from the April Outlook Report, and in line with the basic thinking governing the conduct of 
monetary  policy  stated  in  it.  We  will  continue  to  conduct  monetary  policy  based  on  the  careful 
BIS Review 96/2006 
 3
examination of economic and price conditions. More specifically, if the economy is likely to follow the 
path projected in the Outlook Report, then this will entail some gradual adjustment in the level of the 
policy  interest  rate  so  as  to  accommodate  the  ongoing  changes  in  economic  and  price  conditions. 
Such being the case, it is likely that an easy monetary environment with extremely low interest rates 
will  be  maintained  for  some  time.  The  Bank's  basic  thinking  in  this  regard  has  been  emphasized 
repeatedly,  but  simply  put,  we  intend  to  adjust  the  level  of  interest  rates  gradually,  taking  careful 
account of developments in economic activity and prices. 
In  line  with  the  policy  change,  we  have  decided  to  raise  the  basic  loan  rate  offered  under  the 
complementary lending facility to 0.4 percent. The interest rate differential between the basic loan rate 
and  the  operating  target  of  the  uncollateralized  overnight  call  rate  has widened  marginally  from  the 
previous 0.10 percent to 0.15 percent. Generally speaking, the smaller this differential, the less likely 
the uncollateralized call rate is to diverge from the Bank's operating target. At the same time, however, 
a smaller differential is also likely, to some extent, to restrict the free formation of market interest rates. 
Recently, the situation in the money market has been somewhat restrictive from the standpoint of the 
free formation of interest rates: a consistently large amount of lending has been taking place through 
the  complementary  lending  facility,  mainly  reflecting  high  repo  rates.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
functioning of the money market, which has been in the process of recovery since the abandonment of 
the quantitative easing policy in March, has not yet been fully restored, so that some smoothing of the 
fluctuations in the call rate was still deemed to be necessary. On balance, therefore, we decided to 
keep the changes to the interest rate differential between the basic loan rate and the operating target 
of  the  uncollateralized  overnight  call  rate  as  small  as  possible  because  we  thought  that,  while  also 
giving  consideration  to  the  principle  of  the  free  formation  of  interest  rates,  our  priority  should  be  to 
control the call rate in a stable manner. 
III.  
Interest rate control and its transmission 
Control of short-term rates 
A.  
As  stated  above,  our  current  guideline  for  money  market  operations  is  to  "encourage  the 
uncollateralized  overnight  call  rate  to  remain  at  around  0.25  percent."  Under  the  framework  of  the 
quantitative easing policy in place until March this year, our main operating target was a "quantity," 
namely, the outstanding balance of current accounts that financial institutions hold at the Bank. For 
example, the guideline for money market operations set forth at the MPM in February this year was to 
"conduct money market operations, aiming at the outstanding balance of current accounts held at the 
Bank at around 30 to 35 trillion yen." 
At  central  banks  in  leading  industrial  nations,  monetary  policy  is  conducted  by  controlling  money 
market interest rates at the very short end. It is also quite common for these central banks to set a 
target for such money market rates or to set the base rate for their money market operations as the 
"policy interest rate," thereby leading the money market to achieve the target or the base rate. Since 
the abandonment of the quantitative easing policy in March this year, the uncollateralized overnight 
call  rate,  which  is  a  rate  used  in  trading  overnight  funds  among  financial  institutions,  has  been  the 
Bank's operating target for its money market operations. In other words, after a lapse of five years, 
implementation of monetary policy at the Bank of Japan has finally come back into line with that of 
other central banks in leading economies. 
The money market and interest rate arbitrage 
B.  
In connection with the Bank's return to an interest rate policy, let me take the opportunity to discuss, 
over a rather longer-term perspective, the framework of interest rate control and the mechanisms by 
which it is transmitted. 
The Bank conducts money market operations as a participant in the market. While the bond and stock 
markets serve as venues for trading long-term funds or capital, the money market is characterized by 
the  trade  for  short-term  funds.  Money  markets  are  normally  defined  as  markets  where  funds  with 
maturities of less than a year are traded. They are sometimes classified according to the nature of 
their  participants:  the  interbank  market  is  so  called  because  its  participants  are  limited  to  financial 
institutions,  while  the  open  market's  participants  also  include  firms  and  local  governments.  The  call 
market is an interbank market where short-term funds are traded among financial institutions so as to 
clear  their  daily  excesses  or  shortages  of  funds.  The  call  market  is  further  subdivided  into  the 
4 
 BIS Review 96/2006
include 
the  repo  market  (for 
the  bond  gensaki  market, 
uncollateralized  and  collateralized  call  markets,  according  to  the  collateral  requirements  for  trading. 
Examples  of  open  markets 
the 
lending/borrowing of Japanese government securities against cash collateral), the certificate of deposit 
(CD) market, the commercial paper (CP) market, the treasury bill (TB) market, and the financing bill 
(FB) market. 
The Bank controls interest rates by conducting daily money market operations where it buys and sells 
financial instruments such as bonds through competitive auctions, thereby adjusting for excesses or 
shortages of funds in the money market that may arise, for example, from changes in the supply of 
banknotes  and  public  funds.  The  interest  rate  assigned  as  the  target  in  such  an  operation  is  the 
uncollateralized overnight call rate. The Bank's conduct of monetary policy begins with this exertion of 
control  over  the  uncollateralized  overnight  call  rate,  and  this  is  then  conveyed  through  interest  rate 
arbitrage  to  other  rates  in  the  money  and  bond  markets  as  well  as  on  deposits  and  loans,  thus 
eventually coming to affect economic activity as a whole. 
C.  
How the change in the money market interest rate is conveyed to medium- to long-
term interest rates 
The mechanism by which a very short-term market interest rate, such as the uncollateralized overnight 
call rate, is transmitted through to interest rates at the longer end of the market is based on the idea 
that medium- to long-term interest rates are constructed as an average of expected short-term interest 
rates during the period concerned, plus a risk premium covering uncertainty. The implication is that 
while  the  central  bank  tends  to  determine  a  very  short-term  interest  rate  in  accordance  with  the 
economic  and  price  situation,  medium-  to  long-term  interest  rates  are  determined  by  market 
participants' expectations concerning the future evolution of economic activity and prices, the central 
bank's monetary policy response to these developments, and the appropriate size of the risk premium 
given the level of uncertainty in the economy. 
Medium- to long-term interest rates determined in this way reflect market projections of the future path 
of short-term interest rates. Monetary policy does not directly control the yield curve, a curved line that 
indicates the relationship between interest rates and maturities; rather, the yield curve is shaped by 
the term structure of interest rates, which incorporates market participants' expectations regarding the 
central  bank's  future  policy  decisions.  Ultimately,  it  is  the  shape  of  the  yield  curve  that  actually 
influences the economic decisions of firms and households. 
It is important to control the anticipated path of the short-term interest rate, but this does not mean that 
the Bank can always keep medium- to long-term interest rates low by setting the path of short-term 
interest rates low and by communicating this to market participants. This is because, in the long run, 
the future path of the policy interest rate needs to be in line with the economic and price situation. If a 
policy interest rate is continuously set too high or too low relative to economic and price conditions, 
this will have an adverse impact on the economy and prices, which will eventually require a significant 
rise  or  reduction  in  the  policy  interest  rate  by  the  central  bank.  If  market  anticipation  of  such 
unnecessary fluctuations in interest rates increases uncertainty, the risk premium will become larger, 
thereby causing medium- and long-term interest rates to shift further upward. 
It is sometimes said that long-term interest rates reflect people's view of future economic and price 
conditions, and they cannot therefore be controlled by monetary policy. Long-term interest rates are in 
fact influenced by a change in monetary policy, but for the reasons outlined above, the central bank 
cannot  force  them  out  of  line  with  underlying  economic  and  price  conditions.  If  monetary  policy  is 
conducted in line with economic and price conditions, and market participants are confident that this 
will be the case, the risk premium will become smaller, providing a firm basis for long-term interest rate 
stability. 
Influence on economic activity 
D.  
Let me now turn to the influence of a shift in the yield curve on economic activity. There are actually 
several  routes  by  which  this  impact  is  felt.  One  route  involves  influencing  investment  activity  by 
altering its profitability. As I have stated, the effects of changes in the policy interest rate are passed 
onto interest rates in various financial markets as well as deposit and loan rates. From the standpoint 
of firms and households, funding rates change in line with a change in the policy interest rate, and this 
will  affect  their  decisions  to  invest  in  equipment  and  housing.  Another  possible  route  operates  via 
changes in foreign exchange rates affecting either the profitability or the volume of exports. Changes 
BIS Review 96/2006 
 5
in  the  domestic  interest  rate  affect  nominal  foreign  exchange  rates  through,  for  example,  arbitrage 
between domestic and overseas interest rates. The resultant movements in nominal foreign exchange 
rates  will  alter  competitiveness  in  export  industries,  thereby  affecting  either  the  profitability  or  the 
volume  of  exports.  A  third  route  operates  via  changes  in  asset  prices  influencing  investment  and 
consumption behavior. With the ongoing accumulation of financial assets in recent years, changes in 
equity and land prices are thought to have a greater impact on the spending behavior of firms and 
households. Finally, other routes such as changes in interest rate returns affecting corporate profits 
are also important. 
These  routes  describe  how  changes  in  the  shape  of  the  yield  curve  feed  through  into  changes  in 
economic activity. When economic agents such as firms and households make investment decisions, 
they naturally take into account potential risks. These risks vary with the investment horizon, which will 
be reflected in the maturity of the financial instruments selected to fund the investment. The further 
ahead firms and households are required to look into the future, the larger the influence of changes in 
medium- to long-term interest rates upon their investment decisions. Furthermore, since the market 
expectations concerning the future outlook for the economy and prices as well as the policy response 
of the central bank form the basis of medium- to long-term interest rates, these market expectations 
become particularly important. 
IV. 
Issues related to interest rate control 
The significance of the "official discount rate" 
A. 
So far, I have discussed the basic framework of interest rate control and its paths of transmission. I 
would now like to turn to some issues related to interest rate control. There are three key issues here: 
the  significance  of  the  "official  discount  rate,"  the  importance  of  expectations  formation,  and  the 
transmission lag following monetary policy actions. 
Let me start with the significance of the "official discount rate," which is the rate the Bank applies when 
lending directly to financial institutions. The "official discount rate" is probably one of the most familiar 
terms used in association with monetary policy. However, it is in fact not prescribed in the Bank of 
Japan Law. The term "official discount rate" was used to refer to two rates specified within the Bank of 
Japan Law, namely, the "basic discount rate" and the "basic loan rate." In the past, these rates were 
prescribed  under  two  separate  categories  as  the  "Discount  Rate  of  Commercial  Bills  and  Interest 
Rates  on  Loans  Secured  by  Government  Bonds,  Specially  Designated  Securities  and  Bills 
Corresponding to Commercial Bills" and the "Interest Rates on Loans Secured by Other Collateral," 
and they were set separately. In 2001, these two categories were combined into a single rate termed 
the "Basic Discount Rate and Basic Loan Rate." 
During  the  days  of  regulated  interest  rates,  the  "official  discount  rate"  was  the  policy  interest  rate 
typically  used  to  express  the  basic  stance  of  monetary  policy.  In  those  days,  various  interest  rates 
were linked to the "official discount rate" and changes in the "official discount rate" directly affected 
deposit  and  lending  rates.  A  change  in  the  "official  discount  rate"  was  considered  to  constitute  a 
change in the basic stance of monetary policy and thus to have a so-called "announcement effect." In 
1994, however, the liberalization of interest rates was completed and the systematic linkage between 
the "official discount rate" and deposit rates diminished. Currently, all interest rates are determined by 
arbitrage in the market, as I explained earlier, and not by systematic linkage. As a result, the role of 
"official discount rate" has shifted to the rate offered under the complementary lending facility - a loan 
facility,  introduced  in  2001,  through  which  the  Bank  extends  loans  at  the  request  of  counterparties 
subject to conditions pre-specified by the Bank - and this now effectively stands as the de facto upper 
limit  on  the  overnight  call  rate.  Importantly,  however,  the  current  policy  interest  rate  is  the 
uncollateralized  overnight  call  rate  and  not  this  "official  discount  rate."  For  this  reason,  we  think  it 
appropriate to use the term "basic loan rate" or "rate offered under the complementary lending facility" 
in preference to "official discount rate," which has tended in the past to be associated with the policy 
interest rate. 
The importance of expectations formation 
B.  
Let me now discuss the importance of expectations formation. 
6 
 BIS Review 96/2006
I  have  just  explained  how  economic  agents'  expectations  concerning  the  future  path  of  the  policy 
interest rate influence economic activity and hence developments in prices. The implication is that the 
impact  of  monetary  policy  can  be  more  effectively  increased  by  influencing  market  expectations 
regarding future policy than by independently raising or lowering interest rates. If a change in short-
term interest rates is considered merely temporary, it will not alter the level of medium- or long-term 
interest rates, and its overall influence on the economy will be limited. On the other hand, if market 
participants form expectations that a change in short-term interest rates will be long-lasting, medium- 
to  long-term  interest  rates  will  respond  accordingly,  thereby  increasing  the  overall  impact  on  the 
economy. 
When expectations are formed about future changes in short-term interest rates and these are fully 
incorporated in the formation of medium- to long-term interest rates, a number of points are relevant. 
First, the intended effect of a policy change is achieved as soon as it is anticipated, rather than at the 
point when it is actually enacted. If a fully anticipated future policy change is incorporated in the shape 
of the yield curve, firms and households will take the change as given and make their consumption 
and  investment  decisions  accordingly.  Second,  medium-  to  long-term  interest  rates  will  not  change 
substantially at the actual enactment of the policy change. The idea that a substantial policy impact 
can only be achieved if the policy takes the market by surprise and causes a sudden large shift in 
medium- to long-term interest rates is fundamentally flawed. If the policy change is fully incorporated in 
market  expectations,  it  may  seem  as  though  its  actual  enactment  by  the  central  bank  is  merely 
following  the  market.  However,  this  should  be  taken  as  evidence  that  monetary  policy  is  being 
conducted credibly and transparently, with economic agents such as firms and households behaving 
accordingly. And third, even if a policy change has already been incorporated into market expectations 
and its effect achieved, this does not mean that it is no longer actually necessary to enact the change. 
Should the market expectations be disappointed, this will affect perceptions of future monetary policy, 
thereby changing the shape of the yield curve. 
Given  the  relationship  between  expectations  formation  and  the  yield  curve  described  above,  the 
central bank should seek to improve transparency by carefully explaining its assessment of the state 
of the economy and financial developments, and ensuring that the formation of the yield curve will be 
consistent with its thinking regarding the conduct  of monetary policy by laying out the latter clearly. 
With  this  in  mind,  the  Bank  has  been  communicating  with  the  public  through  the  release  of,  for 
example, the Outlook Report, the Minutes of the MPMs, the Monthly Report of Recent Economic and 
Financial Developments, press conferences, and speeches, as well as by enriching the content of its 
web site. As a result, the Bank is now probably one of the heaviest suppliers of information among 
central banks. The point here is that ensuring the transparency of monetary policy is not just about 
accountability,  but  also  about  raising  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy.  Needless  to  say,  central 
banks do not follow the market when the market expectation of a policy change is deemed erroneous. 
In  such  cases,  the  central  bank  will  seek  to  adjust  market  expectations  by  communicating  to  the 
market its assessment of economic conditions and its views on the appropriate conduct of monetary 
policy. 
Bearing this in mind, it is useful to incorporate an expected future change in the policy interest rate and 
its  anticipated  influence  on  the  economy  into  the  outlook  for  economic  activity  and  prices  that  the 
central bank makes public. In the past, the Bank's outlook for economic activity and prices was based 
on the assumption of a "fixed monetary policy," in other words, it hypothesized that its monetary policy 
would be unchanged. Since the April 2006 Outlook Report, however, the Bank's outlook for economic 
activity  and  prices  has  been  produced  taking  account  of  forecasts  of  the  future  policy  interest  rate 
embodied  in  market  interest  rates,  instead  of  assuming  that  the  policy  interest  rate  will  remain 
unchanged. A number of other central banks that publish an economic and price outlook, such as the 
Bank  of  England  (BOE)  and  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB),  have  started  to  use  market 
participants' projections of the policy interest rate as the assumed policy interest rate when producing 
their outlooks. 
Transmission lags 
C.  
Lastly,  I  would  like  to  take  up  the  issue  of  the  so-called  transmission  lag,  the  time  lag  between  a 
monetary policy action and its impact on the economy. 
It takes a certain amount of time for the effects of a monetary policy action to filter through into the 
economy  and  prices.  Among  the  various  transmission  channels  mentioned  earlier,  the  effects  of  a 
change in interest rates on expected rates of return on investment may be felt within a relatively short 
BIS Review 96/2006 
 7
period  of  time.  Transmission  through  foreign  exchange  rates  and  asset  prices  may  also  take  place 
swiftly.  It  takes  time,  however,  for  an  interest  rate  change  to  affect  household  income  through 
corporate  profits.  Considerably  more  time  is  then  required  for  a  change  in  corporate  profits  and 
household income to gradually alter firm and household sentiment and hence impact on consumption 
and  investment  decisions.  For  a  policy  change  to  be  fully  transmitted  through  to  the  economy, 
therefore, requires a considerable amount of time even when firms and households are rational and 
forward-looking. There are then still further lags between the change in the economic situation and the 
eventual impact on prices. 
It  is  such  lags  in  policy  transmission  that  necessitate  a  forward-looking  approach  to  conducting 
monetary  policy.  For  policy  actions  to  be  effective,  it  is  necessary  to  act  based  on  the  outlook  for 
economic  activity  and  prices  over  a  sufficiently  long  term.  In  the  Quarterly  Bulletin  of  the  BOE,  for 
example, the economic and price outlook of Monetary Policy Committee members for the next three 
years  is  produced  and  published.  At  the  ECB,  the  staff  release  their  outlook  for  the  economy  and 
prices  over  the  next  two  years.  Behind  the  time  frames  of  these  reports  lies  the  idea  that  the 
transmission of monetary policy through to the economy takes place with a long lag. 
Furthermore,  the  length  of  the  lag  differs  substantially  not  only  depending  on  the  structure  of  the 
economy  but  also  depending  on  other  factors  such  as  the  phase  of  the  business  cycle.  For  this 
reason, producing accurate economic and price projections that incorporate the transmission lag is no 
easy task. In recent several years, especially, productivity growth and wage restraint in the corporate 
sector have made prices less sensitive to economic recovery. The situation has, so far, contributed 
favorably  to  economic  developments,  in  the  sense  that  economic  expansion  has  been  relatively 
compatible  with  price  stability.  Viewed  from  a  medium-  to  long-term  perspective,  however,  the 
implication is that short-term projections of inflation will prove inadequate as guideposts for steering 
monetary  policy  toward  price  stability  and  that  past  relationships  between  economic  conditions  and 
prices will no longer hold. It is, therefore, becoming more important to act with appropriately increased 
sensitivity to risks affecting economic activity and prices over longer horizons. 
Concluding remarks 
I  have  so  far  explained  the  background  to  the  recent  change  in  the  Bank's  monetary  policy  and 
discussed in some depth issues related to interest rate control and the path by which its effects are 
transmitted to the economy. 
Let me raise one important point before I conclude. That is, for the effects of monetary policy to filter 
through  into  the  economy  in  the  way  I  have  discussed  today,  both  financial  markets  and  financial 
institutions  have  an  important  intermediary  role  to  play.  Strengthening  the  monetary  policy 
transmission  mechanism  by  improving  the  functioning  of  various  financial  markets  and  financial 
institutions is also very important in supporting the infrastructure of a dynamic Japanese economy in 
the  long  run.  In  this  regard,  the  Bank  has  been  encouraging  the  fostering  and  growth  of  market 
transactions geared toward improving the functioning of the financial markets. Improving the practice 
of money market operations, the introduction of a next-generation real-time gross settlement system, 
and the improvement of business continuity plans in times of disaster are some examples. We, along 
with market participants, intend to strive to further improve the functioning of financial markets. As for 
enhancing financial institutions' performance of their intermediary functions, we will be working toward 
creating an environment where financial institutions, through discussions during on-site examinations 
or interviews, are able to build new business models and upgrade frameworks for risk control, as well 
as to improve management and internal control systems so as to allow monetary functions to operate 
efficiently. 
The Bank would like to contribute, through such efforts, to achieving sustainable economic growth in 
Japan under price stability. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
8 
 BIS Review 96/2006
