Glenn Stevens: Economic conditions and prospects 
Address by Mr Glenn Stevens, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the Australian 
Business  Economists  and  the  Economic  Society  of  Australia  (NSW  Branch)  Annual  Forecasting 
Conference Dinner, Sydney, 11 October 2006. 
 It  is  nice  to  be  back  at  an  ABE-Economic  Society  function  in  a  new  capacity.  Thank  you  for  the 
invitation.  
Tonight I will take opportunity to make some brief remarks about the monetary policy framework, then 
go on to the current state of the economy and the associated issues for monetary policy. I would like to 
conclude briefly with a longer-term perspective. 
The monetary policy framework 
As  you  know,  my  predecessor  on  his  appointment  in  1996  reached  a  formal  agreement  with 
Treasurer Costello on the conduct of monetary policy.1 This was updated in 2003 at the time of his 
reappointment.2  These  Statements  featured  a  numerical  inflation  target,  to  be  achieved  over  the 
medium term, for consumer price inflation, and noted an appropriate degree of flexibility in the conduct 
of policy over the short term. They emphasised the independence of the Reserve Bank, as provided 
under legislation, in the conduct of monetary policy. They provided for accountability to Parliament and 
provision of information to the public. And they recorded the commitment both of the Governor and of 
the Government to the arrangements. 
These arrangements have come to be well understood and widely accepted around the country, and 
around the world. Preserving the purchasing power of money is the most important contribution that 
monetary  policy  can  make  to  sustainable  prosperity.  Having  a  medium-term  numerical  target  for 
inflation – in our case, 2-3 per cent on average – operated by an independent central bank, remains 
for Australia (and many other countries) the most straightforward way of giving practical effect to that 
overall goal. 
To  date,  moreover,  the  system  has  worked  well.  For  a  start,  the  target  has  been  satisfactorily 
achieved. In 1995, a colleague3 and I wrote about Australia’s inflation target that: 
“…if some years from now we can look back and observe that the average rate of 
inflation has a ‘2’ in front of the decimal place, that will be regarded as a success.” 
From the vantage point of 2006, we can look back and see that the average inflation rate has indeed 
had a ‘2’ at the front. The number can be calculated a few different ways, but all give an answer of 
about 2½ per cent over the past decade.4 Inflation has been outside the 2–3 per cent range about half 
the time. That degree of flexibility was always intended because inflation cannot be fine-tuned over 
short periods, and shocks occur that will push it away from target. But, importantly, there has been no 
systematic tendency for the deviation to be one way or the other. 
                                                      
1 
the 
on 
 2 
 Statement 
http://www.rba.gov.au/MonetaryPolicy/statement_on_the_conduct_of_monetary_policy_1996.html. 
Second 
http://www.rba.gov.au/MonetaryPolicy/second_statement_on_the_conduct_of_monetary_policy_2003.html. 
Statement 
Monetary 
Monetary 
Conduct 
Conduct 
Policy, 
Policy, 
the 
on 
of 
of 
available 
available 
at 
at  
3   Stevens,  G.  and  G.  Debelle  (1995),  “Monetary  Policy  Goals  for  Inflation  in  Australia”,  in  A.G.  Haldane  (ed.),  Targeting 
Inflation, Bank of England;  also available at http://www.rba.gov.au/PublicationsAndResearch/RDP/RDP9503.html. 
4    The exact figure can be calculated as 2.56 per cent, which is the compound rate of increase in the CPI over the period from 
mid 1996 until mid 2006, or 2.48 per cent for the same calculation excluding the GST and interest charges (interest charges 
were included in the CPI until 1998), or 2.45 per cent for the Treasury underlying inflation rate until 1998 and the CPI ex 
GST thereafter. The logic for the latter is that the Treasury series was the original target variable until 1998, when the target 
became the published CPI. The wording in the Statement on the Conduct of Monetary Policy, “around the middle of the 
target band”, covers these minor differences quite neatly. 
BIS Review 94/2006 
 1
At the same time, variability in real GDP has tended to decline. Several factors have contributed to 
that but it is important to state that, over the long run, controlling inflation does not harm growth; on the 
contrary, it leads to an improvement in growth prospects. 
With this record of success, the desirability of continuing the system is obvious. At times of changing 
personnel, moreover, it is worth stressing continuity: there was no case for a discrete change to the 
system just because a new Governor was being appointed. 
The Treasurer and I issued a new Statement on the Conduct of Monetary Policy5 on 18 September 
2006, the day my appointment became effective. The language was identical in almost every respect 
to  the  2003  Statement.  The  changes  were  limited  to  those  necessary  to  update  the  document  and 
reflect a new incumbent. What this says is that the well-understood framework of inflation targeting, 
central bank independence and accountability will continue over the years ahead.  
I shall turn now to an evaluation of trends and prospects for the global and local economies in turn. 
The global scene 
It is apparent that demand in the US economy is now growing more slowly than it was a year or two 
ago. Recovery from the shallow 2001 recession is, by 2006, fairly mature and there has been some 
rise in inflation. So some slowing in demand is welcome and necessary. 
At the present time, the debate is over the extent of that slowing – whether it will be enough to take the 
pressure off prices, or whether it might in fact be too great, resulting in unduly weak economic activity. 
Observers have had a hard time this year deciding which of these problems was the larger concern. 
Early in the year, a string of biggish monthly CPI readings had everyone very worried about inflation. 
More  recently,  declining  forward  indicators  of  housing  construction  and  softness  in  housing  prices 
have seen markets and economists more concerned about a weak economy. Long-term interest rates 
have retraced about half their rise in the first part of the year. 
With the effects of a buoyant housing market thought to have been an important expansionary force in 
the US in earlier years, the recent change in sentiment in that market is understandably regarded as 
significant. Australian experience suggests, as does that of the UK, that the end of a housing price 
boom  can  have  noticeable  effects  on  aggregate  demand.  But  those  experiences  also  suggest  that 
such  effects  are  manageable.  In  Australia’s  case,  the  resources  boom  coincided  with  the  housing 
moderation and helped to dampen its effects, but that has not been the case for the UK, which has 
had  broadly  similar  economic  outcomes  to  our  own.  On  this  basis,  one  would  think  that  there  are 
reasonable  prospects  for  moderate  growth  in  the  US  economy  in  the  period  ahead.  But  this  is 
obviously  an  area  of  uncertainty,  and  even  a  favourable  outcome  involves  slower  growth  in  US 
aggregate demand in the future than we have tended to see over most of the past decade. 
A slowing in the US economy is coinciding with a more positive picture in the euro area and Japan 
than  we  have  seen  over  recent  years.  Japan  looks  more  and  more  like  it  is  finally  escaping  the 
stagnation that followed the excesses of the late 1980s and early 1990s. China has continued to grow 
with  remarkable  strength.  To  the  extent  that  these  and  other  areas  are  able  to  generate  growth  in 
domestic demand, as opposed to simply being pulled along by the US, the world economy could be 
expected to continue growing pretty well during 2007, though most likely below the 2006 pace. The 
consensus of forecasters at present seems to be that such an outcome is the most likely. 
Of  course,  forecasts  can  be  wrong.  The  US  might  slow  more  than  expected,  perhaps  because  of 
larger  dampening  effects of  the  housing  downturn.  Another  way  it  might  eventually  slow  more  than 
expected, as pointed out by the IMF’s recent World Economic Outlook, would be if persistent inflation 
pressures  required  further  monetary  tightening.  The  US  remains  sufficiently  important  that,  if  this 
occurred, other regions would probably find that their economies slowed too as a result. 
These  days,  we  should  also  contemplate  the  outlook  for  China.  Periodically  people  worry  about  a 
possible slump in China’s growth, understandably given China’s impact on the global economy over 
recent  years.  But  we  are  also  at  the  point  where  we  probably  should  give  some  thought  to  price 
pressures  in  China.  Even  China  must  have  some  limit  to  how  quickly  it  can  grow  without  causing 
                                                      
5  Third 
Statement 
on 
http://www.rba.gov.au/MonetaryPolicy/third_statement_on_the_conduct_of_monetary_policy_2006.html. 
the 
Conduct 
of 
Monetary 
Policy, 
2 
 available 
at 
BIS Review 94/2006
inflation, and there are certainly anecdotes of rising wage costs in the major coastal industrial centres, 
on top of the higher costs of energy and raw materials. It appears that Chinese export prices are no 
longer declining. Were this trend to continue, the rest of the world, hitherto experiencing the effects of 
deflation in prices for various manufactures, might at some point notice some mild impact on inflation 
rates. 
No discussion of the global economy is complete without some mention of financial trends. Here the 
main factor at work is still, it seems to me, the search for yield. Although the Fed has more or less 
normalised  the  short-term  rate  structure  in  the  US,  short  rates  in  Japan  and,  to  a  lesser  extent, 
mainland Europe remain unusually low. Long-term rates remain on the low side as well. Appetite for 
risk  has  been  a  little  more  variable  this  year,  but  overall  risk  spreads  remain  pretty  low,  especially 
considering some of the events which have occurred over recent years. Of particular note recently has 
been the marked increase in leveraged buy-out activity around the world. This reflects a combination 
of  low  funding  costs  and  high  levels  of  confidence  about  the  potential  future  productivity  and 
profitability of corporate assets. 
Whether or not such confidence is well based remains to be seen. But for the past decade or more, 
much of the action has been in household balance sheets – with a trend towards larger gross balance 
sheets and higher levels of debt. If we now are moving to an era in which corporate balance sheet 
developments are, once again, to the fore, then economists, prudential regulators and other policy-
makers will need to be alert to any economic implications that would flow from such a change.  
The Australian economy 
After 15 years of more or less continuous expansion, we have an economy which is as fully employed 
as  it  has  been  for  a  long  time.  That’s  a  good  thing –  full  employment  is  one  of  the  objectives  of 
macroeconomic policy after all, and is set down in the Reserve Bank Act. But high rates of resource 
utilisation affect the conduct of policy: we need to be more alert to the risk of inflation than in periods 
when the amount of spare capacity was much larger. 
The  international  environment  is  one  of  strong  growth,  and  rising  costs  of  materials.  Inflation  in 
Australia has risen, and not just because of prices of petrol and bananas. Those are likely to show 
declines anyway over the next couple of quarters, but measures of consumer price inflation that are 
not distorted by these factors have picked up. That is not surprising. Input costs have risen across a 
range  of  areas.  We  have  a  tight  labour  market,  and  despite  the  steadiness  recently  of  official 
measures of wages growth, there is still pressure on labour costs, including the kinds that do not show 
up in wage statistics. 
At the same time, there are some puzzles in the picture painted by the various pieces of data on the 
Australian economy. On the one hand, real GDP growth is estimated to have declined to about 2 per 
cent  over  the  12-month  period  to  June 2006,  after  having  grown  by  just  under  3 per  cent  in  the 
preceding year.  Growth in domestic demand has moderated from its earlier heady pace, though it still 
seems  to  have  been  running  at  3½  to  4 per  cent  over  the  year,  which  is  probably  a  bit  above  the 
economy’s sustainable capacity to increase production. 
Yet growth in employment has remained quite strong, and the rate of unemployment has, if anything, 
edged down over the past year. This sort of unemployment result would normally suggest that output 
growth had been at or slightly above trend, which most people would these days put at 3 per cent or a 
little above. Meanwhile, the rate of growth of tax revenues over the past several years has been well 
above what historical relationships suggest should have been expected, given the recorded growth of 
nominal GDP. 
At face value, the output and employment results suggest a marked change in the trend in productivity 
in Australia over the past few years. The various measures of GDP per hour worked suggest there has 
been approximately zero growth in productivity since the end of 2003. This compares with an average 
annual pace of growth of 2 per cent or more in the preceding decade. 
So what’s going on here? 
One possibility is that the level of nominal and real GDP is really higher than is being captured at the 
moment by the statistics.  That would mean that growth over the past few years has been higher than, 
and productivity has not slowed by as much as, the published data suggest. Tax revenues would, in 
this scenario, look more in line with historical relationships.  This outcome would seem more in line as 
well with the unemployment trends. 
BIS Review 94/2006 
 3
tougher  requirements 
A second possibility is that it is the labour market data that are out of line – perhaps due to lags, or 
sampling effects – and  that  they  will sooner  or  later come  back  into  line.  If  that  is  the  story –  if  the 
economy really has grown below trend of late – we might expect some rise in the unemployment rate 
to emerge before much longer.  But this story still needs to explain the strength of tax receipts. 
Or maybe both productivity and output growth really have slowed, as the published estimates suggest. 
The question then would be why productivity slowed so much. One hypothesis we hear from time to 
time is that average productivity might be reduced by adding the workers with the lowest productivity 
after a long expansion. Perhaps this is not altogether surprising at this stage of the cycle – and if we 
are  now  seeing  employment  of  workers  whose  lesser  skills  and  productivity  kept  them  out  of 
contention in the past, that in itself is to be welcomed. 
But  this  addition  of  less  productive  workers  isn’t  enough  to  explain  the  extent  of  the  slowdown  in 
overall productivity. If the figures are correct, the productivity growth for the existing workforce must 
also have declined noticeably. For had it continued at the pace seen over the preceding decade, the 
workforce that was employed two years ago could have accounted for virtually all the output growth 
which  has  occurred  since.  That  would  suggest  the  productivity  of  the  additional  workers  employed 
over that period would not just be lower than average, it would actually be (approximately) zero. Surely 
employers would not have taken on people with productivity that low. 
Other hypotheses have been advanced for a slowdown in productivity growth. Among them are that 
higher levels of labour turnover in a tight market disrupt productivity performance across firms; or that 
changed  regulations  (e.g.  new  accounting  standards, 
to  demonstrate 
appropriate  corporate  governance  and  so  on)  are  using  resources  without  adding  to  output.  At  this 
point,  however,  these  don’t  seem  sufficient  as  an  explanation  for  a  productivity  slowdown  of  the 
magnitude we observe in the data. Hence it appears that, for the moment, we are left with something 
of a puzzle.  
That means that, as usual, monetary policy is being made under conditions of uncertainty. If the GDP 
data  are  correct,  then  the  economy  grew  more  slowly  than  earlier  thought  in  the  first  half  of  2006, 
potentially with some moderating impact on the outlook for inflation. (Even then, we would still have to 
ask the further question of whether the slowing was driven mainly by lack of supply or lack of demand. 
Only in the latter case would it mean that spare capacity in the economy will have been increased.) 
If, on the other hand, there really has been more growth than the GDP accounts suggest – more in line 
with the rise in employment and the trend decline in unemployment – then capacity probably remains 
pretty tight. In that case, upward pressure on inflation remains a distinct possibility. 
Alternatively, if both sets of data are correct, then productivity actually has slowed down considerably. 
But if that is true, unless it is a temporary phenomenon, then potential GDP growth is not 3 per cent or 
a  bit  above  any  more.  It  will  be  less,  and  our  growth  aspirations  would  have  to  be  adjusted 
accordingly.  In  this  scenario,  inflation  pressure  in  the  near  term  could  well  increase  and  demand 
growth may need to be further restrained for inflation to remain under control over time. 
In trying to assess which of these possibilities, or which combination of them, is in operation, one of 
the pieces of evidence to which we will be looking for guidance is the behaviour of prices themselves. 
An  economy  with  genuinely  sub-potential  growth  over  two  years  ought,  other  things  equal,  to  start 
putting some downward pressure on inflation fairly soon. An inflation rate that continued to increase, 
on  the  other  hand,  would  presumably  raise  questions  about  either  the  apparent  rate  of  growth  of 
demand and output, or of potential output or both. You do not need me to tell you, therefore, that the 
price data to be released over the next couple of weeks will be important in evaluating the outlook and 
the balance of risks facing policy. 
Before  I  leave  the  current  state  of  the economy,  a  remark  about the  differences  in performance  by 
region  is  appropriate.  As  everyone  is  aware,  spending  growth  is  strongest  in  Western  Australia,  as 
resource producers seek to put in place more capacity and the income gains from the boom are partly 
spent.  But  the  differences  in  spending  overstate  the  differences  in  actual  economic  performance 
between the regions. Not all the demand generated in Western Australia is being supplied from there: 
some of it is being supplied from the rest of the country, and some of it from outside Australia. It is 
partly  for  that  reason,  presumably,  that  the  differences  in  employment  growth  and  unemployment 
trends  across  states  are  much  smaller  than  the  differences  in  spending.  In  fact,  the  extent  of  the 
differences in output growth across states, while noticeable, do not appear at present to be unusually 
large.  They  also  appear  to  be  well  within  the  sorts  of  differences  experienced  over  time  by  other 
comparable countries or regions, like the United States, Canada or the euro area. 
4 
 BIS Review 94/2006
At  the  same  time,  there  is  some  tendency  for  labour  and  capital  to  move  to  the  resource-intensive 
areas. That is exactly what is supposed to happen in a flexible economy when relative prices change: 
labour  and capital  respond  to  incentives.  Moreover, as  the  Secretary  to  the  Treasury  pointed  out  a 
couple of months ago,6 if the current set of relative prices persists, there will be more such adjustment 
in the years ahead. 
The longer term  
Before concluding, it would be useful to lift our eyes from the immediate ebb and flow of the short-run 
data and to ask, taking a medium-term view, what will be the most important task for monetary policy 
over the period ahead? It should be obvious that, over the next little while, the main job is to ensure 
that  the  inflationary  pressure  we  have  been  experiencing  of  late  is  successfully  resisted,  and  that 
expectations of future inflation remain well anchored. That will be a key part of maintaining an average 
inflation performance of ‘two point something’. 
We could hardly overstate the importance of maintaining that general environment where, as famously 
characterised  by  Alan  Greenspan,  inflation  is  sufficiently  low  and  stable  that  it  does  not  materially 
affect  economic  decisions  by  firms  and  individuals.  A  stable  overall  price  environment  assists  in 
resource allocation and preserves the value of savings. 
It also provides monetary policy with more scope to be flexible in the face of shocks. The past decade 
has seen no shortage of challenges, often of a financial nature: the Asian crisis, the LTCM episode, 
the dot com mania and subsequent downturn, and so on. When conditions in the real economy were 
threatened on those occasions by contractionary forces, central banks in a range of countries were 
able  to  respond  with  reductions  in  interest  rates,  or  by  retaining  already  low  rates  for  an  extended 
period. Some people would be inclined to argue about whether or not such actions were in every case 
ideal. But the more important point is that, without a background of low and steady inflation and well-
anchored expectations, they would not have been feasible at all.  
Were the recent higher inflation rates of the past year in Australia and some other countries to persist, 
and to start affecting behaviour, such a degree of flexibility for monetary policy might not be present in 
future moments of economic difficulty. Acting as needed to keep inflation in check in the near term, on 
the other hand, preserves future flexibility.  
It is that strategic requirement to which central banks should be, and I believe are, paying close heed. 
As we do so, of course, we will be bearing in mind the lagged effects of the policy adjustments already 
made. If we can successfully see off the higher inflation of the past year or so, we will have done a lot 
to establish the conditions needed for ongoing growth. 
                                                      
6  
‘Economic  Policies  to  Address  Global  Pressures’,  speech  by  Dr  Ken  Henry,  Secretary  to  the  Treasury,  to  the  Australian 
Industry 
at 
http://www.treasury.gov.au/documents/1140/PDF/AIG_August_2006.pdf. 
Canberra, 
 available 
National 
August 
Forum 
Group 
2006; 
2006, 
14 
BIS Review 94/2006 
 5
