Mervyn King: Monetary policy developments 
Speech  by  Mr  Mervyn  King,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  at  the  Best  of  the  Black  Country 
Awards, Wolverhampton, 16 November 2006. 
 The Black Country is where it all began. It began here for me because Wolverhampton is where I grew 
up. As a boy, I remember the short train trip from Wolverhampton to Birmingham, through the heart of 
the Black Country, as a journey through manufacturing history. The flames from the blast furnaces lit 
up the grey sky on winter afternoons. “Black by day and red by night” as the American Consul in the 
Midlands once described it. Much has changed since then. It has been a difficult time for the Black 
Country. Many of the companies we visited from school have closed. And the blast furnaces no longer 
light up the night sky. But the character of the Black Country has enabled the region to come through 
and enter a new era of regeneration. So I am honoured, and proud, to have been invited to join you 
tonight. 
The  Black  Country  is  where  it  all  began  –  not  just  for  me,  but  for  the  British  economy.  This  was  a 
centre of the Industrial Revolution – the first blossoming of manufacturing industry in the world. The 
coal and iron deposits found here were critical to the Industrial Revolution, and it was the output of 
nails and  bolts,  screws  and  fasteners  produced  from  those  ceaseless  blast  furnaces  that  made  the 
Black Country synonymous with manufacturing prowess around the world. But that is not the whole 
story.  Just  as  important  were  the  innate  qualities  of  doing  it  yourself  and  perseverance  which 
characterise the Black Country. There is no finer example than the Iron Bridge – the world’s first – at 
Coalbrookedale, built in 1779. As one commentary noted, it stood as “indisputable proof of the abilities 
of our mechanics and workmen”. It reflected not just the local availability of coal and iron, but also the 
skills of those who built it. 
And  it  is  those  same  skills  that  we  celebrate  tonight.  Local  business  success,  recognised  by  these 
‘Best of the Black Country Awards’, is the story of the Black Country being born again. The products of 
the 21st century may not be the nails and bolts, screws and fasteners of the past, but they will require 
the use of manufacturing know-how and business ingenuity to service the needs of consumers. I have 
been struck, as I travel to a different part of the country each month, by how many firms are producing 
imaginative and innovative products for which there is a real demand around the world. By this I do not 
mean  that  all  successful  firms  are  making  high  tech  products.  Rather,  there  is  a  market  out  there 
where low wages are not the most important form of competitive advantage. We have seen that in the 
‘Best  of  the  Black  Country  Awards’,  where  last  year’s  winners  were  drawn  from  the  manufacturing, 
services  and  construction  sectors,  and  where  the  winners  included  both  new  and  established 
companies. Moreover, the Black Country tradition of numerous small firms operating cheek by jowl is 
exactly the model so successful in Silicon Valley and Bangalore, in science parks and film studios, and 
in financial centres around the world. 
Of  course,  some  of  the  old  ways  have  gone,  and  many  manufacturing  companies  have  perished. 
Recent  years  have  not  been  easy  for  the  Black  Country,  especially  as  profit  margins  have  been 
squeezed  by  greater  competition  from  overseas.  But  there  are  –  as  you  yourselves  demonstrate  – 
many  examples  of  the  regeneration  of  the  Black  Country,  be  they  new  businesses  or  older  ones 
re-focussing their activities. And the changes underway here are not restricted to the purely economic. 
The  Black  Country  has  seen  successes  in  education,  culture  and  the  media.  In  education,  the 
University of Wolverhampton – impossible to imagine that there would be one when I was a boy – now 
has  over  23,000  students.  The  University  has  put  its  motto  –  ‘Innovation  and  opportunity’  –  into 
practice, 
the  Telford-
Wolverhampton  Technology  Corridor.  In  culture,  the  New  Art  Gallery  in  Walsall  opened  in  its 
internationally acclaimed building in 1999. And in the Express & Star, you have the most successful 
regional paper in the country. 
Sport, too, plays an important role in the life of the Black Country. Next summer twelve schools in the 
Wolverhampton  and  Walsall  areas  will  be  participating  in  Chance  to  Shine  –  a  new  campaign  to 
regenerate  cricket  in  state  schools,  and  of  which  I  am  proud  to  be  the  President.  Given  that  in 
business  the  need  to  work  in  teams  is  of  the  essence,  it  is  sad  that  competitive  team  sport  in  our 
schools has declined. The aim of Chance to Shine is to give young people from all our communities, 
boys and girls, a chance to experience – before the world of work – what it is like to be in a team, and 
the  Wolverhampton  Science  Park  and 
its  partnerships  with 
through 
BIS Review 112/2006 
 1
to learn how to win and how to lose. Last summer Chance to Shine enabled almost 50,000 children to 
play competitive cricket for the first time. 
Young people need role models and sport is perhaps the most important source of them. Of the many 
Black Country sports men and women who have been role models down the years, there is one whom 
I  would  like  to  single  out  tonight  –  Vikram  Solanki.  Born  in  Rajasthan,  Vikram  moved  to 
Wolverhampton as a small boy, and became the finest and most exciting batsman to emerge from the 
area for a long while. Now captain of Worcestershire, one could not think of  a better role model to 
bring communities closer together. That is why I am pleased to say that I shall be one of Vikram’s 
patrons for his Benefit year in 2007. 
Of course, I could not talk about sport in the Black Country without referring to football. Nowhere had, 
in  my  day,  more  first  division  teams  within  a  few  miles  radius  than  the  Black  Country.  And  all  the 
supporters  of  those  teams  have  had  many  opportunities  over  the  years  to  learn  how  to  win  and, 
especially, how to lose. But for the sake of local interest and rivalry, I am looking forward to the day 
when Wolves and the Albion are restored to the Premiership. 
Just  as  football  needs  a  referee,  so  does  the  economy.  I  think  of  the  Bank  of  England’s  Monetary 
Policy Committee – the MPC – as the referee for the economy. The MPC sets interest rates to keep 
inflation on track to meet the 2% target. We want to allow you to focus on running your businesses – 
you are the players – while the MPC quietly gets on with its job. You may have seen in the news that 
yesterday  the  Bank  of  England  published  its  latest  Inflation  Report.  That  set  out  our  view  on  the 
prospects for the economy over the next couple of years. Perhaps I could briefly summarise our latest 
analysis of the UK economy. 
For the past year GDP has grown at a rate around its long-term average. Inflation has picked up and 
has  been  above  the  2%  target  since  May.  Overall,  the  central  view  is  one  of  inflation  rising  further 
above the target in the near term, before falling back to the target. The risks around that benign central 
view are seen by the MPC as broadly balanced, but there is significant uncertainty about the outlook 
for inflation. 
The  outlook  for  growth  remains  one  of  a  continued  modest  rebalancing  of  demand,  with  consumer 
spending growing at close to its long-run average rate, business investment continuing to recover, and 
net trade making a small positive contribution to growth. 
The MPC judges that assessing the margin of spare resources in the economy is unusually difficult at 
present.  Capacity  utilisation  within  companies,  as  measured  by  surveys,  has  risen.  Although 
unemployment has risen further, it is difficult to know how much of the rise in unemployment actually 
represents increased slack in the labour market. 
Over the past year or so, the labour force has grown rapidly, following strong migration from Eastern 
Europe and elsewhere, and a rise in participation rates. There is, of course, great uncertainty about 
the scale of migration which has clouded estimates of the supply capacity of the economy. Moreover, 
it is difficult to know how far migration affects demand for goods and services as well as supply. So the 
overall impact of migration on inflation in the medium term is unclear. 
Against a background of firm growth and a limited margin of spare capacity, and with inflation above 
the target, the MPC judged last week that an increase of 0.25 percentage points in Bank Rate was 
necessary to keep CPI inflation on track to meet the target in the medium term. So that is where we 
are now. Where will interest rates go next? I do not know. And the reason I do not know is that we do 
not  take  our  decisions  in  advance,  but  wait  to  see  how  the  economy  unfolds  and  then  take  our 
decisions one month at a time. 
The Black Country is where it all began. But now we must look to the future. The Black Country has 
entered a new era. And you are making it happen. I have explained how the MPC sees the prospects 
for  the  economy.  If  we  can  retain  the  degree  of  stability  that  we  have  seen  now  for  more  than  a 
decade, then you will have the opportunity to start and expand businesses that will compete for Black 
Country business awards in the years to come. The winners tonight are shining examples, and I know 
you are all looking forward to finding out who they are. 
It has been a pleasure to come back to where it all began for me. And, whether or not you are one of 
the lucky few to win an award tonight, I wish your business every success. 
2 
 BIS Review 112/2006
