Ardian Fullani: The confidence indices 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the regional seminar “Development 
and 
in  Albania  2”,  Tirana, 
1 December 2006. 
implementation  of  business  and  consumer  confidence 
indices 
 Dear participants, 
Today’s  seminar,  on  the  confidence  indices,  has  a  special  importance,  due  to  the  fact  that  it 
regards the evaluation and decision-making basic elements in economic policies, information and in its 
real  dimension.  As  in  any  decision-making  process  information  is  the  first  step  to  reach  a  sound 
judgment on the right monetary policy for a central bank.    
It  is  indispensable  for  the  monetary  authorities  to  prepare  the  analysis  of  the  macroeconomic 
indicators, in order to prepare a monetary policy that ensures the stability of the internal indicators as 
well as the relations with the partner economies in trade affairs. On a more general view, the economy 
of a country can not achieve competitiveness and international standards, if development policies are 
built on a non complete information basis. The preparation of a complete information framework in the 
economic field is a challenge for the regional countries to reach occidental standards. At the current 
stage, for Albania this challenge is even more urgent. 
The  actual  condition  of  the  national  statistics  has  room  for  spreading  the  statistical  basis  and  for 
providing stable statistics over time. However, the progress in the statistics field, as well as in other 
related  ones,  needs  time,  funds  and  the  right  legal  ground  for  undertaking  substantial  projects. 
Meanwhile, our decisions have to rely on as much as possible sound basis. Drafting the confidence 
indices, as indicators of economic expectations, does not substitute the lack of statistical information 
on  the  current  situation  of  an  economy.  These  indices  enable  monetary  markets  and  authorities  to 
rearrange in time the strategies that preserve balances of related goals. Confidence indices enable a 
central bank adjustment of monetary policy stance in the right time in order to preserve price stability, 
while the economy grows at a potential pace.   
The developed countries are in frontward regarding the preparation of confidence indices as indicators 
of  expected  performance  of  the  economy.  Integration  of  the  markets  and  the  globalizing  process 
increase  the  necessity  of  preparing  these  indices  in  our  region,  because  the  objective  of  monetary 
policy,  the  price  stability,  reflects  stability  and  economic  openness  towards  regional  countries  and 
further. It has already been 4 years that Bank of Albania has started the evaluation of business and 
consumer  confidence  indices.  These  surveys  are  being  run  on  a  quarterly  basis,  with  the  help  of 
INSTAT, and involve over 600 businesses of production, construction and services sectors and about 
1500 consumers. The information collected covers the performance of prices, consumption, income, 
production, employment, investments and some other indicators, which support the decision-making 
on the monetary policy stance.   
In this important process, the Bank has from the beginning been assisted by the experts of Ifo Institute 
for Economic Research, witch is internationally renown in the field of business confidence indices. So 
far,  the  results  of  these  questionnaires  have  been  indirectly  reflected  in  the  periodical  analysis  and 
reports and in other different papers of the central bank. The further consolidation of these indicators, 
paves the path of their publication for the purpose of being used by the economic agents, as an extra 
way  of  communicating  with  the  central  bank.  A  preliminary  step  in  this  direction  is  also  the 
consolidation  of  the  applied  methodology  for  calculating  these  indices,  through  a  professional 
expertise as that of IFO.  
The undertaken steps, in expanding and consolidating the statistical basis of the monetary authority in 
real  time,  will  enable  the  management  on  time  of  the  situations  and  challenges,  which  are  lead  by 
economic development and the further integration of the regional markets. Coordination of the work 
between  regional  central  banks  for  adopting  the  methodology  and  the  indices  enables  the  maximal 
use  of  existing  knowledge  basis  on  the  specific  features  of  our  region,  against  that  of  the  most 
developed  economies.  The  use  of  the  same  methodology  for  establishing  the  indices  will  make  it 
easier to compare them to each other. In parallel, these indicators will serve as a communication tool 
with the international institutions, specialized in best presenting and identifying the priorities according 
to the countries and with the foreign investors interested in our country.   
BIS Review 118/2006 
 1
Our purpose is to maximally adapt the indices we are drafting to the best international practices in this 
field, far from voluntarily solutions. Without any doubt the main challenge remains their efficient use in 
our decision making process.  
We do appreciate that the products, we have been discussing during these two days, the confidence 
indices  in  general,  will  be  a  successful  mean  of  communication  for  the  Bank  of  Albania  with  the 
market’s  actors  and  the  general  public.  I  do  not  hesitate  to  declare  that  the  launch  of  these  two 
products, especially in the context of our purpose to adopt inflation targeting, will further improve the 
decision making process at the Bank of Albania.     
Recently, the Bank of Albania has accelerated the development pace, regarding the improvement of 
the  decision  making  process  and  the  refinement  of  the  mechanisms  that  lead  to  its  decisions.  The 
issue  is  how  quickly  the  market’s  actors  will  follow  the  current  pace  of  the  Bank  of  Albania.  It  is 
important that the difference between the two velocities reduces, in order that our dialogue with the 
market  will  be  standardized  and  transparent.  To  enable  an  as  much  as  possible  contemporary 
communication, among others, an important part plays the cooperation between Bank of Albania, the 
financial market, Ministry of Finance, INSTAT and the other institutions. In addition, it must cooperate 
more  with  other  groups  of  interest,  such  as  Chamber  of  Commerce,  Konfindustria,  Medias  and  the 
general public. 
At this point, I want to emphasize that the role the media plays is really special. A professional media 
would be able to construct reliable and comprehensible communication models, easily understandable 
by the public.  
The products we are getting ready to launch soon, that means the confidence indices, have to justify 
their  designation.  Stated  differently,  the  public  must  believe  the  product  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  is 
reliable, that product is the object and the real indicator of the public’s expectations. In the meantime, 
we expect to have back the echo of the public’s trust. 
Wishing you all a fruitful working-day, 
Thank you! 
2 
 BIS Review 118/2006
