John Hurley: The challenges ahead - SEPA and NPIP 
Speech by Mr John Hurley, Governor of the Central Bank and Financial Services Authority of Ireland, 
at the National Payments Conference, Dublin, 12 December 2006. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I am delighted to be able to address this inaugural national payments conference, hosted jointly by the 
Department of the Taoiseach and the Irish Payment Services Organisation in the historic surroundings 
of Dublin Castle. At the outset, I would like to say that the Central Bank fully supports the conference's 
broad  objective  of  having  open,  ongoing  and  productive  discussions  involving  everyone  with  an 
interest in Irish payment systems. 
I'd like to use the opportunity of this conference to address three payments-related topics, namely: 
• 
• 
• 
the Central Bank's role in relation to payment systems; 
the Single Euro Payments Area - or SEPA, and  
to  share  some  thoughts  from  the  Central  Bank's  perspective  on  the  National  Payments 
Implementation Programme. 
Role of the Central Bank 
The Central Bank has significant responsibilities in the payments area. These take a number of forms. 
At  the  broadest  and  most  important  level,  the  Bank  acts  as  the  overseer  of  payment  systems.  My 
remarks  today  will  concentrate  on  this  function.  Apart  from  this  oversight  role,  we  also  have  a 
significant operational function. 
With regard to the latter, we operate, manage and participate in the Irish real-time gross settlement 
system, IRIS - the system for the settlement of wholesale payments at the interbank level. We are also 
a participant in the local retail paper clearing system, and, of course, we fulfil the traditional central 
bank role of supplying cash. We have also recently agreed to take on the role of settlement agent in 
respect  of  euro-denominated  securities  transactions,  mainly  Irish  equities,  settled  in  the  UK-based 
CREST system. This role is currently carried out by the Bank of England, and will move to the Central 
Bank in 2008. 
I  should  probably  also  mention  our  involvement  with  the  recent  Eurosystem  initiative  known  as 
TARGET2  Securities.  This  is  aimed  at  the  provision  by  the  Eurosystem  of  settlement  facilities  in 
central bank money for all euro-denominated securities transactions. Discussions with the banking and 
securities communities on this initiative are ongoing. 
Oversight 
The oversight of payment systems is a core central banking function. In carrying out this task, central 
banks seek to minimize systemic risk, that is the risk that the failure of any payment system participant 
could  result  in  other  participants  being  unable  to  meet  their  obligations,  leading  to  a  potentially 
disastrous chain reaction of failures.  
Minimizing systemic risk in payment and settlement systems is not only an objective in itself. It is also 
a precondition for achieving financial stability and for the efficient conduct of monetary policy. These, 
in turn, are necessary for the integrity of the euro as a major global currency.  
Our oversight role is enshrined in both domestic and European legislation. Domestically the legal basis 
is  the  Central  Bank  Act  of  1997.  In  the  broader  European  context,  one  of  the  basic  tasks  of  the 
European  System  of  Central  Banks  (of  which  the  Bank  is  a  member)  is  "to  promote  the  smooth 
operation of payment systems". The Eurosystem is further empowered "to ensure efficient and sound 
clearing and payment systems within the Community and with other countries". 
BIS Review 122/2006 
 1
real-time gross settlement systems,  
retail payment systems,  
payment instruments such as payment cards, direct debits and credit transfers,  
third-party service providers,  
central counterparties, and  
securities clearing and settlement systems.  
Back  in  the  early  1990s,  central  banks  focussed  on  large-value  netting  systems  where  the  safety 
concerns  were  more  evident.  Gradually,  however,  the  focus  of  oversight  has  been  extended,  to 
varying degrees in different countries, to: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
The extensive range of activities now subject to oversight reflects their potential impact on financial 
stability and their links to the smooth conduct of monetary policy. Central banks are organised so that 
their operational role in payment systems does not conflict with their oversight role.  
The  Bank currently  directly  oversees  the  Irish  real-time  gross settlement  system,  IRIS,  and  the  two 
retail  payment  systems  concerned  with  paper  and  electronic  clearing.  In  doing  so,  it  applies  the 
provisions of the Central Bank Act, 1997 that require all payment systems operating in the State to be 
approved, and have their rules vetted, by the Central Bank. In approving any payment system's rules, 
we must have regard to the "...proper and orderly regulation of the payment system concerned and of 
competition  between  payment  systems...".  In  assessing  the  soundness  of  these  domestic  payment 
systems, we use as reference the internationally recognised principles developed by the Committee 
on Payment and Settlement Systems of the central banks of the G10 countries. 
In  addition  to  these  direct  arrangements,  the  Central  Bank  is  involved  in  a  number  of  co-operative 
oversight roles. Thus, in relation to the TARGET system, which interlinks all EU euro-denominated real 
time  gross  settlement  systems,  we  participate  in  the  Eurosystem's  oversight  arrangements.  The 
Central Bank will continue this oversight role in relation to TARGET2, the successor to the existing 
TARGET system, which is due to come on stream in November 2007.  
In  addition  to  oversight  of  payment  systems,  the  1997  Act  makes  the  Bank  responsible  for  the 
oversight  of  securities  settlement  systems.  However,  apart  from  the  NTMA's  settlement  system  for 
Exchequer Notes, Ireland actually has no domestic securities settlement infrastructure. Trades in Irish 
Government  bonds  are  settled  in  the  Belgium-based  Euroclear  Bank,  while  trades  in  Irish  equities 
settle in CREST which is located in the UK. Because of this, we have made arrangements whereby we 
co-operate with the National Bank of Belgium in relation to the oversight of Euroclear Bank, under the 
terms of a Memorandum of Understanding. Discussions are on-going with the UK's Financial Services 
Authority in relation to a similar Memorandum of Understanding on the oversight of CREST.  
These  arrangements  illustrate  the  increasingly  cross-border  nature  of  payments  and  settlement 
activities  that  require  co-operation  among  central  bank  overseers.  In  my  view,  central  banks  have 
successfully met these challenges, as can be seen in the examples that I've mentioned showing the 
variety,  flexibility  and  co-operative  nature  of  the  arrangements  in  which  the  Central  Bank  here  is 
involved.  
As I've already mentioned, the role of payment system oversight has expanded in recent years, and 
the  Eurosystem  is  becoming  increasingly  involved  in  the  oversight  of  payment  instruments  such  as 
debit cards, credit cards and cheques and payment networks. As a consequence, the Central Bank 
will  also  become  more  active  in  this  area.  Naturally,  the  intensity  of  this  oversight  will  be 
commensurate with the perceived potential systemic impact of these instruments. 
I hope that this summary of the Central Bank's payment systems role has gone some way towards 
explaining just what it is that we do in this field. In order to reach a wider audience it is our intention to 
publish, in the coming year, a detailed report on our work in the area of payments systems oversight. 
Our oversight role - covering, as it does, payment systems and payment instruments - leads naturally 
to  an  interest  in  the  issues  being  covered  here  today,  SEPA  and  the  National  Payments 
Implementation Programme. 
2 
 BIS Review 122/2006
SEPA 
Moving  on  to  the  Single  Euro  Payments  Area  (or  SEPA)  initiative,  its  aim  is  to  advance  European 
integration  by  putting  in  place  a  competitive  and  innovative  euro-area  retail  payments  market  that 
should bring with it higher service levels, more efficient products and cheaper alternatives for making 
payments.  
The origins of SEPA lie in the introduction of the euro in 1999. Although wholesale - or interbank - 
payments  were  catered  for  by  TARGET,  citizens  of  the  participating  countries  did  not  have  a 
comparable facility for making cross-border, non-cash, low cost, retail payments in euro, even though 
they shared common banknotes and coins once the euro cash changeover took place in 2002.  
Even now, each national retail payments market remains essentially isolated from those of other euro-
area member states, with levels of efficiency and service varying from one euro-area member state to 
another.  As  a  result,  cross-border  retail  payments  in  euro  can  be  slower  and  less  efficient  than 
comparable  payments  made  within  any  one  country.  This  is  because  payment  systems  rules, 
procedures,  standards  and  technical  systems  vary  from  country  to  country.  Therefore,  while  goods 
and services can be traded freely across the euro area, the underlying payments are still hampered by 
national borders and arrangements, so that the completion of the 'internal market' is to some degree 
frustrated.  
The  SEPA  project  aims  to  ensure  that  all  consumers  throughout  the  euro  area,  whether  individual 
citizens  or  corporate  entities,  will  have  available  to  them  common  retail  payment  instruments.  In 
principle,  at  the  end  of  the  process  in  2010,  all  euro-area  bank  customers  will  be  able  to  use  one 
payment  account  and  one  set  of  standardized  instruments.  This  simplified  payments  world  that  will 
result from SEPA will be a major benefit for those who make cross-border payments.  
When the SEPA project is completed, all euro area payments will, in effect, become domestic and the 
current differentiation between national and cross-border payments will disappear. Competition should 
be enhanced, since all consumers using payment services, and not just those making cross-border 
payments,  will  be  able  to  choose  between  payment  service  providers  throughout  the  euro  area, 
regardless of where they might be located. This should foster innovation in the provision of payment 
services. It should also not be forgotten that SEPA will bring the benefits associated with a very real 
modernisation of payment functionality throughout the euro area. Thus, while it is acknowledged that 
SEPA  undoubtedly  involves  large-scale  investment  by  the  banking  industry,  in  the  longer-run,  the 
opening  up  of  the  euro  area  payments  market  to  competition  means  that  the  industry  itself  should 
share in the benefits of this project. 
One very topical debate in the SEPA arena relates to how payment cards - in particular debit cards - 
can become SEPA-compliant. In this regard, the Eurosystem recently issued a progress report on its 
views  on  the  development  of  the  "SEPA  for  Cards".  The  challenge  in  this  area  is  to  ensure  a 
successful transition to a more integrated market while at the same time preserving the efficiency and 
low cost levels that characterise existing national payment card schemes. SEPA migration should not 
lead  to  any  deterioration  in  conditions for  cardholders and  merchants.  This  is an  area  that  is  being 
closely monitored by the Eurosystem and will be the subject of discussions with all of those involved.  
While  there  is  strong  support  from  the  Eurosystem  and  the  EU  Commission  for  SEPA,  it  remains 
primarily a market-driven project. The role of the Eurosystem (of which the Bank is part) in relation to 
SEPA  is  that  of  a  catalyst,  or  facilitator,  while  leaving  its  implementation  to  the  private  sector. 
However, the Eurosystem works actively with the EPC - the European Payments Council - and market 
participants  to  ensure  that  the  necessary  planning  and  preparatory  work  is  carried  out  in  a  co-
ordinated way.  
Since its formation in 2002, the EPC has acted as the European banking industry's decision-making 
and  co-ordination  body  for  SEPA,  and  has  made significant  progress  towards  making  the  project  a 
reality, and creating a solid foundation upon which it can be built. In practical terms, the EPC is the 
body responsible for defining the rules, procedures and standards that will apply to the new SEPA-
compliant payment instruments that the banks will use to develop competitive products to offer to their 
customers.  
As the body with primary responsibility for the implementation of SEPA in Ireland, I'd like to take this 
opportunity to commend IPSO on the speedy preparation of the Irish national SEPA migration plan, 
which was agreed and signed off by the chief executives of all IPSO member banks in December last 
year; Ireland was in fact one of the first countries to complete its national SEPA migration plan. 
BIS Review 122/2006 
 3
It is essential that the SEPA implementation and migration process include the necessary degree of 
engagement with all interested parties. In this regard, I am pleased to see that a SEPA Stakeholder 
Forum  has  been  established  by  IPSO  and  has  already  held  two  meetings,  at  which  government 
departments,  public  utilities,  other  direct  debit  originators  and  business  organisations  have  all  been 
represented. This is a development that the Central Bank very much encourages, and I hope that the 
Forum,  and  conferences  like  this  one,  will  play  a  significant  role  in  increasing  public  awareness  of 
SEPA  over  the  next  couple  of  years.  I  also  strongly  support  the  focus  on  communication  that,  I 
understand, is planned for 2007. 
The European banking industry cannot, however, operate in a vacuum. SEPA is a major European 
objective  in  every  sense,  and  public  authority  support  for  SEPA  is  therefore  vital.  As  with  the 
Eurosystem, SEPA is firmly rooted in EU Commission policy, and strongly supported and promoted by 
both institutions. The EU Commission sees SEPA as part of the European integration process, and will 
facilitate  the  initiative  by  providing  a  common  EU  legal  environment  via  the  proposed  Payments 
Services Directive. Strong support for the SEPA project has also been expressed recently by the EU 
Council of Ministers of Economic Affairs and Finance, the ECOFIN Council. 
National Payments Implementation Programme 
Finally  I'd  like  to  turn  to  the  National  Payments  Implementation  Programme.  In  undertaking  this 
programme of work, IPSO has stated that its intention is to develop a future payments infrastructure in 
Ireland that would be seen as a world class payments environment 'which delivers efficiencies to all 
sectors of the economy, is inclusive of all sectors of society, and shares the benefits universally". The 
Central Bank fully shares this objective and stands ready to assist, in any way that it can, the efforts of 
all  involved  in  delivering  the  goals  of  the  strategy.  Rapid  progress  in  implementing  the  Programme 
would do much to enhance the efficiency of the whole payments area and impact most positively on 
the competitiveness of the entire Irish economy. 
The  importance  of  developing  Ireland's  payment  systems  infrastructure  has  been  recognised  at  the 
highest level; as well as IPSO and its member banks, various Government departments, the Central 
Bank and the Financial Regulator have all been involved from an early stage. It is encouraging to note 
that there has been extensive consultation with many other groups. The involvement of as broad a 
constituency as possible is undoubtedly the best way to achieve a successful outcome. 
The  development  of  Ireland's  payment  systems  infrastructure  -  particularly  in  the  area  of  retail 
payments  will  be  very  much  influenced  by  external  factors,  principally  driven  by  the  SEPA  project. 
There  is  significant  common  ground  between  SEPA  and  the  national  payments  implementation 
programme, with the focus in both being very much on electronic payments. Both initiatives suggest 
that there is little future for the cheque as a payment instrument, and certainly not in the context of 
making cross-border payments.  
Cheques have been characterised as both expensive and relatively inefficient, and the Central Bank 
and the Eurosystem concur with this view. Indeed, in its SEPA 4th Progress Report, the Eurosystem 
went as far as to state that "Cheques...will...ultimately disappear when it becomes clear to their users 
that other means of payment provide better service. By 1 January 2008, it is expected that national 
banking  communities  in  the  euro  area  will  have  put  in  place  a  strategy  for  promoting  the  use  of 
alternative  electronic  means  of  payment..."  and  that  "By  the  end  of  2010...the  use  of  cheques...is 
expected to follow a clear downward trend...".  
To  ensure  that  the  national  payments  initiative  achieves  its  full potential,  the  Irish  banks must  offer 
electronic payment methods that are: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
The public authorities also have an important role to play in ensuring the success of the Programme 
by promoting, in respect of their own payments business, the use of electronic means of payments.  
safe and efficient; 
easy to use; 
accessible to all, and 
no more expensive than existing national instruments. 
4 
 BIS Review 122/2006
Conclusion 
To  conclude,  I  hope  that  I  have  been  able  to  clarify  for  you  the  role  of  the  Central  Bank  in  the 
payments area. I will reiterate that we stand ready to assist IPSO, the Irish banking community and 
others involved in any way possible to deliver on SEPA and the National Payments Implementation 
Programme.  I  would  like  to  thank  you  for  your  attention,  and  also  would  like  to  extend  to  the 
participants in this afternoon's 'breakout sessions' my best wishes for a successful outcome to their 
deliberations. 
BIS Review 122/2006 
 5
