Klaus Liebscher: Southeastern Europe – chances and challenges of 
European integration 
Speech by Dr Klaus Liebscher, Governor of the Austrian National Bank, at the Southeastern 
European Financial Forum, Bucharest, 17 May 2007. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen! 
It is a great honor for me to address this distinguished audience here at the Southeastern 
European Financial Forum. I am pleased to discuss the success the Southeastern European 
countries  have  achieved  so  far  during  their  catching-up  and  European  integration  process 
and the challenges they face. But first of all, let me congratulate Romania and Bulgaria on 
their  accession  to  the  European  Union  on  January  1,  2007.  Both  countries  are  now  fully 
participating in the further progress of European integration. 
I  think  it  is  fair  to  say  that  Southeastern  Europe  is  a  rather  heterogeneous  region,  which 
means  that  it  is  important  to  adopt  a  differentiated  approach  to  analyzing  developments 
within  this  region.  Yet  given  my  short  time  slot  here,  a  certain  degree  of  generalization  is 
inevitable. 
Overall,  Southeastern  Europe  has  performed  well  in  economic  terms  in  the  recent  years. 
Output  growth  has  been  solid  in  2005  and  2006  at  average  rates  of  around  5%.  Inflation 
decreased  considerably  and  the  renewal  of  some  inflationary  pressures  in  2005  and  early 
2006 has apparently been temporary. Noticeable progress has also been achieved in fiscal 
consolidation,  and  fiscal  balances  in  Southeastern  Europe  show  moderate  deficits  or 
surpluses. 
Furthermore, the privatization process is now well advanced in most countries, with the share 
of the private sector in GDP coming to between 55 and 75%. 
At the same time, challenges remain in several areas. 
• 
First,  despite  strong  economic  growth,  unemployment  has  remained  pronounced 
across the region, reaching levels as high as around 40% in some countries. Thus, 
reducing  unemployment  and  increasing  employment  levels  remains  a  significant 
challenge, especially in a number of the smaller countries of the region.  
Success  in  this  area  would  not  only  bring  improvement  to  the  everyday  life  of 
citizens and thus contribute to political and social stability, but help raise potential 
and actual output in these countries. 
Second, external imbalances remain large throughout most of Southeastern Europe, 
with  current  account  deficits  at  higher  single-digit  or  even  at  double  digit  levels. 
Although  these  deficits  are  to  a  significant  degree  financed  by  foreign  direct 
investment  inflows,  the  region  remains  heavily  reliant  on  external  finance.  This 
exposes  the  countries  to  interest  rate  developments  in  industrial  countries  and  to 
changes in investor sentiment.  
Third,  notwithstanding  progress  in  privatization  in  recent  years,  the  share  of  the 
private sector in GDP remains lower in the region than in those Member States that 
joined the EU in 2004. 
Last but not least, progress with structural reforms in the area of factor markets and 
in the judiciary has remained uneven. 
    I  have  no  doubt  that  the  EU  association  and  accession  process  will  continue  to  have  a 
significant  beneficial  impact  on  reform  efforts  in  the  region.  In  the  case  of  Bulgaria  and 
Romania, EU accession has contributed to an improvement of indicators of economic reform, 
BIS Review 89/2007 
 1
governance and the business environment. I am optimistic that the integration process will 
lead to similar benefits for the other countries in Southeastern Europe. In addition, the new 
Member States as well as Bulgaria and Romania have achieved a high degree of integration 
with the EU-15 over the past decade. Trade links deepened in both directions following the 
start of the transition process, owing – among other things – to the gradual dismantling of 
trade barriers in the framework of Association Agreements. The EU-15 is today not only the 
most important trading partner in the region, but also its biggest foreign investor. As a result, 
the EU-15 countries account for approximately two thirds of the total FDI stock in the region. 
This is particularly true for the banking sector, where foreign-owned banks have gained an 
average market share of around 80%.  
Austrian  companies  in  general,  and  Austrian  banks  in  particular,  identified  market 
opportunities in Central and Eastern Europe at a relatively early stage and have established 
a considerable presence in the region by now. 
With an average market share in banking sector assets of almost 25%, Austria’s banks are 
market leaders in Central and Eastern Europe.1 More than one-third of the profits of the six 
largest Austrian banks already come from this region. 
As Austrian banks continue to move into the southeast and east, their exposure is broadly 
diversified,  which  is  intended  to  contain  risks.  At  the  same  time,  the  Austrian  authorities 
closely monitor potential challenges involved. Stress tests indicate that the banks’ exposure 
is manageable and potential contagion effects on Austrian banks should be very limited. 
The  broadly  favorable  economic  developments  I  sketched  earlier  have  provided  a  solid 
background  for  financial  sector  developments  in  Southeastern  Europe  over  the  past  few 
years. 
With  respect  to  the  institutional  framework  and  reforms,  as  measured  by  the  EBRD’s 
transition  indicators,  Southeastern  Europe  has  advanced  substantially  in  terms  of  overall 
banking system transformation. Like in other countries of Central and Eastern Europe, the 
privatization of large parts of the banking sectors was a characteristic feature in the region, 
although  in  most  of  Southeastern  Europe  (apart  from  Croatia  and  the  Republic  of 
Macedonia) privatization took place more recently. 
Institutional reforms and ownership transformation contributed significantly to the deepening 
of  financial  intermediation  in  the  region,  which  has  advanced  steadily  and  dynamically,  in 
particular  in  Bulgaria,  Croatia,  and  Bosnia  and  Herzegovina.  In  Albania,  Serbia  and  the 
Republic of Macedonia, this process has been less even, and bank assets started to expand 
somewhat later. 
The growth of credit to the private sector, in particular to households, has been fairly strong, 
while credit to the public sector has remained steady or even declined. 
In the majority of countries in the region (apart from Bulgaria, Croatia and Romania), credit 
growth has essentially been financed by deposit growth, and changes in banks’ net foreign 
asset  positions  appear  to  be  associated,  to  an  important  extent,  with  rising  net  claims  on 
central banks. 
This  development  distinguishes  Southeastern  Europe  from  Central  Europe,  where  foreign 
financing has – especially recently – played a bigger role. 
Despite  the  dynamic  developments  of  the  past  few  years,  the  degree  of  intermediation  in 
Southeastern Europe, with the exception of Croatia, is below the average level observed in 
the  CEE-8  countries  and  well  below  the  average  of  the  euro  area.  This  is,  however,  not 
surprising,  given  that  the  GDP-per-capita  levels  in  most  countries  of  the  region  are  also 
                                                 
1   Central-, Eastern- and Southeastern Europe, excluding CIS-countries. 
2 
 BIS Review 89/2007
substantially  lower,  and  there  is  an  empirical  regularity  that  financial  depth  increases  with 
rising GDP-per-capita levels. 
Anticipating  a  catching-up  in  income  levels,  prospects  of  further  financial  deepening  in 
Southeastern Europe are certainly intact. 
Let me also point out that prudential indicators of banks in the region have remained broadly 
solid and have in some cases improved. Despite falling moderately in recent years, capital 
adequacy ratios in Southeastern Europe remain at double-digit levels and are higher than in 
the  Central  European  and  Baltic  countries  and  certainly  much  above  the  Basel  minimum 
threshold of 8%. Certainly, retaining a solid capital buffer against risks is highly appropriate 
and advisable. 
In most countries of the region, the share of nonperforming loans has fallen in the first half of 
this decade. Romania and Serbia are exceptions in this respect, but in both countries, the 
rise in the share of NPLs is attributable to the tightening of classification rules. At the same 
time, it should be borne in mind that NPL ratios are lagging indicators. 
An  important  feature  of  bank  intermediation  in  Southeastern  Europe  is  the  large  role  of 
foreign  currencies  both  on  banks’  asset  and  liability  sides.  It  goes  without  saying  that  this 
currency substitution involves risks. 
This  is  particularly  true  for  foreign  currency  lending  to  unhedged  borrowers,  especially 
households. The resulting foreign currency exposure of their clients increases banks’ indirect 
foreign exchange risk and thus their credit risk. 
Finally, in most SEE countries, bank profitability has improved substantially during the first 
half of the current decade. Notwithstanding this improvement, the return on equity levels in 
2005  were  –  with  the  exception  of  Albania  –  below  the  average  recorded  in  the  Central 
European and Baltic countries. 
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  monetary  integration  process  of candidate  and  potential candidate 
countries2 before and after their accession to the European Union. 
On  their  way  into  the  EU,  the  countries  in  Southeastern  Europe  are  free  in  choosing  their 
monetary  and  exchange  rate  policy  strategies.  This  is  clearly  reflected  in  the  variety  of 
exchange  rate  regimes  in  place  across  the  region,  which  range  from  currency  boards  to 
lightly managed floats. 
Moreover, Montenegro and Kosovo are unilaterally euroized and use the euro as their sole 
legal tender. Let me stress that these two cases are very special, originating from a post-war 
crisis resolution setting, and definitely do not constitute a precedent for other countries. 
EU accession represents the first of three stages in the monetary integration process of EU 
Member States. Upon accession to the European Union, new Member States are required to 
treat their exchange rate policies as a matter of common interest and to pursue price stability 
as the primary objective of monetary policy. 
However,  beyond  these  obligations,  the  choice  of  the  respective  monetary  and  exchange 
rate strategy remains, in the first instance, a responsibility and prerogative of the individual 
Member  States.  At  the  same  time,  EU  Member  States  (with  the  notable  exception  of 
Denmark and the United Kingdom) are committed to striving for the eventual adoption of the 
euro. 
                                                 
2   Croatia  and  Turkey  are  candidate  countries.  They  started  accession  negotiations  on  3  October  2005.  In 
December 2005, the European Council granted the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia the status of a 
candidate  country;  accession  negotiations  have  not  started.  All  the  other  Western  Balkan  countries  are 
potential  candidate  countries:  Albania,  Bosnia  and  Herzegovina,  Montenegro,  and  Serbia  including  Kosovo 
under UN Security Council Resolution 1244. 
BIS Review 89/2007 
 3
According to the economic reasoning underlying Economic and Monetary Union (EMU), the 
eventual  adoption  of  the  euro  is  envisaged  as  the  endpoint  of  a  structured  convergence 
process within a multilateral framework. 
Participation in the Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM II)3 represents the second stage in the 
monetary integration process of non-euro area Member States. The basic idea behind ERM 
II is that this mechanism should help to ensure that participating Member States orient their 
policies  toward  stability;  it  should  foster  sustainable  nominal  and  real  convergence  and 
thereby help them in their efforts to adopt the euro. 
Participation in ERM II is voluntary. However, as participation in ERM II is a precondition for 
the  eventual  adoption  of  the  euro,  Member  States  are  expected  to  join  the  mechanism  at 
some stage. ERM II membership can take place any time after EU accession. However, to 
ensure smooth participation in ERM II, major policy adjustments – for example with regard to 
price  liberalization  and  fiscal  policy  –  would  need  to  be  undertaken  before  entering  the 
mechanism. And an agreement among all parties involved in ERM II must be achieved on 
the central rate and the width of the fluctuation band. 
Moreover,  participation  in  ERM  II  requires  sound  monetary,  fiscal,  wage  and  structural 
policies.  The  importance  of  this  statement  cannot  be  overstressed,  as  a  sustainable 
catching-up  process  and  in  particular  investor  confidence  –  and  subsequently  financial 
market and exchange rate stability – rest on a stability-orientated macroeconomic policy mix 
and flexible and efficient economic structures. 
Euro  adoption  and  full  participation  in  EMU  represent  the  third  and  final  stage  in  the 
monetary convergence process. Euro adoption requires the achievement of a high degree of 
sustainable convergence, measured by the fulfillment of the conditions set out in the Treaty 
and its Protocols. 
Every  two  years,  or  upon  request by  a  Member  State,  the  European  Commission  and  the 
European Central Bank prepare Convergence Reports to assess the progress achieved in 
terms of economic and legal convergence. I would like to emphasize that this assessment is 
based  on  the  principle  of  equal  treatment  both  among  non-euro  area  members  and  in 
comparison with current euro area countries. The application of the convergence criteria for 
new EU Member States must be no more, but also no less strict than for the current euro 
area countries. 
A  key  factor  in  examining  the  fulfillment  of  the  convergence  criteria  is  sustainability,  as 
convergence must be achieved on a lasting basis and not just at a given point in time. Let me 
emphasize that in this process of adopting the euro, quality must not be compromised for the 
sake of speed! 
Let me conclude by taking a step back, in order to get a broader view of what all this and 
also this conference are about. I am aware that for many people the European integration 
process  has,  unfortunately,  become  synonymous  mainly  for  regulations,  markets,  trade, 
profits  and  losses.  However,  the  EU  is  much  more  than  that:  The  European  Union  is  the 
most important and successful peace project Europe has ever seen. 
Today, the European Union not only comprises countries from the western part of Europe, 
but also free and democratic countries from Central, Eastern and Southeastern Europe. And 
the  integration  process  of  the  Southeastern  European  candidate  and  potential  candidate 
countries is moving on. Some 15 years ago, such a development appeared highly unrealistic, 
if not impossible. Yet, visionaries, determined policymakers and the people of Europe have 
translated this project into reality. 
                                                 
3   ERM II is a multilateral arrangement of fixed, but adjustable, exchange rates with a central rate and a standard 
fluctuation band of +/–15% against the euro. 
4 
 BIS Review 89/2007
This  success  reminds  us  not  to  lose  sight  of  our  long-term  goals  and  visions.  Yet,  a 
sustainable catching-up and integration process requires strenuous preparations, hard work 
and a lot of discipline. As a consequence, the Southeastern European countries which have 
gone through this process will be in better shape and in a stronger position than before. And 
not only the people in these countries, but all Europeans are going to gain as integration is 
advancing and thus stability and prosperity are progressing in Europe!   
BIS Review 89/2007 
 5
