European Central Bank: Press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, 
and Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 
6 September 2007. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  let  me  welcome  you  to  our  press  conference  and  report  on  the 
outcome of today’s meeting of the ECB’s Governing Council. The meeting was also attended 
by the President of the Eurogroup, Prime Minister Juncker, and Commissioner Almunia. 
On the basis of our regular economic and monetary analyses, we decided at today’s meeting 
to leave the key ECB interest rates unchanged. The information that has become available 
since  our  previous  meeting  has  confirmed  that  the  medium-term  outlook  for  price  stability 
remains subject to upside risks, as identified by both our economic and monetary analyses. 
Incoming  macroeconomic  data  also  confirm  the  strong  fundamentals  of  the  euro  area 
economy and support a favourable medium-term outlook for real GDP growth. Against this 
background, our monetary policy stance is still on the accommodative side with, inter alia, 
money and credit growth vigorous in the euro area. At the same time, the financial market 
volatility and reappraisal of risk of recent weeks have led to an increase in uncertainty. Given 
this high level of uncertainty, it is appropriate to gather additional information and to examine 
new  data  before  drawing  further  conclusions  for  monetary  policy  in  the  context  of  our 
medium-term-oriented  monetary  policy  strategy  aimed  at  delivering  price  stability. 
Accordingly, the Governing Council will monitor very closely all developments. On the basis 
of our assessment, and by acting in a firm and timely manner, we will ensure that risks to 
price  stability  over  the  medium  term  do  not  materialise  and  that  medium-term  inflation 
expectations remain firmly anchored in line with price stability. This is all the more important 
at  times  of  financial  market  volatility  and  increased  uncertainty.  As  regards  the  financial 
markets, we will continue to pay great attention to developments over the period to come. 
Allow me to explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. 
All in all, the data available suggest that economic activity in the euro area is continuing to 
expand at sustained rates. Euro area real GDP growth in the second quarter moderated to 
0.3% quarter on quarter, compared with 0.7% in the previous quarter. However, due account 
should be taken of the volatility of these growth rates. Accordingly, economic growth during 
the first half of 2007, as a whole, was in line with potential growth. Data on activity in the third 
quarter  –  from  various  confidence  surveys  and  indicator-based  estimates  –  remain 
favourable overall and support the assessment that real GDP is growing at sustained rates. 
In particular, the latest data on unemployment are favourable and the levels of all confidence 
indicators to August were high. Global economic activity is expected to remain robust, as the 
likely slowdown in the United States is expected to be largely offset by the continued strong 
growth in emerging markets. This will continue to provide support to euro area exports and 
investment. In addition, consumption growth in the euro area should strengthen further over 
time, in line with developments in real disposable income, as employment conditions improve 
further.  That  said,  in  view  of  the  overall  potential  impact  of  increased  financial  market 
volatility  and  the  re-pricing  of  risk  on  the  real  economy,  appropriate  monitoring  of  the 
economy’s evolution is necessary.  
This outlook is also reflected in the September 2007 ECB staff macroeconomic projections 
for the euro area, which for the first time include Cyprus and Malta. The projections foresee 
average annual real GDP growth in a range between 2.2% and 2.8% in 2007, and between 
1.8% and 2.8% in 2008. In comparison with the June Eurosystem staff projections, the range 
projected for real GDP growth in 2007 has been revised slightly downwards, mainly reflecting 
the  assumptions  of  somewhat  higher  oil  prices  and  slightly  tighter  market  financing 
conditions due to higher average risk premia.  
BIS Review 96/2007 
 1
In the view of the Governing Council, the ranges presented serve as a good reminder of the 
general  uncertainty  surrounding  economic  projections,  which  it  is  worthwhile  emphasising 
given  the  current  volatility  in  the  financial  markets.  The  risks  to  these  projections  for 
economic growth are judged to lie on the downside. These downside risks relate mainly to a 
potentially  broader  impact  from  the  ongoing  reappraisal  of  risk  in  financial  markets,  global 
imbalances and protectionist pressures, as well as further oil and commodity price rises.  
With  respect  to  price  developments,  according  to  Eurostat’s  flash  estimate,  annual  HICP 
inflation was 1.8% in August 2007, the same rate as in the previous month. However, over 
the  remainder  of  this  year,  inflation  rates  are  likely  to  increase  again  to  above  2%.  In  the 
September  2007  ECB  staff  projections,  annual  HICP  inflation  is  projected  to  lie  between 
1.9% and 2.1% in 2007, and between 1.5% and 2.5% in 2008. In 2008, a declining impact 
from indirect taxes and energy prices is expected to be compensated by higher pressures 
from unit labour costs. Compared with the June 2007 Eurosystem staff projections, the new 
ranges for 2007 and 2008 are within the ranges previously projected.  
The Governing Council is of the view that risks to this outlook for price developments lie on 
the upside. These upside risks include increases in indirect taxes beyond those anticipated 
thus  far  and  further  increases  in  oil  prices  and  prices  for  agricultural  products.  More 
fundamentally,  stronger  than  expected  wage  developments  and  an  increase  in  the  pricing 
power in market segments with low competition may occur. Such developments would pose 
upside  risks  to  price  stability.  It  is  therefore  crucial  that  all  parties  concerned  meet  their 
responsibilities. The potential materialisation of these risks – or their abatement – requires 
close monitoring. 
The monetary analysis confirms the prevailing upside risks to price stability at medium to 
longer-term horizons. On the basis of the latest available data (covering the period to the end 
of  July),  the  underlying  rate  of  monetary  and  credit  expansion  remains  strong.  This  is 
reflected in the rapid growth of the broad monetary aggregate, M3, which grew at an annual 
rate of 11.7% in July, and the strength of MFI loans to the private sector, which continue to 
increase at double-digit rates on an annual basis. 
When identifying and assessing the policy-relevant underlying trends in monetary expansion, 
it  is  important  to  look  through  short-term  volatility  and  the  impact  of  temporary  factors  on 
developments in specific monetary aggregates. Taking the appropriate broader and medium-
term-oriented perspective, there are several indications that increases in short-term interest 
rates over recent quarters have influenced monetary developments. For example, increases 
in short-term rates have contributed to a more modest expansion of M1, as the opportunity 
cost of holding the most liquid components of M3 has increased. Moreover, higher short-term 
rates have led to some stabilisation in the growth of MFI credit to the private sector, albeit at 
double-digit annual rates, with the growth of household borrowing moderating as house price 
dynamics  and  real  estate  activity  have  slowed.  However,  these  developments  are  yet  to 
dampen  the  overall  rate  of  monetary  expansion,  as  the  flattening  of  the  yield  curve  has 
increased  the  attractiveness  of  monetary  assets  relative  to  less  liquid  longer-maturity 
instruments, thereby causing broad money growth to rise. Furthermore, the growth of loans 
to non-financial companies has shown renewed vigour in recent months. 
In the current situation, let me remind you that volatility in financial markets can temporarily 
exert considerable influence over monetary dynamics. In previous episodes, private sector 
perceptions of and attitudes towards risk, and the resulting portfolio behaviour, have strongly 
affected monetary developments. The monetary data for July may already have been partly 
influenced by such portfolio considerations and this could possibly apply even more to the 
August data to be released later in September. However, as has been demonstrated in the 
past,  an  in-depth  and  comprehensive  analysis  of  the  monetary  data  can  help  in  our 
understanding  of  the  impact  of  financial  developments  on  monetary  developments  and  to 
extract the policy-relevant signal in monetary growth with regard to longer-term inflationary 
2 
 BIS Review 96/2007
trends.  In  such  circumstances,  the  broad-based  approach  adopted  in  the  ECB’s  monetary 
analysis is at a premium. 
Overall, the continued vigour of underlying monetary and credit expansion points to upside 
risks  to  price  stability  over  the  medium  to  longer  term.  Monetary  developments  therefore 
continue to require very careful monitoring. 
To sum up, a cross-check of the information identified under the economic analysis with the 
outcome  of  the  monetary  analysis  has  confirmed  the  existence  of  upside  risks  to  price 
stability over the medium term – against the background of the strong fundamentals of the 
euro area economy. Accordingly, our monetary policy stance is still on the accommodative 
side with, inter alia, money and credit growth vigorous in the euro area. At the same time, 
given  the  high  level  of  uncertainty,  additional  information  is  needed  before  further 
conclusions  for  monetary  policy  can  be  drawn.  Accordingly,  the  Governing  Council  will 
monitor very closely all developments. On the basis of our assessment, and by acting in a 
firm and timely manner, we will ensure that risks to price stability over the medium term do 
not  materialise  and  that  medium-term  inflation  expectations  remain  firmly  anchored  in  line 
with  price  stability.  In  the  current  context,  it  is  all  the  more  important  that  inflation 
expectations  remain  firmly  anchored  in  line  with  price  stability.  As  regards  the  financial 
markets, we will continue to pay great attention to developments over the period to come. 
In the area of fiscal policy, progress in structural fiscal consolidation remains slow and there 
are  risks  that  some  countries  will  pursue  expansionary  pro-cyclical  fiscal  policies.  For  the 
execution of 2007 budgets and the planning of 2008 budgets, it is crucial that the mistakes 
made  during  the  previous  economic  upswing  of  1999-2000  are  not  repeated.  At  present, 
countries  with  fiscal  imbalances  need  to  correct  them  in  line  with  the  requirements  of  the 
Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  The  commitment  in  the  Eurogroup  to  reach  medium-term 
budgetary objectives in 2008 or 2009, and by 2010 at the latest, has to be respected by all 
euro  area  member  countries.  Those  countries  that  have  already  achieved  sound  fiscal 
positions need to abstain from pro-cyclical fiscal policies. 
Turning to structural reform, the Governing Council welcomes further efforts to increase the 
productive capacity of the euro area through higher employment. Euro area labour markets 
have shown clear signs of progress in the last few years, partly reflecting the impact of past 
labour market reforms. Further progress is needed, however, to enhance occupational and 
geographical  labour  mobility  and  skill  creation,  so  as  to  overcome  the  comparatively  low 
rates of labour market participation and still high unemployment rates in some countries and 
regions.  
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
BIS Review 96/2007 
 3
