Tarisa Watanagase: The Thai economy – monetary policy and the challenges of 
globalization 
Speech  by  Dr  Tarisa  Watanagase,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the  British  Chamber  of 
Commerce Luncheon Talk, Bangkok, 11 June 2007. 
 Chairman Bain, Mr. Ambassador, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I would like to begin by thanking Chairman Bain for his kind invitation for me to speak at this luncheon 
before  all  of  you:  the  distinguished  members  and  guests  of  the  British  Chamber  of  Commerce.  As 
Thailand’s oldest chamber of commerce, you have shown your commitment to the Thai economy. As 
Thailand’s largest non-Asian chamber of commerce, you represent a significant economic force. And 
most  importantly,  the  gathering  here  today  demonstrates  your  active  participation  in  the  future  of 
Thailand. 
It therefore gives me great pleasure to share my views on the prospects of the Thai economy with you 
today. I particularly look forward to your questions, your comments, and a lively exchange of views. 
Distinguished Guests, 
Following mass street protests against the previous administration, a military coup and the annulment 
of the 1997 constitution in September last year, we continue to see heightened political uncertainty. 
Much has happened over the past six months. On the political front, the recent historic ruling by the 
Constitutional  Tribunal  removed  some  political  uncertainty.  But  until  a  new  constitution  and  a 
democratically elected government are firmly in place, political uncertainty is bound to remain a factor 
that affects Thailand’s near-term economic prospects. 
Economic uncertainty has also increased. Around the end of 2006, we saw rapid appreciation of the 
baht,  declining  consumer  confidence,  and  weakened  consumption  and  investment.  In  addition,  the 
implementation of the reserve requirement, the amended Foreign Business Act, and the compulsory 
licensing of certain medicines proved to be unpleasant surprises to the investor community, local and 
international. 
Notwithstanding the less than favorable political and economic environment and despite both external 
and internal shocks, the Thai economy has shown remarkable resilience. Recent figures show GDP 
expanding by 4.3 percent in the first quarter of the year. Net exports and government expenditures 
expanded  well.  However,  household  consumption  slowed  while  investment  contracted.  Much  of  the 
slowdown has been due to the rise in political uncertainty. Softened business sentiments led firms to 
delay their investment plans. Decreased consumer confidence led households to delay purchases of 
durables, such as automobiles and motorcycles. 
In  light  of  the  diminished  pressure  on  prices,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  responded  by  shifting  to  an 
accommodative monetary policy stance. Since the beginning of the year, the policy interest rate was 
lowered  from  5  per  cent  to  the  present  rate  of  3.5  per  cent.  At  this  juncture,  the  Monetary  Policy 
Committee  deems  the  current  level  of  policy  interest  rate  to  be  supportive  of  economic  expansion 
while maintaining stable inflation. 
At this point, allow me to elaborate on Thailand’s economic prospects going forward. Our outlook for 
the  Thai  economy  remains  positive.  Present  data  and  our  forecasts  point  to  a  satisfactory  growth 
outlook for this year and next year. Our forecasts, taking into account the potential risk of high and 
volatile oil prices, show that the Thai economy could grow by 3.8-4.8 percent in 2007 and accelerating 
to 4.3-5.8 percent in 2008. The growth is expected to come mainly from exports, given healthy global 
demand, additional government spending and investment in public infrastructure, as well as lower oil 
prices.  Core  inflation,  or  inflation  excluding  raw  foods  and  energy,  is  forecast  to  remain  within  a 
comfortable  range  of  1-2  percent  in  both  2007  and  2008.  Fundamentals  remain  strong  with  low 
inflation, a current account surplus, and manageable levels of public and external debt. 
But  a  positive  outlook  by  no  means  allows  for  complacency.  Political  risk  remains  substantial.  The 
threat of a disorderly unwinding of global financial imbalances remains imminent; and by this I mean a 
surge in capital inflows still looms. And oil prices continue to be difficult to predict. We must constantly 
work to manage current challenges and prepare for those in the future. 
BIS Review 64/2007 
 1
Undoubtedly,  many  of  you  here  are  concerned  about  Thailand’s  recent  economic  and  policy 
developments  and  the  considerable  challenges  ahead.  Some  among  the  international  community 
have voiced concerns that Thailand is withdrawing from the global economy. I have therefore chosen 
to  focus  the  rest  of  my  talk  today  on  coping  with  the  challenges  of  economic  and  financial 
globalization. 
In  particular,  I  hope  to  address  any  lingering  fears  and  concerns  by  concentrating  on  three  key 
issues. First, I would like to draw your attention to the benefits and challenges of globalization from 
the perspective and actual experience of Thailand. Second, I want to identify the main challenges of 
globalization  and  how  to  meet  them.  And  last,  I  would  like  to  conclude  with  a  discussion  of  how 
Thailand should position itself in order to reap the benefits of globalization while avoiding its pitfalls in 
the long run 
First, I wish to emphasize that globalization brings both opportunities and challenges to small 
open economies. Thailand is no stranger to this reality and successive administrations have shown 
strong  commitment  to  supporting  the  progress  of  global  economic  integration.  Nevertheless,  we 
should  also  put  the  issue  of  benefits  and  challenges  of  financial  and  economic  globalization  into  a 
proper perspective. 
I would like to do this by examining the experience of Thailand during the past two decades. Over the 
past twenty years, it is an undeniable fact that globalization has brought substantial gains to Thailand. 
The  evidence  is  all  around  us.  International  trade  and  investment  have  boomed.  Thai  exports 
expanded by over 11 percent per year during the same period. Our large and vibrant export sector 
sends  goods  all  over  the  world.  And,  in  turn,  Thai  consumers  enjoy  goods  from  all  corners  of  the 
globe. On the investment side, healthy joint ventures and foreign investment abound. Interaction at the 
person-to-person  level  has  also  grown,  underlying  the  fundamental  importance  of  the  sharing  of 
knowledge and skills between nations. 
And last, but by no means least, this luncheon and our presence here today reflect the progress of 
globalization. I am glad to say it is a progress that we have made together. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  is  also  undeniable  that  Thailand  has  shown  a  strong  commitment  to  global  economic 
integration.  Thailand’s  economy  and  openness  have  grown  together  hand-in-hand.  But  openness 
brings  forth  not  only  benefits;  it  also  invites  challenges.  As  such, we  must  embrace  globalization 
with our eyes open for potential risks and pitfalls. 
Although globalization has brought considerable gains over the last decades, the path traveled has not 
always been smooth. In fact, it has been strewn with risks, some predictable and some not. Nearly ten 
years ago, Thailand was in the midst of a financial crisis that had been caused by a number of factors. 
The most telling one was the premature liberalization of the financial sector. That round of financial 
liberalization  encouraged  significant  capital  inflows  and  massive  over-investment,  creating  financial 
vulnerabilities which eventually led to  abrupt reversal of flows in the period that followed. I am sure 
many of you can recall the event vividly. 
And further back in time, nearly twenty years ago, Thailand was embroiled in a global oil crisis that 
thrust  the  world  economy  into  a  period  of  recession  and  high  inflation.  During  both  episodes,  the 
prognosis  for  globalization  seemed  grim.  Nevertheless,  Thailand  emerged  from  these  crises  with  a 
renewed commitment to global economic integration and internal reform. 
The situation today is nowhere near as grim. But the economic lessons of the past remain relevant. 
Openness  comes  with  challenges.  And  as  the  world  grows  increasingly  interconnected,  these 
challenges will not only be more numerous, but they will also be more varied. 
Today, the Thai economy again faces challenges from the external front. The main challenge 
comes in the form of global financial imbalances; another challenge is the threat of high and 
variable oil prices. 
By global financial imbalances, I refer to the pattern of savings and investment allocation across the 
world. At the present, the US economy saves very little relative to its investment needs. Asian and oil-
producing economies save more than their domestic investment opportunities. The European Union 
saves just enough. As a result, the US economy has been borrowing a large sum from Asia and oil 
producers.  The  magnitude  of  capital  flows  from  the  rest  of  the  world  to  the  US  economy  is  not 
sustainable;  it  is  a  matter  of  time  before  the  flows  eventually  reverse.  And,  in  the  process,  the  US 
2 
 BIS Review 64/2007
dollar will depreciate against various currencies, including the Thai baht. The issue here is not only 
when the correction will take place, but how fast and how disruptive. 
Thailand,  like  many  emerging  market  economies  with  small  and  shallow  financial  markets,  is 
particularly vulnerable to fast-moving international capital. Such rapid movements of capital flows, if 
vastly out of line with the underlying economic fundamentals, can have negative impacts on the export 
or import sectors depending on the direction of exchange rate movement. In our case, the surge in 
speculative capital inflows at the end of last year caused a rapid appreciation of the baht relative to 
regional currencies. I must stress that the recent capital surge heralds the onset, and not the end, of 
the  unwinding  of  global  financial  imbalances.  There  remains  considerable  room  for  US  dollar 
correction. As such, the threat of global imbalances to the economic and financial stability of Thailand 
is still very much present. 
You may recall that we have experienced sizeable capital inflows, and accompanied with that, a rapid 
appreciation of the baht effective exchange rate toward the end of last year. In dealing with the rapid 
appreciation, conventional wisdom suggests an adherence to market mechanisms. This proved to be 
inadequate. The baht continued to appreciate with the likelihood of it becoming more and more out of 
line with its fundamentals. After a number of unsuccessful conventional measures, we resorted to the 
measure of imposing a reserve requirement on capital inflows in December 2006. The measure was 
designed to break the one-way currency momentum, to preserve our overall economic stability, and to 
buy  some  time  to  allow  a  smooth  transition.  Let  me  be  clear  that  we  intended  for  the  reserve 
requirement to be a temporary measure, designed to preserve financial stability and to afford the real 
sector time to adjust to a more volatile market condition. To this end, I believe that it has succeeded. 
To be sure, no measure is without its costs. The reserve requirement resulted in a wide-ranging effect 
on  the  market  and  the  economy.  In  light  of  this,  once  the  appreciation  momentum  was  broken,  we 
have  been  carefully  modifying  the  coverage  of  the  measure  to  allow  greater  flexibility  for  business 
operations. We have done this without compromising the needs to contain excessive volatility. That is, 
we  have  provided  the  option  to  fully  hedge  for  loans  and  debt  instruments.  At  the  same  time,  we 
expect  ongoing  relaxations  on  capital  outflow  to  bring  about  a  better  balance  between  inflows  and 
outflows. 
The  unwinding  of  global  imbalances  will  remain  with  us  for  the  foreseeable  future.  During  the 
transition, monetary policy can and must play a vital role in supporting the economy in its adjustment. 
And should the balance of risk shifts from inflation to growth, monetary policy will continue to focus on 
stability while supporting long-term economic expansion. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The second challenge comes in the form of high and variable oil prices. As the global economy 
grows, so does its thirst for energy.  An  importer of  oil,  Thailand continues  to  be  vulnerable  to a 
sharp oil price shock that could abruptly exacerbate our current account. More importantly, as one of 
the most oil-intensive economies in Asia, the high price of oil can create a substantial price pressure 
and the risk of persistent inflation. The continued expansion of China and India suggests that oil prices 
may  rise  yet  again  in  tandem  with  the  global  economic  cycle.  Nevertheless,  increased  productive 
capacity of oil suppliers and technological progress, which will enable us to decrease our reliance on 
oil over time, should dampen the impact in the medium run. 
I have so far outlined the main challenges on the external front. But the key question remains: 
how will  the  Bank  of  Thailand  meet  these  challenges  and  attain  the  goal  of  ensuring  low  and 
stable  inflation  as  well  as  a  resilient,  well-functioning  financial  sector  that  is  able  to  intermediate 
efficiently between savers and investors? This leads to my second point. 
Before we grapple with global imbalances and high oil prices, we must first realize that the key factors 
underlying these challenges are largely beyond our control. They arise from the complex economic 
interactions on the global scale. However, the central bank can attempt to contain the adverse impacts 
of  these  external  shocks  on  the  domestic  economy  by  preserving  domestic  monetary  and  financial 
stability.  This  is,  of  course,  easier  said  than  done.  Rapid  changes,  whether  from  within  or  without, 
typically bring forth tension and necessitate tough decisions in trading off short-term pain for long-term 
gain. 
The recent surge in oil prices is a case in point. High oil prices have had two adverse effects: pressure 
on prices and a drag on economic growth. Tightening interest rates is the Bank of Thailand’s primary 
method of fighting inflation. However, high interest rates would burden firms and households already 
trying to cope with high oil prices. Domestic demand would be adversely affected. The decision entails 
BIS Review 64/2007 
 3
a  tough  trade-off  between  lower  interest  rates  that  boost  the  economy  today  but  invite  inflation 
tomorrow. Tightening interest rates burden households today but pre-empt inflation tomorrow. In the 
most  recent  episode  of  high  oil  prices  in  2004-2006,  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee’s  decision  to 
tighten interest rates to maintain price stability was crucial for sustaining economic stability and growth 
in the current period. 
Inflation has been well contained and its persistence pre-empted. Last year, consumer price inflation 
came down from a peak of 6 percent in the second quarter, to 3.3 percent in the last quarter. In the 
first quarter of this year, headline inflation registered 2.4 percent. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
My  third  and  final  point  is  that  Thailand  must  enhance  its  ability  to  compete  through 
productivity improvement to continue reaping the benefits of globalization. 
The challenges of globalization are constantly changing. To meet these challenges from without, it is 
critical that the Thai economy build strength from within: by continuously improving the flexibility and 
efficiency  of  its  firms,  the  resiliency  of  its  households,  and  the  competitiveness  of  its  business 
environment.  In  this  respect,  public  policy  must  engage  in  financial  and  real  sector  reforms  and 
policies that promote a stable macroeconomic environment and a competitive private sector. 
Looking  ahead,  our  financial  and  legal  infrastructures  will  continue  to  be  strengthened  particularly 
through the introduction of a number of legislations and amendments. The new Financial Institutions 
Act and the Deposit Insurance Act are in the pipeline. The Financial Sector Master Plan (FSMP) will 
move  into  its  second  phase,  with  an  emphasis  on  increased  competition  and  consideration  on 
potential entry of new players to further enhance financial efficiency and resiliency. Our accession to 
the  Basel  II  accord,  an  international  framework  for the  risk  management  of  banks,  will  further  raise 
financial sector stability. 
Monetary  policy,  a  key  responsibility  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  will  continue  to  ensure  low  inflation 
environment  crucial  to  well-functioning  market  economy.  But  there  are  limits  to  monetary  policy  in 
raising the standard of living over time. As such, a stable macroeconomic environment, no matter how 
crucial, is not enough to ensure long-run prosperity in the face of globalization. For that, we must turn 
to the private sector. 
The  private  sector  must  also  work  continuously  to  improve  its  competitiveness  by  strengthening 
productivity.  A  sustained  rise  in  wages  and  living  standards  cannot  take  place  without  productivity 
growth. And adaptability to the shifting winds of global competition cannot happen without the ability to 
adopt the best technology and the ability to use that technology efficiently. 
To this end, the best competition policy for Thailand is policy to encourage competition. Encouraging 
competition  means  open  markets.  Open  markets  give  firms  the  wherewithal  and  the  incentive  to 
invest, innovate and learn to be the best. The pacing and sequencing of market reform will also be 
crucial to its success. 
While the goal is to have sustained productivity increase, we may not see the effects of these reforms 
right away. But we must continue pressing on with the reform effort and not let reform fatigue get in 
our way. 
I need not remind you that Britain herself undertook deep and painful reforms during the 1980s. To a 
great extent, I believe the golden age the British economy is enjoying today reflects the hard work of 
not so long ago. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Globalization is a long and difficult road. We all know the rewards are considerable and the journey 
worthwhile.  But  sometimes  the  obstacles  may  seem  discouraging,  even  insurmountable.  The  risks 
may  seem  too  great.  Nearly  twenty  years  ago,  the  Thai  economy  was  staggering  from  a  global  oil 
crisis. Ten years ago, Thailand was at the epicenter of the Asian financial crisis. Today, we face the 
challenges  of  global  imbalances  and  high  oil  prices.  I  am  optimistic  that  Thailand  will  once  again 
overcome  these  challenges  as  it  overcame  those  in  the  past  with  experience,  lessons  learned  and 
foresight. 
The  future  will  bring with  it  a  new set of  challenges.  I  cannot  tell  you  the  shape  or  form  that  these 
future challenges will take. But I can tell you this: ten years from today, when my successor addresses 
the distinguished members of the British Chamber of Commerce, I expect that this room will not be 
4 
 BIS Review 64/2007
large enough for such a gathering. Your membership will have grown by leaps and bounds together 
with your enterprises. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The road ahead still beckons. We have come a long way together. Let us not stop now. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 64/2007 
 5
