Klaus Liebscher: The euro – a contribution to international stability 
Luncheon  speech  by  Dr  Klaus  Liebscher,  Governor  of  the  Austrian  National  Bank,  at  the 
Metropolitan Club, New York, 16 April 2007. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen! 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  and  honor  to  have  the  opportunity  today  to  talk  in  front  of  such  a 
distinguished audience, in one of the most fascinating cities of the world. Financial markets 
have become global, yet I think New York and Wall Street will always remain synonyms for 
investors seeking returns, prosperity and new horizons. 
Today, I would like to share with you one of Europe’s most recent success stories, notably 
the story of our common currency, the euro. Recently, we celebrated the 50th anniversary of 
the Treaty of Rome, which established the European Economic Community (EEC). The day 
the  Treaty  was  signed,  March  25,  1957,  was  the  birthday  of  the  European  Union,  which 
today unites 490 million inhabitants and 27 countries. 
The euro was introduced on January 1, 1999, and meanwhile, the euro and the Economic 
and Monetary Union (EMU) have entered their ninth year. 
In today’s euro area 317 million people in 13 countries (including Slovenia as the first of the 
new Member States to introduce the euro on January 1, 2007) benefit from a low inflation 
environment and stable inflation expectations, a high degree of confidence in their currency 
as  well  as  a  moderate  level  of  interest  rates  –  all  elements  of  a  favorable  economic 
environment conducive to investment and business making. 
Skeptics but also some advocates of Economic and Monetary Union once regarded the euro 
as “the world’s largest economic policy experiment”.1 Well, although the introduction of the 
euro was an unparalleled project in European history, I certainly would not want to consider 
the euro a mere experiment. Launching the euro was, after all, a solidly founded and well 
prepared  project,  based  on  policymakers’  firm  conviction  that  the  introduction  of  a  single 
currency would entail ample benefits. Hence, I do not regard the euro as an experiment, but 
as a very wise and successful strategy. 
Economic  and  Monetary  Union  has  to  be  seen  as  one  of  our  most  important  strategic 
responses to the chances and challenges in a globalized world. 
The euro has fostered the European integration process; the euro has enhanced Europe’s 
role  in  international  economic  policy  circles;  and  the  euro  provides  a  sound  basis  for  our 
businesses in a very competitive world. 
The stability created by the euro already extends beyond the euro area: The non-euro area 
EU  Member  States,  many  Eastern  European,  Middle  Eastern  and  African  countries  are 
positively  affected  by  the  euro  as  well.  The  euro  is  a  key  currency  for  monetary  policy  in 
many countries. In 2006, 25% of all official foreign exchange reserves worldwide were held in 
euro. 
Since  its  introduction,  the  euro  has  become  the  second  most  widely  used  currency  in  the 
world.  And  in  terms  of  banknotes  and  coins  in  circulation,  the  euro  with  646  billion  has 
already overtaken the US-Dollar.2
                                                 
1   E.g. Richard Baldwin, Co-author of “The Economics of European Integration” (together with Charles Wyplosz). 
2   USD banknotes and coins: USD 810 bn = euro 615 bn (all data and the respective exchange rate by the end 
of 2006). 
BIS Review 89/2007 
 1
Moreover, the euro has proved to be a stabilizing influence not only for the European capital 
markets,  but  also  for  the  international  financial  system,  as  was  demonstrated  after  the 
shocking and very tragic events of September 11. 
How  did  the  euro  establish  itself  that  swiftly  as  an  anchor  of  stability?  To  answer  this 
question, monetary, fiscal and structural policies in the euro area have to be considered. Let 
me start with monetary policy. 
The  monetary  policy  framework  of  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  and  the  Eurosystem 
respectively, which includes the national central banks of the euro area, is based on central 
bank independence, transparency, accountability and an explicit mandate to maintain price 
stability. 
The Eurosystem goes to great lengths to communicate the ECB’s monetary policy strategy, 
the rationale for monetary policy decisions and our assessment of economic developments. 
These communication efforts not only take the form of regular testimonies in the European 
and national Parliaments, periodic bulletins and speeches, but also take place in “real time”: 
ECB  President  Jean-Claude  Trichet  explains  the  monetary  policy  decisions  and  the 
underlying  reasoning  in  press  conferences  which  take  place  immediately  after  Governing 
Council meetings and which provide “question and answer sessions” for journalists. 
The ECB’s monetary policy is based on a clearly defined monetary policy strategy aimed at 
fulfilling our primary mandate of price stability. This is defined as an inflation rate of below, 
but close to 2% over the medium term. 
By and large we have maintained price stability since the introduction of the euro despite a 
difficult macroeconomic environment characterized by a high level of uncertainty and a series 
of adverse external and internal shocks: 
Oil price developments accelerated inflation; at the same time events such as the burst of the 
equity  bubble,  geopolitical  tensions  and  a  decline  in  productivity  dampened  growth  in  the 
euro area. 
These divergent developments in inflation and growth, as well as asymmetric effects of these 
shocks across countries posed challenges, especially for a new central bank. 
Given  such  an  environment  of  constant  economic  uncertainties  and  challenges,  the 
European  Central  Bank  has  put  a  monetary  policy  strategy  in  place  that  is  based  on  a 
comprehensive  analysis  of  economic  and  monetary  developments.  That  means  that  the 
Governing  Council  cross-checks  the  information  gained  from  economic  analysis  with  all 
available evidence from a wide range of monetary, credit and asset market indicators. 
Looking back, this monetary strategy has served us very well, despite some inherent volatility 
between  money  demand  and  inflation:  Since  2004,  private  lending  and  money  aggregates 
have grown in parallel and at accelerated speed. This was an early indication of the current 
economic upswing, which most other data did not signal until much later. 
Indeed, the ECB’s monetary policy strategy contributed to the timely and highly warranted 
adjustment  of  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  stance,  with  the  first  interest  rate  increase  in 
December 2005, which was to ensure that risks to price stability over the medium term do 
not materialize. Having said this, we are aware that strong money and credit growth may also 
signal the build-up of financial imbalances and potential price bubbles in asset markets, as 
could be indicated, for instance, by significant housing price increases in some regions in the 
euro area. 
Despite  the  negative  factors  mentioned  before  inflation  stood  at  only  2.2%  in  2006.  On 
average,  inflation  has  come  to  2.1%  since  the  start  of  EMU,  which  shows  that  inflation 
expectations  have  been  firmly  anchored.  Hence,  price  stability  has  created  a  favorable 
environment for investments and the euro area’s growth performance. 
2 
 BIS Review 89/2007
Indeed,  economic  activity  accelerated  to  2.8%  last  year,  and  since  the  start  of  Monetary 
Union  real  GDP  growth  has  amounted  to  2.1%  on  average.  Unemployment  has  declined 
significantly, dropping from 9% in 1999 to 7.3% recently, a development which is particularly 
welcome. 12 million new jobs were created since 1999. 
The ECB staff projections foresee growth in a range between 2.1% and 2.9% in 2007 and 
between 1.9% and 2.9% in 2008. In the opinion of the ECB’s Governing Council, the risks 
surrounding this favorable outlook for economic growth are broadly balanced over the short 
term. However, looking at longer time horizons, risks may lie mainly on the downside. The 
main  risks  relate  to  the  possibility  of  a  renewed  increase  in  oil  prices,  fears  of  a  rise  in 
protectionist pressures and concerns about possible disorderly developments owing to global 
imbalances. 
Concerning the outlook for prices, last year’s volatility in energy prices will lead to significant 
base  effects,  affecting  the  profile  of  annual  inflation  rates  in  a  slightly  U-shaped  way.  The 
ECB staff projections from March 2007 foresee annual inflation averaging between 1.5% and 
2.1% this year and between 1.4% and 2.6% in 2008. 
Given  these  projections  and  the  credible  price  stability  commitment  of  the  ECB,  long-term 
inflation expectations according to professional forecasters continue to be firmly anchored at 
just below 2%. 
Having  said  this,  upside  risks  to  price  stability  remain  and  relate  foremost  to  higher  wage 
claims,  and  of  course  the  oil  price.  Given  the  favourable  economic  environment,  our 
monetary policy continues to be on the accommodative side, with the key ECB interest rates 
moderate,  money  and  credit  growth  vigorous,  and  liquidity  in  the  euro  area  ample  by  all 
plausible measures. 
Therefore, looking ahead, acting in a firm and timely manner to ensure price stability in the 
medium term is warranted. Indeed, it is essential to ensure that risks to price stability over 
the medium term do not materialise. 
A  price  stability-orientated  monetary  policy  is  a  necessary  precondition  for  sustainable 
dynamic growth and employment, but it is by no means the only precondition. 
Monetary  policy  needs  to  be  supported  by  sound  public  finances,  ambitious  structural 
reforms and a competitive economic framework. While monetary policy in the euro area is 
firmly vested in a supranational body – the ECB – fiscal and structural policies remain the 
responsibility of national governments. 
It is important to understand that unsustainable fiscal policies may put the entire euro area at 
risk. For instance, higher risk premiums in response to unsustainable policies in one Member 
State could spill over to other euro area countries. Hence, membership in the euro area also 
means compliance with a stringent regulatory framework, the Stability and Growth Pact. 
We are aware that the present improvement of fiscal balances in the euro area, from -2.4% 
in 2005 to an expected -1.6% in 20063, is only partly driven by structural improvements. 
Thus, it is essential that any budgetary leeway  emerging from the currently very favorable 
economic  environment  is  used  for  lasting  budgetary  consolidation  in  order  to  prepare  for 
challenges such as population ageing and to create room to maneuver for future economic 
weaknesses. 
Monetary  policy  needs  to  be  supported  by  sound  public  finances  and,  apart  from  that,  by 
ambitious structural reforms and a competitive economic framework, to enable the euro area 
to  fully  reap  the  benefits  of  the  common  currency.  Structural  polices  need  to  ensure  that 
                                                 
3   Forecast for 2006 by the IMF, WEO Spring 2007. 
BIS Review 89/2007 
 3
countries can flexibly react to asymmetric shocks, as the common monetary regime makes 
adjustments to asymmetric shocks a painful and tedious process. 
Even  though  a  number  of  Member  States  have  achieved  significant  progress  in  several 
areas, much remains to be done. Necessary measures include more effective and efficient 
investment  in  knowledge  and  innovation,  as  well  as  promoting  the  flexibility  of  labor  and 
product markets in order to unlock business potential. At the end of the day, only dynamic 
economies can sustain modernized, but still generous welfare systems in Europe. 
This brings me to another part of Europe, the new Member States of Central and Eastern 
Europe.  They  have  succeeded  in  transforming  their  economies  from  centrally  planned 
systems  to  market  economies.  Substantial  progress  has  been  achieved  in  the  areas  of 
property rights, privatization, as well as capital and trade liberalization. 
As these countries have anchored their institutional structures to the EU, they are viewed as 
increasingly secure places for investing and doing business in general. Moreover, the euro 
serves  as  an  anchor  of  monetary  stability  in  the  region,  often  directly,  for  instance  in  the 
framework of the European Exchange Rate Mechanism ERM II. Currently, six countries of 
the  12  new  Member  States  participate  in  the  exchange  rate  mechanism  ERM  II:  Estonia, 
Cyprus, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, and Slovakia. 
All Member States of the EU, with the exception of Denmark and the United Kingdom, are to 
adopt the euro, once they fulfill the Maastricht convergence criteria in a sustainable way, as 
laid down in the EU Treaty. 
In line with this procedure, Slovenia joined the euro area as its 13th member at the beginning 
of this year. In February 2007, Malta and Cyprus submitted their requests for convergence 
assessment by the ECB and the  European Commission. Both institutions will publish their 
convergence  reports  in  May.  Based  on  these  reports,  the  ECOFIN  Council  (i.e.  the  EU 
Ministers  of  Finance)  will  take  a  final  decision  in  July,  after  having  consulted  with  the 
European Parliament and after a discussion of the matter by the European Council (i.e. the 
Heads  of  State  and  Government)  in  June.  In  case  of  a  positive  decision,  both  countries 
would adopt the single currency by the beginning of 2008. 
Even  though  the  new  EU  Member  States  of  Central  and  Eastern  Europe  account  for  only 
some 6% of GDP within the EU, one cannot neglect their positive effects on the rest of the 
European Union. Central and Eastern Europe is the most dynamic region in the EU – both in 
terms of economic growth and in terms of reform speed. During their catching-up-process, 
the new Member States will further gain in importance and may turn into a driving force of the 
European economy. 
As a result of the dismantling of trade barriers, trade links with the new EU Member States 
have  gradually  intensified.  The  former  EU-15  countries  are  not  only  the  most  important 
trading partners for the new Members States but also account for three quarters of their total 
FDI stock. This is particularly true for the banking sector, in which foreign-owned banks have 
gained an average market share of around 70%. 
I expect the very positive dynamics in Central and Eastern Europe to continue. For the three 
EU  members  Czech  Republic,  Hungary  and  Poland,  and  also  for  Russia,  the  staff  of  our 
Bank forecasts annual real GDP growth to range between 5% in the Czech Republic, 6% in 
Poland and 6 ½% in Russia, while economic activity in Hungary is expected to slow down to 
less than 3% this year, as necessary austerity measures take effect. 
For 2008, our staff expects some growth acceleration for Hungary, and some moderation in 
the other countries mentioned. In the long run, the leveling off of EU accession-related and 
catching-up effects may dampen growth, but the general growth prospects remain favorable. 
Austrian  companies  in  general,  and  Austrian  banks  in  particular,  identified  market 
opportunities in Central and Eastern Europe at a relatively early stage and have established 
a  considerable  presence  in  the  region  by  now.  With  an  average  market  share  in  banking 
4 
 BIS Review 89/2007
sector  assets  of  almost  25%,  Austria’s  banks  are  market  leaders  in  Central  and  Eastern 
Europe.4 More than one-third of the profits of the six largest Austrian banks already come 
from this region. 
As Austrian banks continue to move into the southeast and east, their exposure is broadly 
diversified,  which  is  intended  to  contain  risks.  At  the  same  time,  the  Austrian  authorities 
closely monitor potential challenges involved. Stress tests indicate that the banks’ exposure 
is manageable and potential contagion effects on Austrian banks should be very limited. 
Let me conclude by getting back from Austria’s focal point of interest, Central and Eastern 
Europe, to New York’s focal point of interest: the world economy. 
The increasing globalization of the world economy, with new players emerging on the world 
stage, has contributed to the very impressive expansion of the world economy in the recent 
past. Yet, this dynamic growth has also spurred economic challenges, such as strongly rising 
commodity  prices  and  significant  current  account  imbalances.  Recently,  global  growth 
appears to be somewhat more even-footed, as growth in Japan and the euro area has been 
picking up. 
The  economic  upswing  recorded  in  the  euro  area  can  be  attributed,  at  least  partly,  to 
improved  economic  structures  and  is  based  on  the  stability-orientated  framework  of  EMU. 
The ECB and the Eurosystem respectively, will continue to support economic growth in the 
euro area by vigorously pursuing price stability. Following this approach also guarantees that 
the euro can contribute most effectively to international stability. 
                                                 
4   Central-, Eastern- and Southeastern Europe, excluding CIS-countries. 
BIS Review 89/2007 
 5
