Goh Chok Tong: Integration of Awqaf (Islamic endowment) in the Islamic 
financial sector 
Speech  Mr  Goh  Chok  Tong,  Senior  Minister  of  the  Republic  of  Singapore  and  Chairman  of  the 
Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore,  at  the  opening  ceremony  of  the  Singapore  International  WAQF 
Conference 2007, Singapore, 6 March 2007. 
 Excellencies and Distinguished Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
A very good morning to all of you, and a very warm welcome to our guests from the Middle East and 
the region. I hope you will find time from your busy schedule of meetings to enjoy the sights, sounds 
and culinary delights of Singapore. For Singapore offers you a unique experience – we are traditional 
yet modern, Asian but cosmopolitan, geographically small but with a large global outlook. 
Singapore  is  indeed  honoured  to  host  this  first  international  conference  in  the  region  on  waqf.  I 
congratulate  the  Islamic  Religious  Council  of  Singapore  (MUIS),  the  Islamic  Research  and  Training 
Institute of the Islamic Development Bank Group and the Kuwait Awqaf Public Foundation for taking 
the initiative to organise this event. We look forward to more such meetings. 
Asia and Middle East rediscovering each other 
Asia and the Middle East have had a long and fruitful history of exchanges. Links between our two 
regions are ancient. Long before Marco Polo travelled to China, Arab merchants were already doing 
business in Asia using overland and sea routes. The most famous trading routes were the Silk Road 
and  Spice Route,  which served as  major conduits  for  the  flow  of  trade,  people,  ideas  and religious 
beliefs between Asia and the Middle East. In the 14th Century, Muslim traders introduced Islam into 
Southeast Asia. This was three hundred years before Catholic missionaries brought Christianity. 
However, this flow ebbed some time in the last century or so. Due to colonialism and the Cold War, 
Asia  and  the  Middle  East  lost  their  close  contact  with  each  other.  Fortunately,  recent  global 
developments  have  re-ignited  the  mutual  interest  of  countries  in  Asia  and  the  Middle  East  in  each 
other. 
The key factor is globalisation. Globalisation means that changes and events in one part of the world 
will impact on other parts quickly and in a variety of ways and across a broad range of areas. The 
international landscape post-September 11 world underscored this point dramatically. 
Asian countries recognise that the Middle East is an increasingly important part of the global strategic 
balance. Political developments in the Middle East will affect Asia, which is home to 60% of the world's 
Muslim population. Asian countries have therefore stepped up efforts to engage the Middle East and 
understand the region better. Plans by Middle Eastern countries to invest more than US$1 trillion in 
infrastructure and other developments mean plenty of opportunities for Asian countries to participate in 
the Middle East's growth. 
Happily, this interest is not one way. The Middle Eastern countries have also become more interested 
in Asia. Post-September 11, Middle Eastern countries have started to look East to lessen their reliance 
on  the  West  for  management,  science  and  technology,  education,  governance  systems  and 
developmental models. They are also increasingly aware of the dynamism of a rising Asia. 
Singapore began to take a focused interest on the Middle East three years ago. My overall impression 
is that the Middle East is at a tipping point. 
The region faces major political and security challenges like the Palestinian-Israeli conflict, situation in 
Iraq  and  Iranian  nuclear  issue.  These  are  deeply  complex  and  inter-connected  issues,  made  even 
more complicated by a long history of distrust and religious conflict. We in Asia wish the Middle East 
well. We hope that the Middle Eastern countries can find ways to either resolve the issues or at least 
manage them in such a way as to avoid the region from tipping over. 
Despite the challenges, there are many positive developments to balance the negative challenges in 
the Middle East. Breathtaking physical transformation and impressive development are taking place 
BIS Review 21/2007 
 1
there.  High  oil  prices  and  sound  policies  underpin  this  strong  economic  performance.  Within  the 
region, the Gulf states are taking the lead to modernise and diversify their economies in as quick a 
time as possible. 
If  these  positive  forces  tip  the  region  in  the  direction  of  peace,  cooperation  and  development,  the 
Middle East will, together with Asia, transform the world in this century. 
Asia's  growth  story  is  already  well-known.  China  and  India  will  be  the  lead  players.  Japan  is 
experiencing  renewed  vigour.  Prospects  for  ASEAN  on  the  whole  are  good,  though  there  are 
occasional  hiccups.  Asia  is  integrating  through  trade,  tourism,  people-to-people  exchanges, 
investment flows and production chains. If there are no mishaps, by 2050, half of humanity – the more 
than 3 billion people in Asia – will enjoy a standard of living which their grandparents did not even 
dream of. 
Naturally, Asia's growth trajectory will not be a straight line. Asia has its share of problems too – the 
North  Korean  nuclear  issue,  tensions  across  the  Taiwan  Straits,  Kashmir  and  terrorism.  But  these 
issues can be and are being managed. 
Many  countries  in  the  Middle  East  are  keen  to  engage  Asia  but  I  have  been  told  that  their 
businessmen  are  not  so  familiar  with  doing  business  in  China  and  Southeast  Asia.  This  is  where 
Singapore can play a role. As a key financial and commercial hub, Singapore is well-positioned as a 
gateway  for  Middle  East  companies  to  expand  in  Asia.  Middle  Eastern  investors  can  leverage  on 
Singapore's networks and knowledge to venture into Asian markets. 
There  is  much  that  Asia  and  the  Middle  East  can  do  together,  as  we  embark  on  this  journey  of 
rediscovery.  Although  there  are  significant  differences  between  Asia  and  the  Middle  East,  we  also 
share common interests and common challenges. We both want to reconcile tradition with modernity 
and change, to develop without losing our core values. Both Asia and the Middle East can profit by 
sharing experiences. 
This was the reason why Singapore had initiated the Asia-Middle East Dialogue (AMED). AMED would 
help  to  share  developmental  experience,  promote  greater  understanding  and  serve  as  a  bridge 
between the two regions. 
Before stepping down as Prime Minister, I stepped up Singapore's relations with the Middle East, and 
continue to do so in my present capacity. In the past three years, I have visited almost all the Middle 
Eastern  and  the  Maghreb  countries  –  Egypt,  Algeria,  Jordan,  the  Gulf  States,  Iran,  Israel  and  the 
Palestinian Territories – to name a few. Trade and investment between Singapore and the Middle East 
have shot up. To date, Singapore companies have secured more than S$6 billion worth of projects. 
Funds from the Middle East managed in Singapore have increased to around S$28 billion. But there is 
room for greater growth. I have started a second round of visits to the Middle East, beginning with Abu 
Dhabi this year. I want to further strengthen Singapore's relations with them. 
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  theme  of  today's  conference  –  integrating  awqaf  into  the  Islamic  financial 
sector. I have dealt at some length on relations between Asia and the Middle East because I wanted 
to put this conference in a larger context. The evolution of awqaf and Islamic finance is in a sense 
about  how  Muslims  are  adapting  traditional  concepts  to  modern  living  and  how  Islamic  finance  is 
moving out of the Middle East into the rest of the world. 
Growth of Islamic finance 
The growth of Islamic finance as an ethical means of investing wealth arose because Muslims wanted 
to  invest  their  monies  to  get  good  returns,  but  in  accordance  with  Islamic  principles.  While  the 
proportion of Islamic banking assets as a percentage of total banking assets remain small – at about 
less than 20%, – this has risen over the years. We are seeing more examples of successful and viable 
Islamic financing products in the international marketplace. 
Islamic  banking  is  getting  more  widespread  in  Muslim  and  non-Muslim  countries  alike.  Takaful 
insurance and Islamic mutual funds are becoming commonplace. In fact, these products have become 
so popular, even non-Muslims are investing in them. We can expect to see Islamic finance develop 
further globally, eventually becoming an integral component of the international financial system. 
Singapore wants to develop Islamic finance as well. This will make our international financial centre 
more  complete.  The  development  of  Islamic  finance  here  can  take  advantage  of  our  capabilities  in 
wealth management, project financing and trade financing. We have been working in close partnership 
2 
 BIS Review 21/2007
with the industry to review our regulatory framework, and support and facilitate financial institutions to 
provide a wide suite of Islamic financial services and products. 
More Middle Eastern banks are setting up offices in Singapore. At the end of 2005, we had six Middle 
Eastern banks. In 2006, two more came. Since the beginning of this year, three banks have applied to 
set  up  representative  offices  here.  Many  of  these  Middle  Eastern  banks  service  Islamic  financing 
needs. Singapore welcomes more banks from the Middle East to set up here and to partner us in the 
growth of our financial centre. 
Beyond Middle Eastern banks, we have also seen international banks such as Citigroup and Standard 
Chartered  introduce  Islamic  finance  and  murabaha  products  from  Singapore.  More  financial 
institutions are using Singapore as a launch pad for innovative new Islamic products. 
Singapore  will  continue  to  co-operate  with  market  participants  and  other  countries  like  Malaysia, 
Indonesia, Bahrain, Kuwait and the UAE on the development of Islamic finance. 
Integration of Awqaf into Islamic finance 
Let me now turn to waqf. 
Historically, the revenue generated in waqf has been applied to traditional uses like maintenance of 
religious buildings. But this is changing. Proceeds from the estates are now used to contribute more 
widely to society. Rules governing the administration of waqf have become increasingly progressive. 
In Kuwait and Qatar, revenue from waqf has been used to build hospitals, universities and commercial 
and  office  complexes.  Townships  have  even  been  built  in  Morocco.  Such  innovative  financial  uses 
help to unlock the economic potential of waqf. 
In  Singapore,  we  have  the  example  of  an  integrated  mixed-development  at  Bencoolen  Street, 
comprising  a  mosque,  service  apartments  and  a  commercial  complex.  This  was  made  possible 
through  the  innovative  financing  solution  provided  by  the  launch  of  the  musyarakah  bond.  MUIS, 
which administers a number of waqf, has also made use of the proceeds to fund Islamic education. 
Non-Muslims have benefited from waqf as proceeds have been used to purchase medicine for needy 
Singaporeans, regardless of race and religion. 
The Malay/Muslim community in Singapore, while holding fast to the values of Islam also maintains an 
open and progressive attitude in the practice of its faith in our multi-racial and multi-religious society. 
The  Singaporean  Muslim's  identity  stresses  the  importance  of  contextualising  one's  beliefs  to  the 
environment, but without compromising the tenets of faith. 
The  environment  required  to  ensure  the  growth  of  waqf  is  similar  to  conventional  charitable  trusts. 
Singapore has established itself as a strong centre for the administration of charities and trusts. We 
have  introduced  several  initiatives  to  make  Singapore  a  more  conducive  jurisdiction  for  trusts,  a 
vehicle  commonly  used  for  philanthropic  purposes.  This  includes  measures  to  modernise  our  trust 
laws, update our regulatory framework and make our tax regime more conducive for the establishment 
of trusts. This will help Singapore to become a centre for the development of waqf. 
Conclusion 
Let  me  conclude.  Asia  and  the  Middle  East  are  becoming  more  interdependent.  With  our  destinies 
intertwined, it is critical for Asia and the Middle East to continue our efforts at engaging each other, 
strengthening our bonds and enhancing mutual understanding. To overcome the common challenges 
we face, we should continue sharing our experiences. I hope that this conference is the first of many in 
bringing together interested parties from all over the world to explore new and innovative ideas, and to 
learn from each other. 
Barring  unforeseen  developments,  I  believe  that  Asia  and  the  Middle  East  can  overcome  their 
challenges and prosper together in this century. Certainly, we must all do what we can to make this an 
Asia-Middle East Century. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 21/2007 
 3
