Xiang Junbo: Pushing forward the construction of a harmonious socialist 
society through developing a financial system for the disadvantaged 
Speech  by  Mr  Xiang  Junbo,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  People’s  Bank  of  China,  at  the  “2006  China 
Financial Forum”, Beijing, 26 December 2006. 
 Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen: 
I’m very pleased to attend the 2006 China Financial Forum jointly held by China Society for Finance 
and Banking and Financial News. This forum takes the theme of “A harmonious society – the social 
responsibility of China’s financial sector”, which is of great significance, because this theme not only 
reflects  the  characteristics  of  our  times,  but  also  aligns  itself  with  the  objective  of  constructing  a 
socialist harmonious society, highlighting a very practical question facing the financial sector in China, 
i.e., what role the financial sector can play and what social responsibilities it should take as the core in 
the  modern  economy.  It  is  fair  to  say  that  each  of  us  as  financial  practitioners,  especially  those  in 
leading positions, must take this issue seriously. 
Not long ago, I published an article entitled “Push forward the construction of a harmonious socialist 
society  through  developing  a  financial  system  for  the  disadvantaged”.  Today,  I’d  like  to  take  this 
opportunity to talk about the background against which this concept is put forward, the definition of the 
financial system for the disadvantaged, and its key aspects.  
Background of the concept  
1.  
As is known to all, in a modern society, finance and the economy are interdependent. Since China’s 
reform and opening-up, the economy has been growing at a stable and fast pace. While our overall 
national  strength  keeps  improving,  some  deep-rooted  problems  have  emerged  and  accumulated, 
leading  to  structural  imbalances  in  the  economy  and  society,  which  is  reflected  in  the  uneven 
development among regions, between rural and urban areas, and among industrial sectors. One of 
the  direct  outcomes  of  the  “three  imbalances”  is  an  emerging  and  growing  group  of  disadvantaged 
regions,  sectors  and  people.  The  support  and  involvement  of  the  financial  system  is  one  of  the 
important  factors  defining  the  development  of  this  disadvantaged  group.  The  financial  sector  has 
made great endeavors and undertaken some pilot programs in this area, in particular in supporting the 
development  of  the  central  and  western  China,  the  development  of  agriculture,  rural  areas  and 
farmers, reemployment of laid-off workers, poverty reduction initiatives and student loans. We’ve put 
forward theories, carried out trials, and gained experiences, both positive and negative. But in general, 
the  theories,  practice  and  experiences  are  driven  by  isolated  events  instead  of  a  systematic  plan. 
There is no theoretical conclusion made from the strategic perspective of constructing a harmonious 
socialist society, and no practice under the guidance thereof. Because of the absence of a systematic 
financial  theory,  institutional  and  policy  system  to  guide  and  push  ahead  the  construction  of  a 
harmonious society, it is difficult to display the synergy of the entire financial sector in this cause. 
In the new century, especially since the 16th CPC National Congress, we have clarified the strategic 
importance  of  building  a  socialist  harmonious  society  for  the  socialist  society  construction  drive.  In 
addition,  the  just  concluded  6th  plenary  session  of  the  16th  CPC  National  Congress  adopted  the 
Decisions  on  Major  Issues  Concerning  the  Construction  of  a  Harmonious  Socialist  Society.  As  the 
center of the modern economy, finance should and is able to play an important role in the construction 
of a socialist harmonious society. So far, the financial sector has not fully adapted to the endeavors to 
build a harmonious socialist society. We need to make major breakthroughs in financial reform in the 
future. One of the major tasks is to conduct theoretical analysis on how to utilize the financial sector to 
support the building of a harmonious socialist society, and find a way for the sector to do so.. Since 
structural imbalance is a major strain, finance should make its due contribution to solving the structural 
imbalances. To be specific, the financial sector should move away from the concept of “favoring the 
rich  over  the  poor”,  and  provide,  based  on  the  market  principle,  necessary  support  to  industrial 
sectors,  regions  and  groups  that  are  short  of  funding  and  lag  behind  in  economic  and  social 
development.  This  is  not  only  a  requirement  for  the  financial  sector  to  support  the  harmonious 
economic  development,  but  also  a responsibility.  As  such,  I  believe  it  necessary  to  put  forward  the 
BIS Review 26/2007 
 1
concept of “developing the financial system for the disadvantaged” to fully display the functions of the 
financial sector in the construction of a harmonious socialist society. 
Definition of the concept  
financial  activities,.  Specific 
2.  
“Finance  for  the  disadvantaged”  refers  to  the  financing  activities  for  the  underdeveloped  areas  and 
groups.  So  far  in  China,  it  is  meant  to  be  the  support  rendered  to  the  disadvantaged  sectors  with 
agriculture  as  the  primary  one,  less-developed  regions  mainly  in  central  and  western  China,  and 
disadvantaged groups of farmers and laid-off workers in urban areas. It is fair to say that finance for 
the disadvantaged represents a revision to traditional finance that seeks immediate return. Generally 
speaking, in countries with immature financial systems, the opportunities are only available to a small 
group of the population with certain capital accumulation, while those short of capital accumulation are 
deprived  of  development  opportunities,  and  subsequently  of  the  benefits  from  economic  growth. 
However, for a mature financial system with various financial institutions and appropriate institutional 
arrangement,  it  is  possible  to  give  financial  support  to  those  people  or  regions  lack  of  capital 
accumulation but equipped with productive skills or resources in one way or another, so that they have 
opportunities  to  grow  and  develop.  Therefore,  while  conforming  to  the  principle  of  efficiency  in  the 
market economy, finance allocates resources to backward regions and industrial sectors, and helps 
improve the welfare of disadvantaged groups, make them benefit from economic growth and promote 
a harmonious society. 
Internationally, there are two types of financial support to disadvantaged industrial sectors, people and 
regions, namely direct government involvement and indirect policy guidance by the government. Direct 
government involvement means that the government establishes policy financial institutions to lend to 
disadvantaged  industrial  sectors  and  regions,  while  policy  guidance  means  that  the  government 
adopts preferential policies to guide the market to increase input to the disadvantaged. Policy support 
is an important feature of finance for the disadvantaged. However, finance for the disadvantaged is 
more  than  policy  financial  activities,  it  is  a  relatively  complete  financial  system  that  includes 
commercial,  cooperative  and  charity 
the 
disadvantaged varies from country to country. 
Generally  speaking,  a  relatively  complete  financial  system  for  the  disadvantaged  at  least  includes 
three aspects: financial institutions, a legal system and policy supports..  
First, there is a full spectrum of financial institutions that provide finance for the disadvantaged. A lot of 
countries  have  put  in  place  a  well-developed  system,  including  government-backed  financial 
institutions, private partners, commercial institutions and private lending institutions. They interact with 
and complement each other to support the development of backward regions, industrial sectors and 
disadvantaged groups. For example, as far as support for agricultural development is concerned, in 
the  US  there  are  government-backed  agricultural  lending  institutions,  farmers  cooperative  financial 
institutions, commercial financial institutions and private lending institutions; in Japan, the Agriculture, 
Forestry  and  Fisheries  Finance  Corporation  acts  as  the  policy  financial  institution,  and  Japan 
Agricultural Cooperatives as cooperative financial institutions; in India, cooperative agricultural lending 
institutions, policy financial institutions and commercial banks work together to support the agricultural 
development;  in  addition,  in  over  40  countries  governments  have  established  agricultural  insurance 
scheme  to  conduct  agricultural  insurance  business.  To  support  development  in  backward  regions, 
various countries have applied policy finance, development finance, and other supportive measures. 
So far, there are over 750 financial institutions (40% of which are in Latin America) working for the sole 
purpose of developing backward regions. Almost every African country has set up a bank for regional 
development.  To  support  disadvantaged  groups,  over  150  countries  have  pension  insurance 
institutions,  and  half  of  all  the  countries  in  the  world  have  established  policy  medical  insurance 
institutions.  Furthermore,  many  countries  have  student  loan  schemes  in  various  forms,  which  have 
played an important role in promoting economic development and social stability. 
Second,  a  legal  system  governing  finance  for  the  disadvantaged.  Most  countries  regulate  financial 
institutions  through  a  fully-fledged  legal  framework,  and  strictly  separate  financial  legislations  and 
regulations  into  those  regulating  commercial  finance  and  those  targeting  policy  and  cooperative 
finance,  so  that  the  latter  group  of  financial  institutions  has  their  own  laws  and  are  free  from 
intervention. Thus, they are able to serve agriculture, rural areas, disadvantaged industrial sectors and 
groups  better.  Many  countries  have  promulgated  special  laws  to  emphasize  the  importance  of  the 
finance for the disadvantaged, such as Federal Agricultural Loan Act, Agricultural Credit Union Act, 
and Community Investment Statute in the US, Law on Japanese Development Banks, Law on Japan 
forms  of 
finance 
for 
2 
 BIS Review 26/2007
Scholarship  Society  in  Japan,  KfW-Gesetz  (Law  on  KfW  Development  Bank)  in  Germany,  Law  on 
Korean  Development  Bank,  Law  on  Long-term  Credit  Bank  of  Korea  in  South  Korea,  Act  on 
Agricultural Intermediary Credit and Development Companies in India, etc. These laws are gradually 
improved to support and safeguard the development of financial institutions for disadvantaged regions, 
industrial sectors and groups.  
Third, a system of supportive policies. Investment in less-developed regions disadvantaged industrial 
sectors and disadvantaged groups has lower efficiency, diminishing returns, and high risks; therefore, 
it is very unlikely to secure capital investment if completely market-oriented. As such, a lot of countries 
provide preferential policies, such as capital infusion in development financial institutions, guarantee, 
tax holiday, interest subsidy, etc. For example, the German government guarantees all the liabilities of 
KfW incurred in supporting the development of disadvantaged industrial sectors and regions, grants it 
special treatments such as tax exemption and zero dividend payout to shareholders, and allows all 
profits to be used to increase capital. Japan Development Bank is exempted from all local tax, state 
tax  and  corporate  tax.  The  Korean  government  guarantees  the  principal  and  interest  payment  of 
financial  bonds  issued  by  Korean  Development  Bank’s  to  support  development  of  disadvantaged 
industries. The US federal government provides credit guarantee to private financial institutions that 
give  credit  to  backward  regions.  In  building  the  railway  network  in  western  states,  the  federal 
government granted various favorable financial policies to railway companies to boost their financing 
capabilities.  
The focus in developing the finance for the disadvantaged in China  
3.  
We have made some progress in developing the financial system for the disadvantaged, but there is a 
lot  to  do  compared  with  that  in  developed  countries  and  in  order  to  build  a  harmonious  socialist 
society. In my opinion, we should make efforts in the following three key aspects to in order to develop 
a financial system for the disadvantaged.  
First, new measures should be taken to create a financial system for the disadvantaged. Since reform, 
some  financial  institutions  have  been established  for  the  disadvantaged  in  China,  but  there  are  not 
fully  fledged.  For  example,  there  are  structural  and  operational  problems  in  the  rural  financial 
institutions,  such  as  extensive  operational  mode,  weak  management,  low  profitability,  yet-to-be 
improved staff quality, and high risks associated with rural credit cooperatives; the Agricultural Bank of 
China has not fully functioned as a major player in commercial finance for farmers and rural economy; 
the risk compensation, sharing and transferring mechanism is not sound for policy agricultural loans, 
guarantee mechanism in rural areas and agricultural insurance are yet to be developed. There are not 
enough  innovations  of  financial  institutions  and  supportive  policies  to  meet  the  needs  of  farmers’ 
productive activities and livelihood. Generally speaking, there is room for improvement in the financial 
system for the disadvantaged, which should not only include traditional financial institutions, such as 
policy,  development,  commercial  and  cooperative  financial  institutions,  but  also  include  innovative 
financial  institutions  such  as  venture  capital  investment,  guarantee,  insurance,  leasing,  micro-credit 
financial institutions. Endeavors should be made to create a system in which various types of financial 
institutions coexist, complement and compete with each other, each with well-defined functions and 
responsibilities  to  satisfy  the  demand  of  disadvantaged  industrial  sectors,  groups  and  backward 
regions for financial services. It is worth mentioning that, micro finance, as a new measure of poverty 
reduction,  has  evolved  from  the  micro  loans  for  farmers  in  the  1970s,  to  micro-credit  for  micro-
businesses  in  the  1980s,  and  finance  that  seeks  commercial  viability  and  loan  coverage.  It  has 
become an important part in the financial system for the disadvantaged. We have made some trials in 
micro finance in the past, and in the future, we will explore a development mode with multiple players 
in line with the Chinese situation by drawing on positive and negative experiences in other countries, 
so that micro finance can truly and effectively support the majority of disadvantaged.  
Second, progress should be made in creating a legal system for finance for the disadvantaged. The 
finance for the disadvantaged is part of the financial system, so it carries the features and conforms to 
the  general  principles  of  the  financial system  on  the  one  hand; while  on  the  other,  its development 
follows certain special rules. Thus, it is necessary to strengthen the legal system for finance for the 
disadvantaged.  The  first  is  to  strengthen  legislation  for  policy  finance.  From  the  international 
perspective, the primary principle here is a separate law for each type of policy financial institutions. 
Policy banks in China do not have its own legal framework; instead, they are regulated with reference 
to the laws and regulations governing commercial banks. This not only hinders the smooth operation 
of policy banks, but also affects how they position themselves. Therefore, we must actively explore 
BIS Review 26/2007 
 3
independent legislation for policy financial institutions. Administrative regulations may be promulgated 
before  they  gradually  become  laws.  Second,  strengthen  regulation  and  guide  of  informal  finance. 
Informal finance, as a complement to formal finance, plays a role in boosting economic activities in 
rural areas and poor regions and promoting regional economic development to some extent. However, 
due  to  absence  of  laws  and  regulations,  it  contains  a  lot  of  hidden  risks.  In  recent  years,  informal 
finance’s positive role is increasingly recognized, but the legal framework is not being developed at the 
same  time.  Therefore,  laws  and  regulations  should  be  created  and  improved  to  protect  legitimate 
informal financial activities and crack down on loan sharks, underground banks, illegal fundraising and 
other illegal activities. 
Third, adopt new measures in policy support to finance for the disadvantaged. Policy guidance and 
support  from  the  government  is  common  in  developing  finance  for  the  disadvantaged.  Government 
support should be multifaceted and mutually reinforcing, including legal, economic and administrative 
measures,  both  direct  and  indirect.  As  mentioned  earlier,  from  the  inception  and  development  of 
finance for the disadvantaged in various countries, we can see that government support has played a 
central role. Finance for the disadvantaged is based on the effective combination of government credit 
and  market  credit,  and  reflect  the  synergy  of  government  support  and  market  performance.  To  be 
more specific, firstly, the government should provide reliable source of capital for specialized financial 
institutions,  and  provide  guarantee  for  their  policy  lending  to  ensure  sustainability  of  operations. 
Second, emphasis should be laid upon coordination between fiscal and financial policies, reflected in 
tax breaks and fiscal subsidies to relevant financial institutions and activities, and in close cooperation 
between fiscal and financial departments. Third, more transfer payment should go to disadvantaged 
groups, industrial sectors and backward regions in the form of agricultural insurance, unemployment 
insurance and minimum subsistence, to support their risk management and debt servicing capability. 
These  are  my  personal  opinions  toward  the  financial  system  for  the  disadvantaged,  some  food  for 
thought. Hope they will provoke further research in this area, and hopefully more practice to make the 
financial sector more socially responsible in building a harmonious society. I’m open to questions and 
challenges. 
Thank you! 
4 
 BIS Review 26/2007
