Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Ensuring a well-trained security force 
Remarks  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas),  at  the  Graduation  Ceremony  for  Basic  Security  Training, 
Central Bank of the Philippines, Manila, 27 July 2007. 
 The  Members  of  the  Monetary  Board,  distinguished  lecturers  and  resource  persons,  our 
graduates and their respective families, special guests, fellow central bankers, magandang 
umaga po sa inyong lahat! 
I have a question for our graduates: Mahirap ba ang two-month training ninyo? Parang hindi 
masyadong  maliwanag  at  sabay-sabay  ang  sagot  ninyo.  Again:  Mahirap  ba  ang  training 
ninyo?  
Mabuti  naman!  Dapat  talaga  mahirap  ang  training  ninyo.  Afterall,  your  training  should 
prepare you to provide the best security for the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas.  
As you are aware, the Bangko Sentral was created in accordance with the provisions of the 
1987 Philippine Constitution to ensure stable prices and a sound banking system. In other 
words, the Bangko Sentral helps provide a stable environment for our economy to grow and 
provide a better life for Filipinos.  
Therefore, if the premises and human resources of the Bangko Sentral itself are not stable 
safe and secure, we will not able to serve our country in the best way we can.  
Your ability to provide excellent security service to the Bangko Sentral, your fellow central 
bankers, as well as our guests is therefore very important!  
The Basic Security Training Program you have just completed has been designed to make 
sure  that  our  security  personnel  have  the  appropriate  physical,  mental  and  psychological 
aptitude.  
This  is  a  job  meant  only  for  those committed  to  do  excellent  security  service  100%  of  the 
time. You and I know the times call for vigilance against security risks. If you are committed 
only 99% of the time, a security lapse could happen within that 1% window when you lower 
your guard, so to speak.  
The Greek philosopher Aristotle once said that “we are what we repeatedly do. Excellence, 
then, is not a singular act, but a habit.”  
I hope therefore that you will focus on your assigned task at all times.  
Mayroon  pa  akong  isang  paalala:  mahalaga  rin  na  marunong  kayong  kumi-latis  ng  tao  at 
magbigay galang. It is not enough that you have physical stamina, it is also important that 
you deal with your co-workers and our legitimate visitors with courtesy. They should feel safe 
even in the presence of armed personnel; let them know that you are there to protect them.  
Always remember to work with vigilance, diligence, intelligence, and courtesy. These are the 
trademarks of excellent security personnel of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas.  
And  so,  on  behalf  of  the  Bangko  Sentral,  I  congratulate  all  our  graduates  today  for 
completing their rigorous training. Palakpakan po natin sila!  
I also congratulate the SITD led by Col. Ed Gatumbato, Managing Director Noli Torres, and 
Deputy  Governor  Andy  Suratos  for  contuining  these  training  programs  for  our  security 
personnel. Palakpakan din po natin sila!  
Keep up the good work! Mabuhay ang SITD! Mabuhay ang Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas!  
Maraming salamat sa inyong lahat. 
BIS Review 88/2007 
 1
