Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Overseas Filipino Workers – impact on economic and 
social dynamics  
Keynote address by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (Central 
Bank of the Philippines), at the PSA (Philippine Statistical Association) Summer Conference “OFWs: 
Bagong Bayani, Ilan Ba Talaga Kayo?”, Central Bank of the Philippines, Manila, 5 June 2007. 
 PSA President Isidoro David, MBM Valdepeñas, other officers and members of the Board of Directors 
of PSA, Heads of the various statistical agencies, Resource Persons and Reactors, my colleagues in 
BSP and fellow workers in government, sponsors, ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon. 
The Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas is pleased to co-host with the Philippine Statistical Association (PSA) 
this year’s summer conference on the theme: “OFWs: Bagong Bayani, Ilan Ba Talaga Kayo?”. 
Over the past few decades, OFW deployment has had a profound impact on our economic and social 
dynamics.  Research  and  statistics  pertaining  to  OFWs  are  becoming  increasingly  indispensable  in 
establishing and assessing these effects. It is thus critical that various agencies and institutions and 
producers  and  users  alike  of  OFW-related  statistics  are  convening  today:  first,  to  clarify  the  official 
headcount of OFWs, given various sets of data; and second, to provide accurate measures of OFW 
remittances. 
The  best  way  to  start  our  consultation  today  is  to  recognize  that  the  onset  of  globalization  has 
heightened  trade  and  investments  across  countries.  Equally  important,  labor  migration  and  cross-
border employment have also increased. As a result, both the issues of migration and cross-border 
remittances have attracted growing attention from a greater number of policymakers, academicians, 
international organizations, and market practitioners, over the years. 
At this stage, however, there is still a lot of ground to cover on the statistical front. We have yet to 
update and strengthen our database to fully satisfy the needs of policy and program formulators . 
How  important  is  the  information? We need  to regularly  monitor overseas  employment  as basis  for 
policy  and  program  formulations  for  advancing  the  cause  of  protecting  our  overseas  workers  and 
enhancing  their  welfare  and  of  their  families.  Another  key  issue  is  the  impact  of  international 
movement  of  persons  on  our  demographic  structures,  expenditure  patterns,  social  structures  and 
poverty levels. Likewise, we recognize the importance of overseas employment in helping ease the 
pressure  of  unemployment  and  in  boosting  the  national  economy  by  helping  increase  the  foreign 
exchange  reserves.  There  are  of  course  second-order  effects  of  higher  foreign  exchange  inflows, 
including  the  impact  on  the  domestic  currency  and  external  competitiveness.  But  to  me,  it  is 
fundamental to first address the current challenges and measurement issues that have very important 
analytical and policy bearings. This conference will hopefully help pave the way to clarify such issues. 
First,  let  us  look  at  the  statistics  on  the  number  of  OFWs.  Our  theme  for  today,  “OFWs:  Bagong 
Bayani, Ilan Ba Talaga Kayo?”, suggests that we are not yet certain exactly how many are our OFWs, 
and  more  generally,  how  many  Filipinos  are  overseas.  Accuracy  in  this  aspect  may  really  be  a 
challenge because what we want to monitor are people who are always on the move. At present, there 
are  various  agencies  producing  OFW-related  statistics.  The  Philippine  Overseas  Employment 
Administration (POEA), the Overseas Workers Welfare Administration (OWWA) and the Commission 
on  Filipinos  Overseas  (CFO),  on  the  one  hand,  maintain  statistics  based  mostly  on  administrative 
records as an offshoot of their functions. On the other hand, the Bureau of Labor and Employment 
Statistics  and  the  National  Statistics  Office,  have data  based  on  labor  force  surveys  and  census  of 
population  and  housing.  We  need  to  understand  how  these  data  from  various  agencies  are 
interrelated. The first key question is: is there a uniform definition of what an OFW is?. For instance, in 
the Census of Population of Housing, overseas workers are defined as those who had been away for 
not more than five years from date of last departure. Do the other agencies producing OFW statistics 
adopt the same definition?. Is it possible to integrate and reconcile these sets of data from various 
sources to come up with one, uniform, comparable set of data on OFWs and overseas Filipinos?. The 
next question is: how are the definitions linked or reconciled with definitions in other macroeconomic 
statistical frameworks such as the 1993 System of National Accounts (1993 SNA) and the 5th edition 
of  the  balance  of  payments  manual  (BPM5),  which  adopt  a  one-year  residency  criterion  for 
determining  who  are  the  residents  of  a  particular  economy?.  What  are  the  implications  of  adopting 
BIS Review 61/2007 
 1
different sets of definition in our economic statistics and in economic analysis?. While there are efforts 
in the Inter-Agency Technical Working Group (TWG) on Overseas Filipino Statistics to formulate the 
operational  framework,  concepts  and  definitions  for  overseas  Filipinos,  this  conference  could  clarify 
the differences in the sets of data currently available. 
Second, on the remittance data. We have already seen the size of OFW remittances doubling within 
the last five years. With its growing importance to our economy, we need to place emphasis on its 
accurate measurement. We are aware that remittances are by themselves already inherently difficult 
to measure, since they are composed mostly of numerous small, frequent transactions, carried out by 
a multitude of transactors through a complex structure of originating and delivering agents here are 
also other measurement concerns including appropriately capturing remittances of non-resident OFWs 
which are invested in financial instruments or physical assets such as real estate. Moreover, a certain 
amount of remittances still flow through informal channels, which should be measured to determine 
the amount of global remittances. Given the present range of remittance channels, and the expected 
increased complexity of the structure of service providers in the near future, accurate measurement of 
remittances  remains  a  challenge  for  statisticians.  We  therefore  need  to  collectively  consider  and 
design the best approach that will measure remittances in the most accurate and timely manner, going 
forward.  This  will  not  necessarily  be  an  easy  task.  Even  at  the  international  level,  the  conventional 
wisdom is that there is no unique “best” source of data, or collection approach, due to the complexity 
of the phenomenon. Therefore, from a purely technical standpoint, a reasonable strategy would be to 
appropriately  combine  different  sources  and  methods,  e.g.,  bank  reports  data,  household  surveys, 
other  administrative-based  data,  even  econometric  and  demographic  models,  that  will  allow  for 
integration, cross-checks and reciprocal confirmations. Moreover, data on remittances should not be 
considered in isolation from data on stock of workers and deployment of overseas workers, as well as 
wage rates, wage increases and inflation in host countries. At the end of the day, there have to be 
reasonably  explainable  patterns  and  links  among  these  variables  that  will  allow  for  more  informed 
economic analysis, decision making and policy-making by the government. 
On this note, highly commend the Philippine Statistical Association for organizing this conference on 
the subject. We hope that this forum will serve as a catalyst for further statistical research and studies 
on the OFW phenomenon. We also thank the sponsors of this conference for their support.  
For  its  part,  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  remains  committed  to  its  objective  of  improving  the 
remittance  environment  for  the  benefit  of  our  OFWs  –  particularly  by  facilitating  the  reduction  of 
remittance  costs  in  the  Philippines  and  in  host  countries,  and  by  helping  channel  foreign  exchange 
savings  to  microenterprises  and  other  investment  opportunities.  The  BSP  also  fully  supports  the 
statistical  improvement  efforts  that  will  help  ensure  that  the  government  will  formulate  its  policy 
decisions based on solid statistical ground. 
Maraming salamat po, at magandang hapon sa inyong lahat. 
2 
 BIS Review 61/2007
