Shamshad Akhtar: Pakistan – changing economic and social paradigm 
Address  by  Dr  Shamshad  Akhtar,  Governor  of  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan,  at  the  International 
Conference of Young Presidents Organization, Lahore, 4 November 2006. 
 Pakistan’s  economic  diversity  and  potential,  its  geography  and  strategic  location  and  rich  cultural 
heritage together offer this country a unique positioning. A confluence of international and domestic 
political events, however, has often been highly disruptive on a short term basis. Rather than dwell 
upon  history,  I  will  focus  on  what  lends  us  confidence  today  that  Pakistan  is  set  to  reach  new 
economic heights and frontiers. 
Pakistan has on all fronts achieved development paradigm shifts – impact of some of it is distinctly 
visible  and  more  is  yet  to  unfold.  On  ideological  front,  leadership  has  been  infusing  high  degree  of 
moderation, nationhood and tolerance. On economic front, aside from changes in numerology by way 
of  rise  in  GDP  prompted  by  growth  in  industry  and  services  sector  supported  by  telecom  growth, 
promising  are  the  significant  qualitative  changes  in  macroeconomic  management  and  sector  level 
reforms.  Political  transformation  is  steadily  emerging  as  democratic  institutions  and  governance 
structures are asserting themselves. Pakistan is now in the league of emerging markets moving from 
low income to middle income state and on social side there is a growing awareness that we need to 
leverage younger population more effectively through social and human resource investment. 
Achievements and gains however cannot be a cause for complacency as Pakistan has a long road 
ahead to achieve economic, social and political sustainability. 
I firmly believe that the process of change and evolution does not end here as Benjamin Disraeli once 
famously said: 
“In a progressive country change is constant; change is inevitable” 
Exploiting  further  Pakistan’s  economic  potential  promises  to  bring  the  remaining  one  fourth  of 
population  out  of  poverty  and  raising  living  standards  as  growing  economy  generate  more  jobs. 
Economic prospects depend crucially on Pakistan accelerating the pace and implementation across 
the board of economic reforms, and positioning itself to face growing global and regional competition. 
Infrastructure shortages which given domestic resource constraints can only be effectively addressed 
if foreign investors come forward more aggressively. Pakistan has most liberal economic environment 
and  offers  opportunities  for  exceptionally  high  returns  be  it  banking,  corporate,  infrastructure  or 
agriculture sectors. 
In my presentation, I propose to talk about what has finally triggered the development paradigm shifts 
and  discuss  major  initiatives  undertaken  to  bring  about  the  economic,  social  and  governance 
transformation in Pakistan. 
A  qualitative  change  in  economic  management  has  induced  a  degree  of  macroeconomic  stability 
providing  opportunities  for  real  structural  changes.  This  has  been  recognized  by  the  international 
raters and is also reflected in growing investor confidence as evident from the growing remittances, 
foreign  investment  and  in  the  pricing  of  international  sovereign  bond  issues.  These  issues  were 
oversubscribed in the US, Europe and Far East financial markets that now have an appetite to take 
long term view and risks on Pakistan. 
Confidence in the economy was restored as the Government succeeded in reducing substantially its 
macroeconomic imbalances in FY2003-04 which had reached unsustainable levels in the late 1990s. 
Fiscal prudence and external debt restructuring together helped Pakistan reduce its debt/GDP which is 
currently down to 56% of GDP below the target of 60% to be reached in 2013 defined in the Fiscal 
Responsibility Act, 2005. 
Recent  demand  pressures  stemming  from  a  combination  of  factors  (i)  the  hike  in  international  oil 
prices,  (ii)  unanticipated  costs  of  reconstruction  of  earthquake  hit  region,  (iii)  real  increase  in 
development spending of physical and social infrastructure that has been for years neglected and (iv) 
import requirements of fast expanding industry. These factors together strained the external and fiscal 
deficit  that  rose  to  3.9%  and  4%  of  GDP,  respectively  in  FY06.  While  these  deficits  have  been 
financed  properly  as  Government’s  realization  of  tax  collection  and  external  debt  flows  were 
supplemented by significant growth in non debt foreign inflows following the sale of state assets and 
BIS Review 3/2007 
 1
FDI.  Heightened business  activity  coupled with  aggressive  growth  in  financial  industry  prompted  an 
unprecedented  rise  in  private  credit,  stimulated  not  only  by  corporate  sector  but  also  by  growth  in 
agriculture, SME and consumer financing. 
The demand pressures from both public and private sector manifested themselves in rising inflationary 
pressures in the first half of 2005. Recognizing the lingering impact of past few years’ easy monetary 
policy and the emergent demand pressures, the central bank now for almost 18 months has adopted a 
tight monetary policy stance. Combination of rise in policy discount rate twice, rise in reserve ratios 
and  proactive  open  market  operations  together  have  helped  effective  liquidity  management. 
Inflationary  pressures  have  come  down  significantly.  Most  distinct  is  the  decline  in  core  inflation 
though  food  prices  have  been  volatile  largely  because  of  distributional  disruptions.  Maintenance  of 
price stability calls for retaining tight monetary policy. The Government plans to finance its domestic 
and  external  current  deficit  from  the  non  debt  flows  which  have  been  buoyant  given  the  strong 
international interest in Pakistan from all parts including oil exporting Gulf countries. Pakistan is keen 
to pursue its economic agenda while managing the attending challenges and risks. The Government is 
keenly  pursuing  foreign  investment  to  finance  its  requirements  and  has  enhanced  vigilance  on 
economy to ensure corrective actions are taken when warranted. Central Bank being independent has 
played  its  role  to  smooth  short-term  fluctuations  and  pressure  of  the  aggregate  demand  therefore 
stabilizing the output close to its long-run path. 
Openness and market orientation 
Pakistan has for long nurtured openness and market orientation. Set of mutually reinforcing reforms 
today have made Pakistan a liberal and deregulated economy. A large segment of public assets have 
been privatized and incentive regime has been rationalized. Keeping aside ideological or philosophical 
consideration  and  Government’s  fiscal  compulsions,  industrial,  trade  and  price  liberalization  has 
infused high degree of competition which is auguring well for efficient allocation and use of resources. 
Private sector is allowed in all strategic sectors such as oil, gas, telecommunication and other services 
sector  on  a  competitive  basis  which  are  supported  by  sound  sector  policies.  Deregulation  of  civil 
aviation  industry  has  given  air  travelers  a  choice  and  increased  competition  resulting  in  to  better 
customer service and drop in fares. Domestic prices of major crops have been aligned to international 
prices,  while  eliminating  distorting  and  untargeted  subsidies.  Sharp  growth  in  private  credit  from 
virtually under Rs20 billion to Rs400 billion in FY06 (that has involved raising SME financing, doubling 
of agriculture credit, introducing consumer finance loans, etc.) has helped stimulate investments. 
Success  of  market  mechanism  however  does  not  exclusively  depend  on  price  signals  but  it  also 
requires  right  blend  of  host  of  non-price  factors  such  as  physical  infrastructures  (transport  system, 
communications,  telecommunications,  etc.);  institutional  and  organizational  factors  (credit  facilities, 
marketing  network  and  channels,  training  and  educational  facilities,  information,  R&D,  technological 
and  innovative  facilities,  predictable  and  stable  ownership  institutions);  and,  the  organizational 
capacity  of  the  government  for  administrative  and  fiscal  purposes.  Weaknesses  in  the  non-price 
factors are common in Pakistan as in any emerging market economy and have required Government 
to  play  a  coordinating  role  and  lay  down  policies  and  procedures  to  address  market  failures. 
Notwithstanding these measures, reliance on allocative and creative functions of the market may not 
be optimal particularly with underdeveloped markets and institutions. 
Keeping  these  caveats  in  mind,  Pakistan’s  has  launched  wide  ranging  reforms  which  are  yielding 
visible results. 
Liberal foreign investment regime 
Foreigners  and  overseas  Pakistanis  have  been  allowed  100%  equity  in  all  sectors  (with  no  prior 
approval  requirements)  and  foreign  investment  is  treated  at  par  with  domestic  investment.  Foreign 
investors  can  repatriate  capital,  profits,  dividends  and  fees  etc.  Special  Rupee  Convertible  Account 
(SCRA) offers smooth avenue to bring in remittances and portfolio funds for purchase and trading of 
shares and exit freely from Pakistan. FDI flows have grown from under half a billion in FY 2002 to 
US$3.5 billion1
 in 2006 and it is not inconceivable that in next year or so we could double these levels. 
                                                      
1   SBP 
2 
 BIS Review 3/2007
 Trade liberalization 
Moving from import substitution industrial strategy, Pakistan’s has adopted a conducive trade policies 
supported  by  tariff  restructuring,  rationalization  and  reduction;  withdrawal  of  import  quotas,  import 
surcharges  and  the  regulatory  duties;  and  foreign  exchange  liberalization.  Maximum  tariff  rate  was 
reduced  from  65%  in  FY97  to  45%  and  then  again  to  25%  in  FY03.  Likewise,  the  tariff  slabs were 
reduced from 14 to 4 in FY02.2 Zero tariff slabs were replaced by 5% minimum tariff rate; and average 
tariff on agriculture inputs has been also reduced. Pakistan’s trade openness has steadily improved 
from  25.8%  in  FY00  to  34%  in  FY06.3
  Moreover  other  indices,  such  as  the  Overall  Trade 
Restrictiveness Index (OTRI) and IMF’s computed trade restrictiveness index also indicate Pakistan’s 
improved trade openness – both reinforce that Pakistan has most competitive trade regime relative to 
its South Asian counterparts except Sri Lanka.4
Privatization of state owned enterprises (SOEs) 
Reversing the 1970s nationalization of industry and banking system (when the Government took over 
31  major  manufacturing enterprises  and  all  banks), Pakistan  since  1990 has  structured  161  private 
transactions  which  mobilized  close 
to  Rs378  billion  ($6.2  billion  @Rs60.5/dollar).  Political 
commitment,  build  up  of  public  acceptance,  well  conceived  Privatization  Law  and  guidelines  and  a 
fairly  well  equipped  Privatization  Commission  of  Pakistan  (PC)  (established  on  January  22,  1991) 
have together contributed to implementation of privatization program in a fairly transparent manner. 
Today most manufacturing sector and 80% of banking assets are in private hands. Strategic stakes 
have been sold in the Karachi Electric Supply Corporation (KESC), the Pakistan Telecommunication 
Company Limited (PTCL), Kot Adu Power Company, National Refinery, and has sold 5-15% shares in 
power, petroleum and gas companies etc. In the next phase, close to 26 large transactions5 including 
the remaining gas, power and petroleum companies and financial institutions are slated to be sold off. 
These structural reforms have precipitated a steady economic transformation across the board. 
First, scene in services sector is changing led by hype in financial services, telecommunication, trade 
and wholesale all of which have been growing at a fast pace. In financial services, growth in banking 
sector assets and profitability along with privatization together have attracted cumulative FDI flow of 
$11  billion  over  past  five  years.  The  current  wave  of  bank  mergers  is  anticipated  to  and  GDRs  is 
further going to attract additional $1-1.5 billion including Standard Chartered Bank’s merger with the 
largest mid-size bank i.e. Union Bank. Telecommunication sector alone has attracted $2.6 billion and 
its expansion (with teledensity rate registering an increase from 3% to more than 10% in couple of 
years) is triggering telecom revolution with six mobile service provider entering in market in less than 
couple of years that have today about 40 million cellular phone subscriber. Exports of services sector 
have grown from negligible levels to over $300 million. This could be an underestimate as a study has 
pointed  out  that  global  IT  exports  from  Pakistan  could  be  $1  billion  but  a  large  chunk  of  export 
proceeds were retained in escrow accounts by several software houses. The prospects for this sector 
are  bright  and  industry  benefits  from  a  combination  of  decade  plus  tax    holidays,  zero  duties  on 
computer inputs, incentives for venture capital, liberalization of wireless local loop and landline sectors 
etc. 
Second, long time back Pakistan achieved self sufficiency in wheat and other strategic products; it is 
the world’s fourth largest producer of cotton which caters for local textile and clothing industry, while 
                                                      
2   Pakistan: Growth and Export Competitiveness, World Bank, 2006 
3   Ministry of Finance: Economic Survey of Pakistan, various editions 
4   Trade Liberalization, Growth and Poverty, (SPDC) Annual Review 2005-06 
5   Privatization Commission of Pakistan 
BIS Review 3/2007 
 3
feeding  China  and  other  regional  competitors  with  cotton  yarn  and  grey  cloth.  Rice  production  of 
superior  quality  has  boosted  its  exports  that  have  crossed  mark  of  $1  billion.  Dedicated  policies  to 
nurture non-crop sector to offer nonfarm employment is showing visible results as it now contributes 
about 53% of agriculture value added relative to 43% in early 1990s. Pakistan is at present fifth largest 
producer  of  milk.  These  developments  have  helped  raise  rural  incomes  where  almost  66%  of 
population and agriculture offers employments to 45% of work force. Concrete efforts are underway to 
enhance complementarity and synergies between the agriculture and industry by exploiting backward 
and forward linkages. 
Third, Pakistan’s corporate sector has been quite vibrant and highly profitable which is driving slowly 
contribution of industry to value added – risen by over 3% between FY99-06. The private sector has 
been a key driver of this with the support of over 170 MNCs6
 that have had a long standing presence 
in Pakistan in financial services, chemicals, engineering and industrial products, pharmaceuticals and 
more  recently  in  energy,  shipping,  trading  and  other  services.  Barring  few  exception,  most  industry 
sub-sectors have been operating at near or full capacity utilization which has triggered an interest in 
additional  capacity  enhancement.  Consequently,  gross  fixed  capital  formation  in  the  manufacturing 
sector  has  almost  doubled  in  the  past  five  years  and  97%  of  this  is  private  investment.  Shifts  in 
industrial production structure though slow are now emerging. While textile remains the major forte of 
industry,  demand  for  consumer  products  catalyzed  by  rising  income  and  accessibility  to  consumer 
finance  has  helped  double  the  production  of  automobiles,  white  goods  and  electronics  and 
construction demand has boosted cement production. Together, corporate sector profitability in 2005 
reached record highs estimated to be ranging around 6%7 (Net profit margin). 
Fourth, Pakistan’s engagement in world trade reached $42 billion reflecting the Pakistani companies’ 
integration with the global standards of quality, productivity and efficiency. Prospects for export that 
have reached $16.5 billion in FY06 (double the level of FY00) is to receive impetus as the Government 
concludes free trade agreements with United States, China, Malaysia, and Sri Lanka and hub’s like 
planned special economic zones and if joint ventures that would integrate Pakistan in the international 
production network become a reality. Pakistan has been able to somewhat diversify its exports: Share 
of textile has fallen from 65 to 59% over last few years and within this sector there has been growth in 
higher  value  addition  products  in  particular  in  home  textile  where  Pakistan  has  a  leading  edge. 
Concurrently, the share of manufactured goods has increased from 62 percent in FY96 and 72 percent 
in  FY01  to  78  percent  in  FY06.  Aggressive  regional  competition  supported  by  subsidization  is, 
however, hurting textile export prospects even though Pakistan private sector has well positioned itself 
by enhancing its capacities and upgrading its facilities and technology. To mitigate risks associated 
with high vulnerability to textile sector both at industry and export level, Pakistan is launching further 
efforts to encourage greater export diversification. 
Broadening and deepening of financial markets 
Pakistan banking industry is characterized as the most vibrant, healthy and well regulated. Dismantling 
all financially repressive policies and regulations, SBP has managed to discourage segmentation of 
credit  markets,  reduce  high  intermediation  cost  stemming  from  overstaffing,  inefficiencies  and 
accumulation of non performing loans. Financial system has now geared itself to better serve private 
sector and the populations credit requirements in particular of underprivileged sectors such as micro 
finance,  small  and  medium  enterprises  (SMEs)  and  agriculture.  Sequentially,  in  the  financial  sector 
following actions took place: 
• 
First, breakthrough in banking sector occurred when the Government amended SBP Act of 
1956 in February 1994 and assigned SBP autonomy and providing powers to SBP Board of 
Directors for monetary and banking sector policies; 
Second, the Government recapitalized banks (injecting close to Rs 46 billion in some of the 
public sector banks), laid off close to 35,000 employees in two phases8
 from public sector 
banks and closed over 2000 unbanked branches and eliminated credit controls; 
                                                       
6   OICCI 
7   The State Bank of Pakistan: Banking Sector Review, 2005 
8  
In the first phase (1997) 24,000 employees were laid off and in the second phase around 11,700 employees were relieved 
4 
 BIS Review 3/2007
    Third, privatized 4 major public sector banks9
 and supported a program of restructuring and 
improving asset quality which involved write off of loans (in the range of Rs 54 billion10) and 
establishment  of  Committee  for  Revival  of  Sick  Industrial  Units  (CRSIU),  Corporate  and 
Industrial Restructuring Corporation (CIRC) to acquire the NPLs of the public sector banks 
and creation of a National Accountability Bureau (NAB) Cell at SBP to expeditiously process 
the cases of willful defaulters. Moreover a special law, the Financial Institutions (Recovery of 
Finances) Ordinance, 2001 was enacted with a view to facilitate speedy recovery of loans; 
and  
Fourth, introduced both financial innovation and diversification in banking sector by allowing 
entry of Islamic and microfinance industry, women’s banks and SME bank; 
Fifth,  SBP  overhauled  its prudential regulatory and supervisory  framework setting  in  place 
international standards and new regulations for specific sectors such as SMEs, agriculture, 
and  microfinance  and  steadily  increased  minimum  capital  requirements  of  the  commercial 
banks  to  at  least  Rs  6  billion  by  the  year  2009.  SBP  further  issued  risk  management 
guidelines,  e-banking  and  credit  information  system  and  has  developed  Institutional  Risk 
Assessment  Framework 
the  supervisory 
departments and efficient usage of all possible information available on banks and DFIs. 
Finally,  Pakistan  launched  fundamental  reforms  of  stock  market  that  have  ranged  from 
automation of stock market and change in their governance structure to the establishment of 
Securities Exchange Commission of Pakistan (SECP) to regulate the capital markets, NBFIs, 
insurance and corporate sectors. 
to  enhance  collaboration  among 
(IRAF) 
Impact of financial sector reforms has been far reaching. In general while real sector development is a 
prerequisite for growth of financial sector, in Pakistan context, our experience has shown that to some 
extent financial sector reforms have catalyzed and induced real sector development. Today, Pakistan 
has a sizeable banking industry with close to 55 Financial Institutions and asset size of $69 billion, 
deposit  base  of  $52  billion  and  advances  of  $36.7  billion.  Financial  sector  reforms  have  led  to 
improvement in the following areas: 
• 
Financial  depth  has  increased  as  Bank  Assets  to  GDP  ratio  has  improved  from  49.1%  in 
1997 to 55.6% in 2005 whereas money supply (M2) to GDP ratio has also improved from 
36% in FY 00 to 44% in FY 06. Private credit to GDP which reveals the extent to which the 
banking  sector  is  efficiently  allocating  funds  to  the  productive  sector  of  the  economy  has 
increased  from  18%  in  FY  2000  to  27.4%  in  FY  2006.  However  despite  improvements 
Pakistan lags behind its regional peers. 
Profitability  as  well  as  efficiency  has  increased  in  the  banking  sector.  ROA  has  increased 
from  negative  0.2  in  CY  2000  to  2.1  by  June  2006  whereas  ROE  has  increased  from 
negative 3.5% to 26.5% over the same period. Pakistan’s performance in these indicators is 
amongst  the best  in  its  regional  peers.  Intermediation  cost  and  total  expense/total  income 
ratio have come down from 3.43% to 2.96% and from 97.4% to 67.6% respectively over the 
period CY 2000 to June 2006. However, the gains in institutional efficiency have not really 
translated into gains in allocative efficiency as spreads have also risen over the same period. 
NPLs to total loans and net NPLs to net loans ratios have improved to 8 percent and 2.1 
percent respectively over the period CY 2000 to June 2006. 
All the capital adequacy ratios have shown improvement. Risk Weighted CAR has increased 
from 9.7% to 11.9%, Tier 1 Capital to Risk Weighted Assets from 8.3% to 8.9% and Capital 
to Total Assets from 4.5% to 8.1%. Presently 34 out of 40 banks are reporting above 10% 
capital adequacy. 
Diversification of credit has taken place and previously underserved segments have better 
access  to  credit.  The  credit  to  agriculture  sector  has  been  mostly  market  driven  and  has 
almost doubled from Rs. 73.6 billion during FY04 to Rs. 137.5 billion during FY06. The share 
of commercial banks in credit to agriculture has risen from 49 percent to 61 percent mainly 
                                                          
9   Two of these major banks (MCB and ABL) were privatized in early 1990’s while UBL and HBL were privatized 
10   These loans were written off under BPD circular 29 
BIS Review 3/2007 
 5
reflecting  the  strength  of  agriculture  sector  fundamentals  and  the  success  of  the  financial 
sector reforms. Moreover, SBP in its recent restructuring has created a new department for 
agriculture  and  rural  finance  with  a  strong  reorientation  towards  development  finance. 
Likewise, consumer credit has grown by more than 350% and SME financing by 66%. As on 
June  30th  2006,  out  of  total  credit,  the  shares  of  agriculture,  SME,  consumer  credit  were 
6.2%, 16.4% and 14% respectively. 
Micro finance banking sector which was initiated in 2001, now constitutes of 6 banks (with 
more than 110 branches) and an asset base of around Rs 9.7 billion as on 30th June 2006. 
Micro  finance  banking  has  a  lot  of  scope  in  Pakistan  as  according  to  some  independent 
estimates,  it  is  potentially  a  Rs  300  billion  size  market  which  can  generate  revenues  of 
around Rs. 90 billion per annum. 
Likewise Islamic Banking constitutes 2.3% of the total assets of the banking sector with a 
branch network of more than 100 branches. In future according to estimates it will capture 
10%  of  the  total  market  in  Pakistan  by  2010.  Moreover,  growth  in  Islamic  banking  is  also 
expected to increase the financial depth as it will bring a lot of people into the deposit net. 
Realizing the importance of these sectors, SBP has further restructured itself in September 
2006 and has launched efforts to enhance access to finance in these areas. 
Pakistan’s financial sector after going through a process of privatization is already moving 
towards  consolidation  and  mergers.  This  process  spurred  by  SBP’s  requirement  of 
increasing MCR of banks, will weed out weak banks and will make the banking sector well 
capitalized and more resilient to shocks. Moreover, it will also ensure a smooth transition to 
Basel 2. 
Due  to  stock  market  reforms  and  improvement  in  the  stock  market  performance,  equity 
market capitalization to GDP ratio has also increased from merely 16.8% to 31.4% in 2005 
and in fact went as high as 44% in April 2006. However, equity markets are yet to fulfill their 
full  potential  as  an  alternative  source  of  funds  for  the  corporate  sector.  Moreover,  bond 
market in Pakistan is fairly underdeveloped and is merely 5.5% of GDP. 
     Strengthening of governance structure 
Political  stability  and  good  governance  are  essential  pre-requisites  for  improvement  in  investment 
climate and sustainable growth. Following improvements have taken place in these areas: 
Political governance 
Pakistan  despite  all  international  and  public  perceptions,  today  is  a  functioning  democracy  and 
gradually there is a change in complexion and composition of legislatures with more educated people 
and women (27% of National Assembly and 17% of Senate) entering into politics as the law mandates 
for elected representative to have a minimum of bachelor degree to contest in an election. Aside from 
100  members  Senate  and  342  members  National  Assembly  with 
functioning  Committees 
debating/approving  budget,  legislation  and  policies  of  the  Government,  Pakistan  introduced  a  path 
breaking devolution process with the passage of the Local Government Ordinance in 2001 that has 
empowered locally elected representatives (more than one quarter of which are women councilors) to 
manage local government affairs and empowered communities to enhance government accountability. 
To  enhance  accountability  and  reduce  corruption,  the  Government  established  in  1999  a  National 
Accountability Bureau (NAB) which has its head office at Islamabad and five other regional offices in 
the  provinces.  Similarly,  government  has  launched a  major  overhaul  of  civil/public  services  through 
civil services reform committee. 
Enhanced role and vigilance of regulators 
With private sector leading bulk of economic activity, Pakistan has now a web of regulatory framework 
for  specialized  businesses  and  products  backed  by  strong  regulators  who  operate  on  the  basis  of 
modern and transparent set of economic regulations consistent with international standards. On one 
hand,  Pakistan’s  regulator  for  telecommunications  (Pakistan  Telecommunication  Authority  (PTA)), 
Media  (Pakistan  Electronic  Media  Regulatory  Authority  (PEMRA)),  Power  Sector  (National  Electric 
Power  Regulatory  Authority  (NEPRA)),  and  Oil  and  Gas  Sector  (Oil  and  Gas  Regulatory  Authority 
6 
 BIS Review 3/2007
(OGRA))  etc.  were  established  to  unbundle  Government’s  role  as  producer  of  strategic  goods  and 
services and policy making from that of a body that licenses new entities, setting price mechanism and 
standard setting, ironing out and providing guidance on the issues arising out of market imperfections 
and checking compliance and monitoring etc. On the other hand, the financial regulatory authorities 
both for banking and nonbank financial sector have now been made independent. 
Social transformation 
Recent  high  growth  trends  coupled  with  enhanced  spending  on  social  and  poverty  programs11
  that 
rose  from  3.8%  of  GDP  in  2001/2002  to  5.05%  by  2005/2006  has  together  begun  to  pay  some 
dividends as evident from the reversal in poverty incidence trends and social indicators. 
• 
• 
Per capita income has grown from $526 in FY 2000 to $847 in FY 2006. 
The  overall  poverty  has  been  reduced  from  34.46%  in  2001  to  23.90%  in  2005.  The 
percentage of population living below the poverty line in rural areas has declined from 39.26 
percent to 28.10 percent while those in urban areas, has declined from 22.69 percent 14.9 
percent. 
Literacy rates of population 10 years and older have increased to 53% as compared to 45% 
in 2001/02. Both primary and secondary school enrolment have shown improvement in the 
recent  years.  However,  while  elementary  education  gross  enrollment  has  increased  from 
41% in 2001/02 to 46% in 2004/05, it remains far below the targets. 
Overall access to sanitation12
to the sanitation levels achieved by lower middle income countries in 2004. 
Improvements  in  immunization  coverage  of  children  and  women  from  53%  in  2001/02  to 
77%  in  2004/05.  Proportion  of  pregnant  women  attending  antenatal  care  increased  from 
34% in 2001/02 to 50% in 2004/05. 
 has improved from 37% in 1990 to 59% in 2004 getting close 
   Future paradigm shift 
Given its recent track record, Pakistan economy is contemplated to grow at a rate of 7% per annum. 
This should help raise further its per capita income from US$847 per annum to US$ 1557 by 2015 
which in turn will facilitate reduction in poverty. Economic prospects to realize these goals are good as 
ongoing  structural  reforms,  monitoring  of  investment  and  pace  of  project  implementation  is  being 
enhanced.  Demand  is  expected  to  get  stronger  as  the  incomes  rise  further  and  assuming  current 
population growth (1.8%) trends persist, Pakistan will be a market of 185 million – adding to this the 
relatively more affluent Gulf population and the Central Asian States population base Pakistan offers a 
large market. Connectivity and the modernization of existing two Ports and addition of Gawadar port 
will ease pressure. 
We do recognize that tackling the new challenges requires confidence from past achievements but not 
complacency about the magnitude of the challenges to be faced. 
"When it is obvious that the goals cannot be reached, don't adjust the goals, adjust the action steps."  
-- Confucius 
The  key  challenges  going  ahead  are  being  addressed  to  sustain  and  build  on  the  gains  and 
achievements realized in recent years. Let me conclude by highlighting that most of these challenges 
require a further shift in development paradigm which will be pursued. 
First,  Pakistan  has  to  address  low  productivity  and  high  sector  and  industry  concentration  which 
induce  a  degree  of  vulnerability.  In  agriculture,  the  Government  is  striving  to  develop  mega  water 
resources  projects  and  launch  further  efforts  to  enhance  crop  yields  key  to  enhance  agriculture 
productivity  of  major  crops  stabilize  performance.  Concurrently,  work  is  underway  to  mitigate 
excessive  dependence  on  crop  sector  by  nurturing  non  crop  sector.  There  is  strong  potential  in 
                                                      
11   Economic Survey of Pakistan 2005-06 
12   World Development Indicators 2006, Asian Development Bank 
BIS Review 3/2007 
 7
livestock and dairy sector – in case of dairy only 2.5-3.0 percent of the production gets processed. 
Processing and packaging of these products and development of agro based industry would stimulate 
export of these products to the neighboring Middle East markets. 
Second,  while  export  diversification  is  occurring,  dependence  on  textile  sector  is  critical  to  insulate 
from  international  fluctuations  in  textile  demand.  To  achieve  diversification,  Pakistan  has  to  make 
inroads  into  the  medium  and  high-end  technology  spectrum  of  products  which  consists  of  products 
such as electronic goods, automobiles, engineering goods etc. and to look for newer markets. 
Third, while financial system’s depth and breadth has increased, there is continued excessive reliance 
on  banking  system;  as  such  there  is  need  for  exploiting  alternative  sources  of  funds,  particularly 
sources for meeting long term financing needs are yet to be developed. In this regard, Pakistan needs 
to develop long term bond market particularly corporate bond market and further strengthen its equity 
markets. Diversification will facilitate availability of funding for infrastructure development and help in 
structuring required risk mitigation approaches. 
Fourth, the country needs to expedite infrastructure development. Estimates indicate that there total 
infrastructure  investment  requirements  exceed  $40  billion  over  next  five  years.  Mobilizing  these 
investments and it implementation requires special initiatives. 
Fifth,  the  country  needs  to  bring  further  improvement  in  governance  and  competitive  investment 
climate making it more business friendly. Improvement in governance should include among others a 
strong  commitment  to  rule  of  law,  competent  and  efficient  government  sector,  less  cumbersome 
regulations and control of corruption. The strengthening of the competitive investment climate would 
require, further development of markets, efficient nonfinancial factor markets particularly labor markets 
and availability of skilled labor, improve the infrastructure services, and the existence of strong legal, 
regulatory and institutional framework. 
Sixth,  it  is  critical  that  Pakistan  shares  its  gains  equitably  across  regions  and  metropolitan  cities  to 
satellite towns and to rural areas where there is need for further strengthening of incentive framework, 
enhanced availability of credit, and rising non-farm employment opportunities. 
Finally, the social transformation needs to occur side by side with the changes in the market place to 
further  strengthen  the  demand  for  exiting  and  new  products.  People  are  better  informed  and  have 
more choices in terms of goods and services. 
8 
 BIS Review 3/2007
