Joseph Yam: Changes in Asia – a brief look at the dynamics within the region 
Statement by Mr Joseph Yam, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, and Alternate 
Governor for Hong Kong, China in the Asian Development Bank, at the 40th Asian Development Bank 
Annual Meeting, Kyoto, 6 May 2007. 
 I would like to thank the Government of Japan and the people of Kyoto for their hospitality in hosting 
this year’s Annual Meeting of the Asian Development Bank (ADB). I would also like to congratulate 
Mr Kuroda on his re-election as the President of the ADB. 
This  year  marks  the  40th  anniversary  of  the  ADB.  Over  the  past  four  decades,  Asia  has  achieved 
remarkable development, particularly in terms of economic growth and the reduction of poverty, and 
clearly  the  ADB  has  contributed  significantly  to  this  achievement  and  has  established  itself  as  a 
regional financial institution of strategic importance. 
Asia  has  undergone  remarkable  changes  too  over  the  past  four  decades  and  in  many  ways,  in 
particular in terms of the economic dynamics within the region, and between the region and the rest of 
the world. Changes have been particularly marked in the past decade or so, under the influence of 
globalisation  and  the  revolution  of  information  technology.  There  has,  for  example,  been  rapidly 
increasing  trade  integration,  encouraged  obviously  by  the  high  degree  of  freedom  in  international 
trade, and consequently increasing economic interdependence within the region.  
Changes always present new challenges and opportunities. And for the new challenges to be met and 
the new opportunities to be exploited, there is often the need for new approaches and new initiatives, 
at both the national and international levels. There is a view, for example, that trade integration in the 
region  has  not  been  adequately  served  by  financial  integration,  given  restrictive  controls  on  capital 
mobility still being practised in selected jurisdictions. As a result there is some doubt as to whether the 
long term development potential of the region has been maximised and whether the rapid economic 
growth the region is experiencing is sustainable. There is further concern from the point of view of the 
maintenance  of  monetary  and  financial  stability.  New  approaches  and  new  initiatives  are  indeed 
necessary to promote greater financial integration in the region.  
I am sure there are many other areas concerning development of the region in which new approaches 
and new initiatives may be desirable. Being a regional financial institution of strategic importance, it is 
obvious  that  the  ADB  has  a  significant  role  to  play.  I  would  argue  that  this  should  be  a  role  of 
increasing  significance,  or  even  a  pivotal  role,  given  the  increasing  interdependence  among 
jurisdictions within the region and therefore the greater need for regional co-operation. The ADB has 
the right institutional framework for promoting such co-operation, and I am glad to see that under the 
leadership of the President there has been increasing involvement of the ADB in regional financial co-
operation recently. 
I welcome the intention for ADB to launch a review of its Long-Term Strategic Framework and the fact 
that this has been preceded by the work of the Eminent Persons Group convened by the President 
last year. I am also happy to see emphasis being given in the Report of the Eminent Persons Group to 
financial sector development and financial integration in the region, among other operational priorities. 
I certainly hope that this emphasis in the Report will be reflected, through the review process, in the 
Long-Term Strategic Framework. I feel also that such a strategic review should cover the governance 
structure  of  the  ADB  as  well,  in  order  better  to  reflect  the  new  economic  realities  and  the  Asian 
heritage of the ADB. Hong Kong looks forward to contributing appropriately to this review process and 
seeing a new long term strategy developed for ADB that would reflect the consensus of its members 
and stakeholders. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 44/2007 
 1
