Burhanuddin Abdullah: Capitalizing on stability for sustained growth 
Speech  by  Dr  Burhanuddin  Abdullah,  Governor  of  Bank  Indonesia,  at  the  Annual  Bankers’  Dinner 
2007, Jakarta, 12 January 2007. 
Assalamu’alaikum wr. wb, 
Good evening and greetings to you all, 
 Introduction 
I.  
In commencing my speech, I would like to invite you to join me in expressing thanks and praise to God 
Almighty who has again blessed us with the chance to meet in this pleasant and congenial setting at 
the Annual Bankers’ Dinner 2007. 
On  this  wonderful  opportunity  and  on  behalf  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  Bank  Indonesia,  please 
allow me to wish you all a Happy New Year for 2007. May we all be blessed in every step that we 
take. 
Tonight marks the fourth time I stand at this prominent forum, in the presence of you, distinguished 
ladies  and  gentlemen,  to  deliver  the  Governor  of  Bank  Indonesia’s  start-of-year  briefing.  This  also 
suggests that it has been almost 4 (four) years since I was appointed to the position of Governor of 
Bank Indonesia. Despite some shortcomings as well as successes, I would like to thank you all for 
your support and cooperation that has been so forthcoming over the years. 
II. 
Reflection of 2006 economic dynamics 
Year 2006 - the year to restore stability 
A. 
Distinguished guests, 
The year 2006, which only passed a few days ago, was replete with splendid colours which I found 
most impressive. To policymakers in Government, Parliament, and also Bank Indonesia, 2006 was a 
year  which  finally  provided  some  breathing  space,  albeit  with  several  footnotes.  To  entrepreneurs, 
2006 was a year of mixed achievements. Enterprises in the real sector, in the manufacturing industry 
in particular, found 2006 a constrictive year. Competition pressures from more efficient and productive 
countries  were  enormous.  Notwithstanding,  2006  was  a  year  that  generated  much  profit  for 
participants in extractive industries, as reflected by the surging export level to countries that are our 
primary trading partners. Nonetheless, to the majority of the general public, 2006 was a truly trying 
year. It was a test of resilience and patience as a result of high inflation, which were direct and indirect 
effects of fuel price hikes in the previous year. With all these episodes, phenomena and dynamics, 
2006 was a year we should nevertheless be thankful for.  
For  that  reason,  at  the  beginning  of  my  speech  tonight,  I  would  like  to  invite  you  all,  distinguished 
ladies  and  gentlemen,  to  compare  notes  and  ask  imperative  questions  regarding  the  intentions, 
motivation, steps and achievements for the year that has just passed us by. What have we achieved 
so far? What must we persevere within the coming year? What are our problems? Is it lack of hard 
work? Sincerity? Determination? Or is it something else? We are asking such questions while looking 
throughout  the  country  and  wondering  where  are  we  in  the  race  to  seek  prosperity  for  all  of  our 
people? Could we be left behind by our neighbouring countries? 
In  the  following  section  I  will  explicate  the  targets,  hopes  and  dreams  we  must  knit  together  this 
coming  year,  2007.  Inevitably,  deep  observation  and  sharp  analysis  are  required  on  the  numerous 
predicaments  and  on  the  social  and  cultural  order  of  society,  which  will  become  the  foundation  of 
growth and development in our economy. Subsequently, towards the end of my speech I will present 
some messages, follow-up steps and policy measures that will take place this coming year, under one 
common goal, that is to make our economy a more prosperous one. 
Distinguished guests, 
BIS Review 9/2007 
 1
The transition from 2005 is still fresh in our minds. We left 2005 full of hopes and concerns, because 
we were convinced that at the earlier part of 2006 we would still see some difficulties as a result of 
adverse  external  shocks,  particularly  the  soaring  global  oil  price.  Nevertheless,  hopes  abounded 
during  the  early  part  of  2006.  We  were  optimistic,  firstly,  that  macro  economic  stability  would  be 
restored to its proper path and be maintained so that economic enthusiasm would return to where it 
should be. Secondly, we also strived to achieve the first goals in order to quickly minimize the rigidities 
and structural inefficiencies in our economy. 
We  should  be  grateful  because  we  were  able  to  maintain  macroeconomic  and  financial  system 
stability  during  2006.  Numerous  indicators  which  endured  pressures  in  2005  have  shown  positive 
improvement in 2006. Relatively high inflationary pressures at the beginning of 2006 have gradually 
dissipated throughout 2006. By the end of 2006, the inflation rate was recorded at 6.6% (y-o-y); below 
the targeted rate of 8±1% set by the Government and Bank Indonesia. Success in controlling inflation 
in  2006  also  reveals  that  monetary  policy  was  able  to  mitigate  the  second  round  effects  of  soaring 
global oil prices at the end of 2005 on inflation expectations (See Graph 1)1. 
 
  
Inflation  stabilization  in  2006  and  relatively  good  performance  in  the  balance  of  payments,  with  a 
surplus  of  3.7%  of  GDP,  also  contributed  towards  a  stable  rupiah  exchange  rate  throughout  2006, 
after significant depreciation in 2005. Entering 2006, exchange rate volatility had also decreased.  
The year 2006 was also an important one as we settled our outstanding obligations to the IMF without 
triggering  significant  turbulence  in  the  market.  With  the  debt  now  cleared,  we  are  now  a  ‘regular’ 
member of the IMF. Even though the outstanding obligations have been paid, our foreign exchange 
reserves  position  was  maintained  at  an  acceptable  level.  This  improved  the  confidence  of  market 
players  in  the  foreign  exchange  markets.  Throughout  2006,  the  rupiah  to  US  dollar  exchange  rate 
tended  to  be  stable  at  a  level  of  Rp.9,100  –  9,400  per  USD  with  relatively  lower  volatility  than  the 
previous year (See Graph 2). 
 1   If we look a little further back, the outlier period, as a result of significant price changes in the economy, is generally beyond 
the control of monetary policy.  On average, CPI inflation from 2003-2006  was recorded at 6%  y-o-y outside its outlier in 
2005, which was recorded at 17%. 
2 
 BIS Review 9/2007
 Towards  the end  of 2006,  uncertainty  regarding  shocks  in  regional  financial  markets emerged  as  a 
result of the Bank of Thailand’s policy aimed at stemming the flow of short-term capital into its financial 
system. Fortunately such fears never materialized. Although the rupiah fluctuated momentarily, it soon 
stabilised in line with its external balance. The policy taken by Thailand was based on its domestic 
considerations and economic interests. We also have our own considerations in formulating policies 
that match our own particular circumstances and interests. In this case, Bank Indonesia believes that 
the liberal capital account regime that has been implemented for many years remains congruent to our 
wider national interests. The economic theory of Kydland and Prescott regarding time inconsistency in 
employing a policy seems a relevant reference point with respect to the choice of policy regime which 
we have instituted ex-ante. We cannot simply alter our capital account regime to become more closed 
without precipitating a loss of credibility. Credibility, which we have strived painfully to achieve over the 
years, should not be thrown away merely due to the temptation of temporary benefits. 
With the above positive developments, Bank Indonesia found the opportunity to gradually reduce the 
BI  Rate  during  2006.  Throughout  2006,  Bank  Indonesia  trimmed  the  BI  Rate  by  300  basis  points, 
which by end of 2006 was recorded below 2 (two) digits, namely 9.75%. Such reductions were taken 
to  preserve  the  positive  market  perceptions  and  support  a  more  conducive  business  climate,  while 
safeguarding stability in the financial markets amid capital inflows for portfolio placements. 
The  regained  macroeconomic  stability  provided  opportunity  for  a  broad-based  economic  recovery. 
National economic expansion became visible in the second half of 2006, particularly in the growth of 
production indicators, although insufficiently balanced due to a less-than-conducive investment climate 
and the high-cost economy. Investment slowed compared to the previous year, and therefore made 
exports and private consumption the primary base of economic growth. Furthermore, beginning in the 
second half of 2006 we witnessed an upswing in credit growth, which was followed by acceleration in 
government  spending,  and  thus  helping  to  boost  economic  growth.  At  the  end  of  2006,  economic 
growth was recorded at 5.5% y-o-y22. 
The national banking industry has achieved a gradual marked improvement over the last three years. 
Quantitatively, there has been a significant upswing across various financial performance indicators 
and banking industry activity. This was underpinned by growth in total assets, which was bolstered by 
a  build-up  in  earning  assets,  including  credit  (See  Graph  3).  As  of  November,  total  assets  in  the 
banking industry had risen to Rp.1,635 trillion, whereas credit portfolio rose by Rp.78,2 trillion (10.7%). 
This was funded by growth in deposits to the tune of Rp.123 trillion (10.9%). Banking capital was also 
                                                      
2   Bank Indonesia’s estimation. 
BIS Review 9/2007 
 3
maintained at a level deemed more than adequate, as reflected by the Capital Adequacy Ratio (CAR) 
which was maintained at the relatively high level of 20%. 
  
Meanwhile, the level of Non-Performing Loans (NPL) in the industry has taken a significant dive, which 
indicates that, essentially, the prevailing condition of the banking industry has experienced a marked 
and continual improvement. It should be noted that the current level of NPL in the banking industry is 
heavily influenced by the NPL of state-owned banks, which still carry some long-standing problems 
from the past. 
Qualitatively,  the  health  and  resilience  of  the  banking  industry  over  the  last  few  years  have  also 
witnessed significant improvements. The human resources capacity within the banking industry has 
increased,  along  with  the  enhanced  understanding  of  prudential  concepts  and  risk  management 
throughout the banks’ organization hierarchies. The management information system, internal control 
system, risk-management system, good governance and all operational procedures that follow; have 
generally strengthened. The quality of the banking service is also a crucial factor for which progress is 
managed through the creation of a trusted customer protection system. 
In  the  capital  markets,  the  price  of  bank  shares  experienced  a  rather  significant  hike  before  finally 
stabilizing.  Bank  issued  bonds  also  received  a  positive  response  from  the  market  at  an  acceptable 
price. Deposits at banks steadily accrued year by year reaching 10% annually despite a continuous fall 
in  the  savings’  interest  rate,  following  cuts  in  the  BI  Rate.  This  could  be  considered  as  a  strong 
indication that public confidence in the banking industry has recovered and even grown. Alterations to 
the  Bank  Deposit  Guarantee  Scheme,  implemented  in  the  latter  part  of  last  year,  were  performed 
smoothly  and  without  triggering  turbulence  that  could  threaten  overall  financial  system  stability. 
Concerns regarding flight-to-safety and flight-to-quality from the customers of small banks, as a result 
of changes in the blanket guarantee scheme to a limited guarantee scheme instituted by the Deposit 
Insurance Corporation (LPS) have proved not to materialise, or at least minimised. 
Meanwhile, the Rural Bank (BPR) industry has also shown growth. This industry plays an important 
role in developing Small and Micro Enterprises (Graph 4), and communities of villages and suburbs. 
There are currently 1,935 Rural Banks with 3,157 bank offices with a credit portfolio reaching Rp.16,9 
trillion  (Table  1).  As  the  nominal  amount  of  credit  is  usually  small,  to  reach  a  particular  amount  of 
credits extended, Rural Banks will have a much higher client ratio compared to that of Commercial 
Banks. 
4 
 BIS Review 9/2007
  Table 1. 
Performance of Rural Banks 
  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Speaking  about  the  development  of  the  financial  industry,  and  the  banking  industry  to  be  more 
specific, four years ago, we clearly realized that banking industry supervision and regulation must be 
based  on  a  long-term  vision  in  its  achievement  strategy,  and  such  a  vision  must  be  approached 
through systematic and measurable efforts. 
Therefore, at the beginning of 2004, Bank Indonesia issued Indonesian Banking Architecture (API), a 
blueprint  of  upcoming  banking  industry  guidelines,  and  the  kind  of  vision,  direction  and  form  to  be 
achieved.  The  holistic  policies  that  Bank  Indonesia  issue  to  achieve  such  goals  up  until  the  end  of 
2010 are included as part of the API policy structure. 
Since  then,  as  our  distinguished  guests  may  observe,  Bank  Indonesia  has  continuously  strived  to 
manage  and  improve  all  aspects  of  banking  activities.  Each  regulation,  from  strategic  ones  to  the 
technical guidelines of operational courses of action, was designed to be a torch to light the darkness 
and lead the way. Steadily, albeit sometimes slowly, the national banking industry has achieved good 
progress  and  alleviated  many  of  its  problems.  The  pillars  set  forth  in  the  Indonesian  Banking 
Architecture  have  begun  to  transform  into  pillars  of  banking  industry  strengths,  promoting  greater 
stability. 
BIS Review 9/2007 
 5
Through the implementation of good corporate governance (GCG), the most recent Bank Indonesia 
survey  suggested  that  nearly  all  banks  have  conducted  self-assessments.  The  results  of  the 
self-assessments concluded that approximately 98% of banks in Indonesia have applied a minimum of 
50%  of  the  GCG  principles,  as  mandated  by  PBI  8/4/PBI/2006  regarding  GCG  Implementation  for 
Commercial  Banks.  Management  information  systems,  internal  control  systems,  risk  management 
systems,  and  all  operational  procedures  that  follow,  have  generally  progressed,  however,  there 
remains room for improvement.  
As another step to greater ensure that good governance in the banking industry is upheld, in 2006 we 
took a step which we deem to be strategic. A step that we believe may help rebuild a good image and 
erase  any  negative  perceptions  that  abound  within  the  Indonesian  financial  system  which  can  be 
exploited  for  illegal  activities,  such  as  money  laundering.  The  step  taken  is  the  cooperation  with 
various law enforcement authorities – The Indonesian Police, the Attorney General, The Indonesian 
Financial  Transaction  Reports  and  Analysis  Centre  (PPATK)  –  and  most  recently  the  Corruption 
Eradication Commission (KPK).  
The  aforementioned  cooperation  between  Bank  Indonesia  and  the  various  law  enforcement 
institutions  is  hoped  to  be  able  to  clear  any  misperceptions  regarding  to  coordination  efforts  in 
handling  various  banking  crimes,  including  corruption.  Perception,  understanding,  competence  and 
the  work  ethic  in  dealing  with  multiple  banking  problems  will  be  settled  through  a  performance 
structure that is prompt, objective and proportionate. Therefore, it is expected that public confidence, 
as  the  foundation  of  banking  business,  can  be  safeguarded  and  continually  improved  since  it  is 
guaranteed by a trustworthy law enforcement system. 
As a result of our relentless endeavours, the dark cloud that has overshadowed the national banking 
industry  for  so  long  has  begun  to  disperse  little  by  little.  We  should  also  reinforce  our  pledge  and 
commitment,  as  well  as  find  the  faith  that  we  will,  in  time,  accomplish  our  ultimate  goal:  “the 
establishment of a sound, strong, beneficial and rewarding national banking industry”. 
Several problems in 2006 
B.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Based on my previous comments, it would not be excessive to say that there have been numerous 
successes achieved during 2006. We have successfully enticed our economic machines back on the 
proper track. We have reduced the cost of financing, which was the direct result of high inflation. We 
have reiterated that the economic management of our country will only succeed if it is us, ladies and 
gentlemen, who do it. However, against this backdrop, we also comprehend how serious our perennial 
carry-over problems have become, which we have shouldered year after year. That is the structural 
rigidities within our economy, which in turn has paved the way for inefficiency, squandering time and 
resources  in  the  form  of  excess  liquidity  and  unemployment,  and  abject  poverty  that  continues  to 
worsen. 
Meanwhile,  the  condition  of  the  real  sector,  which  forms  the  spine  of  the  country,  is  faced  with  an 
inevitable paradoxical phenomenon. The growth and expansion of economic capacity that took place 
over the last few years tended to favour capital intensive sectors rather than labour intensive ones. 
Unemployment continues to grow despite a prospective economy. Lately, we have also observed the 
exacerbation of poverty. Graphs 5 and 6 provide an illustration of the paradox of growth phenomenon. 
6 
 BIS Review 9/2007
  
There  is  a  suggestion  that  such  paradox  of  growth  occurs  due  to  structural  imbalances  in  the 
Indonesian  economy.  Distortions  caused  by  imperfect  market  structure  and  the  presence  of 
oligopolystic  industries,  which  were  legacies  of  Indonesia’s  economy  history,  have  caused  the 
economy to work only sub-optimally and restrain the market’s ability to allocate resources efficiently. 
Such distortions limit access and broader participation in economic activities. This situation has been 
present for too long and thus making it easy for us to forget to address it. We must now immediately 
open  the  doors of  access and  invite broader  participation  in  the economy  through  improvements  in 
investment  climate,  licence  process  simplifications,  and  other  improvements.  I  believe  that  we  all 
understand that it is only through these means we can achieve high quality growth, which in turn will 
resolve the large income gap issue. 
From this argument, it is clear that improving investment climate, opening easier access and broader 
participation in the economy are important factors in post-crisis economic recovery. Meanwhile, it has 
been  found  by  non-governmental  institutions  such  as  LPEM  UI  and  ADB  that  there  remain  many 
constraints to investment. The development of these constraints in the recent year hints us that the 
investment  climate  has  yet  to  improve  on  a  general  level.  Moreover,  referring  to  the  most  recent 
survey results, illustrated on Graph 7, some of the constraints have followed an increasing trend, such 
as uncertainty surrounding economic policies and regulations; corruption; taxation related matters; the 
skills and education of human resources; infrastructure, particularly electricity and public transport; a 
poor legal system and protracted conflict resolution; as well as cost of financing. In connection to these 
survey  results,  we  can  also  observe  that  the  revision  of  Taxation  Law;  Labour  Law;  Customs  Law; 
Investment  Law;  infrastructure  improvement  and  future  energy  security;  legal  certainty;  and  the 
harmonisation  of  regulations  between  central  and  regional  governments,  were  regarded  by  both 
domestic as well as international investors as constraints to investment activities in 2006. 
BIS Review 9/2007 
 7
 
As  a  result  of  the  above,  investors  and  the  banking  industry;  be  they  domestic  or  international, 
perceive  the  presence  of  high  micro-structural  risks  in  our  real  sectors.  This  is  why  only  minimal 
interest abounds in long-term investments, as shown by the low growth of Foreign Direct Investment 
(FDI) to Indonesia in the post-crisis era, despite the very high FDI potential of other countries in the 
Asian region at the moment. 
 
   Compared to other countries in the Asian region, the micro risk and distortions prevalent in the real 
sector have contributed to lower efficiency and productivity in the Indonesian economy. IMD survey 
results  published  in  the  World  Competitiveness  Report  2006  show  that,  based  on  economic 
performance,  government  efficiency,  business  environment  efficiency  and  the  infrastructure  in 
Indonesia, our country is positioned at 60th out of 61 countries (See Table 2). Meanwhile, a World 
Bank  survey  on  investment  supporting  factors  shows  that  Indonesia  has  dropped  to  135th  place  in 
2006; from 131st in the previous year. 
 
8 
 BIS Review 9/2007
  
The tribulations I have just mentioned, compounded by the passage of time, have caused a slower 
accumulation of capital, reflected by a stagnant investment growth, and a contraction in the share of 
investment in GDP (See Graph 8a), as well as a significant reduction in the quality of capital in the 
economy (See Graph 8b). The downside of such low accumulation and quality of capital is reflected by 
the phenomenon of supply side rigidity in the post-crisis economy. Such a case is illustrated in Graph 
9, which shows a steeper slope in the dynamics of price and output in Indonesia in the post-crisis era. 
The supply side rigidity in the post-crisis economy has in turn triggered the low absorption of labour 
and reduced the speed of economic growth (See Graph 10). These last two aspects clearly pave the 
way  to  wide-reaching  social  and  economic  effects:  Our  poverty  level  has  risen  along  with  widening 
socio-economic inequalities (See Table 3). 
 
  BIS Review 9/2007 
 9
    From  a  different  perspective,  micro  risk  and  economic  distortions,  which  curb  investment,  are  also 
reflected  by  the  decoupling  of  the  financial  and  real  sectors.  Banks  become  reluctant  to  distribute 
funds to the real sector and tend to place their funds in low risk financial instruments, such as SBI and 
SUN. Bank funding to the real sector significantly drops and we are then left facing a liquidity overhang 
in  the  form  of  outstanding  SBI,  which  currently  amounts  to slightly  above  Rp.200  trillion,  forcing  an 
imbalanced economic growth. Our economy only grows with one engine. We are flying with only one 
engine!  The  real  sector  tends  to  move  slowly  since  micro-structural  risk  impedes  on  banking 
intermediation,  whereas  the  financial  sector  continues  to  expand  due  to  the  constancy  of  funds 
invested into it. Such conditions are very unhealthy to our economic system as a whole if they persist. 
In addition, micro risk and the structural distortions in the economy, which trigger supply side rigidity, 
have caused the economy to be more vulnerable to external shocks and inflationary pressures. Our 
core inflation rate has remained persistent. This constraint has surely affected the funding interest rate 
in  the  economy  as  a  whole,  which  tends  to  be  relatively  high.  This  series  of  events  have  caused 
collective suffering for all. By looking deeper to see who will suffer the most from such situation, we 
can  all  agree  that  it  is  not  morally  justified.  My  whole  argument  is  to  reaffirm  that  corrections  to 
structural distortions and improvements in investment climate are the primary determining factors of 
10 
 BIS Review 9/2007
the interest rate’s ability to slide naturally, whilst maintaining stability. It is through these means that a 
sustainable development may be realized. 
Distinguished guests, 
Prevailing conditions combined with our turbulent economy, noted or not, will continue to aggravate 
other problems in social, political and cultural life. I have noted some of the disarray in public social life 
that  tends  to  prioritize  the  interests  of  a  limited  group  compared  to  broader  national  interests. 
Consensus  and  commitment,  which  we  have  all  agreed  upon,  are  barely  felt.  Many  of  us  move 
towards self-interest fulfilment and it is, therefore, very difficult to connect with one another to achieve 
our  national  interests.  More  than  ever  we  require  a  common  thread  that  can  unite  us  as  a  unified 
country.  In  terms  of  global  relations,  upon  seeing  other  countries  marching  forward,  concern, 
powerlessness and a sense of alienation abound. We praise and study their successes, nevertheless 
we remain unable to match their lead. 
Meanwhile, violent culture, self-centred social conduct, regressive ideas, extremism, intolerance and a 
terrible  work  ethic  are  becoming  the  bread  and  butter  of  this  nation.  Political  developments  in  the 
post-crisis  era  have  only  provided  a  minimal  level  of  valid  rewards  that  could  possibly  affect  public 
prosperity. Democracy, which we have adopted as the cornerstone of development, remains primarily 
out of reach and unable to optimise the greater interest of our nation. 
These inauspicious events, which I have briefly outlined today, unfortunately have been made even 
worse, marked by a series of natural disasters that ripped at the heart of our beloved country. Another 
disaster seems to strike and rub salt in our wounds while we are still mourning and trying to recover 
from the one before. Earthquakes, tsunamis, long droughts, bush fires, a mud volcano, and the most 
recent floods and landslides, all struck in succession at different regions of the nation. The economy of 
the victims in the disaster areas is extremely constricted despite all the aid that has poured in. We at 
Bank Indonesia have asked the banking industry to provide special allowance for credits to business 
enterprises throughout the nation that are affected by the disaster. We hope that this will further assist 
them  with  the  establishment  and  reconstruction  of  their  business  ventures.  Regrettably,  this  step 
remains far from adequate. 
Against  this  abhorrent  backdrop,  the  public  urgently  requires  a  united  front  from  all  of  the  nation’s 
components to share concern and hope. We all feel troubled by the crises we are facing. We need a 
political and cultural strategy to restore the nation’s consensus and commitment, awaken the sense of 
importance, eliminate the feeling of being alienated, and become more receptive towards hope. For 
this reason, we, distinguished ladies and gentlemen, should be able to demonstrate to the public that 
we are performing to our fullest capacity, be it as the regulatory authority, banking, the business world, 
mass media, or any other key role, all in the interest of the affected masses. We must unite, help one 
another, and work much harder to overcome our economic pitfalls. Only by doing so will the very real 
hope of improvements in all aspects of our nation’s life be established. 
Regarding  to  economic  issues  we  face,  I  am  sure  that  we  can  all  agree  that  coordination  and 
cooperation with various other institutions which have the authority, expertise, and appropriate policy 
instruments  will  be  instrumental  in  resolving  those  issues.  It  is  clear  that  monetary  and  banking 
policies cannot resolve various structural problems related with unfavourable investment climate and 
distortions  in  the  goods  and  services  market  which  in  turn  cause  high  costs  in  the  economy.  Bank 
Indonesia,  as  the  monetary  and  banking  authority,  has  limitations  in  its  tasks  and  its  policy 
instrument’s scope of reach.  
In accordance with the mandate given by the Law, Bank Indonesia can only contribute to the nation 
through its efforts in maintaining macroeconomic and financial system stability. Still, the achievement 
of such a mandate will largely depend on coordination with other authorities, cooperation with various 
parties,  and  the  help  and  support  of  various  stakeholders.  We  do  realize  that  there  remain  many 
weaknesses  in  the  area  of  banking  supervision,  even  though  today’s  banking  industry  is  much 
sounder, stronger and more profitable compared to several years ago.  
III. 
Economic outlook for 2007 
2007 - a defining moment 
A.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
BIS Review 9/2007 
 11
With respect to the overall condition and dynamics of the economy in 2006, it would not be excessive 
to  say  that  2007  is  a  defining  moment:  the  year  when  capitalizing  on  macroeconomic  stability  to 
generate greater optimism for the lasting recovery of our nation’s economy becomes essential. 
In  this  defining  moment,  the  journey  of  development  for  our  country  is  entering  a  critical  phase. 
Everything that we achieved back in 2006 has led us towards the middle of a bridge of hope, which we 
should immediately cross by expending our every  effort and wholeheartedness but while exercising 
caution at all times. If we are able to keep pacing forward and safely across that bridge, then the hope 
of a better future will open wide before us. However, if we are forced to halt because of our uncertainty 
or loss of direction, then the proverbial bridge will crumble beneath us due to the excessive burden 
that  we  carry.  We  would  drop  back  to  square  one  and  would,  in  fact,  then  face  an  even  higher 
mountain to climb. 
Entering  2007  means  that  we  are  entering  the  10th  (tenth)  year  since  we  were  hit  by  the  multi-
dimensional crisis that so devastated all aspects of our nation’s life. 10 (ten) years is a lengthy period 
of time for a nation to recover. We need to tell ourselves that enough is enough! Delay will only 
continue to marginalise and alienate our great nation in the ever increasing pace of globalization era; 
filled with stiffer competition between countries. Delay will crush us in time. There’s only one way for 
us to resolve our problems. If you want to have a prosperous life, work hard! There’s no substitute for 
a hard work. Hard work towards self-improvement is a sufficient condition on the road to better future. 
Therefore, 2007 is the perfect time for us to work harder with better focus and greater commitment. It 
is now time to act because inaction can be fatal! 
In  the  midst  of  World  War  II,  under  extreme  pressure,  Sir  Winston  Churchill  once  said  “We  shall 
prevail”. This phrase is relevant to our condition at the moment. There will not be any chance of losing 
sight of the prize if we grab tightly with both hands our spirit, faith and hope. The crisis ten years ago 
may have almost severed most of our life lines, but it could not extinguish our hopes for the future of 
our  nation.  Never  have  we  surrendered  to  any  predicament  in  the  history  of  our  nation.  We  have 
always risen from the depths to fight for our dignity and pride as a sovereign nation. 
From  Bank  Indonesia’s  perspective,  the  macroeconomic  condition  in  2007  is  expected  to  remain 
stable  and  will  become  the  primary  foundation  to  achieve  higher  growth,  provided  that  micro  risk 
factors  and  distortions  in  the  real  sector  can  be  minimized  and  the  investment  climate  improves 
significantly. 
Economic growth in 2007 is projected to reach 6.0% (within a range of 5.7%-6.3%), which surpasses 
economic growth in 2005 and 2006. In the first semester of 2007, the main thrust of economic growth 
will stem from consumption with some assistance from private investment. Such a rise in consumption 
will be fostered by an upswing in public purchasing power as a result of the plan to raise the salary of 
civil  servants  and  the  regional  minimum  wage  early  in  the  first  semester  of  2007  and  to  maintain 
inflation at a low targeted rate. Economic growth is projected to be even more robust in the second 
semester of 2007 along with significant improvements in private investment and greater government 
capital  expenditure.  The  expected  increase  in  private  investment  will  be  encouraged  by  greater 
confidence among economic agents regarding improved economic prospects, but also by the positive 
effects brought about by a slide in both the inflation and interest rates, on top of a stable exchange 
rate. 
Externally, exports are projected to grow steadily but remain stunted due to global economic growth, 
which  is  not  as  buoyant  as  during  2006.  On  the  other  hand,  imports  of  goods  and  services  are 
projected to rise along with a surge in domestic demand. Judging by the most recent export growth 
figures, which are primarily attributable to natural resource commodities, the falling trend in the prices 
of global commodities is projected to be offset by export of manufactured goods, as investment climate 
improves. A number of commodities are expected to provide the largest contribution; including textiles, 
electrical appliances, chemical products and machinery. 
  
12 
 BIS Review 9/2007
  
The balance of payments in 2007 is expected to record a surplus, although not as large as the surplus 
in 2006 (See Table 4). The smaller surplus is attributable to an increase in import demand along with a 
boost  in  economic  activities.  According  to  our  projection,  the  current  account  balance  for  2007  will 
reach  a  surplus  of  1,87%  of  GDP.  As  per  the  projected  balance  of  payments,  foreign  exchange 
reserves in 2007 are expected to be around US$47 billion. The surplus in the balance of payments, 
the  increase  in  foreign  exchange  reserves  and  market  confidence  in  the  quality  of  macroeconomic 
policy  management  will,  in  turn,  support  the  stability  of  the  rupiah  exchange  rate  in  2007,  which  is 
projected to move in line with the external balance. 
Greater economic activity in 2007 is not expected to add excessive pressure on prices, in general, so 
that CPI inflation is expected to remain within the target range set forth by the government, namely 6% 
±1%. The growth in demand is expected to be offset by improvements in supply as investment climate 
improves  and,  as  such,  is not  anticipated  to  heap  more  pressure  onto  core  inflation.  Projected  CPI 
inflation  in  2007  is  also  supported  by  the  preserved  inflation  expectations  of  market  players  (See 
consensus  forecast  in  Graph  11)  and  low  upward  pressure  on  administered  prices  along  with  the 
scrapped government plan to hike the prices of strategic administered groups of goods. In addition, 
inflationary  pressure  on  the  volatile  foods  group  is  estimated  to  be  low  thanks  to  government 
commitment to ensure the smooth supply of food, particularly basic necessities. 
BIS Review 9/2007 
 13
   
Nevertheless, I must underline some factors that may affect the economy in 2007. Economic growth in 
2007 has the potential to surpass expectations provided that some crucial facets of the government’s 
agenda for 2007 are implemented immediately; such as improving the investment climate; reducing 
economic distortions; bolstering infrastructure development, particularly energy, public transport; and, 
modernization of industrial machineries. Against this backdrop, Bank Indonesia predicts that economic 
growth may reach 6.3% with private investment as the primary driver as well as consumption  
Conversely,  the  opposite  may  also  be  true  in  the  form  of  sluggish  economic  growth;  reaching  just 
5.7%, if various constraints and downside risks are unable to be mitigated. The constraints are related 
to  production  capacity  flexibility  in  balancing  the  mounting  demand,  primarily  stemming  from  an 
unchanged and unfavourable investment climate and the high-cost economy. Furthermore, economic 
projections for 2007 will also be influenced by the ability of the domestic economy to absorb the risks 
that may emerge in 2007, in particular those related to global financial flows. 
Whichever scenario that would actually take place in the process, the ever increasing support role of 
banks to provide funding will also be a critical factor if the projections are to be realised. In 2007, credit 
growth is expected to reach 15%-18% with a focus on infrastructure and labor intensive - low import 
content sectors, such as the agricultural sector and its respective sub-sectors. 
To this end, the hitherto constricted capacity and capability of particular banks to distribute funds, due 
to the prevailing high NPL value, should be resolved post-haste. Presently, we can witness how an 
array of accelerated infrastructure projects desperately require bank funding, particularly state-owned 
banks.  If  this  is  undertaken  with  proper  sequencing and  at  a  measurable  pace  so  as  not  to  induce 
macroeconomic instability, the success of these projects is predicted to generate significant multiplier 
effects on the dynamics of other sectors. 
If the projections I have mentioned come to fruition, it is expected that the liquidity overhang and value 
of  un-disbursed  loans,  which  are  currently  rather  large  in  the  banking  industry,  will  fall  in  2007. 
Moreover, funding from outside the banking sector, which recently saw a rise, is expected to continue 
to bolster the recovery of a broad-based economy. In relation to this, the banking industry is faced with 
the threat of even tighter competition, be it between the actors within the banking industry or even from 
actors outside of the banking industry in funding provision. This requires players in the industry to look 
more  introspectively,  to  judge  if  they  can  weather  the  storm  of such stiff  competition.  Each  actor  is 
obliged to improve their operational efficiency, which is currently deemed as insufficient, particularly for 
domestic banks. Thus, a constrictive interest rate environment would immediately be followed by a fall 
in  the  banking  credit  interest  rate,  which  has  been  suggested  is  rigid  throughout  the  adjustment 
14 
 BIS Review 9/2007
process.  Over  time,  this  would,  in  turn,  boost  the  competitiveness  of  the  banking  industry,  and  the 
actors could enjoy a lower interest rate. 
Direction of economic policy in 2007 
B.  
With respect to the projections that I have been discussing, I would like to reiterate that distortions and 
the  unfavourable  investment  climate  are  the  primary  constraints  faced  that  could  retard  a  balanced 
economic recovery in 2007. From Bank Indonesia’s perspective, all of the limitations I have mentioned 
could  hamper  the  array  of  measures  taken  by  Bank  Indonesia  to  achieve  and  preserve 
macroeconomic  stability.  The  economy  will  become  more  vulnerable  and  less  able  to  mitigate  the 
range  of  domestic  and  external  shocks.  Our  monetary  policy  stance  would  tend  to  be  particularly 
cautious, especially when unexpected shocks occur that may trigger risk to price stability. 
In terms of the wider national interest, it will not be possible to permanently and continuously alleviate 
poverty and reduce unemployment without structural improvements that slash the high-cost economy 
and enhance the investment climate. 
I therefore see the benefits of the following policy strategy : 
1. 
From  the  monetary  policy  side:  the  implementation  of  inflation  targeting  framework  (ITF), 
within the wider structure of macroeconomic policy, is a strategic step that must continually 
be taken by Bank Indonesia to maintain market confidence on macroeconomic stability and 
overall financial system stability. A number of issues related to capital flows, exchange rates 
and  the  interest  rate  within  a  liberal  capital  account  regime  and  a  floating  exchange  rate 
environment should be placed in the context of global economic adjustments and the kind of 
macro-monetary policy response that would be appropriate to deal with them. In this context, 
policies that provide incentives for long-term capital flows should be prioritized over policies 
that punish short-term capital flows. In addition, to support the financial market development 
and  to  improve  monetary  policy  effectiveness,  we  also  see  the  need  to  improve  the 
operational structure of monetary policy. 
In  terms  of  financial  sector  policy:  Bank  Indonesia  acknowledges  the  importance  of 
bolstering the financial market development to mitigate economic shocks. To this end, and 
by observing numerous potential shocks in the global and domestic markets over the next 
1-3  years,  some  policies  to  expand  and  deepen  the  domestic  financial  sector  need  to  be 
instituted without delay in 2007. This requires a coordinated and collaborative effort involving 
Bank  Indonesia,  government  institutions  and  banking  institutions  –  as  the  primary 
component of the financial sector – as well as non-bank financial institutions. 
From  the  banking  policy  side:  Bank  Indonesia  sees  the  need  to  promote  indirect  banking 
intermediation  through  diverse  efforts  to  foster  universal  banking  without  jeopardizing  the 
ongoing banking sector consolidation. We must also direct such endeavours to encourage 
financial market deepening. 
From the government’s side: the implementation of sharper government policies to reduce 
micro  risk  in  the  real  sector  through  thorough  improvement  of  the  investment  climate  is 
critical  in  2007,  including  to  expedite  infrastructure  development  and  the  provision  of  a 
sustainable  energy supply.  It  is  also  necessary  to  eliminate  the  range  of  distortions  in  the 
goods  and  services  markets  expeditiously  so  that  the  high-cost  economy  may  be 
suppressed immediately. Moreover, 2007 would be a great year to develop sectoral focus in 
the strategy and implementation of long-term national development, with more weight given 
to labour-intensive sectors with high local input. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
On that last note over the economic outlook for 2007, allow me next to elaborate some of my thoughts 
on the essence of the problems and challenges that national banking needs to address this coming 
year. 
The essence of the problems and challenges facing banking in 2007 
IV.  
Distinguished guests, 
Before  profoundly  focusing  on  the  forward  direction  of  banking  industry  policy,  please  allow  me  to 
centre our view on a broader illustration of the problem. This evening, I will not venture too deep in 
emphasizing the micro technical problems confronting the banking industry; something I have normally 
BIS Review 9/2007 
 15
done  in  my  speeches  over  the  last  three  years.  On  this  blessed  occasion,  I  will  try  to  guide  your 
thoughts and views to participate in figuring out how the role and purpose of the banking industry are 
supposed to be placed in achieving the goal of national economic development. 
In  my  understanding,  our  ultimate  target  of  economic  development  that  we  strive  to  achieve  is  the 
establishment of “Perpetually Higher and Better Economic Development”. Only with higher economic 
growth  with  a  better  quality  of  economic  development  can  we,  together,  alleviate  poverty  and 
overcome unemployment problems. 
To  achieve  our  target  will  require  cooperation  and  hard  work  from  various  parties,  including  the 
national  banking  industry.  The  role  of  banking  has  become  incredibly  strategic  in  accelerating  our 
national  economy.  This  is  the  reason  why  we  need  a  healthy  and  robust  banking  system  which 
significantly contributes to funding the economy. Such banking system will strengthen the capacity of 
the financial system in particular, and the economy in general in confronting multiple shocks amidst a 
national  economy  that  is  becoming  increasingly  internationalized  and  integrated  with  the  global 
economy.  
The  aim  of  strengthening  banking  institutions  on  the  one  side,  and  optimising  the  banking 
intermediation  function  on  the  other  are  not  two  separable  or  debatable  things;  they  are  not 
dichotomous. They both resemble two sides that make up one coin as a whole. Only through strong 
banking,  which  is  able  to  execute  its  intermediary  role  properly,  can  we  achieve  financial  system 
stability and ensure the usefulness of banking to the general public. Throughout the past three years, 
Bank Indonesia has undertaken numerous measures to fortify our regulation as well as supervision of; 
to persist with the restructuring of individual banks; to establish sound banking industry infrastructure  
Throughout 2004-2006, we have personally experienced activities which should have been concluded 
expeditiously but ended up protracted. Conversely, there have been activities that we thought would 
take  a  long  time  which  were  concluded  swiftly.  This  is  why  we  make  adjustments  to  our  policy. 
However,  in  the  process  of  determining  policy,  the  overarching  goal,  which  is  to  build  a  solid  and 
beneficial banking system, is something that we must consistently strive to achieve. In the process, 
policy instruments may require adjustment depending on the prevalent situation. 
This  restructuring  process  to  me  is  a  continuous  and  dialectic  social  process,  which  we  can  all 
dynamically comprehend and participate in. We have overcome numerous troubles and challenges, 
but there are even more that we must address, since it is true that “Life is a game of improvement, 
not a game of perfection”. Therefore, it is quite ordinary if adjustments occur in a policy, especially 
when the conditions and dynamics of our environment demand so. There is, however, a contemplation 
that  we  rely  on  as  the  monetary  and  banking  authority:  we  will  only  consider  adjustments  to  micro 
policy  on  condition  that  adjustments  are  taken  measurably  and  cautiously,  without  sacrificing 
macroeconomic stability as a whole and consistent in the context of the overarching goal. 
In  entering  this  defining  moment,  it  also  critical  to  note  that  in  order  to  achieve  such  continuous 
economic growth, we require the presence of a robust formal sector which able to perform optimally. 
Emphasis  on  the  informal  and  micro,  small  and  medium  enterprise  sectors,  albeit  with  significant 
growth, should be considered as a temporary supporting pillar. It is true that we must push these two 
sectors to become a formal sector that is thriving, large, reliable and not merely serving as a social 
pillar. We must also encourage the expansion of the formal industry sector so that it can absorb more 
of the available unemployed human resources. Regrettably, since the dynamic and developing crisis, 
this  sector  has  remained  insufficiently  significant  to  achieve  the  desired  growth.  Investment  in  this 
sector is limited compared to the amount required for noteworthy growth.  
Perhaps we should remain patient and wait for investment to come to this country. After all, we all are 
aware that the government has strong commitment and is working hard to overcome the numerous 
obstacles  in  the  investment  climate.  However, while waiting  for  the  investors  to  arrive,  there  is  one 
thing  that  worries  many  parties:  the  snail-like  pace  of  the  banking  intermediation  function.  Anxiety 
stabs at our hearts and pierces our thoughts. Why would the banking industry hesitate to utilize the 
available potential: while banking industry restructuring has shown its success; while infrastructure has 
been equipped by the presence of the Deposit Insurance Corporation and the Credit Bureau; while 
banking  institutions  have  been  bolstered;  and  amidst  improving  macroeconomic  conditions?  The 
pattern  of  banking  operations  still  contradicts  funding  the  consumption  sector  and  the  allocation  of 
funds  in  financial  markets.  The  latter  issue  reflects  an  unproductive,  and  thus  unsustainable, 
operational pattern. Such limited operations are also, in essence, skewed away from our commonly 
agreed banking industry goal, namely to ensure an effective, efficient and significant banking industry 
for the good of the Indonesian economy. 
16 
 BIS Review 9/2007
This  issue  requires  serious  attention  and  immediate  resolution.  The  banking  industry  would  like  to 
avoid  being  deemed  as  indifferent,  insensitive  and  not  serious  in  comprehending  the  national 
complexity. Apart from the existence of unresolved problems in the real sector, this condition should 
not be used as an excuse for banks to stagnate and cease trying to stimulate activity in the sector. 
Moreover,  the  banking  industry  is  the  most  anticipated  catalyst  to  create  a  breakthrough,  to  lure 
investments that will kindle corporate industry activity and take over the role of consumption that has 
been the spine of economic growth for the last 5 years. These hopes are not excessive considering all 
the  efforts  expended  to  provide  us with  the  confidence  in  banks’ capabilities as  the  primary  engine 
driving the rise of the Indonesian economy. 
The banking industry must take the reins immediately through its role in intermediation. Banking has to 
be  able  to  redirect  its  operations  from  financing  consumption  credits  and  placements  in  financial 
sectors which has been representing its principal weapon for more than the past 9 years; towards a 
more productive way of funding working capital and investment credits. We even believe that if banks 
are able to raise their productive funding to Rp.150 trillion in 2007, especially towards ventures with 
low imports and which are highly labour intensive, then the economy will be able to expand above and 
beyond current projections. 
To this end, banking is required to be able and willing to open up and look for new opportunities in 
terms  of  funding.  Current  economic  demand  dictates  that  extra  effort  from  the  banking  industry  is 
required to communicate and to better recognize the characteristics of the surrounding business world. 
With better recognition, I believe that the perception of banks to a high level of risk exposure in the 
domestic business environment can drastically be reduced. There are abundant industries out there 
that  are  waiting  for  assistance  from  banking.  To  name  a  few,  there  are  the  aquaculture  industry, 
agriculture, plantations, mining and other industries that have always perceived banking to not be on 
their side. In addition, I also demand that the banking industry seek innovations in its funding products. 
The  problem  with  infrastructure  funding  is  that  requires  a  great  amount  of  finance,  albeit  vital  in 
stimulating economic activity. I am confident, however, that it can be dealt with through the innovation 
of  funding  products  by  the  banks  themselves.  A  credit  consortium  and  syndicate  represent  another 
choice for bank in reduce their risk exposure that has to be born in funding projects of relatively high 
value. 
Therefore,  in  2007  I  expect  bankers  to  work  harder,  be  more  innovative  and  more  creative  in 
packaging credit as well as bear credit risk exposure together. Bank Indonesia will assist all of you, 
with policy support, through the steps necessary, which I will elaborate on in my briefing this evening. 
Direction of banking policy in 2007 
V.  
Ladies and Gentleman, 
With  the  desire  and  spirit  to  rise  above  the  existing  problems,  allow  me  this  evening  to  deliver  my 
thoughts  and  views  concerning  measures  that  can  be  undertaken  by  Bank  Indonesia  to  support 
national  economic  growth.  My  views  comprise  of  8  (eight)  leading  principles  of  policy  direction  and 
strategy, which will be enacted in the coming years. 
Firstly,  Bank  Indonesia  will  more  actively  function  as  a  catalyst  in  the  process  of  increasing  bank 
intermediation function towards the real sector. In facilitating bank disbursals in the financing process, 
Bank Indonesia will seek and dominate information as well as thoroughly observe the dynamics of the 
real  sector,  as  an  inseparable  part  of  studying  macroeconomic  indicators.  Various  movements  and 
dynamics in this sector will be analyzed, studied and monitored routinely by Bank Indonesia, since this 
sector can influence macro indicators. 
For  me,  Bank  Indonesia’s  understanding  of  real  sector  conditions,  which  has  always  been  sought 
through  research,  studies  and  surveys  as  well  as  direct  participation  to  observe  actual  conditions, 
need  to  be  utilized  by  other  parties,  particularly  banking  institutions.  BI  will  promote  itself  as  the 
National Economic Database as well as the Information Centre of Economic Studies that is available 
to all parties. Against this backdrop and in addition to propagating the fruits of its labour, BI will service 
the  requirements  of  its  stakeholders  by  conducting  researches  and  studies  on  various  business 
sectors  and  industries,  including  micro,  small  and  medium  enterprises  (MSME),  both  independently 
and  in  collaboration  with  the  banking  industry.  Initiatives  to  establish  the  research  subject  in  the 
various business sectors is offered to parties in need rather than by BI itself; as has been tradition. 
Within this framework, it would be acceptable for me to say that the banking industry is the industry 
most likely to fully utilize Bank Indonesia’s endeavours. 
BIS Review 9/2007 
 17
In the recent decentralization era, Bank Indonesia feels the need to take a critical role in encouraging 
provincial business movement. Having 37 offices in provincial capital cities and other major cities in 
Indonesia,  physical  proximity  between  Bank  Indonesia  and  people  throughout  Indonesia  will  be 
narrowed through the improvement of its role and function, as well as supporting regional economic 
research in order to satisfy public needs wherever we are.  
For that reason, we have formulated an initiative to adjust the overall BI organization, including the 
initiative to revitalize the function and role of Bank Indonesia branch offices (KBI), and the possibility of 
opening new offices in areas whose development requires KBI support. The ability of KBI to participate 
as  the  extension  of  Bank  Indonesia  in  communicating  the  results  of  research  and  studies  on  the 
business environment will be greatly improved. Apart from taking part in this generic role, the potential 
of KBI will also be sharpened in order to comprehend specific issues faced in its locale; being more 
active  in  providing  advices  to  regional  government  and  economic  actors/agents;  resolving  existing 
issues; and providing a useful source of information to participants of the regional economy. 
Through  the  realisation  of  this  measure,  Bank  Indonesia  is  constantly  ready  to  serve  and  utilize  its 
significant resources. Skills, competency, data, information as well as the infrastructure held by Bank 
Indonesia is, in essence, nationally owned and has to be accessible for development purposes. We 
are also ready to place researchers from Bank Indonesia on various research projects or helping with 
the  preparation  of  development  policy  throughout  the  nation.  With  these  numerous  collaborations 
efforts, it is hoped that the outcomes of Bank Indonesia work will be seen to support national issue 
resolution and directly deliver the needs of its stakeholders. 
We  realize  that  the  decentralization  phenomenon  present  amidst  the  pace  of  globalization  and 
economic democratization requires advanced economic management. Currently, without questioning 
their  readiness,  regions  have  been  directly  faced  with  global  competition.  For  instance,  the  tourism 
industry in Bali directly competes with Phuket in Thailand. The dried fruits industry in East Java has to 
jockey with the same industry in Cebu Philippines. Without adequate knowledge regarding the state of 
the competition and various upcoming challenges, as well as guidance in confronting those obstacles, 
it is possible that regional industries will experience uncertainty or even make unfeasible moves that 
can weaken their competitiveness in international trade. To this end, Bank Indonesia will participate 
and conduct real sector studies from the perspective of regional uniqueness and niches. 
The second strategy and direction of policy which will be taken in the coming year is to collaborate 
and coordinate with the government in order to reorganize the national banking industry through the 
revitalization of existing banks and their role, especially state-owned banks. 
We  fully  support  and  openly  welcome  the  policy  steps  taken  by  government  to  improve  the 
performance of state-owned banks. In our view, the rejuvenation of state-owned banks is a step that 
needs  to  be  taken  immediately,  especially  due  to  their  strategic  role  and  position  in  the  national 
banking industry. At present, the total assets of state-owned banks amount to 37% of the total assets 
of the banking industry with share of credits at almost the same level of around 36%. We have a high 
expectation that state-owned banks are capable of taking the lead in endorsing the bank intermediary 
function, which is currently sub-optimal. Furthermore, we also rely on their power and competence to 
fund various development projects that are in the interest of many people. 
However  from  recent  progress,  we  have  notice  that  competition  within  the  banking  industry  for 
potential  customers  with  good  track  records  is  becoming  very  heated;  it  is  neck  and  neck.  What  is 
noteworthy  is  the  participation  of  foreign-owned  banks,  including  joint-venture  banks,  adding  to  the 
competition with their readiness and strength of service. 
Competition challenges from foreign-owned banks will gradually become an important factor that must 
be noted by domestic banks, particularly state-owned banks within the same peer group. Looking at 
the data, it appears that the credit allocated by foreign-owned banks is showing improvement. 
One of the key strengths of foreign-owned banks in penetrating the markets is their higher efficiency 
level  compared  to  state-owned  banks.  The  efficiency  of  foreign-owned  banks  is  clearly  reflected  by 
their low ratio of overhead costs to operational costs, such that they are capable of offering credit at a 
lower interest rate without sacrificing profit (See Graph 12 and 13). This efficiency is also supported by 
excellent credibility and image, so that foreign-owned banks are able to incur relatively lower costs of 
funds. On the other hand, the efficiency level of state-owned banks, which is relatively low at present, 
is associated with expenses and operational costs that must be covered. Consequently, the interest 
rates offered by state-owned banks are relatively higher and difficult to reduce since this would mean 
18 
 BIS Review 9/2007
taking a cut in revenue. With this in mind, there is a clear gap in level of playing field between the two, 
which will widen if not controlled immediately.  
    There is no other alternative for state-owned banks other than to try to keep pace with the efficiency 
level of foreign-owned banks. Clear policy direction and strategy has to be set without delay. Various 
issues  that  have  caused  soaring  overhead  costs  in  state-owned  banks  have  to  be  resolved 
immediately. The problem of high NPL has to be rectified without delay as this represents the primary 
source of the higher costs in terms of the provision for bad assets. Improvements in human resource 
productivity  as  well  as  efficiency  in  utilizing  information  technology  and  other  resources  have  to  be 
made continually in order to attain and even surpass the efficiency level of foreign-owned banks. 
Furthermore,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  size  of  the  bank  also  determines  the  level  of  efficiency 
achieved.  First  of  all,  in  general,  a  larger  bank  is  able  to  obtain  funds  at  a  cheaper  price  than  the 
smaller  banks.  Secondly,  larger  banks  are  able  to  efficiently  utilize  economies  of  scale  which  allow 
them to split their operational costs over a larger unit. Obviously, foreign-owned banks, which mostly 
form part of the multinational banking industry, can optimise this advantage. 
In  this  context,  banking  consolidation,  which  began  in  2005,  has  become  critical  and  must  be 
accelerated  further.  We  should  focus  our  attention  on  the  options  laid  out  in  the  Single  Presence 
Policy. We hope that an accurate choice of policy and strategy will allow existing state-owned banks to 
BIS Review 9/2007 
 19
expand  and  become  healthier,  more  robust  and  powerful  that  are  able  to  serve  as  Indonesian 
banking’s flag carriers and compete with the global banking industry. Meanwhile, where state-owned 
banks are expected to support the execution of development programs, these banks must be able to 
seek and discover market niches that reflect their strengths. Existing state-owned banks must have an 
edge in expertise, so that their very existence is felt and all elements of the community can be proud. 
With regards to the consolidation process, which began three years ago, the third step that we are 
going to take in 2007 is to attempt to facilitate the merger process between banks that we deem in 
need  of  assistance.  In  October  2006,  we  issued  PBI  that  contains  a  number  of  incentives  to  be 
distributed  in  the  merger  and  consolidation  process.  These  incentives  represent  our  greatest 
endeavours in the form of banking industry initiatives to facilitate mergers, which can immediately reap 
concrete results. 
However, if it becomes clear that in 2007 our efforts to support mergers, particularly those aimed at 
reducing  the  number  of  banks  with  systemic  risk,  still  lack  the  necessary  positive  response,  Bank 
Indonesia  will  have  to  become  more  decisively  involved.  The  matchmaking  process,  which  seeks 
compatible partners among problematic banks, needs to be facilitated in a more direct and concise 
way. From our data and information, both quantitative and qualitative, we will try to establish stronger, 
sounder  and  more  profitable  banking  institutions  that  are  the  result  of  a  useful  merger.  Matching 
business  patterns,  characteristics,  targets  and  market  segments  are  all  aspects  that  are  thoroughly 
considered in this process. However, this is not the case in terms of the majority shareholders’ or bank 
owners’  interests.  We  will  exercise  extreme  caution  in  accommodating  their  needs.  The  balance  of 
needs between one party and another is the result of an agreement that absolutely must be reached in 
the  process.  Those  parties  must  be  willing  to  accept  and  provide  deal  options  that  are  mutually 
beneficial.  This  is  where  Bank  Indonesia  will  try  to  take  a  role  in  the  negotiations,  which  will  head 
towards the principles of honest brokering; namely neutral, proper and optimal. 
The  process  in  its  entirety  will  involve  our  role  as  supervisor  and  also  as  regulator  of  the  banking 
industry. The supervisors in Bank Indonesia will commence work as soon as possible. Therefore, as 
bank  owners,  it  would  be  appreciated  if  you  could  kindly  be  more  susceptible  to  cooperation  and 
coordination to achieve the results that we all strive for. 
Moving on, the fourth step that we will take in 2007 is directed towards facilitating a smooth banking 
intermediary function, which has become the focal point of the problems faced by our banking industry 
recently. In my calculation, no fewer than seven Bank Indonesia Regulations have been issued in the 
past  two  years  to  provide  breathing  space  for  the  banking  industry  in  performing  its  primary  role.  I 
believe it is our role, distinguished ladies and gentlemen, to maintain monetary and banking stability. 
On  the  one  side,  we  strive  to  be  sensitive  towards  a  plethora  of  difficulties  faced  by  the  banking 
industry in its efforts to fund development. On the other side however, we also do not wish to see the 
privileges and dispensation that we have granted destroy our accomplishments. Naturally, the banking 
industry is a risky industry, and is therefore prone to experience difficulties if not managed carefully. 
With  respect  to  these  well-known  industry  characteristics,  we  strive  to  ensure  that  every  policy 
measure taken can strike the optimal balance between the potential risk and rewards gained. For that 
reason,  the  policy  we  have  taken  this  time  to  foster  the  intermediary  function  is  not  fully  relaxed  in 
nature. It is more a policy to facilitate. 
One effort that can be immediately done is to study the possibility for banks to finance some specific 
sectors such as agriculture which until currently is still lacking of banks attention. Banks credit to this 
sector  is  still  relatively  small,  only  around  5.3%  of  total  banks  credit  portfolio.  Without  special 
regulation, the agriculture sector would still find it difficult to grow, even though Indonesia has been 
internationally  known  as  the  agriculture  nation.  Even  now,  we  still  have  10  commodities  which 
outperform  other  countries  in  the  international  market,  providing  good  living  to  the  people  and 
generating  adequate  foreign  exchange  reserves.  In  this  respect,  focus  upon  agriculture  sector  is  of 
relevance, at least for the time being before we can move to wider aspects of agriculture industry. We 
also  need  to  consider  developing  agriculture  sector  within  the  context  of  backward  and  forward 
linkage. That is why developing partnership between small farmer and medium/large farmer along with 
the established agriculture corporations will serve as one major condition in developing the sector, so 
the  efforts  will  not  only  aiming  at  increasing  production  but  will  also  involve  technical  assistance, 
marketing as well as to improve small farmers eligibility in accessing banks’ credit.  
Of the policies that we will issue presently, there will be one to amend the content of a particular PBI, 
and  one will  purely  be  a confirmation  letter  on  the  interpretation on  some  regulations  that  we  have 
promulgated  in  the  past.  We  feel  that  there  are  numerous  regulations  that  require  commonality  in 
20 
 BIS Review 9/2007
interpreting and understanding the substance they are trying to achieve. Some of the regulations, for 
which the content we shall adjust and/or clarify include: 
1. 
Regulation  concerning  guidelines  to  evaluate  credit  collectibility.  Currently,  the 
guideline to evaluate earning assets over Rp.500 million is based on three criterion pillars, 
namely  prospects,  debtor  performance  and  the  promptness  of  payment.  There  are  also 
some  conditions  in  the  evaluation,  such  as:  the  obligation  to  submit  an  audit  report 
conducted by a public accountant. As such, companies that record losses must be classified 
as unhealthy. Shortly, we are going to review these regulations and conditions and make the 
following adjustments: 
a. 
The  assessment  of  earning  assets  of  up  to  Rp.5  billion  can  be  conducted  by 
referring  to  1  of  the  3  pillars,  namely  the  promptness  of  payment.  The  main 
purpose  of  this  policy  is  to  ease  banking  in  the  distribution  of  credit  to  potential 
customers of micro, small and medium enterprises, who still require the support of 
banking to build and develop their ventures further. To the banking industry itself, 
this  evaluation  would  improve  the  condition  of  debtor  collectibility;  classified  as 
unhealthy by the three pillars. The improvement in collectibility is attributable to the 
relaxing of this criterion, which would also reduce the burden of the provision for 
assets  associated  with  the  presence  of  NPL.  Banking  costs  could  also  be 
minimized which would precipitate a drop in the credit interest rate offered. To the 
pubic, we predict that micro, small and medium enterprises make up the sector that 
can directly make use of this privilege. However, we need to bear in mind that all 
existing privileges must not influence the implementation of risk management and 
prudential  principles  that  must  be  exercised  when  allocating  credit.  Integrity, 
professionalism and good governance from banking industry actors fully reflect the 
quality  and  competence  of  you,  distinguished  guests  here  this  evening,  in 
undertaking  your  responsibilities.  We  all  realize  that  this  is  the  toughness  and 
robustness that the banking industry stands on. 
An  exception  to  the  three  pillars  is  granted  for  financing  of  debtors/projects  that 
have  obtained  government  assurance  as  regulated  by  PBI  No  7/2/PBI  2005 
regarding  Quality  Evaluation  of  Commercial  Banks.  With 
this  exception, 
development  projects  guaranteed  by  the  government  can  easily  obtain  financing 
from the banking industry. Even a consortium to grant this syndicated credit would 
be simpler to assemble since the risk signals are concise and measurable. 
Pressures  on  the  risk-management  ability  of  banks  in  credit  allocation  and 
evaluation are comparable to the compliance of various secondary qualifications. 
Some  of  the  collectibility  evaluation  conditions  that  are  currently  deemed  as 
burdensome  to  banking  will  be  bypassed,  as  long  as  the  banking  industry 
understands  the  risk  exposure  and  is  prepared  with  an  assortment  of  mitigation 
measures as required. 
Raising  the  limit  for  earning  asset  value  through  uniform  classification  from  the 
current value of Rp.500 million to Rp.5 billion; which is sufficient for the top 50 bank 
debtors. 
Including additional types of collateral that can be used to reduce the provision for 
bad assets. With respect to ongoing dynamics and prevailing conditions, the types 
of  collateral  currently  regulated  will  be  widened  by  including  equipment  and 
warehouse receipts, as stated in established laws and regulations. 
Confirming  the  Legal  Lending  Limit  (LLL)  at  30%  of  capital  for  state-owned 
enterprises that reside in the various development sectors. Currently, the banking 
industry gives the impression that state-owned enterprises eligible for a 30% LLL 
are only those related to infrastructure. In the future, a 30% LLL will be applicable 
not  only  to  infrastructure  related  state-owned  enterprises  but  also  state-owned 
enterprises in other sectors. 
Stressing  and  re-explaining  to  related  parties  within  LLL  regarding  the  joint 
financing of some companies (including banks) on a common project. It must be 
understood that the financial relations of companies involved in joint financing does 
b. 
c. 
e. 
f. 
g. 
2. 
Adjustments to the regulations related to prudential principles will be as follows: 
d. 
BIS Review 9/2007 
 21
h. 
not  restrict  their  relationship.  Therefore,  the  relationships  between  the  joint 
financed companies are not classified as interrelated as long as there is no other 
relationship restriction. 
Reiterating that it is possible to allocate credit to problematic debtors providing that 
the debtors maintain good intentions and that the credit only became bad due to 
reasons beyond the control of the debtor. It will be possible for such debtors to be 
eligible for new credit but only after thorough analysis and under close supervision. 
The amalgamation of the adjustment and confirmation steps I have just described to you, ladies and 
gentlemen, is expected to underpin the intermediary function of the banking industry, which has been 
constrained  for  many  years.  A  holistic,  thorough  and  accurate  understanding  of  valid  regulations 
should  form  the  foundation  of  every  strategic  step  we  take,  backed  up  by  a  legitimate  argument, 
without over-regulating to maintain stability. 
To this end, we internally at Bank Indonesia will also strive to build the capacity of our supervisors in 
terms of seeing, comprehending and interpreting the existing risk exposure. This way the gap between 
the  supervisor  and  supervisee  of  perception  and  comprehension,  utilizing  prudential  signs  when 
reviewing potential credit, can be eliminated.  
The hopes rested on the banking sector to improve the intermediary function are also applicable to 
foreign-owned  banks.  Since  2006,  this  challenge  seems  to  have  been  addressed  positively  by  the 
foreign-owned  banks.  Therefore,  the  burgeoning  credit  allocation  to  productive  sectors  by  foreign-
owned banks is very encouraging to see. To maintain the continuity of this wonderful momentum, our 
fifth step in the coming year is to provide guidance to foreign banks to contribute more optimally to the 
development  of  the  Indonesian  economy.  It  is  about  time  that  foreign  banks  in  Indonesia  be  better 
focused on more productive and useful endeavours to their host country, especially in their respective 
position that has dominated the ownership of banks in Indonesia. It is not excessive for us to expect 
foreign-owned banks to improve their commitment and compliance to support the funding of national 
development. 
Furthermore, the escalating number of foreign-owned banks in Indonesia raises concerns regarding 
the work opportunities of the domestic professional workforce. The current soaring unemployment rate 
in Indonesia urges us to ask foreign banks to think about and cooperate to overcome this situation. 
Concerns  of  a  lull  in  work  opportunities  for  the  local  workforce  are  escalating  along  with  the  rising 
number of foreigners in the Indonesian banking industry. As per what we promised back in 2006, this 
problem will have  to  be  addressed  through a  special  policy  aimed  at  limiting  the  number of  foreign 
workers at the middle management level; which is two levels below the director, except in fields that 
have proven to be beyond the capabilities of local workers due their rare nature or scarce expertise. 
Such  tenures  are  limited  to  a  maximum  of  three  years.  Using  this  time  frame  will  force  banks  that 
utilize  foreign  workers  in  middle  management  to  transfer  the  knowledge  and  technology  to  local 
employees. 
The sixth strategic step that will be taken in the near future is to more proactively develop the financial 
market as well as financial instruments. As I briefly mentioned earlier, our economic recovery in the 
future  calls  for  a  sound,  healthy  and  deep  national  financial  sector  that  can  effectively  mitigate  the 
negative effects of shocks in the global financial market. There are currently other implications of a 
shallow financial market, especially amidst high micro risk. The implications include the constriction of 
economic  funding  for  long-term  investment  and  less  effective  monetary  policy  transmission 
mechanisms. 
The limited numbers of financial products with various durations, as well as primary and secondary 
markets that support trading, have triggered excess funds to the SBI market and short-term portfolio 
placements. This has pushed the real sector of the economy to rely on consumption stemming from 
the wealth effect in the financial sector. 
Meanwhile,  the  liquidity  overhang  in  the  financial  sector,  particularly  in  the  banking  sector,  has 
reached an alarming level as banking only focuses on short-term financial activities, particularly the 
short-term deposit market and SBI market, without distributing credit for investment. 
To address the issues above, I am convinced that the policy to deepen the domestic financial market, 
as well as to develop innovative financial products, can be a strategic step that will support investment 
in real sector, which, in turn, may reduce the liquidity overhang. Efforts that can be made to deepen 
the domestic financial market and widen its products range include issuing SPN and fostering SBI of 
the  longer  term  durations;  providing  an  effective  regulatory  environment  for  financial  product 
22 
 BIS Review 9/2007
development that covers medium-term notes, corporate bonds and commercial papers; and providing 
a greater opportunity for activities related to asset securitization, universal banking and the growth of 
sharia-based  financial  instruments.  These  steps  clearly  require  collaborative  efforts  from  Bank 
Indonesia, the government as well as banking and non-bank financial institutions. In relation to this, 
Bank Indonesia will incorporate the issue of financial market development in the Banking Law. 
The seventh strategic step concerns policy and strategy related to the expansion of sharia banking. 
Witnessing the rapid growth of the sharia banking industry in our nation, Bank Indonesia believes that 
it  is  necessary  to  expedite  such  growth  in  order  for  the  public  to  reap  even  greater  benefits.  We 
estimate  that  the  total  assets  of  sharia  banking,  which  currently  account  for  about  1.5%  of  total 
banking  assets,  to  increase  to  at  least  5%  by  the  end  of  2008.  Consequently,  we  will  conduct  an 
accelerated program  of  sharia  banking,  which will  be  effectively  carried  out  beginning  in  2007.  The 
program to accelerate the expansion of Indonesian sharia banking will be undertaken through three 
key measures: 
First, through more intensive societal education regarding sharia banking. This measure will be taken 
to  improve  public  understanding  and  awareness  of  sharia  financing  and  banking.  Second,  we  will 
stress a review of sharia products, sharia financing services, and encourage the expansion of service 
outlets to boost the accessibility of sharia banks in line with the public requirement. And third, Bank 
Indonesia will  actively  participate  in supporting  incoming  foreign  investment  through sharia  financial 
instruments. 
Through  these  three  measures,  we  hope  to  make  sharia  banking  the  pride  of  its  followers.  Sharia 
banking is not a flash-in-the-pan but something truly monumental, with comparable quality and reach 
to conventional banking. Sharia banking products and services have to be attractive and formulated in 
line  with  public  demand.  In  essence,  better  realization  and  understanding  from  society  precipitates 
greater, real and effective, demand from the public. 
In this context I would like to invite you all, distinguished ladies and gentlemen, to actively participate 
and work hard together to improve integrity, so that the existence of higher quality and more useful 
sharia  banking  can  be  established  in  society.  A  unified  vision  from  all  stakeholders  is  crucial  when 
establishing a sound and efficient sharia banking system, considering how sharia banking can position 
itself  as  a  solution  provider.  In  turn,  such  circumstances  will  create  a  sense  of  belonging  in  the 
community towards sharia banking. 
Last but not least, the policy to be implemented in 2007 is associated with the existence of a rural 
banking  industry  and  its  relation  to  the  livelihoods  of  rural  people  who  are  involved  in  the  informal 
business sector. 
We cannot hide the truth that the informal business sector exists and, in fact, supports most of our 
people’s  livelihoods.  I  would  even  like  to  note  that  this  sector  is  indeed  a  form  of  social  safety  net 
which allows our people to have dreams, hopes and optimism to survive in their, often difficult, journey 
through life. Small-scale farmers in villages, traders in traditional markets, cigarette sellers, small-scale 
grocery vendors and many other agricultural labourers are marginalized by the situation and indeed 
make  up  the  largest  segment  of  our  society.  If  we  want  to  alleviate  the  drudgery  and  improve  the 
quality of life of our people, this is the sector which we must focus our attention. These people are 
currently in furthermost row; however it is time to now put them on the forefront in our policies. Putting 
the last first. 
Understanding  the  dynamics  of  rural  people’s  lives  should  be  redefined  within  the  context  of  their 
relationship  with  rural  banks.  Due  to  the  size  and  specific  criteria  of  commercial  banks  it  is  almost 
impossible for them to finance the informal business sector. We have noticed that credit disbursement 
to informal sectors requires a particular approach and strategy that are specific to the conditions of 
these particular sectors, without ignoring the significance of the risk-management system. Prudential 
principles must reflect market characteristics for which they serve. If a commercial bank client’s track 
record is obtained through standard mechanisms, then the track record of clients or potential clients of 
BPRs may be sought through the social system established in the society. A supporting empirical fact 
to this is that BPRs are located within proximity to their clients, furthermore, the BPR’s employees are 
recruited from the banks immediate surrounding. From the very beginning, we have to realize that the 
relatively small business size of rural banks which located in a specific and limited social environment; 
are  the  rural  banks’  competitive  advantage  over  commercial  banks.  Advanced  rural  banks  do  not 
existentially have to operate like commercial banks. 
BIS Review 9/2007 
 23
Therefore,  going  forward,  we  will  review  regulations  concerning  the  development  of  BPRs  in 
increasing its role and contribution as a Micro Finance Agent (LKM). It is hoped that BPRs will be able 
to maintain the interest of the Small and Medium Enterprises (SME) and the village community and be 
as agile as other LKM’s in meeting the public’s needs.  
Good functioning BPRs and LKMs must be able to distribute themselves across the country. Indonesia 
has more than 60.000 villages, however formal banking services have only reached less than 10.000 
locations. Therefore, expansion in BPR and LKM’s reach is a concrete answer to the SME and village 
community’s need in general. 
One of the efforts Bank Indonesia has implemented to support BPR growth is the Linkage Program. 
The  Program  entails  the  channeling  of  credits  to  Micro,  Small,  and  Medium  Enterprises  from 
Commercial  Banks  or  from  Syariah  Commercial  Banks  to  BPRs  or  Syariah  BPRs.  Without 
compromising prudential principles, efficiencies and synergies are created from these relationships.  
Against this backdrop, the policy direction applied by Bank Indonesia is to redirect the role, function 
and  operational  design  of  rural  banks  to  their  fundamental  purpose,  that  is,  to  serve  the  common 
people, particularly those in informal sectors and living in remote areas. The role of rural banks, which 
was initially to satisfy the financial needs of the common people and in the past primarily meant the 
informal financial sector, has to be reutilized. The relationship between rural banks and the informal 
financial sector has to become complementary, looking for assistance and complementing each other 
to best serve ordinary people. 
Meanwhile, as we see the BPRs develop, another issue will need to earn our attention. This is the 
prevalence of other forms of Micro Finance Institutions (LKMs) which behave very similar to a bank in 
the sense that they mobilize public funds. Examples include Savings & Loans Cooperations (KSP), 
Baitul  Maal  Tamwiil  (BMT),  Community  Credit  Institutions  (BKD),  and  Community  Funding  Body 
(LPD). The number of the aforementioned institutions reaches not less than 10.000. On the one hand 
such prevalence provides an array of variations of non-bank financial institutions which add to Micro 
and Small Enterprises and communities in villages funding alternatives. Its unique characteristics and 
closeness to the village community enables various LKM’s to continue to exist in various communities. 
However, on the other hand, such LKM’s come with its problems, such as lack of clarity as to their 
various  types,  forms,  and  its  supervisory  authority.  Such  condition  creates  situations  whereby 
protection for LKM’s stakeholders and the LKM itself are weak. This issue should receive our attention 
here,  ladies  and  gentlemen.  Moving  forward,  regulation  towards  various  LKMs  need  to  be 
strengthened. 
With  that  as  a  background,  and  also  taking  into  consideration  that  two  years  ago  was  the  Year  of 
Micro Credit, we must move quickly and complete initiatives started in 2001 and finalize the Draft for 
the Law on LKM to become the Law on LKM. I feel that this is worthy of your and our support. 
Conclusion 
VI.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, Fellow bankers, 
This is what I can convey this evening. While reviewing the set of problems and challenges we face, 
we all realize that the years to come will not necessarily be any easier than the years that have passed 
us  by.  An  array  of  measures  to  achieve  policy  success,  both  from  the  government  and  Bank 
Indonesia, require your unrelenting support and cooperation throughout their execution. 
Therefore, we are always open to suggestions and recommendations regarding any of the policies that 
we have promulgated. We now have time, be it through this informal forum, breakfast meetings with 
bankers, or chief editors meeting with the mass media; to discuss the various issues raised here this 
evening.  I  expect  that  the  existence  of  such  avenues  of  discussion  will  minimize  any  potential 
arguments and differences that seem to be picked up by and dominate the mass media, which, in turn, 
do nothing but confuse the general public. 
I would also like to take this opportunity to express that in confronting future challenges, we need the 
involvement  and  participation  of  all  public  elements,  including  the  press.  The  complexity  of  our 
problems requires agents and institutions that never cease worrying or reminding us about them. This 
is where the role and contribution of the press becomes crucial. The press have the concerns of the 
common man at heart and therefore always ask questions. The press play a strategic role in building 
social infrastructure and democracy by remaining impartial and sensitive, always paying attention and 
24 
 BIS Review 9/2007
constantly reminding us all about the importance of common principals and goals in establishing public 
prosperity. 
An  inspiring press core  is  crucial  for  the  people,  especially  to  us  as  the policymakers. Constructive 
reviews from press agents regarding the choices laid bare before us, with their accurate and objective 
explanations, will make it easier for society as a whole to face the challenges that obstruct the journey 
ahead. For that reason, I would like to express my appreciation to the press core that has helped us 
glean enlightened information throughout the years. I hope that the press remain constant in fighting 
for  the establishment  of  public prosperity.  I  hope  that  constructive  cooperation  may  endure  into  the 
future between us all. 
Finally,  let  us  all  work  harder  and  collectively  to  shoulder  this  nation,  which  is  currently  at  a 
crossroads, towards a new and better horizon.  
This is an example of how our attitudes must be in terms of progressing into the New Year. We should 
keep striving to resolve national problems. National banking, on the one side, will continue to clean 
house and reorganise itself to re-establish its role as a significant intermediary institution. On the other 
side,  Bank  Indonesia  will  strive  to  consistently  steer  the  required  improvements  in  a  disciplined 
manner. 
Once  again,  Happy  New  Year  for  2007.  May  Allah  SWT  bless  us  all  and  help  illuminate  our  steps 
towards a better future. Thank you. 
Wassalamu’alaikum wr. wb. 
BIS Review 9/2007 
 25
