David Longworth: Promoting stability, confidence and well-being 
Remarks by Mr David Longworth, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Greater Kitchener 
Waterloo Chamber of Commerce, Waterloo, Ontario, 6 February 2007.  
 Good afternoon. It's good to be in Kitchener-Waterloo, an urban region well known for its dynamism. 
GDP growth here is among the fastest of all regions in the province.  
The strengths of the twin cities – in research, advanced manufacturing, and information technology, 
among  other  sectors  –  are  well  known.  Less  well  known,  perhaps,  is  the  region's  success  in 
responding  effectively  to  changes  in  the  world  economy.  From  the  making  of  shoes  and  buttons  to 
digital  imaging  and  advanced  communications,  this  ongoing  success  in  dealing  with  change  is  a 
testament to your flexibility and entrepreneurial spirit. It may also reflect the emphasis this region has 
long placed on training and education. Education acts as a kind of bedrock, a foundation that helps 
people deal with change and face the future with confidence. 
Change  is  often  difficult.  As  you  know,  this  region  has  had  to  cope  with  a  good  deal  of  difficult 
economic  adjustment.  What  can  make  change  easier  to  deal  with  is  a  backdrop  of  stability  in 
underlying policy fundamentals. That is what the Bank of Canada can help to provide.  
As the nation's central bank, the Bank of Canada has a mandate to promote economic and financial 
stability  and  well-being.  To  fulfill  this  mandate,  we  work  in  three  main  areas:  conducting  monetary 
policy, promoting a safe, sound, and efficient financial system, and designing and issuing secure bank 
notes. In my remarks today, I'd like to explain this work. A useful way to do this is to outline, for each 
area of responsibility, the goal, and the means by which we try to achieve that goal, and then provide 
an assessment of how we've been doing, as well as our plans for improvement. 
Let me start by describing our work in monetary policy. 
Monetary policy 
The  ultimate  aim  of  Canadian  monetary  policy  is  to  help  our  economy  achieve  its  maximum 
sustainable  growth,  and  thus  contribute  to  rising  living  standards  for  Canadians.  The  best  way  to 
achieve this objective, we've learned from experience, is by working towards a specific, concrete goal 
– that of keeping inflation low, stable, and predictable. 
Inflation  control  contributes  to  better  economic  performance  in  many  ways.  Let  me  highlight  two  of 
them. First, low and stable inflation allows us to read price signals clearly, which in turn helps both 
individuals and companies to make sound, long-term economic decisions. If you recall the 1970s and 
early 1980s, when inflation was not contained – when it was both high and variable – you'll remember 
the high degree of uncertainty that prevailed then. Prices were hard to compare and hard to predict. 
As  a  result  of  this  uncertainty,  people  found  it  difficult  to  make  sound  spending  and  investment 
decisions.  Investors  wouldn't  commit  resources  for  long  periods  of  time;  labour  negotiations  were 
acrimonious;  and  the  overall  economy  was  not  as  productive  as  it  could  have  been.  Happily,  this 
experience can now be relegated to the "bad old days." So that's one advantage of inflation control – 
greater certainty about the future value of money.  
Second, when inflation is contained, and monetary policy is set to keep the economy running close to 
capacity,  we  can  deal  more  effectively  with  economic  shocks.  Resources  can  more  easily  be 
reallocated  from  sectors  where  demand  is  relatively  weak  to  sectors  where  demand  is  relatively 
strong. This is especially important during periods when there are large movements in relative prices – 
that  is,  in  the  prices  of  some  goods  and  services  relative  to  other  prices  –  such  as  we've  seen  in 
recent years. Over the past five years, energy and non-energy commodity prices have gone up a good 
deal  in  comparison  with  those  of  non-commodity  manufactured  goods,  and  the  exchange  rate  has 
changed  considerably,  further  affecting  the  prices  of  many  goods.  Yet  overall,  the  economy  has 
adjusted well against the backdrop of low, stable inflation. 
To  summarize:  keeping  inflation  low  and  stable  gives  people  confidence  –  confidence  in  the  future 
value  of  their  money,  confidence  in  their  financial  decisions,  and  confidence  in  the  ability  of  the 
economy to withstand shocks and grow in a sustainable fashion.  
BIS Review 12/2007 
 1
Since  1991,  to  help  us  keep  inflation  low  and  stable,  the  Bank  of  Canada  and  the  Government  of 
Canada  have  had  an  explicit  inflation  target.  And  since  1995,  the  target  has  been  the  2  per  cent 
midpoint  of  a  1  to  3  per  cent  range.  The  inflation  target  helps  to  anchor  people's  expectations  of 
inflation, and that in itself helps to keep inflation low and the economy relatively stable. The target also 
helps us in our deliberations and decision making at the Bank of Canada. I should also mention that 
the inflation target has another important benefit – it makes us more accountable for our actions. 
How does the target guide our decision making at the Bank? Well, if the economy is moving above the 
limits  of  its  capacity,  so  that  the  trend  of  inflation  threatens  to  exceed  the  target,  we  tend  to  raise 
interest rates, all other things being equal. This restrains demand in the economy and brings it back 
into  balance  with  supply,  thus  helping  to  reduce  inflation  pressures  and  return  inflation  to  target. 
Conversely, if the economy is moving below its capacity limits and the trend of inflation is likely to fall 
below the target, we tend to lower interest rates. This stimulates demand and brings it back in line with 
supply, thus bringing inflation back up to target. This symmetric approach to monetary policy has a 
stabilizing influence on the economy, and thus helps to prevent costly boom-and-bust cycles. 
So, that's the goal and the strategy for achieving it. How well have we done in pursuing the objective? 
The simple answer is: very well indeed. Let's look at developments in four key areas. 
First, inflation, as measured by the all-item consumer price index. Since 1995, inflation has been low 
and on target, averaging 2 per cent per year. Over the same period, inflation has also been stable – 
it's been within the 1 to 3 per cent control range 80 per cent of the time – and thus significantly less 
volatile  than  it  was  in  the  period  before  targeting.  Finally,  inflation  has  become  predictable  – 
forecasters and financial markets appear to believe that the Bank will continue to keep inflation near 
the target. In fact, the consensus forecast for 2008 and beyond is for an inflation rate of almost exactly 
2 per cent.  
Second,  interest  rates.  Interest  rates  are  important  to  all  Canadians.  Again,  with  inflation  targeting, 
both short- and long-term interest rates have been lower and less volatile than in the past. As a result, 
borrowing  and  investment  decisions  can  now  be  made  with  greater  certainty.  And  interestingly,  in 
contrast to what might have been deemed possible just a decade ago, interest rates in Canada are 
currently lower – and long-term rates have become more stable – than they are in the United States.  
The third variable I'll mention is output. The growth of output, which is a good indicator of the overall 
health of the economy, has been generally higher, and significantly more stable over this time period. 
Part of the reason for this stability is inflation control. A stable price environment can help the economy 
to  adjust  quickly  and  effectively  to  economic  shocks  – events such as 9/11 and  the  Asian  financial 
crisis of 1997-98. And in fact, Canada has not experienced a recession since 1991.  
Finally,  labour  markets.  Labour  markets  have  also  shown  a  significant  improvement.  Time  lost  to 
labour disruptions has decreased, the length of union contracts has increased, and the unemployment 
rate has fallen to a 30-year low. 
So that's the big picture, and it's a favourable one. I'd like to say a few words now about the current 
situation  –  how  we've  done  recently  in  pursuing  our  monetary  policy  objective.  In  a  nutshell,  the 
economy is doing well, and inflation is close to target. Total CPI inflation is 1.6 per cent, or 2.1 per cent 
if adjusted for the change last year in the GST and other indirect taxes. Core inflation, which excludes 
eight of the most volatile components of the consumer price index, as well as the effect of changes in 
indirect taxes, provides a useful guide for the conduct of monetary policy. It is now at 2 per cent. The 
economy is currently judged to be operating at, or just above, its potential, and the outlook to 2008 is 
for it to remain close to potential. The outlook is for core inflation to remain near 2 per cent from now to 
the end of 2008, and for total CPI inflation to return to the 2 per cent target early next year. If you're 
interested,  you  can  read  more  about  our  take  on  the  Canadian  economy  in  last  month's  Monetary 
Policy Report Update. 
So, as you can see, low and stable inflation is a means to a very important end – sustained economic 
growth.  
Overall, then, monetary policy has been successful in achieving its objective. But can we do better? 
We might be able to improve upon the current inflation target. Last November, you may have heard 
that the Bank and the Government of Canada renewed the 2 per cent inflation target for a five-year 
period. What you may not have heard was that the agreement committed the Bank to continuing its 
research on how monetary policy might be improved for the decades ahead. The goal, as always, is to 
have a monetary policy regime that contributes most effectively to overall economic performance. 
2 
 BIS Review 12/2007
Two of the key issues we'll be looking at are, first, the costs and benefits of having a lower inflation 
target, and second, the costs and benefits of having a "price-level" target instead of an inflation target. 
A price-level target is similar to an inflation target, except that higher-than-target inflation in one time 
period  needs  to  be  offset  by  lower-than-target  inflation  in  the  next  time  period,  and  vice  versa.  If 
inflation  comes  in  lower  than  target  over  a  certain  time  period,  monetary  policy  will  be  focused  on 
raising inflation beyond the target over the subsequent time period. In price-level targeting, the past is 
not "forgotten," but must be offset, so that average inflation becomes somewhat more predictable over 
longer periods of time than it is with inflation targeting. 
Over the next few years, we'll also be focusing our research efforts on several other important issues. 
We'd like to better understand the implications of globalization for the Canadian economy, including 
the  implications  for  inflation  in  Canada.  We'd  like  to  improve  our  understanding  of  the  sectoral  and 
regional aspects of economic adjustment. And we'd like to look at how productivity and demographic 
change affect the economy's potential to grow.  
Now I'll turn to the second area in which we promote economic well-being – the financial system. 
The financial system 
I should start here by saying just exactly what I mean by the financial system. The financial system 
consists  of  three  main  elements  –  institutions,  such  as  banks  and  credit  unions;  financial  markets, 
such as the bond and equity markets; and clearing and settlement systems, such as the Large Value 
Transfer System, which handles large-value and time-sensitive payments.  
It's  through  the  financial  system  that  savings  become  productive  investments,  money  and  financial 
claims are transferred and settled, and risks are effectively allocated. Because it deals with promises 
to pay, the financial system depends to a very large extent on confidence. Individuals and institutions 
need to be confident that commitments will be honoured, and that the system will work, even in times 
of turbulence. 
The Bank of Canada's objective here, then, is to promote the stability and efficiency of the financial 
system – which in turn encourages people to have confidence in it.  
There are three direct means by which the Bank promotes financial system stability, and one indirect 
means by which we promote both stability and efficiency. 
First,  we  oversee  Canada's  main  clearing  and  settlement  systems.  These  are  the  systems  that 
transfer hundreds of billions of dollars of financial assets each day. These systems are designed to 
make sure that all financial claims they deal with will be honoured – even if a large participant were to 
fail.  The  focus  of  the  Bank's  work  is  making  sure  that  key  systemic  risks  are  identified,  and 
establishing  minimum  standards  to  control  that  risk.  With  these  risk-control  standards  in  place,  the 
private sector operators of the system can find the most efficient way to meet them. 
Second, we provide liquidity, both on a routine basis and in times of system-wide financial stress. An 
appropriate  amount  of  liquidity  helps  to  keep  markets  operating  smoothly,  and  is  thus  vital  to  the 
stability and efficiency of the financial system. On a routine basis, the Bank provides overnight credit to 
financial  institutions  to  cover  any  temporary  shortfalls  that  arise  in  the  payments  system.  These 
overnight loans help to stabilize the system, and they reduce the need for participants to hold large 
precautionary balances at the central bank. From time to time, there are shocks that can stress the 
whole financial system – a stock market crash, for example, or a terrorist attack – and these shocks 
can increase the demand for liquidity. In such a situation, the Bank of Canada can increase the supply 
of liquidity to support the smooth functioning of the system, and/or indicate publicly that it is willing to 
provide liquidity as needed. For example, following the terrorist attacks of 9/11, the Bank increased the 
supply of liquidity in the payments system to $1 billion from the then-typical $50 million. 
Third, as the country's "lender of last resort," the Bank of Canada can step in to provide "Emergency 
Lending Assistance" to a solvent bank (or to other deposit-taking institutions covered by our policy) in 
the  event  of  a  serious  liquidity  problem.  This  kind  of  lending  is  aimed  at  preventing  a  loss  of 
confidence in a solvent financial institution, as well as any spillover effects. 
And  fourth,  we  promote  the  stability  and  efficiency  of  the  Canadian  financial  system  by  working  in 
close co-operation with federal and provincial regulators, and public sector partners, and as a member 
of international bodies to strengthen the financial system worldwide. One of the main activities here is 
monitoring  the  domestic  and  international  risks  that  have  a  bearing  on  the  stability  of  the  financial 
BIS Review 12/2007 
 3
system. We communicate our research in speeches, in reports, and in our Financial System Review. I 
should also mention that as "fiscal agent" to the federal government, the Bank has a number of other 
responsibilities that also have an influence on stability and efficiency. For example, we provide policy 
advice to the government on how to fund the federal debt in a stable and low-cost manner. Related 
operations  that  we  conduct  on  behalf  of  the  government  also  tend  to  support  the  stability  and 
efficiency of fixed-income markets.  
Now, how well are we doing with this objective? Well, I said that the objective is to allow Canadians to 
have confidence in the country's financial system. On the financial stability side, we carry out a regular 
assessment of the risks in our Financial System Review. In December, our overall conclusion was that 
Canada's financial, non-financial, and household sectors are in good shape. This assessment reflects 
favourable  fundamentals  –  especially  solid  domestic  and  global  growth,  and  the  prudent  financial 
behaviour of business. Of course, there are always risks. In December, we mentioned the possible 
spillover effects of an abrupt slowdown in the U.S. economy, which may affect the financial health of 
customers of Canadian banks, and a possible disorderly resolution of the large, global current account 
imbalances,  but  the  Canadian  financial  system  appears  to  be  in  a  good  position  to  withstand  such 
shocks, should they occur. 
On the efficiency side, our view, as expressed in the Governor's December speech to the Economic 
Club of Toronto, is that Canada could be doing better in a number of areas, especially in the regulation 
of  financial  institutions,  securities  markets,  and  pension  plans,  and  in  the  enforcement  of  laws 
governing securities markets.  
In carrying out our financial system work, can we do better? A sound and efficient financial system 
requires  constant  vigilance.  We  plan  to  maintain  this  vigilance,  and  to  continue  our  research  into 
financial system issues to help us promote stability and improved efficiency. Specific goals for the next 
two  or  three years are: to  develop a  more  formal  framework  to assess  financial system stability;  to 
improve the collection and use of financial data; and to enhance the ability of the financial system to 
continue  operations  in  the  face  of  serious  disruptions.  We  also  plan  to  have  our  financial  system 
research and policy evaluated by an external party. 
The third and final responsibility I'd like to look at is the design and distribution of bank notes. 
Bank notes 
Bank notes are the most tangible part of a central bank's work. Everyone uses paper money. I should 
point out something that might surprise some of you here in the "Technology Triangle" – despite the 
many alternatives to cash, the demand for cash continues to grow, roughly in line with nominal GDP 
growth. 
The  main  objective  of  our  bank  note  work  is  to  provide  Canadians  with  paper  money  that  can  be 
trusted – money we can use with (here's that word again) confidence. Of course, bank notes should 
also  be  beautiful,  durable,  and  easy  to  handle,  but  if  they  can't  be  used  with  confidence,  either 
because of high inflation or because of widespread counterfeiting, they lose much of their value. 
What's  our  strategy  for  achieving  this  objective?  Well,  as  I  said  earlier,  the  Bank  is  committed  to 
keeping inflation low and predictable, and we have a pretty good track record on that front. To deter 
counterfeiting, we do three key things. First, we take a great deal of care in designing bank notes. As I 
speak,  my  colleagues  at  the  Bank  are  hard  at  work  designing  the  next  generation  of  bank  notes, 
planned for introduction beginning in 2011. A significant part of the design effort goes into making the 
notes secure against counterfeiting. Second, we conduct broad-ranging education efforts to help the 
public,  retailers,  and  law-enforcement  officers  to  authenticate  genuine  bank  notes  and  detect 
counterfeit ones. In fact, if any of you would like some help in this regard, I invite you to go to our 
website and click on "Bank Notes," where you'll find some useful training material. Third, we promote 
vigorous law enforcement. We work closely with police forces and the Crown, and provide them with 
information and training that can help in the prosecution of counterfeiters. In 2004, the Bank launched 
an annual Law Enforcement Award of Excellence for Counterfeit Deterrence. 
How well have we done in pursuing our bank note objective? I think a reasonable assessment would 
be  "fairly well."  Canadians  do have confidence  in  their  money.  They  use bank  notes  for day-to-day 
transactions without worrying unduly about counterfeiting.  
Can we do better? We think we can. In addition to examining whether refinements to the monetary 
policy target would be worth pursuing, as I mentioned earlier, we believe that we can further reduce 
4 
 BIS Review 12/2007
the incidence of counterfeiting. Specifically, by 2009, we aim to reduce the level of counterfeiting to 
fewer than 100 counterfeits detected annually per million notes in circulation, down from about 225 per 
million  last  year,  and  470  two  years  ago.  We  also  have  plans  to  work  with  the  RCMP  to  build  a 
database of counterfeiting information. Finally, we intend to improve our bank note distribution system, 
and to monitor the use of alternative means of payment. 
I'll conclude my remarks now. 
Conclusion 
I've  discussed  the  three  major  areas  of  responsibility  in  which  the  Bank  of  Canada  pursues  its 
mandate  –  often  together  with  partners  –  to  promote  the  economic  and  financial  well-being  of  the 
country. I'm sure you noticed how often I used the words "stability" and "confidence" in my remarks. 
Stability and confidence are the preconditions for strong economic and financial performance.  
We  aim  to  build  on  our  successes  as  we  continue  to  promote  stability  and  earn  the  confidence  of 
Canadians  –  and  by  doing  so,  we  will  further  enhance  the  economic  and  financial  well-being  of 
Canadians. 
BIS Review 12/2007 
 5
