Ardian Fullani: Issues related to the Bank of Albania’s activities 
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  a  regional  meeting, 
Saranda, 24 September 2007. 
 Honourable participants, 
It is my special pleasure to come back to your wonderful city. Today’s meeting is held in the 
framework of the new communication strategy of the Bank of Albania with various groups of 
interest.  Meetings  in  different  regions  of  Albania  help  us  better  understand  the  specifics 
characterising certain geographic areas, raising the premises for an ever more harmonic and 
complete development at the country’s level.  
I would like to elaborate with you some issues related to the Bank of Albania’s activity, which 
I  think,  from  the  viewpoint  of  coverage  and  effects,  involve  all  the  groups  of  interest 
participating in this meeting.  
First  I  would  like  to  deal  briefly  with  the  issue  of  communication.  Nowadays  it  is  widely 
accepted  that  chances  for  long-term  success  become  a  reality  if  one  is  capable  of 
communicating in proper language, with proper actors and on due time. More concretely, the 
central  bank  should  constantly  communicate  simply  and  transparently  with  all  market 
stakeholders, including the broad public, in order to be efficient and forward-looking. This is a 
necessary  premise  to  guarantee  institutional  credibility,  real  independence  and  a  sound 
accountability.  
For a long time from now the Bank of Albania has started to think in a forward-looking way 
about this process and I may actually declare that we have already started to obtain the first 
fruits. According to different estimates, we deem that market efficiency is increasing, inflation 
expectations are anchored around our target, while the awareness of financial stability has 
been constantly increasing.  
Notwithstanding  the  above,  our  claims  in  terms  of  information  and  clarification  of  Bank  of 
Albania’s decision-making are greater.  
Proper  language  translation  and  understanding  of  the  strategic  and  operational  decisions 
(monetary policy decisions) is our strategic target. Our ambition in this regard is great and I 
would  invite  all  the  stakeholders  in  general  and  the  banking  system  in  particular  to  make 
more efforts for cooperation.  
The Bank of Albania is confident that the financial market in Albania has already created a 
complete  physiognomy.  The  participation  of  many  foreign  institutions  of  international 
reputation is a testimony in this regard. Recently its efficiency is enhanced, reflected in both, 
the traded volume and the reduced interest rate volatility. However, the Bank of Albania has 
noticed that the market should develop better and faster. Presently, I am of the opinion that 
there  are  no  objective  reasons  that  would  weaken  the  financial  market  efficiency  and  in 
consequence the transmission of monetary policy to the economy.  
The banking system has got all the possibilities and should interpret more correctly all the 
signals of the Bank of Albania, on due time and intensity. Also, the banking system should be 
seriously prepared not only with the respective structures, but also with professional human 
resources.  This  is  a  standard  requirement,  a  postulate  of  modern  times,  to  which  we  all 
should be committed at maximum.  
I would let you know that the Bank of Albania has already prepared and soon enough will 
launch a specific package, centred on the efficiency of the financial market, particularly of the 
banking one. A new law on repurchase agreements, regulatory changes in required reserve 
BIS Review 106/2007 
 1
maintaining and calculation, rarefaction of Treasury bill auctions from the viewpoint of time, 
and presentation of the base rate are part of this package.  
All these measures will be implemented as a sole package and will revolutionize the inter-
bank market operation, a vital link of the financial market for monetary policy transmission to 
the  economy.  On  the  other  hand,  they  would  make  the  operational  tactics  of  the  Bank  of 
Albania more efficient. I invite the banking system to become part of this process, actively 
participating in all consultations of the case that will precede the launching of this package. 
Its suggestions and comments are welcomed at any moment.  
Monetary policy decision-making of the Bank of Albania is the second issue I would like to 
deal with. I would like to repeat once more that consumer price stability is the primary target 
of the institution I govern. Recently, I believe you have had the occasion to comprehend from 
the  statement  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  Supervisory  Council  that  the  risk  for  an  inflationary 
environment is present. Also, we have enlisted in our statements the probable factors, which 
according  to  our  considerations  make  the  concern  real  for  inflationary  pressures  to  the 
economy.  
The data disclosed by INSTAT show that the annual inflation in August 2007 recorded 4.2 
percent,  somewhat  above  the  upper  limit  of  the  targeted  band  of  2-4  percent.  August 
recorded a high monthly rate, 2.1 percent, a wholly unusual figure compared to the preceding 
years.  
I am confident that we have been understandable when evidencing in our analyses that the 
causes relate to unforeseeable factors (unforeseeable shocks) and other reasons that have 
to do with the demand of the economy for goods and services. 
It should be underlined that during the current year the factors of first nature are numerous 
and  relate  to  developments  within  the  country  and  to  “imported”  developments  from 
international economy. To be more concise, I would briefly highlight: 
1. 
The energy crisis, which during this year appeared earlier than usual and according 
to different assessments, will continue beyond what the business may envisage in 
its plans at the beginning of each calendar year. Naturally, the effect of the lack of 
energy  is  very  complex;  it  affects  directly  the  productive  capacities,  creates 
additional  cost  (alternative  source  of  energy)  on  final  products,  and  increases  the 
overall uncertainty. I think that these elements are sufficient to create ambiguity in 
the markets, generating inflationary premises in the economy. 
During  this  year  we  have  been  faced  with  another  problem.  It  has  to  do  with  an 
international conjuncture of raised prices, which exerts its impact on our market of 
goods and services. Fuels and cereals are more vulnerable by this conjuncture. The 
needs  of  our  economy  for  these  two  articles  are  increasing,  while  the  domestic 
resources are limited, making Albania dependant on imports, and in consequence 
on international market prices.  
In general, the economy demand is estimated to have been high at end of 2006 and 
in  the  major  part  of  2007.  This  fact  is  evidenced  in  the  large  credit  growth  to  the 
economy, in further enlargement of the current account, in increased imports of such 
goods as vehicles, household electrical appliances, and machinery and equipment. 
Generally,  the  increased  demand  at  a  certain  period  of  time  means  inflationary 
pressures  on  the  economy;  therefore  we  have  reasons  to  be  seriously  concerned 
about this problem.  
Nowadays, public expectations for future inflationary developments are in the focus 
of  the  efforts  of  each  central  bank  to  ensure  long-term  price  stability.  More 
concretely,  it  has  to  do  with  the  perceptions  that  every  economic  agent  creates 
about future inflation. In some cases, these expectations are mostly based also on 
the facts verified in the past. But, successful is that central bank, which succeeds in 
anchoring  these  public  expectations  with  a  numeric  target  that  it considers  as the 
2. 
3. 
4. 
2 
 BIS Review 106/2007
optimal  rate  of  inflation.  Therefore,  we  are  much  focused  in  this  direction,  and  I 
would like to once more emphasise in this meeting the Bank of Albania’s attitude, 
that we remain determined in our efforts to keep inflationary expectations anchored 
around 3 percent, a figure that constitutes also our numeric target.  
To this end, we will continue to orient our political and operational decision-making towards 
the meeting of this target”.  
As a final issue I would like to consider another major objective of the Bank of Albania, the 
one  related  to  financial  stability.  As  you  may  already  know  the  Bank  of  Albania  is  the 
licensing and supervisory authority of the banking system and of some other segments of the 
financial  system  (non-banking  financial  institutions  and  foreign  exchange  bureaus).  Being 
simultaneously even an important decision-making authority in the area of the financial and 
economic policies, it is understandable that a delicate challenge remains the harmonisation 
between  both  major  priorities:  effective  monetary  policy  without  damaging  the  financial 
stability and financial stability without damaging the monetary policy effectiveness.  
Currently  this  is  the  trendiest  issue.  Many  experts,  decision-makers,  academics  are  laying 
great emphasis on this problem and they rank the financial stability as a principal, which if 
shaken  it  takes  upon  itself  the  entire  infrastructure  from  which  it  arose,  from  which  it  was 
nourished and grown. Therefore, I consider it important to come back and back to this issue.  
Due to our not very distant history, I think that prudence in terms of financial stability is never 
excessive. I would like to assure you that the Albanian banking system is in a sound financial 
position,  capitalised  and  profitable.  Consolidation  of  the  banking  system  through  mergers 
and acquisitions, aiming at attracting internationally well-known investor with non-contestable 
experience in banking business is the prevailing philosophy in this regard. I believe that we 
have been successful in this direction. Recently there have been new entries in the system, 
highlighting internationally well-known banks, such as Intesa-San Paolo, Credit Agricol and 
Banka Societe Generale. As a conclusion, we may state that at present the Albanian banking 
system composition is appropriate, guaranteeing perspective support to the economy.  
The entry of new banks has directly impacted on raising the value of the banking business in 
Albania, reflected, inter alia, in the increased competition among banks and aggressiveness 
of the banking system towards market share. The Bank of Albania deems that a reflection of 
this phenomenon is also the rapid growth of credit to the economy. More concretely, credit 
outstanding grew by 8 percentage points of GDP over three last years. In July `07 its annual 
growth was above 50 percent, which makes us believe that it may account for 28 % of gross 
domestic product at year end.  
The  Bank  of  Albania,  in  all  its  pronouncements,  has  argued  that  this  phenomenon  is  a 
natural process that associates the banking business in every country. Also Albania, as most 
countries of the region, is under the rapid convergence process to certain parameters of the 
European Union.  
To  this  end,  we  are  completely  aware  of  the  fact  that  the  growth  rates  will  continue  to  be 
high. Leaving aside the probable effects on aggregate demand of the economy, I think that 
under  the  conditions  of  such  rapid  growth,  the  real  challenge  stands  to  the  credit  portfolio 
quality.  
The  Bank  of  Albania  remains  determined  for  the  observance  of  the  whole  regulatory  and 
supervisory package, which aims at guaranteeing a safe credit portfolio. We can not agree 
on  some  concepts  crystallised  recently,  which  make  us  understand  that  certain  banks  are 
running  after  the  market  share  to  the  detriment  of  professional  and  rigorous  treatment  of 
applications for a loan.  
Under  the  conditions  when  many  objective  obstacles  exist,  we  deem  that  maximum 
prudence  should  be  shown  in  extending  loans.  Let  me  remind  you  of  the  fact  that  we  still 
inherit  deficiencies  in  terms  of  ownership  titles,  collateral  and  its  execution,  address 
identification,  property  register  and  credit  register.  Non-recognition  and  non-acceptance  of 
BIS Review 106/2007 
 3
the  above  deficiencies  increases  the  likelihood  that  objectively  or  subjectively,  decision-
making  for  extending  a  loan  may  be  wrong.  I  do  not  feel  well  when  I  see  that  in  certain 
considerable cases, decision-making takes place within a short period of time, not sufficient 
enough to verify the case associating the credit practice.  
I avail myself of this opportunity to require from the banking system to observe rigorously the 
banking supervision and risk management regulations. Given the current structures of credit 
stock  to  the  economy,  I  consider  it  important  to  advise  banks  to  seriously  assess  their 
exposure to foreign exchange risk and be prudent for its management.  
Finally,  I  would  draw  the  banking  system  attention  also  to  another  problem,  which  I  have 
raised times ago. I have observed that there is greater prudence in terms of governance and 
internal audit, but there are problems in terms of transparency, window services, commission 
policies and recent innovations with electronic transactions.  
Our  support  will  not  lack  in  this  direction.  You  may  consider  the  Bank  of  Albania  as  a 
possibility of permanent consultation and assistance. I would assure you that we are totally 
concentrated on and willing to support and assist any banking institution that aspires to bring 
innovation, Western practices and standards to Albania.  
In  conclusion,  let  me  to  say  a  few  words  about  the  city  we  are  gathered  today,  about  the 
potential and support the banking system will provide to it.  
Today  Saranda  is  one  of  the  most  culminant  places  and  may  be  the  best  show-case  of 
possibilities  and  quality  of  the  Albanian  tourism,  of  this  important  sector  that  presently 
contributes by 9 % to the country’s gross domestic product.  
Currently the figure of 1 million tourists a year has become a reality and its perspective goes 
even beyond, if we continue to pay necessary economic, social and institutional attention to 
tourism. Beyond such impressive figures, the tourism development is translated also into a 
constant  improvement  of  Albania’s  image  as  a  country  under  progress,  of  values  it 
possesses and provides, of increased level of employment and revenues for many areas and 
strata  of  population,  as  provision  of  values  of  many  environmental,  historical  and  cultural, 
geographic and curative, economic and social potentials, etc. 
Notwithstanding this optimistic situation, we should not forget that Albania is a Mediterranean 
country, found in one of the most developed tourism areas of the world, in one of the areas of 
the largest variety of types of tourism, and therefore in one of the areas where competition in 
tourism service is in its peak, where many of the countries of the region, with a  very long 
tradition in this sector, have turned it into a real tourism industry.  
Our  objectives  to  improve  rapidly  and  to  solve  qualitatively  the  problems  of  road 
infrastructure, water and electricity supply , sewerages, etc., should be attached to improved 
quality  of  services  and  implementation  of  standards,  completion  of  regulatory  and  urban 
plans  for  all  tourism  areas,  variety  of  types  of  tourism  and  tourism  products.  Besides  the 
coastline  tourism,  which  is  dominant,  the  mountainous  and  rural  tourism,  cultural  and 
historical tourism, archaeological and nature tourism, curative and sports tourism,  massive 
and elite tourism should be also developed. All these are going to make the sector and the 
activity directly or indirectly related to tourism absorb more investments and loans, making 
banks,  domestic  and  foreign  businesses,  private  and  institutional  investors,  etc.,  more 
interested and guaranteed for success.  
You should be convinced that the banking business is observing you attentively, expecting a 
signal, a sparkle which is mostly at your hand. The standards are indispensable and should 
be respected. Therefore, I would invite the local government, the business community, the 
individuals  of  Saranda  to  be  oriented  towards  the  future,  towards  tourism  and  urban 
development models, similar to those of advanced countries.  
Let me conclude by thanking you once more for your hospitality. 
4 
 BIS Review 106/2007
