Ardian Fullani: Does central bank transparency reduce interest rates? 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the seminar: Does Central 
Bank Transparency Reduce Interest Rates?, Tirana, 22 August 2007. 
 in  economic  and 
the  decision-making 
the  public  concerning 
Honourable ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a special pleasure for me to introduce Mr. Sylvester Eijffinger, an academic that is well-
known  for  his  research  into  central  banking  institutional  and  practical  issues.  Today  he  is 
going  to  share  with  us  one  of  the  latest  experiences  of  his  work  in  monetary  policy 
transparency and its effects on the economy.  
This activity is a follow-up of the lectures with distinguished personalities from academy and 
finance  world,  part  of  the  program  on  enhancing  transparency  through  public  education. 
Undoubtedly,  we  have  to  do  with  an  initiative  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  to  contribute  to  the 
enlivening of academic and scientific research in Albania.  
Over the last decade, there is noticed a tendency of central banks to be more and more open 
to 
financial  policies. 
Transparency  has  become  an  important  issue  of  monetary  policy.  The  important  changes 
occurring  in  central  banking  since  the  beginning  of  `1990  have  led  to  interesting  and 
contemporary topics of academic studies in monetary policy. Transparency and opening to 
the public became a necessary practice in the framework of adopting inflation targeting, as a 
good  practice  of  communicating  with  the  public  and  for  meeting  the  final  objective  of 
monetary policy. Moreover, this practice was extended in other central banks of advanced 
and developing economies. The rationale behind such policy stands at the belief that central 
bank  transparency  prevents  the  asymmetric  information  that  exists  between  policy-makers 
and other economic agents. From this viewpoint, transparency increases clarity on monetary 
policy and allows the private sector and the economy to make rational decisions.  
Central bank transparency enhancement has been reflected in the publication of monetary 
policy objective, often defined in numeric form; in the publication of inflation report and the 
expected inflation forecasting; in the description of monetary policy decisions, together with 
the  analysis  and  assumptions  leading  to  such  decisions;  and  in  extreme  cases,  in  the 
publication  of  minutes  of  monetary  policy  meetings,  and  the  voting  result  in  the  decision-
making  process.  Significant  examples  may  be  found  in  the  European  Central  Bank,  the 
Federal  Reserve,  the  Bank  of  England,  the  Central  Bank  of  Canada,  of  New  Zealand,  of 
Sweden.  
These tendencies indicate that central bankers have strong reasons to believe that central 
bank  transparency  carries  over  the  potential  to  increase  credibility  and  reputation  of  the 
institution  and  of  the  monetary  policy,  why  not  even  its  flexibility.  Simultaneously, 
transparency  helps  the  economy  to  achieve  low  inflation  and  interest  rates.  It  is  very 
important  that  scientific  academy  and  researchers  investigate  this  confidence  of  ours, 
providing their contribution and conclusions.  
The Bank of Albania has assessed the importance of monetary policy transparency and has 
made  substantial  steps  for  raising  its  level,  especially  in  the  recent  year.  Let  me  briefly 
mention some of these improvements: 
I  believe  that  you  share  the  same  opinion  with  me,  that  currently  the  decision-making 
process in monetary policy area and in that of financial stability has undergone a significant 
improvement, not only in terms of the analysing process but also from the viewpoint of its 
communication.  Presently  the  Supervisory  Council  has  disclosed  the calendar  of  meetings 
dedicated only to monetary policy decision-making.  
BIS Review 93/2007 
 1
Also,  since  a  long  time,  the  process  of  its  implementation,  of  analysis  and  of  proposals 
passes  through  the  Committee  for  the  Implementation  of  Monetary  Policy,  a  consultative 
body which has not only raised the quality of analysis but has also contributed to a new up-
dated  format  of  the  Bank  of  Albania’s  communication  with  the  market  and  with  economic 
agents in general.  
No  doubt,  the  whole  above-mentioned  framework  passes  through  an  analytical  process  of 
assessment and forecasting, which is synthesised in monetary policy reports, part of which 
are the inflation forecasting models and baseline assumptions for possible economic events 
to which monetary policy should response.  
I may elaborate this point even further, but I believe that in my public presentations, in many 
press releases of the Bank of Albania Supervisory Council, and in our periodical publications 
we  have  made  it  clear  that  the  one-digit  numerical  inflation  target,  the  explanation  of  both 
operational  and  monetary  policy  framework  are  a  central  part  of  the  Bank  of  Albania 
transparency.  
Personally, I am confident that this is the core of central bank transparency. I also believe 
that, thanks to this increased transparency, we have been relatively successful even in the 
achievement of another major central bank objective, i.e., that of anchoring the inflationary 
pressures at the programmed levels. 
Enhancement  of  transparency  to  such  levels  indicates  clearly  the  Bank  of  Albania’s 
obligation to be an entirely accountable institution. We are confident that only in this way we 
will  raise  our  credibility,  will  maintain  and  strengthen  the  confidence  of  the  public  and  of 
economic agents in the Bank of Albania and its commitments.  
An aspect of transparency I would highlight is that of public understanding of central bank 
related issues. No effective communication exists without succeeding in understanding each-
other reciprocally. No matter how broad and clear the information given by central bank is, 
the  positive  effects  of  transparency  may  not  be  fully  benefited  if  this  information  is  not 
interpreted fairly by economic agents. This is particularly necessary for countries of a short 
history  of  market  economy,  where  the  degree  of  public  involvement  in  the  country’s 
economic life is still low. Therefore, the Bank of Albania has been very aggressive in terms of 
designing  and  developing  various  programs  for  public  education.  Numerous  meetings  with 
market  participants,  with  financial  and  banking  community,  with  the  business,  with  the 
academy, with the media and beyond, with the public, have been regularly carried out and I 
assure you that they will continue with the same intensity even in the future.  
I would like to emphasise that the argument of transparency enhancement remains equally 
valuable  also  for  the  rest  of  financial  system.  Transparency,  without  becoming  an  end  in 
itself,  and  without  damaging  the  achievement  of  final  objectives  of  the  business  is  a 
necessary  market  element  for  building  confidence  and  expanding  business  relations,  in 
products  and  volume,  maintaining  the  financial  system  equilibrium  and  stability.  In  this 
framework,  transparency  should  become  a  global  concept  of  the  financial  market  for 
products, services and actions taken by it. To this end, I would request from the banking 
system  to  further  enhance  its  transparency  with  the  public,  particularly  in  terms  of 
explaining simply and sincerely the products it provides, the commissions it applies, 
without  leaving  behind  the  publication  in  due  time  and  quality  of  financial  results, 
pursuant to legal obligations. In this context, I would like to let you know that the Bank 
of Albania will be rigorous in meeting all the obligations arising from the observance 
of laws and regulatory basis.  
As  my  friend  Eijffinger  states:  “Transparency  seems  to  mean  different  things  to  different 
people”, it is understandable that the debate remains open to both, academic and practical 
plane.  New  elements,  quantitative  indicators,  empirical  models  are  constantly  added  to  it. 
The  material  to  be  presented  today,  adds  a  new  value  in  this  regard,  with  practical 
importance  for  central  banks.  I  am  confident  that  today  we  will  have  the  opportunity  and 
2 
 BIS Review 93/2007
pleasure  to  expand  our  knowledge  and  consolidate  our  confidence  in  transparency 
effectiveness. I invite you to be full of attention for the presentation.  
Honourable Professor Eijffinger, 
I  thank  you  for  accepting  my  invitation  to  present  your  research  in  Tirana,  and  I  wish  you 
have a pleasant experience during your stay in Albania. 
BIS Review 93/2007 
 3
