Miguel Fernández Ordóñez: Overview of the Spanish economy in 2006 
Address by Mr Miguel Fernández Ordóñez, Governor of the Bank of Spain, to the Governing Council 
of  the  Bank  of  Spain  on  the  occasion  of  the  presentation  of  the  Annual  Report  2006,  Madrid, 
14 June 2007. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
In 2006 the behaviour of the world economy and of the European economy in particular provided a 
highly favourable setting for the continuation of the Spanish economy’s 13-year-long expansion. The 
world economy grew by 5.4% last year, up even on the high rates of the previous two years, this being 
the most dynamic three-year period of growth for more than 30 years. The strong increase in oil prices 
in the first half of the year and the less expansionary stance of macroeconomic policies did not check 
this dynamism, which was moreover compatible with the containment of inflation rates worldwide and 
with a more favourable financial market performance. 
The  geographical  distribution  of  growth  was  more  balanced  and  more  favourable  for  the  Spanish 
economy.  The  notable  recovery  in  the  euro  area,  along  with  economic  firming  in  Japan,  offset  the 
slowdown in the United States. The contribution of the emerging economies to the global expansion, 
with China and India to the fore with growth of around 10%, remained a key factor. Latin America also 
grew  satisfactorily  and  its  inflation  fell  to  all-time  lows,  against  a  backdrop  of  generally  prudent 
macroeconomic  policies  which  have  contributed  to  a  further  reduction  in  the  region’s  financial 
vulnerability. However, the meagre progress in structural reforms and the unorthodox direction taken 
by some countries’ economic policies may curtail future growth possibilities. 
In the short run the world economy can be expected to continue posting high growth, unless the US 
slowdown becomes more acute and the rest of the world is unable to continue growing under its own 
steam.  Further  ahead,  the  continuity  of  the  high  rate  of  expansion  of  the  world  economy  is  more 
uncertain.  The  increased  efficiency  and  productivity  gains  brought  about  by  globalisation,  through 
greater  trade  integration  and  a  far-reaching  reallocation  of  resources  and  factors,  might  begin  to 
weaken.  In  this  setting,  the  emergence  of  protectionist  tendencies  –  such  as  those  manifest  in  the 
difficulties of moving the Doha round forward – is an added risk to continuing high growth. 
Inflation has remained contained worldwide. The growing integration of the emerging economies into 
the  global  economy,  providing  abundant  low-cost  labour,  coupled  with  heightened  competition  on 
world  markets  and  technological  innovation  have  allowed  price  increases  to  moderate  significantly. 
The  anchoring  of  inflation  expectations,  to  which  the  credibility  acquired  by  central  banks  in  their 
efforts to preserve price stability has contributed, and the headway in the programmes for structural 
reform and increased flexibility in economies have likewise eased inflationary pressures. 
All  these  developments  have  helped  contain  the  upward  pressures  stemming  from  the  impulse  of 
domestic demand and have  made  the  task  of  monetary  policies  easier.  In  2006,  as  the strength of 
economic growth progressively alerted to the emergence of inflationary pressures, the monetary policy 
stance  became  less  expansionary  in  virtually  all  economies,  developed  and  emerging  alike,  and 
inflation rates held at low levels overall, without any substantial passthrough of higher energy prices to 
core inflation being discernible. 
Yet the reduction in spare capacity and labour market tightening will heighten inflationary pressures in 
many  economies,  and  further  oil  price  rises  cannot  be  ruled  out.  Moreover,  as  the  business  cycle 
matures, the task of monetary policymakers may become more difficult, especially for certain central 
banks like the Federal Reserve which will have to square inflationary risks with those stemming from 
the economic slowdown. 
The euro area 
As already stated, the euro area economy finally managed to emerge from the phase of low growth 
experienced in recent years. GDP for the area grew at a rate of 2.9% in 2006, almost double that of 
the previous year and the highest rate since 2000. For the year as a whole, inflation, measured by the 
rate of increase of the HICP, stood as in 2005 at 2.2%, much influenced over the course of the year by 
oil price movements. Core inflation moved mildly upwards during the year, perhaps reflecting some 
BIS Review 67/2007 
 1
minor  indirect  effect  of  the  rise  in energy  prices  against  a  background  of  strengthening  activity  and 
employment. Nonetheless, there has been notable wage moderation so far, perhaps in response to 
greater  labour  market  flexibility  and  growing  competitive  pressures  worldwide.  But  it  remains  to  be 
seen how wages will react in the face of more buoyant domestic demand. 
Throughout 2006 the stance of demand-side policies was consistent with the pick-up in private agents’ 
spending. However, in the monetary policy realm,  the strength of the recovery warranted a gradual 
adjustment in monetary conditions by the European Central Bank. Following the rise in official interest 
rates in December 2005, the ECB continued in 2006 progressively to withdraw the stimulus provided 
in recent years in the light of the observed risks to price stability in the medium term. 
Turning  to  budgetary  policies,  the  improvement  in  the  business  cycle  contributed  decisively  to  tax 
revenue growing substantially above forecast in 2006 and to the euro area budget deficit declining by 
almost 1 pp. Given the persistence of high deficits in many countries, it is of paramount importance to 
harness the opportunity provided by the current boom to complete the ongoing restructuring of public 
finances and to push through measures to boost productivity and employment generation. 
Precisely  in  this  latter  area,  the  year  2006  saw  progress  –  albeit  uneven  across  countries  and 
economic  policy  areas  –  in  the  application  of  the  structural  reform  agenda.  Undoubtedly,  the 
favourable performance in 2006 in terms of employment and growth in activity is largely the result of 
the course of the business cycle. But it seems likely there are also incipient positive effects stemming 
from  the  structural  reforms  already  implemented,  which  may be responsible  for  the  high rate  of  job 
creation  in  this  phase  of  the  recovery  and  the  rise  in  productivity.  That  would  show  how  efforts  to 
heighten  incentives  for  labour  market  participation,  to  further  market  liberalisation  and  to  create  an 
environment  conducive  to  innovation  and  the  development  of  human  capital  ultimately  bear  fruit, 
highlighting the need for sufficient political resolve to persevere with the course of action embarked 
upon. 
At the end of the first half of 2007, the outlook for the euro area is the brightest in recent years. For 
one  thing,  domestic  demand  is  expected  to  retain  its  current  momentum.  Investment  in  particular 
should  continue  to  benefit  from  the  persistence  of  propitious  financial  conditions,  the  strength  of 
corporate earnings and the soundness of companies’ financial position, while household expenditure 
should continue expanding thanks to favourable employment developments. For another, exports are 
expected to continue faring favourably despite the likely easing in world growth. This central scenario 
faces the downside risk of a bigger-than-expected slowdown in the world economy. But, in contrast, a 
better performance of the European labour market might raise forecast growth rates. 
The inflation outlook for 2007 and 2008 suggests the rate of change of the HICP will hold at around 
2%,  in  line  with  the  definition  of  price  stability.  However,  it  cannot  be  ruled  out  that  the  strength  of 
activity  will  lead  to  higher  wage  demands  and  to  greater  price-setting  autonomy  on  the  part  of 
companies. Adding to these upside risks to inflation is the possibility of fresh oil price increases. In the 
expected setting of robust economic activity, wage moderation will remain an essential ingredient for 
containing inflationary expectations, which would help prolong the upturn. In the opening months of 
2007, the ECB has continued closely to monitor these risks and, in general, economic developments 
in the area, so as to ensure that inflation expectations remain in line with the definition of medium-term 
price stability. 
The Spanish economy 
As indicated, the Spanish economy continued its long upturn last year, moving on a mildly accelerating 
path throughout the year. It posted a year-on-year rate of 4% in 2006 Q4, and 4.1% in Q1 this year. 
The buoyancy of activity is proving greater than forecast in early 2006. The recovery in the euro area 
has  boosted  exports,  following  their  sluggishness  in  previous  years,  especially  in  2005,  and  has 
supplemented the main factors that have been underpinning the expansion of the economy. 
There was some re-balancing in 2006 of the relative contributions of domestic expenditure and of net 
exports  to  GDP  growth,  following  three  years  of  progressive  divergence  between  these  two 
components.  Overall,  the  contribution  of  net  external  demand  improved,  despite  which  the  net 
borrowing of the nation increased once more, to 7.8% of GDP. Within domestic demand, consumption 
slowed slightly in 2006 and construction began to show signs of decelerating in Q4, a trend that ran 
into  early  2007.  However,  investment  in  capital  goods  underwent  a  significant  increase  which  is 
holding in the year to date. 
2 
 BIS Review 67/2007
Behind these developments in the Spanish economy, along with the improved external environment, is 
the continuing influence of the favourable factors that have underpinned its dynamism throughout this 
cyclical upturn. First, there is the impulse stemming from the Spanish economy’s integration into the 
euro area. That has been acting as a powerful spur to demand, as a result of the effects on confidence 
and expectations and, naturally, of the expansionary financial conditions that have continued to prevail 
in  2006,  despite  the  change  in  the  stance  of  the  single  monetary  policy  dating  back  to  the  closing 
months of the previous year. Further, there are the factors that have provided for growth on the supply 
side, including most particularly the growing demographic boost to the Spanish economy over the past 
decade, which is contributing, among many other aspects, to generating a substantial expansion in the 
Spanish  economy’s  growth  capacity.  Finally,  the  importance  of  reform  initiatives  in  recent  decades 
cannot  be  ignored,  as  these  have  promoted  market  flexibility  and  dynamism  among  agents  and 
institutions. And pivotal too have been the recent macroeconomic and financial policies, which have 
been a guarantee for stability. 
All these factors have acted simultaneously, mutually reinforcing one another in such a way that it is 
difficult to assign a specific weight to any of them. Let me refer first to the demographic impulse, to 
which particular attention is devoted in the Annual Report presented today. Migrant flows, drawn by 
the substantial and constant expansion of demand, have been in turn a key factor in supply dynamics. 
This is because the rise in the immigrant population has increased the economy’s productive capacity 
by means of the incorporation of abundant labour resources, while it has at the same time contributed 
to  sustaining  domestic  spending  growth.  The  Report  highlights  the  fact  that  the  contribution  of 
immigration  to  income  generation  has  been  greater  than  that  arising  from  the  mere  increase  in 
population, also helping to raise per capita income. The Report also indicates that the effects on the 
expenditure  side  seem  to  help  galvanise  investment  and  that,  in  the  labour  market,  they  have 
introduced  elements  of  wage  flexibility  and  boosted  mobility.  Furthermore,  the  dynamic  effects  of 
immigration  have  been bolstered by  the  impact  of  the  growing  participation  of women  in  the  labour 
market. 
With regard to demand-side impulses, it should be stressed that economic buoyancy has continued to 
be underpinned by monetary and financial conditions which, despite their gradual normalisation over 
the course of last year and in 2007 to date, remain loose for the Spanish economy. Although the cost 
of  bank  credit  for  households  and  firms  and  of  fixed-income  securities  issues  rose  as  the  single 
monetary policy adopted a more neutral stance, these costs reached levels which, from a historical 
perspective, should be classified as moderate. 
In  any  event,  somewhat  less  generous  financing  conditions  than  those  prevailing  during  the  recent 
period  of  exceptionally  low  interest  rates  are  better  suited  to  the  circumstances  of  the  Spanish 
economy. Consequently, they provide some relief following a lengthy phase of high demand pressure, 
while helping to make our growth pattern healthier. 
The strength of demand has been met by very favourable elements in the supply-side response. All 
the productive branches contributed positively to the expansion of output, though mention should be 
made  of  the continuing  momentum  of construction and  the  notable  dynamism  of  the  manufacturing 
branches, closely linked to the recovery in the European economies. It is worth noting once again the 
Spanish economy’s continuing high employment-generating capacity, both in 2006 and in early 2007, 
since  this  feature  is  playing  a key role in  the continuity  of  this  long  expansionary  cycle.  The  strong 
growth  of  employment  in  2006,  at  a  rate  of  more  than  3%  for  the  year  on  average,  contributed 
decisively to sustaining domestic spending. And it has also enabled the growing incorporation of the 
population (particularly the female population) into the labour market to be compatible with further cuts 
in the unemployment rate, which stood at 8.5% on average in 2006, the lowest level since the late 
1970s and practically on a par with the euro area average rate. The behaviour of employment denotes 
changes  of  some  depth  in  the  Spanish  labour  market,  such  as  the  marked  fall  in  the  structural 
unemployment  rate,  which  may  be  interpreted  as  an  increase  in  the  scope available  for generating 
employment without wage pressures arising. 
The  counterpart  to  an  employment-intensive  growth  pattern  has  been  modest  increases  in  actual 
productivity. It is difficult to offer an accurate diagnosis of the reasons for this, given the difficulties of 
measuring and estimating productivity in the presence of significant structural changes, such as the 
composition effects arising from the concentration of growth in sectors that are relatively less dynamic 
productivity-wise. But what are possibly being reflected here are shortcomings in the quality of factors 
of production and in the characteristics of the business sector. 
BIS Review 67/2007 
 3
That said, the responsiveness of supply is not proving sufficient to counter the pressure of expenditure 
on price formation. On one hand, compensation per employee quickened somewhat in 2006, but to a 
lesser  extent  than  did  wage  settlements,  as  a  result  of  the  changes  in  composition  and  the  factors 
boosting labour market flexibility that I referred to earlier. On the other, in a climate of buoyant sales, 
the widening of business margins continued, albeit at a lesser rate than in previous years. All these 
factors, combined with the rise in oil prices in the first half of the year, meant that inflation rose in 2006 
and that the inflation differential with the euro area stood at 1.4 pp. 
Inflation began to perform more favourably in the closing months of 2006, a trend that has run into 
2007, with the related differential being cut to 0.5 pp. Foreseeably, these inflation dynamics will remain 
in  place  for  several  months.  But  it  should  not  be  forgotten  that  the  improvement  has  a  temporary 
component,  linked  to  the  path  of  oil  prices,  and  that  core  inflation  remains  at  2.5%,  despite  the 
continuing restraint of import prices. Price and cost increases in 2006 once again outpaced those of 
our  competitors,  prolonging  the  deteriorating  trend  of  the  indices  that  measure  relative  prices  and 
costs. Insofar as this difference is not warranted by quality improvements, the trend of these indices 
reflects a loss in competitiveness, whose adverse consequences for growth will become patent once 
domestic demand moves back onto a normal footing. 
The  outlook  for  the  Spanish  economy  points  to  the  continuation  of  the  main  features  recently 
observed,  namely:  the  restructuring  of  spending,  thanks  to  a  gradual  easing  in  domestic  demand, 
particularly in consumption and residential investment, and an improvement in the contribution of net 
external demand. The confirmation of these trends would allow for the projection forward of economic 
dynamism at somewhat more moderate rates, in line with growth potential. 
For this to occur, however, further progress in slowing spending and household and corporate debt, 
and in improving the economy’s supply-side conditions, is needed. We must not forget that the long 
expansionary  phase  of  the  Spanish  economy  has  been  accompanied  by  a  buildup  in  certain 
imbalances that pose considerable risks to its sustainability. Thus, until they are sufficiently corrected, 
we should avoid complacency. Admittedly, recent months have seen slower growth in household debt 
and  a  gradual  slowdown  in  house  prices,  while  the  inflation  differential  with  the  euro  area  has 
narrowed. But it is important these processes continue to head off the risks the Banco de España has 
been warning about. 
Economic  policymakers  have  a  major  responsibility  to  take  advantage  of  the  current  economic 
prosperity to adopt, on a preventive basis, the measures required to harness the existing opportunities 
and to mitigate the risks that may arise. The change in the single monetary policy stance dating back 
to late 2005 has contributed to gradually normalising the financial conditions under which households 
and firms take their spending decisions, although monetary conditions are still accommodative for the 
Spanish economy. 
Turning to fiscal policy, buoyant revenue, which continues systematically to grow above budget, has 
provided  for  an  improvement  in  programmed  objectives.  Achieving  fiscal  surpluses  in  expansionary 
phases,  as  established  under  the  new  budgetary  stability  laws,  not  only  proves  suitable  for  easing 
demand  pressures,  but  also  for  retaining  sufficient  room  for  manoeuvre  in  the  face  of  potential 
deviations  from  the  scenario  of  economic  dynamism  and,  naturally,  for  further  restructuring  public 
finances in order to absorb the future consequences of population ageing. This is, unquestionably, the 
main challenge for public finances in the medium term. The agreement reached last year under the 
Toledo Pact also addresses the goal of ensuring the sustainability of the pensions system, although 
the measures adopted are still of limited scope. 
It  should  be  recalled,  however,  that  the  high  growth  of  public  revenue  has  a  difficult-to-estimate 
temporary  component  that  is  linked  in  part  to  the  strength  of  the  real  estate  sector.  Accordingly, 
budgetary consolidation may require an additional effort to control primary spending. The collaboration 
of regional and local government is vital in this connection, as they are responsible for major spending 
components  such  as  public  investment,  health  and  education.  This  consolidation  strategy  should, 
moreover, be compatible with an improvement in the quality of public finances, since that is essential 
for raising incentives and for helping overcome the shortfalls in education, innovation and productivity. 
But when you are part of a monetary union, the most valuable economic policy instrument is, as our 
own experience indicates, the deepening of reforms in order to increase the responsiveness of supply 
and  the  adaptability  of  the  business  and  productive  sectors  to  the  major  changes  the  economy  is 
undergoing, such as globalisation and population growth. 
4 
 BIS Review 67/2007
Specifically,  the  dynamism  and  flexibility  injected  into  the  labour  market  by  the  aforementioned 
phenomena  of  immigration  and  growing  female  participation  need  to  be  accompanied  by  the 
development  of  a  more  appropriate  institutional  framework,  without  forgoing  the  unquestionable 
achievement of good industrial relations. Despite the progress achieved by labour market reforms in 
recent  years,  the  need  remains  to  better  tailor  collective  bargaining  arrangements  to  the  different 
industry-  and  firm-level  requirements  and  to  reduce  the  costs  associated  with  permanent  contracts. 
These  measures  should  be  complemented  by  others  aimed  at  improving  the  quality  of  the  labour 
factor,  by  giving  greater  priority  to  educational  policy  in  order  to  redress  the  secondary  education 
deficit,  adapt  university  courses  to  new  demands  and  promote  effective  continuous  training  for 
workers. 
Improving  the  efficiency  of  the  economy  likewise  requires  increasing  investment  in  physical  and 
technological  capital,  fostering  innovation,  pushing  through  privatisation  where  appropriate  and 
stepping  up  the  pace  of  the  processes  undertaken  in  recent  years  to  heighten  competition.  The 
infusion of competition is particularly relevant in industries pivotal to spreading gains in efficiency to 
the rest of the economy, such as the network industries, the telecommunications market, the energy 
sector  and  rail  transport.  Some  of  these  liberalising  measures  are  detailed  in  the  National  Reform 
Programme so that, irrespective of the need to design other new measures, it would be advisable to 
apply  this  Programme  more  resolutely.  Also,  advantage  should  be  taken  of  the  transposition  of  the 
Services  Directive  to  define  a  more  straightforward  and  competitive  regulatory  framework  for  these 
activities. 
Education, innovation, market liberalisation and, broadly, all reforms geared to increasing productivity 
are of the utmost importance looking ahead to the long term. In recent years the welfare of Spanish 
citizens has been increasing thanks to better use of the labour factor. This is worth celebrating since 
for a long time the Spanish economy’s main problem was in fact a persistently high unemployment 
rate. But as we draw closer to success in this area (the long-term unemployment rate is now around 
2%),  it  will  be  more  difficult  to  obtain  additional  welfare  gains  as  a  result  of  increases  in  the 
employment rate. Before it is too late, we should realise that productivity is the main source of welfare 
in the long run, and the policies that promote this are therefore decisive for shaping the future of the 
Spanish economy. 
The financial system 
The behaviour of Spanish households and corporations in 2006 once again posed fresh challenges to 
the financial system. Given that public and private investment continued to increase, the net borrowing 
of  the  economy  rose  from  6.5%  to  7.8%  of  GDP.  But  what  is  more,  household  and  corporate 
purchases of financial assets inside and outside Spain increased, the result being that gross financing 
required by both sets of agents climbed from 35.6% to 44.7% of GDP. 
Indeed,  although  household  consumption  posted  a  somewhat  lower  growth  rate  than  in  2005,  as 
disposable income moderated even more, household saving as a proportion of household disposable 
income  continued  falling.  Given  that  investment  in  housing  continued  to  increase  at  a  high  rate, 
household net borrowing rose to 1.5% of GDP. Nonetheless, changes in interest rates and property 
price  levels  themselves  began  to  temper  the  demand  for  housing,  with  the  volume  of  transactions 
easing  off  and  a  slowdown  in  prices.  Yet  significant  underpinnings  for  the  dynamism  of  housing 
demand in the medium and long run remain as a result of socio-demographic factors – such as the 
thrust of immigration, the growing incorporation of women into the labour market and the reduction in 
the average family size – which will continue to translate into substantial increases in the number of 
households.  These  socio-demographic  factors,  which  were  not  present  in  the  final  stages  of  the 
previous upturn in this market, will allow activity to stabilise, on this occasion, at higher levels than was 
the case then. 
In  the  new  setting  of  less  relaxed  financial  conditions,  Spanish  households  began  to  resort  less  to 
credit as a means of financing their expenditure. But the slowdown was still modest, it affected only 
house purchase loans and it did not suffice to curb the rising trend of the sector’s debt/income ratio. 
The  associated  interest  burden  also  increased,  further  boosted  by  the  rise  in  interest  rates.  Thus, 
although there has been some headway in Spanish households adapting their spending and saving 
patterns to the progressive withdrawal of the monetary stimulus, this is still limited. 
In the corporate realm, however, the presence of other factors meant that the increase in interest rates 
scarcely  affected  corporate  investment  and  debt.  As  earlier  stated,  investment  in  capital  goods 
BIS Review 67/2007 
 5
became  the  most  dynamic  expenditure  component  in  2006,  owing  principally  to  two  factors:  the 
pressure exerted by demand on the degree of capacity utilisation, which drew close to its historical 
high; and the sound results posted by most companies along with their favourable outlook. 
The  buoyancy  of  investment  was  duly  reflected  in  the  sector’s  debt  ratios.  These  increased  once 
again,  fuelled  by  bank  lending  growth  rates  of  around  30%.  Significantly,  however,  a  very  sizeable 
portion  of  funds  raised  was  earmarked  for  financing  Spanish  institutions’  participation  in  various 
mergers and acquisitions. These M&A operations showed renewed vigour in 2006 not only in Spain 
but also worldwide. 
As in the case of households, the simultaneous increase in liabilities and in the related borrowing costs 
translated  into  an  increase  in  the  interest  burden  borne  by  corporations.  Foreseeably,  the  ongoing 
moderate  rise  in  interest  rates  will  ultimately  emit  a  timely  signal  to  companies  to  adjust  their 
investment  and  business  expansion  projects  to  real  future  earnings  possibilities.  In  that  way  the 
financial risks that might jeopardise the continuity of investment will be lessened. 
The financial institutions of all countries benefited from an exceptionally benign environment, in both 
macroeconomic and financial market terms. Specifically, the balance sheets and income statements of 
Spanish credit institutions were notably sound, with returns on equity not only greater than those of the 
previous year but also far above those relating to risk-free assets. Their ROE stood at around a level 
of 20%, 3 bp up on 2005, with a spread of 16% over long-term government bond yields. These trends 
are similar to those observed in major international institutions, which show sound levels of returns on 
equity along with wide spreads over government bond yields. 
Yet  this  situation  should  not  lead  to  complacency.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  precisely  the  favourable 
circumstances  of  financial  institutions,  as  reflected  in  their  levels  of  profitability  and  solvency,  that 
allows us to discuss more freely the risks and uncertainties they must face in the coming years. 
Financial  innovation  and  the  activity  of  new  market  agents  should  be  viewed  as  positive 
developments. The emergence in recent years of new products, such as credit derivatives and CDOs 
(collateralised  debt  obligations),  and  deeper  markets  for  other  more  traditional  products,  such  as 
asset-backed  securities,  have  provided  financial  market  agents  with  a  new  range  of  profit  and  risk 
possibilities,  allowed  more  dynamic  and  intensive  risk  management,  and  made  for  greater  diffusion 
and better diversification of risk. Similarly, the emergence of new operators, with investors prepared 
not only to assume new risks but particularly to do so over longer terms, has in recent years enabled 
shocks  to  be  absorbed  on  markets  with  a  lower  level  of  stress  and,  subsequently,  lower  volatility. 
Finally,  regulated  and  non-regulated  financial  institutions  alike,  by  increasingly  having  better  risk 
management  systems,  combined  with  supervisory  and  regulatory  models  based  not  on  coercive 
restrictions  but  on  providing  incentives  for  proper  risk  management,  contribute  clearly  to  market 
stability.  Unsurprisingly,  as  a  result  of  all  these  factors,  the  international  financial  system  has 
demonstrated  notable  stability  and  substantial  capacity  to  absorb  adverse  impacts  level-headedly, 
ensuring that the few episodes of overreaction have been very short-lived. 
However, these structural improvements should not mask the fragilities inherent in this new and more 
complex  environment.  The  improvements  based  on proper risk  management  and  diversification  are 
genuine ones. But they entail considerable management complexity and the growing involvement of 
agents  not  subject  to  prudential  supervisory  arrangements  who  do  not  yet  have  tried  and  tested 
experience in managing the risks assumed in more adverse economic environments. Moreover, their 
information on such risks is abundant, but not systematised, and is fragmentary and limited in depth. It 
is therefore likely that the risk of financial crises in the future will be less, but it is also possible that, if 
such crises emerge, they will do so with greater intensity than in the past. 
The improvements arising from new products and financial agents have enabled institutions to spread 
risks and dilute the impact that an upward revision of the risk premium might have on their balance 
sheets. But there is considerable uncertainty about the final destination of financial risk, since this is 
neither created nor destroyed, only transformed or diluted. The most desirable outcome would be for 
risk to end up at new institutions that can withstand negative returns in the short term without having to 
close out positions or cut back risk exposures. 
If ultimately it is pension funds that are going to retain the risk, concern should be voiced about the 
mismatch  between  increasingly  sophisticated  financial  markets  that  defuse  the  risk  in  an  optimal 
fashion and consumers whose financial knowledge has not evolved in step with market sophistication, 
and who remain rooted in a very elementary financial culture. 
6 
 BIS Review 67/2007
Spanish  credit  institutions,  with  a  traditional  business  model  based  on  long-term  relationships  with 
retail customers, are more sheltered from this complexity than other international banks that are more 
active on financial markets and have deeper interactions with the markets. But in a globalised world 
with complex interrelations, we can no longer think solely in national terms. And especially when our 
financial  system  finances  its  ordinary  activity  not  only  through  its  Spanish  customers  but  also  with 
funds raised on the European market. 
The growing integration of the single financial markets can now be seen in many facets. First, some 
market segments, of particular importance for Spanish institutions, already enjoy full integration, and 
talking of the Spanish environment in this connection is meaningless. The integration of the interbank 
markets, the public debt markets and the markets for subordinated debt and preference share issues 
is, quite simply, complete. In the market segments of high-volume business financing, and equities, 
the  degree  of  integration  in  the  recent  period  has  been  substantial.  And  in  other  markets,  such  as 
retail  banking,  a  lesser  degree  of  integration  is  compatible  with  growing  cross-border  competition 
through M&As or branches and subsidiaries. In addition to this there is the practical importance and 
potential  impact  that  European  regulations  emanating  from  Brussels  have  for  Spanish  institutions. 
Such  regulations  include  most  notably  the  IFRSs  (International  Financial  Reporting  Standards),  the 
new Capital Requirements Directive (the Basel II Directive) and the Markets in Financial Instruments 
Directive (MIFID). 
On the basis of all these elements, the conclusion is that the prudential supervisor of Spanish credit 
institutions  cannot  disregard  the  growing  practical  importance  of  the  European  environment,  which 
precludes thinking in strictly Spanish terms. This is so with regard to the diagnosis of institutions, to the 
risks they face in the medium and long run, and to the instruments they have to mitigate such risks. 
Traditionally, the Spanish supervisory model has been able to combine a demanding stance in respect 
of  institutions’  risks  with  incentives  for  best-practices  management.  This  has  positioned  Spanish 
institutions  among  the  most  efficient  and  profitable  in  the  world,  and  the  Spanish  economy  has 
benefited from a highly competitive financial system. In the coming years the challenge is successfully 
to transmit these values in the European context, but also to assimilate the best international – and 
specifically European – supervisory practices. We must allow our institutions to harness the benefits 
the single financial market can offer them. Accordingly, in overseeing our institutions, we should limit 
the inevitable cost all supervision entails, applying prudential policies that encourage appropriate risk 
management,  through  the  tempered  use  of  restrictive  or  coercive  measures  in  relation  to  banks’ 
activities, and through the use of more effective instruments for obtaining prudential information. 
The  second  consideration  on  the  European  market  is  the  need  for  all  European  supervisors  to 
redouble  their  efforts  as  regards  mutual  collaboration.  Indeed,  we  must  move  from  collaboration  to 
cooperation,  and  from  there  to  joint  action  and  mutual  trust,  if  we  wish  to  be  capable  of  properly 
supervising a European financial market with increasingly blurred national boundaries. 
It  should  also  be  acknowledged  that  the  build-up  over  time  of  new  European  financial  regulations, 
even  though  they  have  been  beneficial  to  European  financial  intermediaries  and  institutions,  has 
posed  an  organisational  challenge  to  institutions.  It  is  thus  not  surprising  that  they  have  called  on 
Brussels to contain the rate at which new regulations are promulgated.  
All European regulators and supervisors, including the European Commission, agree on the need for 
the thoroughgoing implementation of approved regulations. But we also agree on the advisability of 
avoiding new regulations in the coming years. The Banco de España has sought, as far as possible, to 
limit the attendant costs, whether through unifying accounting criteria for reporting to the market, for 
prudential purposes and for calculating tax bases, through the convergence of our criteria with those 
demanded  by  other  supervisors,  such  as  the  so-called  national  discretion  clauses  in  Basel  II,  or 
through  our  circulars,  i.e.  specific  regulations  that  provide  institutions  with  the  necessary  legal 
certainty. But new financial regulations cannot be dispensed with indefinitely, since it is quite possible 
that  the  very  dynamics  of  European  market  integration  will  entail  the  need  for  new  regulations  in 
specific fields. Indeed, new reforms may even prove appropriate for Spanish institutions. For example, 
the fragmentation of deposit guarantee arrangements in Europe, in terms of financing, structure and 
organisation,  might  warrant  a  new  Directive,  which  in  turn  would  level  the  playing  field,  given  the 
greater rigour of the Spanish system. 
I  would  not  wish  to  conclude  these  considerations  on  the  growing  importance  of  the  European 
component  of  our  financial  system  without  referring  in  particular  to  the  euro  area  financial  market. 
Indeed, financial integration is even greater for the European countries making up the euro area: their 
banking systems draw on a common pool for their funds, through bank loans, medium-term financing 
BIS Review 67/2007 
 7
(whether  subordinated  or  not),  securitisations  and  mortgage  covered  bonds.  The  existence  of  this 
integrated market for the euro area has allowed certain financial systems in the area to finance their 
economy’s upturn with the funds from other financial systems operating with less pronounced cycles. 
This  is  a  most  favourable  development  as  it  allows  financial  institutions  with  surplus  funds  to  earn 
more efficient and higher returns, thereby sustaining the profitability of their business, while providing 
demanders of funds with more stable financing for their most profitable lending business. Evidently, 
the  outcome  for  the  euro  area  economies  is  a  more  efficient  use  of  financial  resources,  which  are 
routed towards the most productive activities. 
Let  me  now analyse  in  greater  detail  the  situation of  Spanish  deposit  institutions.  As  earlier  stated, 
their banking activity grew notably in 2006 both as regards lending to corporations and to households. 
This  sizeable  increase  in  activity  is  one  of  the  reasons  behind  the  highly  favourable  earnings 
performance of Spanish institutions. However, if activity were to slow in the future, income statement 
margins  might  suffer.  In  that  case,  as  in  any  other  business,  but  all  the  more  so  in  an  industry  as 
competitive  as  Spanish  banking  is,  it  would  be  of  paramount  importance  to  have  flexible  cost 
structures capable of adapting to new scenarios. Indeed, once the property market has moved onto a 
more moderate path, institutions will not only be confronted with a volume challenge, but also one of 
type of business. Specifically, they will progressively have to limit the importance accounted for by the 
property sector in their lending portfolios in recent years, moving towards other activities. 
In the design of these strategies it is to be hoped that easy, short-termist decisions, but which have 
highly negative potential in the medium term, will not be adopted. Entities should not succumb to the 
temptation of offsetting the slowdown in demand with a decline in credit quality standards. 
Recently,  some  concern  was  detected  in  this  connection  in  the  US  mortgage  market,  especially  in 
relation to subprime lending to the least creditworthy segments of the population. Such lending in the 
United States is usually to borrowers with a poor credit history or with little documentation of income 
that makes it difficult to properly assess their creditworthiness. In Spain, if we identified as subprime 
those  operations  with  individuals  who  at  some  point  in  the  past  have  failed  to  meet  their  credit 
obligations,  the  amounts  extended  to  such  individuals  would  stand  at  around  1.27%  of  the  overall 
mortgage funds lent, compared with levels for the US subprime market of around 14% of mortgage 
loans. That is to say, if there were a business segment of this type, it would be very small. Bad debt 
ratios in the Spanish mortgage market stand at 0.4%, compared with 4% in the United States. The 
information available for Spain therefore precludes talking of a market of this type. 
Regarding bad debts, the aggregate ratio for the sector during 2006 was on a declining trend and, in 
any  event,  is  holding  at  minimum  levels,  whether  analysed  from  a  historical  perspective  or  in 
comparison with institutions in other euro area countries. In other words, this indicator of the credit risk 
borne by institutions is not currently showing signs of difficulties feeding through to the industry, and 
this despite the higher growth of doubtful assets over the course of 2006. This higher growth, however, 
must be analysed bearing in mind at least two considerations. First, the increase in doubtful assets is 
due in part to the strong growth in activity recorded in recent years. In an expansionary setting it is 
logical that, if the volume of credit increases, the volume of doubtful assets will afterwards increase 
with some delay even if default probabilities hold constant. Second, it should not be forgotten that the 
changes in accounting rules introduced by the Banco de España to adapt to International Financial 
Reporting Standards mean that doubtful assets must be recognised earlier and in a higher proportion. 
That said, and while acknowledging the low default levels in the Spanish banking system, it seems 
clear there is no further room for further reductions in the ratio. Looking ahead, against a background 
of slowing credit growth, these ratios will conceivably tend to rise, converging at levels that may be 
considered as more normal in such a setting, while similar to those prevailing among our European 
partners. Moreover, both past experience and the findings of various studies show that risk tends to 
emerge with some delay in relation to the time it is assumed. In any event, a rise in the doubtful assets 
ratio should not in itself be viewed as a cause for alarm; it should rather be understood as another of 
the various indicators needed to assess institutions’ financial capacity. 
Although deposits trended more favourably in 2006 than in previous years, institutions had to resort to 
securities issues, subordinated financing and asset securitisations to meet the growing demand from 
households and firms for funds. Going to international markets in search of funds may make Spanish 
institutions more sensitive to external difficulties while exerting additional pressure on their operating 
margins, although it is true that resort is mainly to the euro area markets. Indeed, the fact that Spain 
has  joined  this  area  of  stability  has  meant  that  our  institutions  have  been  able  to  finance  an 
expansionary process like the one we have experienced.  
8 
 BIS Review 67/2007
One  positive  aspect  is  that  institutions  are  raising  finance  especially  by  resorting  to  medium-term 
resources, which are more stable than those that might be obtained on the interbank market. Insofar 
as  the  secondary  markets  are  sufficiently  liquid,  subordinated  debt  or  preference  share  issues  can 
contribute to greater market discipline. Moreover, asset securitisations allow a portion of risks to be 
transferred towards other investors, thereby contributing to better risk management. 
Despite the challenges ahead for Spanish institutions, their resilience was heightened in 2006. Profits 
– the first line of defence against potential problems – not only increased notably but were also sound. 
This was reflected in the main income statement margins which, combined with moderate growth in 
operating expenses, contributed to the favourable dynamics of earnings last year. The return on equity 
increased  once  again,  maintaining,  as  earlier  indicated,  a  wide  spread  over  long-term  government 
bond  yields.  The  solvency  of  Spanish  institutions  held  stable  in  2006,  with  the  attendant  ratio 
comfortably  above  regulatory  requirements.  This  came  about,  moreover,  in  a  setting  in  which  the 
sharp growth of activity exerted upward pressure on capital requirements. 
Earnings in 2006 and solvency levels thus attested to the sound position of Spanish institutions. And 
this was further corroborated by the available market indicators, by the stress tests conducted during 
the IMF Financial Sector Assessment Programme (FSAP) and, subsequently, by the loss distribution 
method, which  shows  that,  even  in a  highly  unfavourable  scenario,  any  losses  generated  would  be 
amply covered by the capital in the system. 
I  should  not  wish  to  conclude  this  address  without  highlighting  the  need  to  further  efforts  in  the 
financial education of consumers. In early 2007 the Banco de España released a new version of the 
Bank Customer Portal, but much remains to be done. The growing complexity and sophistication of 
the  international  financial  system  is,  as  I  mentioned,  creating  a  “knowledge  gap”  between  financial 
institutions and final investors. And far from closing, the gap is widening. Supervisors, along with the 
other authorities involved in safeguarding consumer rights, must step up and, above all, combine their 
efforts in this field, since bank customers with a sound financial grounding are a vital pillar in a sound, 
competitive and stable financial system. 
It remains only for me to express my thanks, which it is a pleasure to do. During these first 11 months 
of  my  term  of  office  I  have  had  the  good  fortune  to  work  closely  with  this  Governing  Council,  the 
Executive Commission, the Deputy Governor and the Directors General, and to have received the firm 
support of the Bank’s staff. I thank you all and, after having celebrated the 150th anniversary of the 
adoption of the name Banco de España, I can bear witness to the fact this institution is performing 
increasingly better the tasks entrusted to it. 
BIS Review 67/2007 
 9
