David Dodge: Making global economic institutions work – what the world 
needs now 
Remarks  by  Mr  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Chicago  Council  on  Global 
Affairs, Chicago, 21 May 2007. 
 It is certainly an honour and a privilege to be able to address the Chicago Council on Global Affairs. 
For 85 years, the Council has promoted the idea that the United States should take a leading role in 
addressing global challenges. And it has done so consistently through the years, even during times 
when isolationism was more fashionable.  
Sixty years ago, just a few months after the Council celebrated its 25th anniversary, Secretary of State 
George Marshall delivered his famous commencement address at Harvard in which he outlined what 
would become known as the Marshall Plan. To those who asked why the United States should take 
such  a  pre-eminent  role  in  rebuilding  war-torn  Europe,  Marshall  said:  "It  is  logical  that  the  United 
States  should  do  whatever  it  is  able  to  do  to  assist  in  the  return  of  normal  economic  health  in  the 
world, without which there can be no political stability and no assured peace."1 That sentiment remains 
absolutely true today. 
But the Marshall Plan was not the only major event of 1947. That year also marked the opening of the 
United Nations Conference on Trade and Employment in Havana, Cuba – the first step in the creation 
of a rules-based multilateral trading system. It is fitting that we should mark the 60th anniversary of 
these events, not just to commemorate their happening, but to celebrate the economic progress that 
they  made  possible  –  progress  that  has  lifted  millions  of  people  out  of  poverty  and,  to  repeat 
Marshall's words, "without which there can be no political stability and no assured peace." 
The  postwar  reconstruction  of  Europe  and  the  development  of  a  rules-based  multilateral  trading 
system  came  a  couple  of  years  after  the  United  Nations  conference  at  Bretton  Woods,  New 
Hampshire  that  led  to  the  creation  of  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  and  the  World  Bank. 
These  institutions  were  joined  in  1948  by  the  Organisation  for  European  Economic  Co-operation 
(OEEC), which was formed to administer aid under the Marshall Plan. The OEEC eventually evolved 
into  the  Organisation  for  Economic  Co-operation  and  Development  (OECD),  which  has  been  an 
extremely useful venue where economic and financial authorities can gather and discuss how best to 
promote  strong  economies  through  liberalized  markets,  freer  trade,  and  sound  macroeconomic 
policies. 
These  institutions  provided  a  framework  that  helped  the  so-called  "first  world"  nations  establish  a 
market-based trade and financial order. And with this order in place, the economies of the first world 
nations – including the United States – thrived. In fact, they flourished so much that, over the years, a 
growing  number  of  countries  have  seen  the  desirability  of  becoming  part  of  this  increasingly  global 
order.  This  expansion,  which continues  today,  is  certainly  a  welcome  development.  It  holds  out  the 
prospect of spreading growth and prosperity to millions more. This process is also very much in our 
own interest in the United States and Canada, since it will allow us to develop larger markets, leading 
to  greater  innovation  and  efficiency,  along  with  increased  productivity  and  incomes.  Of  course,  it's 
important  to  recognize  that  this  process  implies  adjustments  for  our  own  economies  and  for  our 
citizens, and that these adjustments are often difficult and painful. But, in the end, there are always 
clear net gains to be realized from the expansion of trade. 
However,  today's  market-based,  global  trade  and  financial  order  faces  two  main  challenges.  In  my 
opinion, we need to deal with them with some urgency. First, there remain significant imbalances in 
global savings and investment, and all of us should be doing what we can to maximize the chances 
that  these  imbalances  can  be  unwound  in  a  smooth  and  gradual  way.  By  and  large,  this  means 
promoting  policies  that  allow  market-based  adjustments  to  take  place.  Second,  to  facilitate  market-
based adjustments, we need to strengthen the institutions that support the global trade and financial 
order.  So,  today,  I  will  talk  about  what  needs  to  be  done  to  help  facilitate  the  orderly  resolution  of 
                                                      
1   The Department of State Bulletin, XVI, No. 415 (15 June 1947) pp. 1159-1160. 
BIS Review 51/2007 
 1
global  imbalances  and,  in  particular,  discuss  what  needs  to  be  done  within  our  global  economic 
institutions to help in this effort. 
The risks posed by global imbalances 
Let  me  begin  by  talking  about  global  imbalances.  The  word  "global"  is  the  key  to  seeing  both  the 
nature of the problem and the path to its solution. There is no single cause of these imbalances. In 
China and many other Asian countries, we have seen very high levels of net savings. This is partly 
because, in the absence of social safety nets, households accumulate large amounts of precautionary 
savings. And it is partly because of the lack of a well-developed financial system that these savings 
are  not  being  allocated  efficiently.  As  well,  the  absence  of  market-based  mechanisms  within  these 
economies – including the lack of a flexible exchange rate – impedes domestic economic adjustment. 
In  addition  to  this,  we  have  seen  many  oil-exporting  countries  record  large  trade  surpluses,  as  the 
price of crude oil has risen. So, many Asian and oil-exporting countries are experiencing high levels of 
desired savings relative to desired investment. 
The U.S. economy is in the reverse situation. Over the past few years, the United States has become 
a large net borrower, as government deficits rose and household savings fell. As a result, we have 
seen  lower  desired  savings  relative  to  desired  investment  in  the  United  States.  In  the  future,  these 
global imbalances will have to be corrected through an increase of net savings in the United States 
and a reduction of net savings in Asia and in the oil-exporting countries. 
But, given the recent behaviour of international financial markets, and based on recent commentary, 
one might start to think that global imbalances are no longer something to be concerned about. And it 
is true that we are seeing some positive indicators. Domestic demand has picked up in Europe and 
Asia, and has slowed somewhat in the United States. Oil prices appear to have stabilized, and the 
U.S.  dollar  has  depreciated  on  a  trade-weighted  basis,  helping  to  encourage  U.S.  exports  and 
discourage imports. The U.S. current account deficit has shown signs of stabilizing. And China has 
taken some steps towards increasing household demand and building more market-based adjustment 
mechanisms. These steps include the introduction of some exchange rate flexibility, which can help 
increase China's real income and domestic demand. All of these developments are helpful in terms of 
resolving imbalances.  
However,  I  worry  that  it  is  far  too  early  to  start  discounting  the  threat  posed  by  the  persistence  of 
global  imbalances.  There  are  a  couple  of  risks  that  embody  this  threat.  One  is  the  risk  of  rising 
protectionism. We have already seen troubling signs. Some lawmakers are proposing tariffs or quotas 
on  imports  from  some  Asian  countries  in  response  to  the  perception  that  these  countries  are 
manipulating their exchange rates. The other risk is that financial markets could lose confidence that 
policy-makers  worldwide  will  continue  to  take  appropriate  actions.  Such  a  loss  of  confidence  could 
lead to a sharp swing in market sentiment and an abrupt, and costly, resolution of imbalances.  
So how can we best encourage an orderly resolution of imbalances? The first point to be made is that 
a  global  problem  requires  a  global  solution.  Those  who  point  the  finger  only  at  the  United  States, 
calling only for a reversal of its fiscal and current account deficits, are missing the point, as are those 
who say that the problem would go away if China would just let its currency appreciate more rapidly. 
The  world  as  a  whole  is  a  closed economy.  This means  that  large  swings  in  demand  in one  place 
need to be offset by compensating swings in other places. So, if the United States were to dramatically 
increase its net savings to suddenly wipe out its fiscal and current account deficits, the global economy 
would likely head rapidly into recession unless other economies took immediate steps to reduce their 
net savings by increasing their domestic demand.  
The other point to make is that the key to a smooth and orderly resolution of imbalances lies in letting 
market-based  adjustment  mechanisms  work.  After  all,  savings-investment  imbalances  occur  all  the 
time between regions in a single country, such as Canada or the United States. But these imbalances 
don't tend to cause problems, because market mechanisms help to resolve them. Relative wages and 
prices  change,  as  do  relative  returns  on  capital.  And  labour  moves  within  a  country  to  promote  an 
orderly adjustment process. 
Over  time,  authorities  in many  countries  have come  to  understand  that  they  need  to  make  market-
based  adjustment  mechanisms  work.  Their  role  in  promoting  market-based  adjustments  is  to 
implement a coherent framework of macroeconomic policies, supported by a safe and sound financial 
system. From a central banker's point of view, our best contribution to this effort is to deliver monetary 
2 
 BIS Review 51/2007
policy focused on providing low and stable inflation, supported by a floating exchange rate. Given the 
consensus on this point in terms of domestic economies, it seems clear to me that we can promote a 
smooth resolution of imbalances by removing impediments to market-based adjustments in the global 
economy. And this is where our global economic institutions come in.  
Making global institutions work 
I spoke earlier about the birth of the Bretton Woods institutions following World War II. The success of 
the Bretton Woods conference was due in no small part to the commitment shown by the American 
delegation  and  Harry  Dexter  White.  Along  with  the  leader  of  the  British  delegation,  John  Maynard 
Keynes,  White  was  instrumental  in  setting  out  the  original  goals  of  the  IMF.  Under  the  Articles  of 
Agreement, the Fund is charged with promoting international monetary co-operation by providing the 
machinery for consultation and collaboration on international monetary problems, and is tasked with 
facilitating the expansion and balanced growth of international trade. In short, the Fund was designed 
to  be  an  institution  where  national  authorities  could  work  out  the  "rules  of  the  game"  for  the 
international economy. 
Thanks  in  part  to  this  U.S.  leadership,  the  world  thus  had  an  institution  dedicated  to  promoting  a 
market-based  international  financial  order  and  to  avoiding  the  protectionist,  "beggar-thy-neighbour" 
policies that so hobbled the world economy in the 1930s. Delegates at Bretton Woods were ultimately 
able to see how their own country's interest was clearly wrapped up in a collective interest. Treasury 
Secretary Henry Morgenthau referred to the conference as the end of economic nationalism.  
While the world and its economy have undergone revolutionary change in the past 60 years, we still 
need institutions where authorities from the key nations in the global economy can work out the rules 
of the game for economic policies. At Bretton Woods, it sufficed to have the allied nations around the 
table.  But  today,  there  are  a  number  of  different  players  who  need  to  be  present  if  we  are  to 
successfully remove impediments to market-based adjustments in the global economy. We need to 
make  sure  that  these  new  players  are  at  the  table.  But  at  the  same  time,  we  very  much  need  the 
United States to show the same leadership that it did at Bretton Woods 60 years ago. 
Where should we concentrate our efforts? I mentioned the OECD at the beginning of my remarks. This 
institution has been enormously helpful over the years. Indeed, I can recall attending OECD meetings 
in the 1970s and 1980s, when national authorities developed a consensus on the policies that would 
provide the strongest base for sustainable economic growth. These included monetary policy directed 
at  keeping  inflation  low  and  stable,  a  disciplined  fiscal  policy,  structural  policies  that  encourage 
economic flexibility, and a framework for trade liberalization. 
But while the OECD continues to provide excellent analysis, particularly in terms of structural policies, 
it  is  not  yet  a  truly  global  table.  Indeed,  there  are  only  two  economic  tables  with  a  fully  global 
representation: the World Trade Organization (WTO) to deal with trade issues, and the IMF to deal 
with macroeconomic and financial stability issues.  
My  comments  on  the  WTO  will  be  very  brief.  I  mentioned  increased  protectionism  as  a  key  risk 
stemming from the persistence of global imbalances. This risk is heightened by the lack of progress at 
the Doha round of trade talks. It is essential for all countries to see the common interest in reducing 
trade barriers, and to work multilaterally through the WTO to accomplish this. Large emerging-market 
economies  need  to  play  their  part.  But  so  does  the  G-7.  This  means  we  need  to  be  willing  to  talk 
seriously about agricultural issues. I know that, politically, this is a hard sell here in the heartland of 
America, as it is in many parts of Canada. But the global economy needs leadership in order to restart 
these talks, bring them to a successful conclusion, and reduce the threat of protectionism. 
Let me now turn to the IMF. It has become quite common these days to question the relevance of this 
institution.  Some  people  say  that  the  IMF  should  be  scrapped,  because  countries  now  have  ready 
access to private capital flows in global markets and no longer need to borrow from the Fund. Indeed, 
those countries that have IMF loans are scrambling to repay them as quickly as possible.  
But this viewpoint ignores the Fund's original mandate to promote international monetary co-operation 
by providing the machinery for consultation and collaboration on international monetary problems. The 
question  then  becomes,  How  can  the  IMF  best  fulfill  this  role  today?  I  would  argue  that,  given  the 
Fund's structure, its worldwide perspective, and its considerable expertise, there are important ways 
for the Fund to do this. It can improve its surveillance function and, in doing so, it can more effectively 
engage the national authorities of all countries. 
BIS Review 51/2007 
 3
What do I mean by "improving surveillance?" To answer that question, it's best to have some context. 
In earlier decades, the Fund would have a dialogue with individual member countries about whether 
that  country was  following  policies  consistent  with  a  fixed  exchange  rate  regime  and,  under  certain 
circumstances,  the  appropriateness  of  the  fixed  rate  itself.  But  following  the collapse  of  the  Bretton 
Woods  system  in  the  early  1970s,  surveillance  naturally  moved  away  from  a  narrow  focus  on 
exchange  rates.  For  countries  that  were  borrowers  –  or  potential  borrowers  –  from  the  Fund, 
discussion focused mainly on the conditions that a country would need to meet in order to access IMF 
funding.  It  certainly  had  little  to  do  with  the  policies  needed  to  enhance  stability  and  to  facilitate 
domestic and global adjustment.  
It  is  clear  that  today  there  is  a  need  to  refocus  surveillance  on  policies  that  enhance  domestic 
economic stability, and thereby, support global stability. Surveillance should be confined to a country's 
exchange rate, monetary, fiscal, and financial policies, and to the question of whether or not the policy 
choices  are  coherent,  and  thus  consistent  with  maintaining  external  stability.  If  these  policies  are 
inappropriate, or not coherent, they can damage not only one's own domestic economy, but they can 
also have spillover effects abroad. 
When  Keynes  talked  about  the  IMF,  he  sometimes  said  that  it  should  engage  in  "ruthless  truth 
telling."2 Indeed, the Fund's surveillance activities must be applied with an even hand and must deal 
objectively, accurately, and honestly with the key macroeconomic policies of all countries. Of course, it 
isn't always easy to be on the receiving end of this surveillance. I know, because I was one of the 
national authorities back in the 1990s who heard IMF criticism directed his way. At that time, we in 
Canada did not enjoy hearing the truth about our deteriorating fiscal situation, but the criticism did help 
to  provide  the  impetus  for  us  to  take  some  tough  decisions.  All  countries  should  be  subject  to  this 
ruthless  truth  telling,  and  we  in  the  G-7  must  show  leadership  by  demonstrating  our  willingness  to 
listen to the truth about ourselves. 
In  conducting  surveillance,  there  is  a  complication  that  must  be  kept  in  mind.  The  goal  must  be  to 
promote  the  sound  policies  that  I  mentioned  earlier,  so  that  market-based  adjustments  are  not 
impeded. But some of the key emerging-market economies that are systemically important do not yet 
have sound financial systems in place to handle some of these necessary policies. Here, I am talking 
about policies such as full capital account liberalization or completely flexible exchange rate regimes. 
Let me be clear: it is crucial that these countries put in place sound financial systems as quickly as 
possible, so that they can move to adopt a coherent policy framework. But, to the extent that countries 
are making substantial progress, and are committed to further progress as rapidly as possible, those 
of us with well-developed financial markets will have to have some tolerance while these transitions 
are occurring. 
The final point that I will make about surveillance may well be the most important. The Fund must step 
up its efforts to extend surveillance beyond bilateral discussions. Because of its global perspective, the 
Fund  is  the  natural  institution  for  conducting  multilateral  surveillance  on  issues  that  threaten  global 
financial stability, and where responsibility for action is shared among many countries. It is the natural 
institution where national authorities can work with expert staff to assess spillover effects of domestic 
policies. And it would be tremendously helpful to the global economy if the Fund were to return to its 
original  role  of  serving  as  a  table  for  discussion.  It  is  very  important  that  the  national  authorities 
responsible for the implementation of macroeconomic and financial policies talk to each other around 
a  table  where  all  systemically  important  economies  are  represented.  Along  with  strengthening  its 
surveillance function, having the Fund serve as a global table is the other important way that it can 
fulfill  its  original  mandate  of  supporting  the  global  economy  and  promoting  international  financial 
stability.  
Of course, there's more to IMF reform than improving surveillance and increasing the engagement of 
national authorities. Systemically important emerging-market economies will need a greater voice at 
the  table  over  time.  This  is  important  for  the  Fund's  legitimacy.  And  it  is  absolutely  essential  that 
improvements be made in the governance structure of the Fund, that the role of the Executive Board 
be re-examined, and that the accountability of the Managing Director and Fund staff to the Governors 
of the Fund be strengthened. But those issues could serve as topics for another entire speech.  
                                                      
2   Quoted by M. King, "Reform of the International Monetary Fund." Speech to Indian Council for Research on International 
Economic Relations, New Delhi, India (20 February 2006). 
4 
 BIS Review 51/2007
Conclusion 
There will be some who will conclude that I am wildly optimistic to think that there is any potential for 
success in either the multilateral trade talks or in substantially transforming the IMF. But what better 
place  for  optimism  than  Chicago,  where  crowds  have  packed  Wrigley  Field,  season  after  season, 
waiting almost a century for the Cubs to win the World Series again? 
The owners of the Cubs invested a lot of money this past winter, trying to fulfill the optimists' vision of 
a  World  Series.  But  the  vision  I  outlined  today  doesn't  need  money.  What  it  needs  is  leadership; 
leadership from all of us in the G-7 and, in particular, from the country whose efforts 60 years ago 
helped to establish the global economy that we know today. It is imperative to drive for a multilateral 
trade  deal,  through  the  WTO,  to  counter  the  protectionist  threat;  and  to  promote  a  multilateral 
approach, through the IMF, to resolve global imbalances. An IMF that is strengthened along the lines 
that I spoke of today would be enormously helpful in this regard. 
I  am  grateful  for  the  opportunity  to  present  these  ideas  to  you  today;  ideas  that  should  fit  with  the 
Chicago Council's philosophy. By keeping a common goal in mind, we can remove the impediments to 
market-based adjustments and be successful in our efforts to defuse the danger of global imbalances. 
In so doing, we can continue to promote the market-based, global trade and financial order necessary 
for  continued  global  economic  growth,  for  our  continuing  prosperity,  and  for  the  world  stability  that 
Marshall spoke of 60 years ago. 
BIS Review 51/2007 
 5
