Randall S Kroszner: The role of federal banking agencies in strengthening 
federal financial consumer protection 
Testimony of Mr Randall S Kroszner, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve 
System, before the Committee on Financial Services, US House of Representatives, Washington DC, 
13 June 2007. 
The  original  speech,  which  contains  various  links  to  the  documents  mentioned,  can  be  found  on  the  US  Federal  Reserve 
System’s website.  
 Chairman  Frank,  Ranking  Member  Bachus,  and  members  of  the  Committee,  I  appreciate  the 
opportunity to appear today to discuss the Federal Reserve Board's role in protecting consumers in 
financial services transactions. 
Introduction 
An  important  part  of  the  Federal  Reserve's  statutory  mandate  is  promoting  the  availability  of  credit 
throughout the banking system. In the case of consumer credit, equally important with promoting its 
availability  is  the  Federal  Reserve's  responsibility  for  implementing  the  laws  designed  to  protect 
consumers  in  financial  services  transactions.  Many  of  these  laws  are  based  on  ensuring  that 
consumers receive adequate information in the form of disclosures about the features and risks of a 
particular product. 
Information  is  critical  to  the  effective  functioning  of  markets.  A  core  principle  of  economics  is  that 
markets are more competitive, and therefore more efficient, when accurate information is available to 
both consumers and suppliers. When information on alternatives is readily available, product offerings 
have to meet customers' demands and offering prices have to reflect those of market competitors. If 
consumers  are  well  informed,  they  are  in  a  better  position  to  make  decisions  that  are  in  their  best 
interest. Information helps and empowers individual consumers by improving their ability to compare 
products and to choose those that will help them meet their personal goals. 
With  the  aid  of  technological  advances,  financial  institutions  have  been  able  to  offer  innovative 
products  that  are  increasingly  diverse  but  also  increasingly  complex.  While  this  has  expanded 
consumers' access to credit and their options, it also presents a challenge in ensuring that consumer 
disclosures about these more complex products are effective. To be effective, disclosures must give 
consumers information at a time when it is relevant, and in language they can easily understand. The 
information must also be in a format that allows consumers to identify and use the information that is 
most important to them. In a nutshell, because effective disclosure gives consumers information they 
notice, understand, and can use, it empowers consumers and enhances competition. 
The Board is committed to developing more effective disclosures, but even well-designed disclosures 
can  only  be  useful  if  they  can  be  understood  by  consumers  who  have  the  necessary  financial 
knowledge. Accordingly, we must promote financial education, and having been an educator for many 
years, I am very pleased that the Board is actively involved in this area. 
The  Board  is  keenly  aware,  however,  that  disclosures  and  financial  education  may  not  always  be 
sufficient to combat abusive practices. Indeed, the consumer financial services laws implemented by 
the  Board  contain  a  number  of  substantive  protections,  reflecting  carefully  considered  legislative 
judgments  that  certain  practices  should  be  restricted  or  prohibited.  The  Board  also  has  the 
responsibility to prohibit other practices by issuing rules, for example, if the Board finds they meet the 
legal standard for "unfair or deceptive" practices under the Federal Trade Commission Act (FTC Act) 
or  the  Home  Ownership  and  Equity  Protection  Act  (HOEPA).  We  must  be  mindful,  however,  of 
unintended consequences. 
Crafting  effective  rules  under  the  "unfair  or  deceptive"  standard  presents  significant  challenges. 
Whether a practice is unfair or deceptive depends heavily on the particular facts and circumstances. 
To  be  effective,  rules  must  have  broad  enough  coverage  to  encompass  a  wide  variety  of 
circumstances  so  they  are  not  easily  circumvented.  At  the  same  time,  rules  with  broad  prohibitions 
could  limit  consumers'  financing  options  in  legitimate  cases  that  do  not  meet  the  required  legal 
standard. 
BIS Review 65/2007 
 1
This  has  led  the  Federal  Reserve  to  focus  primarily  on  addressing  potentially  unfair  or  deceptive 
practices  by  using  its  supervisory  powers  on  a  case-by-case  basis  rather  than  through  rulemaking. 
The FTC, which has authority to prohibit unfair or deceptive practices for financial services firms that 
are  not  depository  institutions,  has  taken  a  similar  approach.  Because  the  prohibition  on  unfair  or 
deceptive acts or practices applies to all depository institutions as a matter of law, the banking and 
thrift agencies can and do enforce this prohibition using their supervisory enforcement powers. 
The Board also addresses concerns about some practices under other statutes, such as the Truth in 
Lending Act (TILA) or Truth in Savings Act (TISA). For example, the Board used its HOEPA authority 
to  address  the  "flipping"  of  high-cost  mortgage  loans.  Under  TILA,  we  recently  proposed  a  rule 
prohibiting credit card issuers' from describing their rates as "fixed" unless they specify a period where 
the  rate  is  not  subject  to  change  for  any  reason.  The  Board  also  revised  its  TISA  rules  to  address 
concerns  about  overdraft  protection  programs.  The  Board  is  committed  to  addressing  abusive 
practices and will consider how it might use its authority to prohibit specific practices consistent with 
the legal standards in appropriate cases, such as when there are widespread abuses that cannot be 
effectively addressed through case-by-case determinations in the supervisory process. 
The Board’s role in protecting consumers 
In carrying out its mandate related to consumer protection in financial services, the Federal Reserve 
has  several  roles  that  are  carried  out  through  four  complementary  processes.  First,  there  is  the 
Board's  role  as  rulewriter,  in  which  we  issue  regulations,  either  alone  or  jointly  with  other  federal 
agencies,  to  implement  the  consumer  financial  services  and  fair  lending  laws.  Second,  there  is  the 
Federal  Reserve's  role  in  examining  the  financial  institutions  that  we  supervise  for  safety  and 
soundness, as well as for compliance with consumer protection laws and regulations. This includes 
taking supervisory action for the institutions under our jurisdiction, as appropriate, to enforce the laws 
and  resolve  any  consumer  complaints.  Third,  the  Federal  Reserve  actively  promotes  consumer 
education  through  its  publications  and  through  a  variety  of  partnerships  with  other  organizations. 
Finally, the Federal Reserve's Community Affairs Program supports the Board's objective of promoting 
community  development  and  fair  and  impartial  access  to  credit  by  conducting  outreach  activities  in 
lower-income communities and traditionally underserved markets. Today, I would like to discuss each 
of these four roles and some significant actions that the Board has taken in these areas. I will also 
highlight  how  the  Board  is  coordinating  its  efforts  with  the  other  federal  and  state  supervisory 
agencies. 
The Board’s rulewriting responsibilities 
The  Board  has  sole  responsibility  for  issuing  rules  to  implement  a  number  of  consumer  financial 
services  and  fair  lending  laws,  including  TILA,  TISA,  the  Electronic  Fund  Transfer  Act  (EFTA), 
Consumer  Leasing  Act,  Equal  Credit  Opportunity  Act  (ECOA),  and  Home  Mortgage  Disclosure  Act 
(HMDA). In conducting these rulemakings, the Board reviews public comment letters and solicits the 
views of other federal and state regulators who have valuable insights based on their own experience 
and expertise in supervising financial institutions and protecting consumers. We often obtain the views 
of other agencies on Board rulemakings through informal outreach efforts, but sometimes we receive 
written comment letters, as was the case with the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency's (OCC) 
recent recommendations for revised credit card disclosures. We receive the views of state agencies 
through  such  organizations  as  the  Conference  of  State  Bank  Supervisors  (CSBS),  the  American 
Association of Residential Mortgage Regulators (AARMR), and the National Association of Attorneys 
General (NAAG), as well as from individual state regulatory agencies. 
In  addition  to  the  statutes  for  which  the  Board  has  exclusive  rulewriting  responsibility,  the  Board 
shares  rulewriting  responsibility  with  other  agencies  under  certain  laws,  such  as  the  Community 
Reinvestment Act (CRA) and the Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA). Moreover, the Board and other 
federal  financial  regulators  sometimes  play  a  consulting  role  in  the  development  of  consumer 
regulations  issued  by  other  agencies such  as  the Department  of  Housing and  Urban Development, 
and the FTC. For example, most recently, the Board has consulted with the Department of Defense 
(DOD),  as  Congress  directed  with  respect  to  DOD's  development  of  regulations  governing  loans  to 
members of the armed services and their families. 
In  addition  to  its  rulemakings  to  implement  statutory  changes,  the  Board  updates  its  regulations  in 
response to the changing marketplace and emerging issues. As markets change and products evolve, 
2 
 BIS Review 65/2007
questions arise about how existing rules apply in new circumstances. We often address these matters 
with amendments that specifically target a particular issue, or by updating the interpretations published 
in  the  commentaries  to  our  regulations.  That  was  the  case  with  the  Board's  recent  revisions  to  the 
rules governing electronic fund transfers, which addressed electronic check conversions and payroll 
card  accounts.  It  was  also  the  case  with  our  recent  amendments  to  the  TISA  rules  addressing 
overdraft protection programs. 
As a matter of policy, the Board periodically conducts a comprehensive review of each regulation. For 
the consumer financial services laws, one goal of our regulatory reviews is to develop more effective 
consumer disclosures. Writing regulations always involves the challenge of crafting rules that are, on 
the  one  hand,  clear  and  specific  enough  to  facilitate  compliance  and  promote  consistency  among 
financial institutions but, on the other hand, flexible enough to accommodate market developments as 
products and pricing continue to change. We also consider ways to eliminate unnecessary burdens 
consistent with consumer protection. By balancing these interests we seek to avoid imposing undue 
regulatory burdens that could hinder innovation and raise costs without producing offsetting benefits in 
consumer protection. 
Over the last several years, the Board has completed several regulatory reviews. The Board reviewed 
the  regulations  implementing  HOEPA  and  issued  revised  rules  in  2001.  The  Board's  review  of  the 
rules implementing HMDA was completed in 2002, resulting in expanded data collection and reporting 
requirements,  and  the  Board  completed  a  review  of  the  rules  implementing  ECOA  in  2003.  Most 
recently,  the  Board  initiated  a  review  of  the  TILA  rules,  which  are  implemented  in  the  Board's 
Regulation Z. The initial phase of the Board's review of Regulation Z focused on credit cards and other 
revolving  credit  accounts.  Last  month,  the  Board  issued  a  proposal  for  public  comment  that  would 
substantially revise the rules governing credit cards and improve credit card disclosures. Our review of 
the Regulation Z rules for mortgage transactions is now under way as well. 
The Board’s efforts to improve the effectiveness of credit disclosures 
The  Board  has  recently  undertaken  an  innovative  approach  to  improve  the  effectiveness  of  credit 
disclosures – namely, using consumer surveys and testing to assess consumers' needs and develop 
our regulatory proposal. Having taught at the University of Chicago's business school for many years, I 
am well aware of the types of consumer testing that firms have long employed: surveys, focus groups, 
and so-called "mall intercepts" in which shoppers are interviewed at random. However, it is relatively 
novel  to  systematically  use  such  techniques  to  develop  regulatory  proposals  to  improve  the 
effectiveness of disclosures requirements. 
Consumer  testing  can  help  the  Federal  Reserve  address  the  considerable  challenge  of  making 
disclosures  more  effective  by  providing  insight  into  consumers'  understanding  of  financial  products 
and  their  decision-making  process.  Given  the  complexity  of  certain  products,  such  as  credit  card 
products with multiple features and nontraditional mortgages, we have to be mindful of the pitfalls of 
information overload. We must seek to carry out the responsibilities Congress has given us to design 
disclosures that are not only accurate, but also clear and simple enough that they are meaningful and 
useful  to  consumers.  Pages  of  fine  print  that  provide  comprehensive  descriptions  might  satisfy 
lawyers, but the legalese needs to be translated into something consumers can use. 
This requires the Board to make judgments about which credit terms are most important to highlight 
and which could be eliminated. We plan to make these judgments with the benefit of surveys of actual 
consumers  and  extensive  consumer  testing.  We  recently  completed  several  rounds  of  consumer 
testing for credit card disclosures, and that testing was critical to our effort to redesign and, I believe, 
dramatically improve those disclosures in the proposed regulations recently published for comment. 
The substantial investment we have made in developing and testing revised credit card disclosures 
has given us insights that will contribute to our ability to make mortgage disclosures more effective. 
We  are  finding  that  it  is  tremendously  beneficial  to  listen  to  consumers  so  that  we  can  learn  more 
about  how  they  use  information  and  how  we  can  simplify  disclosures  and  enhance  consumers' 
understanding.  Through  our  testing,  we  learned  firsthand  what  information  consumers  find  useful 
when making credit decisions and what information they ignore. Second, we learned what information 
consumers  comprehend  and  what  information  they  do  not.  Third,  we  saw  the  impact  that  different 
formats and presentation can have on consumers' ability to notice and use the information. 
The Board's proposal for credit card accounts would revise the format and content of various credit 
card disclosures to make them more meaningful and easier to read, and to highlight the various costs. 
BIS Review 65/2007 
 3
The disclosure table accompanying credit card applications and solicitations would highlight fees and 
the reasons penalty rates might be applied, such as for paying late. Creditors would be required to use 
the same type of disclosure table to summarize key terms at account opening and when the account 
terms  change.  In  addition,  format  changes  to  periodic  statements  –  such  as  grouping  fees,  interest 
charges, and transactions together – would make them more understandable. As I noted earlier, card 
issuers  would  be  prohibited  from  describing  their  rates  as  "fixed"  unless  they  specify  a  time  period 
where the rate cannot be changed for any reason, or if the rate is fixed for the life of the program. 
The  proposal  to  revise  the  credit  card  rules  would  also  expand  the  circumstances  under  which 
consumers receive advance notice of changes in their account terms, including advance notice before 
a penalty rate is applied. Creditors would be required to send notice of a rate increase or other change 
in terms forty-five days before the change becomes effective, instead of the current fifteen days. The 
proposal would also revise the rules governing the advertising of open-end credit to help consumers 
better understand the credit terms being offered. 
As I mentioned earlier, the Board plans to conduct extensive consumer testing as part of its review of 
mortgage  disclosures.  Like  credit  cards,  mortgage  products  have  become  more  diverse  and  more 
complex. In some cases, creditors are using pricing strategies similar to those used for credit cards, 
for example, offering customers discounted introductory rates that will be replaced in a short time by a 
much  higher  rate,  often  a  variable  rate.  Of  course,  there  is  an  inherent  difficulty  in  adjustable  rate 
mortgage (ARM) disclosures because future interest rate changes are not known. Consumer testing is 
needed  to  determine  whether,  for  example,  consumers  would  find  disclosure  of  the  "worst-case" 
payment useful given that such a payment might never occur or might not occur for several years or 
more, by which time the consumer's own financial circumstances may have changed. 
The wider marketing of payment-option mortgages presents another challenge. Consumers have the 
choice  of  making  low  minimum  monthly  payments  that  increase  the  overall  cost  of  the  credit  and 
ultimately  lead  to  higher  payments.  Just  as  with  credit  cards,  however,  disclosing  a  consumer's 
repayment obligation and the cost of the credit is more complex when there are unknowns – such as 
the future rate if it may vary based on an index, the amount of the consumer's monthly payment, and 
the possibility of negative amortization. When the Board reviews mortgage disclosures, it will consider 
these developments and conduct extensive consumer testing to determine how the features and risks 
of today's mortgage products can be communicated effectively. 
The Board has already taken some initial steps in its review of mortgage disclosures. Last summer, 
the Board held a series of four public hearings on home-equity lending, where we gathered views on 
the impact of federal and state predatory lending laws and on the adequacy of mortgage disclosures, 
particularly those concerning nontraditional mortgage products. Following those hearings, the Board 
revised the consumer handbook that creditors are required to provide with applications for all ARMs. 
The revised handbook gives consumers a better explanation of the features and risks of nontraditional 
ARMs, especially "payment shock" and the risk of increasing loan balances, also known as "negative 
amortization." 
The  recent  problems  in  the  subprime  mortgage  market  have  prompted  the  Board  to  hold  a  fifth 
hearing, which I will chair tomorrow, here in Washington, D.C. The purpose of the hearing is to gather 
information to evaluate how the Federal Reserve might use its rulemaking authority to curb abusive 
lending  practices  in  the  subprime  mortgage  market  in  a  way  that  also  preserves  incentives  for 
responsible  lenders.  Specifically,  hearing  participants  will  discuss  concerns  about  prepayment 
penalties,  escrows  for  taxes  and  insurance,  "stated-income"  loans,  and  lenders'  standards  for 
determining  that  consumers  can  afford  to  make  the  scheduled  payments.  Some  of  these  concerns 
may  call  for more effective  disclosures.  However, we  will  also seriously  consider whether  there  are 
mortgage lending practices that should be prohibited under HOEPA. 
We  must  be  careful,  however,  not  to  curtail  responsible  subprime  lending  or  beneficial  financing 
options for consumers. A robust and responsible subprime mortgage market benefits consumers by 
allowing  borrowers  with  non-prime  or  limited  credit  histories  to  become  homeowners,  access  the 
equity in their homes, or have the flexibility to refinance their loans as needed. Under HOEPA, lenders 
are subject not only to regulatory enforcement actions but also to private lawsuits to redress violations. 
Thus,  any  rules  should  be  drawn  sharply  with  bright  lines  to  avoid  creating  legal  and  regulatory 
uncertainty,  which  could  have  the  unintended  effect  of  substantially  reducing  consumers  access  to 
legitimate credit options. 
4 
 BIS Review 65/2007
Supervisory activities 
Examination and enforcement 
The  Board  has  responsibility  for  enforcing  compliance  by  state-member  banks  and  certain  foreign 
banking  organizations  with  consumer  financial  services  laws,  the  fair  lending  laws,  and  the  CRA. 
Because  of  the  complexity  of  consumer  regulatory  requirements,  the  Board  has  had  a  specialized 
consumer  examination  program  since  the  late  1970s.  The  Federal  Reserve  System  has  a  trained 
cadre of examiners dedicated solely to this function. 
The scope of the consumer compliance examination program has evolved and grown significantly over 
the years. In 1977, the program covered just nine federal consumer protection laws and regulations. 
Today the program covers compliance with more than twenty federal laws related to deposits, credit, 
and the privacy of consumers' financial information. Consumer compliance examinations assess the 
bank's compliance with ECOA, HMDA, TILA, TISA, RESPA, the EFTA, FCRA, and CRA, section 5 of 
the FTC Act, and other federal consumer protection laws. 
Examinations and other supervisory activities conducted as part of the Board's consumer compliance 
program  follow  a  risk-focused  approach  and  are  tailored  to  fit  the  risk  profile  of  the  bank.  This 
approach ensures that supervisory resources are directed to the products, services, and areas of the 
bank's  operations  that  pose  the  greatest  risk  to  consumers.  In  addition  to  assessing an  institution's 
compliance with particular laws and its performance under the CRA, examinations evaluate a bank's 
processes for identifying, measuring, monitoring, and controlling its risk exposure. 
Examiners  routinely  analyze  consumer  complaints  submitted  to  the  Federal  Reserve  regarding  the 
bank being examined, looking for any trends, issues, or areas of possible risk. The examiners also 
analyze  any  consumer  complaints  received  directly  by  the  bank.  The  results  of  this  analysis  are 
factored into examiners' decisions regarding the scope of the compliance examination. We view this 
analysis of consumer complaint activity as an integral component of the examination scoping process. 
Moreover,  consumer  complaints  can  serve  as  an  early  warning  signal  about  emerging  or  potential 
compliance problems or new industry practices. 
The  frequency  of  examinations  is  a  function  of  an  institution's  size  and  prior  supervisory  ratings. 
Institutions with less than satisfactory compliance or CRA ratings, regardless of their size, are typically 
examined every twelve months. Institutions with assets greater than $250 million and satisfactory or 
better  ratings  are  examined  every  twenty-four  months.  Small  banks  (those  with  assets  of  less  than 
$250 million) with satisfactory or better ratings are typically examined every forty-eight to sixty months. 
The Federal Reserve Banks also monitor institutions between examinations looking for indicators that 
could  have  implications  for  their  compliance  efforts  and  bear  on  the  need  for  more  frequent 
supervisory intervention. For example, we analyze consumer complaints and consider any changes in 
supervisory ratings, financial condition, corporate structure, or the institutions' management. 
Where  Federal  Reserve  examiners  observe  weaknesses  or  compliance  failures  by  supervised 
institutions,  examiners  document  them  in  a  report  to  bank  management.  The  required  corrective 
actions  are  stated  in  the  examination  report.  We  find  that  in  the  overwhelming  majority  of  cases, 
management voluntarily addresses any violations or weaknesses that we have identified without the 
need for formal enforcement actions. In those rare instances where the bank is not willing to address 
the  problem,  we  have  a  full  range  of  enforcement  tools  at  our  disposal  and  use  them  to  compel 
appropriate corrective action. 
We  also  recognize  that  cooperation  and  coordination  among  the  financial  institution  supervisory 
agencies are essential to ensuring consistent and effective supervision. Financial institution regulators 
share  information  and  coordinate  activities,  such  as  the  development  of  uniform  examination 
procedures and policies, through the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC) and 
other  channels.  Recently,  the  CSBS  joined  the  FFIEC,  but  we  have,  for  many  years,  coordinated 
supervisory efforts through the CSBS State and Federal Working Group. 
Enforcing the prohibition against unfair or deceptive practices 
This  Committee  has  specifically  asked  the  agencies  to  discuss  their  ability  to  pursue  unfair  or 
deceptive practices by depository institutions. The prohibition on unfair or deceptive acts or practices 
in section 5 of the FTC Act applies to all banks, thrifts, and credit unions as a matter of law, and may 
be enforced by each of the federal banking agencies using their supervisory powers under the Federal 
BIS Review 65/2007 
 5
Deposit Insurance Act. This authority is independent from, and in addition to, the banking agencies' 
authority to enforce any specific regulations the Board may promulgate.1 The Board, the OCC, and the 
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) have all issued written guidance confirming this view of 
the agencies' broad authority to enforce the FTC Act. In fact, the Board, OCC, and FDIC have each 
exercised their supervisory authority in recent years to address the activities of particular banks that 
the agencies deemed unfair or deceptive. 
The  lack  of  rules  under  the  FTC  Act  does  not  appear  to  be  an  impediment  to  the  agencies' 
enforcement  efforts  because  a finding of  unfairness  or  deception  depends  heavily  on  the  facts  and 
circumstances,  and  must  be  determined  on  a  case-by-case  basis.  Rules  seeking  to  define  all  the 
circumstances when a particular practice is unacceptable can be too narrow or too broad and, as a 
result, they may be ineffective or have unintended consequences. In our view, enforcement of the FTC 
Act  on  a  case-by-case  basis,  reinforced  by  agency  guidance  that  establishes  standards  and 
recommended practices, is a more effective way to address these concerns. 
The Board will, however, continue to assess whether there are unfair or deceptive practices that are 
appropriately  addressed  by  adopting  rules  of  general  applicability  under  the  FTC  Act  or  other 
consumer protection laws. We will continue to consult with the OCC and FDIC on these matters. We 
encourage our fellow bank regulators to bring to our attention particular practices that they believe are 
unfair or deceptive that can best be addressed by rules of general applicability rather than through the 
supervisory process. 
Supervisory guidance 
The Federal Reserve and other financial institution regulators also use more informal means to protect 
consumers  and  promote  safe  and  sound  practices  by  financial  institutions.  This  includes  issuing 
principles-based guidance, which sometimes includes "best practices" that institutions should adopt in 
following the recommendations contained in the guidance. Principles-based guidance can often be a 
more  flexible  tool  than  rules  for  accomplishing  regulators'  goals.  This  flexibility  allows  supervisory 
agencies to adapt the guidance to different situations. 
Principles-based guidance is particularly useful when dealing with practices that may be inappropriate 
in some circumstances but appropriate in others. An example of this is the guidance concerning unfair 
and deceptive acts or practices ("UDAPs") issued jointly by the Board and FDIC in 2004. The UDAP 
guidance outlines the legal standards the Board and FDIC use in carrying out their responsibilities for 
enforcing  the  FTC  Act's  prohibition  of  unfair  or  deceptive  acts  or  practices.  These  standards  are 
consistent with those articulated by the OCC and with long-established standards articulated by the 
FTC in enforcing the FTC Act for non-bank entities. The UDAP guidance outlines strategies for banks 
to use to avoid engaging in unfair or deceptive acts or practices, to minimize their own risks and to 
protect consumers. The guidance also lists "best practices" to address some matters seen as having 
the greatest potential for unfair or deceptive acts or practices: advertising and solicitations; servicing 
and collections; and the management and monitoring of employees and third-party service providers. 
Through the issuance of principles-based guidance, backed-up with regular examinations, the federal 
depository  institution  regulators  are  able  to  have  a  significant  impact  on  institutions'  practices. 
Although the supervisory guidance issued by the banking and thrift agencies only applies to depository 
institutions  and  their  affiliates,  state  regulators  can  and  sometimes  do  adopt  the  federal  regulators' 
guidance  for  independent  nonbank  providers  of  financial  services.  This  was  the  case  with  the 
interagency guidance on nontraditional mortgage products that was issued in 2006. We expect similar 
action  by  state  regulators  for  the  interagency  guidance  on  subprime  mortgage  lending  that  was 
proposed in March 2007. The agencies are finishing their review of the comment letters received and 
will work expeditiously to take final action on the proposed statement, including coordinating with the 
CSBS. 
                                                      
1   Section 18 of the FTC Act authorizes the Federal Reserve Board to issue regulations prohibiting specific practices by banks 
that it finds to be unfair or deceptive. The Office of Thrift Supervision and the National Credit Union Adminstration have the 
same authority for thrifts and credit unions respectively. 
6 
 BIS Review 65/2007
Consumer complaints 
In 1976, the Federal Reserve established a system-wide program for receiving and handling consumer 
complaints.  Through  this  program,  the  Board  addresses  complaints  about  the  banks  under  its 
supervision  (state-chartered  banks  that  are  members  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  and  certain 
foreign  banking  organizations)  and  refers  complaints  regarding  other  financial  services  firms  to  the 
appropriate  federal  or state  agency,  including  the  FTC.  The  Board  has  established  uniform  policies 
and procedures for investigating and responding to consumer complaints, which are implemented by 
staff of the twelve Federal Reserve Banks who have been specially trained for that purpose. In each of 
the last two years, the Board has received about 1,900 complaints concerning state-member banks, 
which  number  about  900. The  Board  maintains  a  database  that  enables  us  to  track  the complaints 
filed for each institution and how they are resolved. 
The Federal Reserve has consistently and promptly referred the consumer complaints we receive to 
the appropriate state or federal regulator when they do not involve a bank under our supervision. We 
also immediately notify consumers of the agency to which their complaint has been referred. Since 
January 2002, the Federal Reserve System has received over 25,000 consumer complaints. Of these, 
about  12,000  involved  entities  other  than  banks  under  our  supervision  and  were  referred  to  other 
agencies.  In  virtually  all  of  these  cases  (about  99  percent),  the  Federal  Reserve  referred  the 
complaints to the proper agencies and notified the complainants in an average of two business days. 
Similarly, virtually all of the consumer complaints we received against state member banks and their 
subsidiaries were promptly acknowledged. 
We understand that consumers may face challenges in sorting out where to go for help with questions 
about financial transactions and in determining where to send complaints. As indicated, we facilitate 
the  process  for  consumers  by  ensuring  that  the  complaints  we  receive  are  routed  quickly  and 
accurately  to  the  right  agency  for  handling.  To  further  enhance  our  consumer  complaint  handling 
process, we recently launched a new online consumer complaint system that creates a single Internet 
web site for submitting complaints and inquiries to the Federal Reserve. Complaints submitted through 
the web site are routed automatically to the appropriate Reserve Bank or other supervisory agency. 
One  feature  of  the  new  online  system  that  we  plan  to  activate  in  the  near  future  is  a  customer 
satisfaction  questionnaire  that  will  provide  us with  feedback  about  consumers'  experiences  with  the 
Federal Reserve's processing of their complaints. This questionnaire will be an improved version of 
the  one  we  used  for  many  years.  The  Board  is  also  establishing  a  central  location  for  the 
administrative  handling  of  complaints,  which  will  establish  a  single  mailing  address  and  toll-free 
telephone  number  that  the  public  can  use.  These  enhancements  underscore  our  commitment  to 
ensuring the public has an effective and efficient means for resolving complaints. Our goal is to make 
a consumer's submission of a complaint as easy and seamless as possible regardless of the entity 
involved. 
To enhance interagency cooperation and coordination in processing consumer complaints, the federal 
banking  agencies  held  a  conference  in  April  2006  to  share  information  about  complaint  trends  and 
issues, and learn about best practices in investigating and analyzing complaints. The agency staffs 
also  discussed  ways  to  improve  customer  service  and  the  potential  ways  complaint  data  might  be 
used to aid in the development of consumer education materials. Another interagency conference is 
scheduled for later this year. In addition to these conferences, the agencies' staffs meet periodically to 
share complaint data and to discuss emerging issues identified through the complaint process. 
Consumer education and research 
The Federal Reserve is actively engaged in educating consumers about financial transactions so they 
can better understand their options when shopping for various products. The education materials we 
produce are based on surveys, consumer testing, and other research about consumer behavior. For 
example, the Board has published brochures to assist consumers when they are shopping for credit 
cards, mortgages or leasing a vehicle. We have also issued brochures to help consumers understand 
their  checking  accounts  and  overdraft  protection  programs,  and  to  educate  consumers  about  the 
effects of having their payments processed electronically. These publications are also available on the 
Board's web site. 
Recently the Board has focused on helping consumers understand nontraditional mortgage products 
and ARMs. For example, the Board recently published a consumer education brochure (Interest-Only 
Mortgage Payments and Payment – Option ARMs – Are They for You?) on interest-only mortgages 
BIS Review 65/2007 
 7
and  payment-option  ARMs.  This  brochure  describes  the  loan  terms  and  risks  inherent  in  such 
products and alerts borrowers to possible future payment increases. The Board's revised Consumer 
Handbook on Adjustable Rate Mortgages, which creditors must provide with every ARM application, 
also seeks to educate consumers about the features and risks of nontraditional mortgage products. 
The Federal Reserve’s Community Affairs Program 
The  Federal  Reserve's  Community  Affairs  Program  supports  the  Board's  objective  of  promoting 
community  development  and  fair  and  impartial  access  to  credit  by  focusing  on  low-  and  moderate-
income  consumers.  We  develop  programs  and  build  partnerships  with  organizations  to  help  bring 
consumers  into  the  financial  and  economic  mainstream.  The  Community  Affairs  function  within  the 
Board and the Reserve Banks complements other regulatory and compliance activities with programs 
that educate and equip low- and moderate-income consumers with the tools they need to make better 
choices in establishing credit and building assets. 
The Reserve Banks' Community Affairs programs are specifically focused on improving understanding 
about low- and moderate-income consumers' needs for and access to financial services. Toward this 
end,  the  Reserve  Banks  engage  in  research  that  explores  issues  relating  to  consumers'  use  of 
financial  services  products  and  services.  In  addition,  the  Community  Affairs  Offices  convene  a 
research conference every two years dedicated to generating and presenting research that explores 
current trends in financial services and the implications for lower-income consumers. For example, the 
most  recent  conference  held  this  past  March  in  Washington,  D.C.,  offered  research  on  predatory 
lending and payday lending. 
The Federal Reserve Banks also collaborate with local and regional partners to explore opportunities 
to  create  awareness  of  and  solutions  to  address  concerns  about  financial  services  issues  as  they 
relate  to  lower-income  consumers  and  communities.  Several  Reserve  Banks  have  spearheaded 
initiatives  to  respond  to  concerns  about  rising  mortgage  defaults  and  delinquencies,  with  the  San 
Francisco Federal Reserve Bank holding forums in six cities to discuss community responses. Others 
Federal Reserve Banks have worked with nonprofit organizations and local governments to develop 
strategies  to  improve  lower-income  consumers'  wealth-building  opportunities,  such  as  initiatives 
promoting savings and accessing tax credits. 
All  twelve  Community  Affairs  Offices  have  initiatives  to  promote  and  support  consumer  financial 
education.  The  Federal  Reserve  Banks  have  partnered  with  financial  institutions,  nonprofit 
organizations, local governments, and community institutions to help improve consumers' access to 
financial education materials and programs. Currently, the Board and the Philadelphia Reserve Bank 
are  conducting  long-term  research  projects  to  better  understand  what  makes  particular  consumer 
counseling and education programs successful. 
Conclusion 
The Federal Reserve is committed to being proactive in addressing issues that affect consumers in 
their  financial  services  transactions.  We  seek  to  promote  the  availability  of  consumer  credit  while 
ensuring that consumers receive the information they need to understand their options. Consumers 
who do not have accurate information and an understanding of what that information means will have 
difficulty choosing among competing products. Because information is critical to more competitive, and 
thus more efficient markets, more effective disclosure also has the capacity to weed out some abuses. 
By  using  consumer  testing  systematically,  the  Federal  Reserve  is  taking  an  innovative  approach  to 
revising  its  regulations  and  improving  the  effectiveness  of  disclosures.  At  the  same  time,  we  will 
continue  our  cooperation  with  educational  and  community  organizations  around  the  country  to  help 
inform and support consumer education efforts. We recognize, however, that disclosures and financial 
education  may  not  always  be  sufficient  to  combat  abusive  practices.  Because  some  bad  lending 
practices may require additional measures, the Federal Reserve will seriously consider how we might 
use  our  rulemaking  authority  to  address  abusive  practices  without  restricting  consumers'  access  to 
beneficial financing options and responsible subprime credit. We will, along with the other supervisory 
agencies,  also  continue  to  actively  use  our  other  tools  –  such  as  supervisory  guidance,  the 
examination process, and our enforcement powers – to address specific practices that are abusive or 
otherwise inappropriate. 
8 
 BIS Review 65/2007
