Nout Wellink: No globalisation without innovation 
Speech by Dr Nout Wellink, President of the Netherlands Bank and Chairman of the Basel Committee 
on  Banking  Supervision,  at  the  2007  Money  and  Banking  Conference  "Monetary  Policy  Under 
Uncertainty", hosted by the Central Bank of Argentina, Buenos Aires, 4 June 2007. 
 Introduction 
I grew up in a small Dutch village. Although it was not in a polder, to me the world seemed flat. It took 
several  years  before  I  saw  mountains  for  the  first  time  and  realised  that  the  world  is  not  flat.  The 
generation of my grandchildren misses this kind of experience. Flying long-distance at early age is no 
longer exceptional in the more prosperous parts of the world. The world has changed dramatically in 
the course of decades. Information technology has brought us many new opportunities, in particular 
mobility  of  people,  goods  and  ideas.  I’ll  discuss  technological  progress,  and  what  it  means  for  the 
macro economy in general, and for monetary policy in particular. 
Globalisation is driven by technological change 
There  are  at  least  four  manifestations  of  technological  change  that  have  dramatically  reshaped  the 
world over the past decades: 
• 
What we see in major cities are people from all over the world. What lies behind this is cheap 
and  fast  air  traffic.  Competition  is  a  driving  force.  So  is  technology,  which  makes  air 
transportation more efficient, and management skills that allow for splitting up the market in 
high yielding business-class tickets and low cost fares.  
What  we  see  are  cheap  imports  from  China  everywhere  in  the  Western  world.  What  lies 
behind this are low transportation costs thanks to the cargo container. The cargo container 
can move non-fragile goods for about 1% of retail value to anywhere in the world. In the pre-
container era, shipping costs used to be between 10 and 20% of retail value.1 Apart from low 
transportation costs, additional factors are needed to explain the surge in Asian products in 
Western  markets.  In  particular  the  catch-up  of  Asian  economies  is  creating  new  trading 
opportunities.  
What we  see  is  offshoring  of  labour-intensive  production  to  low-wage  countries.  What  lies 
behind  this  is  that  new  technologies  allow  the  production  process  to  be  unbundled. 
Production sites are located far from target markets, both in manufacturing and in the service 
industry. The share of offshored inputs in GDP can reach up to12%, as in Canada and the 
Netherlands.2   
What we see is low-skilled labour in the West feeling a cold wind of competition from cheap 
labour from Asia and Central and Eastern Europe . At the same time, wages for high-skilled 
labour  are  on  the  increase.  What  lies  behind  this  is  skill-biased  technology.  Automation 
lowers  demand  for  low-skilled  workers,  since  computers  offer  a  substitute.  But  computers 
can  also  amplify  natural  advantages  of  high-skilled  labour,  as  complements  to  labour.  A 
talented professional can serve a much larger customer base due to new ICT opportunities. 
Financial engineering and management skills also tend to favour high-skilled labour.  
   These are just examples, illustrating that there would be no global economy without new technology. 
Technology has always been the driving force for change. This was the case when the invention of the 
printing press in the 15th century boosted the diffusion of ideas; and it is still the case in today’s world, 
where ideas are spreading much faster than twenty years ago thanks to the internet. 
                                                      
1   J. Bradford DeLong (2006) The box that changed the world, Project Syndicate. 
2  
IMF (Spring 2007) World Economic Outlook. 
BIS Review 72/2007 
 1
Macro-economic consequences 
Technological change has brought the world prosperity. In recent years, output growth has been at 
levels not seen since the early 70s. Not just Western economies are growing fast. China and India are 
integrating in the world economy at full speed. China’s average productivity growth over the last ten 
years was close to 10%. Average productivity growth in emerging and developing countries has also 
increased, to 5% last year.3 Despite a recent pick-up, productivity growth in Latin America is lagging 
that in other emerging markets. 
Although technology is a source of welfare, it can also have negative side-effects. For instance, the 
unprecedented  speed  at  which  ideas  are  passed  between  people  is  a  key  achievement  of  the  ICT 
revolution. But it also allows bad ideas to travel fast, such as religious fundamentalism. I feel some 
sympathy for those who fear rapid technological change. But whether we like it or not, we can’t stop 
technological progress. Like toothpaste, once it’s out of the tube, it is hard to get it back in again. The 
challenge is to make sure that new technologies bring change for the better. 
There  are  winners  and  losers  from  technological change,  at  least  in  relative  terms.  The  developing 
world at large is benefiting from recent developments. However, some areas are losing out. On the 
losing  end  are  areas  that  lack  connections  to  the  container-handling  network  and  the  internet.  This 
applies to areas that lack crucial infrastructure, be it reliable electricity and roads, or the rule of law. 
In  the  Western  world,  job  security  has  diminished,  not  just  for  blue-collar  workers.  These  days, 
services in ICT and other high-tech sectors are offshored to low-income countries. But the number of 
offshored  jobs  is  still  very  modest  compared  to  the  total  number  of  jobs  lost  and  created.  In  the 
Netherlands,  roughly  9.000  jobs  are  offshored  each  year,  whereas  the  annual  number  of  job 
destruction and creation is above 800.000.4 Since the ICT revolution is skill-biased, it favours high-
over low-skilled labour. Fortunately, higher income inequality between high- and low-skilled workers 
does  not  necessarily  imply  that  low-skilled  workers  are  worse  off.  The  IMF  has  shown  that  recent 
trends  have  increased  the  size  of  the  pie.  Cheaper  inputs  have  lifted  output  and  overall  labour 
compensation  by  about  6%  in  real  terms  in  advanced  economies  over  the  last  25  years.5  And  all 
consumers benefit from lower prices. 
To keep labour market effects in check, employability is a key policy issue. Flexible employees can 
adapt to new circumstances that technology brings about. Governments can offer a helping hand by 
improving education, and by providing a social security system that encourages people to move from 
one job to another. In some countries, social security schemes may be so generous that they deter 
efforts  to  seek  new  employment.  But  the  slogan  “the  lower,  the  better”  goes  much  too  far.  In  Latin 
America, for instance, social security schemes alleviate income inequality. If the benefits of economic 
growth are widely shared, support for economic reform can be expected to be broader than otherwise. 
Monetary policy 
The challenge for monetary policy is to adapt to the new environment. Fortunately, central banks have 
much  more  room  for  manoeuvre  now  than  they  had  when  Arthur  Burns  was  appointed  as  Fed 
Chairman  by  President  Richard  Nixon  back  in  1970  with  the  words:  [quote]  “I  respect  his 
independence; however, I hope that independently he will conclude that my views are the ones that 
should be followed” [unquote]. Also downward pressure on inflation by cheap imports from low-income 
countries has made central bankers’ life in the Western world a bit easier than in the past. Prices for 
clothes and big ticket items such as cars and personal computers have declined. Computers became 
a  lot  cheaper  if  one  takes  into  account  quality  improvements.  The  overall  downward  pressure  on 
inflation has allowed for lower monetary policy interest rates, at least in the short term. 
In  the  longer  term,  the  real  equilibrium  interest  rate  might  rise. This would  be  the  case  if  the  world 
would have moved to a permanently higher trend rate of productivity growth. The jury is still out on 
                                                      
3   Productivity  is  measured  as  real  GDP  divided  by  working  age  population.  Source:  IMF  (Spring  2007)  World  Economic 
Outlook. 
4   Numbers are averages over 2001-2005. Source: Dutch Ministry of Economic Affairs (2005) Visie op verplaatsing. 
5 
IMF (Spring 2007) World Economic Outlook. 
2 
 BIS Review 72/2007
whether this is true. Other things equal, a higher real equilibrium interest rate implies that monetary 
policy interest rates also have to move to a higher level, consistent with the new equilibrium. 
So, a major issue is to determine the trend rate of productivity growth. From a monetary policy point of 
view the question can be rephrased as: What is the level of growth at which the economy can operate 
without generating higher inflation? It is always difficult to determine the speed limits of an economy, 
but in times of change this is even more challenging. One development makes it particularly hard. That 
is the move from an industrial to a post-industrial society. In the 1950s, 30% of the US labour force 
was  employed  in  manufacturing.  Now  the  number  is  10%.  We  have  moved  to  a  service  oriented 
society. In the service industry, capacity utilisation cannot be measured by counting idle capacity in 
factories. Besides, productivity growth can only be estimated in an imprecise way. Usually, total factor 
productivity  is  used  as  the  key  measure.  It  is  determined  as  a  residual:  productivity  growth  is  the 
increase in value added that cannot be explained by the volume of inputs used. This measure is very 
rough.  All  in  all,  potential  output  and  its  growth  rate  is  more difficult  to  determine  than  it  was  in  an 
industrial economy. 
Uncertainty about potential output translates into uncertainty about the output gap between potential 
and  actual  output.  It  has  always  been  tricky  to  base  monetary  policy  on  output  gaps.  Research  by 
Orphanides suggests that the Great Inflation was to a large extent due to mismeasurement of potential 
output and the output gap.6 It appears virtually impossible to determine output gaps in real time. They 
can  only  be  measured  in  a  reliable  way  ex  post,  with  the  benefit  of  hindsight.  “Life  can  only  be 
understood backwards, but it must be lived forewards” as the Danish philosopher Kierkegaard said. 
This is certainly true for monetary policy, with its medium term objectives. How to cope with this? I’ve 
learnt  a  couple  of  things  since  I  thought  the  world  was  flat.  One  is  that  the  objectives  of  monetary 
policy  should  be  modest.  Fine-tuning  economic  growth  has  always  been  a  too  ambitious  goal  in  a 
world with long and variable lags in monetary transmission. A clear focus on low and stable inflation 
can safeguard central banks against the temptation of activism. Given current uncertainties, monetary 
authorities  must  be  particularly  cautious  in  interpreting  the  output  gap.  They  have  to  remain  firm  in 
reaction to actual inflation and other relatively reliable indicators of inflation risks, such as excessive 
wage growth. 
As a side remark, I add that, in theory, capital  account liberalisation and trade openness warrant a 
sharper focus of monetary policy on price stability rather than output stabilisation.7 International capital 
mobility, as well as broader access to financial markets, creates new opportunities for households to 
smooth  consumption  over  the  years.  Free  international  trade  allows  for  specialisation  in  domestic 
production. As a result, it might be possible to disentangle consumption and production to a higher 
extent  than  in  the  past.  In  other  words,  households  can  cushion  changes  in  production  without 
intervention by the central bank. 
I would like to conclude with a warning. A focus on price stability is more complicated than it sounds. 
Low  and  stable  consumer  price  inflation  is  no  reason  for  complacency.  In  spite  of  consumer  price 
stability,  asset  price  inflation  may  signal  underlying  imbalances,  such  as  an  overoptimistic  risk 
assessment  by  financial  market  participants  that  keeps  long-term  interest  rates  at  unwarranted  low 
levels.  Monetary  policymakers  must  be  forward-looking,  and  assess  possible  divergences  between 
real  and  nominal  factors  in  the  area  of  monetary  aggregates,  credit  and  asset  markets.  How  this 
should be done in practice is a difficult question that deserves further elaboration. I won’t answer it 
now. Time is running out. Sometimes it is better to stop before one has finished. 
                                                      
6   Athanasios Orphanides (2003) The quest for prosperity without inflation, Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 50, nr. 3. 
7   Assaf Razin and Prakash Loungani (2006) Globalization and equilibrium inflation-output tradeoffs, NBER Working Paper nr. 
11641. 
BIS Review 72/2007 
 3
