Tarisa Watanagase: The Thai economy – challenges and prospects 
Speech  by  Dr  Tarisa  Watanagase,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the  European  Heads  of 
Mission  Luncheon,  Residence  of  the  Ambassador  of  the  Federal  Republic  of  Germany,  Bangkok, 
21 February 2007. 
 Ambassador Brümmer, 
Your Excellencies,  
Ladies and gentlemen, 
At the outset, I would like to thank Ambassador Brümmer for inviting me to speak at this luncheon. It 
gives me great pleasure to share my views on Thailand's economic prospects with all of you. 
This talk is most timely for these are difficult times for Thailand. In the past year, Thailand under major 
political developments. We saw mass street protests against the previous administration, a military 
coup and the annulment of the 1997 constitution. The present government has promised an election 
and a new constitution but, as year-end bombings painfully show, political uncertainties remain. 
Economic uncertainty has also increased. In the past few months we saw rapid baht appreciation and 
declining consumer confidence. The threat of a disorderly unwinding of global imbalances still persists. 
In  addition,  the  implementation  of  the  reserve  requirement  and  the  introduction  of  the  amended 
Foreign Business Act proved to be unpleasant surprises to investors and the global community. 
These are indeed difficult times. And difficult times require difficult choices to be made. Some of you 
may be concerned that Thailand may not be able to weather all these challenges. Some of you may 
fear  that  Thailand  is  turning  her  back  on  globalization.  I  believe  that  these  fears  and  concerns  are 
unfounded and that Thailand will persevere. 
Our  outlook  for  the  Thai  economy  in  the  medium  term  is  positive.  Our  forecasts  show  the  Thai 
economy growing by 4-5 percent in 2007 and by 4-5.5 percent in 2008. These are respectable growth 
estimates for Thailand in light of the challenges and our focus on growth with stability. In the rest of 
my talk, I will address in detail the challenges and prospects for the Thai economy going forward. 
This brings me to the first of my three key points. 
The first key point is that the Thai economy is no stranger to difficult challenges. And we have 
always  persevered  in  each  instance.  In  1997,  we  had  the  Asian  crisis  and  undertook  painful 
reforms; in 2001, the global economic downturn adversely impacted the Thai economy; and in the past 
two years, we had the Tsunami, SARS, the avian flu, southern unrest, political uncertainty, and the 
recent oil shock. 
The recent oil shock in particular proved to be a difficult test for the Bank of Thailand. High oil prices 
have  two  adverse  effects:  pressure  on  prices  and  a  drag  on  economic  growth.  Tightening  interest 
rates is the Bank of Thailand's primary defense against inflation. However, high interest rates would 
burden firms and households already trying to cope with high oil prices. Domestic demand would be 
adversely  affected.  There  was  no  clear  or  easy  choice  to  make.  In  the  final  analysis,  the  Bank  of 
Thailand  decided  to  tighten  interest  rates  with  the  view  that  maintaining  inflation  stability, 
notwithstanding the short-term adverse impacts, was necessary for sustained economic stability and 
growth in the long run. 
I could go on with more of such examples from further back in time, but I am sure that you are well 
aware of them. However, the past is not always a good predictor of the future. And indeed, the Thai 
economy is currently faced with a new kind of challenge. This leads me to my second point. 
The  preeminent challenge  to  the  Thai  economy  in  the  medium  term  is  how to  cope with the 
unwinding  of  global  imbalances,  a  slowdown  in  the world  economy,  volatile  global  financial 
markets, and an appreciating baht. Thailand, like many emerging market economies with a small 
and shallow financial market, is particularly vulnerable to fast-moving international capital. Such rapid 
movements of capital flows, if vastly out of line with the underlying economic fundamentals, can have 
negative  impacts  on  the  export  or  import  sectors  depending  on  the  direction  of  exchange  rate 
movement. In our case, the recent surge in speculative capital inflows has caused a rapid one-way 
appreciation of the baht relative to regional currencies. The appreciation, which was vastly out of line 
BIS Review 20/2007 
 1
with our economic fundamentals, if left unchecked, could be detrimental to not only the export sector 
but also economic stability. 
In  dealing  with  the  rapid  appreciation,  conventional  wisdom  suggests  an  adherence  to  market 
mechanisms.  This  proved  to  be  inadequate,  and  the  baht  continued  with  its  appreciation.  After  a 
number  of  unsuccessful  conventional  measures,  we  resorted  to  the  less  conventional  measure  of 
imposing a reserve requirement on capital inflows in December 2006. The measure was designed to 
break the one-way momentum, to preserve overall economic stability, and to give the export sector 
time to adjust. To this end, it has succeeded. Other regional currencies continued to appreciate while 
the Thai baht had stabilized. 
The  decision  to  impose  the  reserve  requirement  was  a  difficult  one  as  it  entailed  a  painful  tradeoff 
between  investor  sentiment  and  export  sector  competitiveness  as  well  as  economic  stability.  In  the 
end, cost-benefit analysis led us to choose the latter given the importance of export sector stability to 
the overall economy. Indeed, during the first three quarters of 2006, net exports accounted for 5.1 per 
cent  out  of  5.3  per  cent  GDP  growth  in  total.  Losing  export  sector  stability  will  result  in  economic 
instability. As a small open economy, Thailand relies a great deal on international trade. 
Let me be clear that the reserve requirement was designed to preserve economic stability and to give 
time for the export sector, which includes many SME operations, to adjust. The reserve requirement 
was not designed to maintain a certain exchange-rate level. As such, the reserve requirement is not a 
permanent measure; it is temporary. In addition, the intended benefits of measures such as these will 
tend to decrease as people find ways to circumvent the regulation over time. 
Therefore, after the appreciation momentum was broken, we gradually adjusted the measure to add 
flexibility  without  compromising  the  original  objective  of  maintaining  baht  stability.  Now,  firms 
borrowing from abroad can either set aside the required reserves or fully hedge their loans. Similar 
flexibility  will  be  extended  to  other  types  of  inflows  in  due  course.  Capital  outflows  will  be  further 
liberalized while a better database of capital flows is being built. 
This leads me to my third and final point: how to deal with the challenge of global dynamism in 
the medium term. 
The critical challenge for the Thai economy is how to continuously improve its flexibility, efficiency, and 
competitiveness  amid  ever-changing  global  economic  conditions  and  structure.  In  this  respect,  we 
need  to  engage  in  financial  and  real  sector  reforms  and  policies  that  promote  a  sound  and  stable 
macroeconomic environment. 
To  mention  a  few  examples,  our  financial  and  legal  infrastructures will continue  to  be  strengthened 
particularly  through  amendments  and  the  introduction  of  a  number  of  legislations  such  as  the  new 
Financial Institutions Act and the Deposit Insurance Act. The Financial Sector Master Plan (FSMP) will 
move into its second phase, with the review of the plan and an emphasis on increased competition 
and  consideration  on  potential  entry  of  new  players  to  further  enhance  financial  efficiency  and 
resiliency. 
The  real  sector  must  also  work  continuously  to  improve  productivity.  Sustained  economic  growth 
cannot  happen  without  productivity  growth.  To  this  end,  significant  real  sector  reforms  have  been 
made to raise real sector productivity, promote transparency, and strengthen governance. We may not 
see the effects of these reforms right away but we must continue pressing on with the reform effort 
and not let reform fatigue get in our way. 
Productivity also depends on the availability and quality of public goods. With a strong fiscal position, 
the  Thai  government  this  fiscal  year  has  opted  to  pursue  much  needed  infrastructure  projects.  Key 
infrastructure investment projects include the expansion of the mass transit network in Bangkok, water 
resource management, and an integrated logistics system. These public investments will ease bottle-
necks and allow firms to focus on improving their efficiency and productivity. 
The  importance  of  productivity  cannot  be  overstated.  But  with  integrated  world  financial  markets, 
exporting  firms  must  also  learn  to cope with  exchange  rate  risk.  We encourage  exporters  to  hedge 
against foreign exchange rate risk, to bill their exports in foreign currencies other than the US dollar, 
and to use imports as a natural hedge. 
Your Excellencies,  
Ladies and gentlemen, 
2 
 BIS Review 20/2007
The risk of global imbalances has been with us and will remain with us for some time to come. Each 
country has to do its own part in managing the risk. For us, we will forge ahead with our economic and 
political reforms. But major economies must also do their best to mitigate global imbalances since this 
is  a  global  problem.  We  must  solve  it  together.  International  policy  dialogues  such  as  the  Fund-
initiated Multilateral Consultation would need to be strengthened. It is the duty of major economies, 
such as the United States, China, Japan, and, of course, the European Union to ensure that there are 
sufficient international policy dialogues and that they are successful. 
Without the economic cooperation and political will of the major economies, each and every country 
will be at risk. We all agree that difficult times require difficult choices. But there is one choice that 
should not be difficult: that is, the decision to stand together. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 20/2007 
 3
