Njuguna Ndung’u: Implementation of Basel II, risk management 
framework within banks and the prevention of financial crime 
Address by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the opening of 
the 7th East African Banking School, Nairobi, 20 August 2007. 
 The Chairperson, Kenya Institute of Bankers; 
Representatives of Financial Institutions; 
Distinguished Participants; 
Distinguished Guests; 
Ladies and Gentlemen; 
It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  be  with  you  today  and  to  address  the  participants  at  the 
7th East  African  Banking  School.  Before  I  make  some  remarks,  let  me  take  this 
opportunity  to  thank  the  organisers  of  this  workshop  and  the  facilitators  for  inviting  me  to 
preside  over  the  opening  of  this  important  workshop  and  to  give  a  keynote  address.  On 
behalf  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya,  and  on  my  own  behalf,  please  allow  me  to  warmly 
welcome each and every one of you to Nairobi, Kenya. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The  financial  sector  is  growing  in  dynamism  and  complexity  to  become  very  competitive. 
These  developments  require  highly  trained  expertise  and  substantial  resources  to  support 
such capacity building. The banking sector and our respective central banks must therefore 
invest heavily in capacity building. I would appeal to banks from partner states to continue 
supporting  their  respective  Institutes  of  Bankers  with  adequate  resources  to  enable  them 
offer more courses that meet the growing demand in training. In Kenya, we are pleased with 
the efforts the Kenya Institute of Bankers (KIB) is making to meet the growing demands of 
the  financial  sector  in  professional  training.  The  Central  Bank  of  Kenya  has  continued  to 
complement  KIB’s  efforts  in  these  endeavours  through  the  Kenya  School  of  Monetary 
Studies. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is worth noting that the theme, “Banking in a Globalised and Complex Environment”, is 
very appropriate in this era of globalisation of banking business. However, before delving into 
this  topic  allow  me,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  to  recognise  the  important  role  KIB  has  been 
playing  in  capacity  building  in  Kenya.  Currently,  KIB  has  40  banks  out  of  42  banks  as 
corporate members. I have also been informed that KIB has approximately 7,000 individual 
members,  with  2,300  actively  pursuing  courses  leading  to  professional  examinations. 
Successful candidates at the lower level examination are offered a Certificate in Banking & 
Financial Services, whereas at a higher level, a Diploma in Banking and Financial Services is 
offered  by  the  Institute.  Therefore,  KIB  provides  examinations  that  enable  successful 
candidates to be professionally qualified bankers. This underlines the significant contribution 
that KIB has been making in improving management of financial institutions in Kenya. I urge 
you  to  continue  this  good  work.  With  the  rapid  expansion  and  the  ever  increasing 
sophistication  and  dynamism  of  the  banking  sector,  the  demand  for  well  trained  bank 
professionals will definitely be on the increase. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I have reviewed the contents of the 7th School’s workshop programme and noted that it has 
been well designed around ten topics to reflect the central theme of the workshop, namely, 
Implementation  of  Basel  II,  Risk  Management  Framework  within  banks  and  the 
Prevention of Financial Crime. In my remarks, I will briefly touch on these issues and make 
BIS Review 92/2007 
 1
an attempt to clarify our position on some of them. However, during the training sessions, 
you will be required to delve into greater details on these subjects. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
One of the best known schemes for financial crimes involves money laundering. This is the 
method  of  hiding,  mixing  and  disguising  the  proceeds  of  criminal  activities  through  legally 
operating  institutions  for  the  purpose  of  disguising  the  origins  of  the  proceeds.  In  other 
words, money laundering is a tool that is used by people involved in illegal activities, such as 
drug trafficking, organised crime, tax-evasion, political bribery, and above all, corruption. In 
addition,  the  events  of  September  11th  have  added  another  dimension  to  the  problem  of 
money  laundering  and  brought  to  light  the  synonymy  between  money  laundering  and 
terrorism. Reliable estimates by the IMF put money laundering to be in the ranges of USD 
590 billion to USD 1.5 trillion, about 2% to 5% of the world’s economic output. 
Due  to  banks’  confidentiality  principle  and  their  capability  to  handle  huge  cashless 
transactions and transmit funds efficiently, they are normally the targets of money laundering 
activities.  In  doing  so,  banks  also  suffer  serious  consequences  from  money  laundering, 
which  include  reputation  and  legal  risks.  Money  launderers  are  now  able  to  quickly  move 
illicit  money  between  national  jurisdictions,  therefore  complicating  the  task  of  tracing  and 
confiscating  these  assets.  It  is  in  this  regard  that  there  is  a  concerted  international  and 
regional effort to combat the vice. 
In  the  area  of  Anti–Money  Laundering  (AML),  Kenya  has  set  out  seven  key  strategic 
objectives  for  the  proceeds  of  crime  and  anti-money  laundering  prevention.  As  you  may 
remember, Kenya has signed and ratified all the United Nations Conventions on combating 
Money  Laundering  and  the  Financing  of  Terrorism.  Kenya  has  also  criminalised  money 
laundering under the Narcotics Drugs and Psychotropic Substances (Control) Act No. 4 of 
1994. 
To  date  a  draft  Proceeds  of  Crime  and  Money  Laundering  (Prevention)  Bill,  2007  is  now 
being debated by Parliament. The proposed legislation will be the focal point of Kenya’s AML 
regulatory regime. The legislation will, amongst others, require financial institutions to: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
The Central Bank expects financial institutions to be committed to ensure that the integrity of 
the Kenyan financial system is not in any way compromised by these criminal activities. In 
this  connection,  I  would  like  to  urge  the  respective  Institutes  of  Bankers  to  develop  and 
implement  relevant  course  materials  to  support  institutions  in  their  efforts  to  train  staff  on 
anti-money laundering techniques. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
On the topic of risk management framework within banks, I am pleased to report that over 
the last two years, the Central Bank has been involved in initiatives aimed at transforming the 
approach  used  for  conducting  its  core  mandate  of  supervision  and  regulation  of  banks  to 
make  it  more  risk-focused.  During  the  year,  significant  steps  were  made  towards 
implementation of Risk Based Supervision. Inspection procedures and report formats were 
modified,  and  the  Central  Bank  received  Risk  Management  Programs  (RMPs)  from  all 
institutions as required of them. 
The exercise has substantially raised the level of awareness among banks on the importance 
of strong risk management systems. Most banks have now hired risk management personnel 
and  introduced  procedures  for  reporting  and  reviewing  the  critical  risks  facing  their 
Establish appropriate Know Your Customer (KYC) requirements; 
Maintain records; 
Establish suspicious transaction reporting mechanisms; and 
Provide training to staff on anti-money laundering techniques. 
2 
 BIS Review 92/2007
operations.  This  process  will  continue  to  improve  bank  operations  and  contribute  to  the 
soundness of Kenya’s banking system. 
In addition to this, risk management and strategic management are both aimed at enhancing 
corporate  governance  in  the  banking  sector.  The  Central  Bank  has  continued  to  lay 
emphasis on corporate governance in the banking sector as one of the key tenets of its legal 
and  regulatory  framework.  In  this  regard,  the  Central  Bank  has  revised  provisions  in  the 
prudential guidelines to require institutions to separate ownership from management, restrict 
ownership of shares to reduce shareholder dominance, introduce board independence and 
periodic disclosure of financial statements. 
During  our  deliberation  under  the  auspices  of  the  Monetary  Affairs  Committee  of  the  East 
African  Community  last  May,  we  were  pleased  to  learn  that  majority  of  our  partners  have 
equally made notable progress in these areas. I am therefore pleased that this Workshop will 
cover  these  topics  adequately.  However,  we  expect  that  having  followed  keenly  the 
developments in the banking sector, our respective Institutes of Bankers will strive to offer 
more  relevant  courses  and  training  opportunities  to  its  membership  to  meet  the  growing 
training needs on risk management in banks. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Since  1999,  banking  institutions  in  Kenya  have  been  regulated  under  Basel  I  Capital 
Adequacy Accord which was issued by the Basel Committee in 1988 to guide in assessing 
banks’  capital  adequacy  requirements.  Under  this  framework,  the  focus  has  been  largely 
placed on the credit risk faced by banks. The 1988 Accord was later amended in 1996 to 
incorporate a capital charge for the market risk, which we in Kenya and other Central Banks 
in the region have not adopted. 
In 2004, the Basel Committee issued the Basel II Capital Accord which, in addition to credit 
and market risk, introduces a capital charge for operational risks that banks face. The Accord 
took effect from the beginning of 2007 in G10 countries. However, the committee recognises 
that emerging countries such as Kenya will not be able to implement this accord in 2007 as 
they  are  yet  to  fulfill  the  prerequisites  of  the  new  Accord.  The  Central  Banks  of  Kenya, 
Uganda and Tanzania have indeed agreed that they will only implement the Basel II accord 
upon implementation of key prerequisites. These preconditions include: 
• 
• 
• 
The  move  to  Basel  II  will  ensure  that  the  solvency  of  the  banking  sector  is  determined  in 
more precise terms, taking into account most of the critical risks that banks are exposed to. 
Through the revised approach, we will overcome the simplistic methods of measuring capital 
adequacy currently in use, which do not reflect the increasing sophistication of activities that 
many  banks  are  beginning  to  engage  in.  As  a  result  of  the  improved  techniques  brought 
about by the new Accord, we hope to achieve increased stability of the sector. 
The  Central  Bank  is  currently  undertaking  various  initiatives  within  its’  current  2006-9 
strategic  plan  to  ensure  full  compliance  with  the  aforementioned  prerequisites  of  Basel  II 
implementation. Of critical importance has been the shift to Risk Based Supervision (RBS) 
which began in 2004. RBS focuses on assessing the adequacy of banks’ risk management 
frameworks in identifying, measuring and mitigating inherent business risks.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Risk  Management  does  indeed  lie  at  the  heart  of  Basel  II  and  it  is  imperative  that  a  “risk 
management culture” be inculcated in banks as a precursor for implementation of the new 
Accord. Towards this end, the Central Bank conducted a survey in 2004 that indicated gaps 
in  Risk  Management  Practices  in  Kenyan  Banks.  This  led  to  the  issuance  of  Risk 
The full implementation of the Basel I Accord; 
Adoption of Risk Based Supervision; and 
Adherence to the Basel Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision. 
BIS Review 92/2007 
 3
Enhancing the independence of the Central Bank; 
Expanding the “Permissible Activities” of banking institutions; 
Introducing consolidated supervision; and 
Establishing provisions for Prompt Corrective Action. 
Management  Guidelines  by  the  Central  Bank  to  guide  banks  in  the  development  of  Risk 
Management Frameworks. 
The Central Bank, since May 2006, has been reviewing the Risk Management Frameworks 
of all institutions. These frameworks will form the basis of future “supervisory relationships” 
between  the  Central  Bank  and  each  institution.  More  fundamentally,  the  Risk  Based 
Supervision approach will inculcate the requisite “risk management culture” in banks before 
Basel II implementation can be considered. 
The Central Bank recognises that the structure of banking institutions is increasingly evolving 
and  becoming  more  complex  due  to  business  linkages  with  the  non-bank  financial 
associates, affiliates and subsidiaries. These linkages obviously affect the soundness of the 
banks in the conglomerate group. The Central Bank supervisory approach has traditionally 
viewed banks as “stand-alone” entities. In response to this, the Central Bank is developing a 
consolidated supervision framework, which will address the risks arising from the activities of 
the conglomerate. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
To  achieve  all  these,  the  Central  Bank  has  proposed  comprehensive  amendments  to  the 
Banking Act with a view to bringing it in line with international best practices and to meet the 
dynamic  needs  of  the  banking  industry.  In  particular,  some  of  the  objectives  of  the  review 
exercise include: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
A robust legal and regulatory framework for the banking sector in Kenya is part of the reform 
package that is intended to ensure a suitable environment for safe and sound banking. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Before  I  conclude,  please  allow  me  to  pose  a  few  challenges  for  the  regional  Institutes  of 
Bankers. 
First, as you are well aware, microfinance is the provision of financial services to low income 
people  and  enterprises.  The  microfinance  industry  in  our  region  has  experienced  major 
transformations over the past twenty years, growing from a fledgling concern dominated by a 
few donor and church-based NGOs to a vibrant industry increasingly driven by commercial 
viability and sustainability. We challenge the institutes to tailor a curriculum that meets the 
requirements of this sector, which plays an important part in the financial market. 
Second, regional central banks are currently enhancing their technical capacity to handle the 
challenges posed by the implementation of Basel II. Basel II implementation requires various 
skills like IT experts, legal expertise, actuaries and banking experts. Thus the training efforts 
of the institutes will be a key ingredient in the development of the three pillars of Basel II. The 
inclusion of the stakeholders in this consultative process and capacity building is crucial. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I would like to encourage you all to participate actively during this important forum so as to 
get maximum benefits from this workshop. As I conclude, may I welcome the presence of 
delegates from Rwanda and Burundi to this workshop. I wish the participants a happy stay in 
Nairobi and fruitful deliberations. 
With these few remarks, it is now my humble duty to declare the 7th East African Banking 
School officially open. 
Thank you for your kind attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 92/2007
