Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Strengthening the foundation for effective 
governance 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas), at the Induction of Officers and Annual General Membership 
Meeting of the Bankers Institute of the Philippines (BAIPHIL), Makati City, 24 July 2007. 
 the 
The newly elected officers and directors of BAIPHIL led by its President and BSP Assistant 
Governor  Ms.  Ma.  Dolores  B.  Yuvienco,  my  colleagues  at  the  MB  (MBM  Valdepeñas, 
Boncan, Villafuerte, Antonio) Prime Minister Virata, Gov. Laya, Gov. Cuisia, SEC Chairman 
Barin,  members  of 
Institute,  bank  chairman,  vice-chairman,  presidents,  other 
distinguished guests, fellow BSPers, ladies and gentlemen. 
First of all, let me thank you for inviting me to be your inducting officer and guest speaker in 
this year’s general membership meeting. It is an honor to be here. 
I am very pleased to be here today for your annual general membership meeting for several 
reasons.  First,  we  at  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  look  at  the  Bankers  Institute  of  the 
Philippines  more  popularly  known  as  BAIPHIL  s  our  partner  in  strengthening  our  banking 
system through research, information exchange and education.  
In fact, BAIPHIL is one of only seven institutions accredited by the Bangko Sentral to conduct 
mandatory corporate governance seminars for bank directors.  
Second, the theme chosen by BAIPHIL’s new set of officers and directors for the fiscal year 
2007 to 2008 echoes our own focus at the Bangko Sentral, which is: “ Enhancing Internal 
Governance a Continuing Journey.”  
Indeed,  good  corporate  governance  is  a  must  for  banking  institutions,  whether  they  are 
private or government. You can say that we at the Bangko Sentral walk the governance talk. 
While I will be the first to say that we are not perfect, it is not for lack of trying. In fact, it is a 
continuing topic in our planning sessions. Like BAIPHIL, we at the Bangko Sentral believe 
that for as long as the environment where we operate remains dynamic, there will always be 
room to enhance governance; it is a continuing journey with no finish line.  
We  at  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  are  also  pleased  that  Assistant  Governor  Dolly 
Yuvienco has been elected President of BAIPHIL at a time when the banking sector made 
the crucial transition to Basel II.  
But before I go into the details of our ongoing corporate governance reforms, I will give an 
overview  of  the  performance  of  the  banking  system  before  and  after  the  Bangko  Sentral 
institutionalized the corporate governance framework, to put things in proper perspective. 
Philippine banking system: an assessment 
Prior  to  the  institutionalization  of  corporate  governance  reforms,  the  growth  rates  of  key 
balance sheet accounts of the banking system were minimal at single-digit levels of about 5 
per cent. Bank earnings and returns to shareholders were also moderate. 
In  2002,  the  Bangko  Sentral  institutionalized  corporate  governance  within  the  banking 
system, beginning with the Mandatory Seminar on Corporate Governance and the issuance 
of the Bangko Sentral Handbook on Corporate Governance.  
BIS Review 85/2007 
 1
Since  then,  the  practice  of  good  corporate  governance  at  individual  banks  has  played  a 
major part in strengthening the foundations for growth and stability of the Philippine banking 
system.  
As  of  May  2007,  key  performance  indicators  of  the  banking  system  reflected  overall 
soundness:  double-digit  growth  rates  in  assets,  deposit  liabilities  and  capital  accounts. 
Likewise,  asset  quality  has  significantly  improved  with  preliminary  NPL/NPA  ratios  of  5.8 
percent and 6.6 percent, respectively, moving closer to their pre-crisis levels of 4 percent. If 
you recall, we had double-digit NPL/NPA ratios of 17 percent and 15 percent, respectively, in 
2001. It is also worth noting that unlike our neighboring countries, the asset cleanup of our 
banking system did not require huge government bailouts. What we had were incentives to 
remove some friction costs.  
Meanwhile,  banks  remain  well-capitalized  with  capital  adequacy  ratio  of  18.1  percent  (vs. 
14.2 percent in 2001), on a consolidated basis, still above the BSP regulatory requirement of 
10 percent and the international standard of 8 percent. 
Banks also sustained their profitability as annualized consolidated net income after tax stood 
at  P17.3  billion.  Higher  bank  profits  likewise  resulted  in  bigger  returns  for  banks’ 
shareholders  as  annualized  Return  on  Equity  stood  at  10.4  percent,  versus  5.8  percent  in 
2001. 
In  other  words,  the  Philippine  banking  system  remained  resilient  and  in  a  much  stronger 
position on sustained implementation of financial sector reforms.  
With our banks on a sound footing, the bigger challenge lies in the sustainability of its growth 
momentum. In this area, corporate governance continues to play a crucial role and we, at the 
BSP,  remain  committed  in  working  with  industry  players,  industry  associations  such  as 
BAIPHIL,  and  other  financial  regulators  to  further  strengthen  the  foundation  of  corporate 
governance for our supervised financial institutions.  
Rationale for corporate governance reforms 
On  a  global  level,  adherence  to  good  corporate  governance  also  plays  a  key  role  in 
sustaining  the  overall  health  of  the  financial  system  and  ensuring  its  ability  to  withstand 
crises.  
To recall, fundamental weaknesses in corporate governance have been identified as among 
the  factors  that  triggered  the  1997  Asian  crisis  and  other  financial  catastrophes  in  recent 
years. In the case of the Asian crisis, financial systems in the region became vulnerable to 
external  shocks  arising  from  excessive  concentration  of  risk,  poor  credit  policies,  and 
inadequate risk management systems.  
 The  international  response,  which  emerged  as  a  consensus  was  to  move  toward  best 
practices  particularly  on  corporate  governance.  On  our  part,  we  at  the  Bangko  Sentral 
rationalized the regulatory framework to closely align prudential standards with practices that 
promote  the  good  governance  tenets  of  transparency,  accountability  and  fairness.  Let  me 
now highlight these initiatives. 
BSP’s corporate governance initiatives 
Bangko  Sentral’s  corporate  governance  agenda  is  anchored  on  the  practice  of  effective 
corporate  directorship,  sound  audit  and  compliance  systems,  and  enhanced  disclosure  in 
financial reporting. In this regard, we have issued several regulations intended to reinforce 
these critical elements of good governance. At the core of these regulatory initiatives is the 
leading  role  to  be  played  by  the  board  of  directors  in  the  overall  corporate  governance 
agenda.  
2 
 BIS Review 85/2007
Clearly,  Board  oversight  is  key  to  effective  bank  governance  and  ultimately,  to  achieving 
overall stability within the organization. Toward this end, we have emphasized the collective 
responsibility  of  the  banks’  board  of  directors  and  senior  management  to  ensure  the 
soundness and stability of their respective banks. One way to instill such accountability to the 
board of directors is through director education.  
Since 2002, the BSP has been requiring bank directors and trustees of non-stock savings 
and  loans  associations  (NSSLAs)  to  undergo  the  mandatory  seminar  on  corporate 
governance  to  familiarize  them  with  their  duties  and  responsibilities  as  corporate  decision 
makers. As of end-March 2007, a total of 6,856 directors and trustees or 84.7 percent of the 
8,094  directors/trustees  of  banks,  quasi-banks  and  NSSLAs  have  attended  corporate 
governance courses. Let me take this opportunity to remind those who have yet to take the 
governance course to get their schedule as soon as possible. This is mandatory.  
We  have  also  enforced  and  strengthened  our  fit  and  proper  standards  for  directors  and 
officers of financial institutions. In this regard, we also support continuing director education 
and training particularly on qualification/disqualification standards (Circular No. 513 dated 10 
February 2006). 
Similarly,  we  have  highlighted  the  role  of  independent  directors  in  protecting  the  broader 
public  interest  and  the  creation  and  empowerment  of  critical  board-level  committees  on 
corporate governance, risk oversight and audit. 
To promote fairness and transparency further, we have enforced stronger safeguards against 
connected  party  transactions.  Another  related  issuance  of  the  BSP  is  the  revision  of  the 
prompt corrective action or PCA framework following the issuance of Circular No. 523 dated 
23 March 2006. This was done to compel banks to take pre-emptive action against what may 
constitute as threats to financial stability and thereby, ensure that they continue to operate in 
a  safe  and  sound  manner.  As  part  of  the  PCA  framework,  banks  are  encouraged  to  align 
capital with actual risk exposures, implement business improvement measures, and institute 
corporate governance reforms. 
And in the interest of accountability, we have required banks to establish a sound compliance 
system. The aim is to ensure a bank’s identification of relevant laws and regulations, analysis 
of risks of non-compliance, and prioritization of compliance risks.  
The Bangko Sentral also recognizes the critical role that external auditors play in providing 
an 
institutions’  condition  and 
performance. In connection with this, we have further rationalized the guidelines governing 
the selection, appointment and the reporting requirements for external auditors of banks.  
As  a  further  measure,  we  have  issued  new  guidelines  on  internal  audit  function.  The 
standards  define  the  status  and  scope  of  the  internal  audit,  prescribe  the  minimum 
qualifications for bank internal auditors, and highlight the importance of the audit committee 
in establishing appropriate mechanisms for reporting financial improprieties or malpractices. 
independent  and  objective  assessment  of 
financial 
Shift to international accounting standards 
The  BSP  also  spearheaded  the  full  adoption  by  the  banking  system  of  prescribed 
international  financial  reporting  standards  (IFRS)  and  international  accounting  standards 
(IAS) for enhanced risk disclosure and better market discipline.  
The  implementation  of  the  Philippine  Financial  Reporting  Standards  (PFRS)  and  the 
Philippine  Accounting  Standards  (PAS)  is  expected  to  improve  the  quality  of  financial 
information to be disclosed to market participants.  
In relation to this, we have issued the new financial reporting package (FRP), in accordance 
with  the  provisions  of  PFRS/PAS.  The  new  FRP  will  facilitate  an  enhanced  off-site 
surveillance by Bangko Sentral of its supervised entities.  
BIS Review 85/2007 
 3
Corporate governance and Basel II 
Moreover, improved governance in banks and other financial institutions remains an integral 
aspect of our continuing agenda to promote a sound and stable banking system. This will be 
highlighted  further  as  we  begin  to  fully  implement  the  revised  risk-based  capital  adequacy 
framework under Basel II this year.  
The new Basel II-based framework will not only focus on the computation of the appropriate 
level of capital given a certain level of exposure, but will also underscore the need for more 
market  disclosures  by  banks  on  their  risk  exposures  and  risk  management  practices.  The 
required disclosures to the public of bank capital structure and risk exposures are aimed at 
promoting  greater  market  discipline  in  line  with  the  so-called  Pillar  3  of  the  Basel  II 
recommendations. 
These reform initiatives should go a long way in establishing a sound governance regime at 
the institution level for a more effective and stronger financial intermediation. Ultimately, this 
will help preserve overall integrity and stability of the banking system.  
In fact, there are already a number of success stories on governance at the institution level. 
Let me briefly highlight some of them.  
One  universal  bank  was  able  to  exit  from  its  5-year  rehabilitation  program,  partly  due  to 
improvements  in  corporate  governance  and  oversight.  This  generated  positive  results, 
highlighted by a reduction in the Bank’s NPA ratio, strengthening of its capital position and 
improvement in the Bank’s profitability and liquidity. 
Another bank was able to achieve progress in building up its capital. The bank successfully 
raised its capital through issuance of tier 1 capital (common shares, preferred and hybrid tier 
1  capital),  thereby  increasing  its  CAR  from  14  percent  as  of  end-September  2005  to  27 
percent as of end-March 2007! 
Still another universal bank launched a major bank-wide initiative designed to restructure its 
whole credit delivery process and resolve the increasing volume of its non-performing loans. 
This  program,  embedded  under  the  Bank’s  credit  excellence  thrust,  includes  technical 
infrastructure and system enhancements, policy reviews and credit organization alignment. 
Coupled  with  good  governance  principles,  the  Bank  was  able  to  achieve  a  significant 
decrease  in  its  NPL  ratio  from  8.68  percent  to  3.99  percent  in  March  2007.  Its  risk 
management system also significantly improved, enabling the Bank to allocate capital among 
the  various  businesses  more  appropriately  and  building  its  capabilities  to  engage  in 
derivatives activities. 
The examples set by these banks demonstrate the crucial beneficial role of good corporate 
governance in ensuring and sustaining a strong foundation for growth and profitability. I hope 
their stories will inspire other banks to take the path of good governance in word and in deed. 
In closing, I would like to thank BAIPHIL for its steadfast support for BSP’s reform initiatives, 
particularly, in championing corporate governance. 
Congratulations  to  the  newly  elected  officers,  directors  and  committee  chairpersons!  I  am 
confident that you will lead BAIPHIL in a professional manner and exemplify the very ideals 
of good governance.  
Thank you all. Mabuhay ang BAIPHIL! Mabuhay ang Philippine banking sector! 
4 
 BIS Review 85/2007
