Martín Redrado: Consolidating growth through innovation  
Speech by Mr Martín Redrado, Governor of the Central Bank of Argentina, at the Conference 
“Consolidating  Growth  through  Innovation”,  organised  by  the  Council  of  the  Americas, 
Buenos Aires, 7 August 2007. 
 We  are  gathered  here  today  to  exchange  and  develop  ideas  on  innovation  as  a  tool  to 
consolidate growth.  
The first thing that came to mind when I was preparing this speech was to try and explain 
what role innovation has played regarding the current monetary and financial policy strategy, 
what  it  has  contributed  during  these  years  in  office,  and  to  what  extent  it  promotes 
macroeconomic stability.  
All  in  all,  the  question  is:  how  innovating  and  how  effective  is  the  existing  monetary  and 
financial policy framework in Argentina? 
I must say that, paradoxically, in answering this question the financial market turbulence of 
the past two weeks gave me a big hand.  
What  we  are  experiencing  today  has  enabled  us  to see  our  global  monetary  and  financial 
policy strategy in action. Far from being erratic, each move in this strategy has been in line 
with  the  intertemporal  goals  of  equilibrium  in the  monetary  market,  the  preservation  of  the 
value  of  currency  and  the  stability  and  depth  of  the  financial  system.  I  say  “intertemporal” 
because the Central Bank has “an across-cycle” view rather than a short-term one.  
Worsening  recession  in  the  US  real  estate  market,  its  impact  on  those  who  are  more 
exposed  to  these  assets,  and  their  effects  on  consumption  and  investment  hit  both 
developed and emerging countries alike.  
In  industrial  countries,  the  fall  of  the  markets  in  the  past  two  weeks  swept  more  than  two 
thirds of this year’s returns away. 
I believe we are witnessing a belated “re-pricing” of risk in financial markets that is entering a 
new stage where there is a “spillover” toward the set of asset classes and global investors 
worldwide.  
Evidently, the fall of the US real estate market will deepen and thus affect growth. Defaults 
on low-quality mortgage loans are being largely absorbed by financial institutions; therefore, 
the  effect  on  aggregate  demand  will  depend  on  how  they  requirements  for  new  loans  are 
being adjusted. 
The Fed will react more aggressively only if the phenomenon goes beyond an expected (and 
even welcome) “correction” of financial asset prices and becomes a credit crunch threatening 
economic stability.  
In my view, sound economic growth in the rest of the world is undoubtedly a positive factor 
that balances (and also mitigates) the US weakness. 
Against  this  turbulent  backdrop,  which  leads  to  tighter  credit,  especially  in  the  riskiest 
countries,  Argentina  has  shown  that  it  has  the  necessary  exchange  rate  and  monetary 
institutions to provide its population with a horizon of solvency and predictability.  
And even though predictability and innovation do not always go hand in hand, our monetary 
policy capacity to react to an external crisis served to maintain the horizon of stability. At the 
same  time,  this  has  resulted  in  an  innovative  behavior  compared  to  the  spasmodic 
responses that Argentina featured over history. 
BIS Review 87/2007 
 1
Greater  uncertainty  is  a  good  exercise  to  understand  that  it  is  possible  to  live  with 
international volatility, without fearing for the future of our savings or the stability of our jobs. 
Action taken, encompassing a set of financial and banking regulations and direct intervention 
in the monetary, foreign exchange and financial asset markets, responds to a preventive and 
consistent strategy developed in the past few years to ensure the necessary capacity and 
strength to prevent frights in times of turbulence.  
Prudential foreign reserve accumulation is an example that speaks for itself. As with every 
insurance policy, it represents an “abstract” benefit while it is not used, but a “concrete” one 
in  financial  stress  situations:  the  $44  billion  in  the  Central  Bank’s  coffers  were  enough  to 
discourage speculation.  
The  current  managed  floating  regime  aims  to  prevent  excessive  short-term  volatility  that 
affects spending, saving and investment decisions. At the same time, the current framework 
avoids providing “foreign exchange insurance” that would favor the inflow of “hot money”.  
Along  these  lines,  avoiding  a  hysterical  reaction  by  the  monetary  authority  in  the  first  two 
days of the international turbulence was key to prove the adequacy of the current exchange 
rate regime. The “fear of floating,” well-known in the economic literature, is still alive in the 
Argentine collective memory, even among sophisticated analysts and the specialized press.  
Afterward, and in order to reduce uncertainty, our action combined direct intervention in the 
foreign  exchange  market  –  in  coordination  with  state-owned  banks  –  to  avoid  inflationary 
pressures. Then we continued with the provision of liquidity in the money market so that the 
natural  increase  in  interest  rates  would  not  become  persistent  and  thus  threaten  credit 
dynamics.  
To that end, monetary policy instruments were used such as the absorption of Central Bank 
securities (Lebacs and Nobacs) which, far from being conventional debt securities – they are 
backed by reserves – make up liquidity “cushions” that may be used in turbulent situations. 
Indeed,  we  have  begun  to  buy  back  short-,  medium-  and  long-term  securities  to  inject 
liquidity  to  the  market,  proving  that  they  are  in  fact  monetary  policy  instruments.  Besides, 
regulatory measures were adopted – bimonthly calculation of banks’ liquidity requirements – 
to “decompress” stress situations in the money market. 
Clearly,  for  the  current  transition  stage  of  the  Argentine  economy,  there  is  no  other  viable 
and  sustainable  alternative  than  the  current  managed  floating  regime.  A  system  based  on 
free  floating,  still  called  for  by  many,  would  have  involved  the  risk  of  going  back  to  the 
devaluation-inflation spiral that has been so recurrent throughout our economic history. 
In the past few days, however, we also learnt that in spite of the necessary foreign exchange 
stability for the current transition stage, there is no “foreign exchange insurance.” We have 
seen that on Wednesday 25, when the upward trend was most marked, the exchange rate 
increased, leading to a volatility that ruled out hopes of guaranteed profits.  
When devaluation expectations became noticeable, threatening to manifest itself in the rest 
of the economy, we made it clear that we will mitigate steep increases potentially having an 
inflationary impact or causing uncertainty.  
Once the foreign exchange rate was stabilized, we adopted measures to reduce the upward 
pressure on interest rates, a process that will continue until normalization is achieved. 
But, what do we mean when we talk about a stage of transition?  
In post-crisis periods, the macroeconomic fundamentals usually overreact to then gradually 
readjust themselves and converge towards a long-lasting scenario.  
These transition stages take time and raise enormous challenges. Our neighboring countries’ 
experience 
in  both  policy  design  and 
implementation are the adequate way of riding them.  
flexibility  and  gradualism 
teaches  us 
that 
2 
 BIS Review 87/2007
During  the  Money  and  Banking  Conference  organized  by  the  Central  Bank  of  Argentina, 
Vittorio  Corbo,  President  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Chile,  stressed  the  sequential  process 
undergone  by  the  Chilean  economy  following  the  crisis  of  the  early  1980s.  Four  elements 
have  been  of  utmost  importance  in  this  long  process:  consolidating  fiscal  solvency  as  a 
countercyclical  tool,  reestablishing  external  sustainability,  restructuring  liabilities,  and 
rebuilding the financial system. Once all these aspects were addressed, progress was made 
in the consolidation of a regime that is nowadays highly credible. Thus, in 15 years, Chile 
managed  to  lead  inflation  from  around  30  percent  to  the  current  annual  2.9  percent,  after 
patiently building credibility and institutions.  
In  Argentina,  the  monetary  policy  transmission  channels  are  only  just  being  rebuilt,  since 
credit to the private sector accounts for 10 percent of the economy, still far below the Latin 
American  average.  Therefore,  patiently  rebuilding  the  power  of  monetary  policy  tools  is  a 
great step towards consolidating growth and stability. 
Meanwhile, monetary and financial policy should be conceived under a general equilibrium 
approach,  where  fiscal  solvency,  the  monetary  balance  and  external  sustainability  are 
mutually determined. Against this backdrop, a sustainable and long-lasting reduction of the 
inflation rate depends on the comprehensive, joint and coordinated action of the monetary 
policy, the fiscal policy, the wages policy, and the competition policy. 
Thus, we see that the current regime of control over the money supply and the demand for 
money combines the necessary doses of monetary prudence (as shown by sixteen running 
quarters of compliance with self-imposed monetary aggregate growth targets) and flexibility 
(which has enabled us to weather the recent turbulence).  
Through this scheme, by trading in the repo market, issuing Central Bank notes and bill, and 
collecting in advance the rediscounts granted during the crisis, we eliminated any potential 
excess money supply.  
In fact, in the first half of the year we sterilized 80 percent of foreign exchange purchases – 
up to almost ARS 25 billion. And this did not affect the Bank’s positive balance sheet. 
The  Monetary  Program  sets  indicative  targets  for  all  monetary  aggregates.  However,  the 
achievement of these targets is linked to the change in the means of payment, since in an 
economy  where  financial  normalization  has  not  yet  been  achieved,  it would  be  healthy  for 
savings – time deposits – to be more rapidly channeled back into the financial system.  
Deposit performance has not been affected by financial uncertainty and time deposits keep 
growing above the average. 
This  is  another  eloquent  example  of  the  strategy  developed  in  the  past  few  years  to  face 
contingencies:  the  recovery  of  banking  liquidity  and  solvency,  which  allows  us  to  have  a 
sound financial system today that acts as a “turbulence buffer.” In turn, improved profitability, 
together with capitalizations, strengthen the solvency of the system. 
Just as reserves play the role of liquidity insurance to the monetary authority, banks’ cash is 
the  first  defense  line  against  unexpected  events.  For  this  reason,  banking  regulations 
fostered  the  recovery  of  liquidity,  equivalent  to  almost  40  percent  of  total  deposits,  one  of 
soundest of the region.  
We should not forget about the growing dynamism of banks in getting resources through the 
international capital market. We have seen several institutions (not only the bigger but also 
the medium and small) gain access to medium- and long-term funding in capital markets with 
Argentine peso-denominated, fixed-rate instruments, unlike the case of the past decade. 
All in all, besides mitigating volatility and its effect on real variables, action taken prevented 
the growth of the interbank rate from leading banks to increase the long-term interest rates, 
such as the rates charged on secured and mortgage loans. This is in line with our strategy to 
boost credit to households and businesses. 
BIS Review 87/2007 
 3
For a while now, we have been creating incentives for the recovery of credit to the private 
sector  from  a  set  of  specific  measures.  These  measures  had  a  two-fold  aim:  on  the  one 
hand,  extending  access  to  potential  borrowers  and,  on  the  other,  improve  the  quality, 
quantity and cost of credit for those who already have access to financing. 
Today, credit growth is widespread and has not been affected by turbulence either.  
Credit lines of up to ARS 200,000 for small, medium and micro enterprises are growing faster 
every year.  
Agroindustrial  production  and  services  were  the  productive  sectors  that  boosted  the 
extension of financing to firms in the first half of 2007, concentrating over 80 percent of loans. 
The latest growth of secured loans is the highest since the recovery begun in 2004, and it 
takes place in a context where automotive sales to the domestic market reached new record 
highs.  
Something similar happens with mortgage loans. In the past few months, they showed the 
greatest  growth  since  mid-2005,  when  they  reverted  their  downswing.  Mortgage  loans  are 
mostly  granted  to  households,  mainly  up  to  ARS  250,000,  and  currently  account  for  70 
percent of loans – against 54 percent a year ago. 
Furthermore, our policies help improve compliance: the nonperforming portfolio was reduced 
to only 4 percent of private financing. 
Finally,  we  have  adopted  measures  that  are  producing  what  I  consider  to  be  the  major 
innovations in Argentine economic history.  
A monetary and financial system that is independent from the public sector, and that takes 
and  trades  in  domestic  currency,  with  a  lender  of  last  resort  that  also  lends  in  domestic 
currency.  
In  this  regard,  we  have set  strict  guidelines  to  reduce  exposure  to  the national,  provincial, 
and municipal public sectors. Ceilings have been established based on the capital of each 
institution and on the relevant jurisdiction. In addition, an overall maximum restriction was set 
at 35 percent of each bank’s total assets, which is fully effective now.  
As a result, banks’ exposure to the public sector accounts for only 17 percent of total assets, 
vis-à-vis around 50 percent during the end of the crisis.  
Besides, we took specific measures to prevent those who cannot repay in US dollars from 
borrowing in that currency, encouraging the development of the credit market in Argentine 
pesos. 
In  the  financial  arena,  we  see  that  the  government  share  in  banks’  total  assets  was 
dramatically reduced since the crisis. This crowds in the private sector. The non-performing 
portfolio  has  hit  an  all-time  low.  The  system  has  already  shown  a  positive  balance  for  a 
couple  of  fiscal  years  now,  and  the  process  of  capitalization  and  extension  of  terms  for 
liabilities  has  been  gathering  momentum  in  the  past  few  years.  Thus,  we  now  have  a 
financial system that is more mature and better matched. 
In the current monetary scenario, currently there are no symptoms of a weakened demand 
for  domestic  currency,  and  monetary  aggregates  have  been  strictly  controlled  to  keep  the 
balance between supply and demand.  
All  in  all,  the  new  international  scenario  creates  new  opportunities  and  challenges  for  the 
monetary  strategy,  but  without  jeopardizing  the  continuity  of  the  ongoing  program  nor 
disrupting the rules of the game  
On the contrary, international volatility can provide greater room for maneuver in terms of use 
of  available  instruments,  that  is,  the  foreign  exchange  and  interest  rates  to  achieve  the 
intermediate targets (monetary program) and final targets (intertemporal inflation rate) of the 
4 
 BIS Review 87/2007
Central  Bank's  monetary  policy,  the  greatest  contribution  of  it  to  stability  being  the 
transparency and predictability of its guidelines. 
Central Bank actions show us the consistency and effectiveness of the innovative strategy 
we are implementing, both in the monetary and the financial arena. This is a strategy that, in 
stages of transition such as this one, requires the essential monetary policy tools to act in 
coordination so as to consolidate sound economic growth with social inclusion.  
Thank you very much. 
BIS Review 87/2007 
 5
