Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Potential for new linkages and opportunities between 
Japan and Malaysia 
Speech  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia,  at  the 
Malaysia-Japan  Business  Forum  "Enhancing  New  Linkages  And  Opportunities",  Kuala 
Lumpur, 24 August 2007. 
 It is my honour and great pleasure to be here to speak at this important forum which brings 
together government leaders and the business community from our two countries. I would 
like  to  take  the  opportunity  to  thank  the  Japan  External  Trade  Organisation  (JETRO)  for 
inviting  me  to  speak  at  this  Forum.  JETRO  has  played  an  important  role  in  fostering  the 
economic relations between Malaysia and Japan. While Japan and Malaysia has established 
strong  economic  ties,  the  environment  in  which  we  are  operating  has  experienced 
pronounced  changes.  These  changes  present 
linkages  and 
opportunities between Japan and Malaysia.  
the  potential 
for  new 
Enhancing interlinkages and integration in Asia  
Asia  today  is  increasingly  recognised  as  a  dynamic  growth  region  in  the  global  economy. 
Asia's previous success was accomplished in part by strengthening its global interlinkages by 
exports  to  the  rest  of  the  world.  Today,  new  regional  interlinkages  are  emerging  as  Asia 
expands  further  its  trade  and  investment  within  the  region,  a  trend  that  has  generated 
mutually reinforcing regional growth.  
The Asian economic integration is now already well advanced through the intensification of 
intra-regional trade and investment. Trade within Asia now accounts for more than half of the 
total trade of the region. This change is partly the result of the rapidly growing economies in 
Asia  ,  which  has  created  a  large and  expanding  cumulative  export  market.  This economic 
integration is also the result of Asia's participation in the globalization of production. These 
trends have led to greater diversification of economic activity in the region and a reduction in 
the over-concentration in the traditional export markets. In the area of investment, Japan has 
for several decades been a major foreign direct investor in the Asian region. A more recent 
phenomenon  is  the  more  widespread  cross-border  investment  undertaken  in  the  region  to 
capitalise on the growing opportunities arising from the diversity of economic strengths in the 
region.  
These  developments  have  increased  the  potential  for  Asia  to  be  an  important  engine  of 
growth in the global economy. The advancement that has been achieved in the increased 
economic integration needs to be reinforced by greater financial integration. Accelerating the 
regional  financial  integration  process  would  serve  as  a  powerful  impetus,  not  only  for 
reinforcing the trade and investment inter linkages, but more importantly to facilitate a more 
efficient international allocation of capital. In so doing it would contribute towards unlocking 
Asia's full potential in the global economy. Indeed, such greater financial integration would 
also play an important role in facilitating the allocation of some part of Asia's surplus funds 
into  productive  investments  within  the  region.  The  more  effective  and  efficient  recycling  of 
funds  within  the  region  will  help  reduce  financing  costs,  stabilize  financial  prices,  and 
increase  the  potential  for  the  diversification  of  risks.  All  this  would  cumulatively  promote 
stability and resilience of the financial systems in our region. The current turmoil in the global 
financial  markets  and  the  uncertainties  it  has  generated  underscores  the  need  for  greater 
financial stability and resilience of our financial systems.  
There  are  several  ways  to  enhance  financial  interlinkages,  some  of  which  are  already  in 
progress.  In  the  financial  sector,  we  have  already  seen  Asian  financial  institutions  expand 
BIS Review 94/2007 
 1
beyond domestic borders, thus strengthening the regional economic linkages. The regional 
authorities and regulators have also come together to develop the regional financial markets, 
including 
infrastructure  and 
mechanisms  for  crisis  management  and  resolution.  These  developments  have  paved  the 
way for new forms of economic partnerships and strategic alliances and advance further the 
regional integration process and its inter linkages with the rest of the world.  
the  supporting  regional 
the  capital  markets, 
financial 
Malaysia and Japan: interlinkages and opportunities  
Malaysia is one of the most open economies in the world, with significant global trade and 
investment linkages, and has become a significant profit centre for foreign direct investment 
for several decades. Similarly, the volume of trade activity in Malaysia is two times the size of 
our  economy,  among  the  highest  in  the  world.  Our  outreach  for  trade  has  been  with  both 
large and small economies. For several decades Malaysia has had an extensive economic 
relationship with Japan, with Japanese foreign direct investment being particularly significant 
since the mid 1980s. Japanese investments have also been important in making Malaysia 
part of the regional production network. To this day, Japan remains a significant partner in 
trade and investment for Malaysia. 
While  Japan's  economic  relationship  with  Malaysia  through  trade  and  investment  is  well-
established,  going  forward  there  is  significant  potential  for  strengthening  the  financial 
linkages. In this recent decade, Malaysia has significantly transformed our financial sector. 
The  restructuring,  consolidation  and  reform  of  the  financial  sector  has  strengthened  the 
capacity,  flexibility  and  resilience  of  the  financial  system.  In  addition,  there  has  been  the 
development of several new segments of the market, including the bond market and Islamic 
finance. The Malaysian bond market is the largest in South East Asia with a vibrant private 
debt  securities  market.  Malaysia  has  also  continued  to  progressively  liberalise  its  already 
open financial system to further enable free flow of funds into and out of the system. This 
transformation has opened up the potential for a range of new opportunities for participation 
in the financial sector in Malaysia and for facilitating greater financial flows within the region.  
New linkages and opportunities offered by Islamic finance  
This  decade  has  also  witnessed  a  rapid  evolution  and  global  expansion  of  the  Islamic 
financial  services  industry.  Malaysia  has  developed  a  comprehensive  Islamic  financial 
system  that  operates  in  parallel  with  the  conventional  financial  system.  More  recently,  its 
international  dimension  has  gained  significance  as  Islamic  finance  is  becoming  an 
increasingly important part of the international financial system. In doing so it is contributing 
to  strengthening  international  interlinkages  between  financial  markets  and  systems  that  is 
more  widespread  and  inclusive.  The  number  of  Islamic  financial  institutions  worldwide  has 
increased to more than 300 spanning over 75 countries. Total assets of the Islamic financial 
system  are  estimated  to  exceed  one  trillion  US  dollars.  It  is  among  the  fastest  growing 
financial  segments  in  the  world  with  an  estimated  annual growth  in  the  region  of 15  to  20 
percent.  There  is  now  a  growing  strong  demand  for  Islamic  financial  product  in  the  global 
market,  far  exceeding  the  current  availability  of  financial  products  and  services  being 
provided by the Islamic financial institutions.  
The global development of the Islamic financial system has become particularly important in 
this  more  challenging  financial  and  economic  environment.  As  the  international  financial 
system becomes more diversified and as this new form of financial intermediation develops, 
it  has  presented  businesses  with  alternative  means  of  raising  funds  while  investors  are 
presented with new asset classes. It has contributed towards greater diversification of risks. 
More importantly, the very fundamental requirement of Islamic finance is that it requires an 
underlying economic transaction thereby avoiding emphasis on speculative purposes. It also 
prohibits the commoditisation of risks, which leads to its proliferation through multiple layers 
2 
 BIS Review 94/2007
of  leveraging  and  disproportionate  distribution.  Islamic  finance  as  a  form  of  financial 
intermediation will also contribute towards enhancing the efficient mobilisation and allocation 
of  funds  across  regions.  This  will  bring  about  strengthening  of  a  more  wide  spread  and 
inclusive  global  financial  integration.  The  greater  diversification  of  risks  also  contributes 
towards promoting international financial stability. The transparent nature of Islamic financial 
contracts  and  the  need  for  underlying  economic  transaction  reinforces  the  stability  of  the 
Islamic financial system.  
Going forward, in the current liberalised and globalised environment, Islamic finance is at the 
threshold of a new dimension in strengthening financial interlinkages between nations across 
the globe. Just as the Old Silk Road in the 14th century offered a route that facilitated the 
trade  in  goods  from  the  East  to  the  West,  we  can  now  envisage  the  New  Silk  Road  that 
facilitates  financial  flows  across  borders  between  the  East  and  West.  As  regional  financial 
integration  intensifies,  it  will  be  a  route  that  will  facilitate  this  process.  The  previous  trade 
linkages between the Middle East and Asian regions also has potential to strengthen, being 
the two of the fastest growing regions in the global economy. While the world trade has on 
the average expanded by 9 percent over the period 2002-2006, Asia's trade with the Middle 
East  has  increased  on  the  average  by  30  percent.  In  2006  alone,  mega  transactions 
involving  corporate  acquisitions  and  real  estate  purchases  from  the  Gulf  to  Asia,  are 
estimated to total more than USD18 billion. Going forward, the value of such investments are 
expected to increase. Over the next five years, it is estimated that Asia will need USD1 trillion 
in  terms  of  infrastructure  investment  and  is  in  search  of  new  partnerships  and  strategic 
investors to co-invest in these undertakings. This trend would benefit the economic regions 
with high savings and surpluses such as Asia and the Middle East because it would promote 
intermediation  of  a  part  of  the  surplus  funds  in  the  region  to  be  channelled  to  productive 
investments in the region.  
Several  financial  centres  in  the  West,  Middle  East  and  Asia  are  now  introducing  Islamic 
finance  as  an  integral  part  of  their  financial  markets  to  offer  the  wide  range  of  financial 
products and services. This trend is envisaged to stretch the New Silk Road from East Asia 
and  Middle  East  and  extend  to  Europe  and  the  rest  of  the  world.  Indeed,  we  are  already 
seeing the participation of global investors and the international financial community.  
The Malaysian experience  
Let me share with you Malaysia's experience in developing on Islamic financial system in a 
highly  liberalised  environment.  Malaysia  has  developed  a  comprehensive  Islamic  financial 
system that includes the banking and takaful industries, and the Islamic money and capital 
markets – a matrix which mutually reinforces the integrity and stability of the Islamic financial 
system.  Significant  progress  has  in  particular,  been  achieved,  in  the  development  of  the 
Malaysian sukuk, or Islamic bond market. The Malaysian sukuk market has now evolved into 
the world's largest Islamic bond market. In 2007, Malaysia accounted for about two third of 
the global sukuk outstanding amounting to about USD47 billion. In 2002, the Government of 
Malaysia  issued  the  first  global  sovereign  sukuk.  With  this  issuance,  it  became  an 
international  benchmark  for  the  issuance  of  global  sukuk.  There  have  since  been  several 
further  sovereign  issues  in  the  global  capital  market.  The  sukuk  market  has  been  an 
important  source  of  financing  for  productive  investment  activities,  while  for  investors,  it 
provides greater potential for diversification into new asset classes.  
The  development  of  the  Malaysian  sukuk  market  has  involved  wide  ranging  initiatives  to 
facilitate  an  efficient  issuance  process,  the  price  discovery  process,  the  broadening  of  the 
investor  base,  the  establishment  of  a  benchmark  yield  promoting  the  liquidity  in  the 
secondary  market  and  strengthening  of  the  regulatory  framework.  These  initiatives  have 
been  reinforced  by  the  legal  and  Shariah  framework  and  the  supporting  financial 
infrastructure including the settlement system and the bond information system. 
BIS Review 94/2007 
 3
The  international  prudential  standards  for  Islamic  finance  is  set  by  the  Islamic  Financial 
Services Board (IFSB), is located in Malaysia . The IFSB thus formulates the international 
regulatory and supervisory standards for Islamic financial institutions aimed at achieving best 
practices in order to secure soundness and stability of the Islamic financial system. With the 
setting  up  of  the  Accounting  and  Auditing  Organisation  for  Islamic  Financial  Institutions 
(AAOIFI), appropriate accounting standards have also been put in place to reflect the true 
and fair value of banking operations to ensure greater accountability and responsibility of the 
financial institutions.  
With the increased maturity of our domestic bond market, further steps have been taken by 
Malaysia to allow foreign corporation, multinational corporations and multilateral agencies to 
raise funds in the Malaysian bond market with no restrictions for the utilisation of these funds. 
These  funds  maybe  used  to  finance  foreign  investment  activities  outside  the  country. 
Following this liberalisation, the inaugural ringgit denominated sukuk issue was in 2004 by 
the International Finance Corporation (the investment arm of the IBRD World Bank), followed 
by the issue by the IBRD World Bank in 2005. In November of 2006, our market was further 
liberalised to allow for the raising of foreign currency sukuks from our domestic market. More 
recently,  a  landmark  issuance  the  750  million  dollars  exchangeable  sukuk  Musyarakah  by 
Khazanah Nasional, the Government's investment arm, marked the world's first issue of its 
kind, 
to  conventional  equity-linked 
transactions.  These  issues  have  attracted  investors  from  outside  of  Malaysia,  thereby 
strengthening our interlinkages with other international financial markets.  
I am pleased to mention that a memorandum of understanding between the Central Bank of 
Malaysia and the Japan Bank for International Corporation (JBIC) has been signed this year 
for us to advance relations in this area between JBIC and the central Bank of Malaysia. In 
addition,  a  Japanese  consumer  credit  company  based  in  Malaysia  marked  another 
significant milestone by issuing an Islamic commercial papers early this year.  
The changes that have occurred in the economic and financial environment in our region and 
the  global  environment  have  presented  us  with  wide  ranging  new  opportunities.  The 
partnership between Malaysia and Japan thus not only needs to evolve not only in the trade 
in goods and direct investment but also needs to encompass growing financial ties. Islamic 
finance  represents  a  vehicle  that  could  further  deepen  our  financial  relationship  and  the 
regional  integration  process.  In  enhancing  these  new  linkages  and  greater  integration,  it 
would contribute towards unlocking the new potential opportunities for our mutual prosperity.  
Thank you. 
features  common 
full  convertibility 
incorporating 
4 
 BIS Review 94/2007
