Caleb M Fundanga: Important building stones for successful organisations in 
Zambia 
Remarks by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, on the occasion of the opening 
of Investrust Bank PLC 2007 Management Strategic Planning Session, Mfuwe, 11 April 2007. 
 • The Managing Director 
• Heads of Departments 
• Members of the Investrust Bank Plc Management Team 
First of all, I wish to take this opportunity to say congratulations on your 10th anniversary attained on 
19th September, 2006. 
Considering that the Bank opened its doors at a very difficult time when confidence in locally owned 
banks was at its lowest, reaching 10 years is no mean achievement. The Bank of Zambia is proud to 
be associated with your achievements and can assure you of our full support now and the future. It 
was only on 30th March 2007 that Bank of China also celebrated 10 years of operations in Zambia. 
It is a great privilege and honour for me to officiate at this wonderful and history making occasion in 
your bank. History making in the sense that you have gathered in this conference to chart a path for 
your Financial Institution to ensure its sustained growth. Decisions you will make in this gathering are 
critical to all your stake holders. The public is keenly following your growth and performance. 
Allow  me  to  remind  you  of  the  following  issues  which  I  believe  are  important  building  stones  for 
successful organizations. 
Dynamic leadership 
1.  
Your  role  in  Investrust  Bank  Plc  is  very  crucial.  As  the  Management  team,  you  are  providing 
leadership. Your way of doing things must be exemplary, inspirational, and analytical, with drive and 
with integrity. Keep abreast with current affairs. As Financial Intermediaries in the economy, the public 
looks up to you for innovative and effective products. 
Customer focus 
2.  
The Bank of Zambia is keen to see that the Zambian public is offered quality service by the Banking 
industry. We wish to see more innovative products introduced on the market. 
I am glad to note that Investrust Bank Plc is part of some banks who teamed up under ZAMLINK to 
offer ATM services to their clients. Such collaboration is commended. It is in the same spirit that you 
have supported the RTGS and DDACC products. 
I will be pleased to learn that this conference will deliberate and resolve on how best the Bank will 
improve  service  delivery  to  greater  heights.  You  need  to  develop  financial  products  that  reflect  the 
country’s level of development and not just ape what is being done in developed countries. 
Sound practices 
3.  
In recent years, we have read of how “big” institutions have been brought down due to unprofessional 
conduct  by  their  senior  executives.  I  urge  Investrust  Bank  Plc  to  pro-actively  propagate  Corporate 
governance standards at all levels of Management. 
I  commend  the  Bank  for  the  newly created  dedicated  function of Risk Management  in  its structure. 
This will provide prudential guidance in the other areas of operations. 
I also commend the Bank for adopting a “Whistle-blowing” policy to help ensure professional conduct 
is adhered to at all times. 
These  measures,  Mr  Managing  Director  will  work  to  your  own  Bank’s  benefit.  The  Bank  of  Zambia 
stands ready to assist in any way in your quest for Best Practice. 
BIS Review 36/2007 
 1
Lending rates 
4.  
On the banking front, we have witnessed Bank lending rates follow the downward trend. Mr Managing 
Director, these are positive indicators. 
I  am  aware  that  the  perennial  complaint  from  our  local  business  houses  has  been  the  prohibitive 
interest rates charged by banks on credit facilities. There is need to continue work on reducing lending 
rates  further  as  the  current  levels  are  still  unbearable  by  most  of  our  upcoming  entrepreneurs.  In 
certain fora, Mr Managing Director, the borrowing culture of Zambians has been heavily criticized. It is 
said  that  Zambians  borrow  with  no  intention  of  paying  back.  It  is  one  of  the  reasons  the  Bank  of 
Zambia is taking seriously the matter of the Credit Reference Bureau being operational as soon as 
possible. The Bank of Zambia is keen to ensure this negative perception is eradicated. 
Banking services to the unbanked 
5.  
Mr Managing Director, late last year Bank of Zambia launched the findings of the FISCOPE SURVEY, 
a survey which revealed that 68% of Zambian have no access to banking services. I am glad that, true 
to  private  sector  entrepreneurial  spirit,  you  have  opened  a branch  in  Luangwa  where  there  was  no 
bank representation from pre-independence days. 
In spite of the not - so reliable electricity supply to the area and the not – so good road to Luangwa, 
you did not see these as impediments to bringing banking services to Luangwa but rather you have 
looked at them as challenges to be overcome. 
Mr Managing Director, the step taken by your bank is to be lauded. 
I  take  this  opportunity  to  appeal  to  the  entire  management  to  take  the  findings  of  the  FINSCOPE 
Survey  as  a  serious  challenge  to  the  Banking  Industry  to  reduce  the  percentage  of  the  unbanked 
population. 
Planned move to the Listed Tier of Lusaka Stock Exchange 
6.  
I am informed that due to the phenomenal growth of the Bank, Management and shareholders have 
agreed to move the Bank up the ladder to the Listed Tier of Lusaka Stock Exchange very soon. This 
has  become  necessary  in  order  to  raise  more  requisite  capital  and  enhance  the  bank’s  profile  and 
oversight. This is an important step as it will mean that the bank will broaden public participation in its 
ownership and other public institutions will now participate as well. I therefore call upon Zambians and 
parastatals to take up shares in the bank. 
I am told that the Bank is about to venture into new products such as Women Empowerment loans 
and Islamic Banking. We at the Central Bank welcome innovations such as empowerment loans but 
urge  caution  with  products  such  as  Islamic  Loans  since  an  innovation  of  this  nature  needs  close 
collaboration with the regulatory authority. 
Closing remarks 
7.  
In closing, Mr Managing Director, having celebrated your 10th anniversary I urge you not sit on your 
laurels. May this be a time of serious reflection as you chart your path towards celebrating your next 
10 years and beyond! 
I look forward to Investrust Bank Plc being represented in other countries as well. 
Regarding the strategic planning session that we are gathered here for, I wish to commend you, Mr 
Managing Director for coming up with this initiative. Every organization needs to plan its future actions 
and activities. This is a process that must be embraced by all top management. Although only senior 
managers are represented here today it is my expectation that what ever you will be discussing will 
have benefited from lower levels of your bank. For your plan to succeed it is important that all senior 
managers embrace the plan whole heartedly. 
With these remarks, I declare the Strategic Planning Conference of Investrust Bank Plc officially open. 
I thank you all. 
2 
 BIS Review 36/2007
