Njuguna Ndung’u: Savings-investment cycle – supporting pension schemes by 
protecting  the  value  of  pensions  and  promoting  efficiency  of  the  financial 
sector 
Remarks by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the annual 
luncheon of the Association of Retirement Benefits Scheme, Nairobi, 23 May 2007.  
 Chairman and Council members of the Association of Retirement Benefits Schemes,  
Distinguished guests,  
Ladies and Gentlemen  
I am happy to be with you today for this luncheon and I deeply appreciate this kind gesture 
from your association.  
Coming early in my tenure as Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, an occasion such as 
this affords me the opportunity to acquaint myself with so important a building block of the 
financial  sector  of  the  economy  as  yours.  I  hope  it  also  affords  you  an  opportunity  to 
understand  what  I  intend  to  achieve  during  my  tenure  and  what  that  means  to  your 
Retirement Benefits Schemes.  
I would like therefore to take this opportunity to share with you a few thoughts on Retirement 
Benefits Schemes and the Central Bank. I must first acknowledge and commend Retirement 
Benefits Schemes in which your association is a stakeholder, for the very important role they 
play in the welfare of the retirees as well as in support to the economy.  
To the retirees, Retirement Benefits Schemes provide an invaluable vehicle for accumulating 
savings during the life cycle of earnings and provides an insurance mechanism of a steady 
stream of payoffs at retirement period, which allows a decent living standard in retirement. 
This I regard as an important savings-investment cycle. But it works well when the financial 
sector also works well.  
To  the  economy  in  general,  Retirement  Benefits  Schemes  provide  a  vehicle  for  pooling 
financial resources for investment. For instance, I am made to understand that Retirement 
Benefits  Schemes  in  Kenya  have  acquired  assets  amounting  to  KSh212  billion.  This  is  a 
significant amount of savings.  
Retirement  Benefits  Schemes’  assets  require  security  in  two  senses.  First,  the  schemes 
require security in the ordinary sense of actual security of funds – the assurance that funds 
are available when needed by the beneficiaries. This security is provided by the Retirement 
Benefits Scheme managers operating within strict governance frameworks and oversight by 
the  regulator  of  the  benefits  schemes  –  the  Retirement  Benefits  Authority.  The  security  is 
further enhanced by other regulators of the financial system like Capital Markets Authority, 
Commissioner of Insurance, and (the institution I come from) – the Central Bank.  
Secondly, I think the main source of security lies in ensuring investment opportunities with 
rewarding  returns  that  are  also  predictable,  while  at  the  same  time  protecting  the  savings 
from  inflation  erosion.  Retirement  Benefits  Schemes  thus  thrive  well  in  stable  financial 
systems and where these benefits can be invested for gain and also develop the financial 
market.  Retirement  Benefits  Schemes  benefit  from  Central  Bank  in  both  scores:  stable, 
predictable low inflation; stable, well-functioning financial sector.  
The law mandates the Central Bank to play two overriding roles. I would therefore like to say 
a  word  or  two  on  how  the  Central  Bank  in  pursuit  of  the  two  overriding  goals  would  be 
beneficial to the Retirement Benefits Schemes.  
Let me start with inflation. The Central Bank is committed to pursue effective monetary policy 
that  is  consistent  with  the  development  agenda  of  the  country  and  the  development  of  an 
BIS Review 79/2007 
 1
appropriate  financial  sector  in  which  you  play  a  role.  In  particular,  the  commitment  is  to  a 
prudent  monetary  policy  that  keeps  a  tight  lid  on  inflation.  This  should  help  Retirement 
Benefits  maintain  the  value  of  benefits.  This  is  a  commitment  which  the  Central  Bank  will 
sustain and thus make a meaningful contribution to the economy and to Retirement Benefits 
Schemes. This environment allows you decide where to invest your funds and assures you 
that  whatever  payoffs  you  make  to  beneficiaries,  they  are  not  eroded  by  inflation  and  are 
mediated efficiently by the financial sector.  
To ensure financial sector stability, the Central Bank provides prudential guidelines and other 
regulations  to  guide  the  operations  of  the  banks  and  micro  finance  institutions  to  provide 
proper  functioning  and  orderly  exit.  The  Bank  is  also  charged  with  the  responsibility  to 
promote an efficient and effective payment, clearing and settlement system. This facilitates 
the proper working of the financial sector and stable payments systems.  
Note: Effective monetary policy requires an efficient financial sector. This has been identified 
as a sector to lead the way in the Vision 2030. I also anticipate that the financial sector will 
require to develop innovative products to tap into these savings provided by your schemes. I 
have observed the development of fund managers in the market in the last 5 years has been 
tremendous  –  a  positive  development.  I  am  therefore  looking  forward  to  a  good  working 
relationship with the industry as we strive to achieve the nation’s overall development goals.  
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 79/2007
