Tom K Alweendo: Economic emancipation of Africa and the way forward 
Speech by Mr Tom K Alweendo, Governor of the Bank of Namibia, at the Annual Dr. Sam Nujoma 
Public Lecture Series, Windhoek, 22 May 2007. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen: 
Let me first thank the organizers of this event for inviting me as a speaker. The organizers requested 
me to speak on the topic “Economic Emancipation of Africa and the way forward”. In itself this 
topic suggests two things, namely that the African economy is in bondage and that it can be freed from 
its bondage. 
Talking about economic emancipation in Africa is problematic in that Africa is a diverse continent with 
economies  that  are  significantly  different  and  thus  would  require  different  diagnosis.  There  are 
therefore no simple solutions to the question of economic emancipation in Africa. What is certain is 
that true economic emancipation in Africa will be realized only when the continent’s economies are 
growing at their full potential, which is not the case currently. 
Today there is a consensus among Africans and non-Africans alike, that Africa as a continent is far 
behind other continents in terms of economic development. Most of the poorest nations in the world 
are on  the  African continent.  For  example,  Africa’s GDP  accounts  for only  1.2  percent of  the  world 
GDP,  even  when  the  continent’s  population  is  11  percent  of  world  population.  Average  income  per 
person in Africa stands at about U$450 in comparison with U$5,000 for Malaysia. The proportion of 
the population that lives in abject poverty is estimated at 46 percent in Africa, compared to about 20 
percent  in  Latin  America  and  the  Caribbean.  We  are  all  aware  of  the  United  Nations  Millennium 
Development  Goals.  One  of  these  goals  is  to  halve  poverty  by  2015.  Only  a  few  countries  in  Sub-
Saharan  Africa  are  likely  to  meet  this  target.  It  is  estimated  that  the  continent  would  need  to  grow 
consistently  by  about  7  percent  per  year  to  be  able  to  reduce  poverty  by  half  as  envisaged  in  the 
MDGs. 
When comparisons are made between African and South-East Asia, the story is told that in the 1960’s 
Africa and South-East Asia were at the same level of economic development. Today, however, South-
East Asia is far ahead of Africa. Why did Africa lag behind so much over the last forty years? What did 
we neglect to do? There are probably a number of factors that has contributed to the slow economic 
development on the continent, but I would like to mention only three. 
First is the issue of leadership. Leadership is so important that no institution or country can prosper 
without effective leadership. Effective leadership requires that leaders are prepared to serve others as 
opposed to being served by others; leaders who put others ahead of their own agendas; leaders who 
are  not  too  concerned  about  self-promotion;  leaders  who  have  the  courage  to  take  unpopular  but 
correct decisions. What Martin Luther King ll said about leadership is revealing. He said “The ultimate 
measure  of  a  man  is  not  where  he  stands  in  moments  of  comfort  and  convenience,  but  where  he 
stands at times of challenge and controversy”. 
In my view, the continent has had a number of leaders who have mismanaged their economies and 
therefore contributed to the African economies to be in bondage we find ourselves today. We have 
had  leaders  who  were  more  interested  in  accumulating  personal  wealth  at  the  expense  of  their 
citizens. We have had leaders who promoted divisive policies that more often than not led to political 
instability  and  civil  wars.  Most  of  our  African  leaders,  at  that  time,  concentrated  more  on  political 
leadership at the expense of economic leadership. 
It is gratifying, however, to note that this is changing. If you follow the agenda of the African Union 
today, the African leaders are well aware that the promotion of economic development should be a 
priority.  There  are  also  encouraging  signs  that  show  that  things  are  changing  for  the  better.  For 
example, over the past three years Africa’s economic growth has averaged 4.4 percent compared to 
3.5 percent in the 1990s. If the continent is able to sustain these growth rates at this level, we might 
see a difference in the high incidence of poverty on the continent. 
The  second  factor  that  in  my  view  has  contributed  to  the  lack  of  economic  development  on  the 
continent  is  the  legacy  of  colonialism.  Most  countries  on  the  continent  became  independent  in  the 
1960s  and  1970s.  The  unfortunate  thing  is,  however,  that  after  the  colonial  powers  departed,  they 
BIS Review 56/2007 
 1
continued to dominate the African economies. What is bad about this is not so much the fact that the 
departed colonial powers continued to be involved in the African economies, but rather the fact that 
they did so at the expense of the Africans. The colonial powers continued to exploit the African raw 
materials  to  build  their  economies  at  the  expense  of  the  African  economies.  What  is  astonishing, 
though, is the fact that we allowed them free passage to do so, and we still do allow them to do so. 
To  date  we  still  continue  to  behave  as  if  we  cannot  manage  our  own  economic  affairs  without  the 
departed colonial powers’ assistance. It is astonishing to know that many an African country will still 
prefer a European consultant to advice on economic matters. This is in spite of the fact that over the 
years,  Africa  has  spent  enormous  amounts  of  financial  resources  on  education  and  training. 
Unfortunately, we are still reluctant to practically demonstrate our skills. We still want to think that we 
are less experienced to be experts in economic matters. As a result, we continually believe that we 
need  to  build  new  capacities  or  we  need  assistance  from  the  departed  colonial  powers.  What  we 
forget is that expertise comes with practice and if we fail to practice what we have learned, we will 
never become experts at anything. 
I am not advocating a position where Africa should not have any economic ties with other continents. 
On  the  contrary,  what  I  am  advocating  is  economic  ties  with  other  continents  that  are  mutually 
beneficial. For too long Africans have been hoodwinked by non-Africans where, in our desperation to 
gain their acceptance, we agreed to non-beneficial economic deals. The lesson we must have learned 
from these experiences should be that, as a general rule, no nation helps another nation unless it is in 
its  self  interest.  It  is  therefore  time  that  as  Africans  we  must  start  believing  that  we  have  the 
capabilities and the expertise to run our economic affairs to our benefit. 
The third factor I would like to mention briefly is that of culture and tradition. While I firmly believe that 
a nation without culture and tradition will be a lost nation, we should also recognize the fact that all 
cultures do evolve. A particular culture or tradition that was cultivated at a particular period of time may 
hinder  our  economic  development  if  we  were  to  continue  to  practice  such  a  tradition  without  any 
adaptation. For example, I am told of an African tradition where when a man dies, all his cattle are 
slaughtered at the time of his burial. In most African countries, we still continue to practice communal 
land tenure system. These are some of the practices that have the potential to hold us back to achieve 
our full economic potential. 
What is then the way forward to emancipate Africa economically? It can be done and all what we need 
to do is to re-focus our mind on what is important for our economic development and less on what is 
convenient. I believe that we can create the necessary momentum for our economic emancipation if 
we continue to address those issues that are important to Africa’s economic development. Following 
are some of the issues that we need to continue to address. 
Political stability is a must. No economic development can take place in an environment of civil wars 
and political unrest. When you have social unrests, scarce resources that are necessary for economic 
development  are  diverted  to  unproductive  war  expenditures.  We  therefore  need  to  continue  to 
promote  policies  that  will  prevent  political  instability.  It  is  heartening  to  note  that  political  stability  is 
improving in Africa. Although there are still few countries that are facing civil wars, the situation has 
significantly improved compared to the 1970s and 1980s. 
Macroeconomic stability is equally important. During the 1980s, Africa lost a decade in terms of 
economic  growth  partly  due  to  the  absence  of  prudent  macroeconomic  policies.  High  and  volatile 
inflation  rates,  unsustainable  budget  deficits  and  balance  of  payments  crisis  characterized  many 
countries  on  our  continent  during  this  period.  Therefore,  maintaining  and  further  consolidating  both 
political and economic stability would be an important ingredient in enhancing economic growth. 
Today  education  is  widely  recognized  as  an  important  contributor  to  economic  growth  because  it 
leads to the creation of new knowledge and innovation. Not only is education important for economic 
growth,  it  is  probably  the  most  basic  necessity  after  those  that  are  vital  to  life  itself,  such  as  food, 
clothing  and  shelter.  It  is  education  that  lifts  people  out  of  the  state  of  poverty.  The  huge  gaps  in 
economic  opportunities  that  we  witness  on  the  continent,  is  mainly  as  a  result  of  lack  of  skills  and 
knowledge. What we must, however, remember is that it is no longer enough to provide education as a 
social service. In today’s world where international boarders are fast crumbling, it is education that will 
distinguish winners from losers. As African countries, we have now to compete in the world market 
where competition is so fierce and only the fittest will survive. It is therefore critical that the education 
must be relevant and of high quality. 
2 
 BIS Review 56/2007
Not only should the education be of high quality, but it must also be practical. The education must lead 
to a situation where we are able and ready to use the knowledge we have acquired and find ingenious 
ways of addressing the economic problems facing Africa. This means Africa must continue to invest in 
its human capital, while at the same time creating incentives to keep them on the continent. 
Another  important  issue  that  needs  our  focus  is the quality of our public institutions.  Our  public 
institutions must be strengthened with the necessary capacity to carry out their mandates effectively. 
We must therefore ensure that we appoint only people with the required capabilities and willingness to 
lead our public institutions. To do otherwise will be wasting our scarce resources and the continuation 
of economic bondage. We should also guard against a situation where a number of what looks like 
good policies are developed, except that no one cares to ensure that such policies are implemented. 
One  of  the  fathers  of  modern  economics,  Adam  Smith,  in  his  seminal  publication,  the  Wealth  of 
Nations, observed already in 1776 that “Africa had been poor from time immemorial because it lacked 
the  navigable  rivers  and  natural  inlets  that  afford  the  benefits  of  low  cost  see-based  trade”.  This 
suggests that a great deal of the continent’s lack of economic development can be attributed to a lack 
of basic infrastructure. This is especially so in rural Africa where the majority of the population lives. 
Lack of basic infrastructure such as roads, electricity and telecommunication are prevailing conditions 
in most rural Africa. 
History  has  shown  that  in  most  regions  of  the  world  where  a  take-off  in  economic  growth  and 
development occurred, the “green revolution” preceded such a takeoff. This is true of China, India and 
even  the  USA.  I  therefore  believe  that  the  African  economic  take-off  will  be  accelerated  by  an 
expansion  of  agricultural  output.  In  fact,  the  agricultural  sector  is  where  Africa’s  comparative 
advantage  lies,  provided  that  the  WTO  negotiations  regarding  the  elimination  of  farm  subsidy  by 
advanced countries are successfully concluded. Africa will then need to scale up its investment in the 
agriculture  sector.  For  example,  African  farmers  need  training,  they  need  fertilizers  at  reasonable 
prices, and they need market outlets. All these require significant investment. A related problem is the 
lack  of  tradable  land  rights  in  most  African  countries,  especially  for  the  rural  communities.  Without 
ownership of the land, rural farmers would find it difficult to obtain funding from financial institutions to 
improve their production. 
I have attempted to point out what needs to happen for Africa to be economically independent. Among 
other things, there is a need for Africa to continue to invest in its human capital, physical infrastructure, 
and  institutional  development.  The  road  ahead  is  not  easy,  but  the  challenges  are  not  without  a 
solution.  However,  the  situation  demands  of  us  a  strong  vision  and  effective  leadership.  I  am 
convinced that Africa’s economic problems can only be solved by the Africans ourselves, and for us to 
succeed  we need  to  focus  our  attention  to what  is  important  and  necessary  as  opposed  to  what  is 
currently convenient. 
I thank you. 
BIS Review 56/2007 
 3
