Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Layon – money as vision of a nation 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas),  at  the  opening  of  the  Layon  Exhibit  at  the  BSP  Money 
Museum, Manila, 3 July 2007. 
 Monetary  Board  Members,  officers  and  directors  of  the  Philippine  Numismatic  and 
Antiquarian Society, Mr. and Mrs. Angel Cacnio, Mrs. Fely Asuncion and other members of 
the Asuncion family, fellow central bankers, ladies and gentlemen, good morning.  
The 14th anniversary of BSP finds us celebrating on several fronts – we have new facilities, 
an  exciting  exhibit  at  our  main  building  lobby,  and  the  grant  of  support  for  various  social 
projects.  
Another cause for celebration is the “coming home,” so to speak, of the designs for Philippine 
currency  that  were  proposed  in  the  1940s  to  the  1950s.  These  never  reached  Philippine 
shores, had never been in private hands, and were seen by the public only for the first time 
when these were included in the catalogue of the American auction house H. R. Harmer.  
Interestingly  enough,  it  was  Dr.  Benito  Legarda,  the  Central  Bank  official  who  started  the 
Money Museum, who called our attention to the auction. I therefore ask all of you to join me 
in acknowledging Dr. Legarda by giving him a round of applause. While Dr. Legarda cannot 
join us today, we are assured he is celebrating this moment with us as well.  
Dr. Legarda retired from the Central Bank more than two decades ago, but the central bank 
remains close to his heart. As they say, once a central banker, always a central banker.  
The Monetary Board was quick to realize the significance of these pieces in the history of the 
BSP  and  indeed,  of  our  country,  and  readily  approved  our  participation  in  the  auction.  I 
therefore ask all of you to join me in thanking the Members of the Monetary Board here with 
us today by giving them a round of applause.  
Canadian  numismatist  Douglas  Andrews  describes  the  pieces  as  “stunning  in  their  use  of 
proposed color schemes, vignettes, and different designs, many of which look contemporary 
even  by  present  standards.”  He  considers  the  bound  volume  containing  an  assortment  of 
3,500  different  trial  and  proof  notes  from  the  late  nineteen-forties  and  early  fifties  as  the 
largest single offering of color proof notes ever. 
Other  currency  designs  in  this  exhibition  are  those  made  by  Italian  company  Istituto 
Poligrafico dello Stato as well as by Filipino artists Angel Cacnio and Rafael Asuncion. They 
prove  that  the  artistic  talent  of  the  Filipino  is  indeed  world  class,  as  their  works  join  the 
foreign works in this exhibition.  
Mr.  Cacnio  allowed  us  to  reproduce  his  designs  for  the  exhibition,  and  we  thank  him, 
especially  as  he  joins  us  today  with  his  wife  Mrs.  Amelia  Cacnio.  On  the  other  hand,  Mr 
Asuncion has passed on, but we thank his wife Mrs. Fely Asuncion and her family for lending 
his works and for joining us today.  
The  exhibition  conceptualized  by  museologist  Ino  Manalo  proposes  that  currency  design 
embodies the vision and aspirations of a nation and its leaders. We can see in the proposed 
designs  for  instance  the  focus  on  power  generation,  the  importance  of  agriculture,  and 
excitement over the development of Mindanao.  
Layon, the exhibition title, refers in our native language to objectives, goals and visions. But I 
understand that it can also mean the deep part of the river, referring to the role of money as 
currency, as a current that flows through our economy and our lives.  
BIS Review 79/2007 
 1
Through  this  exhibit,  let  us  explore  the  convergence  of  art  and  the  economy  that  is 
established by currency design; the relationship between currency design and the vision of 
national economic development.  
Thank you all and good morning. 
2 
 BIS Review 79/2007
