Stanley Fischer: Overview and challenges facing the Israeli economy  
Speech by Professor Stanley Fischer, Governor of the Bank of Israel, at the Seventh Annual Herzliya 
Conference, Herzliya, 23 January 2007. 
 As you surely know, the Israeli economy is in very good shape. According to initial estimates by the 
Central Bureau of Statistics, GDP grew in 2006 by 5 percent, which seems all the more impressive as 
it  was  a  year  with  hostilities  in  the  north.  Furthermore,  we  saw  rises  in  investment,  exports, 
employment, and productivity, while unemployment continued to fall, reaching 8.3 percent, compared 
to a record high of 10.7 percent in 2003. The lowest unemployment rate the economy achieved since 
1990 was 6.6 percent. That was in 1996, when the labor market was at the start of structural change 
with  the  entry  of  foreign  workers,  and  it  is  therefore  reasonable  to  assume  that  the  natural  rate  of 
unemployment – that commensurate with full employment – is now at a higher level. At the same time, 
financial  stability  and  price  stability  have  been  maintained.  This  background  allowed  for  cumulative 
interest  rate  cuts  in  recent  months  such  that  now,  for  the  first  time,  there  is  a  significant  negative 
interest rate gap of 0.75 percentage points, between the Bank of Israel and the US Fed rates. 
These achievements are beginning to give us encouraging signs regarding certain improvements in 
two problematic areas that the economy faces: 
• 
The public sector debt burden. This, one of the biggest problems in the Israeli economy, 
fell  to  about  88  percent  of  GDP  compared  to  97  percent  at  the  end  of  2005.  This  is  a 
remarkable achievement, but it is important that we continue along this path to bring the ratio 
down to 60 percent of GDP – the ceiling set by the Maastricht treaty – and after that, to bring 
the ratio down even further. 
Poverty,  a  major  topic  of  public  debate  in  Israel.  The  Bank  of  Israel  monitors  not  only 
relative  poverty  –  a  measure  principally  of  social  gaps  –  but  also  a  measure  of  absolute 
poverty. This is a measure of the individual's ability to purchase a basket of essential goods. 
We  have  therefore  been closely  following  developments  of  a  measure  of  the  poverty  line, 
calculated  in  real  terms  since  our  base  year  (which  we've  taken  as  1997  for  calculation 
purposes). From our analyses, we see that in 2005 there was some drop in absolute poverty 
after it had risen in the years 2001 to 2004. Those years where the absolute poverty index 
rose  could  be  attributed  to  the  period  of  recession  in  economic  activity,  and  in  2004, 
individuals were suffering from the effects of cutbacks in welfare payments which continued 
gradually  even  after  the  recession.  The  drop  in  poverty  in  2005  could  be  attributed  to  the 
growth that began in 2003. By the way, though poverty was seen to rise in 2005 – according 
to the relative measurement – it rose more moderately than in previous years. 
 Only in a few months time, when the Incomes Survey for 2006 is published, will we be able to see 
what happened with poverty – both in relative and absolute terms – in the past year and we all hope 
that we'll find that economic growth continues to positively affect all levels of society. 
We  all  have  a  tendency  to  praise  ourselves  for  our  achievements  and  blame  external  forces  when 
things  go  wrong.  But  the  truth  is  that  some  of  the  achievements  in  the  Israeli  economy  in  2006 
stemmed from the favorable condition of the world economy; almost everywhere, and in particular the 
emerging market economies, registered rapid growth and low inflation in 2006. 
But even after taking into account the external factors, we may still attribute an important part of our 
economic  achievements  to  our  own  actions.  I'll  start  with  macroeconomic  policy.  And  I  refer  to  the 
government's  budget  policy  –  and  this  year  the  government  managed  to  steer  the  state  budget  for 
2007 through the Knesset very shortly after the end of 2006 – and to the Bank of Israel's interest rate 
policy. And it is impossible not to note the most important role: that of the business sector, which for 
years has grown at a faster pace than the economy in general. 
Looking forward, we estimate that the economy will grow this year by 4.6 percent and that inflation will 
reach the target range of 1-3 percent. In terms of inflation-over-the-past-12-months, this is expected 
only by the fourth quarter of the year. In any case, the Bank of Israel's policy is to adjust the interest 
rate gradually as and when needed, to avoid unnecessary shocks to the economy and the financial 
markets. 
BIS Review 10/2007 
 1
I would like to add a few words about the many affairs that are termed – rightly or not – as corruption 
scandals. Obviously we'd prefer that such affairs didn't happen, but it is important to stress that the 
moment they do arise, they are dealt with promptly and seriously. This is a very important bright side, 
and it is not a trivial point. It shows that the judicial and legal infrastructures are not prepared to put up 
with  such  unacceptable  behavior.  We  should  also  remember,  that  in  most  of  the  cases,  we  are 
referring only to a suspicion and it is not clear what the final outcome will be. In the past, we have seen 
many cases of suspicion that in the end came to nothing. 
And  what  is  the  most  important  challenge  facing  the  Israeli  economy  today?  It  is  the  challenge  to 
maintain this growth drive and to translate it into what we term "sustainable growth." And what is the 
most important topic on this agenda? First, macroeconomic policy, i.e. budget policy and interest rate 
policy, which I noted earlier and the importance of which, I hope, the general public understands. And 
secondly, further to policy, is the need to continue with reforms. 
Here I would like to expand on reforms in the Israeli economy. 
The panel before me spoke about one of the most important reforms in recent years, the reform of the 
capital market. There were other important reforms, such as the reforms of the ports, and personal 
income tax. 
In this context, I would like to present an initial list that we at the Bank propose to put forward. And 
more so, the Bank's Research Department is working to draft proposals for these reforms. Specifically 
our list includes: 
1. 
In the labor and welfare fields: Here we return to a subject we have proposed, and which 
we are working on together with the Prime Minister's Office and the Ministry of Finance: that 
of negative income tax ("earned income tax credit"). Other topics in hand are the increase in 
incentives to go to work, inter alia, through helping improve work support services, foremost 
of  which  is  childcare,  and  strengthening  the  Wisconsin  Plan  along  such  lines  that  are 
currently  being  discussed.  That  is  tightening  the  link  between  incentives  for  participating 
companies and absorbing the individuals into the labor force in general, and ensuring quality 
placements for the workers in particular, as well as adjusting the program to the needs of the 
various population groups. 
In  education:  It  is  important  that  a  reform  of  the  higher  education  system,  along  with  the 
primary and secondary systems, is examined. Concerning higher education, the whole issue 
of  funding  must  be  dealt  with.  Fortunately,  a  new  committee  has  been  set  up  headed  by 
former Minister of Finance, Beiga Shochat, to seriously tackle the field of higher education, 
and the Bank of Israel is involved in two sub-committees on this matter. As for primary and 
secondary  schooling,  one  must  find  ways  to  increase  the  effectiveness  of  the  system,  to 
direct sufficient resources to it and to ensure equal opportunities for children from all strata of 
society  in  order  to  encourage  and  nurture  excellence.  Education  is a  very  important  issue 
that will aid economic growth in the long term as well as reduce social gaps. In Israel, as 
elsewhere, the yield on education has increased a great deal in recent years. 
Banking competition: The Bachar committee achieved its mission of increasing competition 
in the credit field, but now we face the challenge of boosting competition in the retail field. 
Here, the Supervisor of Banks is the major player, and together with the management of the 
Bank of Israel and me, is examining ways to strengthen competition in the banking system 
including making it easier to transfer accounts from one bank to another, and more besides. 
There  is  the  field  of  bank  charges,  and  in  this  context  the  Bank  of  Israel  has  already 
prepared  a  bill  that  would  grant  the  Supervisor  of  Banks  the  authority  to  regulate  fees  in 
areas that have no competition. This bill will be submitted in the next few days. 
In  infrastructure:  In  this  context  I  refer  to  the  fields  of  transportation  –  roads,  rail,  public 
transport  –  and  the  field  of  electricity  –  and  here  it  is  important  to  carry  out  the  planned 
reforms. 
Real estate: Here our emphasis is mainly on developing a more efficient real estate market, 
on  land  ownership  (the  Israel  Lands  Administration)  and  on  easing  the  bureaucratic 
processes such as planning, licensing and registration. Reform in this field is clearly not a 
simple matter but it is important to begin freeing the real estate market in Israel from its many 
current restrictions. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
2 
 BIS Review 10/2007
6. 
7. 
8. 
Defense spending: This is very much on the agenda of the day, and I am happy to see that 
a committee headed by former director general of the Ministry of Finance, David Brodet, is 
dealing with this subject, and the Bank of Israel is involved. Clearly every country has the 
responsibility of defending its citizens, but it is difficult to know exactly what resources are 
required. It is easy to err in either underestimating or overestimating the funds needed. So it 
is  important  to  establish  from  time  to  time  a  select  group  of  professionals,  such  as  the 
current committee, to check this matter thoroughly, and it is important too to follow through 
on any resulting recommendations. 
Health: This subject often pops up on the agenda and, among other things, it is important to 
examine the pricing of various health services. I would like to add here that overall the health 
system in Israel is very good by any measure in international comparison. 
Another matter of concern, particularly when coming to approve the state budget, is that of 
examining  a new  approach  to  the  budget  process. This  includes  a  multi-year  approach  to 
fixing  budget  aggregates,  the  involvement  and  responsibility  of  the  different  government 
ministries  in  the  budget  process,  decentralizing  budget  responsibility  through  quality 
management of local governments, and increasing transparency of the budget process. 
Most of these matters are in different stages of treatment by the government, and the Bank of Israel 
not only supports their progress but also assists as best it can. 
As I said earlier, this is only a very formative list, part of it already being dealt with and others only 
partly so, if at all. What is important is to start straight away on creating the necessary infrastructure 
that will propel the economy forward for many years. In other words, we must do everything possible 
to ensure this drive toward sustainable growth. This is vital not just for the future of the economy, but 
also for the future of the State of Israel. 
BIS Review 10/2007 
 3
