Emsley D Tromp: Economic perspectives of Curaçao 
Address delivered by Dr Emsley D Tromp, President of the Bank of the Netherlands Antilles (Bank van 
de  Nederlandse  Antillen),  on  the  occasion  of  the  Corporate  and  Commercial  Breakfast  Meeting 
organized by RBTT Bank, Willemstad, 3 May 2007.  
 Good morning ladies and gentlemen, 
For this morning, I have been asked to give you an overview of the outlook for Curaçao’s economy. 
However, given the fact that our host, RBTT, is a regional player in the financial market, I cannot do 
this  without  taking  the  regional  outlook  and  our  current  political  and  socio-economic  situation  into 
consideration. 
Ladies and gentlemen, the Caribbean region has made impressive economic progress in recent years. 
With a growth rate of around 5 percent in 2006, this progress was supported by strong private sector 
performance, mainly in the construction and tourism sectors. The International Monetary Fund expects 
2007 to become the fifth year of what is already the most vigorous period of recovery and expansion 
since the 1970s. The outlook remains bright, as a growth rate of 4.2 percent is expected for 2008. 
Similar  to  other  economies  in  the  Caribbean,  Curaçao’s  economy  is  characterized  by  its  smallness 
and  openness,  which  makes  it  highly  vulnerable  to  external  shocks.  Furthermore,  the  Caribbean 
economies are relatively less diversified – relying oftentimes on one export product. Contrary to most 
economies  in  the  region,  Curaçao  experienced  an  average  annual  economic  growth  of  less  than  1 
percent during the past five years. Our weak economic performance has been accompanied by high 
unemployment  rates  –  especially  among  the  youth  –  and  increasing  marginalization.  Without 
pretending  that  Curaçao’s  economic  structure  or  factor  markets  are  completely  similar  to  those  of 
other economies in the region, I do believe that given these numbers, we can conclude that Curaçao 
is lagging behind. The question then arises, what are we doing wrong? 
Before  answering  this  question,  allow  me  first  to  put  into  perspective  the  recent  economic 
developments on the island of Curaçao. In 2005, the economy grew by a mere 0.8 percent, largely 
owing  to  the  financial  services,  wholesale  and  retail,  and  construction  sectors.  Although  the  official 
figures for 2006 have not been published yet, it is expected that the economy has again grown, albeit 
at a slightly slower pace than in 2005. 
Growth in 2006 was mainly due to an encouraging performance in Curaçao’s stay-over tourism. Rising 
occupancy rates triggered a wave of new hotel projects and expansion of existing hotels. Furthermore, 
the wholesale and retail sectors grew as a result of more activities in the free-zone and tourism, and 
higher domestic spending. Activities in the construction sector also rose, due mainly to investments in 
the tourism and transportation sectors on the island.  
Ladies and gentlemen, Curaçao’s economic recovery, however, is greatly affected by an increasing 
fiscal imbalance, related to the high government debt. In addition, despite Curaçao being very open to 
investment, the attractiveness of our investment climate to foreign and domestic investors still needs 
major improvements. Due to the weaknesses in our investment climate, investment growth has been 
modest compared to the region. In addition, for the last several years, we have been suffering from 
constant changes in the Island’s territory executive council. This has led to a lack of consistency in 
government policy, which has not been very conducive to a good investment climate.  
If  we  are  to  address  our  economic  ills  in  an  effective  manner,  we  must  try  at  least  to  grow  at  the 
regional average. It is not only a matter of reaching more economic growth through higher domestic 
demand,  but  more  importantly  through  raising  productivity  growth  and  foreign  demand.  Hence,  we 
must  catch  up  by  reaching  sustainable  economic  growth.  Ladies  and  gentlemen,  sustainable 
economic  growth  is  the  key  to  improving  the  standard  of  living  in  our  society.  It  is  therefore  of  the 
utmost importance for us to pursue sound policies to address the fiscal imbalance and to strengthen 
our  competitive  advantage  in  order  to  attract  more  investments  and  hence  promote  sustainable 
economic  growth.  In  addressing  these  issues,  we  must  also  take  into  account  the  ongoing 
constitutional reforms. 
Ladies and gentlemen, as we all know Curaçao has arrived at an important historical cross-road. By 
December next year, it is expected that the Antillean constellation will cease to exist and Curaçao will 
BIS Review 45/2007 
 1
become  a  separate  country  within  the  Dutch  Kingdom.  This  status  aparte  will  provide  us  with  the 
unique  opportunity  to  address  our  social  and  economic  problems  in  a  more  island-specific  context. 
However,  constitutional  changes  alone  should  not  be  seen  as  a  solution  for  all  our  social  and 
economic problems. The constitutional reform must therefore be accompanied by social and economic 
reforms to foster sustainable economic growth.  
As  I  have  pointed  out  repeatedly,  sound  public  finances  are  crucial  to  promote  higher  sustainable 
growth, to create jobs, and to achieve social progress. Although several measures have been taken to 
reduce public expenditures and public sector debt, the public finances have worsened over the years. 
High fiscal deficits, combined with weak economic growth, resulted in a rising debt-to-GDP ratio. In 
2005, the Island Territory of Curaçao reached a debt of NAf.2.5 billion, equivalent to a debt-to-GDP 
ratio of 59 percent. When speaking about the debt of the country Curaçao we must also take the debt 
of the Netherlands Antilles into consideration. I must stress that being part of the Netherlands Antilles, 
each island has contributed to the accumulation to this high debt. In 2005, the Netherlands Antilles 
had a debt of NAf.2.9 billion. By December 15, 2008, the Netherlands Antilles will cease to exist. Then, 
each island will be allocated its share in the debt of the Netherlands Antilles. Therefore, given that the 
debt of the Netherlands Antilles should be re-allocated among the islands of the Netherlands Antilles, 
Curaçao’s actual debt will increase to NAf.3.9 billion, leading to a debt-to-GDP ratio of 93 percent.  
Such a debt burden poses serious risks to a sustained growth and hence the goal of improving our 
standard of living. That is why debt relief is so important. As you all know, I have been a proponent of 
the solution as contained in the “Concluding Statement” or “Slotverklaring”, which was signed between 
Curaçao,  St.  Maarten,  and  the  Netherlands  in  November  2006,  as  it  gives  us  the  opportunity  to 
eliminate  our  unsustainable  debt  and  start  with  a  clean  slate  in  the  new  constitutional  status.  In 
addition,  the  “Slotverklaring”  incorporates  immediate  economic  stimulation  through  the  Social 
Economic Initiative. However, it is for our policymakers to decide whether a solution along the lines of 
the  “Slotverklaring”  will  be  adopted  or  other  solutions  will  be  pursued.  Up  till  now,  no  feasible 
alternatives have been presented to solve our structural fiscal problems.  
The so-called Monte alternative is fallacious on several grounds and as such cannot be considered a 
credible alternative: 
1. 
The central tenet of this plan is the so-called zero coupon bond alternative. By implementing 
this solution which has been advanced in 2003 by the Debt Commission, it is contended that 
we can substantially reduce our debt-to-GDP ratio. The momentum for refinancing part of the 
debt with a zero coupon bond has passed. Since interest rates are now much higher than in 
2003, when the debt commission recommended this, refinancing our debt (with the 0% bond 
as collateral) will not yield the then envisioned interest savings. In addition, the debt ratio will 
not fall due to this refinancing. 
Due  to  some  miscalculations,  interest  expenses  will  not  decrease  as  much  as  the  Monte 
commission presented. Hence, the need for additional measures will become more pressing. 
The expected yield of privatization is too optimistic. Moreover, the analogy with Holland is 
also not substantiated by facts. Privatization had only a limited impact on the debt ratio in 
Holland; the largest impact came from strong economic growth. 
Fiscal  discipline,  an  important  aspect  of  the  Monte-plan,  will  be  undermined  by  the 
suggestion  of  the  committee  itself  to  borrow  from  the  central  bank  to  redeem  outstanding 
treasury paper. 
Monetary stability will become subordinate to central bank profits. The most important task of 
a central bank is to promote monetary stability and not to maximize profit. Earmarking central 
bank profits to guarantee interest payments by the Curacao government, as suggested by 
Monte,  will  create  unnecessary  uncertainties,  erosion  of  investors’  confidence  and  may 
therefore erode monetary stability. 
The  establishment  of  various  new  institutions  will  increase  bureaucratic  tangles  and 
competition in laxity. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
Credible and realistic alternatives for the debt solution in the “Slotverklaring” require a swift and major 
reduction  in  our  debt  and  interest  burden  to  free  funds  for  our  ailing  health  care,  education,  and 
poverty  alleviation.  These  alternatives  should  raise  consumers’  and  investors’  confidence,  and  not 
distort our capital market.. 
2 
 BIS Review 45/2007
Moreover,  debt  relief  must  be  accompanied  by  safeguards  to  prevent  a  new  build-up  of  debt  to 
unsustainable proportions. Fiscal discipline is not only needed for macro-economic stability, but also to 
preserve funds essential for public investment, especially in health care, education, infrastructure, and 
social safety nets. 
Ladies and gentlemen, achieving significant and sustainable increases in per capita income require 
higher investment and, more importantly, a substantial improvement in total factor productivity growth. 
As  a  share  of  GDP,  investment  in  Curaçao  lags  behind  the  Latin  American  and  Caribbean  region. 
Therefore, we must strengthen our competitive advantage vis-à-vis the region.  
Several  studies  have  revealed  the  weaknesses  of  our  investment  climate,  such  as  high  utility  and 
labor costs, rigid labor laws, a qualitative mismatch between labor demand and supply, complicated 
and  time-consuming  licensing  procedures,  and  a  complex  tax  system  with  opaque  tax  incentive 
schemes. These weaknesses are compounded by the absence of a clear and consistent investment-
driven  growth-oriented  economic  policy  and  a  weakened  government  administrative  apparatus. 
Therefore,  it  is  important  to  have  policies  in  place  that  foster  both  higher  investment  and  a  more 
efficient use of resources. 
The first area that should be addressed is the functioning of the labor market. Ladies and gentlemen, 
the current rigid rules on hiring and firing, the mandatory benefits, and the high overtime compensation 
are  not  attractive  for  investors.  The  current  situation  has  led  to  socially  unacceptably  high 
unemployment rates. Tight labor market regulations have adverse effects on economic performance 
because they create rigidities that allow vacancies and unemployment to coexist, contributing to high 
overall unemployment rates. To improve our competitiveness, it is crucial to be able to deploy labor 
more flexibly, as long as individual protection against abuse is preserved.  
Furthermore, our investment climate will benefit greatly from investment in education and training to 
reduce the qualitative mismatch between labor demand and supply. Currently, both the construction 
and hospitality sectors are experiencing a lack of qualified labor on our labor market. Improving the 
quality  of  education  is  important  for  developing  an  adequate  stock  of  human  capital  and  hence 
fostering economic  growth.  In  sum,  a more  flexible  labor  market  and  a  higher  educated  labor  force 
improve productivity, which is essential for a more sustainable long-term growth prospects.  
Ladies and gentlemen, another area that needs our attention is the further development of our capital 
market  to  promote  a  wider  range  of  financing  possibilities  for  investors.  An  inherent  feature  of 
corporate financing in developing countries is the prevalence of bank-based financing. Because of the 
limited degree of development of our capital market, equity-based financing is very rare on the island. 
Equity-based financing could, however, be an alternative, especially for large investment projects and 
projects with a high risk profile. Therefore, a good initiative to overcome this bottleneck would be the 
introduction  of  a  venture  capital  fund  for  risky  investment  projects.  Through  such  a  fund,  equity 
financing  of  start-up  firms  with  promising  projects  can  be  stimulated  by  offering  higher  than  usual 
returns to investors. In addition, we should step up our efforts for the creation of a securities exchange. 
In  this  respect,  we  can  learn  from  the  experiences  of  countries  in  the  region,  such  as  Barbados, 
Jamaica, and Trinidad & Tobago, that have known securities exchanges for over twenty years.  
Another  weakness  of  our  investment  climate  is  the  current  administrative  barriers,  the  long  and 
unjustifiable delays in administrative decisions by government departments and excessive discretion in 
administrative functions. The existing red tape and bureaucracy weaken our competitiveness relative 
to other economies in the region. Therefore, I hope that with the new constitutional status of Curaçao, 
the  elimination  of  the  double  layer  of  government  will  reduce  the  administrative  barriers  in  the 
government  apparatus  considerably.  This  will  facilitate  the  decision-making  process  of  policies  and 
projects.  
Finally, numerous studies on the Curaçao economy in recent years have indicated that there is a need 
for fiscal reform. With the new status approaching, Curaçao is going to have the opportunity to include 
all the necessary reforms in a new tax system, which could have a positive impact on the investment 
climate. In my view, the new tax system of Curaçao should be simple and transparent. Direct tax rates 
should  be  competitive  compared  to  other  countries,  especially  in  our  region.  These  reforms  are  to 
promote consumer spending and investment by increasing disposable income. This will lead to more 
economic  activities,  and  hence  more  tax  revenues  to  finance  the  government’s  policy  programs.  In 
that regard I welcome the study of the Ellis committee which should report to the government before 
long. 
BIS Review 45/2007 
 3
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  before  I  conclude,  I  like  to  emphasize  that  there  cannot  be  sustainable 
economic  growth  if  we  do  not  address  our  social  ills.  Therefore,  we  should  continue  to  explore 
possibilities to raise the old age pension (AOV) further to guarantee a decent life for our senior citizens 
that depend solely on this state pension. 
Second,  we  should  improve  the  availability  of  low  cost  housing.  If  financial  institutions  in  the 
Netherlands Antilles provide, for example, for a period of say five years a limited number of mortgage 
loans annually at concessionary terms to low income households, this will go a long way in alleviating 
our  housing  problem.  I  am  referring  to  loans  at  a  30-year  term  and  2%  interest.  This  should  help 
reduce the backlog in low cost housing of the public housing foundation FKP and hence improve the 
living conditions of more low income households. 
Third, the necessary investments in the refinery should be accelerated with the aim of also lowering 
the  utility  costs.  A  more  lasting  solution  to  our  high  utility  costs  together  with  our  environmental 
problem can be achieved by investing in the modernization of our refinery. This will not only improve 
the  purchasing  power  of  the  consumer,  but  it  will  also  improve  our  competitive  situation  leading  to 
more growth. 
Fourth,  we  should  expand  investments  in  our  education  also  to  attain  social  goals.  Equipping  our 
socially weaker citizens with the right skills increases their chance for a job considerably and therefore 
their prospects for a better life. 
Ladies and gentlemen, we are in the midst of important constitutional changes. Changes that will have 
far reaching implications for generations to come. I understand that due to the inherent uncertainties of 
these  changes  and  their  implications  for  economic  recovery,  financial  institutions,  investors,  and 
entrepreneurs may be reticent towards taking risks. This attitude could slow down investments on the 
island. To prevent a reversal of the economic recovery, the authorities should therefore address the 
debt  issue  and  the  necessary  macro-economic  reforms  in  an  adequate  and  swift  manner.  This  will 
create  a  solid  foundation  to  become  an  autonomous  country  with  bright  prospects  for  the  future. 
Looking  to  the  medium  term,  Curaçao’s  main  challenge  remains  to  reach  a  higher  and  sustainable 
growth rate, and share the benefits of growth more equitably. With a more equitable and less divided 
society,  macroeconomic  volatility  will  also  be  reduced.  Towards  the  status  of  a  country,  Curaçao’s 
economic agenda should aim at building on past achievements and address current challenges and to 
accomplish a stable macro-economic climate benefiting all layers of our society.  
Thank you for your attention.  
4 
 BIS Review 45/2007
