Shamshad Akhtar: Pakistan’s capital markets – mobilizing for growth  
Keynote address by Dr Shamshad Akhtar, Governor of the State Bank of Pakistan, at the Pakistan 
Capital  Markets  Conference  organized  by  Pakistan  Business  Council  and 
IFC,  Karachi, 
5 September 2006. 
 Good Morning everyone. At the onset I would like to thank Mr. Saleem Raza for inviting me to speak at 
this conference, and I would also like to acknowledge all the distinguished participants.  
A  lot  has  been  done  in  Pakistan  in  terms  of  financial  sector  reforms.  These  reforms  have  been 
substantive both in the banking sector as well as in capital markets. We have implemented what you 
may call the ‘first generation of reforms’ and now we are positioning ourselves for the next ten years. I 
think there is need to give another jolt to the system and enhance, broaden and deepen the reforms. 
The first phase has yielded positive results and we are reaping the benefits of that phase. It is in the 
context of the second generation of reforms that we need to put together all the ideas that come out of 
international evidence and structure the way forward. This I believe is very important and I hope that 
today’s forum will give us the opportunity to debate these issues because it’s all about policy choices, 
and we have to choose a route which is more conducive for Pakistan.  
Personally  I  am  fascinated  and  amazed  by  the  changes  in  the  global  financial  landscape.  I  think  if 
effectively  exploited,  these  opportunities  will  augur  well  for  emerging  markets  in  general,  and  for 
Pakistan in particular. A few points to note:  
(i) 
First,  capital  today  is  more  mobile  than  it  ever  has  been  and  can  be  readily  deployed 
internationally. I say this because after the East Asian crisis there has been a lot of emphasis 
on capital flows and their resurgence. Just looking at the numbers from IIF, private capital 
(net) flows to emerging markets surged in 2005 to $400 billion1 with 55% by way of equity 
flows (almost three fourths being FDI and remaining portfolio investment) and 45% private 
credit flows via commercial banks or other Financial Institutions.  
Within this overall global framework there are certain dilemmas, and one of the major issues 
is  that  of  global  imbalances.  These  imbalances  have  changed  the  global  and  financial 
market dynamics. Emerging market economies, traditionally the recipients of foreign capital, 
are a source of net foreign capital outflows and collectively finance the large and growing 
U.S. current account deficit. More importantly, the accumulation of East Asian reserves and 
their  rise  to  US  $1.7  trillion  reflects  the  real  potential  of  this  region  to  self-finance  its 
requirements and to offer other Asian economies capital, the source of which otherwise has 
been, in case of South Asia, the industrialized West. So I see the opportunities for Pakistan, 
to  first  of  all  tap  the  overall  pool  of  resources  and  within  that  context,  also  start  looking 
towards the East Asian region where there is a substantial surplus of available resources.  
Third, the enhancement of overall global liquidity, besides serving capital deficit in parts of 
the world, has cross-border spillovers and largely stems from growing financial integration, 
particularly among the G8 countries. The level of integration outside these countries varies 
and there are theoretical studies which point towards that. The fact of the matter is that the 
financial  world  is  now  much  more  closely  integrated  than  ever  before.  The  integration  of 
financial systems has played a role in enabling the global imbalances to persist and to be 
easily  financed  without  blocking  growth.  However,  emerging  markets  which  are  capital 
deficient, with external vulnerabilities, do face the risk of exchange rate fluctuations (because 
of either the dollar weakening viz a viz other currencies, or internal country dynamics) and 
asset price volatility because of adverse movements in relative stock prices.  
(ii) 
(iii) 
Generally, the global environment remains benign although there was a very hot debate at the recent 
BIS  annual  meeting  which  I  attended,  where  there  was  a  huge  concern  that  expectations  of 
inflationary  tendencies  remain  both  at  the  regional  and  international  level,  and  consequently  most 
economies  have  actually  tightened  their  monetary  policies,  or  at  least  have  withdrawn  monetary 
stimulus on a timely basis which would improve the long term global economic growth prospects and 
                                                      
1  
Institute of International Finance (IIF), March 2006. 
BIS Review 5/2007 
 1
attract and maximize capital flows; 
mitigate macroeconomic risks stemming from capital flows; and 
develop a well balanced and vibrant financial sector  
interest rate scenario. Moderation of long term interest rates in many ways is central to the pricing of 
assets, both real and financial. The world wide movement in interest rates, and also in Pakistan, will 
help  achieve  a  more  realistic  realignment  of  prices.  This  in  turn  facilitates  global  financial  stability 
which is critical for emerging markets, including Pakistan, to benefit effectively from capital flows.  
These trends that I have talked about offer Pakistan tremendous opportunities, provided that Pakistan 
pursues  and  sustains  market  confidence.  Besides  political  stability,  there  is  need  for  Pakistan  to 
adhere to its (a) prudent macroeconomic policies, (b) further deepen and diversify financial markets, 
and (c) to reinvigorate structural reforms that foster productivity gains which will also keep the financial 
sector alive. These factors are a prerequisite for Pakistan to:  
• 
• 
• 
With  this  global  perspective,  I  would  like  to  offer  some  views  on  financial  market  development  in 
Pakistan. 
Financial market development in Pakistan has, and will remain, the primary driver of economic activity. 
I always say that we have changed the economic dynamics in Pakistan. Normally the real sector leads 
financial  market  development  but  in  Pakistan  financial  market  development  has  stimulated  the  real 
sector. Over FY00-06, Pakistan has attained an average economic growth of over 5% which, among 
other factors, has been helped by the growth in overall credit in the range of 16.1% per annum. Private 
sector credit growth has actually far exceeded these average growth rates in recent years (average 
annual growth observed in the range of 18.3%). Bank credit has grown rapidly, serviced diverse needs 
and  ventured  into  new  areas  such  as  consumer  financing,  which  has  stimulated  the  demand  for 
durables. However, over half of the credit still flows towards the large corporate sector and in terms of 
tenor, bulk of the credit is for less than 1-2 years. Furthermore, private sector credit still does not meet 
the full requirements of the economy. For example, the investment requirements of the infrastructure 
sector are enormous which conservatively are estimated to be in the range of US$ 39 billion,2 and in 
the agriculture sector bank credit meets perhaps half of the real demand, although its share has grown 
phenomenally.  Across  the  board  credit  flows  to  the  corporate  sector,  infrastructure,  and  agriculture 
sector, etc are likely to rise as the investment environment improves further. So what do we need to do 
here? We need to position our banking sector to deliver these diverse sector requirements. 
Does the financial sector have the potential to meet these investment requirements which are critical 
to stimulate economic growth to achieve above average trends ? My inference is that there is need to 
introduce more depth and breadth in financial markets. The M2/GDP ratio – an indicator of financial 
deepening – has grown in Pakistan, but when Pakistan’s financial system structure is compared with 
the structures of the East Asian Economies given in the recently published World Bank report, we get 
an indication of where we stand in the year 2005 : 
• 
Bank assets as a proportion of GDP in Pakistan are 56% relative to China (200%), Malaysia 
(162%), Hong Kong (443%), Singapore (185%) and Philippines (61%). 
Equity Market capitalization as a percentage of GDP in Pakistan was 31% in 2005. Although 
now  it  has  increased  to  40%  and  in  fact,  went  up  to  44%  in  April  2006,  but  it  is  still 
substantially low relative to Malaysia (141%), Thailand (67%) and Korea (90%). 
Likewise, the volume of bonds outstanding as a percent of GDP is merely 5.5% in Pakistan 
compared to Malaysia (90%), Singapore (68%) and China (27%), although in China the bulk 
of these bonds are sovereign.  
  While Pakistan has definitely improved quite a bit, when we compare ourselves to the region, we are 
still lagging far behind and for me this is where we should strive to make more inroads. In my view, not 
only  is  there  more room  for  banking  assets  to  grow,  but  more  fundamentally,  there  is  now  need  to 
finally jolt the non-bank financial sector more strongly. It is indeed noteworthy that the growth of KSE3 
                                                      
2   Conservative  estimates,  as  stated  in  the  Medium  Term  Development  Framework,  2005-2010,  Planning  Commission  of 
Pakistan. 
3  Karachi Stock Exchange 
2 
 BIS Review 5/2007
market capitalization has risen from under 2000 points to over 10,000 points in the last few years, and 
went  on  to  record  highs  of  12,274  points  on  April  17,  2006.  Average  daily  turnover  is  remarkable, 
which, at 525 million shares, makes KSE one of the most liquid markets. Likewise the P/E ratio of 9.45 
is  extremely  attractive  when  compared  with  average  price  earning  ratios  of  neighboring  countries. 
Likewise,  KSE’s  dividend  yield  ratio  also  offers  good  prospects  relative  to  other  emerging  markets. 
However, I still maintain that Pakistan’s capital market lacks sufficient depth, breath and maturity. It is 
prone to structural vulnerabilities and manipulation. This is confirmed by the decline in the number of 
listed companies from 762 in the year 2000 to 658 in 2006. Moreover, as I have already mentioned, 
market capitalization as a percentage of GDP is still low and there are very few listed debt securities.  
But  there  are  promising  prospects  and  with  various  stakeholders’  efforts,  the  stock  market  has 
achieved many milestones. The Stock Exchanges have fully automated the trading system with a T+3 
settlement  cycle.  The  shares  are  traded  in  dematerialized  form  and  settlement  takes  place  in  a 
paperless  environment  through  the  Central  Depository  Company  and  National  Clearing  and 
Settlement  System.  The  recent  step  of  implementing  the  Unique  Identification  Number  (UIN)  will 
substantially strengthen the disclosure regime and will go a long way in bringing more transparency in 
trading,  work  as  an  effective  deterrence  against  market  manipulation,  and  will  be  very  helpful  in 
investigating and probing any wrongdoing.  
Besides the need for broadening and deepening of reforms, we need to further enhance the efficiency 
of financial markets and institutions to lower intermediation costs. By and large, Pakistan’s financial 
sector has performed fairly well within the South Asian context as the system has benefited from the (i) 
privatization  of  banks,  (ii)  consolidation  of  the  banking  sector,  (iii)  strengthening  of  the  prudential 
regulations for the banking industry; and (iv) introduction and enforcement of corporate governance.  
According  to  World  Bank’s  ranking,  Pakistan  is  marginally  behind  India  in  access  to  finance  and 
efficiency, whereas it ranks the highest in corporate governance in the South Asian region. 
 
Final Ranking of SAR Countries 
   0.56 
Pakistan
0.55 
0.70 
0.68 
0.90 
2.83 
SL
0.80 
0.66 
0.40 
0.69 
2.55 
India
0.67 
0.73 
0.97 
0.84 
3.21 
Nepal
0.33 
0.40 
0.43 
0.68 
1.84 
B'desh
0.57 
0.51 
0.50 
0.68 
2.25 
Description   
Access to Finance 
Performance & Efficiency 
Stability 
Corporate Governance 
Total 
  
Score [Total Points/4 (core indicators)] 
  
Rank 
Source:  The World Bank 
 
The efficiency of the banking system has improved, and can be gauged by the lower intermediation 
cost, which has fallen to 2.7% relative to 3.4% in the year 2000. Average earning per share (EPS) has 
increased. Deposits and Assets per employee have also risen. Likewise, the cost to income ratio has 
decreased to 42% from 72% in the year 2000. Although some of the efficiency indicators have shown 
improvement but the problem of high spread belies the story. The very high spreads undermine the 
efficiency of the banking sector.  
In the context of the equity market, I believe that the lack of depth and breadth and weaknesses in the 
price discovery mechanism, with multiple exchange floors and gyrations in equity markets driven by 
speculative tendencies, undermine the process of stock valuation. The end result is that it is costly for 
companies to raise capital from stock markets which keeps individual investors, with less appetite for 
risk, totally out of these markets.  
0.64 
0.80 
0.46 
0.71 
3 
4 
5 
2 
1 
            BIS Review 5/2007 
 3
Further enhancement of market depth and liquidity by way of listing of more primary issues, promotion 
of  the  secondary  market  in  debt  securities  and  strengthening  of  regulations  and  their  enforcement 
would help mitigate perceptions and risks. 
Let me now move to another point that I would like to convey. While in Pakistan there is an emergence 
of interdependence of the banking sector and capital markets, globally, regulatory frameworks allow a 
more  systematic  fostering  of  the  financial  sector  inter-linkages.  This  has  helped  to  exploit  different 
segments of the financial sector to mutually reinforce and innovate institutions, markets and products. 
In  Pakistan,  the  relationship  of  the  banking  sector  with  the  capital  markets  has  many  facets  and  I 
would like to take a few minutes to talk about that because it indicates some interesting trends.  
State Bank has allowed banks and DFIs to establish subsidiaries for conducting brokerage business 
and  some  banks  have  already  purchased  membership  rights  of  the  stock  exchanges  and  have 
established  subsidiaries.  Corporate  Governance  standards  of  these  subsidiaries  and  their  systems 
and  procedures  are  expected  to  be  much  better  and  advanced  than  their  peers.  This  will  not  only 
improve the image of capital markets but will also encourage other brokerage entities to improve their 
corporate governance, systems and procedures. 
Banks and DFIs have also been allowed to establish Asset Management Companies (AMCs) to float 
and manage mutual funds. A number of banks have established AMCs and have launched both open-
ended  and  close-ended  mutual  funds.  This  clearly  will  have  an  additional  impact  on  improving  the 
corporate  governance  of  listed  companies  since  they  own  substantial  holdings,  have  significant 
incentive  to  ensure  that  the  companies  invested  in  are  managed  properly,  have  the  requisite 
negotiating powers as well as the expertise to safeguard the interests of minority shareholders. 
In addition to this type of inter-relationship between the banking sector and the capital markets, there 
is another direction in which we have nurtured the relationship. First of all, the prudential regulatory 
system actually sets the exposure limits of the ownership and cross-share holding and has been set in 
place to safeguard the interest of the banking sector, which I believe is more stable than the remaining 
parts of the financial sector. In this regard, the following limits have been prescribed by State Bank of 
Pakistan for banks and DFIs for their activities related to capital markets: 
• 
• 
For lending against shares, banks/DFIs are required to maintain a minimum margin of 30%. 
The total investment in shares has been capped at 20% of the equity in case of banks and at 
35% in case of Islamic banks and DFIs. 
The investment in a single company by any bank/DFI has been limited to 5% of their equity. 
The  total  exposure  which  a  bank  can  take  on  a  single  company  in  the  shape  of  direct 
investment in its shares or by lending against the security of its shares has been capped at 
30% of the paid-up capital of the company. 
Banks/DFIs are also required to obtain prior approval from State Bank if they wish to invest 
in  any company  in excess  of 5%  of  their  own  paid-up capital  or 10%  of  the  capital  of  the 
company. 
  The  reason  why  I  have  mentioned  these  details  is  because  I  wanted  to  show  what  this  prudential 
regulatory structure has resulted in. Empirically we know that direct investment in the shares of listed 
companies  has  grown  from  approximately  Rs.  16  billion  in  December  2001  to  Rs.  38.9  billion  by 
December  2005.  Likewise,  financing  against  quoted  shares  has  grown  from  under  Rs.  5  billion  to 
approximately Rs. 39 billion over the same period. The bulk of the liquidity in the capital markets is in 
the form of CFS4 or what was earlier called as Badla. 
  
(Rs. Million) 
                                                      
4   Continuous Funding System 
4 
 BIS Review 5/2007
Year 
Dec 2001 
Dec 2002 
Dec 2003 
13,393 
Dec 2004 
35,506 
Dec 2005 
38,872 
7,371 
4,598 
36,370 
24,623 
29,797 
23,164 
16,132 
against 
Financing 
Quoted Shares 
Investment in Shares* 
  
Another important statistics worth quoting is that financial institutions represent one fourth of the total 
market capitalization. The reason why I am going through all of these statistics is to illustrate that there 
is  a  regulatory  framework  that  guides  this  interdependence  and  defines  the  regulatory  architecture, 
and moreover, there is a movement towards greater interdependence and inter-linkages. But is this 
sufficient or should we do something more? What lessons can we learn from international markets?  
In  other  jurisdictions  and  particularly  in  developed  markets,  the  relationship  between  the  capital 
markets  and  banking  is  much  deeper  and  clearly  more  interdependent.  This  has  encouraged  the 
development  of  the  mechanism  for  risk  sharing  and  risk  transfers,  such  as  derivatives  and 
securitization,  which  allows  proper  financial  leveraging  by  enhancing  the  risk-bearing  capacity.  Of 
course emerging worries about the associated risks and their different dimensions have motivated a 
fundamental rethinking of the Basle capital adequacy standards, regulations and supervision. Besides 
complexities of capturing and estimating all types of risks, concerns regarding contagion of volatility in 
one  segment  of  the  market  to  another,  have  motivated  BIS  to  define  more  elaborately  the 
requirements  for  safeguarding  the  financial  sector  by  introducing  stringent  prudential  regulation, 
restraints  on  counterparty  exposures,  using  joint  conglomerate  supervision  systems  to  keep  a 
vigilance on risk exposures and, verifying the corporate governance standards by trying to keep them 
as uniform as possible.  
Now where do we need to go from here? I think there are two important messages that I would like to 
convey.  The  first  basically  relates  to  the  need  for  re-examination  of  the  legal  and  regulatory 
framework. This brings me to a 2002 paper of mine which I had presented in Japan. At that time there 
was a big debate after the financial crises on what Asia needs to do to diversify its financial sector. 
One of the major stresses was on the need to nurture more systematically the interdependence of the 
capital markets and the banking sector. 
International evidence suggests that in United States, amendments were made in banking laws which 
were seen as a way to enable the US banks to remain globally competitive. Adopting this new law 
resulted  in  ending  60  years  of  segregation  of  activities  of  banking  and  securities  markets.  The  US 
congress recognized that many of the arguments raised in successfully segregating both the activities 
in the past were no longer credible. So although the new law in the United States today enables banks 
through  financial  holding  companies’  structures  to  engage  in  security  market  activities  through  an 
affiliated  brokerage  firm,  nevertheless  the  banks  are  still  prohibited  from  directly  engaging  in  retail 
securities. Financial holding companies and subsidiaries engaged in brokerage activities are required 
to register with the US Securities and Exchange Commission. Where brokerage affiliates operate on 
bank premises, they are required to notify the customers that their securities products are not insured 
by  the  Federal  Deposit  Insurance  Corporation  (FDIC)  and  that  these  are  not  deposits  or  other 
obligations of the bank and are subject to investment risks. Securities affiliates of the bank may also 
engage in underwriting as long as certain funding and capital restrictions are satisfied. 
In  most  continental  European  countries,  the  banking  legislation  does  not  distinguish  between  the 
commercial and investment banks. Any institution authorized to operate as a bank may offer a wide 
range of financial services. Banks must comply with standard prudential requirements while engaging 
in  these  activities  and  universal  banks  may  also  be  able  to  control  the  equity  participation  in  the 
industrial firms. The implementation of the relevant European Union directives and the rise of mergers 
and acquisitions between banks, securities companies and insurance companies support the universal 
nature of European banking.  
The US and European banks are able to offer sophisticated financial products, establish international 
conglomerates  putting  pressure  now  on  Asian  banks  to  improve  the  product  offerings  in  their  own 
markets. Although universal banks already exist in many Asian countries, in general, Asia lags behind 
in this aspect. Not all Asian countries permit universal banking. For example in China, the law strictly 
segregates banking and securities related activities based largely on the conflict of interest concerns 
and  unique  situations  arising  from  the  Government’s  dominant  role  in  the  banking  sector  and  the 
securities markets, both in the capacity of owner as well as regulator.  
BIS Review 5/2007 
 5
Foreign Currency Options (FX Options),  
Forward Rate Agreements (FRAs) and  
Interest Rate Swaps (IRSs). 
To me whether we take this route or that route, it is important for us to have some reflection because 
we  need  economies  of  scale,  and  we  need  credit  diversification  and  efficient  delivery  of  financial 
services. In order for us to compete, we need to look at the other structures. Similarly, we all know 
about  what  has  been  going  on  in  the  insurance  and  pension  system  as  reforms  there  have  been 
delayed so much that I feel that we should now look at more innovative structures. Before we delve 
into any of these areas, as regulators, we need to reflect about which regulatory framework would be 
appropriate.  
Finally the other point which I want to talk about is the need for us to be risk-takers in the financial 
markets. As a central bank, I feel that we have done our job by introducing the necessary regulations 
and the framework for derivatives and products of that nature. These regulations provide guidelines for 
transacting OTC derivatives in the country and currently permit three types of derivative transactions:  
1. 
2. 
3. 
So  far  we  have  managed  to  grant  the  status  of  the  authorized  derivatives’  dealers  to  three  banks: 
Standard Chartered Bank, Citibank and United Bank Limited.  
The use of financial derivatives is a recent phenomenon in Pakistan and the first such real derivatives 
transaction took place in August 2003 which was a Rs. 100.0 million FRA. During the last one and a 
half  years,  the  derivatives  market  has  grown  considerably.  Besides  the  plain  vanilla  products  as 
mentioned  a  minute  before,  the  market  is  slowly  and  gradually  moving  towards  more  complex  and 
exotic structures. All approvals are reviewed & approved under specific transactional approval process 
by the Derivatives Approval & Review Team (DART) at SBP. I know that some people would like to 
see this fast tracked and we have taken steps to do so. Though the specific transactions approved 
thus  far  are  more  complex  and  include  variations  of  Cross  Currency  Swaps  (CCS),  IRS  with 
embedded  option,  etc,  the  total  volume  in  derivatives  is  still  very  low.  In  FX  options  the  Pak  rupee 
equivalent is merely 177 million and FRAs 9.650 million and so forth. The numbers are still very small 
despite having grown substantially. The point of going through these statistics is to highlight that there 
is a lot of work to be done in this area.  
In conclusion, I would like to say that Pakistan has phenomenal opportunities in what has been going 
on  globally  in  terms  of  private  capital  flows  in  terms  of  the  savings  that  exist  due  to  reserve 
accumulation in the region. Secondly, we have to be proud of what we have achieved but at the same 
time we need to remember that there is still a lot more to be done. There are emerging trends of the 
nexus being developed between the capital markets and the banking sector and other segments of the 
non-banking sector. However, it is merely a small fraction. Moreover, there are clearly lots of lessons 
that  can  be  drawn  from  international  and  regional  experiences  of  how  we  can  foster  these  inter-
linkages and safeguard these effectively with the appropriate regulatory framework. I believe with us 
moving towards Basel II, while also positioning ourselves at the central bank with better supervision of 
the  joint  conglomerates,  we  should  be  able  to  offer  these  safeguards  and  oversee  things  more 
effectively.  So  I  would  like  to  encourage  this  forum  to  deliberate  more  on  how  we  can  go  about 
nurturing this and what further steps are needed to promote innovation in the markets.  
Thank you very much.  
6 
 BIS Review 5/2007
