Durmuş Yilmaz: The Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey – the history, 
recent developments and the future of monetary policy in Turkey 
Opening remarks by Mr Durmuş Yilmaz, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, at the 
Conference on the occasion of celebrating the 75th anniversary of the Central Bank of the Republic of 
Turkey, Ankara, 1 June 2007. 
 Governors, 
Colleagues, Friends, and  
Distinguished Guests, 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  welcome  you  to  this  Conference  on  the  occasion  of  celebrating  the  75th 
anniversary of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey. As this conference is also President Trichet’s 
first official visit to the Central Bank, I would like to express my heartfelt gratitude to him for joining us at 
this special event. 
On  occasions  like  these,  I  believe,  it  is  appropriate  to  look  back  and  make  an  assessment  of  the 
institutional progress the Central Bank of Turkey has made since its inception. I would therefore like to 
take this opportunity to share with you the most significant changes taken place in the Bank’s history, 
and  then  focus on  the recent developments  in  the implementation  of monetary  policy.  Finally,  from  a 
medium to long-term perspective, I would like to say a few words on the future of monetary policy in 
Turkey. 
As  we  know  during  the  30  years  or  so  immediately  preceding  the  First  World  War,  major  world 
currencies were based on gold, in the sense that the value of the currency in one way or the other was 
closely linked to the intrinsic value of the metal itself. However, after the First World War, countries one 
after another abandoned the gold standard and adopted what is called the fiat money. That is, paper 
money and the gold had gone through a divorce. Therefore under the prevailing circumstances printing 
money  and  managing  the  financial  system  had  become  more  important,  which  created  a  more 
compelling  need  for  the  establishment  of  strong  institutions  to  take  care  of  banknote  issuing  and  to 
safeguard the value of money. 
In this regard, Turkey did not and could not stay uninvolved in this general tendency. Having won the 
War  of  Independence,  the  founders  of  the  Turkish  Republic  were  aware  of  the  need  to  establish  a 
central bank. The establishment would have been the economic crowning of the political achievements 
and  was  considered  to  be  the  most  significant  symbol  of  sovereignty  as  well  as  economic 
independence. Thus, the idea of establishing a national central bank was debated intensively at the 1st 
National Economic Congress held in Izmir in 1923. 
The ideas discussed and the deliberations made were crystallized in the preparation of “The Draft Law 
on the Republic Issue Bank” with the contributions from European scholars. It was enacted on June 11, 
1930 as the Law on the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey. Accordingly, the Bank started to operate 
on October 3, 1931 and Mr. Selahattin Çam was appointed as the first General Director, or as we now 
refer to, as our first Governor. 
The Law did not involve any explicit provision for the independence of the CBT. However, this did not 
mean that Lawmakers then did not have any idea about the relationships among money, politics and 
price level. On the contrary, the founders of the Republic were fully aware of the idea that a central bank 
should be independent in order to get the best outcome from its policies. Let me quote, for example, 
_smet  _nönü,  the  Second  President  of  the  Republic,  in  one  of  his  various  speeches  on  the 
establishment  of  the  Central  Bank;  “I  knew  from  the  very  start  that  the  Central  Bank  had  to  be  an 
independent institution, operating with the integrity and robustness that would be required against even 
the Government and the Ministry of Finance, let alone its relations with other private banks”. 
The law did not stipulate any provisions for granting short term advances to the government to prevent 
the use of the Central Bank resources for financing government expenditures, and thus to avoid inflation 
and to maintain fiscal discipline. 
These are enough evidence that despite no formal provisions for the independence, the CBT was de 
facto an independent authority in conducting monetary policy. In order to safeguard this informal, implicit 
independence, the CBT was established as, and still is, a joint stock company, in which the state and 
BIS Review 57/2007 
 1
other local entities hold shares. This structure was by no means a coincidence, but of deliberate design 
aiming  at  minimizing  government  intervention.  However,  in  today’s  world,  the  relationship  between 
ownership structure and central bank independence has become less significant. Nowadays, the most 
independent central banks are wholly state-owned and the central bank independence involves much 
more than just ownership. 
The early years of the establishment were the years in which autonomous functioning of the CBT was at 
the forefront. The central bank operations were respected and at times demand for short-term credit by 
the governments was then resisted. The outcome was low inflation. The basic aim of the Bank was to 
support the economic development of the country. To this end, the Bank’s main operational tools were 
to set rediscount rates, regulate money markets, execute the Treasury operations and take, jointly with 
the Government, all measures to protect the value of the Turkish currency. 
During and after the Second World War, central banking underwent drastic changes in the world in line 
with the gradual global economic and political transformation. The scope of the central bank’s mandate 
to  manage  and  control  the  circulation  of  currency  was  extended.  Its  responsibility  now  ranged  from 
issuing banknotes, functioning as a lender of last resort, achieving and maintaining low inflation to being 
the guardian of financial stability. 
Except  the  temporary  amendment  concerning  the  short-term  advances  to  the  government  before  the 
Second World War, no major amendments were made to the Central Bank Law. 1950s and 60s were 
relatively easy years. However, the authorities thought that the provisions of the Law of the Central Bank 
fell short of meeting the necessities of contemporary central banking. Therefore, on January 14, 1970 a 
new Law on the Central Bank of Turkey was adopted. 
The  new  Law  brought  in  changes  on  the  structure  of  the  Bank  as  well  as  changes  in  its  policy 
implementations.  The  most  important  organizational  change  was  replacing  the  General  Director,  the 
highest post in the Bank, with the Governor. As regards policies, the Bank was directly authorized to set 
monetary policy in line with the development plans and annual programs. The Bank was also authorized 
to conduct open market operations in order to manage money supply and liquidity and was entrusted 
with medium term discount credit facilities to real sector through the intermediary of commercial banks. 
In the 70s, there were significant developments in the world economy. In the aftermath of the first oil 
shock in early seventies, inflation all over the world economies became rampant. Accordingly, the main 
focus was directed towards the fight against inflation. 
The  1980s  and  90s  were  the  years  where  a  number  of  structural  and  institutional  changes  were 
introduced in the Turkish economy. With various measures taken between 1980 and 1989 Turkey’s both 
current and capital account transactions were fully liberalized. Trade restrictions were eliminated and the 
Turkish currency was made fully convertible. 
There  were  also  notable  changes  on  the  domestic  financial  market  infrastructure.  For  the  monetary 
policy  to  be  effective  what  is  needed  is  the  existence  of  well-developed  financial  markets.  For  this 
purpose the Central Bank played a leading role in the creation of domestic money, foreign exchange 
and government bond markets. 
To further strengthen the financial markets infrastructure the Central Bank established a well-functioning 
electronic  payments  and  securities  settlement  system.  Contrary 
the 
performance of the Turkish economy in terms of inflation and growth was not satisfactory. Aside from 
short-lived periods of relative stability, loose fiscal policies along with accommodative monetary policies 
were  the  main  causes  of  high  inflation.  Under  these  circumstances  backward  indexation  became  a 
common practice in pricing behavior; inertia evolved in inflation, which was very difficult to eliminate. As 
inflation increased, inflation expectations also increased and a self-nurturing inflation cycle began. 
In the meantime, there were number of attempts to get out of this impasse. First, there was a monetary 
program introduced in 1990. This was very important in that it reorganized and re-structured the Central 
Bank  balance  sheet  and  explained  to  the  financial  community  and  to  the  general  public  how  the 
monetary  policy  operated.  It  was  the  first  time  when  certain  monetary  concepts  like  base  money  or 
central bank money were brought to the attention of the public. However external developments like the 
first  Gulf  war  brought  this  program  to  an  end.  The  second  major  program  for  disinflation  was  the 
exchange rate based stabilization program of 2000 under the IMF support. This program collapsed for 
known reasons in February 2001. 
At this juncture, one might wonder why Turkey was not successful in her disinflation attempts. I believe 
the answer lies, as already mentioned, in the lax fiscal policies. As I have already mentioned the very 
these  developments, 
to 
2 
 BIS Review 57/2007
first  law  of  the  Central  Bank  did  not  have  any  provision  for  financing  the  government.  However  the 
amendment made to the law just before the Second World War to extend temporary short-term advance 
facility  to  the  government,  in  order  to  smooth  out  the  difference  between  timing  of  taxes  and 
expenditures, was firmly incorporated in its Law in 1970. The provision stipulated that the government 
had the access to the Central Bank financing to the tune of 15 % of the total budget spending. Although 
this facility was phased out after the 1994 crisis, it was one of the reasons of fiscal indiscipline and high 
and persistent inflation in Turkey. 
As we all know, tough times call for tough decisions. The collapse of exchange rate-based stabilization 
program in 2001 was, in one sense, an opportunity for Turkey to “put her house in order”. The fiscal cost 
of the crises brought every individual in the economy to his senses. Fiscal discipline and tight monetary 
policy were the immediate answers to the chronic problems of Turkey. But how would this discipline be 
achieved? The answer lied, and still lies in building a Chinese wall between the Central Bank and the 
Treasury in terms of government finances, by means of an independent Central Bank. Accordingly, the 
Central Bank of Turkey was granted independence by the Parliament in May 2001, as a response from 
the society to the previous 30 years of bad experience. 
Since  it  takes  time  for  the  policy  decisions  to  bring  the  intended  results,  economic  agents  must  be 
patient for the policies to fully work out. If policies are changed in the middle, we are back to square one 
again.  But  the  literature  on  time  inconsistency  has  taught  us  that  the  change  in  the  policies  tends  to 
occur  in  an  untimely  manner.  Therefore  the  central  bank  independence  means  to  eliminate  the 
inconsistency between short-term temptations and full implementation of the designed optimal policies. 
The amendments that granted the independence to the Central Bank in 2001 also prohibited granting 
advances and extending credits to the Treasury and other public institutions. The Central Bank cannot 
buy government securities from the primary markets. The new Law entrusts the Bank with the single 
mandate of achieving and maintaining price stability, and with instrument independence. By Law, the 
Central Bank shall support the general economic policies provided that they do not conflict with the price 
stability. 
At  this  stage,  it  is  impossible  not  to  agree  with  President  Trichet,  in  this  statement:  “The  undesirable 
social and economic consequences of inflation, namely inefficient allocation of resources, high levels of 
interest rates, the regressive inflation tax, arbitrary redistribution of income and wealth to the detriment 
of the most vulnerable, and, last but not least, economic instability, lower growth and lower job creation, 
are the benchmarks against which one has to assess the social benefits of price stability. This is why a 
credible commitment to maintaining price stability is so important for the living standards of European 
citizens.”1
Together with its independence, the Central Bank of Turkey was set to be accountable in various ways. 
In this sense, according to Article 42 of the Law on the Central Bank of Turkey, we are accountable to 
communicate with the Government and with the public if inflation deviates excessively from the target, or 
even a possibility of deviation becomes evident. 
Moreover, in line with the transparency principle, we have started to give more importance to sharing our 
views  about  the  general  economic  outlook,  current  inflation  and  inflation  outlook  and  informing  about 
monetary and exchange rate policies through press releases, announcements, reports and every other 
means such as press meetings, interviews, speeches and presentations. 
The Law also set up the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC). Having got the instrument independence, 
the Central Bank moved from implementing monetary policies aiming at implicit inflation targets together 
with certain monetary aggregates as intermediary targets to an explicit inflation targeting regime. 
There are certain preconditions to be met for a successful implementation of inflation targeting regime. 
First central bank must have strong team of economists, well functioning transmission channels and the 
instrument to guide the policies. In this respect the Central Bank of Turkey reorganized its Research and 
Monetary  Policy  Department  and  increased  the  number  of  economists  with  PhD’s.  We  have 
strengthened  the  research  capacity  and  the  analytical  power  of  the  Department.  At  the  start  of  the 
program, high debt to GDP ratio was a problem for debt sustainability and there were high uncertainties 
about the transmission mechanism. And also due to the high and chronic 30 years of inflation there was 
not a solid track record of credibility. Between 2002 and 2005, the period of implicit inflation-targeting 
                                                      
1   Trichet, J.C. (2007). “Hearing Before the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee of the European Parliament”. Brussels, 
March 21, 2007.
BIS Review 57/2007 
 3
regime,  the  Central  Bank  tried  to  build  up  its  credibility  by  setting  inflation  targets  together  with  the 
Government and achieving them. During the last 5 years’ period debt to GDP ratio fell to sustainable 
levels,  with  significant  developments  in  credit  markets  and  a  downfall  in  dollarization  levels,  which 
strengthened  the  transmission  mechanism  to  a  large  extent.  Also  the  MPC  assumed  the  role  of  a 
decision making body, from an advisory one. 
The currency reform was also a necessary condition for successful IT implementation as the currency 
with many zeros kept the inflation memories in the public mind alive. That is why we dropped 6 zeros 
from the currency during the implicit inflation targeting period. Meanwhile, economic agents adjusted to 
floating exchange regime and the short-term interest rates were set as the only policy instrument. And 
finally we established the Communication Department, which is a must for IT implementations. 
Having fulfilled the necessary groundwork, the Central Bank adopted fullfledged IT in 2006. 
At  the  beginning  of  my  speech  I  said  that  the  divorce  between  paper  money  and  the  gold  was  the 
reason for some countries setting up central banks anew and broadening the mandates of the existing 
ones. We must then ask why people are willing to hold and use paper money. This is a very important 
question,  and  the  answer  is  they expect  the  future  value of  the money  to remain stable because  the 
future price level will remain stable. This is a matter of great trust. But to whom do the people trust? 
They trust to the body, which is responsible for the stable prices: the central banks. 
Therefore  the  bottom  line  of  the  inflation-targeting  regime  is  the  management  of  the  expectations.  If 
expectations are anchored to the target, wage earners and price setters will behave in such a way that, 
at  the  end  of  the  period,  the  target  will  be  reached.  Then  the  question  is,  how  can  we  anchor 
expectations?  The  answer  is:  by  building  credibility  through  delivering  what  is  promised.  Once  this  is 
achieved, the volatility in interest rates, inflation and output would be lower. 
How  do  we  build  credibility?  Central  banks  can  do  this  by  anchoring  inflation  expectations  through 
establishing  a  good  track  record  and  by  demonstrating  that  the  central  bank  adjusts  its  policy  rates 
appropriately in response to the changes in the inflation outlook. This behavior is known as the central 
bank reaction function. That is to say, in order to keep the inflation in line with the target, the central 
banks react to economic news in a more or less predictable manner. 
As economy changes over time, the available data set also changes. We get some of our guidance from 
the  analysis  of  these  data  by  using  models  or  econometric  tools.  Models  are  useful  but  they  are  not 
sufficient; in formulating our decision we do and must put some weight on judgments as well. This is 
known as the art side of the monetary policy. 
Central Bank of Turkey has been able to bring down inflation from 70 % in 2001 to 7.7 % at the end of 
2005.  Although  the  structural  reforms  over  the  last  five  years  have  been  critical  in  the  fight  against 
inflation,  the  new  monetary  framework  of  inflation  targeting  also  played  an  important  role.  Inflation 
expectations have somewhat been successfully anchored to the target, notwithstanding some deviations 
and  deteriorations  lately.  At  the  end  of  May  2007,  the  Central  Bank  of  Turkey  is  faced  with  a 
considerable credibility gap. Our strong reaction in 2006 have contained inflation expectations and we 
predict that inflation expectations will continue to move towards the medium term target of 4 percent as 
the headline inflation comes down in the next couple of months. However, it should be noted that there 
are also other important factors in determining the inflation expectations, such as incomes policy and the 
course of fiscal policy, or political aspects, etc. 
Apart  from  short-term  interest  rates,  communication  skills  are  also  critical  tools  in  guiding  the 
expectations towards the target. What we do is important, but equally important is how we convey this to 
our  target  audience.  That  is  not  only  what  we  communicate  but  also  to  whom  we  communicate.  Of 
course the target audience of central banks are financial markets in particular and the public in general. 
When communicating we try to make our messages simple and straightforward. However this is easy 
said than done. Again this is the art side of monetary policy. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  before  concluding,  I  would  like  to  note  that  the  existence  of  independent  and 
autonomous institutions along with the practice of good governance principles is vital for Turkey. 
An independent central bank has constituted and will continue to constitute a cornerstone for structural 
transformation towards good governance and good institutions in Turkey. The Central Bank of Turkey 
aims to fulfill expectations by operating as a sound institution through its independent, transparent and 
accountable  status,  by  policy  implementations  focused  on  its  sole  mandate  of  price  stability  and  by 
practices to increase efficiency in institutional design. 
4 
 BIS Review 57/2007
Hence,  it  is  a  great  honor  for  me  to  be  here  with  all  the  executives  and  former  governors  who  have 
made  the  Central  Bank  of  Turkey  what  it  is  today  throughout  this  period.  I  would  like  to  extend  my 
thanks to them all again for all their valuable contributions to this important institution. 
Thank you.  
BIS Review 57/2007 
 5
