Zdeněk Tůma: Europe's club of nations needs a rule change 
Comment  by  Mr  Zdeněk  Tůma,  Governor  of  the  Czech  National  Bank,  in  the  published  Financial 
Times (London, England), 4 January 2007. 
 The  European  Union  is  a  pretty  big  club  and  it  will  only  get  bigger.  The  rules  and  institutional 
framework used by the 27 members to make decisions are, however, much the same as they were 
when there were six or 15 members. The process of enlargement poses a dilemma: with the number 
of members growing we need rules respected by everyone more than ever before, but at the same 
time such rules can be a straitjacket, especially given that the present rules were designed for a very 
different club. 
One example is monetary policy and the process of adopting the euro. Policymakers designed a set of 
rules 15 years ago that are applied any time a country wants to join the single currency. The country is 
required  to  comply  with  the  Maastricht  criteria  and  also  to  stay  for  at  least  two  years  within  the 
exchange rate mechanism-2 framework. Back then, these rules might have been perfectly legitimate, 
but today they are outdated and -counter-productive. 
The ERM-2 might have made sense in a situation where monetary policies around western Europe 
were based primarily on fixed exchange rates explicitly or implicitly pegged to the D-mark. Then, the 
ERM-2 framework worked as a platform for co-operation among countries with interlocked currencies. 
Today, such a system does not generate any benefits for most EU members. There now exists a wide 
range of monetary policy frameworks, running from currency boards and hard pegs (used by Denmark 
and the Baltic states) to inflation-targeting economies with floating exchange rates (the UK, Sweden, 
the Czech Republic, Poland), with other countries lying somewhere in between. 
Countries with currency boards have been allowed to pursue their original policy within the ERM-2, 
meaning that fulfilling the condition of staying inside this system is a formality. 
But what is the sense in asking countries that already use inflation targets and floating rates to enter 
the ERM-2? The step is simply counter-productive. It implies switching from a regime that is perfectly 
compatible  with  the  European  Central  Bank  framework  to  a  semi-fixed  exchange  rate,  which  is 
incompatible.  We  certainly  do  not  need  any  exchange  rate  band  to  assess  whether  a  currency  is 
stable as determined by the market - we can just take a look at the prevailing market exchange rate. 
Similarly,  the  budget  deficit  threshold  of  less  than  3  per  cent  of  gross  domestic  product  has  been 
modified  by  the  stability  and  growth  pact,  which  sets  stricter  criteria  for  keeping  the  fiscal  house  in 
order. All EU members are expected to comply with the pact, so that staying under the Maastricht 3 
per cent limit is again purely a formality. This Maastricht criterion could be abolished without any harm 
being done. 
What about inflation? Over the past three or four years we have had many discussions on this issue 
with the ECB and the European Commission. We have repeatedly pointed out that setting the inflation 
criterion in relative terms - against the three best performers in the EU - was an appropriate option 10 
years  ago.  But  today  we  have  another  firm  anchor:  the  single  currency  and  the  definition  of  price 
stability applied by the ECB. The purpose is for an applicant to converge with the euro area. So the 
benchmark  should  be  the  price  stability  benchmark  used  by  the  ECB  and  not  the  countries  that 
happen to have the lowest inflation, quite often because of one-off shocks. 
Even more important, the growing number of EU members increases the probability of extremes: by 
definition the distribution of inflation rates is wider. Therefore the benchmark currently being used is 
systematically lower than it was during the second half of the 1990s. This means that the favourite 
argument of equal treatment does not hold: the same rule leads to stricter treatment because there is 
a different and much larger sample. 
All these examples illustrate a more general European dilemma. We need a stable legal framework, 
but all legal systems in history have evolved as the world has changed. Rules such as constitutions 
are - and should be - difficult to change. Others, however, have to be more flexible. There is little doubt 
that rules supporting policymakers' decisions belong to the latter group. 
BIS Review 3/2007 
 1
We  are  caught  between  two  poles.  We  need  rules  for  policymaking,  yet  we  must  also  retain  some 
discretion. The response to the economic arguments should certainly not be: "The legal department 
has decided that the treaty says . . . ". 
2 
 BIS Review 3/2007
