Lim Hng Kiang: Review of the property sector in Singapore and Asia 
Opening speech by Mr Lim Hng Kiang, Deputy Chairman of the Monetary Authority of Singapore and 
Minister  for  Trade  and  Industry,  at  Citigroup  Asia  Pacific  Property  Conference  2007,  Singapore, 
23 April 2007. 
 Thank you Catherine 
Distinguished guests 
Ladies and gentlemen 
A  warm  welcome  to  Citigroup’s  inaugural  Asia  Pacific  Property  Conference.  This  is  an  excellent 
opportunity  for  developers,  investors  and  financial  intermediaries  to  share  ideas  and  network  with 
other key players in the market. I am certain that this conference will be interesting and fruitful. 
Strong regional prospects 
Asia is witnessing robust growth, led by sustained growth of the Chinese and Indian economies and 
the  welcome  recovery  of  Japan  –  now  into  its  fifth  year  of  expansion.  The  regional  economy  is 
consistently growing at a much faster pace than the rest of the world. 
Singapore is fortunate to be strategically located to enjoy the positive effects of Asian growth. We are 
well positioned to serve as a gateway for global investors to access regional opportunities. 
As  the  regional  economics  grow,  they  present  exciting  opportunities  for  direct  investment  in  real 
estate,  as  well  as  through  real  estate  financial  investments,  whether  in  office  developments, 
commercial and retail complexes or industrial estates. 
Prospects in Singapore property sector 
Singapore  is  a  good  example.  Demand  for  all  property  sectors  in  Singapore  has  been  rising, 
underpinned by Singapore’s economic expansion, particularly in the financial, business services and 
tourism sectors. Demand for office and retail space is strong. The high hotel occupancy rates have 
spurred  new  interest  in  hotel  developments.  In  private  housing,  annual  take-up  of  uncompleted 
residential units has surpassed the previous high in 1994.  
The  Government  land  sales  programme  will  continue  to  provide  new  development  opportunities  in 
Singapore. Already, we have seen strong market interest supporting the development of the Marina 
Bay and Orchard Road areas. With the positive outlook for Singapore and the government’s strategic 
plans  for  development  of  key  industries,  investments  in  real  estate  from  foreign  investors  have 
substantially increased. Investors in Singapore real estate now come from many countries, namely the 
U.S., Hong Kong, Australia, Germany, Japan, the Middle East and Indonesia.  
Singapore as a gateway to property finance 
Investment opportunities in Asia, including Singapore, have not gone unnoticed by global investors. 
Property and property-related assets are also gaining popularity with investors seeking high-yielding 
and predictable returns with exposure to capital gains. Attracted by the region’s rapid economic growth 
and  positive  outlook  on  Asia,  global  investment  funds  are  increasing  their  allocation  to  Asia, 
specifically in Asian real estate. 
Singapore can play an important role as a gateway for global investors to access Asian opportunities 
via our capital markets. As a leading home for global fund managers, total assets under management 
in  Singapore  exceed  S$720  billion  with  over  50%  of  these  funds  invested  into  Asia  Pacific.  The 
Singapore  Exchange  is  an  established  listing  venue  for  regional  property  companies  based  in 
Singapore  as  well  as  foreign  property  developers.  Alongside  Singapore’s  vibrant  REIT  market,  we 
offer a strong value proposition for real estate players to tap on Singapore’s capital market to finance 
the rapid growth in the Asian real estate sector. 
BIS Review 38/2007 
 1
Singapore’s Real Estate Investment Trust (REIT) market 
Singapore was the first country in Asia to introduce a regulatory framework to facilitate the offering of 
Real Estate Investment Trusts (REITs). This framework allows property companies to securitise their 
completed real estate assets in the capital markets, realise capital gains and re-invest into developing 
new  properties.  By  offering  investors  direct  exposure  to  assets  with  stable  cash-flows,  REITs  tap  a 
new  pool  of  investors  who  are  seeking  higher-yielding  securities,  including  pension  funds  and 
insurance companies.  
Since the first REIT listing in 2002, the Singapore REIT market has become the largest REIT market in 
Asia  outside  of  Japan.  Currently,  Singapore  has  16  listed  REITs,  making  up  a  total  market 
capitalization of over S$26 billion. Singapore REITs offer investors access to a diversity of real estate 
assets including retail malls, office buildings, industrial properties and serviced apartments. In 2006, 
we also saw the first dedicated hotel REIT as well as Asia’s first healthcare REIT. 
Several key factors have contributed to the growth of the Singapore REIT market. Our established and 
robust, yet pro-business regulatory framework and competitive tax regime have drawn the attention of 
global investors, attracting the securitization of not just domestic, but increasingly offshore assets.  
The  number  of  cross-border  REITs  listed  on  the  Singapore  Exchange  has  increased,  further 
consolidating  Singapore’s  status  as  a  regional  REITs  hub.  These  REITs  offer  global  investors 
exposure to properties throughout Asia Pacific via the Singapore market, including properties in China, 
Hong Kong, Australia, Indonesia, Vietnam, Malaysia and Japan.  
To  sharpen  Singapore’s  edge  as  an  Asian  REITs  hub,  it  is  crucial  for  us  to  maintain  a  conducive 
environment  both  for  issuers  and  for  investors.  To  this  end,  MAS  regularly  reviews  its  regulatory 
regime to keep pace with market development while providing adequate safeguards for investors and 
issuers, in close consultation with the industry,. 
Despite substantial growth in market capitalization of REITs in Asia, from approximately US$40 billion 
in  2005  to  US$63  billion  in  2006,  estimates  suggest  that  the  current  market  only  represents  4%  of 
investible-grade real estate in Asia, whereas in Australia estimates lie in the region of 50% to 60%. 
This  suggests  immense  potential  for  increased  securitization  of  Asian  real  estate  assets,  and  for 
diversification beyond the conventional types of properties. 
Innovations in property finance 
The success of our REIT market has also spurred growth in other areas. Take for example our debt 
market.  Singapore-listed  REITs  have  also  been  large  issuers  of  commercial  mortgage-backed 
securities, contributing 20% of all issuance of mortgage-backed securities in Asia-ex-Japan last year. 
Indeed, Asia’s largest ever commercial mortgage-backed security was issued jointly by two Singapore 
REITs – CapitaMall Trust and CapitaCommercial Trust. Another example of product innovation is in 
the growth of investment products such as property securities unit trusts and listed property securities 
funds. 
A  potentially  exciting  area  for  innovation  is  in  the  property  derivatives  market.  Property  derivatives 
offer  the  potential  for  property  companies,  asset  managers,  banks  and  investors  to  hedge  or  re-
balance their property exposure according to their views on the market. A key criterion to develop the 
property  derivative  market  in  Singapore  would  be  the  existence  of  transparent,  reliable  and  well-
followed  direct  property  indices,  which  serve  as  reference  points  or  benchmarks  for  structuring  of 
property derivative products.  
Given  the  prospects  of  the  Singapore  property  market,  industry  players  are  currently  studying  the 
construction of property indices based on the Singapore property market. We are excited to see the 
introduction  of  these  property  indices  which  would  enhance  information  on  Singapore’s  property 
market and provide benchmarks for structuring property derivatives and other innovative investment 
products. These developments will add to the breadth and depth of Singapore’s markets by providing 
investing and hedging tools for market participants in a cost-effective and flexible manner. Moreover, 
they  would  lead  to  development  of  expertise  in  product  structuring  as  well  as  real  estate  portfolio 
analysis and performance measurement. 
2 
 BIS Review 38/2007
Conclusion 
So ladies and gentlemen, general positive sentiments suggest that 2007 and the years ahead will be 
exciting for Asia and its property sector. I am certain that with judicious planning and sound execution, 
the sector will see strong growth, sustained by liquidity from the capital markets. I wish you continued 
success as we build together on our strong foundations. 
With this, I wish all participants at this conference a fruitful exchange of ideas and discussion. 
BIS Review 38/2007 
 3
