Jean-Claude Trichet: How can the European economy succeed in an 
increasingly globalised world? 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  a  VIP  lunch  on 
“Restructuring  EU  business  in  an  increasingly  globalized  economy”  organised  by  the  Chamber  of 
Commerce and Industry, Amsterdam, 15 February 2007. 
 Dear Ladies and Gentlemen,  
It  is  a  pleasure  for  me  to  be  here  today  and  share  with  you  some  thoughts  on  how  the  European 
Economy  can  succeed  in  an  increasingly  globalised  world.  This  question  is  as  old  as  globalisation 
itself  and deeper  thoughts  on how  economies  can  succeed  in  the  presence of  increased trade  and 
integration date at least back to David Ricardo (1772-1823). As you know, on the basis of a contract 
between England and Portugal on trade in wine and cloth, he showed in a model containing just these 
two goods and the production factor labour, that trade can be beneficial for both countries even if one 
country  has  an  absolute  advantage  in  producing  both  goods,  that  is  when  it  has  a  relatively  lower 
labour input in producing both goods. Although on first sight absolutely simple, Paul Krugman praised 
Ricardo’s idea as ‘‘[..] truly, madly, deeply difficult [..] but also utterly true, immensely sophisticated – 
and extremely relevant to the modern world’’.1 Today, more than two centuries later, we still ask how 
countries should position themselves to gain from trade and integration, but the focus has become a 
global one, with goods and services, capital and information surrounding the world at a speed none of 
us would have imagined only a decade ago.  
For the euro area countries, the change in their economic environment has been particularly marked 
over the last decade: while being increasingly integrated into the global economy, they are part of the 
European  Union  that  witnessed  a  substantial  enlargement  in  recent  years.  And  they  are  closely 
integrated in EMU, where now altogether 13 countries share the same currency.  
Against this background, I would like to split this exposition into two major parts. First, I would like to 
review some stylised facts on the features of the euro area’s integration into the global economy and 
how  this  has  changed  over  time.  Second,  based  on  how  the  euro  area  has  coped  so  far  in  its 
increasingly globalised environment, I would then like to draw your attention to structural reforms that I 
consider decisive for the euro area to remain competitive and to keep pace with its main competitors 
worldwide.  
Developments in intra-European integration 
The economic and financial environment of the euro area has changed substantially during the last 
decades  and  is  still  changing  further.  We  know  that  by  moving  from  several  currencies  to  a  single 
currency  many  costs  are  reduced  or  in  some  cases  even  disappear.  The  euro  has  contributed  to 
reducing trading costs both directly and indirectly by, for instance, removing exchange rate risks and 
the costs of currency hedging among the legacy currencies. Information costs have been reduced as 
well. The euro also enhances price transparency and discourages price discrimination: this helps to 
reduce market segmentation, while also fostering competition. Hence, the euro acts as a catalyst for 
the single market programme and provides a positive impetus to the euro area economy. 
Many studies and analyses are now substantiating some of the important effects of the euro adoption. 
First and foremost, the euro area economies are becoming more interdependent, as evidenced by the 
significant increase in intra-euro area trade in goods witnessed since the launch of the euro. Indeed, 
exports and imports of goods within the euro area increased from about 26% of GDP in 1998, a year 
before the adoption of common currency, to around 31% in 2005. This rise in cross-border trade may 
be associated, to a large extent, with the introduction of the single currency and the increased price 
and cost transparency that it helped to foster. 
                                                      
1   See Paul Krugman (1998) ‘Ricardo’s difficult idea, www.web.mit/krugman/www/ricardo.htm. 
BIS Review 15/2007 
 1
A less-known feature of deepening trade is that intra-euro area trade in services has also grown in 
recent years. Intra-euro area exports and imports of services increased from about 5% of GDP in 1998 
to  around  6.5%  in  2005.  Trade  in  services  should  rise  faster,  accompanying  the  completion  of  the 
single market for services. This is particularly necessary in the financial area. We are perhaps already 
seeing  the  first  signs  of  this  process;  during  2004-2005  the  growth  of  the  euro  area’s  international 
trade in financial services (intra euro area + extra euro area) surpassed the growth in all other sectors 
of  services,  with  intra-euro  area  trade  in  financial  services  growing  almost  as  rapidly  as  extra-euro 
area services trade. The other dynamic sectors on the intra-trade side were computer and information 
services as well as communication services. 
The  increasing  interdependence  of  the  euro  area  countries  is  also  confirmed  by  the  considerable 
growth in intra-euro area foreign direct investment (FDI) flows, which are now on par with extra-euro 
area  FDIs  accounts  for  about  5  percent  of  euro  area  GDP  per annum.  Such  FDI  flows  accumulate 
over time and contribute to the reshaping of Europe as we know it. Between 1999 and 2004, intra-euro 
area FDI stocks grew robustly from almost 14% to around 28% of euro area GDP. 
The globalisation process 
The  very  profound  structural  changes  in  Europe  take  place  simultaneously  with  the  process  of 
globalisation. Globalisation is characterizing today’s world. The internationalisation of economic life is 
reflected in the sharp enlargement of cross-border activities in the goods and capital markets globally. 
As an even greater number of companies and countries have become more involved in foreign trade 
of  goods  and  services,  world  trade  has  been  growing  faster  than  global  economic  output,  thereby, 
leading to a higher degree of trade openness worldwide, which increased from about 45% in 1998 to 
more than 55% in 2005. 
The globalisation process is not limited to trade flows. Cross-border FDI has also flourished as a result 
of the rapid internationalisation of production. Moreover, not only the amount of investments, but also 
the structure of world FDI has been affected by globalisation and the worldwide division of labour. The 
motives of production cost savings and new market access resulted in a redistribution of FDI flows and 
stocks  in  favour of  developing countries,  mainly situated  in  Asia.  At  the  same  time,  one should  not 
forget the role played by the global integration of financial markets, which gave access to international 
capital for many developing countries, increasing their involvement in the global economy even more. 
Integration of the euro area into the global economy 
Taking into account these broad world globalisation trends, one could naturally pose the question “Has 
the  process  of  intra-European  integration  advanced  in  isolation  of  world  trends?”.  The  answer  is  a 
resounding “No”. In fact, exports and imports in goods with trading partners outside the euro area rose 
from about 24% of GDP in 1998 to almost 30% of GDP in 2005, reflecting an even higher increase 
than for intra-euro area trade in the same period. This is mainly due to the more sustained growth in 
world GDP, an increase in global trade integration and a very sizeable increase of euro area trade with 
China,  emerging  Asia,  and  the  new  EU  Member  States  that  joined  the  Union  in  May  2004.  For 
example, the share of China and the new EU Member States in extra-euro area trade increased from 
11.7%  in  1998  to  17.2%  in  2005.  Also  the  increase  in  extra-euro  area  trade  in  services  was 
remarkable:  from  about  7.5%  of  GDP  in  1998  to  around  9.5%  in  2005.  Turning  to  extra-euro  area 
outward FDI stocks2, their growth in the same period proved equally remarkable rising from 21% to 
34% of euro area GDP; albeit the rise was somewhat less rapid than the one observed for intra-euro 
area  FDI.  The  financial  openness  of  euro  area  is  also  confirmed  by  ratios  of  external  assets  and 
liabilities to GDP (respectively 135% and 145% in 2005)3, which exceed those of US. 
Taken  together,  these  stylised  facts  underscore  that  euro  area  countries  are  fully  involved  in  the 
globalisation  process  so  that  we  can  easily  conclude  that  we  are  not  witnessing  the  creation  of  a 
“fortress Euro area”! 
                                                      
2   Stocks of FDIs outside euro area owned by euro area residents. 
3   Net international investment position of the euro area was -10.1% of GDP in 2005. 
2 
 BIS Review 15/2007
Change in factor intensity of euro area exports 
Globalisation  fundamentally  changes  world  patterns  of  production  and  trade,  providing  a  lot  of 
opportunities as well as challenges for the euro area countries. The crucial question therefore is how 
the  euro  area  tackles  these  challenges  and  opportunities.  In  other  words,  the  euro  area  global 
competitiveness  and  trade  specialisation  in  comparison  with  that  of  its  trading  partners  is  of  great 
importance. 
The  results  of  our  latest  research  on  the  comparative  advantage  according  to  factor  intensity  show 
that,  between  1993  and  2004,  the  export  specialisation  of  euro  area  exporters  seems  quite  broad. 
While the euro area does not specialise in raw materials-intensive exports, its comparative advantage 
lies  predominantly  in  capital-,  research-intensive,  as  well  as  labour  intensive  categories  of  exports. 
The specialisation in the latter category does not seem to be fully in line with the capital-labour ratio of 
the  euro  area,  which  is  much  higher  than  in  emerging  economies.  Partly,  this  reflects  the  export 
specialisation of some euro area countries in lower-tech sectors such as textiles and paper. 
By contrast, the United States and Japan have a strong specialisation in research-intensive exports, in 
line  with  their  relatively  large  share  of  R&D  spending  in  GDP.  In  addition  to  this,  Japan  is  also 
specialised 
large  capital-labour  ratio. 
Unsurprisingly, China, but also other emerging Asia and the central and eastern European countries 
(CEEC) have a concentration in exporting labour-intensive goods. 
The trade integration of the emerging countries should a priori have led to large changes through time 
in  comparative  advantages  and  thus  specialisation  across  countries  in  recent  years.  However,  it  is 
rather  striking  that  the  euro  area’s  export  specialisation  tends  to  change  rather  slowly  over  time  in 
comparison to competitors, and we still see a relatively high specialisation in labour-intensive goods 
for the euro area despite the increasing trade integration of the CEECs and emerging Asia. Moreover, 
euro area specialisation in research-intensive products, which is, as we have seen, not as strong when 
compared to Japan and the United States, and has not increased much over time.4  
At the same time China’s specialisation in labour-intensive goods has actually fallen over time, while 
its specialisation in research intensive goods has sharply increased and is now larger than that of the 
euro area. Partly this is explained by imitation of technologies, or the assembly of research-intensive 
products in China, rather than their full development and manufacture. Nevertheless, China is rapidly 
moving up the technological ladder, possibly suggesting more competitive pressure originating from 
the developed economies down the road. 
in  predominantly  capital-intensive  goods,  reflecting 
its 
How has the euro area coped so far?  
How has the euro area succeeded in its increasingly globalised economic environment over the last 
decade? Looking back I would say that the euro area is able to make globalisation a success for its 
citizens. Trade and investment performance have contributed to GDP per capita growth, with GDP per 
capita  growth  standing  on  average  at  1.84%  between  1998  and  2006,  that  is  the  eight  year-period 
since  the  start  of  Stage  Three  of  EMU.5  Furthermore,  between  1998  and  2006,  the  euro  area 
employment rate rose by 5.4 percentage points to 64.4% in 20066, with females and older workers 
aged  55-64  even  witnessing  an  increase  in  their  employment  rates  by  8  percentage  points.  At  the 
same time, the euro area unemployment rate declined by 3 percentage points to 8.3% in 20067 and 
estimates  of  the  non-accelerating  inflationary  rate  of  unemployment  (NAIRU)  by  international 
institutions point to a downward trend in structural unemployment.  
Interestingly,  given  the  widespread  fears  that  particularly  low  skilled  persons  in  the  industrialised 
countries would loose most from globalisation, in the euro area, by skill level, the unemployment rate 
                                                      
4   To  describe  it  in  quantitative  terms  we  can  use  an  index  of  revealed  comparative  advantage,  which  shows  the  relative 
export  specialisation  to  the  world  in  particular  export  groups  –  the  greater  the  extent  to  which  the  measure  exceeds  the 
value of 1 then the greater the degree of specialisation in that sector. For example, the revealed comparative advantage of 
the euro area in research-intensive products for the period 1993-2004 was 1.1, while it was 1.4 for both the US and Japan 
over the same period. See for more details Annex 1. 
5   Data rely on the Groningen Growth and Developments Centre. Estimate for 2006. 
6   Eurostat LFS data, 2nd quarter. 
7   Eurostat LFS data, 2nd quarter. 
BIS Review 15/2007 
 3
of low-skilled persons declined strongest over the last decade. While persons with tertiary education 
witnessed a decline in their unemployment rate by 2 percentage points to 4.7% in 2006 and persons 
with at least secondary education a decline by 1.4 percentage points to 7.2%, the unemployment rate 
of persons with just below secondary education declined by 3.4 percentage points to a still high level 
of 9.9% in 2006. The employment gains for low-skilled workers in connection with the observed growth 
of the service sector over the last decade may be taken as evidence that the euro area labour force is 
reasonably successful in adjusting to globalisation by structural change towards services. 
Despite  these  successes,  the  euro  area’s  capacity  to  adjust  and  to  grow  in  the  presence  of 
globalisation  is  far  from  having  achieved  its  full  potential.  Still  more  resources  must  be  put  at 
productive use. For example, GDP growth per hour worked in the euro area declined to an average of 
1.2%  between  1996  and  2005  down  from  2.2%  between  1990  and  1995,  while  the  US  doubled  its 
average  growth  in  GDP  per  hour  worked  from  1.2%  to  2.4%  over  the  same  periods.8  At  the  same 
time, employment is still low and unemployment high in comparison with other main competitors. For 
example, the US met the EU’s target of 70% for the employment rate of those aged 15 to 64 by 2010 
already  in  1995  and  the  US  unemployment  rate  amounted  to  just  4.6%  in  2006.9  Furthermore,  the 
share of long-term unemployed in the euro area stood at an enormously high level of 46.8% in 2006, 
implying that almost every second person in the euro area labour force has been unemployed for more 
than a year. At the same time, although following a downward trend, the youth unemployment rate in 
the euro area amounted to 16.2% in 2006. Thus, a large amount of human capital, which is decisive 
for maintaining the euro area’s competitiveness, is unused and at risk of deteriorating.  
The need for structural change and reforms  
For  a  long  time,  we  have  observed  that  in  particular  Multinational  Enterprises  could  react  flexibly 
enough  to  changing  market  conditions  in  different  areas  of  the  world  by  sufficiently  adjusting  their 
internal division of labour across borders. Today - and this is one of the main features of globalisation 
that we observe – each individual has access to the world market via internet and can offer products 
and compare product prices.10 It is this feature which, on the one hand, offers enormous opportunities 
for  welfare  gains  but  which,  on  the  other  hand,  creates  great  challenges  to  competitiveness.  Thus, 
structural reforms need to be designed such that they offer each individual the chances of gaining from 
its  increasingly  global  environment.  In  this  regard,  without  aiming  to  be  exhaustive,  I  would  like  to 
highlight  four  main  areas,  namely  market  integration  and  product  market  competition,  R&D  and 
innovation, an entrepreneurial-friendly environment as well as labour market flexibility. 
First, we need further steps in the liberalisation of international trade. A danger to world growth is that 
the current Doha trade round does not succeed. As you know, negotiations were suspended last July, 
but  I  am  very  pleased  that  there  is  a  tentative  momentum  building  towards  renewing  negotiations, 
which was also seen in Davos and was fully supported by the recent G7 in Essen, whose members 
gave  a  clear  commitment  to  the  Doha  round  of  free  trade  talks  and  accepted  their  responsibility  to 
ensure a successful outcome. I note that this momentum has now led to substantial moves in Geneva, 
with  the  WTO  Director-General,  Pascal  Lamy,  announcing  that  he  is  beginning  to  reconvene  the 
various negotiation groups. We can only wish him success and ask political leaders, who have said 
they would like to see a successful conclusion to the round, to follow through their words with deeds.  
Furthermore, the euro area countries will be the more equipped for the increased globalised economy 
the  more  they  are  able  to  exploit  the  benefits  of  EMU  and  the  EU  internal  market.  In  this  regard, 
existing impediments to the internal market for goods and services need to be removed and financial 
integration  further  fostered.  Further  efforts  in  the  fields  of  product  market  deregulation  and 
liberalisation are required to raise product market competition – at the EU and national level. As the 
example  of  the  European  telecommunications  market  shows,  this  would  enable  more  efficient 
production structures associated with a more competitive price setting. 
Second, euro area countries have to raise their innovative activity by investing more in research and 
development,  thereby  boosting  productivity.  In  this  regard,  an  increased  level  of  product  market 
                                                      
8   Data rely on the Groningen Growth and Developments Centre. 
9   Annual average. 
10   See Denis Snower (2006) ‘Globalisation challenges for the euro area’; OeNB, Wien. 
4 
 BIS Review 15/2007
competition  would  raise  incentives  to  win  new  market  shares  by  offering  new  and  more  innovative 
products,  thus  creating  a  higher  demand  for  R&D.  Against  this  background,  the  Lisbon  agenda 
envisages that by 2010 EU countries spend on average 3% of their real GDP on R&D, including both 
public and private spending. With roughly 3.5% of real GDP being spent on R&D in 2005, Finland is 
the only country in the euro area that meets this target already. In contrast, the euro average of real 
GDP  being  spent  on  R&D  in  2005  amounted  to  just  1.9%.  To  increase  investment  in  R&D  it  is 
essential to foster private spending and to not rely on public spending only. Generally, economic policy 
has  to  ensure  the  right  framework  conditions  for  private  spending  on  R&D  as  this  would  be  best 
channelled  towards  successful  investments.  In  this  respect,  necessary  structural  reforms  include 
market liberalisation and deregulation, but also an adequately trained and educated workforce. There 
has  been  a  remarkable  catch-up  in  education  of  the  younger  generation  compared  to  older 
generations in the euro area. In 2004, 74% of the euro area population aged 25-34 had attained at 
least upper secondary education, compared to 59% of those aged 45-54.11 With ageing populations in 
an increasingly competitive international economic environment, education and training policies have 
to ensure a high quality education for the young – containing a high degree of basic knowledge but 
also knowledge demanded by the productive sector. And they have to ensure sufficient incentives for 
the life-long learning of persons that need to stay for longer in the labour force than in the past.  
Third,  we  need  to  create  an  entrepreneurial-friendly  environment  with  low  administrative  and 
bureaucratic  costs  for  firms  and  business-starts  ups.  This  would  support  the  exploitation  of  new 
production possibilities, increase entrepreneurial efforts and innovative activity of firms. Together, this 
would raise employment and the potential growth rate of an economy. The immense importance of this 
issue is increasingly appreciated by the EU and European governments, with the Netherlands being 
one of the forerunners in the area of ‘better regulation’. A brief look at numbers shows the potential for 
the euro area. Following studies by the World Bank, in 2006, the average cost of starting a business 
with up to 50 employees in the euro area amounted to roughly 2226 USD, compared to 285 USD in 
the US. In 2006, it took on average 22 days to set up a business in the euro area, compared to 5 days 
in  the  US.12  As  regards  administrative  costs,  studies  gauge  these  costs  in  the  EU25  to  amount  to 
3.5% of real GDP.  
Fourth, to fully exploit countries’ changing comparative advantages in producing goods and services it 
is essential that labour markets can adjust to the variation in their production structures. This requires 
the right incentives for a sufficient mobility of workers, inter alia, between jobs and regions, but also 
from  unemployment  to  employment.  Suitable  adjustment  mechanisms  in  the  euro  area  also  require 
sufficient labour mobility across borders. The new euro area member Slovenia therefore needs to be 
granted  full  access  to  all  euro  area  countries’  labour  markets,  which  is  currently  not  the  case. 
Furthermore, sufficient wage differentiation is needed, especially to improve employment opportunities 
for less skilled persons and in regions with high unemployment. Generally, wage developments need 
to adequately reflect developments in productivity by skill level, region and industry. 
Furthermore, adjustments to the level of employment protection are required, in particular where they 
impede the hiring of younger and older workers. In this regard, over the last decade, the euro area 
countries  have  made  progress  particularly  in  rendering  the  use  of  temporary  employment  contracts 
more flexible. As a result, for example, the share of young people working on temporary contracts has 
risen  to  50.3%  in  2006,  compared  to  41%  in  1996.  At  the  same  time,  the  level  of  employment 
protection  legislation  for  permanent  contracts  has  only  fallen  slightly  since  1990.  It  is  therefore 
important to reform regulation on regular contracts where it has adverse effects on hiring incentives.13 
Generally,  with  the  ageing  of  the  European  populations,  employment  gains  in  combination  with 
ambitious and effective structural reforms in the pension and health care sectors are the only way to 
render social systems sustainable in an increasingly global economy. 
Implementing this necessarily non-exhaustive list of structural policy priorities should increase the euro 
area’s overall flexibility in an increasingly globalised world. For firms in the euro area countries, these 
reforms  should  generally  lead  to  a  greater  choice  of  suitable  investment  options  and  open  up 
possibilities for improved productivity, thus helping them to raise cost competitiveness. As the present 
                                                      
11   See OECD (2006) Education at a glance, Paris. Weighted averages. 
12   Worldbank (2007) Doing Business 2007, Washington. GDP weighted averages, excluding Luxembourg. 
13   For a discussion see OECD Employment Outlook (2006) and O. Blanchard and A. Landier (2002) ‘The perverse effects of 
partial labour market reform: fixed term contracts in France, Economic Journal, Vol. 112, pp. 214-244. 
BIS Review 15/2007 
 5
strong growth and export performance of the German economy shows, which between 1999 and 2005 
only witnessed limited cumulated unit labour cost increases of 2.8% compared to a euro area average 
of  11%,  appropriate  unit  labour  cost  developments  for  producers  are  crucial  for  firms’  competitive 
position.  
Conclusion 
I  would  like  to  conclude  by  saying  that  granting  people  their  share  in  the  gains  from  increasing 
integration into the world economy requires most importantly their integration into the labour market. 
Given the recent gains in euro area employment, one could say that the euro area has increasingly 
been able to make globalisation a success for its citizens. This has been the result of a stepping up of 
structural  reforms  in  the  Euro  area.  Progress  has  been  made  but  a  lot  remains  to  be  done. 
Globalisation, together with the remarkable advances of science and technology, offers new chances 
and opportunities for all economies in the world and particularly for the Euro area. But we have to be 
fully  aware  of  the  key  condition  to  fully  reap  the  benefits  of  a  phenomenon  which  accelerates 
formidably the pace of change at global level: flexibility. The more all markets of any given economy 
are flexible, the more this economy adapts rapidly to changes, the more it benefits from globalisation 
and delivers prosperity and jobs.  
6 
  BIS Review 15/2007
