European Central Bank: Press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt 
am Main, 11 January 2007. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I are very pleased to welcome you to our first press 
conference in 2007. Let me therefore wish you all a very Happy New Year. I would also like to take 
this  opportunity  to  welcome  Slovenia  as  the  thirteenth  country  to  adopt  the  euro  as  its  currency. 
Accordingly,  Mr  Gaspari,  the  Governor  of  Banka  Slovenije,  became  a  member  of  the  Governing 
Council on 1 January 2007. 
Let me now report on the outcome of our meeting, which was also attended by the President of the 
Eurogroup, Prime Minister Juncker, and Commissioner Almunia. 
On the basis of our regular economic and monetary analyses, we decided at today’s meeting to leave 
the  key  ECB  interest  rates  unchanged.  The  information  that  has  become  available  since  our  last 
meeting  has  further  underpinned  the  reasoning  behind  our  decision  to  increase  interest  rates  in 
December. It has also confirmed that very close monitoring of all developments is of the essence so 
that risks to price stability over the medium term do not materialise. This will permit medium to longer-
term inflation expectations in the euro area to remain solidly anchored at levels consistent with price 
stability. Such anchoring is a prerequisite for monetary policy to make an ongoing contribution towards 
supporting  sustainable  economic  growth  and  job  creation  in  the  euro  area.  Our  monetary  policy 
continues to be accommodative, with the key ECB interest rates remaining at low levels, money and 
credit growth very strong, and liquidity in the euro area ample by all plausible measures. Therefore, 
looking  ahead,  acting  in  a  firm  and  timely  manner  to  ensure  price  stability  in  the  medium  term  is 
warranted. 
Turning  first  to  the  economic  analysis,  quarter-on-quarter  real  GDP  growth  in  the  euro  area  was 
0.5%  in  the  third  quarter  of  2006,  after  very  strong  growth  in  the  first  half  of  last  year.  Domestic 
demand remained the main driver of economic growth, thus confirming the anticipated broadening of 
the recovery and pointing to the increasingly self-sustaining nature of economic expansion in the euro 
area. Drawing on the latest information, the evidence from various confidence surveys and indicator-
based  estimates  supports the  assessment  that  robust  economic growth  has continued  and  that  the 
situation in labour markets has improved further. While some volatility in the quarter-on-quarter growth 
rates around the turn of the year may be observed – associated with the impact of changes in indirect 
taxes in a large euro area country – the information available continues to be in line with our baseline 
scenario. 
Looking  ahead,  the  medium-term  outlook  for  economic  activity  continues  to  be  favourable  and  the 
conditions  remain  for  the  euro  area  economy  to  grow  solidly,  at  rates  around  potential.  As  for  the 
external environment, global economic growth has become more balanced across regions, with some 
deceleration  in  the  US  and  resilient  growth  elsewhere.  Overall,  global  growth  should  remain  robust 
and therefore continue to provide support for euro area exports. Domestic demand in the euro area is 
expected to maintain its momentum. Investment should remain dynamic, benefiting from an extended 
period of very favourable financing conditions, balance sheet restructuring, accumulated and ongoing 
strong  earnings,  and  gains  in  business  efficiency.  Consumption should  also  strengthen  further  over 
time,  in  line  with  developments  in  real  disposable  income,  as  employment  conditions  continue  to 
improve. 
In the Governing Council’s view, the risks surrounding this broadly favourable outlook for economic 
growth over the coming years lie mainly on the downside. The main risks relate to fears of a rise in 
protectionist pressures, the possibility of a renewed increase in oil prices, and concerns about possible 
disorderly developments due to global imbalances.  
With regard to price developments, according to Eurostat’s flash estimate, annual HICP inflation was 
1.9%  in  December  2006,  unchanged  from  the  previous  month.  On  account  of  their  volatility  over 
recent  months,  and  owing  to  base  effects,  energy  prices  will  continue  to  play  an  important  role  in 
determining  the  profile  of  annual  rates  of  HICP  inflation  in  early  2007,  together  with  the  impact  of 
higher indirect taxes. Looking further ahead, annual inflation rates are projected to hover around 2% 
over this year and next. 
BIS Review 2/2007 
 1
In the Governing Council’s view, the outlook for price developments remains subject to upside risks, 
stemming in particular from a stronger than anticipated pass-through of previous oil price increases, 
increases  in  administered  prices  and  indirect  taxes  beyond  those  announced  thus  far,  and  the 
possibility of renewed oil price increases. More fundamentally, given the favourable momentum of real 
GDP  growth  over  the  past  few  quarters  and  positive  labour  market  developments,  wage  dynamics 
could be stronger than currently expected. It is therefore crucial that social partners continue to meet 
their  responsibilities.  In  this  context,  wage  agreements  should  take  into  account  productivity 
developments,  while  recognising  the  still  high  level  of  unemployment  and  price  competitiveness 
positions. As stated on previous occasions, it is also important that wage settlements move away from 
automatic, backward-looking indexation mechanisms. 
Turning to the monetary analysis, annual M3 growth rose to 9.3% in November. This represents its 
highest annual rate of growth since the introduction of the euro and, indeed, its strongest aggregate 
growth in the euro area group of countries since 1990. While the significance of monthly figures should 
not be overstated, as they may also be influenced by temporary factors, the series of strong monetary 
data over the past couple of months underscore the continued very dynamic underlying rate of broad 
money expansion in the euro area. Rising short-term interest rates, in combination with low long-term 
interest rates, have exerted only a limited influence over monetary developments in recent months. 
This has mainly taken the form of shifts among the components of M3 rather than constraining the 
overall  expansion  of  M3  itself.  In  particular,  over  recent  months  the  annual  growth  rate  of  M1  has 
moderated somewhat, reflecting shifts from overnight deposits into other components of M3 that offer 
more market-related returns. 
All in all, the rate of monetary and credit expansion remains rapid, reflecting the low level of interest 
rates and the strengthening of economic activity in the euro area. In particular, the annual growth rate 
of loans to the private sector was 11.2% in November, unchanged from the previous month. While – in 
the  context  of  rising  interest  rates  –  the  growth  of  household  borrowing  has  shown  signs  of 
stabilisation  in  recent  months,  albeit  at  very  high  rates,  the  growth  of  borrowing  by  non-financial 
corporations  continues  to  trend  upwards.  Thus,  credit  continues  to  expand  rapidly  and  in  a  broad-
based fashion, thereby remaining the main driver of the current strong monetary growth when viewed 
from the counterpart side of the MFI balance sheet. 
Taking  a  medium  to  longer-term  perspective,  the  latest  developments  are  consistent  with  a 
continuation of the persistent upward trend in the underlying rate of monetary expansion. Following 
several  years  of  robust  monetary  growth,  the  liquidity  situation  in  the  euro  area  is  ample  by  all 
plausible measures. Continued strong monetary and credit growth in an environment of ample liquidity 
point  to  upside  risks  to  price  stability  over  the  medium  to  longer  term.  Monetary  developments 
therefore continue to require very careful monitoring, particularly against the background of improved 
economic conditions and continued strong property market developments in many parts of the euro 
area. 
To sum up, annual inflation rates are projected to hover around 2% this year and next, with risks to 
this  outlook  remaining  on  the  upside.  Given  the  very  strong  monetary  and  credit  growth  in  an 
environment of already ample liquidity, a cross-check of the outcome of the economic analysis with 
that of the monetary analysis supports the assessment that upside risks to price stability prevail over 
the  medium  to  longer  term.  Hence,  very  close  monitoring  of  all  developments  is  of  the  essence  in 
order to ensure that risks to price stability over the medium term do not materialise. This will permit 
medium  to  longer-term  inflation  expectations  in  the  euro  area  to  remain  solidly  anchored  at  levels 
consistent with price stability. Therefore, looking ahead, acting in a firm and timely manner to ensure 
price stability in the medium term is warranted. 
As  regards  fiscal  policy,  almost  all  euro  area  countries  have  submitted  their  updated  stability 
programmes. While these programmes generally indicate that governments plan to proceed towards 
sound  budgetary  positions,  there  are  also  indications  that  budget  targets  do  not  consistently  imply 
sufficient  consolidation  and  that  concrete  and  credible  measures  have  not  yet  been  specified  in  all 
programmes.  These  indications  are  a  cause  of  concern  and  entail  risks  for  the  future.  Against  the 
background  of  current  good  times,  it  is  essential  that  sound  budgetary  positions  are  reached  in 
countries with fiscal imbalances and that a pro-cyclical loosening is avoided in all member countries. 
Moreover,  countries  need  to  improve  the  quality  of  their  tax  and  expenditure  policies  as  part  of  a 
comprehensive medium-term strategy, so as to strengthen confidence in a growth and employment-
friendly, and sustainable, fiscal policy environment. 
2 
 BIS Review 2/2007
With regard to structural reforms, over recent years euro area countries have become increasingly 
aware of the necessity to adjust to the challenges of increased global competition, ageing populations 
and accelerating technological change. In response, some have undertaken reform efforts to create 
more job opportunities. Both as a reflection of these reforms and as a result of wage moderation in 
some  countries,  the  euro  area  has  seen  a  remarkable  dynamism  in  employment  growth  over  the 
recent  period.  Notably,  around  12  million  new  jobs  were  created  in  the  euro  area  in  the  eight-year 
period since the start of Stage Three of EMU. This compares favourably with the little more than two 
million new jobs created in the same group of countries in the eight years before 1999. However, the 
Governing  Council  notes  that  significant  structural  impediments  continue  to  exist  and  contribute  to 
explaining why unemployment rates are still unacceptably high and participation in the labour market 
is  still  low  by  international  standards.  With  other  countries  in  the  world  also  increasing  the 
competitiveness  of  their  markets,  it  is  essential  for  each  euro  area  country  to  minimise  the  market 
distortions induced by its particular regulations and for the euro area as a whole to remove remaining 
barriers to market integration. This requires the implementation of comprehensive reforms necessary 
to deepen market integration, soften labour market rigidities and improve wage flexibility in order to 
continue fostering growth and new employment opportunities. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
BIS Review 2/2007 
 3
