Jean-Claude Trichet: Thoughts on the euro area enlargement 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Celebration 
“Welcome to the Euro”, Ljubljana, 15 January 2007. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen,  
It is a great pleasure to be here with you today and celebrate the adoption of the euro in Slovenia and, 
following  the  inclusion  of  Greece  in  2001,  the  second  enlargement  of  the  euro  area  since  the 
introduction of the euro in then 11 EU Member States on 1 January 1999.  
1 January 2007 is a major landmark in the long and challenging economic and monetary integration 
process that brought Slovenia into the euro area. The preparations to euro adoption demanded a lot of 
effort as well as political determination and commitment to pursue stability-oriented economic policies 
in  Slovenia.  Thanks  to  these  policies,  Slovenia  has  made  significant  progress  with  regard  to  both 
nominal and real convergence in recent years and in 2006 managed to fulfil all economic and legal 
convergence criteria. At the same time, it has enjoyed high economic growth that made it possible to 
narrow the income gap vis-à-vis the euro area in terms of PPP from somewhat above 60% of the euro 
area  average  in  1995  to  close  to  80%  now.  Let  me  congratulate  the  Slovenian  people  on  these 
remarkable achievements and let me warmly welcome you to the euro area.  
1 January 2007 marks the beginning of a new economic era for Slovenia. It does not, however, mark 
the end of economic challenges and the economic integration processes of your country into the rest 
of the euro area and the European Union. In fact, like all other members of the euro area, Slovenia 
has to make further efforts to intensify its economic integration within the euro area and I am confident 
it will do so. I will particularly stress that fiscal and structural policies become now even more important 
given that there is no longer the possibility to resort to independent domestic monetary or exchange 
rate policy.  
On this joyful occasion, I would like to share with you some thoughts on the euro area enlargement.  
Contrary to occasional comments made, the current euro area enlargement clearly demonstrates that 
the euro area is not a closed club. Instead its doors are open to any new EU Member State that fulfils 
the necessary preconditions. Let me recall that all countries that joined the European Union in 2004 
and 2007 became members of the Economic and Monetary Union with a derogation. This means that 
they are not only entitled but expected to adopt the euro once they fulfil the convergence criteria. It is 
no  one’s  intention  in  the  euro  area  and  certainly  not  in  the  ECB  to  bar  the  euro  adoption  in  EU 
Member  States  outside  the  euro  area.  What  is  fundamental  –  and  we  stick  to  that  position  -  is  the 
fulfilment of the convergence criteria as specified in the EU Treaty. We examine the sustainability of 
the  convergence  process  on  the  basis  of  a  coherent  analytical  framework  specified  in  our 
Convergence Reports. This framework has been used consistently across time and for all examined 
countries and we will continue to use this framework for the analysis in the future. 
The notion of sustainability implies for us that the convergence criteria must be fulfilled on a lasting 
basis and not only at the time of the convergence examination. A lack of sustainability would result in 
serious  economic  problems  for  the  newcomer  with  maintaining  economic  and  financial  stability.  In 
addition  economic  problems  in  an  individual  euro  area  country  might  also  have  negative 
consequences  for  the  entire  euro  area.  Thus,  a  thorough  and  rigorous  approach  to  fulfilling  the 
convergence criteria on a sustainable basis is in the interest of all current and prospective euro area 
members.  
Looking to the euro area since its inception of 1 January 1999, one is impressed by its success. Not 
only the success of the single currency itself which has gained the same level of monetary stability and 
confidence that was the privilege only of the best previous national currencies. Not only the fact that 
inflation over the last eight years has been in the euro area significantly lower than in the eight years 
before  the  euro.  Price  stability  is  a  necessary  condition  for  growth  and  job  creation.  So  it  is  not 
surprising that growth has been higher in the euro area since January 1999 than in the eight years 
before and that in the same period of eight years job creation has been significantly higher: 12 million 
jobs created since 1 January 1999 compared to less than 3 million during the eight years before. But 
this does not mean that the euro area should not strive to do even much better, taking into account in 
particular the present level of unemployment and the low level of yearly labour productivity increases. 
BIS Review 5/2007 
 1
More flexibility of all markets is of the essence. We must continue to strive for the full liberalisation of 
the  markets  of  goods  and  services,  for  further  significant  progress  in  financial  integration  and  for 
flexibility in the labour markets including free movement of workers. This free movement of workers 
within  the  monetary  union  is  not  only  important  for  its  proper  functioning  but  it  also  symbolises  the 
depth of the economic integration achieved between euro area countries. Thus, let me repeat here my 
earlier  calls  that  the  remaining  labour  mobility  restrictions  for  Slovenian  citizens  in  the  euro  area 
countries should be eliminated. Such barriers do simply not belong to a single currency area. 
Ladies and gentlemen, let me again congratulate Slovenia for its successful integration with the euro 
area and the adoption of the euro. Looking at the track record of sound economic policies in the past I 
am confident that the newest member of the euro area “family” will continue with responsible economic 
domestic  policies,  securing  further  stable  and  robust  economic  growth  and  pursuing  efficiently  the 
catching-up process. Let me also reconfirm my hope that all euro area Member States will do their 
best to further strengthen the economic integration in the euro area. This will have positive effects on 
economic  growth  and  job  creation  for  all  317  million  people  in  the  euro  area  today.  Finally,  let  me 
encourage all the new Member States to pursue sound and consistent economic policies in order to 
achieve lasting real and nominal convergence. Further progress in this field will hopefully allow us to 
welcome again new members to the euro area.  
Thank you very much for your attention.  
2 
 BIS Review 5/2007
