Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Providing critical support to disaster-striken 
areas through the Calamity Assistance Program 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas), at the signing ceremony among members of the Countryside 
Financial  Institutions  Enhancement  Program  Task  Force  of  the  MOA  to  implement  the 
Countryside Financial Institutions-Calamity Assistance Program, Manila, 14 August 2007. 
 Landbank President Gilda Pico, PDIC OIC Imelda Singzon, fellow bankers, co-workers in the 
BSP, our friends from the media, special guests, good morning.  
What  we  just  signed  this  morning  is  the  P200  million  Countryside  Financial  Institutions 
Calamity  Assistance  Program  –  a  crucial  support  program  for  countryside  rural  banks, 
cooperative banks and thrift banks to help fund early recovery and reconstruction activities in 
calamity-stricken areas.  
This is a joint initiative of the Countryside Financial Institutions Program Task Force which 
counts  as  members  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas,  Philippine  Deposit  Insurance 
Corporation and the Land Bank of the Philippines. 
As indicated in our guidelines, qualified banks are rural banks, thrift banks or coop banks in 
areas  affected  by  typhoons,  disasters  and  other  natural  calamities  –  as  declared  by  the 
Office of the President or the National Disaster Coordinating Council. 
Each  qualified  financial  institution  can  borrow  a  maximum  amount  of  90%  of  its  affected 
existing portfolio or P 5million, whichever is lower, provided the loan amount does not exceed 
the bank’s borrowing capacity. The loan is payable in seven years with an interest rate of 9% 
and post-dated checks as collateral.  
The loans may be availed of from Land Bank branches within one year from the date of the 
declaration of the calamity by the NDCC or the Office of the President.  
Given  our  country’s  history,  this  calamity  assistance  program  will  be  most  helpful  to 
countryside areas where many of our poor reside. Among others, the Philippines lies along 
the Western Pacific Basin – which is the world's busiest typhoon belt. We are also part of the 
circum-Pacific seismic belt ringed by major tectonic plates and volcanoes.  
In  fact,  a  World  Bank  study  indicated  that  calamities  which  destroy  crops,  properties  and 
infrastructure have been a major cause for poverty, especially in the countryside.  
We hope therefore that this calamity assistance program will empower countryside financial 
institutions to help fund early recovery and reconstruction in affected areas.  
The members of the Task Force appeal to all of you to support this program. Together, let us 
get this program going!  
Marami pong salamat sa inyong lahat. 
BIS Review 90/2007 
 1
