Y V Reddy: Indian economy – review, prospects and select issues 
Address  by  Dr  Y  V  Reddy,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  Central  Bank  of  Chile, 
Santiago de Chile, 7 June 2007. 
 Governor Corbo and Friends, 
I am honoured by the kind invitation of Governor Corbo to visit the esteemed Central Bank of Chile. 
We, in the Reserve Bank of India, deeply appreciate the gesture. Governor Corbo is respected for his 
lucid expositions on complex issues in various international fora. While his analysis of monetary policy 
challenges  in  Chile  is  a  matter  of  interest  to  the  central  bankers,  his  understanding  of  global 
developments, especially of Emerging Market Economies is also appreciated. The performance of the 
Chilean economy over the last 15 years has attracted international interest and is often considered to 
be an interesting model of structural reforms, liberalization and stabilisation. The Chilean experience 
with management of capital inflows and temporary recourse to unique Chilean type of tax on cross 
border capital flow is often discussed in both academic and policy circles.  
The visit of Governor Corbo to India in January 2004 was the first by a Governor from Latin America to 
visit  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  in  the  recent  years.  The  scholarly  speech  that  he  delivered  on  the 
recent developments and prospects of the Chilean Economy was very well received in the Reserve 
Bank.  
Today,  in  my  presentation,  there  would  be  a  brief  review  of  the  Indian  economy,  followed  by 
assessment of short term and medium term prospects. I will conclude by addressing select issues in 
the conduct of policy in the areas of money and finance in India, as they are likely to be of interest to 
the audience here.  
A brief review of the Indian economy 
I.  
India’s Constitution adopted in 1950 had established parliamentary form of democracy and India has 
been a republic with universal adult suffrage, which has contributed to significant stability of political 
system. It is a now a federation with 28 States and seven Union territories. While the largest State 
(Uttar Pradesh) has a population of 166 million the smallest State (Sikkim) has a population of only 
0.54  million.  There  is  significant  diversity  in  religious  faiths  with  different  States  having  majority  of 
population belonging to different faiths such as Hindu, Islamic, Christian and Buddhist faiths. India is a 
host  to  the  largest  number  of  practicing  Zoroastrians  (of  ancient  Persia)  in  the  world.  There  are  22 
languages recognised by the Constitution of India as major languages spoken by a large section of 
society. While the boundaries of the States are based, by and large, on language, they have also been 
redrawn in the past to accommodate local aspirations. This is unique for any federation and reflects a 
subsisting  spirit  of  accommodation.  Furthermore,  the  local  self-governments,  right  up  to  the  village 
level, are mandated by the Constitution.  
Growth 
Sometimes  India  is  described  as  a  re-emerging  economy  since  in  the  18th  century,  this  area  had 
accounted for about a quarter of world output – but that is part of history. The annual growth rate of 
GDP  in  the  geographical area  of  India  in  the  first  half  of  20th  century  is  estimated  to  be  around  an 
average  of  0.9  per  cent  per  annum  and  per  capita  income  at  an  average  rate  of  0.1  per  cent  per 
annum. The economy of independent India which is of contemporary interest had to be built upon the 
overhang  issues  of  second  World  War,  the  trauma  of  partition,  the  integration  of  princely  states 
numbering over 500 and a low level of GDP.  
From an annual average growth rate of 3.5 per cent during 1950 to 1980, the growth rate of the Indian 
economy accelerated to around 6.0 per cent in the 1980s and 1990s. In the last four years (2003-04 to 
2006-07), the Indian economy grew by 8.6 per cent. In 2005-06 and 2006-07, it had grown at a higher 
rate of 9.0 and 9.4 per cent, respectively.  
BIS Review 62/2007 
 1
Stability 
An important characteristic of the high growth phase of over a quarter of century is resilience to shocks 
and considerable amount of stability. We have witnessed only one serious balance of payments crisis 
triggered  largely  by  the  Gulf  war  in  the  early  1990s.  Credible  macroeconomic  structural  and 
stabilization programme was undertaken in the wake of the crisis. The Indian economy in later years, 
could  successfully  avoid  any  adverse  contagion  impact  of  shocks  from  the  East  Asian  crisis,  the 
Russian  crisis  during  1997-98,  sanction  like  situation  in  post-Pokhran  scenario,  and  border  conflict 
during May-June 1999. Seen in this context, this robust macroeconomic performance, in the face of 
recent oil as well as food shocks, demonstrates the vibrancy and resilience of the Indian economy.  
Saving and investment 
The  average  saving rate  in  India was 10  per  cent  in  the  1950s,  which  rose  to  17.5  per cent  in  the 
1970s and further to 23.41 per cent in the 1990s. The saving rate was 32.4 per cent in 2005-06. The 
strengthening of economic activity in the recent years has been supported by persistent increase in 
gross domestic investment rates from 22.9 per cent of GDP in 2001-02 to 33.8 per cent in 2005-06. It 
may also be noted that over 95 per cent of investment during this period was financed by the domestic 
savings. 
Inflation  
Since independence, the inflation rate, in terms of the wholesale price index (WPI), on average basis 
was above 15 per cent in only five out of fifty years. In thirty-six out of fifty years, inflation was in single 
digit  and  on  most  occasions  high  inflation  was  due  to  shocks  –  food  or  oil.  The  tolerance  level  to 
inflation has been low, relative to many developing countries, especially on account of the democratic 
pressures in the country.  
The inflation rate accelerated steadily from an annual average of 1.7 per cent during the 1950s to 6.4 
per cent during the 1960s and further to 9.0 per cent in the 1970s before easing marginally to 8.0 per 
cent in the 1980s. However, the inflation rate declined from an average of 11.0 cent during 1990-95 to 
5.3  per  cent  during  the  second  half  of  the  1990s  (1995-2000)  and  further  to  4.9  per  cent  during 
2003-07.  
More  recently  during  2006-07,  WPI  based  inflation  rate  increased  from  4.1  per  cent  at  the  end  of 
March 2006 to an intra-year peak of 6.7 per cent at end-January 2007 and remained firm in the range 
of  6.1-6.6  per  cent  in  the  succeeding  weeks  before  moderating  to  5.7  per  cent  by  the  end  of  the 
financial year (as on March 31, 2007). As on May 19, 2007, the WPI inflation rate was 5.1 per cent.  
from 
imbalances 
the  banking  system  as  also 
Fiscal performance  
The average gross fiscal deficit of the central government as per cent to GDP during the decade of 
1980s was 6.8 per cent as against 3.8 per cent in the 1970s. The Reserve Bank had to facilitate the 
financing  of  budgetary 
through  monetary 
accommodation. As interest rates were administered and not market determined, the interest rates on 
public  debt  were  kept  artificially  low.  By  the  early  1990s,  as  the  budgetary  imbalances  became 
unsustainable, percolating into the overall macroeconomic imbalance and financial repression ensued, 
the Government had to initiate a programme of stabilisation and structural reforms, inter alia, to bring 
down the budgetary imbalances.  
A major landmark in the interface of the Reserve Bank with fiscal developments was the Supplemental 
Agreement  between  the  Reserve  Bank  and  the  Government  to  terminate  the  process  of  automatic 
monetisation  through  phasing  out  ad  hoc  Treasury  Bills  and  introduction  of  a  system  of  Ways  and 
Means (WMA) advances from April 1997. However, the Reserve Bank continued to participate in the 
primary market by privately placing/devolving the issues of government securities on its own account 
in the market. Subsequently, however, under the provisions of the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget 
Management  (FRBM)  Act,  2003,  the  Reserve  Bank  no  longer  participates  in  the  primary  market 
auction of the government securities since April 2006.  
The Government of India is pursuing the path of rule-based fiscal consolidation from the year 2004-05 
under the FRBM Act, 2003 and FRBM Rules, 2004. The underlying purpose of the targets set under 
this legislative mandate has been to reduce the ratio of gross fiscal deficit (GFD) to gross domestic 
product (GDP) to three per cent by 2008-09. Furthermore, the revenue deficit (RD) to GDP ratio has 
2 
 BIS Review 62/2007
been targeted to touch 0 per cent by 2008-09 so that borrowed resources can be used to meet only 
capital  expenditures.  The  progress  of  targeted  fiscal  consolidation  has  been  satisfactory  so  far  and 
GFD/GDP and RD/GDP ratios are budgeted to reduce to 3.3 per cent and 1.5 per cent, respectively, in 
2007-08; the objective is to meet the FRBM targets by 2008-09 and remain at those levels in 2009-10.  
External sector 
The average current account deficit since 1950-51 has been around one per cent of the GDP. During 
this  period,  except  for  11  years  when  there  was  marginal  surplus  in  the  current  account,  we  had 
modest deficit during the rest of the years.  
After  the  Independence  in  1947,  higher  imports  and  capital  outflows,  led  by  partition,  resulted  in 
significant deficit in the balance of payments necessitating running down of the accumulated sterling 
balances.  However,  the  signs  of  strain  in  the  balance  of  payments  were  clearly  visible  from  the 
Second Five Year Plan (1956-61) onwards. Though the devaluation of 1966 brought to the fore the 
problems  associated  with  the  overvalued  exchange  rate,  it  did  not  bring  immediate  desired 
improvement  in  the  balance  of  payments  position.  The  remittances  from  Indians  working  abroad 
became a new source of meeting the growing financing needs in the 1970s. However, the second oil 
price shock during 1979-80 proved to be the precursor of another phase of strain on India's balance of 
payments. 
In the aftermath of the balance of payment crisis in the early 1990s, several stabilisation and structural 
reform measures were undertaken. The hallmark of the reform process has been a gradual, cautious 
approach that incorporated a careful sequencing and phasing across different sectors of the economy. 
Recognising  the  macro-economic  implications  of  volatility  associated  with  capital  flows,  India  has 
adopted a policy of managing the capital account with a preference for non-debt flows. Consistent with 
the principle of hierarchy of capital flows, India has been making efforts towards encouraging more 
inflows  through  FDI  and  enhancing  the  quality  of  portfolio  flows  by  strict  adherence  to  “Know  Your 
Investor” principle. Going forward, the pace of further liberalization will critically depend on the reforms 
in real and fiscal sectors as also global developments.  
In the recent period, India’s external sector has become resilient with the current account deficit being 
maintained at modest levels after a few years of marginal surplus during 2001-02 to 2003-04. External 
sector  indicators  show  considerable  level  of  sustainability  attained  in  the  last  decade.  Sustained 
growth in export of services and remittances has continued to provide buoyancy to the surplus in the 
invisible account, which has enabled financing a large part of trade deficit. The capital flows have been 
buoyant  leading  to  sustained  rise  in  foreign  exchange  reserves.  The  merchandise  trade  deficit  is 
currently  close  to  7  per  cent  of  GDP;  however,  the  current  account  deficit  is  under  1.5  per  cent  of 
GDP, mainly due to the knowledge and competitive advantage we have in services and the steady 
support from remittances from Indians working abroad.  
Financial sector 
The  experience  during  the  initial  period  after  Independence  shows  that  institution  building  and 
development of the financial system was propelled by the needs of the country's central planning. It 
was considered necessary to ensure that sectoral needs of credit to agriculture and industry were met 
in accordance with the Plan priorities. The Reserve Bank was vested with the major responsibility of 
developing the institutional infrastructure in the financial system. With a view to expand the outreach, 
the 14 largest commercial banks were nationalized in July 1969 as a major step to ensure adequate 
credit  flow  into  genuine  productive  areas  in  conformity  with  Plan  priorities.  Again  in  1980,  six  more 
private sector banks were nationalised, thus further extending the domain of public control over the 
banking system. 
Since the beginning of the reform period in 1991, the approach towards the financial sector in India 
has been to move away from financial repression and consistently upgrade the system by adopting the 
international best practices through a consultative process. Financial sector reforms were carried out 
in two phases. The first phase of reforms was aimed at creating market-oriented financial institutions 
operating in an environment of operational flexibility and functional autonomy. The focus of the second 
phase of financial sector reforms has been on strengthening of the financial system consistent with the 
movement towards global integration of financial services.  
Major policy measures during the reform of the banking sector include phased reductions in statutory 
pre-emption like cash reserve and statutory liquidity requirements and deregulation of interest rates on 
BIS Review 62/2007 
 3
deposits  and  lending,  except  for  a  select  segment.  The  diversification  of  ownership  of  banking 
institutions is yet another feature which has enabled private shareholding in the public sector banks, 
through listing on the stock exchanges, arising from dilution of the Government ownership. On account 
of healthy market value of the banks’ shares, the capital infusion into the banks by the Government 
has  turned  out  very  profitable  for  the  Government.  Foreign  direct  investment  in  the  private  sector 
banks is now allowed up to 74 per cent, subject to the prescribed guidelines. There have been new 
banks,  new  instruments,  new  windows,  new  opportunities  and,  along  with  all  this,  new  challenges. 
Banks  have  been  provided  significant  freedom  in  their  resource  allocation  through  working  of  the 
market  mechanism.  The  Reserve  Bank  has  endeavoured  to  establish  an  enabling  regulatory 
framework  with  prompt  and  effective  supervision,  and  development  of  legal,  technological  and 
institutional infrastructure.  
The co-existence of the public sector, private sector and the foreign banks has generated competition 
in  the  banking  sector  leading  to  a  significant  improvement  in  efficiency  and  customer  service.  The 
share of private and foreign banks in total assets increased to 27.6 per cent at end-March 2006 from 
24.7 per cent at end-March 2005 and less than 10.0 per cent at the inception of reforms.  
Currently,  all  scheduled  commercial  banks  are  compliant  with  the  minimum  capital  adequacy  ratio 
(CRAR) of 9 per cent. The overall CRAR for all scheduled commercial banks stood at 12.4 per cent at 
end-March 2006. The overhang of gross non-performing assets of scheduled commercial banks has 
declined from 8.80 per cent of advances in 2002-03 to 3.30 per cent in 2005-06. Operating expenses 
as a ratio of total assets of Indian scheduled commercial banks has declined from 2.24 per cent in 
2002-03 to 2.11 per cent in 2005-06.  
As development of the financial markets is an ongoing process, initiatives to further deepen and widen 
the  various  segments  of  the  financial  markets  would  have  to  be  continuously  pursued.  Since  the 
overall objective of maintaining price stability in the context of economic growth and financial stability 
will remain, the effort will be to harmonise the deregulation and liberalisation of financial markets with 
the domestic developments in real as well as fiscal sectors and global developments in international 
financial architecture.  
II. 
Prospects  
Short-term prospects 
The  distinguishing  feature  of  India’s  macroeconomic  performance  in  2006-07  has  been  the  strong 
acceleration of growth. Industry and services, comprising over 80 per cent of the economy, registered 
double-digit  growth.  While  there  seems  to  be  evidence  of  structural  changes  taking  place  in  the 
economy,  there  are  indications  that  the  upsurge  of  demand  pressures  in  2006-07  may  contain  a 
cyclical component. As regards structural changes, first, the recent growth momentum is driven by a 
step-up in the investment rate, which, in turn, is supported by a sizeable increase in the rate of gross 
domestic saving. This noteworthy improvement is attributable mainly to a distinct increase in corporate 
saving  and  turnaround  in  public  sector  dis-saving  from  2003-04  onwards,  while  household  saving 
continues to remain the mainstay of gross domestic saving. Second, India’s linkages with the global 
economy are getting stronger, underpinned by the growing openness of the economy. Third, there is 
evidence of improvements in total factor productivity and the efficiency of capital use.  
There  are  cyclical  factors  also  underlying  the  recent  growth  experience.  First,  robust  global  GDP 
growth, which exhibited four years of strong expansion, has been supportive of high growth in India. 
Second,  the  persistent  high  growth  in  bank  credit  and  money  supply,  the  pick-up  in  non-oil  import 
growth  and  the  widening  of  the  trade  deficit  in  recent  years  together  indicate  upside  pressures  on 
aggregate  demand.  Third,  cyclical  forces  are  also  evident  in  the  steady  increase  in  prices  of 
manufactures, resurgence of pricing power among corporates, indications of wage pressures in some 
sectors, strained capacity utilisation and elevated asset prices. 
It is important to assess India’s recent macroeconomic performance against the evolving configuration 
of risks, which are likely to shape the outlook. First, the buoyant growth in industry and services has 
been somewhat marred by the setback to agriculture which has suffered substantial deceleration and 
volatility. It is now widely recognised that the performance of agriculture is critical not only for output 
and  employment  but  also,  particularly  for  price  stability.  While  over  60  per  cent  of  the  workforce  is 
dependent on agriculture, the sector accounts for barely 20 per cent of the GDP.  
4 
 BIS Review 62/2007
Second,  alongside  shortfalls  in  agricultural  performance,  large  gaps  have  emerged  in  the  physical 
infrastructure.  Rapid  growth  in  demand  for  infrastructure  with  a  less  than  proportionate  supply 
response in the prevailing investment climate has resulted in stretching of the capacity utilisation in 
electricity generation, roads, ports and major airports.  
Third,  domestic  developments  in  2006-07  in  terms  of  firming  up  of  inflation  through  the  year,  led 
mainly by rising prices of primary articles, has been a matter of concern.  
Monetary and financial conditions are reflecting these demand-supply gaps as well as the onset of a 
durable  pick-up  in  aggregate  spending.  The  acceleration  of  growth  in  the  real  sector  has  been 
reflected in the upward shift in the growth trajectory of non-food credit extended by commercial banks. 
The expansion in non-food credit at 29.8 per cent in the period 2003-04 to 2006-07 is unprecedented 
in the history of the Indian economy. There has been some sign of deceleration in the recent period as 
growth in year on year non-food credit was 27.2 per cent as on May 11, 2007 as compared with 32.3 
per cent during the same period last year.  
In consonance with the rising capital flows, the reserve money growth has been higher in the recent 
period averaging 17.8 per cent during 2003-07. The rate of growth of reserve money was 23.3 per 
cent as on May 18, 2007 on year on year basis (20 per cent a year ago).  
Similarly, the high credit growth in the recent period has led the money supply growth to remain high 
averaging 16.7 per cent during 2003-07. During 2006-07, the money supply grew by 20.7 per cent. As 
on May 11, 2007, the growth in money supply on year on year basis was 20.2 per cent (18.2 per cent 
a year ago).  
Taking into account the high expansion of money supply worldwide, and given the monetary overhang 
of 2005-07, it is important to contain monetary expansion in 2007-08 at around 17.0-17.5 per cent, in 
consonance  with  the  outlook  on  growth  and  inflation.  The  Annual  Policy  Statement  for  the  year 
2007-08 also placed aggregate deposits growth in 2007-08 at around Rs.4,900 billion and a graduated 
deceleration of non-food credit to 24.0-25.0 per cent in 2007-08.  
Monetary  policy  in  India  has  to  also  contend  with  the  burden  of  challenges  emanating  from  other 
sources. First, it is recognised that monetary policy has to contend with the high level of public debt 
and  fiscal  deficit.  While  the  recent  improvements  in  the  fiscal  position  of  States  and  significant 
consolidation  in  the  finances  of  the  Centre  have  to  some  extent  alleviated  the  situation,  the  fiscal 
position  may  need  further  strengthening  as  we  proceed  with  further  liberalisation  of  financial  sector 
and capital account. Second, in the recent period, the enduring strength of foreign exchange inflows 
has complicated the conduct of monetary policy, as such inflows can potentially reduce the efficacy of 
monetary policy tightening by expanding liquidity. Third, in India, levels of livelihood of large sections 
of the population are inadequate to withstand sharp financial fluctuations, which impact real activity. 
Accordingly,  monetary  policy  has  to  also  bear  the  burden  of  protecting  these  segments  of  the 
economy from volatility in financial markets often related to sudden shifts in capital flows. Fourth, a 
situation in which aggregate supply is less than elastic domestically imposes an additional burden on 
monetary policy. While open trade has expanded the supply potential of several economies, it does 
not seem to have had any significant short-term salutary effect on some supply elasticities.  
The operation of monetary policy in India is also constrained by some uncertainties in transmission of 
policy signals to the economy. First, despite the progressive deregulation since the early 1990s, some 
categories of interest rates continue to be administered, thereby muting the impact of monetary policy 
on  the  structure  of  interest  rates.  Second,  external  sector  management  is  complicated  by  the 
incentives for some elements of capital flows provided by public policy setting. Thus, the magnitudes 
and direction of capital flows to select sectors in the domestic economy are beset with uncertainties in 
regard to the global and domestic environment not necessarily related to economic fundamentals or 
the  monetary  policy  setting.  Third,  the  operation  of  monetary  policy  has  to  be  oriented  around  the 
predominantly public sector ownership of the banking system which plays a critical role not only in the 
transmission of monetary policy signals but also in other public policy considerations. 
Overall,  the  Reserve  Bank  projects  the  real  GDP  growth  in  2007-08  to  be  around  8.5  per  cent, 
assuming no further escalation in international crude prices and barring domestic or external shocks. 
For the year 2007-08, the Reserve Bank's policy endeavour would be to contain inflation close to 5.0 
per cent. In the medium term, in recognition of India’s evolving integration with the global economy 
and  societal  preferences,  the  resolve,  going  forward,  is  to  condition  policy  and  expectations  for 
inflation in the range of 4.0-4.5 per cent.  
BIS Review 62/2007 
 5
Medium-term prospects 
The Approach Paper for the Eleventh Five Year Plan (2007-08 to 2011-12) targets an average annual 
growth  of  9  per  cent  relative  to  8  per  cent  targeted  by  the  Tenth  Plan  (2002-03  to  2006-07).  This 
aspiration  for  growth  would  require  significant  acceleration  in  investment  from  27.8  per  cent  in  the 
Tenth Five Year Plan to 35.1 per cent in the Eleventh Five Year Plan. While half of the increase in 
investment is expected to come from private investment in farms, small and medium enterprises and 
in the corporate sector, the rest is estimated to emanate from public investment with a focus on the 
infrastructure sector. The higher level of investment is proposed to be financed by some combination 
of  increased  domestic  savings  and  increased  foreign  savings.  A  significant  portion  of  the  required 
increase  in  domestic  savings  is  expected  to  come  from  an  improvement  in  government  savings. 
Household savings and private corporate savings can also play a major role in this regard.  
Realising that the growth benefits need to trickle down further, the Eleventh five year Plan is likely to 
provide an opportunity to restructure policies to achieve a new vision based on faster, more broad-
based and inclusive growth. Doubling of agricultural GDP growth to around 4 per cent is particularly 
important in this context. The Approach Paper suggests that this must be combined with policies to 
promote rapid growth in non-agricultural employment so as to create 70 million job opportunities in the 
11th Plan.  
Very recently on May 29, 2007, our Honourable Prime Minister announced a major scheme to double 
the growth rate of agriculture to 4.0 per cent over the 11th Plan period. The Government would provide 
rupees  250  billion  for new  farm  initiatives  launched by  States.  A time-bound Food  Security  Mission 
was also announced to counter rising prices of food products and to ensure visible changes in their 
availability over three years.  
If  these  objectives  are  achieved,  the  percentage  of  people  in  poverty  could  be  reduced  by  10 
percentage  points  by  the  end  of  the  Plan  period.  The  policy  reforms  and  monitorable  targets  as 
indicated in the Approach Paper, particularly on education, health, women and children, infrastructure, 
when  attained,  are  expected  to  benefit  a  larger  chunk  of  population  immensely.  This  will  help  in 
making the Indian growth process more inclusive and durable.  
The Approach Paper to the 11th Five year Plan suggests that growth target for industrial sector and 
manufacturing  sector  could  be  placed  at  10  per  cent  and  12  per  cent,  respectively  during  the  Plan 
period. This is based on the assumption that India has also the potential of emerging as a favoured 
manufacturing  destination  of  the  world  especially  in  respect  of  certain  manufacturing  activities, 
characterized by entrepreneurial dynamism and cost competitiveness.  
The  services  sector  in  the  country  has  benefited  from  the  availability  of  vast  skilled  labour  and  is 
expected to continue to lead the economy, drawing from its linkage with the well performing industrial 
sector and expanding international trade. The Approach Paper puts special focus on services sector 
so that its potential to create employment and growth is fully realised.  
There  is  commitment  on  the  part  of  the  Government  to  pursue  the  process  of  fiscal  correction  and 
consolidation. The task ahead for the central Government is to achieve the FRBM targets, especially 
the elimination of revenue deficit by 2008-09. Favorable factors towards this end are buoyancy in tax-
GDP ratio and turnaround in public sector dis-saving from 2003-04 onwards.  
To reap the rewards of demographic dividend, public policy has a critical role to play towards creating 
a quality social infrastructure in terms of education and health and also generate employment which 
can help the easy and productive absorption of the prospective “youth bulge”.  
The Approach Paper emphasises further financial innovation, particularly the insurance and pension 
sectors, which are considered to be good sources for meeting the long-term-financing requirement of 
the  infrastructure  sector. The  policy  approach  being  followed  is  likely  to  ensure  greater  outreach  of 
banking business, and also, in the present scenario of high growth, enable the banks to usefully lend 
to the disadvantaged sections and successfully pierce the informal credit segment. 
III.  
Select issues in the conduct of policy 
Multiple objectives  
The preamble to the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 sets out the Bank’s objectives as "to regulate 
the issue of Bank notes and the keeping of reserves with a view to securing monetary stability in India 
6 
 BIS Review 62/2007
and  generally  to  operate  the  currency  and  credit  system  of  the  country  to  its  advantage".  Although 
there is no explicit mandate for price stability, as is the current trend in many countries, the objectives 
of monetary policy in India have evolved as those of maintaining price stability and ensuring adequate 
flow of credit to the productive sectors of the economy. In essence, monetary policy aims to maintain a 
judicious balance between price stability and economic growth. The relative emphasis between price 
stability and economic growth is governed by the prevailing circumstances at a particular time and is 
spelt  out  from  time  to  time  in  the  policy  announcements  of  the  Reserve  Bank.  Financial  stability, 
subsumed in monetary stability, has gained in importance since the second half of the 1990s.  
The Reserve Bank discharges the functions of debt manager and banker to the government of India 
and  the  State  governments.  Regulation  and  supervision  of  banks  and  non-banking  financial 
companies  are  also  assigned  to  Reserve  Bank.  In  addition  to  management  of  current  and  capital 
account  transactions  of  external  sector,  development  and  regulation  of  the  money,  government 
securities and forex markets are also the functions of the RBI. Payment systems also fall within the 
purview of the RBI.  
Measurement and targeting of inflation 
An appropriate inflation indicator should reflect price changes of the constituent items accurately and 
provide  some  understanding  of  the  headline  inflation.  The  consumer  price  index  (CPI)  is  generally 
favoured  as  an  indicator  of  inflation  for  monetary  policy.  Given  the  widely  differing  consumption 
baskets as between the rich and the poor, between the rural and the urban areas and even across 
regions in India, a single CPI index could be less representative. Hence, a measure of producer prices 
to  which  the  wholesale  price  index  (WPI)  is  akin,  is  currently  treated  as  more  representative  and 
familiar across the country. However, the growing importance of services in the consumption basket 
makes the WPI less representative. There are occasions when divergence between WPI and CPI is 
larger  than  usual.  In  view  of  these  considerations,  we  do  monitor  and  disseminate  all  the  CPI 
indicators,  while  using  this  as  relevant  information  for  policy  formulation.  In  parallel,  we  are  doing 
technical work on computing a Harmonised Consumer Price Index, and we are in consultation with the 
government in this regard.  
It  is  increasingly  recognised  that  monetary  policy  should  be  associated  with  managing  inflation 
expectations also. The guiding criterion for inclusion of a variable in the inflation indicators panel would 
be the information content on future inflation. We are now actively working on collecting information 
relating to real-sector indicators of future inflation, such as variability of output around trend / potential, 
capacity  utilisation,  inventory,  corporate  performance,  industrial/  investment  expectations  and  other 
indicators of aggregate demand.  
In  India,  we  have  not  favoured  the  adoption  of  an  explicit  inflation-targeting  framework  for  several 
reasons. First, the monetary policy in India has the twin objectives of growth and price stability but the 
relative  emphasis  between  the  two  keeps  varying  depending  upon  the  circumstances.  Second,  we 
have had a record of moderate inflation, with double digit inflation being the exception, and largely, 
socially unacceptable. Third, the adoption of inflation targeting requires the existence of an efficient 
monetary transmission mechanism through the operation of efficient financial markets and absence of 
interest  rate  distortions.  In  India,  although  the  money  market,  government  debt  and  forex  markets 
have indeed developed in recent years, they still have some way to go, whereas the corporate debt 
market  is  yet  to  develop.  Though  interest  rate  deregulation  has  largely  been  accomplished,  some 
administered interest rates still persist. Fourth, in an economy as large as that of India, with numerous 
regional differences, and continued existence of market imperfections in factor and product markets 
across  regions,  the  choice  of  a  universally  acceptable  measure  of  inflation  is  also  difficult.  Fifth, 
inflationary  pressures  often  emanate  from  significant  supply  shocks  related  to  the  effect  of  the 
monsoon on agriculture in addition to oil prices.  
We do not have the concept of core inflation but for purposes of analysis as well as articulation, we 
identify the impact of fuel- and food-price shocks. These two items are often subject to shock – both 
external  and  domestic.  The  two  items  also  have  a  large  weight  in  the  basket,  especially  of 
consumption.  It  is  also  difficult,  ex  ante,  to  differentiate  between  the  shock  and  the  permanent 
components.  
We,  in  the  Reserve  Bank,  since  three  years,  have  nevertheless  articulated,  with  significant  impact, 
tolerance  limit  of  inflation  at  around  five  per  cent.  That  has  since  been  embedded  in  inflation 
expectations as noticed in severe adverse reactions when WPI exceeded five per cent. In the RBI’s 
Annual  Policy  of  2007-08,  we  indicated  a  self-imposed  informal  inflation  mandate  over  the  medium 
BIS Review 62/2007 
 7
term to be in the range of 4.0 to 4.5 per cent. The goal is to anchor inflation expectation in India so as 
to align them with the global levels, as soon as possible for ensuring smooth economic integration with 
the global economy.  
Use of prudential measures  
Financial stability has emerged as one of the key considerations in the conduct of monetary policy. 
The  Reserve  Bank  has  adopted  a  two-track  approach  in  the  pursuit  of  financial  stability.  First,  by 
ensuring  monetary  stability  through  lowering  of  inflation,  it  has  lowered  inflationary  expectations, 
thereby fostering financial stability. Second, the Reserve Bank has applied a multi-pronged strategy, to 
promote stability of financial institutions, financial markets and the financial infrastructure. The stable 
economic regime, combined with the macro financial oversight of the financial system, has imparted 
confidence to market players to conduct their business in an orderly manner.  
In  India,  rising  economic  activity  has  propelled  non-food  credit  growth  above  30  per  cent  since 
2004-05.  Substantially  high  credit  growth  has  been  observed  in  sectors  such  as  real  estate  and 
consumer credit leading to sharp escalation in asset prices and strains on credit quality. The policy 
response  has  been  in  terms  of  prescribing  higher  provisioning  and  assigning  higher  risk  weights  to 
sectors where the price rise has been exorbitant, as a supplement to monetary policy measures.  
There  is  a  growing  support  for  the  more  contemporary,  pragmatic  view  advocating  the  use  of 
prudential regulation as a policy response, to dampen excessive credit growth in pursuit of financial 
stability.  
Single vs. multiple regulators 
In India, as in the case of many other countries, there are several agencies entrusted with the task of 
regulation and supervision of different institutions and market participants in the financial sector. The 
RBI regulates and supervises the major part of the financial system through its various departments 
under the provisions of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 and the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934. Its 
supervisory  domain  covers  Commercial  Banks,  Non-Banking  Financial  Companies  (NBFCs),  Urban 
Cooperative  Banks  (UCBs)  and  some  of  the  All-India  Financial  Institutions  (AIFIs).  Some  of  these 
AIFIs, in turn, regulate and/or supervise other institutions in the financial sector. Thus, the Regional 
Rural Banks (RRBs) and Central and State Cooperative Banks are supervised by the Reserve Bank of 
India  through  National  Bank  for  Agriculture  and  Rural  Development  (NABARD);  State  Financial 
Corporations  (SFCs)  through  the  Industrial  Development  Bank  of  India  (IDBI)  (since  transferred  to 
SIDBI) and the Housing Finance Companies through National Housing Bank (NHB).  
Since  1992,  Securities  and  Exchange  Board  of  India  (SEBI)  regulates  the  capital  markets  and 
supervises  several  institutions  such  as  the  Stock  Exchanges,  Mutual  Funds,  Asset  Management 
Companies,  securities  dealers  and  brokers,  Merchant  Bankers  and  Credit  Rating  Agencies.  SEBI 
regulates  venture  capital  funds  also.  The  entities  in  the  insurance  sector  are  regulated  by  the 
Insurance  Regulatory  and  Development  Authority  (IRDA)  since  1999.  Banks  are  permitted  to  be 
involved 
joint  ventures,  equity  participation  and  agency-type 
arrangements. An apex regulatory body for pension funds i.e., the interim Pension Fund Regulatory 
and  Development  Authority  (PFRDA)  has  been  set  up  in  2004.  The  Ministry  of  Corporate  Affairs 
(MCA) regulates the deposit taking activities of non-banking non-financial companies and also some of 
the activities of the NBFCs.  
There are several mechanisms in India by which coordination amongst the regulators in the financial 
system is ensured. First, there is exchange of information amongst the regulators on a routine basis 
and on occasions through special request. Secondly, there is a High Level Co-ordination Committee 
on  Financial  and  Capital  Markets  presided  over  by  the  Governor  RBI  with  which  the  Finance 
Secretary; Chairman, SEBI; Chairman; IRDA and more recently, Chairman, PFRDA are associated as 
members.  The  High  Level  Committee  has  constituted  a  Standing  Working  Group  to  enable 
coordination amongst the Ministry of Finance, RBI and SEBI at the operating level and to assist the 
Committee in its deliberations. Finally, while nominees of Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Corporate 
Affairs are on the Board of SEBI along with a Deputy Governor of the RBI, the Finance Secretary is a 
member (without the voting rights) of the Board of Directors of the RBI.  
insurance  activity 
through 
in 
8 
 BIS Review 62/2007
Banking sector reforms through rebalancing  
There are some unique aspects of banking sector reform in India. There has been no banking crisis in 
the Indian economy. The reform process can best be described as gradual rebalancing of the banking 
sector  to  enhance  efficiency  and  stability.  The  overhang  problems  were  managed  internally  without 
recourse to Asset Reconstruction Company (ARC). Some of the salient aspects of the banking sector 
reforms in India are briefly enumerated here.  
First, the reform measures were initiated and sequenced to create an enabling environment for banks 
to overcome the external constraints – which related to administered interest rate regime, high levels 
of  pre-emption  through  reserve  requirements,  and  credit  allocation  to  certain  sectors.  The  interest 
rates in the banking system have been largely deregulated except for a few categories, viz., savings 
deposit accounts, non-resident Indian (NRI) deposits, small loans up to rupees two hundred thousand 
and export credit. However, the administered interest rates prevail in small savings schemes of the 
Government.  The  statutory  reserve  requirements  have  also  been  progressively  reduced  while  the 
norms for priority sector lending have been rationalised.  
Second, as against the overwhelming dominance of the Public Sector Banks in the banking system in 
the  pre-reform  period,  the  share  of  the  public  sector  banks  in  the  aggregate  assets  of  the  banking 
sector has declined from 90 per cent in 1991 to around 75 per cent in 2000 while the share of wholly 
Government-owned public sector banks declined sharply from about 90 per cent to less than 10 per 
cent  of  aggregate  assets  of  all  scheduled  commercial  banks  during  this  period.  Diversification  of 
ownership has led to greater market accountability and improved efficiency.  
Third, with a view to enhance efficiency and productivity in the banking sector through competition, the 
private sector and the foreign-banks were allowed more liberal entry. Since 1993, twelve new private 
sector banks have been set up. As a major step towards enhancing competition in the banking sector, 
foreign  direct  investment  in  the  private  sector  banks  is  now  allowed  up  to  74  per  cent,  subject  to 
conformity with the guidelines issued from time to time.  
Fourth, consolidation in the banking sector has been another feature of the reform process, which also 
encompassed the Development Financial Institutions (DFIs), which have been providers of long-term 
finance. The RBI enabled the reverse-merger of a large DFI with its commercial-banking subsidiary, 
which  was  a  major  initiative  towards  universal  banking.  Subsequently,  another  large  term-lending 
institution  has  been  converted  into  a  bank.  The  mergers  between  non-banking  financial  companies 
and banks as also between private sector banks are now permitted, subject to the RBI guidelines. The 
underlying  principles  for  consolidation  would  also  apply,  as  appropriate,  to  the  public  sector  banks, 
subject to the provisions of the relevant legislation.  
Fifth, impressive institutional and legal reforms have been undertaken in relation to the banking sector. 
In 1994, a Board for Financial Supervision (BFS) was constituted comprising select members of the 
RBI Board with a variety of professional expertise to exercise “undivided attention to supervision”. The 
BFS  ensures  an  integrated  approach  to  supervision  of  commercial  banks,  development  finance 
institutions,  non-banking  finance  companies,  urban  cooperatives  banks  and  primary  dealers.  It 
provides  direction  on  a  continuing  basis  on  regulatory  policies  including  governance  issues  and 
supervisory practices.  
A Board for Regulation and Supervision of Payment and Settlement Systems (BPSS) has also been 
recently  constituted  to  prescribe  policies  relating  to  the  regulation  and  supervision  of  all  types  of 
payment  and  settlement  systems,  set  standards  for  existing  and  future  systems,  authorise  the 
payment and settlement systems and determine criteria for membership to these systems.  
The Credit Information Companies (Regulation) Act, 2005 and the Government Securities Act, 2004 
have  been  enacted.  Certain  amendments  are  also  being  considered  by  the  Parliament  to  enhance 
Reserve Bank’s regulatory and supervisory powers.  
Sixth, a number of measures for enhancing transparency in the banking sector, through disclosures 
standards, have been instituted. Illustratively, all cases of penalty imposed by the RBI on the banks as 
also directions issued on specific matters, including those arising out of inspection, are placed in the 
public domain.  
Seventh,  in  the  regulatory  framework  and supervisory  practices, which  have  almost converged with 
the best international practices, two points are noteworthy. First, the minimum capital to risk assets 
ratio (CRAR) has been kept at nine per cent i.e., one percentage point above the international norm; 
and second, the banks are required to maintain a separate Investment Fluctuation Reserve (IFR) out 
BIS Review 62/2007 
 9
of profits, towards interest rate risk. The IFR has helped in cushioning the valuation losses required to 
be booked by the banks in a rising interest rate environment. 
As regards the implementation of Basel II framework for capital adequacy, a differentiated approach 
has been adopted in respect of commercial, cooperative and Regional Rural Banks (RRBs) – keeping 
in view the significant divergence in their size, operational complexity, their criticality for the financial 
sector  and  the  need  to  achieve  greater  financial  inclusion.  Thus,  the  capital  adequacy  norms 
applicable to these entities have been maintained at varying levels of stringency and one might say 
that we are adopting a three-track approach with regard to capital adequacy rules. On the first track, 
the commercial banks are required to maintain capital for both credit and market risks as per the Basel 
I framework; on the second track, co-operative banks are required to maintain capital for credit risk as 
per  the  Basel  I  framework  and  surrogates  for  market  risk;  on  the  third  track,  the  RRBs  have  a 
minimum capital requirement, which is, however, not on par with the Basel I framework.  
As  regards  the  timeframe  for  implementation  of  Basel  II  framework,  the  foreign  banks  operating  in 
India and the Indian banks with foreign branches are required to adopt the Standardised Approach for 
credit risk and the Basic Indicator Approach for the operational risk, with effect from March 31, 2008. 
All other commercial banks are required to adopt these approaches not later than March 31, 2009. 
Eighth,  the  regulatory  framework  in  India  is  increasingly  focusing  on  ensuring  good  governance 
through “fit and proper” owners, directors and senior managers of the banks. Transfer of shareholding 
of five per cent and above requires acknowledgement from the RBI and such significant shareholders 
are  put  through  a  `fit  and  proper'  test.  Banks  are  required  to  screen  the  nominated  and  elected 
directors  through  a  nomination  committee  to  satisfy  `fit  and  proper'  criteria.  The  directors  are  also 
required  to  sign  a  covenant  indicating  their  roles  and  responsibilities.  The  RBI  has  issued  detailed 
guidelines on ownership and governance in private sector banks emphasising diversified ownership. 
The listed banks are also required to comply with governance principles laid down by the SEBI – the 
securities-markets regulator. 
Concluding remarks 
The developments in the Indian economy are attracting global attention for several reasons, such as 
size of the economy, recent acceleration in growth, maintenance of stability, impressive productivity 
increases,  demographic  dividend,  etc.  The  contours  of  public  policy  have  been  predominantly 
domestically  designed  to  suit  the  country  context  while  harmonizing  with  the  global  best  practices. 
There  are,  no  doubt,  many  challenges,  specially  those  relating  to  poverty,  literacy  and  health  care, 
which demand high priority. We are trying to address these issues in a democratic set up through a 
participative process. We are appreciative of the global understanding and support for our endeavour. 
In this light, I wish to express my appreciation to Governor Corbo for having invited me to brief you on 
our journey towards inclusive growth. I am also thankful for the excellent arrangements made and the 
courtesies extended to me by the Central Bank of Chile. 
10 
 BIS Review 62/2007
