Mohd Razif bin Abd Kadir: The life insurance industry in Malaysia  
Speech by Mr Mohd Razif bin Abd Kadir, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 
Launch of Tokio Marine-Asia Life Group, Kuala Lumpur, 9 March 2007. 
 Mr. Kunio Ishihara, President of Tokio Marine, 
Mr. Morio Ishii, Vice-President of Tokio Marine, 
Members of the Senior Management of Tokio Marine Asia Pte. Ltd and Asia General Holdings, 
Mr. Ng Chek Khiang, Chief Executive Officer of Asia Life (M) Berhad, 
Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It  is  a  pleasure  to  be  here  with  you  this  evening  to  celebrate  the  official  launch  of  TM  Asia  Life 
Malaysia  Bhd..  An  alliance  of  this  nature  is  certainly  a  happy  event,  especially  when  it  reflects  the 
positive transformation that is shaping the insurance industry in Malaysia. TM Asia Life combines the 
strengths of the one of the world’s largest Japanese insurance groups and an established life insurer 
in the Malaysian market that has provided over 50 years of trusted service to Malaysians. It also marks 
the  establishment  of  the  first  Japanese-owned  life  insurance  company  in  Malaysia,  adding  further 
diversity to the profile of foreign insurers in our market.  
When  developments  like  this  take  place  in  the  industry,  we  look  forward  to  new  innovations,  fresh 
management  perspectives  and  a  renewed  energy  that  will  take  the  industry  to  the  next  level  of 
development. In this particular case, there are tremendous competitive advantages to be reaped from 
the global experience and expertise of the Tokio-Marine Group, combined with an intimate knowledge 
of the Malaysian market derived from Asia Life’s long-standing presence in the domestic market. With 
Tokio  Marine’s  presence  in  all  three  life,  general  and  takaful  sectors,  the  Tokio  Marine-Asia  Group 
alliance  in  Malaysia  is  also  well-positioned  to  take  full  advantage  of  cross-sector  synergies  to 
effectively implement strategies that are responsive to the changing market conditions and consumer 
demands. Let me, therefore, congratulate all of you who are part of this exciting transformation.  
Ladies and gentlemen,  
The life insurance industry in Malaysia continues to face exciting opportunities as well as challenges. 
As some of you may be aware, an important long-term economic issue which we are now grappling 
with  concerns  pension  reforms  which  are  aimed  at  ensuring  adequate  financial  provisions  for  the 
ageing population during their retirement years. Malaysians today live longer and have fewer children. 
By the year 2020, the percentage of the population above the age of 60 years is estimated to more 
than double to 16% of the population, from only 7% in 2000.  
The demographic changes also have significant implications for healthcare financing. With the ageing 
population and medical inflation, total expenditure on healthcare has continued on an increasing trend. 
A large proportion of that is borne directly “out-of-pocket” by individuals, or by employers as part of 
employment benefits for staff.  
Going  forward,  private  pensions  and  health  insurance  will  have  an  increasingly  important  role  in 
supporting sustainable financing in the long term for retirement and healthcare. More Malaysians are 
already turning to the private insurance industry to finance their healthcare expenditure. As a result, 
the medical and health insurance business has grown significantly in the last five years, averaging at 
an annual growth rate of close to 30%. About 80% of this business is written by life and composite 
insurers, mainly as riders to life insurance policies. Similarly, a larger role for private pensions may be 
envisaged under the pension reform initiative.  
At the same time, there is also a growing awareness among Malaysians of individual responsibility in 
financial planning. Planning for retirement and healthcare needs are clearly among the most important 
of financial decisions, but sound financial planning also includes individuals protecting themselves and 
their dependents from financial vulnerabilities arising from death, disability or unemployment, providing 
for children’s education and as well as making sound investment choices.  
These developments present enormous opportunities for the life insurance industry, particularly given 
the large untapped market that still exists with less than 45% of the population having a life insurance 
or family takaful policy. By the same token, however, they place equally important responsibilities on 
BIS Review 24/2007 
 1
insurers to make sure that the products sold are suitable, that insurers have assets which match their 
liabilities;  and  that  customers  are  given  enough  information  to  enable  them  to  make  responsible 
decisions.  
To  its  credit,  the  insurance  industry  has  taken  important  strides  in  rising  to  the  challenges  faced. 
Generally,  Bank  Negara  has  been  encouraged  by  the  positive  response  of  the  industry  to  new 
regulations  that  further  strengthen  corporate  governance  and  risk  management  standards  and 
promote the fair treatment of consumers. Of course, some companies have been more progressive 
than others in absorbing the regulatory principles within their companies. But overall, our supervisory 
interactions  with  the  industry  have  shown  that  the  industry  as  a  whole  has  made  good  progress  in 
lifting standards of financial and business practices.  
This  is  encouraging  as  ultimately,  both  the  industry  and  Bank  Negara  have  a  common  interest  in 
promoting an efficient and stable insurance market in Malaysia.  
At Bank Negara, we are continuing to strengthen our regulatory and supervisory capabilities as well as 
sharpen our focus. As those from Malaysia would be familiar, we are now into the fourth month of the 
Bank’s new regulatory and supervisory structure. The new organisational structure for the regulatory 
and supervisory functions within the Bank were realigned back in November last year to move from 
the  previous  sectoral  approach  to  regulation,  to  one  that  will  integrate  the  Bank’s  regulation  of  the 
different financial sectors under its purview along functional lines. As a result, the functions previously 
under the former Insurance Regulation Department have now been assumed by the newly established 
Financial  Sector  Development  Department,  the  Prudential  Policy  Department,  the  Consumer  and 
Market Conduct Department and the Financial Surveillance Department. On the supervision side – or 
better  known  to  you  as  the  examiners that  come and  pay  you  a visit  every  now  and  then –  a  new 
department  known  as  the  Financial  Conglomerates  Supervision  Department  has  also  been 
established to facilitate the integrated supervision of financial service groups that include both banks 
and insurance companies under their umbrella.  
The new cross-sector regulatory structure allows us to modernise the regulatory framework for both 
the insurance and banking sectors at a more equal pace. The increased synergies created will enable 
the Bank to apply the best regulatory practices in the banking sector to the insurance sector, and vice 
versa. Regulations in the area of market conduct, for example, are more advanced in the insurance 
sector  than  they  are  on  the  banking  sector.  On  the  other  hand,  the  regulatory  framework  for  risk 
management and capital adequacy is generally more developed on the banking side. Under the new 
structure,  the  Bank  is  able  to  leverage  on  the  more  advanced  developments  in  either  sector  to 
enhance the regulatory framework for both sectors simultaneously if possible. This, in turn will promote 
a more consistent and comparable regulatory regime for the banking and insurance sectors.  
Substantial resources have already been allocated to this effort, particularly in the areas of corporate 
governance, product regulation and financial reporting which have an important bearing on banks and 
insurers that are within the same group. The rationalisation of current regulations will also take into 
account international developments which will help to reduce the compliance costs for internationally 
active insurers operating in Malaysia.  
The  transition  to  the  new  structure  has,  so  far,  been  smooth.  As  expected,  the  industry  is  still 
familiarising  itself  with  new  personalities  and  the  new  functional  responsibilities  of  the  various 
Departments.  For  this  purpose  we  have  designated  the  Insurance  Supervision  Department  as  the 
main contact point for insurers in their communications with Bank Negara. Internally, we will ensure 
that the issues raised are channeled to, and speedily resolved by, the right Departments.  
Under  a  more  principle-based  approach  to  regulation,  Bank Negara will  continue  to  introduce  more 
flexible prudential standards for insurance companies. This will reflect an increased emphasis on the 
strength of an insurer’s corporate governance and risk management capabilities. It is also in line with 
the Bank’s implementation of the risk-based approach to supervision. Insurers that demonstrate sound 
risk management and strong governance can expect to enjoy greater capital efficiency and a lighter 
supervisory  touch.  In  this  connection,  the  Bank  is  putting  in  the  final  touches  to  risk-based  capital 
framework which will issued before the end of March for implementation on a parallel run basis for a 
period of two years.  
Ladies and gentlemen,  
As life insurers gear up to take advantage of expanding opportunities in the changing environment, it 
is  essential  that  commensurate  efforts  be  directed  at  raising  standards  in  the  fair  treatment  of 
consumers. In the long run, the industry as a whole has a clear interest in informed, responsible and 
2 
 BIS Review 24/2007
capable  consumers.  As  past  experience,  whether  in  Malaysia  or  abroad,  has  invariably  shown,  the 
irresponsible and unfair treatment of consumers is damaging to the consumer, damaging to the firm, 
and damaging to the reputation of the industry.  
The  Bank  is  encouraged  by  the  high  level  of  commitment  shown  by  some  insurers  towards 
significantly  improving  their  market  conduct  practices.  Nevertheless,  much  more  can  be  achieved 
across  the  industry  to  address  overly  aggressive  sales  practices  that  result  in  unsuitable  products 
being sold to consumers.  
Bank  Negara  is  investing  significantly  in  raising  the  level  of  financial  capability  among  consumers 
through initiatives under the Consumer Education Programme. Additional focus has been given to this 
task with the setting up of the Consumer and Market Conduct Department. But this is an extensive 
task,  for  which  a  significant  improvement  in  the  level  of  financial  literacy  among  across  a  wide-
reaching spectrum of consumers may only be seen in the next generation of consumers.  
It is, therefore, important now that insurers take their responsibility for the fair treatment of consumers 
seriously.  In  particular,  we  would  like  to  see  a  far  greater  interest  by  the  Board  and  senior 
management in improving selling practices, as well as the quality of disclosures and advice provided 
to  consumers.  These  issues  need  to  be  addressed  on  the  ground,  with  proper  enforcement  by 
management  to  prevent  misselling  practices,  unclear  documentation  or  explanations  by  agents  and 
marketing staff, and contract terms and exclusions that are unreasonable. Wide gaps have also been 
observed  between  companies  in  the  level  of  competence  of  staff  selling  the  products,  and  in  the 
quality of training provided to staff and agents. There is a need to achieve greater, as well as more 
consistent, progress in this area.  
Bank Negara is determined to improve standards in the area of market conduct, and we will continue 
to  actively  engage  the  industry  in  this  effort.  I  hope  that  all  insurers  will  throw  their  support,  at  the 
highest level, behind the various initiatives that are being implemented by both the Bank and industry 
associations to achieve this. As a newly-formed alliance, the Tokio-Marine-Asia Group has a valuable 
opportunity to set the correct tone at the outset in this area for your Group’s priorities in the Malaysian 
market. I trust that you will use the opportunity wisely to set a new benchmark in responsible market 
conduct for the industry.  
On that note, let me once again congratulate Tokio Marine and Asia on the official launch of TM Asia 
Life  Malaysia  Bhd.  I  look  forward  with  great  anticipation  to  your  positive  contribution  to  the  further 
development and growth of the Malaysian insurance industry.  
BIS Review 24/2007 
 3
