Tarisa Watanagase: The prospects of the Thai economy and monetary policy 
Speech by Dr Tarisa Watanagase, Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the Japanese Chamber of 
Commerce (Bangkok) Dinner Talk, Bangkok, 16 March 2007. 
 President  Banno,  fellow  bankers,  distinguished  business  leaders,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  good 
evening. 
"First of all, I would like to thank the Japanese Chamber of Commerce (JCC) for inviting me to speak 
at this dinner." 
Japan's relationship with Thailand has a long history and encompasses many aspects – as a trading 
partner,  investor  and  major  contributor  to  Thailand's  economic  development.  Japan  is  ranked  as 
Thailand's  number  one  trading  partner  and  investor.  In  2006,  Japan  contributed  16.3  percent  to 
Thailand's total trade, while net foreign direct investment (FDI) from Japan constituted 32.6 percent of 
Thailand's total net FDI inflows. It is therefore my pleasure to be here and share my views on the Thai 
economy – the outlook and challenges, as well as our monetary policy, with all of you. 
I would like to structure my talk to cover three key areas. First, I will touch briefly on the overall 
condition of the economy. Secondly, and in relation to the first one, I will elaborate on recent 
monetary policy decisions. Finally, before concluding, I will share my views on the prospects 
and challenges facing the Thai economy. 
Let me begin with the economy. 
The  past  year  was  one  of  the  more  challenging  times  for  Thailand,  in  terms  of  both  political  and 
economic  aspects.  On  the  economic  side,  uncertainties  heightened  because  of  both  external  and 
internal  factors.  The  impending  threat  of  global  imbalance  became  even  more  pronounced.  The 
dwindling confidence in the US dollar continued, which brought about massive capital inflows into the 
region,  resulting  in  an  across-the-board  currency  appreciation.  At  the  same  time,  rising  oil  prices 
continued to put pressure on inflation during the first half of 2006. Consumer and investor confidence, 
meanwhile, was clouded by lingering political uncertainties that brought about delays in consumption 
and investment decisions, as well as in government spending. As domestic demand weakened, export 
became the main driver of the Thai economic growth. 
Despite  the  negative  environment,  the  overall  economic  performance  was  quite  satisfactory.  The 
economy proved to be resilient, as the growth momentum continued while overall economic stability 
improved. 
Regarding  internal  stability,  headline  inflation  came  down  from  a  peak  of  6  percent  in  the  second 
quarter of 2006 to 3.3 percent in the last quarter and to 2.3 percent in February this year. Core inflation 
fell from its peak of 2.9 percent in April 2006 to 1.4 percent in February – well within our target range. 
Overall external stability remained sound. The current account turned into surplus since August and 
registered a surplus of 1.2 billion US dollars in December 2006, or an overall surplus of 1.5 percent of 
GDP for the year 2006. Meanwhile, reserves to short-term debt also rose further. 
The  economy  registered  a  growth  rate  of  5  percent  in  2006,  a  respectable  number,  against  the 
backdrop of external and internal disturbances. The recent slowdown in consumption and investment 
could be traced to the confidence factor. Political uncertainties and the unwarranted strengthening of 
the  currency  that  prompted  the  introduction  of  reserve  requirements  on  short-term  capital  inflows, 
together with the amendment of the Foreign Business Act that, unfortunately, happened successively 
within such a short period of time, all had a negative effect on consumer and business confidence. 
However,  we  believe  that  the  momentum  has  not  been  lost,  and  uncertainties  only  postponed 
consumption  and  investment  decisions.  Evidently,  retained  earnings  to  total  assets  averaging  over 
Q1-Q3 of 2006 was at 17.6 percent, higher than the average of 13.3 percent in 2005, while capacity 
utilization rose to 74.2 percent in 2006, indicating that further investment in production capacity should 
be in the pipeline. 
To  sum  up,  while  challenges  abound,  we  have  weathered  them  relatively  well  so  far.  This  can  be 
attributed  to  a  fine  combination  of  the  economy's  resiliency  and  appropriate  policy  stance.  By 
appropriate policy stance, we refer to the “right” policy for the “right” reason at the “right” time. 
BIS Review 27/2007 
 1
Let's now turn to our monetary policy. 
Monetary policy's main objective is to maintain monetary stability. By this we mean price stability and 
confidence  in  the  value  of  the  currency.  Thailand  has  adopted  inflation  targeting  since  May  2000. 
Under  inflation  targeting,  the  emphasis  is  given  to  maintaining  core  inflation within  the  target  range 
and,  at  the  same  time,  achieving  a  balanced  growth  path.  We  use  the  1-day  repurchase  rate  as  a 
policy  instrument  to  keep  the  quarterly  average  of  core  inflation  within  the  target  range  of  0-3.5 
percent.  If  inflationary  pressure  heightens  and  thereby  increases  the  possibility  of  core  inflation 
breaching the target, interest rate has to be raised. Bearing in mind that a time lag of 4-8 quarters 
before  a  change  in  the  policy  rate  can  be  fully  transmitted  to  the  rest  of  the  economy,  policy 
consideration needs to be forward-looking. 
Upward  inflationary  pressure  over  the  past  few  years,  due  to  higher  oil  prices,  has  been  tamed  by 
monetary  tightening.  We  raised  the  policy  rate  13  times  between  August  2004  and  June  2006, 
bringing the policy rate to 5.00 percent from 1.25 percent per annum. Hikes in the policy rate have 
brought the money market and commercial bank interest rates higher over the past 2 years. Our policy 
response proved timely, with inflation and its second round effects well contained. 
Recently,  domestic  demand,  particularly  in  private  consumption  and  investment,  showed  signs  of  a 
slowdown, while economic momentum from exports was expected to moderate, given the prospects of 
the  global  economy  in  2007.  Since  inflationary  pressures  have  subsided  in  line  with  easing  energy 
prices, monetary policy could be eased in support of a further expansion of the economy. The MPC, 
thus, lowered the 1-day repurchase rate, the policy rate, to 4.75 on 17 January meeting and a further 
25 basis points reduction on 28 February and expect to pursue a downward path of interest rate in a 
cautious manner. This accommodative monetary policy stance will help stimulate domestic demand by 
supporting  economic  sentiments,  cutting  down  financial  costs  and  preparing  the  stage  for  private 
investment recovery once confidence has returned, most likely in the 2nd half of this year. 
Having  considered  the  recent  economic  conditions  and  monetary  policy,  we  will  now  turn  to  the 
prospects and challenges of the Thai economy as we move forward, and how we are going to 
deal with them. 
Ladies and gentlemen, for this year, we expect the economy to continue facing a number of important 
challenges both internally and externally. 
Internally, political uncertainties, which have adversely affected private sector's decision to invest, are 
likely to stay until the next general election. Externally, the threat of an impending global imbalance 
remains  high,  while  the  global  economy  is  expected  to  slow  down.  Moreover,  the  risk  from  volatile 
global financial markets lingers, while the baht could continue to appreciate against the US dollar. It 
may be a great concern to you whether the Thai economy will be resilient enough to withstand such an 
adverse  environment.  However,  we  believe  that  sound  fundamentals  and  the  appropriate  policy 
stance would prepare the economy well in the long term.  
Facing  internal  challenges,  the  monetary  policy  stance  has  become  more  accommodative  as 
mentioned earlier. The reduction in the policy rate has been effectively transmitted into lower money 
market rates as well as lower commercial banks' retail rates. To date, 4 major Thai commercial banks 
have  reduced  their  deposit  rates  and  3  of  them  have  cut  down  their  lending  rates.  The  downward 
interest rate path should help improve sentiments and lower the cost of funds, which would support the 
recovery in domestic demand, particularly, investment. 
The  outlook  for  the  Thai  economy  within  the  next  few  years remains positive.  The  BoT's  forecasts, 
having incorporated the aforementioned risks, show that the Thai economy should be growing by 4-5 
percent  in  2007  and  by  4-5.5  percent  in  2008.  Such  growth  rates  are  respectable  in  light  of  these 
challenges. 
Regarding  the  challenge arising  from  the  volatile global  financial  market  and an  appreciation  of  the 
baht,  Thailand,  with  a  relatively  small  and  still  shallow  financial  market  like  many  emerging  market 
economies,  is  vulnerable  to  the  fast-moving  international  capital.  Rapid  movements  of  capital  flows 
can have negative impacts on the export or import sectors, which could pass on the adverse effects to 
the  real  sector  and  financial  sector  and  eventually  jeopardizing  economic  stability.  The  rapid 
appreciation of the baht particularly in the last quarter of last year, which proved to be inconsistent with 
economic fundamentals and much out-of-line with the rest of the region, inevitably forced the Bank of 
Thailand to implement a reserve requirement on capital inflows to break the rapid one-way momentum 
and preserve overall stability after several capital account measures proved unsuccessful. 
2 
 BIS Review 27/2007
Ladies and gentlemen. 
I would like to reassure you that we have always welcomed genuine foreign capital flows and investors 
and will continue to do so. The measure implemented in December was not meant to affect genuine 
investors and this was clear from the beginning. The measure announced on 18th of December clearly 
stated that capital inflow in the form of foreign direct investment (FDI) was exempted from the reserve 
requirement. And later on, as it turned out that genuine flows were still affected by the measure, we 
attempted  to  find  an  alternative  option  to  alleviate  pressure  on  the  baht  and  adverse  effects  on 
productive sectors. 
To date, the exchange control measure has effectively slowed down the appreciation of the baht. On 
average,  the  nominal  effective  exchange  rate  in  February  strengthened  by  only  0.5%  relative  to 
January, compared to an appreciation of 1.7% between November 2006 and the first half of December 
–  before  the  measure  was  implemented.  After  we  have  successfully  slowed  down  the  one-way 
appreciation momentum, we have allowed greater flexibility to the measure without compromising the 
needs to contain excessive volatility – by providing the fully-hedging option for all categories of inflows 
that  are  covered  under  the  reserve  requirement  measure.  We  will  closely  monitor  the  hedging 
requirement. If its implementation is effective, we can lift the reserve requirement and keep only the 
hedging requirement. 
In  safeguarding  economic  stability  and  fostering  long  term  growth,  the  BoT  also  looks  beyond  the 
immediate  horizon.  However,  to  overcome  the  challenge  of  global  dynamism  over  the  long  run, 
monetary and financial stability alone are not sufficient. The challenge here is for the Thai economy to 
make  sustainable  gains  in  productivity  through  increased  flexibility,  efficiency,  and  competitiveness 
amidst the dynamic global economic conditions and structure. In this respect, we need to promote a 
sound and stable macroeconomic environment by carrying out necessary reforms in the real sector 
and financial sector. 
The real sector must work continuously in improving productivity to enhance its competitiveness. So 
far, reform efforts from both the private and public sectors have been made to promote transparency, 
strengthen governance and improve the quality of human resources. In the long term, the government 
plans to embark on key infrastructure investment projects, which include the expansion of the mass 
transit network in Bangkok, water resource management, and an integrated logistics system. These 
public investments will ease bottle-necks without exerting too much pressure on external stability and 
allow firms to focus on improving their efficiency and productivity. 
On  the  financial  sector,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  has  played  an  important  role  in  strengthening  the 
financial infrastructure. The Financial Sector Master Plan (FSMP), in place since 2002, will move into 
its second phase. FSMP aims to broaden access to financial services to all potential users, promote 
competition in financial services in order to enhance financial efficiency and resiliency and ensure that 
our  financial  sector  can  perform  well  in  the  global  competitive  environment.  We  have  already  seen 
significant  consolidation  and  increased  efficiency  of  the  banking  sector  as  the  first  phase  of  FSMP 
ended. In addition to FSMP, the amendments and introduction of a number of legislations, such as the 
new  Financial  Institutions  Act  and  the  Deposit  Insurance  Act,  will  foster  a  more  efficient  financial 
sector.  On  the  supervisory  side,  we  have  also  continued  our  efforts  to  enhance  financial  sector's 
resiliency to unfavorable disturbances through an early adoption of IAS 39, currently underway, and 
the  new  Basel  Capital  Accord  at  the  end  of  next  year.  FSMP  and  improved  supervision  will 
complement structural reforms in the real sector to bring about strong foundations for further economic 
growth and stability. Structural reforms in the real sector continue to need concerted efforts from both 
the private and public sectors as well as support from foreign investors like all of you here. The BoT is 
committed to doing all the necessary work for a strong financial sector that will provide a supportive 
environment and infrastructure for the private sector to prosper. 
Ladies and gentlemen, the essence of my talk today is to reassure you that the performance of 
the  Thai  economy  has  been  satisfactory  and  that,  despite  the  adverse  environment  and 
challenges facing the Thai economy, I strongly believe that the Thai economy will be able to 
continue  to  perform  favorably  while  moving  forward.  We  are  strongly  committed  to 
implementing the most appropriate policies to help foster growth, stability and resiliency of the 
economy and to further strengthen its solid foundation. 
In  closing,  I  would  like  to  express  my  appreciation  to  Japanese  businesses  for  their 
contribution  to  the  progress  of  the  Thai  economy  over  the  years.  Here's  hoping  that  we 
continue 
relationship.  
Again, I am deeply grateful for this opportunity, and thank you for your kind attention. 
to  build  and  strengthen 
foundation  of 
this  great 
the 
BIS Review 27/2007 
 3
