John Hurley: The €15 silver Mestrovic coin 
Speech by Mr John Hurley, Governor of the Central Bank and Financial Services Authority of Ireland, 
at the Launch of the €15 silver Mestrovic coin, Dublin, 12 February 2007. 
 Your Excellency, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to welcome you here today to the launch of this 
coin bearing the design prepared so long ago by Ivan Mestrovic. It is hard to believe that it was eighty 
years ago. 
Ivan Meštroviæ was a sculptor, an architect, a writer and a participant in important political events of 
his day. He studied at the Vienna Academy of Art in the early nineteen hundreds at the height of the 
Vienna  Secession  movement.  He  was  awarded  the  grand  prix  for  sculpture  at  the  1911  World 
Exhibition in Rome. And from 1923 to 1942, Meštroviæ was Dean of the Zagreb Academy of Arts.  
A  Committee  was  set  up  in  1926,  chaired  by  the  Irish  poet  and  Nobel  Prize  winner,  William  Butler 
Yeats, to recommend designs for the coinage of the new Irish State. Ivan Meštroviæ was one of the 
internationally  renowned  artists  approached  to  put  forward  designs.  As  a  result  of  communication 
problems, however, it was ultimately not possible to include his work in the process. Nonetheless, it is 
very interesting to see what was thought about his design at that time. 
W.B. Yeats himself called it ‘one magnificent design’. Thomas Bodkin, at that time a Governor of the 
Irish National Gallery, described it as ‘a superb design’. The official Report of the Committee referred 
to it as ‘a magnificent piece of work’ and recommended to the Government that an alternative use for it 
be  found.  Over  the  years,  many  possibilities  were  examined.  And  for  more  than  forty  years,  it  has 
been the design on the seal of the Central Bank of Ireland, which you can see displayed here. 
For my years here as the Governor of the Central Bank and Financial Services Authority of Ireland I 
have been familiar with this excellent work. It is now a particular pleasure for me to see the design, 
which was intended for use on a coin, at last finding its true home. And what a beautiful coin it makes. 
I think that great credit is due to the Croatian Monetary Institute on the excellence of their work. The 
end result they have achieved fully validates the comments made originally in 1927 and, in my view, 
does full justice to the excellence of Ivan Mestrovic’s art. Quality design is never diminished by the 
passing of the years. 
This  is  the  first  time  that  the  Central  Bank  has  produced  a  joint  coin  issue,  and  I  am  particularly 
delighted  that  the  Croatian  National  Bank  has  been  our  partner  in  this  project.  Ireland  and  Croatia 
have a good deal in common, we share excellent relations in business, financial and political circles 
and Ireland firmly supports Croatia’s objective to become a member of the EU. May I welcome the 
delegation from the Croatian National Bank and the Croatian Monetary Institute and thank them for 
their cooperation and support throughout this very worthwhile joint project. It was a pleasure for us to 
work together in such a positive atmosphere. 
Your Excellency it gives me great pleasure to present you with our Irish €15 coin and your Croatian 
150 Kuna coin together in this presentation box. 
BIS Review 14/2007 
 1
