Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr:  Meeting  the  challenges  of  a  rapidly  changing 
supervisory and regulatory landscape 
Inspirational message by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of the Central Bank of the Philippines 
(Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas),  at  the  induction  of  ARBEX  Officers,  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines, 
Makati City, 21 February 2007. 
 Fellow Central-Bankers, good afternoon!  
I am pleased to be your inducting officer and guest speaker on this important occasion. 
First  of  all,  let  me  congratulate  the  incoming  officers  of  ARBEX  led  by  Mr.  Alexander  G.  Cera.  I 
commend  the  sustained  united  efforts  of  your  Association  in  promoting  goodwill  and  understanding 
among  bank  examiners  as  well  as  in  enhancing  the  well-being  and  dignity  of  your  members. 
Noteworthy  also  are  your  initiatives  aimed  at  spearheading  development  programs  and  activities 
directed  towards  the  active  support  of  good  governance  and  other  related  programs  for  nation 
building. 
Let  me  also  take  this  opportunity  to  encourage  you  to  continue  to  face  with  vigor  and  passion  the 
challenges that we all have to face in the rapidly changing supervisory and regulatory landscape. 
Being the primary supervisor and regulator of banks, we continue to promote safety and soundness of 
the  financial  system  by  providing  effective  and  efficient  bank  supervision  and  regulation.  This  is 
consistent with our policy objective of maintaining a stable and efficient financial system. 
We are now in the mid-to-end-stream of transition from the traditional approach to the new globally 
accepted  best  practice  risk-based  approach  to  supervision  and  examination  of  financial  institutions, 
which is designed to sharpen the supervisory focus on areas that pose the greatest risk to banks. The 
shift will allow for a more effective assessment and evaluation of the adequacy and effectiveness of 
the risk management system of the banks. 
You, as examiners, therefore, are challenged to further raise the level of your knowledge in risk-based 
supervision and improve your skills in conducting risk-focused examination. 
Rest assured that the Management is doing its part by providing adequate technical trainings like the 
structured  training  for  the  examiners  and  other  trainings  being  offered  through  the  BSP  Institute  to 
equip you with sufficient knowledge and skills in performing your job. 
The regulatory reforms in central banking are inevitable across all categories of banks. While these 
reforms  look  overwhelming,  with  your  dynamic  support,  we  will  be  able  to  attain  our  objectives. 
Moreover, with the commitment of the ARBEX leadership and cooperation of all the members, you will 
be better equipped to face the challenges ahead. As you strive to enhance the well-being and dignity 
of  your  members  and  improve  their  professional  status,  you  also  magnify  the  values  essential  in 
attaining the BSP vision and mission. 
Let  us  therefore  join  hands  as  we  embrace  the  changes  in  the  way  world-class  central  bankers 
perform their tasks! 
Thank you and good day! 
BIS Review 19/2007 
 1
