Ben S Bernanke: Central banking and bank supervision in the United States  
Remarks  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve 
System, at the Allied Social Science Association Annual Meeting, Chicago, 5 January 2007.  
 The Federal Reserve, like many central banks, is engaged in a wide range of activities beyond the 
making of monetary policy. For example, the Fed plays a critical role in the U.S. payments system, 
both as an overseer and as a provider of wholesale and retail payments services; it has substantial 
responsibilities in the area of consumer protection, including rule-writing and enforcement; it promotes 
financial  stability;  and,  together  with  other  agencies,  it  supervises  both  large  and  small  banking 
organizations. 
In this talk I will consider the case for one of these activities - namely, the supervision of the banking 
system - being conducted, at least in part, by the U.S. central bank. In some countries, such as the 
United Kingdom and Japan, the responsibility for supervising banks (as well as financial institutions 
and  financial  markets  more  generally)  has  been  assigned  to  a  single  financial  supervisory  agency, 
rather than to the central bank. In the euro area, even as the European Central Bank has assumed 
responsibility  for  monetary  policy,  some  national  central  banks  or  other  national  authorities  have 
retained  substantial  supervisory  powers.  Various  other  institutional  arrangements  exist  around  the 
world, including the more traditional model in which the central bank also serves as a supervisor of the 
banking system. In light of these alternative models, does it make sense for the Federal Reserve to 
supervise banking organizations? 
At a conceptual level, the discussion of whether the central bank should also act as a supervisor has 
focused on issues of incentives and efficiency. With respect to incentives, one question that has been 
raised is whether assigning both macroeconomic and supervisory goals to a single institution might not 
lead  to  conflicts  of  interest.  Some  writers  have  argued,  for  example,  that  a  central  bank  with 
supervisory responsibilities might, at times, be hesitant to impose appropriate monetary restraint out of 
concern  for  possible  adverse  effects  on  banks  (Goodhart  and  Schoenmaker,  1995).  On  the  other 
hand,  if  macroeconomic  and  supervisory  goals  are  interdependent,  a  single  agency  responsible  for 
both objectives might be better able to take those interdependencies into account than could multiple 
agencies, each charged with a single goal (Wall and Eisenbeis, 1999; Bernanke, 2001). For example, 
Alan Greenspan has argued along these lines that "a single regulator with a narrow view of safety and 
soundness  and  with  no  responsibility  for  the  macroeconomic  implications  of  its  decisions  would 
inevitably have a long-term bias against risk-taking and innovation (Greenspan, 1994, p. 130)." 
The issue of the efficiency of combining central banking and supervision in one agency boils down to 
whether that combination entails significant economies (or diseconomies) of scope (Goodhart, 2000; 
Mishkin, 2001; Haubrich and Thomson, 2005). For instance, if supervisory activities yield information 
that is useful for carrying out monetary policy or other central bank functions (or vice versa) and this 
information  cannot  be  obtained  easily  through  interagency  cooperation,  then  granting  some 
supervisory  authority  to  the  central  bank  may  lead  to  better  outcomes.  By  the  same  token,  if 
economies  of  scope  are  outweighed  by  the  benefits  of  specialization  -  arising,  for  example,  from 
increased  organizational  focus,  the  development  of  more  specialized  expertise,  or  a  reduction  in 
regulatory overlap - then the cause of efficiency may be better served by separating supervision from 
central banking.1  
Abstract arguments can take us only so far, however. Because financial markets, political systems, 
and  regulatory  objectives  vary  across  countries  and  because  initial  conditions  are  influenced  by 
historical accident, no single institutional structure seems likely to be best in all cases (Dixit, 1996). 
Therefore, I will avoid generalizations today and restrict my attention to the current arrangements in 
the United States. 
                                                      
1   Charles  Goodhart  has  suggested  that  separating  monetary-policy  and  supervisory  functions  may  have  the  benefit  of 
eliminating the risk that poor supervisory performance could adversely affect the central bank’s reputation for competence, 
thereby  affecting  its  ability  to  perform  its  other  responsibilities,  including  monetary  policy  (Goodhart,  2000).  See  also 
Haubrich (1996). 
BIS Review 1/2007 
 1
In the U.S. context, the various issues that have been raised concerning institutional incentives seem 
unlikely to be determining factors in a consideration of the preferred regulatory structure; indeed, the 
side  of  the  debate  on  which  they  would  weigh  is  uncertain.  In  particular,  U.S.  monetary  policy  has 
been  quite  successful  for  some  time,  and  I  am  not  aware  of  any  evidence  that  monetary-policy 
decisions have been distorted because of the Fed’s supervisory role. The issue of efficiency is less 
easy  to  dismiss,  however.  The  U.S.  bank  regulatory  system  is  complex  and  in  some  respects 
duplicative,  and  though  removing  supervisory  authority  from  the  Fed  would  leave  much  of  this 
complexity intact, it would produce a slightly simpler allocation of supervisory responsibilities. We can 
thus narrow the question I posed at the beginning, of whether the Fed should supervise banks, to the 
question  of  whether  the  Fed’s  supervisory  role  generates  economies  of  scope  of  sufficient  social 
benefit to outweigh any associated costs. 
In the remainder of my remarks, I will discuss some economies of scope arising from the combination 
of  bank  supervision  and  other  central  bank  responsibilities.  Although  I  will  touch  on  a  number  of 
complementarities  between  these  activities,  my  focus  will  be  the  benefits  of  the  Fed’s  supervisory 
authority for the execution of one of its core functions: the prevention and management of financial 
crises. In particular, I will argue that the Fed’s ability to deal with diverse and hard-to-predict threats to 
financial stability depends critically on the information, expertise, and powers that it holds by virtue of 
being both a bank supervisor and a central bank. 
The Federal Reserve’s supervisory authority 
As a starting point, some background on the Federal Reserve’s supervisory authority may be helpful. 
The Federal Reserve shares the responsibility for regulating and supervising the U.S. financial system 
with a number of federal and state government agencies, including the other banking agencies, the 
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), and the Commodity Futures Trading Commission. The 
Fed, along with state authorities, supervises state member banks (that is, state-chartered banks that 
are members of the Federal Reserve System). In addition, it supervises the U.S. operations of foreign 
banks and, in some cases, the foreign operations of U.S. banks.  
The  Federal  Reserve  also  serves  as  the  umbrella  supervisor  of  all  bank  holding  companies  and 
financial  holding  companies,  which  gives  the  U.S.  central  bank  broad  oversight  responsibilities  for 
these banking organizations. However, the bank and nonbank subsidiaries of such holding companies 
are often supervised by agencies other than the Fed. Supervisory responsibility is determined by the 
type of charter held by the supervised company and by the principle of functional regulation, under 
which the identity of the primary supervisor depends on the nature of the financial activity being carried 
out.  For  example,  the  commercial  banking  activities  of  holding-company  subsidiaries  with  national 
bank  charters  are  supervised  by  the  Office  of  the  Comptroller  of  the  Currency  (OCC),  whereas 
securities activities in nonbank subsidiaries are under the jurisdiction of the SEC. The Fed cooperates 
with  the  OCC,  the  SEC,  and  other  supervisors  in  determining  the  financial  condition  of  the 
consolidated organization. 
The Fed’s supervisory responsibilities require extensive engagement at both the policymaking and the 
operational  levels.  In  the  policy  arena,  the  Fed  provides  technical  support  to  the  Congress  on 
legislation related to banking and financial markets and sometimes advocates specific measures (such 
as  prompt  corrective  action  for  troubled  depositories);  along  with  other  agencies,  it  represents  the 
United States in international forums to develop and negotiate various standards (such as bank capital 
standards);  it  collaborates  with  other  agencies  (or,  in  some  cases,  has  sole  authority)  to  develop 
regulations and supervisory guidance that implement the banking and consumer protection laws; and, 
working  with  other  agencies  as  appropriate,  it  develops  norms  and  practices  for  supervisors  and 
examiners.  At  the  operational  level,  the  Federal  Reserve  System  (including  the  twelve  regional 
Federal Reserve Banks) works closely with other agencies to examine banking organizations and to 
ensure  that  they  operate  in  a  safe  and  sound  manner  and  comply  with  the  relevant  laws  and 
regulations.  
The  Federal  Reserve’s  supervisory  activities  give  the  institution  access  to  a  wealth  of  information 
about the banking system. For example, the Fed’s examination staff collects and analyzes information 
on  each  supervised  organization’s  management  structure,  lines  of  business,  financial  condition, 
internal controls, risk-management practices, operational vulnerabilities, and much else. Moreover, the 
Fed’s supervisory activities provide it with a window onto financial institutions that it does not regulate 
and onto developments in the broader financial markets. I have already mentioned the Fed’s role as 
the  umbrella  supervisor,  which  affords  it  access  to  information  (as  well  as  direct  or  back-up 
2 
 BIS Review 1/2007
examination authority) for all holding-company subsidiaries, nonbank organizations as well as banks. 
Its supervisory activities also allow the Fed to obtain useful information about the financial companies 
that  do  business  with  the  banking  organizations  it  supervises.  For  example,  some  large  banks  are 
heavily engaged in lending and providing various services to hedge funds and other private pools of 
capital. In the process of ensuring that banks prudently manage these counterparty relationships, Fed 
staff members, collaborating with their colleagues from other agencies, learn a great deal about the 
business practices, investment strategies, and emerging trends in this industry.2 Finally, many large 
banking  organizations  are  sophisticated  participants  in  financial  markets,  including  the  markets  for 
derivatives and securitized assets. In monitoring and analyzing the activities of these banks, the Fed 
obtains valuable information about trends and current developments in these markets. Together with 
the  knowledge  obtained  through  its  monetary-policy  and  payments  activities,  information  gained 
through  its  supervisory  activities  gives  the  Fed  an  exceptionally  broad  and  deep  understanding  of 
developments in financial markets and financial institutions. 
The benefits of the Fed’s supervisory authority for its non-supervisory activities 
The extensive information and the expertise that the Fed gains in the process of supervising banks are 
useful  for  carrying  out  many  of  the  central  bank’s  non-supervisory  activities.  The  benefits  of 
supervisory information for monetary policy are perhaps the most debated. The research literature has 
focused on whether information drawn from bank examinations is helpful in assessing the economic 
outlook and thus in formulating monetary policy. The results have been mixed (Peek, Rosengren, and 
Tootell,  1999;  Feldman  and  others,  2003).  Some  evidence  suggests  that  supervisory  information  is 
likely  to  be  most  useful  for  monetary  policymaking  in  times  of  financial  stress.  For  example,  the 
Federal Reserve’s experience suggests that such information was helpful in evaluating the availability 
of  credit  in  the  early  1990s,  when  some  banks’  lending  was  constrained  by  their  limited  capital 
(Bernanke and Lown, 1991; Greenspan, 1994). More generally, monetary policy is certainly aided by 
the  anecdotal  information  on  regional  economic  conditions  that  Reserve  Bank  business  and 
community contacts, including numerous bankers, provide. Many of these contacts are fostered by the 
extensive interaction between the Reserve Banks and the banks in their Districts. 
The Federal Reserve’s oversight of the payments system is another critical central banking function. In 
contrast to the situation in some other countries, the Federal Reserve lacks explicit legal authority to 
oversee systemically important payments systems. Instead, the Federal Reserve’s powers in this area 
derive  to  a  considerable  extent  from  its  bank  supervisory  authority.  Notably,  some  key  institutions 
providing clearing and settlement services hold bank charters that place them under Federal Reserve 
oversight.3 In its capacity as a bank supervisor, the Fed can obtain detailed information from these 
institutions about their operations and risk-management practices and can take action as needed to 
address risks and deficiencies. The Fed is also either the direct or umbrella supervisor of several large 
commercial  banks  that  are  critical  to  the  payments  system  through  their  clearing  and  settlement 
activities.4  
As  I  have  mentioned,  the  Fed  also  has  an  operational  role  in  the  payments  system.  In  particular, 
Fedwire  -  a  system  that  the  Fed  operates  for  transmitting  large-value  payments  -  is  a  critical 
component  of  the  U.S.  financial  infrastructure.  The  operation  of  Fedwire  and  related  payments 
systems often involves large short-term credit exposures to system participants (reflecting so-called 
daylight  overdrafts).  The  Fed  also  extends  overnight  credit  to  depository  institutions  through  the 
discount window. The Fed’s management of credit risk associated with these various forms of short-
term  lending  relies  heavily  on  supervisory  information.  In  normal  times,  this  information  often  is 
                                                      
2   Bernanke (2006) explains the  usefulness of the "indirect  regulation" approach to  hedge funds. This approach avoids the 
costs of direct regulation by relying on the self-interest of hedge-fund counterparties and investors to exert market discipline 
on these organizations. 
4  
3   These institutions include the Depository Trust Company (a state member institution) and the CLS Bank International (an 
Edge Act corporation). 
In principle, legislation to give the Federal Reserve direct oversight authority over systemically important payments systems 
could reduce the Fed’s need to rely on its bank supervisory powers in this area. However, the Fed’s supervisory activities 
also provide it with information about payments systems from the vantage points of system users (that is, the banks that 
make  and  receive  payments),  providing  useful  additional  perspectives  both  on  the  functioning  of  the  payments  systems 
themselves  and  on  the  risks  to  banks  and  other  financial  institutions  that  arise  in  the  process  of  clearing  and  settling 
transactions. 
BIS Review 1/2007 
 3
obtained  from  other  banking  agencies.  When  a  financial  institution  is  under  considerable  stress, 
however,  it  is  helpful  to  have  available  in-house  supervisors  who  can  independently  assess  the 
borrowing institution and evaluate its collateral.5  
I have described several ways in which the Fed’s supervisory authority assists it in performing its other 
functions. In my view, however, the greatest external benefits of the Fed’s supervisory activities are 
those related to the institution’s role in preventing and managing financial crises. 
system, 
systemically 
functioning  both  as  an  overseer  of 
Bank supervision and the prevention and management of financial crises 
Although  the  Federal  Reserve  is  today  best  known  to  the  public  as  the  agency  responsible  for 
monetary policy, the Fed was founded in 1913 largely in response to the periodic episodes of banking 
panics and other forms of financial instability that had plagued the U.S. economy during the nineteenth 
and early twentieth centuries (Friedman and Schwartz, 1963).6 Today, the Fed retains its key role in 
the prevention and mitigation of financial crises, for a number of reasons. First, the Fed has unique 
powers to provide liquidity to the financial system, through means that include open-market purchases, 
discount-window loans, and intra-day overdrafts. Second, as I have noted, the Fed is a key player in 
the  payments 
important 
clearing-and-settlement  systems  and  as  a  major  provider  of  payments  services.  Problems  in  the 
execution  of  payments  -  arising  from  institutions’  uncertainties  about  the  financial  condition  of  their 
counterparties,  failures  of  the  payments  infrastructure,  or  both  -  have  been  central  features  of  a 
number  of  U.S.  financial  crises.  Even  in  situations  in  which  the  payments system  has  continued  to 
function normally, the information the Fed has gleaned from its payment activities has been helpful for 
understanding and managing financial stresses. Third, the Federal Reserve has developed extensive 
international relationships and has worked closely with foreign central banks and, as a consequence 
of  its  responsibility  for  the  supervision  of  cross-border  banking  operations,  with  foreign  supervisors. 
These relationships have proved useful in past crises, and are likely to be even more critical in the 
future as the globalization of finance continues. Fourth, the Fed’s responsibilities for macroeconomic 
stability  provide  it  with  both  a  strong  incentive  and  the  knowledge  to  prevent  or  mitigate  financial 
disruptions  that  threaten  to  spill  over  into  the  broader  economy  (Mishkin,  2000).  Finally,  the  wide 
scope of the Fed’s activities in financial markets - including not only bank supervision and its roles in 
the  payments  system  but  also  the  interaction  with  primary  dealers  and  the  monitoring  of  capital 
markets associated with the making of monetary policy - has given the Fed a uniquely broad expertise 
in evaluating and responding to emerging financial strains. 
Financial  stability  is  strengthened  both  by  taking  steps  to  prevent  financial  crises  and  by  managing 
crises  effectively  if  they  occur.  To  make  crises  less  likely,  over  the  years  the  Federal  Reserve  has 
worked effectively with the Congress, other supervisors, and financial market participants to develop 
statutory, regulatory, and other measures.7 The Fed has also worked with other supervisors and with 
financial institutions to support the development of practices that limit systemic risk. For example, over 
the  past  year  and  a  half,  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  has  collaborated  with  the  private 
sector  and  with  other  regulators  to  strengthen  the  infrastructure  that  supports  the  credit  derivatives 
market. Very rapid growth in the volume of trading in that market in recent years had led to substantial 
backlogs  of  unconfirmed  trades.  As  a  result  of  the  cooperative  efforts  of  market  participants  and 
regulators, these backlogs have been cut sharply, reducing the risk that incomplete trading records 
                                                      
5  
Indeed, the Congress, in the FDIC Improvement Act of 1991, imposed a heightened level of scrutiny on lending to troubled 
institutions. In particular, if the Federal Reserve extends credit to a bank more than 5 days after the bank becomes critically 
undercapitalized or to an undercapitalized bank for more than 60 days out of a 120-day period, the Federal Reserve Board 
may be liable for a portion of any consequent increase in FDIC resolution costs [12 U.S.C. § 347b(b)]. In such situations, the 
Fed  needs  the  capacity  to  evaluate  whether  such  loans  are  appropriate  -  a  task  requiring  considerable  information  and 
expertise on the operation of troubled banks and the resolution process. 
6   The first sentence of the Federal Reserve Act assigned the new  central bank the responsibilities of furnishing an  elastic 
currency,  affording  a  means  of  rediscounting  commercial  paper,  and  establishing  more  effective  supervision  of  banking. 
Each of these responsibilities was closely tied to the goal of preventing or ameliorating financial panics; in particular, the 
furnishing of an elastic currency and the rediscounting of commercial paper both involved the provision of liquidity to the 
financial system as needed to avoid seasonal or other financial stresses. 
7   For example, the Federal Reserve has supported, and sometimes helped to craft, clarifications of the legal framework that 
underpins  financial  contracts,  which  are  critical  when  contracts  must  be  unwound  in  a  crisis.  In  the  regulatory  and 
supervisory areas, the Fed has helped to develop risk-sensitive bank capital standards and encouraged banks to continue 
upgrading their methods for measuring and managing risk. 
4 
 BIS Review 1/2007
could  complicate  the  evaluation  of  firms’  positions  and  financial  conditions  in  a  crisis.  A  number  of 
other cross-cutting initiatives are under way, including, for example, a coordinated review of how major 
firms use stress-testing techniques to measure their credit and market risks. As the financial system 
becomes  more  complex,  more  global,  and  more  interconnected,  public-private  collaborations  that 
transcend national borders and cut across types of institutions, markets, and financial instruments will 
become increasingly valuable. The Fed will continue to initiate and support such efforts. 
Because  of  the  Fed’s  unique  perspective  on  issues  of  financial  stability  -  a  perspective  based  on 
statutory  authority,  historical  experience,  and  an  appreciation  of  the  links  between  financial  and 
macroeconomic  stability  -  the  participation  of  the  U.S.  central  bank  in  collective  efforts  to  prevent 
financial  crises  seems  highly  desirable.  The  Federal  Reserve’s  supervisory  authority  is  useful  in 
helping the institution to more effectively identify issues and potential problems, by giving it a "seat at 
the table" that allows it to be heard on these issues, and by increasing its contact and influence with 
financial-market participants and other supervisors. In short, the Fed’s supervisory powers help both to 
give  it  a  voice  in  policy  discussions  concerning  financial  stability  and  to  increase  the  quality  of  its 
contributions to those discussions. 
With strong private-sector institutions and good public policies in place, episodes of severe financial 
stress  should  be  relatively  infrequent.  When  financial  problems  do  develop,  however,  the  Fed  and 
other  policymakers  face  the  important  threshold  question  of  whether  public  action  is  warranted;  in 
particular,  they  must  weigh  the  expected  benefits  of  taking  action  against  the  possibility  that  such 
action  will  encourage  excessive  private  risk-taking  in  the  future  (the  moral  hazard  problem).  To 
minimize the moral hazard problem, policymakers should act only in those cases in which it seems 
likely that inaction would risk systemic problems with the potential to damage the broader economy; 
and if they act, they should do so in ways that disturb market outcomes as little as possible. 
In  those  cases  when  policymakers  choose  to  respond  to  an  actual  or  potential  crisis,  however,  the 
actions taken should be informed, timely, and effective. From the Fed’s perspective, the ability to act 
effectively in a financial crisis is greatly enhanced by its ongoing supervisory role. Such events can 
involve  significant  and  unpredictable  interdependencies  across  institutions,  markets,  and  the  real 
economy and, in some cases, breakdowns in communications or in the financial infrastructure. In a 
situation of financial stress, the Federal Reserve’s supervisory function helps it to obtain timely and 
reliable information on conditions in the banking sector, the payments system, and the capital markets, 
while  helping  the  Fed  maintain  the  in-house  expertise  necessary  to  gather  and  evaluate  such 
information  quickly  and  to  make  sound  judgments  about  possible  policy  responses.  Moreover,  the 
Fed’s ongoing relationships with the financial firms it supervises, as well as with other supervisors, can 
ease  communications  and  improve  cooperation  in  a  crisis,  leading  to  more  effective  crisis 
management.  
It is true that, in some episodes of financial stress, important information was provided voluntarily by 
securities firms and other organizations over which the Federal Reserve has limited or no regulatory 
authority,  or  by  other  supervisors;  moreover,  some  of  the  expertise  that  proved  most  valuable  was 
derived  from  the  Fed’s  non-supervisory  activities.  Nevertheless,  examination  authority  and  a 
knowledgeable and experienced examination staff have often proved essential. After the September 
11 terrorist attacks, for example, Federal Reserve examiners were sent to the backup sites of the large 
banking  firms  that  had  been  affected.  These  staff  members  proved  crucial  in  discerning  what  was 
happening in a highly confused and uncertain situation. The information they obtained helped the Fed 
assess the damage that had been done, think through the potential implications for financial markets, 
and evaluate possible remedial actions. 
Perhaps the most important remedial action taken by the Fed in the wake of the September 11 attacks 
was its provision of massive amounts of liquidity, which helped avoid logjams in the payments system 
and  ensure  that  credit  for  the  financial  system  and  the  economy  would  be  available  as  needed. 
Methods  of  providing  liquidity  included  open-market  purchases,  intra-day  overdrafts  that  were  well 
above normal levels, discount-window lending, the crediting of banks on regular schedules for checks 
in process of collection, securities lending, and currency swaps that allowed foreign central banks to 
provide dollar liquidity to financial institutions in their own countries (Ferguson, 2003). In undertaking 
these steps, the Federal Reserve benefited from its knowledge of the liquidity management practices 
of key institutions, their funding positions, and their financial conditions, as well as from its ability to 
evaluate  the  collateral  provided  by  institutions  requesting  funds.  This  information  and  expertise, 
gained in part through its supervisory role, allowed the Fed to supply the needed liquidity efficiently 
and without undue risk.  
BIS Review 1/2007 
 5
Most financial crises do not involve loss of human life and damage to physical infrastructure of the sort 
that  occurred  on  September  11,  2001.  But  even  in  the  case  of  purely  financial  events,  the  Fed’s 
supervisory  powers  give  it  the  knowledge  (and,  in  some  cases,  the  influence)  needed  to  work  with 
other  supervisors  and  the  private  sector  to  help  resolve  the  situation.  In  the  aftermath  of  the  1987 
stock market crash, for example, the Fed drew on its supervisory experience to evaluate the funding 
and credit risks facing major banking organizations. On-site examiners obtained timely information on 
potentially significant lending losses and liquidity pressures. Besides issuing a public statement that 
the  discount  window  was  available  to  provide  liquidity,  Federal  Reserve  officials  contacted  senior 
managers  of  major  banks  -  many  of  whom  had  ongoing  relationships  with  the  Fed  as  the  result  of 
supervisory interactions - to discuss the situation. These discussions encouraged the banks, when it 
was consistent with appropriate risk management, to make credit available to securities firms, allowing 
them to make necessary payments and avoiding possible payment gridlock (SEC, 1988; Greenspan, 
1994).  
The Fed undertook similar discussions with other supervisors and with financial firms in response to 
the failure of Drexel Burnham Lambert in 1990 and the collapse of Long Term Capital Management 
(LTCM) in 1998. As the condition of Drexel deteriorated, other firms became less willing to trade with 
it, making it difficult to wind down its positions in an orderly manner (Breeden, 1990). Because of the 
Federal  Reserve’s  ongoing  supervisory  relationships  with  the  main  clearing  banks  and  its  detailed 
knowledge of the payments system, the Fed was able to address the banks’ concerns and facilitate 
the liquidation of Drexel’s positions (Greenspan, 1994). In the case of LTCM, the Federal Reserve had 
the credibility with large financial firms to facilitate a discussion, from which emerged a private-sector 
solution that helped to avoid potential market disruptions (Greenspan, 1998).8  
A general point that emerges from many of these examples is that financial crises and panics often 
involve  problems  of  coordination  and  collective  action  (Diamond  and  Dybvig,  1983).  The  job  of  the 
crisis manager in such cases is to assist in solving these coordination problems and to help all parties 
arrive  at  a  cooperative  solution.  The  market  information,  the  wide-ranging  expertise,  and  the 
relationships that the Fed has developed in part through its supervisory activities have been invaluable 
in allowing the central bank to act as an "honest broker" in such situations.  
I  have  focused  today  on  the  benefits  of  the  Fed’s  supervisory  role  for  its  other  central  bank 
responsibilities, but the reverse is also true: The Fed’s non-supervisory activities help it to be a better 
supervisor, which in turn promotes financial stability. For example, in its conduct of monetary policy, 
the Federal Reserve monitors financial market developments closely and interacts regularly with the 
primary dealers in government securities. The knowledge thus gained has improved the Fed’s ability 
to  understand  and  evaluate  banks’  financial-market  activities.  The  Fed’s  capital-market  expertise  is 
also  useful  in  the  regulatory  process.  For  example,  the  Federal  Reserve  made  substantial 
contributions  to  the  revisions  to  the  Market  Risk  Amendment  to  the  Basel  I  Capital  Accord,  under 
which the capital charge for banks’ trading assets is more closely tied to the market risk of their overall 
portfolios. 
Conclusion 
How best to preserve financial stability is a complex subject with a long history, and my remarks today 
have touched lightly or not at all on some central questions - among them, how to determine when 
financial  events  justify  public  action  and  how  the  responsibilities  for  maintaining  financial  stability 
should be allocated among private and public actors. Also, I should be clear that my purpose today is 
not to make a comprehensive case that our current regulatory structure is ideal. To the contrary, we 
should always be looking for ways to make supervision more effective and less burdensome. My point 
today is a narrower one: that the supervisory authority of the Fed has significant collateral benefits in 
helping it carry out its responsibilities for financial stability. In particular, the information, expertise, and 
powers that the Fed derives from its supervisory authority enhance its ability to contribute to efforts to 
                                                      
8  
In  both  the  Drexel  and  LTCM  episodes,  the  Federal  Reserve  initially  detected  the  firms’  problems  through  either  market 
surveillance  or  its  interactions  with  primary  dealers,  rather  than  through  banking  supervision.  Once  the  problems  were 
known, considerable information came from the troubled firms themselves (Breeden, 1990; McDonough, 1998). However, 
that information was supplemented, and to an extent validated, with information received from banking institutions under the 
Federal Reserve’s supervisory authority. In contrast, in the 1987 crash, when the crisis was not centered on a single firm but 
instead  involved  widespread  concerns  about  securities  firms’  access  to  bank  credit,  the  Fed  placed  greater  reliance  on 
information obtained through its supervisory authority. 
6 
 BIS Review 1/2007
prevent financial crises; and, when financial stresses emerge and public action is warranted, the Fed 
is able to respond more quickly, more effectively, and in a more informed way than would otherwise be 
possible.  
Yogi  Berra  reminded  us  that  prediction  is  very  hard,  especially  about  the  future.  In  that  spirit,  the 
Federal  Reserve  continues  to  work  actively  to  prepare  for  the  possibility  of  financial  stress.  For 
example,  we  have  created  cross-disciplinary  teams  of  experts  -  including  staff  drawn  from  bank 
supervision  -  to  monitor  financial  developments  and  to  consider  possible  crisis  scenarios  and  the 
appropriate policy responses. We have worked with other agencies both here and abroad to improve 
our abilities to communicate and coordinate in a crisis situation. We also continue to take measures to 
ensure that our communications, information systems, and policy processes will remain viable should 
critical infrastructure be disrupted. The Federal Reserve has established a strong record of promoting 
financial  stability,  and  we  will  continue  to  work  to  ensure  the  vibrancy  and  resilience  of  the  U.S. 
financial system.  
References 
Bernanke, Ben (2001). "Comment," in Frederic Mishkin, ed., Prudential Supervision: What Works and 
What Doesn’t, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 293-297. 
__________  (2006).  "Hedge  Funds  and  Systemic  Risk,"  speech  delivered  at  the  Federal  Reserve 
Bank of Atlanta’s 2006 Financial Markets Conference, Sea Island, Georgia, May 16. 
Bernanke, Ben and Cara Lown (1991). "The Credit Crunch," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 
2:1991, pp. 205-39. 
Breeden, Richard (1990). Testimony before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, 
United States Senate, March 2. 
Diamond, Douglas and Philip Dybvig (1983). "Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and Liquidity," Journal of 
Political Economy, vol. 91 (June), pp. 401-19. 
Dixit,  Avinash  (1996).  The  Making  of  Economic  Policy:  A  Transaction-Cost  Politics  Perspective. 
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. 
Feldman, Ron J., Jan Kim, Preston Miller, and Jason E. Schmidt (2003). "Are Banking Supervisory 
Data  Useful 
for  Macroeconomic  Forecasts?"  The  B.E.  Journal  of  Macroeconomics,  vol.  3 
(Contributions), article 3. 
Ferguson,  Roger  (2003).  "September  11,  the  Federal  Reserve,  and  the  Financial  System,"  speech 
delivered at Vanderbilt University, February 5. 
Friedman,  Milton  and  Anna  Schwartz  (1963).  A  Monetary  History  of  the  United  States,  1867-1960: 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
Greenspan, Alan (1994). Testimony before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, 
United  States  Senate,  March  2.  Available  in  Board  of  Governors,  Federal  Reserve  Bulletin,  vol.  80 
(May), pp. 382-85. 
__________(1998). Testimony before the Committee on Banking and Financial Services, U.S. House 
of Representatives, October 1.  
Goodhart, Charles (2000). "The Organizational Structure of Banking Supervision," Occasional Papers, 
no.1, Basel Switzerland: Financial Stability Institute, November. 
Goodhart,  Charles  and  Dirk  Shoenmaker  (1995).  "Should  the  Functions  of  Monetary  Policy  and 
Banking Supervision Be Separated?" Oxford Economic Papers, vol. 47 (October), pp. 539-560.  
Haubrich,  Joseph  G.  (1996).  "Combining  Bank  Supervision  and  Monetary  Policy,"  Federal  Reserve 
Bank of Cleveland, Economic Commentary, vol. 11, pp. 1-9. 
Haubrich,  Joseph  G.  and  James  B.  Thomson  (2005).  "Umbrella  Supervision  and  the  Role  of  the 
Central Bank" Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, Policy Discussion Paper no. 11, December. 
McDonough, William J. (1998). Statement before the Committee on Banking and Financial Services, 
U.S. House of Representatives, October 1. 
BIS Review 1/2007 
 7
Mishkin, Frederic (2000). "What Should Central Banks Do? (101 KB PDF)" Federal Reserve Bank of 
St. Louis Review, vol. 82 (November/December), pp. 1-14. 
__________  (2001).  "Prudential  Supervision:  Why  Is  It  Important  and  What  Are  the  Issues?"  in 
Frederic Mishkin, ed., Prudential Supervision: What Works and What Doesn’t, Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press. 
Peek, Joe, Eric S. Rosengren, and Geoffrey M. B. Tootell (1999). "Using Bank Supervisory Data to 
Improve  Macroeconomic  Forecasts,"  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Boston,  New  England  Economic 
Review, September/October, pp. 21-32. 
Securities  and  Exchange  Commission,  Division  of  Market  Regulation  (1988).  The  October  1987 
Market Break: A Report, Washington: The Commission, February. 
Wall,  Larry  and  Robert  A.  Eisenbeis  (1999).  "Financial  Regulatory  Structure  and  the  Resolution  of 
Conflicting Goals," Journal of Financial Services Research, vol.16 (December), pp. 223-45.  
8 
 BIS Review 1/2007
