Timothy F Geithner: Reflections on the Asian financial crises  
Remarks  by  Mr  Timothy  F  Geithner,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
Bank of New York, at the Trends in Asian Financial Sectors Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of San 
Francisco, San Francisco, 20 June 2007. 
 It  is  a  pleasure  to  be  here  at  the  San  Francisco  Fed  and  to  join  you  in  looking  back  at  the  Asian 
financial crises. Many people in this room played critical roles in the drama of that time. We did not 
always completely agree, but we usually found a way to work together on a common strategy. 
The crises hit with remarkable speed and force, with substantial effects on the world economy as a 
whole. The collapse in confidence led to substantial and sustained outflows of capital, forcing large 
exchange rate devaluations, a sharp fall in asset prices and leaving entire banking systems virtually 
insolvent. GDP fell by between 10 and 15 percent. The crises forced substantial changes in the IMF’s 
instruments for crisis resolution and a major international effort to strengthen financial systems.  
Even after a decade, the crises are a subject of debate and controversy. For many, they represented a 
failure of financial globalization, a dramatic demonstration of the perils of openness to capital flows. A 
popular perception was that economies with strong records of growth and financial management were 
forced into positions of vulnerability by externally imposed programs of capital-account liberalization 
and  then  were  pushed  into  turmoil  by  an  unstable,  even  predatory  international  financial  system. 
Adherents of this view tended to view the policy response to the crisis as harsh or inept or both.  
Time has taken some of the edge off these criticisms, but they still affect the political debate in the 
region today. They reflect anxieties about the balance of risks and benefits of economic and financial 
integration  that  still  play  an  important  role  in  shaping  economic  policy,  even  with  the  substantial 
progress achieved since the crises. 
I want to outline some of the principal lessons of that period, both in terms of reducing vulnerability to 
financial crisis and in terms of strategies for crisis resolution. I offer these with the knowledge that it is 
hard for anyone who was not a finance minister or a central bank governor in the region at the time to 
understand what it was like. As one of those involved in shaping the international response, I can say 
that there was a lot we did not fully appreciate about the dynamics of the crises then, and that justifies 
humility today in thinking about the lessons for the future. 
With those qualifications, here are a few thoughts on four important issues: 
• 
• 
the role of balance sheet problems in creating vulnerability to crisis,  
the  challenge  in  designing  an  appropriate  exchange  rate  regime  and  monetary  policy 
framework for emerging market economies,  
the conditions for dealing with progressively greater openness to capital flows, and  
the role of policy reforms and financial assistance in crisis resolution.  
 Currency mismatches and balance sheet problems 
In general, the crises were the consequence of fundamental economic problems, often manifested in 
the  buildup  of  substantial  balance  sheet  problems,  with  excessive  short-term  borrowing  in  foreign 
currency by the sovereign, the banking system, or both. 
In Asia, the accumulation of short-term debt was concentrated in the banking system. Banks borrowed 
dollars and yen on a large scale and then lent those funds to corporations that earned their revenues 
in  domestic  currency.  This  created  a  mismatch  between  the  currency  denomisnation  of  the  banks’ 
liabilities and their assets. And this mismatch created an acute vulnerability to exchange rate risk.  
The  rapid  increase  in  foreign  currency  exposure  was  encouraged  by  fixed  exchange  rate  regimes, 
since  these  created  the  illusion  of  protection  from  exchange  rate  risk.  It  was  encouraged  by  tax 
incentives that favored short-term foreign currency borrowing through offshore banking centers. It was 
fed by the selective liberalization of capital controls on foreign borrowing, while limitations on equity 
inflows were left in place. It was exacerbated by classic moral hazard – the result of past government 
BIS Review 69/2007 
 1
interventions to limit corporate and bank failures. And it was made worse by poor disclosure, which 
masked  the  scale  of  the  increase  in  external  liabilities  and  the  deterioration  in  the  level  of  official 
reserves. 
The scale of the buildup of foreign currency debt was fundamental to the dynamics of the crises. Once 
confidence weakened, and fixed exchange rate commitments became unsustainable, the economies 
experienced a sharp reversal in capital flows as both residents and nonresidents sought to limit their 
exposure to domestic institutions and assets. 
This broad flight from domestic assets created conditions similar to a classic bank run. The exchange 
rate  decline  magnified  concern  about  potential  losses  in  the  corporate  sector  and  banking  system, 
which led to a further shift in assets out of the country, which exacerbated the exchange rate decline. 
These  balance  sheet  vulnerabilities  led  to  a  vicious  cycle  in  which  the  exchange  rate  and  financial 
weaknesses reinforced each other. 
As economies slipped toward the edge of the cliff, policymakers were left with alarmingly few options 
to  try  to  contain  the  crisis  and  mitigate  the  damage  inflicted  on  the  real  economy.  Given  that  real 
interest  rates  were  already  negative,  relaxing  monetary  policy  further  risked  accentuating  the 
exchange rate decline, which would, in turn, have exacerbated the problems of the banking system. 
But  with  demand  already  in  free  fall,  policymakers  were  equally  reluctant  to  tighten  policy  and  risk 
further damage to growth. 
Fiscal positions in Asia were far weaker than they initially appeared to be because of the enormous 
contingent liabilities that governments faced as a result of the collapse of the banking systems. This 
limited the room for countercyclical fiscal policy, although each government moved eventually to put in 
place modest fiscal stimulus. 
This  diagnosis  of  financial  vulnerabilities  led  to  a  very  substantial  improvement  in  the  quality  of 
national balance sheets in the region. More on this later. 
Exchange rate regimes and the perils of the middle 
A second, and closely related lesson, relates to the exchange rate regime. In the crisis countries, the 
exchange rate regime of choice had been a fixed but adjustable peg. This was softer than a currency 
board  –  the  possibility  of  adjustment  was  built  into  the  arrangement,  but  it  was  presented  as  a 
commitment to a fixed nominal exchange rate for an indefinite period of time. 
Although these regimes of limited exchange rate flexibility had been regarded as a means of achieving 
economic stability, in fact they turned out to be a source of instability. Nominal exchange rates against 
the  dollar  had  been  held  fixed  for  some  time,  while  real  effective  exchange  rates  had  appreciated 
significantly. Because of weaknesses in the financial system, the investment booms of the previous 
decade had not translated into increased productivity. 
As  investors  grew  concerned  about  potential  weakness,  pressure  on  the  exchange  rate  further 
intensified  until  it  became  unsustainable.  Exchange  rate  intervention  proved  ineffective.  Once 
confidence  had  been  shattered,  the  markets  responded  with  brutal  speed  and  force.  Monetary 
authorities without a record of institutional independence and without a sufficiently clear mandate for 
price stability did not have the experience or credibility needed to restore confidence quickly. 
The  crises  helped  bring  about  a  fundamental  reassessment  of  the  merits  of  fixed  but  adjustable 
exchange  rate  regimes,  regimes  that  try  to  exist  somewhere  in  the  middle  between  the  opposite 
extremes  of  irrevocably  fixed  and  purely  floating.  The  new  consensus,  which  you  can  now  see  in 
policy  choices  across  emerging  markets,  is  that  the  soft  middle  is  fundamentally  untenable  for  an 
economy that is open to cross-border capital flows. With the limited exceptions of those cases where 
full  monetary  union  or  a  currency  board  is  optimal,  or  where  a  fixed  exchange  rate  can  provide  a 
nominal anchor for a disinflation strategy, the general view now is that flexible exchange rate regimes 
make more sense for emerging market economies.  
Exchange rate flexibility offers the advantage of allowing monetary policy to be directed at sustaining 
price  stability,  which  in  turn  offers  a  better  prospect  of  sustained  growth.  Changes  in  fundamental 
factors such as productivity growth and inevitable shocks to demand and supply require changes in 
relative  prices,  both  domestically  and  internationally.  A  flexible  exchange  rate  makes  it  easier  for 
relative prices to move rapidly and effectively in the appropriate direction and so generally eases the 
cost of adjustment. 
2 
 BIS Review 69/2007
Regional economic integration has increased rapidly in Asia in recent years, but these economies still 
seem a long way from the point where economic or political conditions would make a compelling case 
for some kind of regional monetary integration. (In Europe, of course, the political case for monetary 
integration  largely  preceded  the  economic  argument.)  For  Asian  economies,  as  for  most  emerging 
economies today, the principal challenge is to establish conditions that will enable them to prosper in a 
world where their exchange rates adjust more freely to changing fundamentals. 
Capital-account liberalization 
A  third  important  conclusion  from  the  crises  relates  to  strategies  for  capital-account  liberalization. 
Although this was not the conventional wisdom at the time, I think the evidence supports the view that 
the  policy  mistakes  that  contributed  to  the  crises  lay  not  in  the  decision  to  become  more  open  to 
capital flows, but in the how those governments chose to become more open. 
The  supervisory  and  regulatory  regimes  over  the  financial  system  did  not  provide  a  strong  enough 
framework of incentives for risk management and controls over financial intermediaries. But the more 
consequential mistake was that the crisis economies each in different ways chose to liberalize capital 
controls selectively. Each had in place other incentives or distortions that led to an excessive reliance 
on short-term borrowing through the banking system. 
These  weaknesses  left  the  financial  system  and  the  economies  as  a  whole  with  less  capacity  to 
manage the greater pressures and risks that came with openness to capital flows. 
The policy consensus that has emerged from this experience has a more cautious view of the benefits 
of financial integration, a greater awareness of the damage caused by creating incentives that distort 
the composition of flows and a greater appreciation of the importance of having in place a strong set of 
institutions,  in  the  financial  system  in  particular.  It  has  also  fostered  a  greater  skepticism  within 
governments of their ability to sustain and adjust a set of limited controls on capital flows, once an 
economy has passed a certain point of relative openness. Money tends to move around these controls 
with progressive ease, and it becomes more difficult over time to counteract this force with acceptable 
costs to other objectives. For this basic reason, many emerging market governments that were early 
proponents of selective controls have moved to eliminate them.  
Faced  with  the  challenges  of  managing  policy  in  an  increasingly  integrated  world  economy,  the 
dominant instinct of officials is often to try to shield the economy from volatility. But the crises of the 
1990s helped demonstrate why this approach can be both futile and counterproductive. As economies 
become more open to capital flows, policies designed to insulate an economy from external shocks, 
whether  they  be  fixed  exchange  rate  regimes  or  selective  capital  controls  and  restrictions  on 
international  transactions,  rarely  offer  durable  stability,  and  they  bring  additional  risks.  These  risks 
come in the form of additional distortions that might undermine future growth or magnify vulnerability to 
future financial volatility.  
The more promising approach is to invest in the complement of institutions and policies that enable an 
economy  to  live  more  comfortably  with  openness.  Focusing  on  those  measures  that  will  enable  an 
economy to be more flexible and to adapt more quickly to change ultimately will be a more effective 
policy strategy. It is politically more difficult, but economically more effective than those solutions that 
seem to offer protection from competition and volatility.  
Crisis resolution 
A fourth lesson, or series of lessons, comes from our experience in crisis resolution. The strategies 
adopted  to  stabilize  markets  and  then  to  foster  recovery  varied  significantly  across  the  crisis 
economies.  Each  involved  a  somewhat  different  mix  of  policy  reforms  and  temporary  financial 
assistance, tailored to the different conditions that prevailed. 
Where there was success, the common feature was what Larry Summers called the Powell Doctrine 
applied to international finance – the overwhelming use of force, with a clear strategy for resolution. 
The “force” in this sense applied both to the scale of financing made available relative to the need and 
to the quality of the policy measures.  
Very substantial resources were deployed in support of the recovery efforts, and a large share of the 
resources was made available upfront, in order to try to mitigate the liquidity problem and to stem the 
loss  of  confidence.  In  contrast  to  the  typical  IMF  program,  governments  were  permitted  to  use  a 
BIS Review 69/2007 
 3
portion  of  the  IMF-supplied  resources  to  take  some  pressure  off  the  exchange  rate,  as  foreign 
investors sought to reduce their exposures to the crisis countries in the initial stages of the crises. 
But the provision of large external financial resources was not, by itself, sufficient to achieve stability. 
The critical feature of every program was a set of policy measures designed to address the causes of 
the crisis, to stabilize confidence and to put in place conditions for recovery.  
In  some  cases,  the  initial  policy  response  looked  tentative  or  inadequate.  In  others,  the  reform 
program  did  not  appear  to  have  broad  support  within  the  government.  Broader  political  uncertainty 
associated  with  a  pending  election  or  change  in  leadership  also  undermined  confidence  in  the 
commitment  to  a  credible  recovery  plan.  Where  confidence  in  the  recovery  plan  was  weak,  the 
financial  resources  had  little  impact  on  market  sentiment  and  confidence  faltered.  Even  though  the 
resources  looked  large  relative  to  past  financial  interventions,  they  were  easily  overwhelmed  when 
markets were unimpressed by the policy response. 
Ernesto  Zedillo  explained  the  policy  challenge  exceptionally  well  when  he  wrote  that  since  markets 
tend to overreact at the onset of crisis, so policy needs to overreact too. 
A classic problem in financial crises is to distinguish between problems of illiquidity and insolvency. 
This diagnosis is critical to the design of an effective response, but it is very hard to do. We – in this 
case I mean the IMF, its major creditors and the governments in the region – treated these cases as 
closer to the illiquidity extreme on the continuum, rather than to the insolvency extreme. 
In the Asian crisis countries, unlike in Russia or Argentina, there was no plausible case for arguing that 
the sovereign governments had accumulated debts they were unable to repay. A forced restructuring 
of the external debt of a country or a forced suspension of payments on those obligations would have 
made the crisis in Asia, and more broadly, substantially worse. 
These were not conditions of insolvency, but nor were they purely temporary liquidity problems that 
could have been addressed through the quick infusion of unconditional finance without any change in 
policies. The crisis economies all tried that strategy in the weeks and in some cases months before 
going to the IMF for assistance. Those strategies failed not simply because the governments ran out of 
reserves, but because they had failed to embrace a broader set of policy changes powerful enough to 
restore confidence in future stability and growth. 
It is worth emphasizing that the strategies ultimately adopted in each case were quite unorthodox and 
were certainly not uniform. Besides the novel approach adopted in terms of the scale and structure of 
financing and the degree of international cooperation in support of the programs, the policy packages 
were  also  notable  in  the  degree  of  emphasis  placed  on,  for  example,  financial-sector  reform  and 
improvements to disclosure. 
In each case, the reforms proposed were the result of careful analysis of the causes of the individual 
crises  and  a  pragmatic  assessment  of  what  was  needed  to  correct  the  conditions  that  had  led  to 
problems  and  to  restore  confidence.  And  in  all  cases,  the  strategy  was  continually  modified  and 
adjusted as conditions changed and as the principals responsible developed a better feel for what was 
working and what was not. 
Conclusion 
Recovery in the Asian crisis countries took time, but it was stronger and more rapid than had been 
typical  in  other  emerging  market  financial  crises.  Barely  18  months  after  the  crisis,  for  example, 
Korean GDP had returned to pre-crisis levels, and this was true for all the Asian crisis countries by 
2003.  Growth  has  been  relatively  strong  and  stable  since,  though  at  a  pace  somewhat  below  the 
unsustainable rates of the decade prior to the crises.  
The countries directly affected by the crises a decade ago are fundamentally stronger. The balance 
sheet  weaknesses  have  been  transformed  into  strength.  Financial-sector  reforms  have  been 
undertaken on a generally impressive scale. Stronger legal and institutional frameworks have helped 
create  an  environment  in  which  enterprise  is  thriving.  Macroeconomic  policy  has  been  reasonably 
prudent, and debt-to-GDP ratios are declining. Exchange rate regimes have become more flexible. 
These changes have made these economies far more resilient than they were a decade ago. They are 
much less likely to face the type of crisis, the acute, self-reinforcing panic produced by the balance 
sheet problems of that era. 
4 
 BIS Review 69/2007
Is there more to be done? Of course, but the challenge now is not so much the challenge of building 
stronger defenses against crisis, but rather the longer-term challenge of building a greater capacity to 
adapt to change in this increasingly integrated and rapidly evolving global economy. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 69/2007 
 5
