Toshiro Muto: Challenges facing Japan’s economy – a case for structural 
reform 
Speech by Mr Toshiro Muto, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Japan Society, 
London, 7 September 2007. 
 It  is  my  great  honor  to  speak  to  you  today,  the  esteemed  members  of  the  Japan  Society. 
When I was last invited to speak here in 2004, the Japanese economy was just coming out of 
a  protracted  downturn  after  the  collapse  of  the  bubble  and  was  at  last  moving  onto  a  full-
fledged recovery path. Japan's economy has since continued its growth and I am happy to 
report to you today that the recovery, which started in 2002, is now in its sixth year and has 
become the longest in the postwar era. 
Current economic situation in Japan 
I.  
First, let me briefly discuss the current Japanese economic situation. Japan's economy has 
been  experiencing  a  sustained  period  of  growth  at  the  rate  of  around  2  percent,  which  is 
slightly  above  the  potential  growth  rate,  supported  by  strong  external  demand  and  stable 
domestic demand. 
Conditions  in  the  corporate  sector  are  particularly  good.  According  to  the  Tankan  (Short-
Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan), a business survey conducted by the Bank 
of  Japan,  the  ratio  of  firms'  current profits  to sales  is  at  a  record  high and  corporate  fixed 
investment this fiscal year is likely to register its fifth consecutive year of growth. 
Those favorable conditions in the corporate sector are gradually but steadily feeding through 
to the household sector. Although wages are not yet rising, as I will discuss in more detail 
later, household income is trending upward via several channels, for example, increases in 
the number of employees and in dividends, and private consumption is steady. Under those 
circumstances,  the  utilization  of  resources  such  as  production  capacity  and  labor  is 
increasing. The unemployment rate has come down to 3.6 percent for the first time in nine 
years. 
There are two main factors behind Japan's continued economic growth. The first is growth in 
exports on the back of the global economic expansion. The extension and deepening of the 
international division of the production process, particularly in Asia, along with rapid growth in 
newly  industrialized  economies,  have  together  greatly  contributed  to  the  growth  of  our 
economy. 
The second is the recovery of strength in the corporate sector along with the restoration of 
stability  in  the  financial  system.  From  the  latter  half  of  the  1980s,  the  formation  and 
subsequent  collapse  of  the  economic  bubble  left  firms  burdened  with  excesses  in  debt, 
production  capacity  and  labor,  and  financial  institutions  with  significant  holdings  of 
nonperforming loans. Firms have since restructured their business lines and improved their 
financial  standing,  while  the  rate  of  banks'  nonperforming  loans  has  been  reduced  from  a 
peak of above 8 percent to below 3 percent. I think it is fair to say that those impediments 
have now mostly been removed. 
The price situation 
II.  
On  the  price  front,  there  is  not  yet  any  evidence  of  inflationary  pressure  despite  steady 
growth in the economy. The annual rate of change in consumer prices (excluding fresh food) 
stayed  negative  from  fiscal  1998  through  2004.  Although  small  but  positive  in  both  fiscal 
2005 and 2006, the recent figures are again negative, albeit marginally. 
BIS Review 99/2007 
 1
The  absence  of  inflationary  pressure  despite  steady  growth  in  the  economy  is  one  of  the 
distinctive  features  of  the  current  recovery  and  also  a  somewhat  puzzling  phenomenon. 
Behind it, I believe, lie three changes affecting the formation of prices and wage-setting. 
The  first  is  the  advance  of  economic  globalization.  As  globalization  proceeds,  competition 
with newly industrialized economies that enjoy lower labor costs has been compelling firms 
to raise productivity and to retain their restrictive stance on labor costs, together with greater 
exposure to the discipline of the capital market. 
The  second  is  the  influence  of  deregulation.  Even  nonmanufacturing  firms,  which  are 
relatively  unexposed  to  the  global  market,  find  themselves  in  a  fiercely  competitive 
environment as deregulation and realignment of the industry continues. 
Attitudes on the part of employees could be listed as the third change. Employees, having 
experienced  a  protracted  period  when  the  employment  situation  was  severe,  still  tend  to 
prefer stable employment to wage increases. 
Taking a rather longer perspective, however, the environment surrounding prices is likely to 
change  gradually.  First,  with  the  economy  continuing  to  grow  steadily,  overall  supply  and 
demand conditions are likely to tighten. 
Second,  labor  market  conditions  are  becoming  tighter,  as  indicated  by  the  decline  in  the 
unemployment rate. That will eventually lead to rising wages although this may be gradual. 
Third, surveys of inflation expectations in the private sector suggest moderate rises in prices 
ahead. Given those factors, the annual rate of change in our consumer prices is expected to 
be around 0 percent in the short run, but gradually to rise in the longer run. 
The conduct of monetary policy 
III.  
I will now turn to the conduct of monetary policy. In a situation where prices are not rising 
while the economy is growing steadily, the Bank has been adjusting the level of interest rates 
in a gradual manner. Our policy interest rate, the call rate, now stands at 0.5 percent after 
being raised twice since the termination of the quantitative easing policy in March 2006. 
The Bank has no plans to abandon this basic idea about the conduct of monetary policy. In 
other words, while assessing the situation of the economic activity and prices in a forward-
looking  manner,  if  the  Japanese  economy  is  deemed  likely  to  follow  a  path  of  sustained 
growth under price stability, the Bank intends to adjust the level of interest rates gradually in 
accordance with improvements in the economic and price situation. 
At  the  Monetary  Policy  Meeting  in  August,  we  decided  to  keep  our  policy  interest  rate 
unchanged.  The  Japanese  economy  is  expected  to  continue  to  enjoy  sustained  growth. 
However, global financial markets have been exhibiting some volatility recently, triggered by 
the subprime mortgage problem in the United States. Although that seems basically to reflect 
a  reevaluation  of  risk  by  investors,  we  believe  that  the  market  situation  deserves  close 
attention, along with the global economic developments. We will carefully assess incoming 
economic data and other information as well as the financial market situation both at home 
and abroad, so as to ensure appropriate policy decisions. 
Challenges facing Japan's economy 
IV.  
So far, I have explained the path of Japan's economy to date, and also our thoughts on the 
conduct of monetary policy. I hope that the economy will remain on a stable growth path and 
will be able to match the UK's record 15-year expansion. However, I am aware that a number 
of domestic issues, such as the declining birth rate and population aging along with the need 
for  fiscal  consolidation,  have  made  some  people  skeptical  about  the  future  of  Japanese 
2 
 BIS Review 99/2007
growth. I will use the rest of my allotted time to talk about three issues, and to explain how 
they are being dealt with. 
The first issue is the declining birth rate and the aging population. Although the problem is 
being experienced by many leading economies, the situation is especially serious in Japan. It 
is  not  easy to  maintain the  pace  of  economic growth  when  the  working-age  population,  of 
those aged between 15 and 64, is decreasing at a rate of nearly 1 percent a year. 
Under such circumstances, society's key task is to bring those members of the elderly and 
female  population  who  are  willing  to  work  into  the  workforce.  Firms,  as  a  move  toward 
solving the problem, have been diversifying their employment patterns. As a result of such 
efforts, labor force participation rates among the females and the elderly are increasing and 
the total number of employees is growing at around 1 percent a year despite the diminishing 
working-age population. 
Considering the labor market over the longer term, however, there is evidently a need to start 
exploring other possible measures to deal with the declining population. For that point, I am 
informed that the UK has accepted around 6 hundred thousand immigrants in the last three 
years  and  they  are  contributing  to  the  growth  of  the  UK  economy.  Japan  too  needs  to 
consider  accepting  more  foreign  workers,  while  paying  due  attention  to  its  impact  on 
Japanese society as a whole. 
The second issue is fiscal consolidation. Basically, I believe that it should be carried out in as 
transparent  a  fashion  as  possible.  The  long-term  path  of  fiscal  consolidation  and  its 
measures should be spelt out clearly in advance. 
As for the pace of consolidation, it is important that it should be measured, with each step 
taken  in  confidence  that  the  economy  remains  on  a  sustainable  growth  path.  That  is  how 
fiscal consolidation has proceeded to date. 
The Japanese government, while establishing a precise target for how much they intend to 
reduce  fiscal  expenditure,  aims  to  achieve  a  surplus  on  its  primary  balance  by  the  early 
2010s.  The  primary  balance  deficit,  which  expanded  to  around  6  percent  of  GDP  in  fiscal 
2003, is expected to fall to around 0.9 percent this fiscal year. Spending on public works for 
this fiscal year, in particular, has declined to around half its peak in fiscal 1995. The amount 
of the reduction is large, corresponding to around 4 percent of GDP. 
Yet  even  with  such  steady  progress  in  fiscal  consolidation,  the  public  debt,  at  over  140 
percent of GDP, is still the largest among leading economies. The government's next step is 
to secure a stable reduction of this rate by the mid-2010s. It will be a considerable challenge 
when  social  security  expenditure  is  increasing  due  to  the  aging  population.  And  additional 
measures to reduce expenditure and maintain revenue levels, including possible changes in 
the consumption tax, should be examined, following nationwide discussions. 
The  third  issue  is  the  intensification  of  competition  with  newly  industrialized  economies. 
Particularly  during  the  period  after  the  collapse  of  the  bubble  economy  when  Japan  was 
undergoing  heavy  economic  adjustments,  the  growing  presence  of  newly  industrialized 
countries tended to be regarded as a threat to Japan's competitiveness. 
In recent years, however, Japanese firms have become better adapted to the situation and a 
new  international  division  of  the  production  process,  concentrated  in  Asia,  has  been 
established. That is evidenced by the changing composition of Japan's imports from Asian 
countries. The composition has been gradually shifting away from labor-intensive products, 
such as clothing and other light manufacturing goods, toward machine products that require 
a  relatively  high  degree  of  processing,  such  as  IT-related  machinery.  Against  that 
background, intra-regional trade has been expanding. Japan has been exporting high-tech 
parts and importing final goods from Asian countries assembled utilizing the abundant labor 
force in the area. 
BIS Review 99/2007 
 3
Direct  investment  from  Japan  to  Asian  countries  is  increasing  as  Japanese  firms  seek  to 
optimize  their  production  processes.  The  profitability  of  overseas  operations  is  steadily 
growing and the positive effects are feeding back to Japan via channels such as investment 
income and patent royalties. 
Those transactions appear in the balance of payments as improvements in the balances for 
income and services, respectively. Bolstered by increasing interest earnings on bonds, the 
income surplus currently exceeds the trade surplus and makes up over half of the current 
account surplus (now around 5 percent of GDP). 
As such, I would like to stress that the relationship between Japan and the rest of the world, 
especially Asian countries, has outgrown that of mere export competitors and has developed 
into  a  mutually  constructive  relationship  operating  through  a  network  of  supply  chain 
management and direct investment. 
I  have  discussed  three  issues  facing  Japan's  economy.  Those  are  the  issues  that  cannot 
easily be resolved. However, as I have explained, steady steps are being taken to address 
them and the results are gradually becoming apparent. I believe that, by pushing ahead with 
such measures, it is entirely possible for Japan's economy to attain a new era of economic 
development. The Bank intends to contribute to the process by securing sustained economic 
growth and price stability through the appropriate conduct of monetary policy. 
Thank you very much. 
4 
 BIS Review 99/2007
