Andres Lipstok: Opportunities of the Estonian economy in global competition 
Opening  address  by  Mr  Andres  Lipstok,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Estonia  (Eesti  Pank),  at  the 
Conference "Opportunities of the Estonian Economy in Global Competition", Tallinn, 23 May 2007. 
Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen! 
 Introduction 
It is a great honour to welcome you here in Tallinn.  
Fifteen years ago Estonia regained its currency, the Estonian kroon. As we know, money has three 
key functions – it serves as a unit of account, store of value, and medium of exchange. The rise and 
fall of an economy depends on how well these three functions are fulfilled.  
In smaller countries, such as Estonia, the meaning of money goes beyond that. Stable and credible 
currency becomes a national symbol of success. That is why the introduction of the Estonian kroon is 
the most important event for our people from the early nineties. The new constitution, the declaration 
of independence, free elections – all these political events were perhaps more significant. But our own 
currency was and still is very special for most people. 
Our  historical  background  might  partly  explain  the  “euro”  scepticism  of  Estonians.  The  unfortunate 
truth is that joining the euro area is not very popular right now among Estonians. People understand 
the importance of it but hesitations still persist, price rise fears being the most common. Uncertainty is 
part of the cause as well: the exact date of the euro adoption is not known and there is no time to look 
deeper into the matter against the background of everyday life. Nevertheless, Estonians are one of the 
most pro-EU nations in the whole Union. More than 70 per cent of us hold positive or very positive 
views  on  the  EU.  However,  the  origins  of  euro  scepticism  and  EU  optimism  are  the  same.  The 
European Union and EU membership represent common European values, economic prosperity and 
security  for  our  citizens.  Our  own  currency  stands  for  the  same  values:  credibility,  prosperity  and 
economic security. 
The  Estonian  kroon  represents  these  values  for  a  very  specific  reason.  Namely,  our  currency  has 
been  pegged  to  the  euro  for  already  15  years.  I  cannot  resist  joking  that  from  the  monetary  policy 
perspective we are one of the oldest members of the euro area. A whole generation of Estonians has 
grown up without having to ask what the interest rate of Eesti Pank is. Instead, they know that the 
value of the kroon will not change and interest rate changes come from Europe. Most probably, what 
matters for Estonians is that while being part of Europe we still wish to retain something our own. 
This is not the most convenient situation for Eesti Pank. On one hand, we should be proud of the trust 
we  have  earned  at  home.  On  the  other  hand,  we  know  that  joining  the  euro  area  is  beneficial  and 
necessary  for  the  whole  country.  Not  only  because  of  the  obligation  arising  from  the  Treaty  of  the 
European Union. Rather because euro area membership provides ultimate monetary and economic 
security for our nation that is already used to the “de facto membership”. 
Competitiveness in today’s world 
Ladies and Gentlemen let me now turn to the topic of today’s conference: competitiveness in today’s 
world. I would like to look at it from the perspective of a really small country. 
As we all know, globalization has changed the understanding of success factors for countries. Old-
style economic policies and market protection are of no use any more, since today whole factories and 
industries are moved within a short time. How can a small country survive in this world at all? 
It is often said that real wages should be kept artificially low to attract investment and provide high 
returns on capital. I do not think this is the right way for a small country. We could never compete with 
major  economies  when  it  comes  to  mass  production.  Instead,  we  should  make  use  of  the  fact  that 
globalization creates also a huge spectrum of niche markets. Mass production cannot meet countless 
individual  needs,  as  people  all  over  the  world  demand  more  and  more  personalised  products  and 
services. This is the key to success for smaller economies. 
BIS Review 63/2007 
 1
The point of departure for a society to remain competitive is to get over the fear of globalization. The 
new world is after all an opportunity, not a cause for sorrow. Every small country should be able to 
seize the opportunity if policymakers get a few fundamental things right. I am now going to name four 
of these fundamentals. 
Four cornerstones of competitiveness 
The first, if not the most important, cornerstone of competitiveness is society’s openness to new ideas, 
its  willingness  to  communicate  and  ability  to  adapt.  Of  all  factors  that  support  economic  growth, 
openness is universally considered the most important. Openness to ideas allows better understand 
and make use of the global marketplace. 
Policy-makers  can  do  a  lot  to  promote  openness.  Efficient  telecom  infrastructure  and  Internet 
penetration serves as one way to do it. Market liberalization and competition are the keywords here. 
Another  equally  important  factor  is  the  country’s  ability  to  attract  highly  mobile  professionals. 
Consequently,  issues  like  security,  quality  of  public  and  social  services,  language  skills  and  clean 
environment are also becoming increasingly relevant in ensuring competitiveness. 
The  second  and  equally  important  factor  in  supporting  innovative  society  is  the  spirit  of 
entrepreneurship  and  culture  of  risk-taking.  Openness  makes  the  world  and  its  ideas  accessible  to 
people. However, you need an entrepreneur to make use of these opportunities and ultimately bring 
benefits to the whole society. Today, competitiveness is directly and positively correlated to the ease 
of doing business. 
There  are  several  areas  where  policy  developers  can  encourage  risk-taking.  For  instance,  better 
access to public services is one of the most instrumental ways to reduce red tape and increase the 
efficiency of business environment, either by means of the Internet or any other means. Flexible labour 
market  structures  and  decentralised  wage-setting  are  generally  regarded  as  the  prerequisite  to 
support smaller enterprises, for these are often the engines of innovation in post-industrial economies. 
Last  but  not  least,  we  should  not  underestimate  the  role  of  policy-makers  in  developing  education 
systems. Let me add a word on this last point. We are often told that Europe and Western countries in 
general need more engineers and mathematicians to restore their supposedly lost competitive edge. 
Engineers  are  definitely  essential  as  creators  yet  the  success  of  a  company  or  a  society  requires 
more. To be truly competitive a firm also needs excellent management and marketing skills. In short, 
you need an entrepreneur. However, it is often overlooked when it comes to the educational reform in 
Europe. Young people should be taught the essentials of ethical entrepreneurship and finance from 
the very first grades onwards. When creating and producing something innovative you cannot just stop 
half way – you also have to sell it. 
Thirdly, talking about competitiveness, we should not underestimate the role of universities and higher 
education either. Money is again an issue here. We should be much more open to finding additional 
sources of financing. As we know, in the United States the success of universities relies on relatively 
broad-based funding. We also know that European education systems are already facing tensions in 
light of the traditional role of a state. In my opinion, policy-makers should promote new and innovative 
ways of funding higher education which would be clearly beneficial for all parties. Private savings for 
financing higher education should increase considerably.  
Finally, in addition to openness and the culture of risk-taking, a competitive society needs responsible 
macroeconomic and financial management. Indeed, stable money, low and predictable inflation, and 
fiscal responsibility are probably the most essential public goods governments and central banks can 
provide over a short term to support innovation. It is equally well known that market-based access to 
finance enables to quickly mobilise necessary funds for innovation. Single financial market supported 
by common infrastructure plays an essential role in increasing the competitiveness of the European 
Union. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, let me once more welcome you to Tallinn. I wish you a successful and thought 
provoking conference. 
2 
 BIS Review 63/2007
