Marion Williams: Financial sector developments in Barbados 
Address by Dr Marion Williams, Governor of the Central Bank of Barbados, at the opening 
ceremony of the FirstCaribbean International Bank Business Centre, Warrens, St. Michael, 
29 June 2007. 
 in  Barbados.  By  establishing 
Thank you, Madam Master of Ceremonies, for your kind words of introduction. 
Mr. Charles Pink; other members of the Board; members of Management and staff; specially 
invited guests; distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen. 
Let me first offer my congratulations to FirstCaribbean on the construction of this impressive 
facility  at  Warrens.  In  so  doing,  you  are  confirming  your  long-term  commitment  to  the 
development of the Barbadian economy. It has now been acknowledged that Warrens is the 
fastest  growing  urban  centre 
its  Head  Office  here, 
FirstCaribbean  has  become  part  of  the  growth  and  the  expansion  of  the  area  and 
demonstrates today its confidence that this location has the potential to be a major financial 
hub. 
Mr.  Chairman,  I  am  naturally  pleased  by  any  activity  which  seeks  to  improve  the  level  of 
financial intermediation in Barbados. Financial intermediaries agglomerate capital from many 
small savers and allocate it to eligible users. In so doing, they also transfer, pool and reduce 
risk,  increase  liquidity  and  convey  information,  thus  contributing  to  an  environment  for 
growth. A well-functioning financial system can make an important contribution to the growth 
of Gross Domestic Product. 
There  is  no  doubt  that  over  time  Barbados  has  enjoyed  a  very  high  standard  of  financial 
intermediation.  The  commercial  banking  sector  has  led  the  way  in  this  regard  and  has  so 
conducted itself that there is tremendous confidence in our banking system. The confidence 
which the public at large has reposed in the banking sector is exemplified by the continued 
increase in commercial bank assets. During the two decades ending in 2006, for example, 
commercial bank assets grew six-fold. 
FirstCaribbean  International  Bank,  whose  roots  in  Barbados  run  very  deep,  has  made  a 
major  contribution  to  the  growth  of  the  domestic  financial  sector  and,  by  extension,  to  the 
economic well-being of Barbados. This has been demonstrated in many tangible ways over 
the  years,  including  the  provision  of  credit  and  foreign  exchange,  the  issue  of  financial 
instruments and the management of assets. The construction of this facility must be seen as 
yet another example of the continuing effort by this organisation to be among the leaders in 
the financial services sector. 
Over the last two decades or so in Barbados, it was investment that provided much of the 
impetus  for  the  growth  in  Gross  Domestic  Product  (GDP).  While  consumption  expenditure 
and  exports  of  goods  and  services  kept  pace  with  GDP,  the  growth  rate  of  investment 
exceeded  that  of  the  GDP  by  nearly  60%.  Over  the  same  period,  private  building  activity 
(which includes projects like this one) grew by 21% more than GDP. 
It is projects like this one that would have facilitated the strong performance of the economy 
in recent years. Indeed, the construction sector is still the main driver of the economy, and 
expanded by 7% in 2006 and by 5.4% in the first quarter of 2007. As is the case in Barbados, 
the buoyancy of the construction sector generated certain spin-offs in other areas. 
This  initiative  to  rationalise  your  bank’s  operational  and  technical  capacity  is  undoubtedly 
good for the organisation. It is widely accepted that one good measure of the development of 
an economy is the level of financial sophistication. As customers’ income levels rise and they 
are exposed through the electronic media and travel to more up-market financial services, 
they will demand a wider range of products and better levels of service delivery. But given 
BIS Review 78/2007 
 1
the  degree  to  which  these  modern  products  depend  on  accounting,  internal  control, 
technology  and  other  services,  their  provision  can  be  only  as  efficient  as  the  back-office 
operations which support them. 
Accordingly,  a  service-oriented  bank  must  be  constantly  upgrading  these  back-office 
capabilities  if  it  is  to  meet  the  public’s  demand  for  sophisticated  products  and  services.  A 
financial institution can make its reputation on its ability to deliver those services which are in 
the full glare of the public, but if the same institution does not allocate adequate resources to 
its back-office activities it will not keep that reputation for very long. 
Take  technology  as  a  case  in  point.  Modern  commercial  banks  now  use  technology  to 
improve  the  efficiency  of  distributional  channels,  utilise  outsourcing  and  improve  real-time 
transactions.  As  the  old  adage  states,  time  is  money.  Since  the  overwhelming  majority  of 
banking transactions are time-sensitive, the efficient use of time should be the goal of both 
the  bank  and  the  customer.  It  is  the  state  of  the  institution’s  technology  which  ultimately 
affects  the  bank’s  ability  to  make  electronic  transfers  in  a  timely  fashion.  I  would  like  to 
believe that customers can expect to have their accounts credited and debited more speedily 
as a result of this initiative and that the result will be a more satisfied customer. 
I am sure that FirstCaribbean is aware that having its technological capacity in one location 
also  has  its  risks  and  that  the  initiative  must  be  accompanied  by  an  appreciation  of  risk 
management and by contingency planning. I am therefore certain that an organisation with 
the reputation of FirstCaribbean, understands its important role in the intermediation process 
and  has  paid  due  regard  to  the  need  for  preventative  maintenance  and  the  speediest 
possible return to normalcy after any downtime. 
In recent years, the Central Bank has collaborated with commercial banks in the community 
in  the  introduction  of  the  Real  Time  Gross  Settlement  and  the  Automated  Clearing  House 
systems. These initiatives from all  accounts have placed the domestic financial system on 
the cutting-edge of payment and settlements. 
However, there are other areas in which progress has been relatively slow. One of these is 
the  establishment  of  a  real  time,  on-line  comprehensive  database  of  financial  statistics 
otherwise known as the Electronic Data Interchange. This facilitates the flow of information 
from  the  commercial  banks  directly  into  the  Central  Bank’s  database.  When  this  is  fully 
operational it will help to improve the formulation of monetary policy by the Central Bank and 
allow us to respond more quickly in a more market-based environment. 
Since  the  start  of  the  21st  Century,  the  financial  sector  in  Barbados  has  experienced 
significant changes.  These  include  mergers,  acquisitions, the  disappearance  of indigenous 
banks as well as the introduction of new regulations and legislation, and new studies have 
been  made  particularly  with  respect  to  governance,  regulatory  compliance,  anti-money 
laundering, and risk management. Now, with the full implementation of the Caricom Single 
Market  and  Economy  (CSME)  and  the  constant  demands  in  some  circles  for  financial 
liberalisation, one can expect that there will be additional changes over the next few years. 
Let  me  now  move  on  to  talk  a  bit  about  upcoming  changes  in  policy  which  will  affect  the 
operations of commercial banks. 
The Central Bank of Barbados took over responsibility for exchange control in 1973 but the 
system predates the Bank. Exchange controls became more critical in 1975 when Barbados 
fixed  its  currency  against  the  US  dollar.  The  system  served  this  country  well,  mainly  for 
monitoring purposes, and helped to avoid the disastrous speculative outflows which nearly 
ruined some Southeast Asian countries in 1977. 
During  the  last  decade,  however,  there  has  been  increasing  support  for  the  view  that 
exchange controls can be a brake on economic development. Consequently, the Bank has 
been  gradually  liberalising  its  exchange  controls.  This  view  was  also  embraced  by  the 
originators of the CSME and commitments were given that those Caricom member countries, 
which  still  had  exchange  controls  would  remove  them  within  a  specified  time  frame.  That 
2 
 BIS Review 78/2007
deadline is now January 2008. Accordingly, with effect from that date, Barbados is expected 
to honour a commitment to remove all exchange controls in respect of transactions with other 
CSME member countries. 
Another aspect of capital account liberalisation is that it places more of the responsibility for 
managing the country’s foreign assets in the domain of the commercial banks. It seems to 
me,  therefore,  that  banks  can  be  no  less  diligent  in  operation  of  a  liberalised  foreign 
exchange system than in one with some controls. This should still require banks to at least 
maintain adequate records of the foreign exchange transactions so as to permit monitoring. 
You will realise that for a couple years now your national ID numbers are required in order to 
execute any foreign exchange transaction resulting in an out flow of foreign currency. The 
Central  Bank’s  objective  is  to  be  able  to  monitor  the  movement  of  foreign  exchange  by 
individuals and companies and by type or categories and to receive this information in the 
Central Bank as it occurs in the commercial bank. It is planned that the system can then be 
manipulated  to  show  all  foreign  exchange  purchases  by  individuals  cumulatively  over  a 
period of time, by company and by type of transaction. This is already possible, but currently 
the  data  has  to  be  first  input  manually  in  the  Bank.  Our  objective  is to  achieve  this  at  the 
point of input of the data by the commercial bank and have it input directly into the Central 
Bank’s database. I trust that this investment will help to facilitate that. 
The  conventional  wisdom  in  academic  circles  is  that  an  adequate  level  of  financial  sector 
development  should  precede  capital  account  liberalisation.  While  it  can  be  argued  that 
commercial banks in Barbados are highly developed financial intermediaries, there are still 
some  concerns  about  the  non-bank  financial  entities.  Nonetheless,  now  that  substantially 
greater  liberalisation  is  in  sight  I  would  urge  all  financial  institutions  to  seek  to  at  least 
increase  the  range  and  scope  of  domestic  financial  instruments.  In  so  doing,  there  would 
also be a higher probability of attracting foreign capital. 
A lack of adequate liquidity has been identified as one of the major impediments to a more 
vibrant financial sector. Many potential investors simply cannot find any assets to purchase. 
This reflects, in part, a cultural situation; where Barbadians purchase equity in a private firm 
or buy government securities, and tend to hold these assets for as long as possible. Some 
analysts believe that this conservative mind-set would change if there were an abundance of 
attractive issues and options coming on stream on a regular basis. In this connection, it has 
been  suggested  that  the  development  of  a  secondary  mortgage  market  could  attract  the 
attention  of  domestic  and 
to  proceed  with 
implementation of the Secondary Mortgage Market as soon as the legislation is completed. 
There  is  also  a  view  that  the  market  for  government  securities  needs  more  dynamism. 
Government  securities  are  structured  to  cater  to  the  needs  of  both  individuals  and 
institutional investors. Since there is a zero risk associated with holding government paper, 
these  instruments  are,  in  the  overwhelming  number  of  cases,  held  to  maturity  even  when 
holders  experience  cash  flow  problems.  What  is  required  are  dealers  in  government 
securities who would perform the role of market makers, thereby bringing more participants 
and liquidity to the market. 
The Central Bank is also currently considering a number of matters touching on open market 
operations and is developing operational modalities in this regard. We expect shortly to be 
able to open dialogue with the parties involved in the hope of getting buy-in from commercial 
banks. 
It will be important in the changing environment that conditions are created to attract capital 
to Barbados. Commercial banks should not expect immediately to see any radical change in 
the way modifications to the minimum deposit rate are determined and indeed there may well 
continue to be some floor for its savings rate, this time as a protective mechanism rather than 
a monetary policy tool. The Central Bank will continue for the time being to be guided by the 
differential between local and foreign interest rates, but given the somewhat freer movement 
investors.  The  Bank 
intends 
foreign 
BIS Review 78/2007 
 3
of funds within CARICOM, post December 2007 more diligence will be required and more 
rapid market responses will be necessary. 
Further exchange control liberalisation and greater flexibility in the interest rate regime are 
part of an overall move toward greater reliance on market forces in the financial sector. For 
sometime now, the Central Bank has been reducing the reserve requirements for commercial 
banks and the total requirement, net of the recently-introduced foreign reserve component, 
now stands at 17% of deposits, the lowest in three decades. It is expected that in time this 
requirement will be further reduced. 
In  terms  of  other  developments,  the  legislation  relating  to  the  much-discussed  Deposit 
Insurance Corporation (DIC) has now been proclaimed, the Board has been appointed and 
the  Chairman  Honourable  Justice  Leroy  Inniss  has  called  his  first  meeting  next  week,  so 
commercial  banks  can  expect  to  hear  from  the  DIC  very  soon.  The  establishment  of  this 
entity  is  occurring  in  the  context  of  a  healthy  banking  system.  This  is  unusual  for  the 
Caribbean. All other DICs were established in the context of a bank failure. This is a great 
beginning for our DIC. Commercial banks are also positioned to benefit from a reduction in 
tax on assets to assist in funding their contribution to the new Deposit Insurance Corporation. 
I  believe  that  this  too  makes  our  beginning  different.  I  expect  you  will,  in  due  course,  be 
hearing from the new Chairman who is the new spokesman for the DIC and less from me on 
this topic. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  let  me  in  conclusion  once  more  applaud  the  decision  of 
FirstCaribbean  to  construct  this  facility  at  Warrens.  As  Barbados  strives  to  become  a 
financial hub in the Caribbean region more of these kinds of initiatives will be required if we 
are to achieve that goal. I am confident that the Business Centre will adequately deliver the 
services for which it was intended and I wish that all the employees who will work here will 
have the most rewarding experiences. 
I thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 78/2007
