Lucas Papademos: Adoption of the euro by Cyprus and Malta 
Speech by Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the Euro 
Festivities marking the decision of the EU Council on the adoption of the euro by Cyprus and 
Malta, Brussels, 10 July 2007. 
 In  less  than  six  months  from  now,  the  euro  will  be  part  of  the  everyday  life  as  the  new 
currency of the people of Cyprus and Malta. This is an essential and practical consequence 
of the decision taken by the ECOFIN Council today. It is a momentous decision in the history 
of both countries. And it is the culmination point of a process of economic adjustment and 
technical preparations. On behalf of the entire  Governing  Council of the European Central 
Bank, I would like to warmly congratulate all those involved in this process, and the people of 
Cyprus  and  Malta,  on  this  accomplishment!  The  enlargement  of  the  euro  area  to  include 
these two countries is a significant and joyful event, not just for them, but also for all of us 
who are already part of the European monetary union.  
We at the ECB and the Eurosystem are particularly pleased to welcome two new members in 
our central banking “team”. The Central Banks of Cyprus and Malta will become members of 
the Eurosystem. And the Governor of the Central Bank of Cyprus, Athanasios Orphanides, 
and the Governor of the Central Bank of Malta, Michael C. Bonello will become members of 
the Governing Council of the ECB. The two governors, together with the other 19 members 
of the ECB’s Governing Council, will thus participate fully in the decision-making concerning 
the  single  monetary  policy.  We  are  looking  forward  to  benefit  from  their  experience  and 
expertise in our deliberations. Together, we will continue to analyse carefully the economic 
situation and outlook in the euro area and to do what is necessary to fulfil our mandate: to 
maintain price stability in the euro area as a whole, to the benefit of soon 15 countries and 
319 million Europeans.  
I am sure that the people of Cyprus and Malta are looking forward to the changeover to the 
euro.  They  rightly  expect  that  it  will  take  place smoothly  and  that  they  are  informed  about 
their new banknotes and coins. A smooth changeover to the euro will enhance their trust in 
the  safety  and  integrity  of  their  new  currency.  To  this  end,  the  ECB,  in  close  co-operation 
with  the  Central  Bank  of  Cyprus  and  the  Central  Bank  of  Malta,  have  embarked  in 
comprehensive  euro  information  campaigns  on  the  euro  banknotes  and  coins  in  the  two 
countries  and  will  take  all  measures  necessary  to  ensure  a  successful  transition  from  the 
Cyprus and Maltese pounds to the euro.  
Thankfully,  we  have  by  now  accumulated  certain  experience  with  such  changeover 
processes.  The  euro  changeover  that  took  place  early  this  year  in  Slovenia  was  a  great 
success.  Within  a  short  period  of  time,  Slovenians  had  completely  accepted  the  new 
currency and integrated it in their daily life. I am confident that the Cypriots and the Maltese 
will  also  benefit  from  the  undeniable  economic  advantages  of  belonging  to  the  single 
European currency area. As part of our experiences with previous changeovers to the euro, 
we know that we have to monitor carefully that prices are converted properly, and that the 
changeover  should  not  be  used  as  an  occasion  to  raise  prices  in  an  unfounded  and 
inordinate manner. It is therefore encouraging to see the positive outcome of several “price 
watching” movements in Cyprus and Malta, be they grass-roots or institutionally organised. 
And I have no doubt that the Cypriots and Maltese will be vigilant consumers. 
Entering monetary union is a historic undertaking. Both countries have taken an irreversible 
step towards deeper economic integration within the euro area; they are now part of what 
can  be  called  a  “community  with  a  common  destiny”,  or  –  it  is  maybe  better  to  use  the 
German term – a “Schicksalsgemeinschaft”. The stability and dynamism of the economies of 
Cyprus  and  Malta,  and  the  welfare  of  their  people,  will  be  of  a  direct  and  immediate 
importance to all of us who share the single currency. Similarly, the growth and prosperity of 
BIS Review 80/2007 
 1
the euro area as a whole will be a matter of significant interest also for the people of Cyprus 
and Malta. Just like the members of a family, all members of the euro area should discuss 
together and take the best course of action, for the benefit of each and of all. 
Let me conclude by congratulating, once again, Cyprus and Malta for this great achievement, 
to become part of the euro area and to adopt “The EURO. OUR money.”  
Κύπρο, καλωσόρισες  
Merħba, Malta! 
Thank you very much. 
2 
 BIS Review 80/2007
