Tarisa Watanagase: Issues important to small and open emerging market 
economies 
Speech  by  Dr  Tarisa  Watanagase,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the  Panel  Discussion  on 
Financial Globalisation, Capital Flows, and Challenges for Central Banks, at the 77th Annual General 
Meeting of the Bank for International Settlements, Basel, 24 June 2007. 
 My discussion will focus on the issues important to small and open emerging market economies. The 
first  is  regards  to whether the  present situation  of sustained  inflows  into emerging  markets  is really 
sustainable.  What  do  these  seemingly  sustained  inflows  tell  us,  particularly  in  terms  of  investors’ 
assessment of riskiness of the region? Or from another angle, have risks in the region declined? I will 
discuss  this  in  the  context  of  financial  innovations  in  risk  management,  and  conclude  with  a  few 
remarks on how these developments affect central banks across the globe. 
My first question, therefore, arises from the observable reduction of risk premia for financial assets in 
the region. On the surface, this low risk premia implies lower risks. But does, it, really? 
We all realize that the international financial system is currently in an environment with low risk premia 
across a broad set of asset classes, combined with low volatility in the prices of these assets. 
Furthermore, this low risk premia has been sustained despite the various episodes of risk aversion in 
the  recent  past.  This  raises  concerns  about  whether  prices  –  and  consequently  the  risk  premia 
themselves – accurately reflect actual risks. 
Of  course,  it  is  arguable  that  the  search  for  yield  in  riskier  assets  is  due  in  part,  no  doubt,  to  the 
historically  low  interest  rates  and  abundant  global  liquidity,  partly  a  result  of  recent  expansionary 
monetary policy around the world. This has encouraged greater risk-taking, resulting in a substantial 
reduction in risk and liquidity premia over the entire maturity spectrum. 
On  the  other  hand,  however,  low  risk  premia  could  also  reflect  changing  risk  appetite.  More 
importantly, it is unclear whether this change in risk appetite has arisen from permanent or transitory 
factors.  I  make  this  distinction  because  permanent  factors  would  imply  that  this  reduction  in  risk 
premia is here to stay. Transitory factors, on the other hand, imply that the risk premia would rise once 
these factors reversed. 
Let me try to identify some of the permanent factors that have resulted in the shift in risk appetite and 
preferences. These include, firstly, changing demographics. The aging population has led to a larger 
volume  of  pension  funds,  which  need  to  seek  higher  returns  in  emerging  market  assets.  Secondly, 
technological  advances,  such  as  the  IT  revolution  and  decline  in  costs  of  telecommunications  and 
transportation,  have  substantially  lowered  costs  for  cross-border  financial  transactions.  Thirdly, 
changes in exchange rate regimes and capital account liberalization over the years have lifted many of 
the previous obstacles to crossborder financial transactions. Fourthly, financial innovation has made 
credit risk transfer mechanisms more widely available, increasing the appeal of riskier assets. Fifth, 
the high level of liquidity may be a result of structural factors, or in some cases, policy factors, making 
savings in emerging markets persistently higher than in developed markets, given the lack of social 
welfare, healthcare, etc. This has resulted in a higher marginal propensity to save for consumers in 
emerging markets and contributes to a persistent global savings glut. Sixth, greater diversification in 
international  reserves  management,  as  well  as  sovereign  wealth  funds,  may  have  led  to  increased 
investment by authorities in more diverse assets as well. 
On the other hand, numerous transitory factors may also have been responsible for this change in risk 
appetite  and  risk  premia. A  reversal  in  any  of  these  factors  could  result  in risk  aversion away  from 
emerging markets and destabilizing capital flows, and a rise in risk premia. Let me name a few factors. 
Firstly, the situation of global imbalances and slide of the USD has led to preference for investment in 
emerging  markets,  particularly  given  ongoing  –  but  by  no  means  sustainable  –  expectations  of 
appreciating  currencies  in  emerging  market  economies.  Secondly,  low  interest  rates  worldwide  and 
the  high  level  of  global  liquidity  have  led  to  search  for  yield  in  riskier  investments.  This  may  be  a 
temporary  phenomenon  if  we  believe  that  the  extended  period  of  accommodative  monetary  policy 
worldwide is unsustainable, and eventually monetary would need to tighten to compensate for this era 
of profligacy. Thirdly, similar investment strategies employed by hedge funds and other funds could 
BIS Review 74/2007 
 1
lead to momentum trading and herd movements, both in terms of inflows and outflows. Any shocks 
that trigger a change in these strategies could result in large movements of capital. 
In any case, whether owing to the changes in risk appetite or not, we must remind ourselves that the 
current  pricing  of  risk  is  based  on  the  expectation  that  strong  growth  and  contained  inflation  will 
continue to prevail. Any unexpected deterioration of the macroeconomic environment, however, could 
trigger a rapid turnaround in sentiment. 
This leads me to my next point, which I had raised earlier, of whether the increase in capital flows to 
emerging markets was likely to result in an increase in risks? This seems the likely case. For example, 
local investors do not usually provide counter-trade to hedge funds but rather take similar positions, 
hence increasing the overall risks. 
In addition, investment of hedge funds in a particular country is usually only a small fraction of their 
whole  portfolios,  and  inflows  reversals  may  take  place  easily.  Individual  risk  management  can  also 
collectively  induce  systemic  risks,  and  central  banks  may  be  required  to  resolve  such  problems  to 
avoid adverse impacts from sudden reversal of capital flows. 
This leads us to the question of whether we are underestimating the inherent risks of these capital 
flows? Let me explain why this may be the case. 
First of all, net capital flows are small. Gross capital flows, however, are much larger: this may suggest 
that the economy’s degree of vulnerability is actually larger than currently accounted for. Should we 
therefore be concerned with large two way (gross) flows, as opposed to net flows, and the size of the 
much larger global balance sheet if counted in this way? 
Arguably,  large  gross  capital  flows  and  the  flow  of  surplus  capital  from  emerging  markets  to  more 
developed  markets  may  be  a  structural  phenomenon,  as  mentioned  earlier.  The  characteristics  of 
developed  financial  markets,  in  terms  of  lesser  financial  frictions,  better  information  and  fewer 
borrowing constraints leading to better liquidity and lending, as well developed social welfare systems, 
are reflected in the persistent gap in savings compared to developing markets. In addition, financial 
integration  has  facilitated  cross  border  arbitrage  transactions,  resulting  in  easier  liquidity  conditions 
globally. 
The implications and associated risks of this high level of global liquidity are different depending on 
whether  the  current  state  of  affairs  is  a  new  equilibrium  consistent  with  the  conditions  under 
globalization  (e.g.  case  above),  meaning  that  monetary  policy  should  not  try  to  counteract  this 
phenomenon. 
However,  if  the  current  phenomenon  is  due  to  temporarily  excessively  accommodative  monetary 
policy that would eventually translate into higher inflation, this would require eventual tightening and 
lead to the risk of capital reversals. 
But there are also compelling reasons to argue that risks have been better distributed, given financial 
innovation and various credit risk transfer mechanisms. Let me therefore pose another question: has 
the  use  of  these  credit  risk  transfer  mechanism  helped  to  distribute  risks,  making  the  financial 
environment a safer place? 
On  the  plus  side,  credit  transfer  mechanisms  can  “redistribute”  risks,  as  default  losses  would  be 
absorbed  by  a  larger  number  of  investors  than  otherwise.  Some  of  the  losses  may  be  borne  by 
sophisticated  players  (such  as  hedge  funds  or some  institutional  investors) who  are  well  diversified 
and can better bear the losses. Credit transfer mechanisms also allow banks (via credit derivatives) to 
improve their own risk management and enable them to diversify their risk profiles. 
However,  the  use  or  risk  transfer  mechanisms  can  contribute  to  opacity  in  the  distribution  of  risks, 
especially  once  risks  are  transferred  to  unregulated  entities  (i.e.  non-banks).  This  could  lead  to 
bunching  of  risks  in  particular  areas.  Additionally,  the  use  and  constant  innovation  of  credit  risk 
transfer mechanisms has allowed risk to take on more complex forms, making risk less traceable. 
My final point will be on the resulting challenges to central banks of small open economies. 
Central banks need to understand how globalization affects three main objectives: (1) the domestic 
inflation process, (2) the transmission mechanism of monetary policy, and (3) financial stability. Let me 
point out at the outset that empirically, there is still some disagreement to the extent of each effect. 
First of all, it has been argued that the domestic inflation process has been largely changed by trade 
globalization. In particular, increased trade openness and stronger international competition from low 
2 
 BIS Review 74/2007
cost  suppliers  in  emerging  economies  has  resulted  in  lower  prices  of  imported  goods  and  limiting 
pricing power of domestic firms. In addition, higher international wage competition in labour markets, 
as well as upward pressure on productivity growth (albeit this is difficult to distinguish from effects of 
technological developments), have provided downside risks to inflation. 
On the other hand, higher commodity prices due to stronger demand for energy related commodities 
and industrial raw materials pose an upside risk for inflation. 
Secondly, the monetary policy transmission mechanism has been changed by financial globalization. 
Policy interest rates influence short-term interest rates. But recently, the response of long-term rates to 
changes in the policy instruments has become less apparent. This raises concerns of whether central 
banks’  monetary  policy  is  becoming  less  effective,  particularly  given  that  savings  and  investment 
decisions are more influenced by long-term rates. 
Additionally,  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  has  become  harder  in  light  of  financial  globalization.  A 
policy rate increase to tame inflationary pressures may induce further capital flows, thus bringing more 
liquidity into the domestic market. 
Thirdly,  domestic  financial  stability  is  to  a  greater  extent  affected  by  global  liquidity  conditions.  For 
instance,  growth  in  cross-border  financial  flows  increasingly  influences  domestic  asset  prices. 
However,  this  effect  can  be  broken  down  into  two  main  scenarios.  The  first  is  through  changes 
consistent with fundamentals. An example of such a change is the wave of worldwide mergers and 
acquisitions, resulting from globalization, and improvements in efficiency through economies of scale 
and  integration.  While  this  has  exerted  upward  pressure  on  equity  prices,  this  may  not  be  a  great 
concern for stability. 
On  the  other  hand,  some  changes  drive  prices  away  from  fundamentals.  This  includes  asset  price 
moves caused by excessive investment in developed financial markets, or short term capital inflows 
into emerging markets in search of yield, or through carry trades, etc., which may result in asset price 
misalignments. 
In  this  regard,  the  question  arises  whether  the  central  bank’s  price  stability  objective  is  enough  for 
financial  stability,  given  destabilizing  asset  price  movements,  coupled  with  movements  in  the 
exchange rate, which may not be in line with fundamentals. 
BIS Review 74/2007 
 3
