Ranee Jayamaha: Recent economic developments, challenges and strategies – 
proactive strategies in reducing inflation 
Speech by Dr Ranee Jayamaha, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, at the Central 
Bank of Sri Lanka, Colombo, 25 May 2007. 
 Inflation  is  a  common  enemy.  Its  impact  will  be  felt  by  every  single  person  in  a  country.  Managing 
inflation and reducing inflationary expectations cannot be achieved by the Central Bank of Sri Lanka 
(CBSL) alone. It can only be done collectively and with cooperation from all stakeholders. 
Who are these critical stakeholders ? 
CBSL,  the  government,  banks  and  financial  institutions,  fund  managers/traders/dealers  operating  in 
various markets, investors both local and foreign households and consumers. 
Central Bank of Sri Lanka 
1. 
Given  its  prime  objective  of  maintaining  price  stability,  CBSL  has  been  proactive  in  the  conduct  of 
monetary  policy,  which  is  the  instrument  through  which  this  purpose  can  be  achieved.  CBSL  sets 
monetary  targets  taking  into  consideration  growth  prospects  of  the  economy,  liquidity  requirements 
necessary to facilitate growth and inflation at a desired level. The ultimate aim is to keep inflation at 
desirable levels and reduce inflationary expectations. CBSL, at its disposal, has a limited number of 
instruments  to  conduct  monetary  policy.  The  current  framework  places  greater  reliance  on 
market-based  instruments,  such as changes  to  the policy  interest  rate  and conduct  of  open  market 
operations. 
Accordingly, CBSL has announced its monetary policy strategy and targets at the beginning of 2007. 
The  upfront  announcement  of  the  policy  targets  indicates  the  transparency  of  monetary  policy 
operations and we believe that it helps to enhance policy effectiveness. More importantly, it helps the 
other stakeholders to fall in line with the announced strategy. 
Government 
2. 
The  fiscal  policy  should  support  monetary  policy  to  work  effectively.  Therefore,  government’s 
commitment to maintain fiscal targets is essential. According to the government’s medium term macro 
framework  enunciated  in  the  fiscal  management  report  2007,  the  overall  deficit  in  2007  will  be 
contained at around 7.2% of GDP. The Govt. has taken significant steps to enhance revenue through 
additional measures such as improvement to tax administration, rationalize current expenditure and 
improve  its  debt  management  policy.  The  achievement  of  the  first  quarter  2007  revenue  target  is 
commendable.  While  maintaining  the  momentum  in  revenue  targets,  it  is  also  necessary  to  reduce 
Govt.  expenditure  and  work  in  tandem  with  monetary  policy  to  contain  inflation.  In  reducing 
government expenditure, it is also desirable to link income policies of the Govt., in particular, wage 
increases to productivity gains. Attempts are made to minimize income expenditure gaps and avoid 
deficit financing from inflationary sources such as bank financing, in particular, borrowing from CBSL. 
Govt.’s medium term strategy rests largely on public investments in key sectors and infrastructure that 
supports growth. It is important that these investments are financed in such way that it would not place 
excess burden on the budget. In this regard, it is encouraging to note that the Govt. has committed to 
commence operations of infrastructure projects such as the South Harbour Development, Weerawila 
Airport and other highways within the framework of public private partnership, which will provide an 
opportunity to the private sector to take part in such projects. 
Reducing vulnerability to rising import prices 
In view of the significant volatility in oil prices in international markets, CPC has taken measures to 
hedge oil imports so that the price fluctuations do not adversely affect domestic prices. It may be worth 
BIS Review 55/2007 
 1
exploring the possibility of introducing hedging to other critical imports such as gas, fertilizer to mitigate 
impacts of adverse price fluctuations in the domestic market. 
Banks and financial institutions 
3.  
Banks and financial institutions are expected to provide finances for economic activity. Some banks 
and financial institutions provide credit to government as well as the private sector, while others serve 
only the private sector. The continuing high growth in private sector credit could cause a threat to price 
stability  as  well  as  the  financial  system  stability.  High  credit  growth  could  deteriorate  the  quality  of 
assets of commercial banks and increase the level of non-performing loans. In inflationary situations, 
lenders  should  be  cautious  not  to  fuel  inflation  further,  but  to  direct  investment  towards  productive 
activities. 
Banks and financial institutions continue to enjoy short term profits from lending at high rates to their 
customers and living on interest income. But the real value of their assets and profits continue to erode 
in an inflationary environment. For example, the real growth of assets in the banking system in 2006, 
was 5% as compared to a nominal growth of 19%. Similarly, the real growth of profits of the banking 
sector in 2006 was 12% compared to a nominal growth of 26%. In essence, the real value of short 
term profits recorded by the banking sector is only half of the nominal growth. Eventually, there will be 
pressures  for  higher  wages  which  will,  together  with  rising  non-performing  loans,  erode  profits  and 
threaten the stability of the banking system. Banks and financial institutions should therefore take a 
longer  term  view  and  be  more  cautious  in  expanding  their  loan  portfolios  towards  consumption 
oriented credit and promoting consumerism. 
The Impact of expansion of consumption credit 
Expanding  credit  to  less  productive  areas  specially  consumption,  would  reduce  current  as  well  as 
potential savings and add to inflationary pressures in a situation where there is limited availability of 
goods  and services and resources.  Such  lending  would  also  lead  to  high credit  risks  as  short  term 
consumption credit is not backed by realizable collaterals although banks make high profits on interest 
income. Banks and financial institutions re-arrange their credit portfolios in a manner that support the 
growth and investment drive. 
Arranging funding sources without relying on CBSL funds 
CBSL  wishes  to  see  market  liquidity  “broadly  in  balance”  as  it  will  enable  the  Bank  to  conduct  its 
monetary policy more effectively. That means when there is excess liquidity in the system, borrowing 
from CBSL would add to enhancement of reserve money which will have multiple effects in expanding 
money  supply  and  liquidity  in  the  economy.  Banks  should  make  concerted  efforts  to  adjust  their 
funding sources to meet credit demands by mobilizing deposits and enhancing revenue through fee-
based activities. For emergencies, they should establish credit lines within their peers. Mobilization of 
deposits does not depend solely on high interest rates, but also on improved customer services and 
justifiable  fees  and  charges.  Similarly,  banks  should  diversify  business  operations  beyond  core 
business of lending and that will help to reduce high credit risks. 
Improvements in efficiency to reduce intermediation costs 
Banks  need  to  improve  operational  efficiency  and  reduce  interest  spreads  and  margins  thereby 
reducing transaction costs to customers. High spreads and margins and related profits of banks and 
financial institutions will raise transaction costs to borrowers and investors who will pass such costs to 
customers through high prices of goods and services. This is inflationary. Compared to most countries 
in  the  region,  banking  and  financial  services  in  Sri  Lanka  are  provided  at  very  high  margins.  For 
example, India’s interest margin is 2.6% and Bangladesh is 2.5%. In Sri Lanka, it is 4%. In fact, even 
the big investors have begun to feel the impact of high transaction costs although many of them have 
the bargaining power to obtain funds at prime rates. The medium to small enterprises have no choice 
or access to finance. 
2 
 BIS Review 55/2007
4. 
Fund managers/dealers/traders 
Interbank market 
The  tight  monetary  policy  stance  adopted  by  CBSL  and  its  possible  continuation  would  result  in 
increased reliance by banks on the inter-bank call market. Given the self imposed limits by banks on 
lending  to  each  other,  if  a  few  banks  attempt  to  raise  a  large  volume  of  funds  from  the  inter-bank 
market , there could be volatility in interest rates. Banks should not often rely on a potentially volatile 
call  money  market  as  an  alternative  to  mobilizing  deposits  or  exploring  other  funding  sources.  The 
heavy reliance by some banks on the call money market drives short term interest rates and make 
borrowing  costs  to  investors  and  business  community  to  very  high  levels.  The  volatility  in  the  call 
market also creates uncertainty among the businesses and that adds to inflationary expectations. 
Forex market 
Given the current account imbalances, there is a mismatch in foreign exchange inflows and outflows. 
Sri  Lanka’s  foreign  exchange  market  is  not  deep  enough  to  absorb  relatively  large  transactions, 
though its size and operations have gradually increased. In such a market, huge speculative trades 
could be rather disturbing and they could move the exchange rate against economic fundamentals. No 
doubt,  forex  market  is  a  key  source  of  foreign  exchange  income  to  banks.  Its  price,  which  is  the 
exchange rate, is determined according to demand and supply forces. CBSL recognizes that demand 
and  supply  forces  should  be  allowed  to  determine  the  exchange  rate  and  that  some  amount  of 
speculative trading is needed to develop the market. When there are trade bills of customers or banks 
themselves  and,  if  banks  do  not  have  adequate  forex  with  them,  it  is  natural  to  borrow  from  the 
market. However, more often than not, traders/dealers speculate to make short-term gains in the forex 
market and try to drive the exchange rate to levels which they prefer it to be. Banks should earn profits 
and be financially viable. CBSL wishes to see a well-capitalized and profitable banking sector. In many 
instances, it was noted that the exchange rate depreciates to levels which are not in line with inflation 
differentials of our trading partners measured through the real effective exchange rate. This could be 
due to market domination by a few dealers who wish to earn unusually high profits. 
Needless  to  say  that  exchange  rate  depreciation  on  a  continuous  basis  makes  imports  more 
expensive  given  the  high  import  content  of  Sri  Lanka’s  trade  basket.  High  import  expenditure  has 
cascading effects on all imports, including oil and other intermediary goods imports. Then the cost is 
felt by entrepreneurs, industries, investors, and finally by the whole country. Banks operating in the 
forex  market  therefore,  should  not  only  be  concerned  of  their  profits  but  also  of  their  public  policy 
responsibilities. In their own interest too, banks should be mindful of the uncertainties they create in 
the  forex  market  which  is  not  conducive  to  its  smooth  operations  and,  therefore,  the  perception  by 
international markets and investors. 
As you are aware, worker remittance has financed around 69% of Sri Lanka’s trade deficit. There has 
been an increase in worker remittances in the recent past responding to active promotional campaign 
launched  by  CBSL  with  the  support  of  the  Sri  Lanka  Foreign  Employment  Bureau,  overseas  job 
agencies, foreign missions and the banks. Recently, the number of professionals and skilled worker 
categories were encouraged to take up foreign employment, which is catching up fast. Banks should 
make  extra  efforts  to  mobilize  their  remittances,  as  this  will  add  to  their  fee-based  income  through 
enhanced financial services. The increase in remittances will have a beneficial impact in reducing the 
current account deficit and creating a greater stability in the foreign exchange market. 
Govt. securities market 
Commercial banks and a few non-banks are the primary dealers who buy and sell Govt. securities and 
create  secondary  transactions  in  this  market.  The  Govt.,  tends  to  borrow  from  the  debt  securities 
market which is non inflationary. It appears that there are market collusion and cartel type operations 
which tend to drive returns on treasury bills and bonds to levels which are not in line with the current 
and expected movements in key macro variables. Often, CBSL has to reject bids because of the very 
high bidding rates quoted by primary dealers. CBSL is the banker to the Govt. When market collusion 
does  not  enable  the  Govt.,  to  borrow  at  reasonable  rates,  CBSL  has  to  take  treasury  bills  which 
inflating  financing,  as  it  compels  CBSL  to  issue  reserve  money  into  the  system  which  has  multiple 
effects in increasing money supply and liquidity in the system. Primary dealers, specially the banks, 
BIS Review 55/2007 
 3
have  a  responsible  role  to  play  in  this  regard  and  be  mindful  of  unusually  high  bidding  and  its 
repercussions on the whole economy. 
Investors and the business sector 
5. 
One way of beating inflation is to enhance productivity. Improvements to the factor productivity should 
be  introduced  using  improved  technology  and  higher  productivity  methods.  Investing  in  technology 
today will not only increase productivity but also help lowering product prices. They may have to look 
for foreign collaboration, joint ventures and partnerships if additional funding and technical skills are 
not available within the country. They should also facilitate investments outside the Western province 
and promote regional development and employment generation in outstations while using factors of 
production available in such areas. 
Businesses  and  investors  have  many  opportunities  under  the  Public  Private  Partnership  (PPP) 
program.  Given  the  Govt.’s  commitment  to  commence  large  infrastructure  projects  during  this  year 
and some in 2008, the private investors and businesses could contribute to the development process, 
in particular, by participating in infrastructure projects through PPPs. It will help reduce financing of 
capital expenditure by the Govt. 
Businesses  should  continue  to  focus  attention  on  improving,  branding,  investing  in  research  and 
development,  and  promote  innovation.  Businesses  should  increase  efficiency  of  resource  usage  by 
reducing waste. Waste add to cost of production of goods and services. For instance, post harvest 
losses  in  perishable  agricultural  products  is  estimated  to  be  around  30%-40%  which  has  been 
repeatedly articulated by CBSL in its past annual reports. Businesses should also attempt to shift from 
the  traditional  methods  of  employing  labour  and  capital  towards  IT-based  new  technologies.  In 
addition, knowledge based product markets should be developed to attract business and knowledge 
processing centres. Such activities would not only bring in additional sources of foreign exchange, but 
will also move production processes towards high tech methods. 
6.  
Households and the general public 
Misconceptions about the term inflation 
Inflation is interpreted in various ways by various circles. The price tags on products and services in 
shops, supermarkets and service centres is not the inflation but it is the rate of increase in prices. In 
other words, it refers to a continuous growth in general price levels in the economy. Households and 
the general public should also recognize that short term shocks like droughts, floods and landslides 
could  temporary  raise  the  prices  of  basic  food  items  but  it  will  stabilize  when  situation  is  back  to 
normal. The high prices at a given point in time should not be construed as inflation and they need not 
build-up inflationary expectations. 
Reducing inflationary expectations 
The self-fulfilling prophecy that inflation is continuing to rise will eventually result in high inflation. All 
stakeholders are informed that action has been taken to reduce inflation by relevant authorities and 
that there is hope of bringing it down. 
In  essence,  inflation  is  eroding  the  value  of  assets,  wealth  and  profits  of  the  financial  institutions, 
businesses, investors and public at large. Inflation can only be beaten with adequate commitment by 
all stakeholders. 
4 
 BIS Review 55/2007
