Radovan Jelašić: Developments in the Serbian banking sector 
Speech by Mr Radovan Jelašić, Governor of the National Bank of Serbia, at the Annual Assembly of 
the Association of Serbian Banks, Belgrade, 29 May 2007. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, esteemed fellow bankers, 
A very successful year is behind us, and even more successful ahead of us. 
Macroeconomic  data  to  corroborate  such  conviction  are  presented  in  the  material  prepared  for  the 
ASB Assembly. On this occasion, however, I wish to discuss a subject rarely discussed, the subject 
that represents a real revolution behind the scene and is called monetary policy. Except for bankers 
and  those  well-informed,  hardly  anyone  is  aware  that  the  NBS  has  been  managing  a)  monetary 
aggregates, as well as b) the exchange rate primarily, or almost solely, through monetary policy. The 
best  proof  lies  in  the  fact  that  in  almost  three  months  the  NBS  engaged  in  trading  in  the  foreign 
exchange market on two occasions only and for well known reasons. I truly find it a joke when even 
today  some  people  talk  about  “unrealistic  exchange  rate”  and  volunteer  estimates  of  what  the 
exchange  rate  should  be.  Nobody  even  noticed  that  monetary  policy  has  finally  entered  the  21st 
century, not to mention that nobody even bothered to praise us for such achievement. Never before 
has there been any talk about documents, such as Inflation Report, within the NBS walls. Moreover, 
many of our colleagues find it difficult to volunteer any opinion, while others are wondering how the 
exchange rate manages to remain stable without the NBS intervening in the process. All of the above 
goes to prove that the NBS is finally on the right track to becoming a real adjudicator rather than a 
player – which is, after all, its actual role. 
It comes as no surprise to me that the politicians, hungry for self promotion, talk of substantial price 
that has been paid by the NBS for achievement of price stability, as this only speaks of their ignorance 
of  the  role  of  a  central  bank,  which  is  one  of  the  first  lessons  in  textbooks  on  banking.  One  of  the 
reasons  for  attending  annual  meetings  of  the  IMF  and  World  Bank  is,  inter  alia,  to  talk  to  Mr. 
Greenspan, the legendary Chairman of the Federal Reserve, who told me a month ago at a dinner 
party  in  Washington:  “By definition,  politicians  do  not  understand  monetary  policy  –  otherwise,  they 
would not be politicians“! Still, I find it very surprising that a country, such as Serbia, should have so 
many “professors” and “experts” on monetary policy who are a disgrace to their own profession and 
the very subject matter that they have been teaching their students for decades. As with the banking 
sector  reform,  I  never  expected  to  get  much  support,  but  neither  did  I  expect  to  get  so  little  of  it. 
Fortunately, we enjoy tremendous support from our citizens and that is most important to us.  
Let me now turn to the banking sector and speak of how I see its further development. Though the 
largest and the most spectacular part of the banking sector restructuring has already been completed, 
its fine tuning is a challenge that should on no account be underestimated, and there are quite a few 
details to tackle not only in 2007, but until the end of the decade.  
Ownership structure 
1.  
As an indispensable, albeit insufficient, prerequisite for banking sector reform, transformation of the 
ownership structure paved the way for a modern and stable banking sector. Nearly 80% of the Serbian 
banking  sector  has, so  to  say,  already  joined  the  European  Union,  as  it  is  in majority  ownership of 
strategic investors from the EU member countries. 
Some challenges still remain, such as: 
• 
The Republic of Serbia has to define its further strategy clearly in terms of both majority and 
minority interest in banks;  
The National Bank of Serbia has set a deadline until 30 June this year to all qualified holders 
of more than 5% interest, as specified by the recently adopted Banking Law (15% before), 
for submission of necessary documents for the purpose of assessing their financial standing, 
reputation and investment strategy.  
The  frequency  and  method  of  capital  increases,  as  well  as  the  capital  adequacy  ratio  of 
some banks confirm that some bank owners are interested only in fast price gains from their 
  BIS Review 56/2007 
 1
stock of shares and hope to re-sell them and make a quick buck. It remains yet to be seen 
whether  such  banks  will  be  able  to  find  strategic  partners  or  fight  increasingly  stronger 
competition.  
At this stage of the banking sector development, strategic investors show interest in both purchasing 
existing banks and setting up new institutions based on greenfield licenses. Surely, this will not only 
boost the level of competitiveness of the Serbian banking sector, which is one of the key NBS goals, 
but also ensure a wider range and better quality of banking services and products for Serbian citizens. 
The National Bank does not expect a significant drop in the number of banks in the forthcoming period 
as there are equal chances of local banks being acquired by competitors as of the prime-rate strategic 
investors applying for a greenfield license. 
Competitiveness and profitability 
2.  
Both the decline in inflation (and the key policy rate that led to a fall in the weighted average interest 
rate from 18.15% to 12.95% in the past seven months), and the rise in income from increased number 
of employees and new business units, will have a major influence on the commercial bank profit and 
loss  account  as  early  as  in  this  year.  Taking  into  account  interest  of  some  banks  to  position 
themselves well in our market irrespective of current losses but with a view to the expected growth of 
Serbian economy on the longer run, the real battle for clients is yet to begin. Coupled with increasingly 
aggressive lending, relatively high fixed costs in the banking sector will be a great challenge for banks 
not only from the aspect of their profit and loss account, but also from the standpoint of their market 
positioning. Profit margins earned in 2005 are ancient history now, and so will soon be those earned in 
2006 – profits will be based primarily on the volume of operations, and not on the of margin levels. 
Competition will slice profitability of some banks, and I sincerely hope that taboos such as costs of a) 
running  current  accounts,  b)  administrative  injunction  for  payment,  v)  money  transfers,  g)  loan 
processing, etc. will soon be on the table again!  
Transparency and education 
3.  
The best way to boost competition in the banking sector is by improving transparency and educating 
consumers  of  financial  services.  Transparent  market  of  services  and  educated  consumers  are 
essential for building an efficient banking and financial sector. In a maze of commissions, nominal and 
effective  interest  rates,  one-off  costs,  etc.  it  is  difficult  for  citizens,  even  those  holding  a  degree,  to 
decide on which service is best to choose. Bearing in mind that many of them are turning to those 
services for the first time after more than a decade, and that some banking products such as mortgage 
loans are in most cases used once in a lifetime, the responsibility of banks and the National Bank of 
Serbia in respect of enhanced transparency and education becomes even greater. This means that 
banks should provide full and clear information on their services in a simple and understandable way 
to enable their clients to compare offer terms for different products as well as for the same product by 
different banks and be able to make informed decisions. At the same time, the customer is educated 
and his sense of responsibility for his own decision and the risk that it involves is developed. 
All  developed  countries  are  challenged  with  increased  transparency  and  improved  consumer 
education, and  their central  banks,  from  ECB,  Bank of  England and  the  FED, keep reiterating  their 
significance.  
I truly believe, and my belief is based on discussions with hundreds of financial services consumers, 
that  banks  need  to  be  more  proactive  in  their  public  relations  in  order  to  change  the  image  of  the 
banking profession. Banks have to respond to all criticism, comments and complaints, they have to 
defend their line of business and, above all, they have to provide full information to their clients. In this 
respect, I welcome the ASB’s Code of Professional Banking Conduct which sets a good example of 
self-regulation,  and  at  the  same  time,  reduces  pressures  on  the  National  Bank  as  the  regulatory 
authority.  Nevertheless,  the  NBS  will  continue  to  insist  on  disclosure  of  the  effective  interest  rate, 
education of bank clients, as well as on fast and efficient processing of customer complaints! 
2 
 BIS Review 56/2007
NBS regulations 
4.  
Six  years  of  transition  and  the  current  level  of  development  of  the  banking  sector  call  for  another 
systematic review of all NBS regulations. Another reason for such general review is the introduction of 
Basel II in Serbia. It is expected that this strategy will be implemented primarily through banks with 
adequate risk management system and using it as a platform for more efficient risk management in 
their home countries, i.e. EU member countries. The review of the regulatory framework should go in 
three directions: 
• 
• 
Commercial banks ought to be given greater flexibility in assessing their risks exposure;  
The number of reports submitted to the NBS and the frequency of their submission have to 
be rationalized,  
Regulations in the area of supervision should aim primarily at liquidity and solvency of the 
banking sector, and not at macroeconomic issues.  
 Needless to say that communication and mutual understanding are essential to the success and that 
the above revision has to be done in full cooperation with commercial banks. 
Unfortunately, stability is valued in Serbia only once it is lost! Events of the second week of May and 
an unexpected flashback into the nineties which, thank Lord, lasted for several days only, proved that 
there are no guarantees and that politics has a significant impact on movements in the exchange rate 
of the dinar and on the stock exchange. I sincerely hope that not only the citizens and all institutions, 
but politicians as well, will all learn a good lesson from events of that notorious week. All of us in the 
NBS most certainly have! 
The last, but not least, I wish you a successful and profitable business year – and as I can see, its 
onset  is  promising  –  and  we,  on  our  part,  shall  do  everything  in  our  power  to  uphold  our  legal 
obligation and sustain stability! 
Thank you! 
BIS Review 56/2007 
 3
