Anwar Al-Sadah: Bloomberg Discussion Forum “Sharia Alternative Asset 
Management” 
Speech by His Excellency Anwar Al-Sadah, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Bahrain, at the 
Bloomberg Discussion Forum “Sharia Alternative Asset Management”, Sakhir, 22 May 2007. 
 Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen – Good Afternoon. 
It is a pleasure for me to be here with you today, and to be able to participate in this Bloomberg forum 
on  Sharia  alternative  asset  management.  I  should  like  to  thank  the  organizers  for  putting  together 
today’s interesting programme, and very much look forward to interacting with you, the industry, on 
this topical subject. 
I should also like to pass on the apologies of the Governor of the Central Bank, Rasheed Al-Maraj, 
who was meant to be with us today – but who unfortunately now has to attend a meeting in Kuwait. 
I  believe  this  conference  is  particularly  well  timed. You  need  no  reminding  that  the current  regional 
macro-environment  remains  extremely  positive.  A  combination  of  high  liquidity  and  moves  towards 
structural  reforms  has  generated  high growth  rates and,  for  the  first  time,  significant  levels  of  intra-
regional investment. With export revenues at record highs, the GCC countries have been recording 
current account surpluses larger than China’s for the past three years. In the meantime, inflation has 
been kept under control. 
Not  surprisingly,  this  buoyant  macro-economic  environment  has  benefited  the  financial  sector.  To 
quote just a few numbers, financial sector assets in Bahrain grew by over a quarter last year; financial 
sector employment grew by a fifth; and 51 new financial sector licenses were issued. 
Within this overall picture, the Islamic financial sector has continued to develop strongly, beyond its 
niche  status.  Increasingly,  regional  investors  are  looking  to  invest  in  a  Sharia  compliant  manner, 
providing the products are competitive. They are also being joined by international investors, looking 
for diversification. 
Buoyed by strong investor demand, Islamic investment funds thus currently represent a fast growing 
element within the Islamic financial sector, albeit from a low base. 
Products have proliferated in recent years, with investors now able to place their savings in a wide 
range  of  Shari’a  compliant  funds,  including  equity,  commodity,  real  estate  and  Ijarah  –  i.e. 
leasing-funds. The growing number of major international financial services firms entering this market, 
and the establishment of credible Islamic equity benchmarks such as the Dow Jones Islamic market 
index and the FTSE Global Islamic Index Series, also testify to the firm foothold that this market has 
now gained. 
In  Bahrain,  Islamic  funds currently  represent  some US$1  billion  in  assets,  out  of  the  $9 billion  plus 
invested  in  CBB-registered  funds.  In  global  terms  these  remain  small  numbers,  of  course,  but  the 
average annual growth in Islamic fund assets has exceeded 20% a year over the past five years. 
Within  this  broad  picture,  the  outlook  for  alternative  asset  management  in  the  region  also  looks 
positive, in my view. The excesses experienced in several of the region’s stock markets during 2004-
06  have  now  largely  been  eliminated.  With  more  realistic  valuations  and  returns  now  being 
experienced  regionally,  international  alternative  investment  managers  are  able  to  compete  more 
effectively for regional investors’ attention. 
The experiences of the past two to three years have also helped mature the investor base. They are 
more sensitive to the need for expert managers, and the relationship between risk and reward. Finally, 
of  course,  the  strong  growth  in  institutional  liquidity  and  private  wealth  of  the  past  few  years  has 
created new demand for alternative investment vehicles. 
The CBB has long-supported the investment funds industry in Bahrain, and we are currently working 
to ensure that the regulatory framework is suited to today’s environment. 
Back in the 1990s, Bahrain was the first regional jurisdiction to create a credible regulatory framework 
for the regulation and supervision of collective investment schemes. 
BIS Review 53/2007 
 1
Bahrain’s success to date as the region’s leading funds centre is a testament to that commitment. As 
of end-April 2007, 2,294 funds were authorized by the CBB, of which 102 were locally domiciled funds 
– by far and away the largest concentration of locally domiciled funds in the GCC. 
In recent years, various initiatives have been undertaken to facilitate the continued development of this 
sector. 
These  have  included  the  streamlining  of  the  authorization  and  commercial  registration  process  for 
mutual funds; and the creation in 2004 of a new corporate vehicle – the so-called Special Purpose 
Vehicle  (SPV)  –  that  was  better  suited  to  mutual  funds  than  the  corporate  vehicles  previously 
available. In 2006, a new investment business rulebook was issued, creating a comprehensive and up 
to date framework for investment business licensees, one better adapted to activities such as asset 
management, funds administration and custody services. 
This  year,  we  have  been  working  on  updating  our  collective  investment  scheme  regulations,  first 
introduced  in  the  1990s.  Whilst  they  created  a  strong  base  on  which  an  investment  funds  industry 
could grow, the original regulations were geared towards retail funds and were thus increasingly ill-
adapted to the evolution of this sector. 
A key objective of the new regulations, therefore, has been to widen the range of schemes permitted. 
Besides retail schemes, the new regulations will also authorize expert schemes. These will be subject 
to less restrictive investment guidelines, compared to those applied to retail schemes, but in return will 
be subject to some limitations as to their investor base. 
The regulations will also create a category of exempt schemes, formally recognizing for the first time 
the  likes  of hedge  funds: exempt schemes  will  not require  authorization,  nor will  they be  regulated. 
However, exempt schemes may only be sold to institutions and high net worth individuals, and will be 
required to register with the CBB, in order to allow monitoring of market developments. 
These regulations, I am pleased to say, have now been finalized, following the consultation exercise 
which took place earlier this year, and will be issued by the end of this month. We believe that they 
represent a significant step forward in the regulatory framework for funds and alternative investment 
vehicles, and will create a straightforward and proportionate framework within which the industry can 
work and grow. 
I should like to close these opening remarks by noting another important on-going initiative, specifically 
relevant  to  Islamic  funds.  These  are  the  separate  projects  currently  underway  between  the 
International  Islamic  Financial  Market,  based  here  in  Bahrain,  with  the  international  industry 
associations ISDA and ICMA (the International Capital Market Association). 
These  projects,  which  the  CBB  is  actively  supporting,  are  geared  at  developing  a  number  of 
standardized Islamic contracts and their associated documentation. It is often said that Islamic finance 
requires  greater  standardization  in  these  areas,  if  it  is  to  continue  growing  successfully.  These 
initiatives are aimed at doing just that, and will help reduce risks and costs for persons undertaking 
Sharia compliant transactions. 
In  conclusion,  the  region  as  a  whole  is  experiencing  unique  conditions.  Most  obviously,  liquidity  is 
extremely high, and with it the associated demand for alternative investments. But for the first time you 
are  seeing  real  reforms  and  an  opening  up  of  regional  markets,  creating  the  opportunity  for  local 
investments and local funds, catering to both regional and international investors. 
Finally, here in Bahrain, we continue to work to ensure that our regulatory framework remains the best 
and most straightforward in the region, enabling operators to make the most of these opportunities and 
best serve investors’ needs. 
On this note, I should like to thank for your attention, and I look forward to taking your questions. 
2 
 BIS Review 53/2007
