David Dodge: Monetary policy and developments in the global and Canadian 
economies 
Remarks  by  Mr  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Canadian  Netherlands 
Business and Professional Association, and the European Union Chamber of Commerce in Toronto, 
Toronto, 25 January 2007. 
 Good afternoon. I'm happy to be here in Toronto to take part in your Outlook 2007 event. I'd like to 
begin with a few words about the framework that guides the Bank of Canada in conducting monetary 
policy.  After  this  brief  introduction,  I  will  spell  out  the  Bank's  interpretation  of  recent  economic 
developments and our outlook for 2007 and 2008, both in Canada and elsewhere. Then, I'll say just a 
few  words  on  another 
the 
interdependencies  of  the  global  economy,  and  thus  to  strengthen  the  surveillance  function  of  the 
International Monetary Fund. Finally, I will open the floor for your questions and comments. 
improve  our  understanding  of 
the  need 
important 
topic  – 
to 
A framework for monetary policy 
So  let  me  begin  by  discussing  our  framework  for  monetary  policy.  The  Bank  of  Canada  has  been 
around  for  over  70  years.  Throughout  this  period,  the  Bank  has  had  one  over-arching  mandate:  to 
promote the economic and financial welfare of Canadians. Over the years, we have learned that the 
best contribution that monetary policy can make in this regard is to give Canadians confidence in the 
future value of their money. We do this by keeping inflation low, stable, and predictable. 
In  earlier  decades,  the  Bank  of  Canada  tried  various  approaches  to  achieving  price  stability  by 
controlling  variables  that  indirectly  affected  prices.  For  example,  in  the  1970s,  the  Bank  aimed  to 
control the growth of monetary aggregates. But there were problems with all the methods we tried. 
Finally, at the beginning of the 1990s, the Bank decided that the best way to achieve price stability 
was  to  target  inflation  directly.  We  reached  a  formal  agreement  with  the  federal  government  that 
spelled out the details of our inflation-targeting system. This agreement has been renewed four times. 
The latest renewal occurred last year, and extends through to the end of 2011. In that renewal, we 
agreed to continue our policy of targeting consumer price inflation at the 2 per cent midpoint of a 1 to 3 
per cent target range over the medium term.  
We also set out a research program to explore whether our very good policy framework can be made 
even better. In particular, we want to examine the potential costs and benefits of moving to a lower 
inflation target, and the potential costs and benefits of pursuing a price-level path instead of an annual 
inflation  target.  That  said,  the  research  would  need  to  uncover  compelling  evidence  in  favour  of  a 
change  before  we  would  want  to  alter  the  system  that  has  proven  so  successful  over  the  past  15 
years. 
A key part of that success is that the framework sets out a rather simple paradigm that allows people 
to  understand  and  predict  how  the  Bank  will  react  to  economic  developments.  If  the  economy  is 
moving above the limits of its capacity, so that the trend of inflation is threatening to move above our 
target, we tend to raise interest rates, all other things equal. This restrains demand in the economy 
and brings demand back into balance with supply, thus reducing inflationary pressures. Conversely, if 
the  economy  is  moving  below  its  capacity  limits  and  the  trend  of  inflation  is  likely  to  fall  below  the 
target, we tend to lower interest rates. This stimulates demand and brings it back in line with supply, 
thus increasing inflationary pressures. 
This  simple  paradigm  is  very  helpful  because  monetary  policy  works  better  when  it  is  understood. 
Because people understand the paradigm, they can anticipate how we will react to events that have 
an impact on inflation in Canada. Once every quarter, we spell out our views about where we see the 
starting  point  for  the  economy  in  terms  of  the  balance  between  total  demand  and  supply,  and  our 
base-case projection for how we see the economy evolving. Last week, we published our most recent 
outlook in our Monetary Policy Report Update. Let me now take you through that document, and talk 
about our base-case projection for the global and Canadian economies. 
BIS Review 10/2007 
 1
Recent economic developments and outlook 
I'll begin with the global economy. Over the past five years, global growth has been very strong, and 
this  growth  has  continued  in  recent  months.  Overseas,  growth  in  the  euro  area  has  been  slightly 
stronger than expected, while growth in China has continued to outperform expectations. In Japan, we 
have  seen  encouraging  signs  that  business  investment  and  exports  remain  strong,  although 
household consumption has been weaker than expected. Global growth likely exceeded 5 per cent in 
2006. Our base-case projection is that the world economy will expand by about 4 3/4 per cent this 
year, and by about 4 1/2 per cent next year – a more sustainable pace.  
The strong growth of recent years has had several important implications for Canada. It boosted the 
prices of many of the commodities that we export – including oil and natural gas. This led to strong 
increases in our terms of trade and to a corresponding rise in the external value of our currency. But 
more  recently,  some  of  these  effects  have  begun  to  ease  slightly  amid  signs  of  moderating  global 
demand and, in some cases, increased supply. Oil prices have come down from their highs, as have 
some metals prices. This has led to a recent reduction in our terms of trade, a decline in the external 
value of our currency, and a slowing in nominal GDP growth, implying reduced growth of government 
revenues. 
For Canada, the performance of the U.S. economy is crucial to our prospects, so let me turn to the 
situation there. After a strong start to 2006, U.S. economic growth moderated. This moderation largely 
reflected a substantial downturn in the U.S. housing market and a cyclical slowdown in the market for 
automobiles. There are two important points to be made here. First, there is little evidence that the 
weakness  in  these  two  sectors  has  spread  to  the  rest  of  the  U.S.  economy.  Indeed,  household 
consumption has remained firm, backed by employment gains seen in a very healthy service sector. 
Second,  recent  evidence  suggests  that  a  significant  portion  of  the  adjustment  in  these  sectors  has 
already taken place. The adjustment in the automotive sector appears to be well advanced, and the 
housing sector is working through its adjustment. This bodes well for the U.S. outlook. Our base-case 
projection  is  that  real  GDP  growth  should  recover  to  the  rate  of  growth  in  potential  output  by  the 
second half of 2007, before moving slightly above potential growth through 2008. On an annual basis, 
growth is projected to be 2.5 per cent in 2007 and 3.2 per cent in 2008. 
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  Canadian  economy.  In  the  second  half  of  2006,  final  domestic  demand  for 
Canadian goods and services continued to grow robustly. But Canadian businesses began to reduce 
production of a number of goods and to reduce their rate of inventory investment. Much of the impetus 
for  this  reduction  was  the  slowdown  in  U.S.  demand  for  automobiles  and  housing.  The  inventory 
correction and lower exports served to restrain real GDP growth in Canada in the second half of 2006. 
When  Statistics  Canada  publishes  the  national  accounts  data  for  2006,  we  expect  it  to  show  that 
growth for the second half averaged about 1.6 per cent.  
In line with the paradigm I outlined earlier, we looked at the implications of these developments, and at 
many other pieces of information, in order to determine the starting point for the level of total demand 
relative to supply. The Bank's conventional measure of the output gap suggests that the economy was 
operating just above its production potential in the fourth quarter. There have also been other signs of 
upward pressures on capacity and inflation. In our winter Business Outlook Survey, the percentage of 
companies reporting that they would have difficulty in meeting an unanticipated increase in demand 
was still above average. The employment-to-population ratio stayed very high in December compared 
with  historical  experience,  while  the  unemployment  rate  was  at  a  30-year  low.  Finally,  the  Bank's 
measure of core inflation – which we use as an operational guide – had remained slightly above 2 per 
cent, and above our earlier expectations, because of pressure from prices for shelter and some other 
services. 
On the other hand, there were also some signs of downward pressure on inflation. There has been an 
easing  in  the  underlying  trend  increase  in  wages  in  recent  months.  And  the  percentage  of  firms 
reporting  labour  shortages  in  the  Bank's  winter  Survey  was  slightly  below  average.  Overall,  our 
judgment is that the economy was operating right at, or just slightly above, the limits of its capacity at 
the end of 2006. 
That's a quick look backwards. Now, let me turn to the Bank's base-case projection for the rest of this 
year and for 2008. Overall, we project that real GDP growth will pick up during 2007, averaging about 
2 1/2 per cent in the first half of this year, and about 2 3/4 per cent in the second half. The detailed 
breakdown  can  be  found  in  the  Update,  but  the  bottom  line  is  that  we  project  that  the  Canadian 
economy will continue to operate close to its production capacity through to the end of 2008.  
2 
 BIS Review 10/2007
The Bank projects that core inflation will stabilize at close to 2 per cent as pressures from house prices 
ease  and  the  economy  remains  near  potential.  Total  consumer  price  inflation  will  continue  to  be 
affected  by  movements  in  energy  prices  and,  for  the  first  half  of  the  year,  by  last  year's  cut  in  the 
Goods  and  Services  Tax.  Overall,  given  recent  energy  prices  in  futures  markets,  total  inflation  is 
projected to average just above 1 per cent in the first half of the year, before returning to the 2 per cent 
target in 2008. 
That's a look at our base-case economic projection. But if there's one thing we can be certain about, 
it's that the economy will not evolve exactly as set out in our base case. So a very important part of our 
outlook is the assessment of the risks surrounding our projection. There are risks on both the upside 
and  the  downside.  The  main  risks  are  the  ones  that  we  have  been  talking  about  for  the  past  six 
months or so.  
The main upside risk to our inflation projection comes from stronger household demand in Canada. 
With the increases in house prices in many parts of the country, consumption could be stronger than 
expected as households borrow against the increased equity in their homes. There has been strong 
growth in various indicators of household credit over the past year, although the pace of growth has 
eased in recent months, and we have seen a slight deceleration in the annual rate of increase of new 
house  prices  more  recently.  So  while  this  main  upside  risk  remains,  it  appears  to  have  diminished 
somewhat since October. 
The main downside risk continues to come from the United States, where clear weakness remains in 
the housing sector. But there are some encouraging signs. As I mentioned earlier, the slowdown in the 
U.S. housing and automotive sectors does not appear to have spread more broadly. There is evidence 
that a significant portion of the adjustment in the automotive sector has already taken place, while the 
adjustment in the housing sector continues. So, in the Bank's judgment, the main downside risk to our 
inflation projection for Canada does remain, but it has also diminished. Overall, we judge that the risks 
to our inflation outlook are roughly balanced.  
In addition to these risks, we are faced with a great deal of uncertainty about the trend growth rate of 
potential  output  in  Canada.  We  are  fairly  confident  in  our  assessment  of  the  contribution  of  labour 
force growth to future potential output. However, there is a lot of uncertainty about the trend rate of 
productivity growth. We use the past trend rate – roughly 1.5 per cent – as the basis for our projection 
of future productivity growth. But recent data on productivity have been disappointing. It is unclear how 
much of this weak performance is caused by cyclical factors that will be reversed in due course, and 
how much represents a permanent downward shift in the trend rate of productivity growth. Adding to 
the  uncertainty  is  the  way  the  data  tend  to  be  revised  over  time.  Remember  that  you  calculate 
productivity  by  dividing  total  output  by  total  hours  worked.  Both  numbers  are  revised  over  time, 
sometimes  fairly  dramatically.  This  makes  the  challenge  of  understanding  what's  happening  to  the 
trend rate of productivity growth more difficult. 
Finally, there does remain a possibility of a disorderly resolution of global imbalances. In general, the 
term "global imbalances" refers to the large and persistent current account deficit seen in the United 
States that is mirrored by current account surpluses in Asia and many oil-exporting countries. These 
current-account imbalances have resulted from imbalances in global savings and investment. While 
the U.S. economy has seen very strong domestic consumption and negative savings in recent years, 
many other economies – particularly in Asia and the OPEC nations – have seen too much saving and 
not enough domestic consumption. This global savings glut outside the United States has contributed 
to low long-term interest rates and to what some observers have called a "wall of liquidity" that has led 
to strong investment flows into many assets, and higher prices for these assets. 
As long as market participants have reason to believe that policy-makers will take appropriate actions, 
there is no reason to expect that these imbalances won't be unwound in a gradual and orderly way. 
Indeed,  this  is  what  the  Bank's  base-case  assumes.  So  far,  financial  markets  have  handled  these 
imbalances smoothly. This smooth handling of global imbalances has been helped by innovations in 
financial markets that have led to new ways to price and transfer risk. Currently, there is little evidence 
to  suggest  that  these  risks  are  being  distributed  inappropriately  across  the  global  economy.  But 
assessing such risks is very difficult. It requires the ability to conduct analysis at a global level and a 
real  understanding  of  the  interdependencies  in  the  global  economy.  National  authorities,  here  in 
Canada and elsewhere, do their best to carry out this analysis. But this analysis can be greatly helped 
by an organization with global reach, and which is dedicated to looking at the global economy as a 
whole. This organization already exists – it is the International Monetary Fund. 
BIS Review 10/2007 
 3
Strengthening the International Monetary Fund 
In recent years, there have been some who have called into question the relevance of the IMF. But at 
the Bank of Canada, we believe that the IMF still has an important role to play. The danger posed by 
global imbalances shows that we need an international institution charged with supporting the smooth 
functioning of the global economy. 
Now, it is true that the IMF does need to change if it is to better carry out this task. At the Bank of 
Canada, we have spent a great deal of effort over the past year or so thinking about this topic. We 
believe  that  a  strengthened  IMF  can  best  support  the  global  economy  by  improving  the  way  it 
conducts  surveillance.  The  Fund  has  a  very  important  role  to  play  in  analyzing  spillovers  and 
interdependencies. And it is the only institution that can perform this role: it is global in scope, and it 
regularly convenes the national authorities from the world's most important economies. 
So how can we best accomplish the goal of strengthening Fund surveillance? I would say two things. 
First, the IMF needs to update the rules for conducting surveillance. We need a clear statement that 
surveillance will focus on exchange rate, monetary, fiscal, and financial policies, and on whether or not 
a  country's  policy  choices  are  coherent.  This  is  not  just  because  these  policies  can  affect  other 
members  of  the  global  economy,  but  also  because  these  global  effects  can,  in  turn,  have 
repercussions for a country's own economic prospects. 
Second, the Fund should adopt the idea of setting out an annual work program for surveillance. Each 
year,  the  members,  along  with  the  Managing  Director  and  staff,  would  update  and  specify  –  in 
concrete and transparent terms – the objectives and priorities of surveillance for that year. 
I  mention  these  issues  today  because  we  have  a  window  of  opportunity  to  move  forward  on  IMF 
reform. There is today, at least in some quarters, a willingness to strengthen this institution, to make it 
more  relevant.  As  the  world's  economies  become  increasingly  globalized,  I  would  argue  that  now, 
more than ever, a strengthened IMF is in every country's interest. The risk of a disorderly resolution of 
global  imbalances  may  be  relatively  small,  but  it  remains  an  important  risk  for  all  economies. 
Strengthening the IMF is one way of reducing this risk. 
4 
 BIS Review 10/2007
