Jean-Claude Trichet: The role of central banks in a globalised economy 
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, on the occasion of the 
13th Conférence de Montréal, Montreal, 18 June 2007. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Thank you for inviting me to the 13th Conference of Montreal hosted by the International Economic 
Forum of the Americas. I am delighted to speak today before such a distinguished audience. I greatly 
appreciate  your  objective  to  organise  wide-ranging  and  open  discussions  on  major  international 
economic  issues.  The  theme  of  this  year’s  conference  –  Succeeding  through  uncertainty:  from  risk 
evaluation to strategic decisions – is a very timely and challenging one. We at the European Central 
Bank often have to navigate uncertainties and find that our monetary policy strategy is of great help in 
setting the course.  
One of the themes most discussed in the conference programme is globalisation, and rightly so given 
its  huge  importance.  I  would  like  to  investigate  with  you  the  role  of  central  banks  in  a  globalised 
economy. First, I will outline some of the features of the debate. Second, I will reflect on the integration 
of  the  euro  area  within  the  globalised  economy.  Third,  I  will  reflect  on  some  of  the  implications  of 
globalisation for central banks.  
led 
trends  which  have 
Globalisation and some of its underlying trends 
1.  
Globalisation  encompasses  several  phenomena  and 
to  a  growing 
interdependence  of  most  economies  throughout  the  world.  It  displays  its  effects  through  a  strong 
increase in cross-border transactions in goods and services, capital, labour and natural resources. I 
would  add  that,  at  the  same  time,  we  are  witnessing  a  substantial  increase  in  the  cross-border 
exchanges  of  ideas  and  concepts  between  the  various  institutions,  organisations  and  non-trading 
companies. The concept of globalisation has been of vital importance over the last 20 years – and has 
been even more so in the last ten years – thanks to a combination of factors, including the diffusion of 
ever  more  sophisticated  and  affordable  information  and  communication  technologies.  The  cost  of 
shipping  goods  has  fallen.  Economies  have  continued  to  open  up  and  many  trade  and  financial 
barriers have been lifted. National barriers to the circulation of goods, services and production factors 
are  diminishing  everywhere.  Foreign  direct  investment  (FDI)  flows  have  also  surged,  leading  to  an 
internationalisation  of  production  processes  and  new  ways  of  doing  business  as  companies  have 
established affiliates abroad both to gain access to foreign markets and to reduce input costs.  
Globalisation has allowed many emerging countries to enter and compete in world markets. In order to 
measure  the  phenomenon  on  a  global  scale,  it  should  be  noted  that  the  labour  force  available  for 
participating in globalised markets has probably doubled from 1.5 billion to 3 billion with the opening-
up of China, India, many formerly centrally planned economies and several other emerging countries. 
Although labour mobility is still limited worldwide, the increased flexibility of capital flows implies that 
firms now have much easier access to global labour supply than before. As a result, many industries 
have set up supply chains on a global scale.  
Let  me  now  provide  you  with  some  figures  to  document  the  magnitude  and  scope  of 
globalisation.  Global  trade  openness  –  measured  as  world  exports  and  imports  of  goods  and 
services  as  a  share  of  world  GDP  –  has  practically  doubled  over  the  last  20  years,  from  33.9%  of 
world  GDP  in  1986  to  60%  of  world  GDP  in  2006.  An  increasingly  decisive  factor  has  been  the 
increase  in  trade  in  intermediate  goods  and  services  as  a  result  of  the  rising  internationalisation  of 
production processes.  
Financial systems have also been deeply affected. As investors’ incentives to hold foreign assets in 
their portfolios and the possibilities to diversify and spread financial risks globally have grown, this has 
affected all facets of financial systems, be it markets, infrastructures or institutions.  
Let  me  briefly  illustrate  some  impressive  developments.  The  share  of  gross  international  asset 
holdings in world GDP – which provides a measure of financial openness – has shown an eightfold 
increase over the last 25 years and now stands at more than 130% of world GDP. As far as global 
capital  flows  are  concerned,  it  is  noteworthy  that  their  composition  has  changed  significantly  over 
BIS Review 68/2007 
 1
recent years. While FDI and international equity flows were dominant in the late 1990s, international 
transactions  in  mainly  liquid  assets  have  risen  in  recent  years,  making  up  most  of  the  increase  in 
global capital movements. International risk-sharing and the transfer of net savings across countries 
are important features of this process.  
Emerging  market  economies  are  gaining  a  larger  share  of  global  GDP.  Aggregated  data  show  that 
they  posted  net  private  capital  flows  of  USD  650  billion  in  2006  compared  with  USD  458  billion  in 
2005. Net direct investments remained globally unchanged over this period, with net inflows of USD 
267 billion in 2006. Portfolio investments, on the other hand, which include the public sector, recorded 
higher  outflows  in  2006  of  USD  379  billion,  compared  with  USD  258  billion  in  2005,  while  portfolio 
investments  to  emerging  market  economies  decreased  slightly.  On  the  whole,  emerging  market 
economies have most recently been providing the rest of the world with net resources corresponding 
to  their  current  account  surpluses.  The  main  drivers  are  limited  domestic  absorptive  capacities  and 
underdeveloped domestic financial systems.  
Globalisation is fostering economic prosperity and raising living standards through various channels. 
There is stronger international competition and a greater transfer of technology and knowledge. This is 
promoting productivity gains and global economic growth. Higher efficiencies are helping to lower both 
costs  for  firms  and  prices  of  tradables.  The  availability  of  new  product  varieties  is  increasing. 
Resources  are  allocated  to  the  most  profitable  activities  across  the  world,  and  there  are  new 
possibilities to diversify and share risks globally. Also, scrutiny by international investors serves as a 
disciplining device, which enhances the quality of domestic economic policies and thus contributes to 
improved economic fundamentals.  
However, globalisation also presents some challenges and poses some risks. The ever closer global 
integration  and  the  surge  in  capital  mobility  have  rendered  the  international  financial  system  more 
exposed to changes in investor sentiment. Furthermore, international trade and financial links might 
intensify the transmission of shocks from one country to another and amplify cross-border spillover. 
We should not forget that, a few years ago, a number of financial crises posed a major threat to the 
international financial system, including the Asian crisis starting in 1997 and the Russian crisis in 1998. 
Each  of  these  crises  was  different  and  the  international  community  managed  to  resolve  them 
successfully. Each crisis illustrated the need for adequate investment in institutions and human capital 
to strengthen economic governance. I will come back to the impact of major financial crises for central 
banks in my third reflection. Past crises illustrate the vulnerability of the global economic and financial 
system and remind us of the importance of always being alert and never being complacent.  
The integration of the euro area within a globalised economy  
2.  
My second reflection is about the economic and financial links between the euro area and the rest of 
the  world.  I  will  argue  that  integration  within  Europe  has  gone  hand-in-hand  with  the  integration  of 
Europe within the global economy. In trade terms, for example, the euro area is very open vis-à-vis the 
rest of the world; more open than the United States and Japan. Extra-euro area exports of goods and 
services  account  for  around  20%  of  euro  area  GDP,  roughly  the  same  share  as  extra-euro  area 
imports. This is substantially higher than in the United States, where exports of goods and services 
represent about 10% of GDP and imports 16%, as well as in Japan, where total exports amount to 
15%  of  GDP  and  imports  13.4%.  Moreover,  particularly  noteworthy  for  the  euro  area  is  that  the 
increase  in  trade  with  the  rest  of  the  world  has  been  even  greater  than  the  increase  in  exchanges 
within the euro area. 
What is even more remarkable, perhaps, is that the euro area is more financially open than the United 
States and Japan. Let me present four observations. The first observation is that the external assets 
and liabilities of the euro area, as a percentage of GDP, are very large and account for around 124% 
and  137%,  respectively.  By  comparison,  in  the  United  States,  the  corresponding  figures  are 
substantially lower: 90% of GDP for assets and 110% for liabilities. In Japan, foreign financial assets 
are likewise significantly lower than in the euro area (94% of GDP in 2005), and the difference is even 
greater for liabilities, which represent only 60% of GDP, i.e. less than half of the corresponding figure 
for the euro area. This highlights how the euro area is very outward-looking. 
My second observation is that the euro has very probably contributed to the financial opening of the 
euro area. On the assets side, stocks of euro area assets held abroad increased from less than 87% 
of GDP in 1999 to, as mentioned, over 124% in 2005. On the liabilities side, the increase was also 
very substantial, from around 92% to 137%. The rise has actually been much less pronounced for the 
2 
 BIS Review 68/2007
United States: US assets have grown from 80% of GDP in 1999 to 90% today, and US liabilities have 
increased from 91% to 110% of GDP. In other words, the euro area has witnessed a more substantial 
increase since the start of Economic and Monetary Union. 
My third observation is that the euro area is an attractive place for FDI. A breakdown reveals that 
inward FDI amounts to more than 27% of euro area GDP, against 22.5% for the United States. The 
euro area seems to have received, proportionally to GDP, a similar amount of FDI as China – 27.3% 
for both economies – according to IMF statistics. In net terms, the stock of direct investment abroad is 
only slightly higher than that of FDI within the euro area (30.4% against 27.3%, respectively).  
My fourth observation concerns bilateral FDI linkages of the euro area. Based on available data, it is 
worth noting that the stock of euro area FDI abroad is mostly held with mature economies: nearly 21% 
in the United States, 24% in the United Kingdom, 9% in Switzerland, and between 2.5% and 3% in 
Sweden,  Canada  and  Japan.  Likewise,  on  the  liabilities  side,  the  United  Kingdom  and  the  United 
States account for a larger share than on the assets side (nearly 40% and 23.5%, respectively). 
I  should  also  stress  that  the  amount  of  euro  area  FDI  in  emerging  market  economies  rose  quickly. 
Between  1999  and  2005,  outward  FDI  from  the  euro  area  to  the  so-called  BRIC  group  –  which 
includes Brazil, Russia, India and China – increased markedly. Over this period, the stock of outward 
FDI in the BRIC group rose from €63 billion to €133 billion (or by 111%). In comparison, the stock of 
euro  area  FDI  in  the  United  States  increased  by  55%,  from  €360  billion  to  €558  billion,  during  the 
same period.  
The euro area itself has also become more attractive as a destination for FDI from the BRIC countries: 
between 1999 and 2005, FDI stocks from the BRIC group in the euro area tripled, from €4 billion to 
€12 billion. This is still low in comparative terms but is not insignificant. In terms of comparison, the 
figures for US FDI stocks in the euro area rose from €322 billion to €560 billion over the same period. 
Brazilian and Russian firms account for the bulk of the BRIC countries’ FDI surge in the euro area, but 
Chinese and Indian FDI has picked up in recent years.  
On the whole, this evidence suggests that there is no “fortress Europe” or “fortress euro area”  
The implications of globalisation for central banks  
3.  
My  third  reflection  is  about  the  implications  of  globalisation  for  central  banks  in  their  two  principal 
functions, i.e. setting monetary policy and helping to secure financial stability.  
Globalisation and monetary policy. 
The issue of the impact that we have observed for some months of the historic episode of accelerated 
globalisation  on  inflation  is  both  important  and  much  debated.  Economic  theory  has  numerous 
channels  through  which  globalisation can  influence  the  level  of  prices,  but  these  influences  are  not 
one-directional. 
I have already mentioned the basic phenomenon of the increase in the pool of labour available to the 
world  economy  with  the  widespread  opening-up  of  emerging  economies  and  the  former  centrally 
planned economies. The phenomenon exerts pressure, in particular, at the slightest rise in the cost of 
labour,  especially  unskilled  labour.  In  a  more  general  manner,  it  tends  to  modify  significantly  the 
previous  balance  between  capital  and  labour  at  the  global  level.  Globalisation  also  exerts  pressure 
conducive to price stability by strengthening global competition, by reducing the ability of firms to fix 
prices and by exerting pressure on unit production costs in the industrialised countries.  
A third influence, which is in keeping with my previous two points, is that globalisation has also exerted 
a positive effect on the productivity of the global productive sector by facilitating, and accelerating, the 
phenomenon of restructuring and optimisation of the division of labour in a wider cross-border context. 
But it would be naive to think that the effects of globalisation on inflation go in one direction only. 
Indeed, the sudden emergence of fast-growing economies in the global economy is exerting upward 
pressure on prices for mining products and fossil fuels. This phenomenon has been particularly visible 
since 2003. 
The same phenomenon of rising prices is observable in certain areas of agricultural production. The 
attainment of considerably higher living standards by a new and numerous middle class translates into 
major changes in eating habits and, as a result, in the meat, cereal and fresh produce sectors of the 
world economy. 
BIS Review 68/2007 
 3
leading 
technologies  – 
Since  the  theoretical  influences  that  globalisation  can  be  said  to have  on  prices  are  numerous  and 
work in different directions, it might perhaps be natural to suppose that globalisation, as a continuous 
phenomenon with medium-term effects, will translate into substantial changes in relative prices – the 
prices  of  manufactures  falling  and  those  of  oil,  gas  and  certain  commodities  rising  –  without  the 
general level of prices being significantly affected. 
Empirical research does not allow this conjecture to be either irrefutably confirmed or disproved in the 
recent period. All in all, the available data indeed confirm that the prices of manufacturing imports in 
the euro area were at end-2006 still below their 2001 level. Although import prices for raw materials 
have risen strongly since 2003, it can be said that, over the same period, the acceleration in import 
prices overall, all products taken together, has been moderated by the growing proportion of euro area 
imports  coming  from  countries  with  low  production  costs  (countries  in  eastern  Europe  and  Asia, 
particularly China). 
It  remains  that  the  phenomenon  of  globalisation  and  of  its  acceleration  since  the  mid-1990s  has 
coincided with a decline in global inflation and in its volatility. Concomitantly and as a consequence of 
this  stabilisation  of  inflation  at  a  low  level,  we  have  also  seen  lower  volatility  in  macroeconomic 
variables. 
But  it  would  be  wrong  to  conclude  that  this  correlation  between  globalisation  and  low  inflation 
demonstrates a causal relationship. Indeed several other factors – independent of globalisation – can 
be identified as helping to explain these good results. I see at least four.  
In the first place, the very rapid progress in science and technology, in particular information and 
communication 
to  significant  productivity  gains  which  coincide  with 
globalisation and, moreover, are one of its underlying causes. In the second place, structural reforms 
which  have  been  introduced  in  the  industrialised  world  from  the  beginning  of  the  1980s  and  which 
have  gradually  increased  throughout  these  economies.  These  structural  reforms,  like  the  spread  of 
technological  progress,  have  helped  to  increase  the  growth  potential  of  the  economies  and  thus  to 
facilitate  price  stability.  In  the  third  place,  the  greater  budgetary  discipline  which  has  recently 
characterised most economies following the previous period of poor fiscal management. And finally, 
the monetary policy pursued by the central banks and their enhanced credibility. 
I would particularly like to stress the last point. Whatever the influences being exerted in the context of 
globalisation, the basic principle which allows the anchoring of monetary policy remains: in the long 
run, inflation is a monetary phenomenon. As a consequence, globalisation does not affect the central 
role and overriding responsibility of central banks to preserve price stability.  
In  the  short  term,  the  central  bank  must  continue  anchoring  inflation  expectations  at  a  level  that  is 
consistent  with  the  central  bank’s  definition  of  price  stability.  Let  me  illustrate  this  by  means  of  an 
example. Let’s take the significant increase in energy prices over the last few years. I will assume that 
a central bank credibly commits to maintain stable prices and is fully and unequivocally trusted by the 
public  and  by  other  policy-makers.  The  corporate  sector,  which  uses  energy  as  an  input  for  its 
production processes, observes a significant and sharp rise in the price of oil. Since there is a credible 
commitment to price stability over the medium term and inflation expectations are well anchored at low 
levels, entrepreneurs easily understand that it is the relative price of energy that is rising, while the 
aggregate price level may not increase as much. Therefore, their incentives to fully pass the increase 
in  input  prices  to  consumers  are  reduced  because,  if  they  did,  their  competitiveness  could  be 
significantly  eroded,  especially  in  an  increasingly  competitive  global  environment.  Hence,  in  this 
example,  the  credibility  of  the  central  bank  clearly  reduces  second-round  inflationary  effects  and 
minimises macroeconomic fluctuations in output and inflation. 
Now let me turn to the role of central banks in mitigating risks to financial stability stemming 
from globalisation. 
Widespread interlinking of the financial systems has created a global financial system that it becoming 
a real, significant entity at the global level. This affects the financial stability assessment performed 
by central banks in two ways.  
• 
The first way is that it calls for a growing global focus on their financial stability analysis. For 
instance, for the euro area, a complete and comprehensive view on the key sources of risk 
and vulnerabilities facing the financial system cannot be formed without taking due account 
of wide global imbalances or concerns about excess global liquidity.  
4 
 BIS Review 68/2007
 The  second  way  is  that  it  calls  for  enhanced  cross-border  cooperation  and  exchange  of 
information  among  central  banks  (and  between  them  and  other  authorities  contributing  to 
financial stability). This should produce a comprehensive picture of risks and vulnerabilities 
and identify appropriate and effective mitigating policy actions. In the European Union this 
goal is pursued mainly through the activity of the Economic and Financial Committee in its 
Financial Stability Table set-up, comprising representatives from ministries of finance, central 
banks and the supervisory committees in banking, securities and insurance, as well as the 
ESCB/Eurosystem. At the level of the G-10, this goal is pursued by the Financial Stability 
Forum and other sectoral committees.  
The globalisation of financial systems also affects the role of central banks in the design of financial 
regulation and supervision. This role is played by central banks because they either have a direct 
supervisory  responsibility  or  act  in  an  advisory  capacity  to  governments.  In  general,  financial 
globalisation calls for an intensification of efforts among regulators on a cross-border basis to produce 
consistent  regulatory  and  supervisory  standards.  The  aim  is  to  promote  a  level  playing-field  and 
reduce regulatory arbitrage. This is clearly illustrated by the experience of the European Union where 
the  establishment  of  a  single  financial  market  is  a  main  strategic  objective  and  presupposes  the 
removal  of  potential  regulatory  and  supervisory  barriers.  The  EU  experience  also  shows  the 
usefulness  of  proceeding  in  steps  in  the  process  of  convergence  by  focusing  first  on  regulatory 
requirements and subsequently on supervisory standards and practices. In this context, I would like to 
offer three considerations:  
• 
First, in the areas clearly identified previously it is important that the regulators of the major 
financial  systems  deepen  and  strengthen  their  dialogue  at  the  global  level.  Therefore,  the 
initiative of the European Commission to extend its traditional regulatory dialogue with the 
United States to other major countries, including China and Japan, is supported in particular.  
Second, we see an increase in the number of new areas in which the need for a consistent 
approach at the global level is becoming apparent. Financial institutions with high leverage 
are  a  good  example  here.  On  the  basis  of  the  mandate  given  informally  by  the  G8,  the 
Financial  Stability  Forum  has  played  and  continues  to  play  a  crucial  role  in  developing 
recommendations  at  the  global  level  targeted  at  regulators,  counterparties  of  the  leverage 
funds  and  investors  in  these  funds.  The  institutions  themselves  have  been  encouraged  to 
develop,  voluntarily  and  under  their  own  responsibility,  their  principles  of  best  practice 
(“benchmarks”),  both  in  terms  of  transparency  towards  their  counterparties  and  their  own 
investors,  and  in  terms  of  their  optimal  management  of  risks.  Credit  derivatives  markets 
could also be mentioned as another area that requires a consistent approach at the global 
level. 
Third, in general terms, there is a still a great deal of progress to be made in harmonising 
effective  supervisory  practices  at  the  international  level.  This  is  particularly  paradoxical 
regarding the banks, since the Basel Committee is the oldest and most advanced in terms of 
ensuring  that  uniform  principles  and  concepts  of  prudential  supervision  are  defined  at  the 
global  level.  However,  given  the  diversity  of  practices,  a  significant  harmonisation  effort  is 
still necessary and is currently being made by the Basel Committee’s Accord Implementation 
Group  (AIG),  which  is  mandated  to  work  on  practical  implementation  issues  for  achieving 
convergence of banking supervision practices at the international level. 
  Conclusion 
4.  
I would like to conclude by drawing your particular attention to the following five points:  
First,  let  us  never  forget  that  scientific  and  technological  progress  is  very  much  at  the  root  of 
globalisation.  There  would  be  no  low-cost,  instantaneous  transmission  of  information,  concepts  and 
services at the global level without new information and communication technologies. There would be 
no extremely rapid expansion of international trade in goods without technological progress in sea and 
air transport. 
Second, if science and technology are at the root of the current globalisation, this could be a trend that 
not only lasts, but also strengthens. There is no indication that scientific and technological progress is 
tending to slow down. In fact, the opposite is the case. 
BIS Review 68/2007 
 5
Third, the rapid growth that we are seeing at the global level, and highly significant transformations 
which  are  both  the  cause  and  effect  of  this  growth  at  the  level  of  each  of  the  economies,  rapid 
changes of the respective economic weightings of the various continents and of the structure of the 
global economy  all  combine  as  a consequence  to make  predictions based  on  past  regularities  less 
reliable. Consequently, uncertainty tends to increase and economic and financial risks with a weak or 
very  weak  probability,  but  a  strong  destabilising  potential,  appear  as  the  inevitable,  and  in  fact, 
“normal”  counterpart  to  an  unprecedented  period  of  economic  prosperity.  Now  is  not  a  time  to  be 
complacent. 
Fourth, more than ever during a period of accelerated globalisation, central bank credibility is essential 
for  anchoring  solidly  inflation  expectations  and  for  forming  a  solid  base  for  monetary  and  financial 
stability in a brilliant, mobile international economy in which uncertainty and risks cannot be ignored.  
Fifth and finally, it is crucial to deepen and strengthen global governance by exploiting to the full all 
possibilities  offered  by  all  formal  and  informal  institutions  that  exist  and  by  consolidating  global 
financial  stability,  not  only  by  unifying  the  principles  and  concepts  of  prudential  supervision  and 
regulation,  but  also  by  achieving  real  unification,  resulting  at  the  global  level  from  the  practical 
implementation of regulation and supervision. 
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for your attention. 
integration 
(2007),  Financial 
in  Europe,  Report 
that  can  be  downloaded 
Selected references 
Baumann, U. and F. di Mauro (2007), Globalisation and euro area trade: interaction and challenges, 
ECB Occasional Paper Series, no 55.  
Borio, C. and Filardo, A. (2007), Globalisation and inflation: New cross-country evidence on the global 
determinants of domestic inflation, BIS Working Papers No. 227.  
Devereux, M. B. and Sutherland, A. (2007), Financial Globalisation and Monetary Policy, Discussion 
Paper Series No 6147, International Macroeconomics, Centre for Economic Policy Research. 
ECB (2006),  Effects of the rising trade integration of low-cost countries on euro area import prices, 
Box in Monthly Bulletin, August.  
ECB 
http://www.ecb.int/pub/pdf/other/financialintegrationineurope200703en.pdf.  
ECB (2007), Financial Stability Review, June.  
Freeman, R. (2006), The great doubling: the challenge of the new global labour market, August. 
IMF (2006), How has globalisation affected inflation?, World Economic Outlook, Chapter III, April.  
OECD (2006), Globalisation and inflation in the OECD economies, ECO/CPE/WPI. 
Papademos, L. (2006), Monetary Policy in a Changing World: Commitment, Strategy and Credibility, 
Speech  at  the  Fourth  Conference  of  the  International  Research  Forum  on  Monetary  Policy, 
Washington D.C., 1 December. 
Paramo,  G.  (2007),  Globalisation  and  monetary  policy,  Speech  posted  on  ECB  website  at: 
http://www.ecb.int/press/key/date/2007/html/sp070316.en.html. 
Rogoff,  K.  (2006),  Impact  of  Globalization  on  Monetary  Policy,  Harvard  University  (prepared  for 
symposium  sponsored  by  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City  on  “The  New  Economic 
Geography: Effects and Policy Implications” Jackson Hole, Wyoming, 24-26 August). 
Trichet, J-C. (2006), Economic integration in the euro area, 15th European Regional Conference of the 
Board of Governors – Tel Aviv University, Paris, 31 March. 
Trichet, J-C. (2007), The current state of European Financial Integration, University of Stirling, 11 May. 
from: 
6 
 BIS Review 68/2007
