Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Leading the way toward growth and 
development 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas),  at  the  Inaugural  Blessing  of  the  newest  branch  of  One 
Network Bank in Sasa, Davao City, 20 July 2007. 
 Archbishop Capalla, Mayor Duterte, the officers and staff of One Network Bank (ONB), fellow 
bankers, special guests, Maayong gabi-i sa inyong tanan! 
On behalf of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, I congratulate ONB on the inaugural of its Head 
Office  Branch,  the  65th  in  its  network  of  branches  within  Mindanao.  These  65  branches 
exclude the five new branches that have just been approved by the BSP. Now a leading rural 
bank,  ONL  has  positioned  itself  as  a  catalyst  for  economic  growth  in  Mindanao,  with  a 
presence bigger than other private banks. 
One Network Bank: making a difference in Mindanao 
In  particular,  ONB’s  support  for  the  agriculture  sector  including  small  farmers  is  most 
commendable. I understand that ONB’s loan exposure to agriculture is among the highest in 
the industry and it continues to grow: it was P1.1 billion in March 2006 and by March this 
year it had reached P1.5 billion! 
We  also  recognize  the  Bank’s  contribution  in  financing  the  development  of  the  education, 
health and services sectors in Mindanao through credit facilities that are made available to 
various institutions such as schools, hospitals, and local government units. 
In  addition,  ONB  has  responded  positively  to  Bangko  Sentral’s  policy  to  encourage 
technological innovations that translate to more efficient and convenient ways of facilitating 
access to banking services. For instance, ONB paved the way for the investments by rural 
and cooperative banks in Automated Teller Machines. In addition, ONB’s focus to expand its 
remittance  services  resulted  in  partnerships  with  commercial  banks  and  money  transfer 
companies.  ONB  has  also  applied  for  its  own  FCDU  license.  This  is  aligned  with  Bangko 
Sentral’s  policy  to  encourage  more  overseas  workers  to  transact  through  the  banking 
system. 
The way forward 
Indeed,  judging  from  its  involvement  in  countryside  banking,  ONB  has  become  a  model 
among rural banks in terms of both financial soundness and social responsibility. 
Tonight,  therefore,  I  ask  the  men  and  women  of  ONB  to  sustain  ONB’s  performance  and 
enhance the bank’s status as an agent of economic growth. 
Ladies and gentlemen. The BSP has been fostering a more liberal regulatory environment, 
built on strong prudential supervision foundation to promote a more inclusive and accessible 
financial system. Among others, we have liberalized branching to boost the efficient delivery 
of  financial  services,  including  microfinance,  to  areas  with  minimal  access  to  banking 
services. 
Altogether, these regulatory measures should give rural banks scope to participate more fully 
in economic development. Now, more than ever, we shall be relying on the collective support 
BIS Review 85/2007 
 1
of industry players in working toward a stronger and more efficient rural banking system – 
one that is fully capable of mobilizing savings for a robust rural economy. 
To  achieve  this,  let  us  work  together  to  continue  the  reforms  we  have  started  to  create 
greater confidence in the integrity and dependability of the country’s banking system. 
Let us therefore resolve to strengthen our partnership for a more efficient, competitive and 
resilient banking system as a service to our people and our country. 
Again, our congratulations to the officers and staff of ONB! 
Daghan Salamat sa inyong tanan. 
2 
 BIS Review 85/2007
