Ben S Bernanke: Subprime mortgage lending and mitigating 
foreclosures 
Remarks  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve  System,  before 
the  Committee  on  Financial  Services,  US  House  of 
Representatives, Washington DC, 20 September 2007. 
 Chairman Frank, Ranking Member Bachus, and members of the Committee, I am pleased to 
appear before you to discuss the origins of the problems in the subprime-mortgage market 
and the response of the Federal Reserve to these developments. I will also discuss some 
possible legislative options for addressing these concerns.  
Recent developments in the subprime-mortgage sector 
Let me begin with some background on the subprime-mortgage sector. Subprime mortgages 
are loans intended for borrowers who are perceived to have high credit risk. Although these 
mortgages  emerged  on  the  financial  landscape  more  than  two  decades  ago,  they  did  not 
begin to expand significantly until the mid-1990s. The expansion was fueled by innovations – 
including the development of credit scoring – that made it easier for lenders to assess and 
price  risks.  In  addition,  regulatory  changes  and  the  ongoing  growth  of  the  secondary 
mortgage market increased the ability of lenders, who once typically held mortgages on their 
books  until  the  loans  were  repaid,  to  sell  many  mortgages  to  various  intermediaries,  or 
"securitizers." The securitizers in turn pooled large numbers of mortgages and sold the rights 
to the resulting cash flows to investors, often as components of structured securities. This 
"originate-to-distribute" model gave lenders (and, thus, mortgage borrowers) greater access 
to capital markets, lowered transaction costs, and allowed risk to be shared more widely. The 
resulting  increase  in  the  supply  of  mortgage  credit  likely  contributed  to  the  rise  in  the 
homeownership  rate  from  64  percent  in  1994  to  about  68  percent  now  –  with  minority 
households and households from lower-income census tracts recording some of the largest 
gains in percentage terms. 
However, for all its considerable benefits, the broadening of access to mortgage credit that 
has occurred during the past decade also had important negative aspects. Not surprisingly, 
given  their  weaker  credit  histories  and  financial  conditions,  subprime  borrowers  default  on 
their  loans  more  frequently  than  prime  borrowers.  The  consequences  of  default  may  be 
severe  for  homeowners,  who  face  the  possibility  of  foreclosure,  the  loss  of  accumulated 
home equity, and reduced access to credit. In addition, clusters of foreclosures can lead to 
declines in the values of nearby properties and do great damage to neighborhoods.  
During the past two years, serious delinquencies among subprime adjustable-rate mortgages 
(ARMs)  have  increased  dramatically.  (Subprime  mortgages  with  fixed  rates,  on  the  other 
hand, have had a more stable performance.) The fraction of subprime ARMs past due ninety 
days or more or in foreclosure reached nearly 15 percent in July, roughly triple the low seen 
in  mid-2005.1  For  so-called  near-prime  loans  in  alt-A  securitized  pools  (those  made  to 
borrowers  who  typically  have  higher  credit  scores  than  subprime  borrowers  but  still  pose 
more risk than prime borrowers), the serious delinquency rate has also risen, to 3 percent 
from  1  percent  only  a  year  ago.  These  patterns  contrast  sharply  with  those  in  the  prime-
mortgage  sector,  in  which  less  than  1  percent  of  loans  are  seriously  delinquent.  Higher 
delinquencies have begun to show through to foreclosures. About 320,000 foreclosures were 
                                                 
1   Estimates of delinquencies are based on data from First American LoanPerformance. 
BIS Review 104/2007 
 1
initiated in each of the first two quarters of this year (just more than half of them on subprime 
mortgages),  up  from  an  average  of  about  225,000  during  the  past  six  years.  Foreclosure 
starts tend to be high in states with stressed economic conditions and to rise where house 
prices have decelerated or fallen.  
Adjustable-rate subprime mortgages originated in late 2005 and in 2006 have performed the 
worst, with some of them defaulting after only one or two payments (or even no payment at 
all).  Relative  to  earlier  vintages,  more  of  these  loans  carried  greater  risks  beyond  weak 
borrower credit histories – including very high initial cumulative loan-to-value ratios and less 
documentation of borrower income. In addition, the sharp deceleration in home prices since 
2005, including outright declines in some markets, left many of these more-recent borrowers 
with little or no home equity. In this situation, some borrowers (particularly owner-investors) 
may  have  found  that  simply  walking  away  from  their  properties  was  their  best  option. 
Moreover,  low  home  equity  has  made  refinancing  –  the  typical  way  for  many  subprime 
borrowers  to  avoid  large  scheduled  interest  rate  resets  –  difficult  or  impossible  for  many. 
Thus, with house prices still soft and many borrowers of recent-vintage subprime ARMs still 
facing their first interest rate resets, delinquencies and foreclosure initiations in this class of 
mortgages are likely to rise further. It is difficult to be precise about the number of foreclosure 
initiations  expected  in  coming  quarters,  as  it  will  depend  on  (among  other  factors)  the 
evolution of house prices, which will vary widely across localities. Historically, about half of 
homeowners who get a foreclosure notice are ultimately displaced from their homes, but that 
ratio  may  turn  out  to  be  higher  in  coming  quarters  because  the  proportion  of  subprime 
borrowers, who have weaker financial conditions than prime borrowers, is higher. The rise 
could be tempered somewhat by loan workouts.  
The originate-to-distribute model seems to have contributed to the loosening of underwriting 
standards in 2005 and 2006. When an originator sells a mortgage and its servicing rights, 
depending  on  the  terms  of  the  sale,  much  or  all  of  the  risks  are  passed  on  to  the  loan 
purchaser.  Thus,  originators  who  sell  loans  may  have  less  incentive  to  undertake  careful 
underwriting  than  if  they  kept  the  loans.  Moreover,  for  some  originators,  fees  tied  to  loan 
volume made loan sales a higher priority than loan quality. This misalignment of incentives, 
together  with  strong  investor  demand  for  securities  with  high  yields,  contributed  to  the 
weakening of underwriting standards.  
The  fragmented  market  structure  of  mortgage  originators  in  the  subprime-lending  industry 
may also have contributed. Data collected under the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act show 
that  independent  mortgage  companies  –  those  that  are  not  depository  institutions  or  their 
subsidiaries  or  holding  company  affiliates  –  made  nearly  half  of  higher-priced  first-lien 
mortgages in 2006 but only one-fourth of loans that were not higher-priced. In addition, some 
sources  report  that  the  majority  of  mortgages  are  obtained  through  a  broker,  often  an 
independent entity, who takes loan applications on behalf of a depository institution or other 
lender.  The  various  lending  institutions  and  brokers  operate  under  different  regulatory  and 
supervisory regimes with varying intensities of enforcement effort. That fragmentation makes 
monitoring brokers and lenders difficult for regulators and investors alike. 
Markets  do  tend  to  self-correct.  In  response  to  the  serious  financial  losses  incurred  by 
investors, the market for subprime mortgages has adjusted sharply. Investors are demanding 
that  originators  employ  tighter  underwriting  standards,  and  some  large  lenders  are  pulling 
back from the use of brokers. The reassessment and resulting increase in the attention to 
loan  quality  should  help  prevent  a  recurrence  of 
the  recent  subprime  problems. 
Nevertheless,  many  homeowners  who  took  out  mortgages  in  recent  years  are  in  financial 
distress.  To  help  those  borrowers,  the  Federal  Reserve,  together  with  the  other  federal 
supervisory agencies, has issued two statements – in April, to mortgage lenders; and earlier 
this  month,  to  mortgage  servicers  –  to  encourage  the  financial  industry  to  work  with 
borrowers  to  arrange  prudent  loan  modifications  to  avoid  unnecessary  foreclosures.  The 
Conference  of  State  Bank  Supervisors  (CSBS)  joined  the  federal  agencies  in  the  second 
statement. Often, loan workouts are in the interest of all parties. We have also encouraged 
2 
 BIS Review 104/2007
lenders and servicers to identify and contact borrowers who, with counseling and possible 
loan  modifications,  may  be  able  to  avoid  entering  delinquency  or  foreclosure.  The  simple 
step  of  reaching  out  to  borrowers  before  they  get  into  trouble  can  be  very  productive.  In 
addition,  a  member  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Board  serves  as  a  director  of  NeighborWorks 
America, which encourages borrowers facing payment difficulties to seek help by contacting 
their lenders, services, or trusted counselors. Recently, NeighborWorks America launched a 
nationwide  advertising  campaign  to  increase  awareness  of  available  support  from  their 
24-hour hotline, and they are now responding to 2,000 calls a day, almost double the number 
in June.  
Additionally,  the  Federal  Reserve  is  working  closely  with  community  and  industry  groups 
around the country to reduce homeowners' risks of foreclosure. The community affairs offices 
in  each  of  the  Reserve  Banks  provide  significant  leadership  and  technical  assistance.  For 
instance, a public-private collaboration initiated by the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago with 
Neighborhood  Housing  Services  of  Chicago  and  the  City  of  Chicago  produced  the  Home 
Ownership Preservation Initiative (HOPI), which began in 2003. In the ensuing three years, 
the  HOPI  program  counseled  more  than  4,000  people,  prevented  1,300  foreclosures,  and 
reclaimed 300 buildings.2 HOPI has also been a model for foreclosure prevention programs 
now operating around the country, including in Baltimore and Atlanta and in Ohio. As another 
example, the community affairs office of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco recently 
convened  a  series  of  workshops  to  develop  community-based  solutions  to  mortgage 
delinquencies  in  six  cities.  More  than  700  lenders,  housing  counselors,  community  group 
representatives, and government officials attended. 
Regulatory responses 
The  Federal  Reserve  takes  responsible  lending  and  consumer  protection  very  seriously. 
Along with other federal and state agencies, we are responding to the subprime problems on 
a  number  of  fronts.  We  are  committed  to  preventing  problems  from  recurring,  while  still 
preserving responsible subprime lending.  
Last  year,  in  coordination  with  other  federal  supervisory  agencies,  we  issued  principles-
based  guidance  describing  safety-and-soundness  and  consumer-protection  standards  for 
nontraditional  mortgages,  such  as  interest-only  and  negative-amortization  mortgages.  We 
subsequently  issued  illustrations  to  help  institutions  clearly  communicate  information  to 
consumers.  In  June  of  this  year  the  agencies  issued  supervisory  guidance  on  subprime 
ARMs. The guidance describes standards that banks should follow to ensure that borrowers 
obtain  loans  that  they  can  afford  to  repay  and  that  give  them  the  opportunity  to  refinance 
without prepayment penalty for a reasonable period before the interest rate resets. We have 
requested public comment on illustrations to help lenders implement this guidance.  
The  Board  also  is  committed  to  providing  more-effective  disclosures  to  help  consumers 
defend against improper lending. As I discussed in my testimony to this Committee in July, 
we  recently  issued  proposed  rules  under  Regulation  Z,  which  implements  the  Truth  in 
Lending Act (TILA), to improve disclosures related to credit cards and other revolving credit 
accounts.  We  are  now  engaged  in  a  similarly  rigorous  review  of  TILA  rules  for  mortgage 
loans  and  will  be  conducting  extensive  consumer  testing  of  mortgage  disclosures  for  this 
purpose. In my view, better disclosure of the schedule of mortgage payments over the life of 
the loan can help borrowers understand the terms of their mortgages and judge their ability 
to make future payments. Consumers may also benefit from better information about costs, 
including brokers' fees, when choosing among competing mortgage products. In addition, we 
                                                 
2   "The  Home  Ownership  Preservation  Initiative  in  Chicago  (HOPI):  Reducing  Foreclosures  Through  Strategic 
Partnerships,"  presentation  by  Bruce  Gottschall,  executive  director,  Neighborhood  Housing  Services  of  
Chicago, June 25, 2007, http://nw.org/network/neighborworksprogs/foreclosuresolutions/documents/hopi_000.ppt.  
BIS Review 104/2007 
 3
are developing two sets of proposed changes to TILA rules – one to address concerns about 
incomplete  or  misleading  mortgage  loan  advertisements  and  solicitations  and  a  second  to 
require lenders to provide mortgage disclosures more quickly so that consumers can get the 
information they need when it is most useful to them. 
Improved and more timely disclosures may not be sufficient in some cases. As I discussed in 
July, we will use our rulemaking authority under the Home Ownership and Equity Protection 
Act  to  propose  additional  consumer  protections  later  this  year.  We  are  looking  closely  at 
some mortgage lending practices, including prepayment penalties, escrow accounts for taxes 
and  insurance,  stated-income  and  low-documentation  lending,  and  the  evaluation  of  a 
borrower's ability to repay. The information that we gathered at a public hearing in June and 
from the subsequent comment letters has been extremely helpful. 
The  recent  problems  in  subprime  lending  have  underscored  the  need  not  only  for  better 
disclosure and new rules but also for more-uniform enforcement in the fragmented market 
structure of brokers and lenders. In that regard, the CSBS has partnered with the American 
Association of Residential Mortgage Regulators (AARMR) to develop a nationwide licensing 
system  and  database  for  mortgage  professionals,  and  they  have  made  considerable 
progress. The system is expected to start up in January 2008 with seven states, and another 
thirty states have committed and will be added gradually. Such a nationwide system would 
help limit the ability of originators who run afoul of their state regulators to continue operating 
simply by moving to another state.  
Raising the quality of underwriting practices by all lenders to a uniformly high standard is an 
important objective. To that end, the Board and the other federal agencies worked with the 
CSBS to apply the two guidance documents I mentioned – on nontraditional mortgages and 
subprime  ARMs  –  to  state-supervised  institutions.  The  CSBS  published  nearly  identical 
guidance documents and has urged the states to implement them. Many states have done 
so, or are moving to do so.  
To  achieve  strong  and  uniform  enforcement,  interagency  cooperation  among  a  variety  of 
federal and state agencies is essential. As I noted in my testimony in July, the Board has 
launched a pilot program with the CSBS, AARMR, the Office of Thrift Supervision, and the 
Federal Trade Commission. The goal of this program is to expand and improve consumer 
protection  by  strengthening  compliance  reviews  at  selected  nondepository  lenders  with 
significant  subprime-mortgage  operations.  The  Board  will  review  nonbank  subsidiaries  of 
bank  holding  companies,  and 
the  other  agencies  will  conduct  similar  reviews  of 
nondepository  institutions  of  thrift  holding  companies,  independent  mortgage  lending 
companies,  and  mortgage  brokers  doing  business  with  these  entities.  The  reviews  will 
include  an  evaluation  of  the  companies'  underwriting  standards  and  senior-management 
oversight of the practices used for ensuring compliance with consumer protection regulations 
and laws. The agencies have been working closely together and are scheduled to begin the 
on-site reviews in the fourth quarter. The partner agencies will share information about the 
reviews  and  make  joint  assessments  of  lessons  learned.  This  project  should  also  lay  the 
groundwork for various additional forms of future cooperation to ensure more effective and 
consistent supervision and consumer protection. 
Legislative responses 
Beyond the actions underway at the regulatory agencies, I am aware that the Congress is 
considering statutory changes to help alleviate the problem of foreclosures. Modernizing the 
programs  administered  by  the  Federal  Housing  Administration  (FHA)  is  one  promising 
direction.  The  FHA  has  considerable  experience  in  providing  home  financing  for  low-  and 
moderate-income  borrowers.  It  insures  mortgages  made  to  borrowers  who  meet  certain 
underwriting criteria and who pay premiums into a reserve fund that is designated to cover 
the costs in the event of default. This insurance makes the loans less risky for lenders and 
4 
 BIS Review 104/2007
investors, and it makes the loans eligible for securitization through the Government National 
Mortgage Association (Ginnie Mae).  
Historically,  the  FHA  has  played  an  important  role  in  the  mortgage  market,  particularly  for 
first-time home buyers. However, the FHA's share of first-lien home purchase loans declined 
substantially, from about 16 percent in 2000 to about 5 percent in 2006, as borrowers who 
might have sought FHA backing instead were attracted to nontraditional products with more-
flexible and quicker underwriting and processing. In addition, maximum loan values that the 
FHA  will  insure  have  failed  to  keep  pace  with  rising  home  values  in  many  areas  of  the 
country.  
In modernizing FHA programs, Congress might wish to be guided by design principles that 
allow  flexibility  and  risk-based  pricing.  To  alleviate  foreclosures,  the  FHA  could  be 
encouraged to collaborate with the private sector to expedite the refinancing of creditworthy 
subprime  borrowers  facing  large  resets.  Other  changes  could  allow  the  agency  more 
flexibility to design new products that improve affordability through features such as variable 
maturities or shared appreciation. In addition, creating risk-based FHA insurance premiums 
that match insurance premiums with borrowers' credit profiles would give more households 
access to refinancing options.  
The  risk  of  moral  hazard  must  be  considered  in  designing  government-backed  programs; 
such  programs  should  not  bail  out  failed  investors,  as  doing  so  would  only  encourage 
excessive  risk-taking.  One  must  also  consider  adverse  selection;  programs  that  provide 
credit to only the weakest eligible borrowers are likely to be more costly than those that serve 
a broader risk spectrum. Risk-based insurance premiums or tighter screening and monitoring 
by lenders can mitigate adverse selection. But ultimately such mechanisms have their limits, 
and  no  government  program  will  be  able  to  provide  meaningful  help  to  the  highest-risk 
borrowers  without  a  public  subsidy.  Whether  such  subsidies  should  be  employed  is  a 
decision for the Congress. 
The  government-sponsored  enterprises  (GSEs)  Fannie  Mae  and  Freddie  Mac  are,  to  a 
limited  extent,  assisting  in  subprime  refinancings  and  should  be  encouraged  to  provide 
products for subprime borrowers to the extent permitted by their charters. However, the GSE 
charters  are  likely  to  limit  the  ability  of  the  GSEs  to  serve  any  but  the  most  creditworthy 
subprime borrowers. Indeed, if GSE programs remove the strongest borrowers from the pool, 
the  risks  faced  by  other  programs  –  such  as  a  modernized  FHA  program  –  could  be 
increased.  
Some  have  suggested  that  the  GSEs  could  help  restore  functioning  in  the  secondary 
markets  for  non-conforming  mortgages  (specifically  jumbo  mortgages,  those  with  principal 
value greater than $417,000) if the conforming-loan limits were raised. However, in my view, 
the reason that GSE securitizations are well-accepted in the secondary market is because 
they  come  with  GSE-provided  guarantees  of 
financial  performance,  which  market 
participants  appear  to  treat  as  backed  by  the  full  faith  and  credit  of  the  U.S.  government, 
even though this federal guarantee does not exist. Evidently, market participants believe that, 
in the event of the failure of a GSE, the government would have no alternative but to come to 
the rescue. The perception, however inaccurate, that the GSEs are fully government-backed 
implies that investors have few incentives in their role as counterparties or creditors to act to 
constrain  GSE  risk-taking.  Raising  the  conforming-loan  limit  would  expand  this  implied 
guarantee to another portion of the mortgage market, reducing market discipline further. If, 
despite these considerations, the Congress were inclined to move in this direction, it should 
assess whether such action could be taken in a way that is both explicitly temporary and able 
to be implemented sufficiently promptly to serve its intended purpose. Any benefits that might 
conceivably  accrue  to  this  action  would  likely  be  lost  if  implementation  were  significantly 
delayed, as private securitization activity would likely be inhibited in the interim.  
BIS Review 104/2007 
 5
Implications for financial markets and monetary policy 
Most recently, as I am sure Committee members are well aware, subprime mortgage losses 
that  triggered  uncertainty  about  structured  products  more  generally  have  reverberated  in 
broader financial markets, raising concern about the consequences for economic activity. As 
I noted in a speech last month at the economic symposium hosted by the Federal Reserve 
Bank of Kansas City, the turbulence originated in concerns about subprime mortgages, but 
the resulting global financial losses have far exceeded even the most pessimistic estimates 
of the credit losses on these loans. These wider losses reflect, in part, a significant increase 
in investor uncertainty centered on the difficulty of evaluating the risks for a wide range of 
structured securities products, which can be opaque or have complex payoffs. Investors also 
may  have  become  less  willing  to  assume  risk.  Some  increase  in  premiums  that  investors 
require to take risk is probably a healthy development on the whole, as these premiums have 
been  exceptionally  low  for  some  time.  However,  in  this  episode,  the  shift  in  risk  attitudes 
combined with greater credit risk and uncertainty about how to value those risks has created 
significant market stress. On the positive side of the ledger, past efforts to strengthen capital 
positions and financial market infrastructure places the global financial system in a relatively 
strong position to work through this process.  
In response to these developments, the Federal Reserve moved in early August to provide 
reserves to address unusual strains in money markets. On August 17, the Federal Reserve 
Board  announced  a  cut  in  the  discount  rate  of  50  basis  points  and  adjustments  to  the 
Reserve Banks' usual discount window practices to facilitate the provision of term financing 
for as long as thirty days, renewable by the borrower. The purpose of the discount window 
actions was to assure depositories of the ready availability of a backstop source of liquidity. 
The Federal Reserve also took a number of supplemental actions, such as cutting the fee 
charged for lending Treasury securities. 
Earlier this week, Federal Open Market Committee lowered its target for the federal funds 
rate by 50 basis points. The action was intended to help forestall some of the adverse effects 
on  the  broader  economy  that  might  arise  from  the  disruptions  in  financial  markets  and  to 
promote  moderate  growth  over  time.  Recent  developments  in  financial  markets  have 
increased the uncertainty surrounding the economic outlook. The Committee will continue to 
assess the effects of these and other developments on economic prospects and will act as 
needed to foster price stability and sustainable economic growth. 
6 
 BIS Review 104/2007
