Jean-Paul Redouin: Risks may be transferred, but they do not disappear! 
Address by Mr Jean-Paul Redouin, Deputy Governor of the Bank of France, at the Paris Europlace, 
Financial Forum, Stockholm, 29 March 2007. 
 The international financial system is going through an extraordinarily benign phase. The world is 
enjoying  stable  inflation  and  strong  and  broad-based  GDP  growth.  At  the  macrofinancial  level, 
corporate  profits  have  been  sustained,  risk  premia  have  been  very  thin  for  a  broad  set  of  asset 
classes, and volatilities remain unusually low. Based on these market signals, risks appear very low. 
Do risk premia correctly reflect the risks currently facing the financial system? Or is their low 
level the result of excessive risk appetite on financial markets? Indeed, some recent warning signals 
have  reminded  us  how  fragile  the  current  pricing  of  risk  is,  and  how  much  it  relies  on  the 
expectation that an “ideal scenario” of strong growth and contained inflation will prevail. 
In this context, I would like to focus my remarks on a very important structural development: 
credit risk transfer. 
Basically,  the  transfer  of  risks  helps  to  spread  them,  according  to  a  process  I  shall  call  the 
“atomisation of risk" (namely risk being split into elementary particles and then re-packaged). But do 
these techniques mean that risks disappear? 
The  breakthrough  of  CRT  has  gone  hand  in  hand  with  constant  innovation  and  the  emergence  of 
powerful non-bank players. The financial markets are therefore in a state of permanent revolution in 
which globalisation and disintermediation have made the channels risk can take more complex and 
affected its traceability. 
This evolution can bring stability and resilience to the system only under certain conditions. The role of 
a  central  banker  and  supervisor  is  to  list  them,  to  inform  the  financial  community  of  the  systemic 
aspects of their development and to implement certain key policy measures. 
CRT can improve distribution of risk and stronger resilience to shocks. How?  
1.  
The  First  benefit  is  linked  to  a  process  of  “atomisation”  of  risk.  Greater  risk  dispersion  among 
investors may increase the resilience of the financial system in the event of shocks. Financial 
engineering has enabled credit risk to be extracted from banks’ balance sheets and broken down into 
portions  of  risk  that  are  repackaged  into  portfolio  products.  This  is  the  essence  of  securitisation 
mechanisms: the default of a large issuer has less chance of resulting in the default of its creditors, 
and default losses are absorbed by a large number of investors. 
Second, the emergence of powerful non-bank players to whom risk is transferred contributes to 
greater risk dispersion and market efficiency. One example is hedge funds, which have become 
large  risk  absorbers  on  credit  markets.  Their  share  in  derivative  trading  is  estimated  at  up  to  25%. 
Hedge funds trade mainly on the riskiest segments and often buy equity tranches of CDOs, previously 
the  preserve  of  banks.  Another  example  is  institutional  investors  (mutual  funds  and  pension  funds, 
insurance  companies,  etc.),  which  have  increased  their  exposure  to  risk  transfer  instruments,  even 
though their investment policies remain fairly conservative. 
Third,  banks  themselves  may,  via  credit  derivatives,  improve  their  risk  management.  They 
diversify their risk profiles by gaining exposure to companies or sectors in which they do not have 
customer relationships and by hedging risks while retaining customer relationships. Credit risk transfer 
mechanisms are also used by banks to deal with single-name concentration risk. 
Consequently,  major  improvements  in  risk  measurement  have  been  made.  From  a  prudential 
viewpoint, the Basel II framework takes better account of risk mitigation techniques employed by 
banks, including the use of credit risk derivatives, and applies specific treatment to securitisation. 
BIS Review 33/2007 
 1
2.  
But this evolution should make us more – not less – vigilant regarding the 
assessment and tracking of risks. 
The wider benefits that CRT can bring should not give rise to a false sense of security. Risks do 
not disappear as a consequence of their transfer. Banks need to pay attention both to "residual risks" 
(e.g.  tail  or  extreme  event  risks)  and  all  of  the  risks  (e.g.  operational  risk,  documentation  and 
settlement  risk,  legal  risk)  arising  from  the  use  of  CRT.  Furthermore,  the  growing  complexity  and 
volume  of  CRT  transactions  call  for  enhanced  monitoring.  Actually,  understanding  where  risk 
ultimately  lies  and  how  risky  exposures  can  build  up  is  an essential  prerequisite  for  safeguarding 
financial stability. The argument is fourfold: 
First, historically low interest rates and abundant liquidity have prompted an intense search for 
yield. Lower interest rates have encouraged risk-taking and higher leverage as investors have wanted 
to  secure  high  rates  of  return.  A  case  in  point  is  insurance  companies,  which  have  to  service 
guaranteed rates of return, and pension funds that have agreed to specific benefits. As the return on 
risk free bonds has declined, investors have been increasingly led to search for yield and increase the 
share  of  risky  assets,  including  credit  derivatives,  in  their  portfolios.  This  contributes  to  the 
compression of risk premia. This can continue as long as long-term interest rates stay low. But there is 
some circularity in the situation. On the one hand, institutional investors are “victims” of low long-term 
interest rates. On the other hand, they help to maintain this situation as they continue to look for even 
longer-dated bonds. Therefore, if the pricing of long-term government bonds, which is the reference for 
the  pricing  of  many  other  assets,  remains  distorted,  credit  risk  premia  may  be  based  on  shaky 
foundations. 
Second,  risk  transfer  mechanisms  contribute  to  a  certain  opacity  in  the  distribution  of  risks. 
Most transactions are conducted on OTC markets and are not recorded in a centralised manner: there 
is  therefore  a  “knowledge  gap”  in  the  financial  system  as  regards  CRT  exposures.  More 
fundamentally, risks are usually transferred by banks, which are regulated and transparent, to 
entities  that  are  unregulated  and  are  not  required  to  disclose  their  positions.  It  is  therefore 
impossible for market participants and regulators to identity the situation of the ultimate risk holders. 
Third,  the  atomisation  of  risk  has  been  accompanied  by  higher  leverage  embedded  in  the 
instruments  themselves,  making  it  hard  to  assess  which  of  these  countervailing  effects  prevails. 
While atomisation of risk mitigates the impact of a shock, leverage amplifies it. For instance, “single-
tranche” collateralised debt obligations (CDOs) substantially increase “embedded” leverage: a single-
tranche CDO  is generally leveraged 5  to  10  times, meaning  that  potential  losses  are 5  to 10  times 
greater than the losses on the underlying portfolio. This is a type of leverage that does not show up in 
lending  figures.  Assessing  the  extent  and  effect  of  embedded  leverage  on  a  system-wide  basis  is 
therefore a real challenge. 
Lastly, market liquidity can be very fragile. Indeed, it is now much easier to trade credit exposures 
thanks to standardised credit derivative indexes. However, liquidity remains very uneven among CRT 
markets  and  cannot  be  guaranteed  under  stressful  market  conditions.  Many  institutions  are  also 
vulnerable to “runs”. Market liquidity dry-ups therefore constitute one of the risks to be assessed. 
What are the implications for central bankers and supervisors? 
3.  
I would like to suggest three approaches: 
First,  remind  market  participants  and  investors  that  benign  times,  such  as  the  current  credit 
environment,  should  not  be  the  benchmark  for  assessing  risks.  Credit  risk  transfer  markets 
remain untested in stress situations. The US subprime mortgage market is a bellwether reminding us 
that excesses in credit growth and relaxation of lending standards are paid for sooner or later by much 
higher risk premia. 
Second,  transparency  must  be  improved  in  the  financial  system  and  for  CRT  in  particular. 
Indeed, for stress tests to be fully relevant, we need reliable data at the aggregate level. Without good 
reporting of exposures, mitigation actions are not efficient. Increased transparency can take various 
forms. One means is to increase the transparency of institutions such as hedge funds or private 
equity funds. Another possibility is to increase the transparency of market operations, with trades 
recorded in a central depository, for example. Such infrastructure improvements can also produce 
transparency in a “seamless” way, avoiding an excessive reporting burden. 
2 
 BIS Review 33/2007
Third,  there  is  a  need  to  work  to  better  understand  and  assess  risk  at  a  system-wide  level, 
including the linkages that bind together the various elements of the financial system. Like in physics, 
there  are  resonance  frequencies,  propagating  tensions  from  one  knot  of  the  network  to  another. 
Stress  testing  plays  a  key  role  here.  To  complement  individual  stress  tests,  policymakers  are 
developing  global  and  cross-country  stress  tests.  These  impact  studies  consist  in  measuring  the 
impact of linkages between business cycle fluctuations and a range of key observable variables that 
best  characterise  the  banking  sector.  These  exercises  should  also  incorporate  potential  market 
contagion  through  different  channels:  banks'  interlinkages  (domino  effects)  and  bank  portfolios’ 
exposures to shocks. 
 To  sum  up,  we  should  not  forget  that  the  current  financial  system  is  multidimensional  and  closely 
interlinked. It remains essentially an untested world in stress situations. History has shown that it is 
precisely  in  good  times  that  the  seeds  of  financial  distress  develop.  In  the  present  context  of  the 
desperate  hunt  for  yield,  risk  transfer  markets  may  encourage  investors  to  take  on  more  risk. 
Therefore, financial innovation should not only concentrate on extracting yield but also on pricing risk 
at a sustainable level. This is one of the most demanding challenges of the coming years for both the 
private sector and the public authorities. 
BIS Review 33/2007 
 3
