Wu Xiaoling: Lessons we should learn from the Asian financial crisis 
Remarks  by  Ms  Wu  Xiaoling,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  People’s  Bank  of  China,  at  the 
International  Seminar  on  the  Tenth  Anniversary  of  the  Asian  Financial  Crisis,  Beijing, 
21 June 2007. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen: 
Good morning. 
It is a great pleasure for me to attend the International Seminar on the Tenth Anniversary of 
Asian  Financial  Crisis  jointly  hosted  by  the  Financial  Research  Institution  of  the  People’s 
Bank  of  China,  Institute  of  World  Economics  and  Politics  of  Chinese  Academy  of  Social 
Sciences, and the China Business News. Please allow me, on behalf of the People’s Bank of 
China, to welcome the distinguished guests from the World Bank, the International Monetary 
Fund and other international institutions, and countries and regions including Japan, Korea, 
Thailand, Malaysia, and Indonesia, etc. and experts and scholars from domestic government 
agencies and institutions. 
This year marks the tenth anniversary of the Asian financial crisis. The world economy has 
undergone tremendous changes over the past ten years. It is of significance to conduct in-
depth  discussion  on  policy-making  and  reform  strategies  in  China’s  financial  opening-up 
against  today’s  backdrop  of  global  economic  imbalance,  excess  liquidity  and  increasingly 
changing financial market.  
Lessons we should learn from the Asian financial crisis 
1.  
In  July  ten  years  ago,  the  attack  on  Thai  Baht  by  the  international  hot-money  triggered  a 
large  scale  financial  crisis,  which  severely  damaged  the  economies  of  Thailand,  Malaysia, 
Indonesia,  Japan,  Korea,  and  China’s  Hongkong  SAR  and  Taiwan  province,  and  pulled 
Asian countries into an economic and social turmoil.  
Reflecting  on  the  reasons  behind  Asian  financial  crisis  ten  years  later,  we  find  lessons  in 
many aspects. 
(1) 
A country’s financial opening-up must suit status quo of its financial system. Sound 
domestic financial system and healthy operations of the enterprises are the micro 
basis to forestall external shocks, thus we should effectively combine the processes 
of  opening-up  and  internal  reform.  An  orderly  opening-up  will  help  foreign  and 
domestic  financial  institutions  to  influence  and  learn  from  each  other.  Inefficiently 
managed opening-up and a fragile banking system will undermine financial stability.  
More efforts should be made to intensify monitoring on cross-border capital flows, in 
particular,  short  term  capital  flows.  The  abnormal  flow  of  short-term  speculative 
capital may lead to financial crisis. Relevant countries should adopt exchange rate 
regime best suited its local characteristics. Rigid and inflexible exchange rate regime 
will  be  an  easy  target  of  international  speculation.  Rapid  increase  of  asset  prices 
due to large inflow of foreign capital will not sustain, and the fall of asset prices is 
always  correlated  with  capital  flight  and  depreciation  of  local  currency,  thus  we 
should  keep  alert  to  excess  investment  of  foreign  capital  in  domestic  assets. 
Relevant  countries  should  make  more  research  on  monitoring  of  cross  border 
investments by the hedge funds.  
An appropriate crisis management mechanism is the guarantee to prevent crisis and 
reduce loss from the crisis. Relevant countries should establish crisis management 
mechanism adaptive to its own financial system. Meanwhile, the increase of cross 
(2) 
(3) 
BIS Review 90/2007 
 1
border  financial  cooperation  has  a  bearing  on  preventing  the  spread  of  crisis  and 
reducing  loss  from  the  crisis.  International  institutions  should  improve  rescue 
methods by adopting prompter countermeasures suitable to specific condition of the 
rescued. 
2.  
The role and contribution of China, as a responsible big country, in Asian 
financial crisis 
In order to mitigate the impact of Asian financial crisis and help crisis-stricken Asian countries 
walk out of the plight, then China’s Premier Zhu Rongji promised, on behalf of the Chinese 
government, to the world that the RMB would not depreciate, followed by a series of active 
measures and policies.  
(1) 
China  made  vigorous  efforts  to  participate  in  the  IMF’s  rescue  operations  to  help 
related Asian countries. After the outbreak of financial crisis, under the arrangement 
framework of the IMF, the Chinese government provided a total of over US$4 billion 
assistance  to  Thailand,  as  well  as  export  credit  and  emergency  free  medicine 
assistance  to  Indonesia  and  other  East  Asian  countries,  although  China  had 
inadequate foreign exchange reserves at that time. 
China  actively  cooperated  with  relevant  parties  to  participate  in  and  advance 
regional  cooperation.  At  the  sixth  ASEAN  informal  leaders’  meeting,  then  China’s 
President  Jiang  Zhemin  unveiled  three  proposals  of  strengthening  regional 
cooperation  to  refrain  the  crisis  from  spreading,  reform  and  improve  international 
financial  system,  and  respect  self-selected  measures  of  relevant  countries  and 
areas  to  overcome  financial  crisis.  At  the  second  informal  ASEAN+China,  Japan 
and Korea leaders’ meeting and the informal ASEAN+China leaders’ meeting, then 
Vice  President  Hu  Jintao  emphasized  that  East  Asian  countries  should  vigorously 
engage in reform and adjustment of financial system, with the most pressing need to 
intensify the management and supervision over short-term capital flow. He called on 
the East Asian countries to strengthen exchange on macroeconomic issues such as 
financial  reform,  have  dialogue  between  deputy  finance  ministers  and  deputy 
governors of central bank, and form expert team at appropriate time to launch in-
depth  research  on  specific  measures  on  managing  short  term  capital  flow.  The 
above  measures  adopted  by  the  Chinese  government  received  positive  response 
and support from most crisis-stricken countries.  
China  promised  that  the  RMB  would  not  depreciate.  Being  a  highly  responsible 
country, the Chinese government made the decision of no depreciation of the RMB 
with  an  aim  of  safeguarding  regional  stability  and  promoting  development,  which 
played  a  pivotal  role  in  maintaining  economic  and  financial  stability  of  the  Asian 
countries and the world at large, as well as Asian countries’ economic recovery and 
regaining of rapid growth in later years.  
China  implemented  policies  to  boost  domestic  demand  and  stimulate  economic 
growth. While sticking to no depreciation of the RMB, the Chinese government took 
a  wide  range  of  measures  to  boost  domestic  demand  and  stimulate  economic 
growth,  which  safeguarded  health  and  stability  of  domestic  economic  growth, 
mitigated  difficult  situation  in  the  Asian  economies,  and  fueled  recovery  of  Asian 
economy.  
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
The  adoption  of  these  measures  by  the  Chinese  government  embodied  that  as  a  part  of 
Asia, China had a full awareness of collective interests and responsibility and has made its 
due  contribution  to  the  rapid  recovery  and  regaining  of  growth  momentum  of  the  Asian 
economy. 
2 
 BIS Review 90/2007
3.  
Expedite financial system reform to enhance capability to withstand financial 
crisis 
In the wake of the Asian financial crisis, China attached great importance to financial stability 
and  financial  safety  by  taking  a  mix  of  measures  to  improve  sound  operation  of  the 
microeconomic financial entities, reinforce the role of market mechanism in the allocation of 
financial resources, push forward the reform of foreign exchange management system and 
foreign  exchange  rate  regime  on  a  sequenced  manner,  intensify  monitoring  and  control  of 
financial risks, and enhance the capability to prevent and forestall financial crisis. 
(1) 
Prudential financial regulatory system was improved. The occurrence of a series of 
financial crises, such as Latin American debt crisis and Mexico financial crisis, led 
us  to  the  conclusion  that  fragile  financial  regulatory  system  was  the  main  reason 
behind  financial  crisis  in  many  countries.  Given  under-fledged  financial  regulatory 
system, China intensified the building of financial regulatory policies after the Asian 
financial crisis. Following the establishment of securities regulatory commission, we 
set  up  insurance  and  banking  regulatory  commissions  to  materialize  separated 
operation and regulation with a view to strengthening regulation on various financial 
institutions.  
Reform on property right system was introduced in state-owned commercial banks. 
The Asian financial crisis made us realize that inefficient operation of state-owned 
commercial banks had become the main obstacle to the stability of financial system, 
with  bad  loans  cumulated  over  the  past  years  and  inefficient  banking  governance 
structure putting China’s financial system into a more vulnerable situation. To deal 
with  the  problems  of  low  capital  adequacy  ratio  in  state-owned  commercial  banks 
and weak risk prevention capability, we took a wide range of measures to reform the 
state-owned  commercial  banking  system  and  enhance  their  risk  prevention 
capability.  In  1998,  we  made  270  billion  yuan  worth  of  recapitalization  to  state-
owned  commercial  banks  and  transferred  1400  billion  yuan  non-performing  loans 
from these banks. The top priority in the following years was the reform on state-
owned  commercial  banks.  We  ushered  in  the  reforms  on  ownership  structures  of 
these banks with the successful listing of the Industrial Commercial Bank of China, 
the  China  Construction  Bank,  and  the  Bank  of  China.  Governance  structures  of 
state-owned  commercial  banks  saw  fundamental  changes  owing  to  the  listing  of 
these  banks,  corporate  transparency  enhancement,  and  supervision  based  on 
international accounting standards and external audit requirements. Although facing 
huge  accumulation  of  foreign  exchange  reserves,  China  insisted  on  introducing 
foreign strategic investors, encouraging overseas listing of commercial banks, and 
increasing  inflows  under  capital  account  during  the  reform  of  state-owned 
commercial  banks.  It  was  our  hope  to  break  constraints  hard  to  remove  under 
China’s current system and promote banking governance structure with the help of 
international experience and market pressure.  
Greater efforts were made to develop and foster financial markets. Under-developed 
Asian financial market led to insufficient channels and mechanisms to divert risks, 
as well as Asian countries’ failure to handle financial crisis. Only with the help of a 
wider open financial sector, game rules in the international market, and diversified 
and flexible financial instruments can we defeat crisis. 
Over  the  past  decade, China  has  gradually  established  a financial  market  system 
comprised of money, bond, securities, foreign exchange, gold and futures markets 
featuring  multi-layered  bourses,  diversified  products  and  varied  mechanisms.  In 
addition, we embarked on non-tradable shares reform to advance reform of financial 
systems so as to lay a solid foundation for overall mechanism transformation and full 
play  of  the  role  of  capital  market.  Besides,  we  made  strides  in  developing  bond 
market by improving assets structure of capital market to address the problems of 
(2) 
(3) 
BIS Review 90/2007 
 3
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
simple market structure and mismatch of market size between securities market and 
bond market so as to facilitate optimal assets management of listed companies and 
portfolio of investors. 
Reform  of  the  foreign  exchange  management  system  proceeded  smoothly.  The 
Asian financial crisis made us realize how important a flexible exchange rate regime 
and foreign exchange rate management system to economic growth was. Therefore, 
after  the  full  convertibility  of  RMB  under  the  current  account  in  1996,  we  made 
continuous  efforts  to  push  forward  the  reform  of  foreign  exchange  management 
system by simplifying procedures of RMB convertibility under the current account, 
gradually  lifting  restrictions  on  foreign  exchange  uses  under  the  capital  account, 
meeting appropriate demands on foreign exchange, followed by a series of reform 
measures  on  the  foreign  exchange  rate  regime  based  on  market  demand  and 
supply. On July 21, 2005, the RMB exchange rate against US dollar was adjusted to 
8.11  yuan,  and  the  exchange  rate  policy  featuring  a  peg  to  the  US  dollar  was 
changed to an arrangement with reference to a basket of currencies. From May 21, 
2005, the band of trading prices of the RMB against the US dollar on the interbank 
foreign exchange spot market has widened from 0.3 percent to 0.5 percent, which 
meant that daily trading prices of the RMB against the US dollar on the interbank 
foreign exchange spot market could float within a band of 0.5 percent around the 
central parity released by the China Foreign Exchange Trading System. 
Taking  into  consideration  of  economic  and  financial  situations  both  at  home  and 
abroad,  the  PBC  will  keep  regular  floating  of  the  RMB  exchange  rate  based  on 
market supply and demand with reference to a basket of currencies so as to keep 
the  RMB  exchange  rate  basically  stable  at  an  adaptive  and  equilibrium  level, 
facilitate broadly balanced BOP, and safeguard the stability of macro economy and 
financial market. 
Major  progress  was  made  on  the  building  of  financial  legal  system,  regulatory 
mechanism and infrastructures. Around 1998, China had enacted or revised a series 
of  laws  and  regulation  to  provide  stronger  support  for  regulating  market  activities 
and safeguarding market order, such as the Securities Law, the Company Law, the 
Law on Enterprise Bankruptcy, the Law of Anti-money Laundering and the Property 
Rights  Law.  Thanks  to  effective  coordination  and  risk  monitoring  by  the  financial 
market  regulatory  agencies,  such  as  the  PBC  and  the  China  Banking  Regulatory 
Commission  (CBRC),  a  full-fledged  regulatory  framework  on  financial  market  has 
taken  shape.  Infrastructures  building  made  major  achievements  featuring  better 
systems  for  transaction,  custody  and  settlement  and  more  efficient  interaction  of 
markets. 
Adjustment on economic structures was intensified. It was the most important reform 
measure we adopted following the Asian financial crisis. One of the reasons behind 
the crisis was the inappropriate economic structure and weak capability to forestall 
crisis.  Presently,  China  is  confronted  with  dual  challenges  of  global  economic 
imbalance  and  domestic  economic  imbalance.  The  appreciation  pressure  of  the 
RMB came from the twin surpluses of China’s BOP and was also the reflection of 
economic structure imbalances. 
Without  a  sense  of  urgency  to  expedite  structure  adjustment,  China’s  economy  will  face 
severe  difficulties  in  the  years  to  come.  Fully  understanding  this  challenge,  Chinese 
government  has  pursued  a  mix  of  measures  to  adjust  economic  structure,  including 
improving foreign exchange management to enhance flexibility of exchange rate, adjusting 
foreign  trade  policies  of  encouraging  export  and  limiting  import,  enhancing  efficiency  of 
foreign investment, improving resource and factor price formation mechanism by intensifying 
energy  conservation  assessment  in  line  with  stricter  environment  protection  standards, 
improving fiscal policies, and encouraging consumption, etc. 
4 
 BIS Review 90/2007
The purpose of reviewing the Asian financial crisis a decade ago is to prevent occurrences of 
a new crisis. China is willing to join hands with relevant countries and regions to safeguard 
the stability of regional and global financial systems. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 90/2007 
 5
