Rakesh Mohan: Capital account liberalisation and conduct of monetary policy – 
the Indian experience 
Paper  by  Dr  Rakesh  Mohan,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  presented  at  an 
International  Monetary  Seminar  on  Globalisation,  Inflation  and  Financial  Markets,  organised  by  the 
Bank of France, Paris, 14 June 2007.  
Assistance  of  Sanjay  Hansda,  Indranil  Bhattacharyya,  Partha  Ray  and  M.D.  Patra  in  preparing  the  paper  is  gratefully 
acknowledged. 
 Overall approach 
I.  
The  distinguishing  feature  of  our  overall  reform  process  initiated  in  the  early  1990s  has  been  the 
accomplishment of high economic growth in an environment of macro economic and financial stability. 
In fact, we have achieved acceleration in growth while maintaining price and financial stability. 
During this period, apart from all the other reforms, we have achieved current account convertibility, 
and also opened the capital account to a substantial extent. With this growing openness, we have not 
been insulated from exogenous shocks. These shocks, global as well as domestic, included a series 
of  financial  crises  in  Asia,  Brazil,  Russia  and  Mexico,  in  the  1990s  and  other  events  such  as  9/11 
terrorist  attacks  in  the  US,  border  tensions,  sanctions  imposed  in  the  aftermath  of  nuclear  tests, 
political  uncertainties,  changes  in  the  Government,  and  the  current  oil  shock.  Nonetheless,  stability 
could be maintained in financial markets. Indeed, inflation has been contained since the late-1990s to 
an average of around five per cent, distinctly lower than that of around seven to eight per cent per 
annum over the previous four decades. Simultaneously, the health of the financial sector has recorded 
very significant improvement. 
The story of Indian reforms is by now well-documented (e.g., Ahluwalia, 2002); nevertheless, what is 
less appreciated is that India achieved this acceleration in growth while maintaining price and financial 
stability.  With  increased  deregulation  of  financial  markets  and  increased  integration  of  the  global 
economy, the 1990s were turbulent for global financial markets: 63 countries suffered from systemic 
banking crises in that decade, much higher than 45 in the 1980s. Among countries that experienced 
such crises, the direct cost of reconstructing the financial system was typically very high: for example, 
recapitalisation of banks had cost 55 per cent of GDP in Argentina, 42 per cent in Thailand, 35 per 
cent in Korea and 10 per cent in Turkey. There were high indirect costs of lost opportunities and slow 
economic growth in addition (McKinsey & Co., 2005). It is therefore particularly noteworthy that India 
could  pursue  its  process  of  financial  deregulation  and  opening  of  the  economy  without  suffering 
financial crises during this turbulent period in world financial markets. The cost of recapitalisation of 
public sector banks at less than 1 per cent of GDP is therefore low in comparison. Whereas we can be 
legitimately  gratified  with  this  record,  we  now  need  to  focus  on  the  new  issues  that  need  to  be 
addressed  for  the  next  phase  of  financial  development,  particularly  in  the  context  of  fuller  capital 
account convertibility and increasing integration of financial markets. 
That the current annual GDP growth of around 8.5 to 9 per cent can be achieved in India with a level 
of gross domestic investment in the range of 30 to 33 per cent over the past 4 years suggests that the 
economy is functioning quite efficiently. Thus our policy of gradual and sequenced reform cannot be 
said to have been at the cost of growth or efficiency. We need to ensure that we maintain this level of 
efficiency  and  attempt  to improve on  it  further.  As  the  Indian  economy continues on such a  growth 
path and attempts to accelerate it, new demands are being placed on the financial system. 
In examining the conduct of monetary policy in India in the presence of continuing and gradual capital 
account liberalisation, a key lesson is that this process has to be viewed in the context of the overall 
reform process. As an economy undergoes the transition from a closed to an open economy, first on 
the  current  account  and  then  on  the  capital  account,  the  interest  of  financial  stability  is  served  by 
simultaneous action on a number of different fronts. The framework of monetary policy itself has to 
undergo  a  change  from  the  previous  direct  methods  of  control  of  monetary  aggregates  to  indirect 
methods imparting signals through the market. For such a change to be effective the monetary policy 
transmission process has to be strengthened through development of all financial markets, and the 
building  of  market  micro-infrastructure.  On  the  external  front,  the  transition  from  a  fixed  or  pegged 
exchange  rate  to  a  market  determined  one  itself  needs  careful  assessment  of  the  efficiency  of  the 
foreign exchange market, the capabilities of market players and evaluation of effects of exchange rate 
BIS Review 66/2007 
 1
volatility. The operation of financial markets and the degree of vulnerability that an economy becomes 
exposed to with greater opening is itself influenced significantly by fiscal conditions. Hence the efficacy 
of monetary policy, efficiency of financial markets, and external vulnerability are closely linked to the 
practice of prudent fiscal policy. Finally, for efficient monetary policy transmission, and depth, liquidity 
and efficiency of financial markets, financial intermediaries themselves have to be strengthened. It is in 
view of all these inter-linkages that I have chosen to provide a brief overview of developments in each 
of these areas as they have evolved over the past decade and a half in India. 
II.  
Process of setting out monetary policy objectives 
General objectives  
Traditionally, central banks pursue the twin objectives of price stability and growth or employment. In 
pursuing  the  basic  objectives,  central  banks  also  need  to  keep  in  view  considerations  of  orderly 
financial  markets  and  financial  stability.  Needless  to  say,  the  objectives  of  monetary  policy  are 
interrelated and have trade-offs as well. The preamble to the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 sets out 
the Bank’s objectives as "to regulate the issue of Bank notes and the keeping of reserves with a view 
to securing monetary stability in India and generally to operate the currency and credit system of the 
country  to  its  advantage".  Although  there  is  no  explicit  mandate  for  price  stability,  as  is  the  current 
trend  in  many  countries,  the  objectives  of  monetary  policy  in  India  have  evolved  as  those  of 
maintaining  price  stability  and  ensuring  adequate  flow  of  credit  to  the  productive  sectors  of  the 
economy.  In  essence,  monetary  policy  aims  to  maintain  a  judicious  balance  between  price  stability 
and economic growth. The relative emphasis between price stability and economic growth is governed 
by  the  prevailing  circumstances  at  a  particular  time  and  is  spelt  out  from  time  to  time  in  the  policy 
announcements of the Reserve Bank. 
Considerations of financial stability have assumed greater importance in recent years in view of the 
increasing openness of the Indian economy, financial integration and the possibility of cross border 
contagion.  As  we observed  the  severe  costs  of  financial  instability  elsewhere,  financial stability  has 
ascended  the  hierarchy  of  monetary  policy  objectives  since  the  second  half  of  the  1990s.  Strong 
synergies and complementarities are observed between price stability and financial stability in India. 
Accordingly, we believe that regulation, supervision and development of the financial system remain 
within the legitimate ambit of monetary policy broadly interpreted. 
Framework 
Till 1997-98, monetary policy in India used to be conducted with broad money (M3) as an intermediate 
target. The aim was to regulate money supply consistent with the expected growth of the economy 
and the projected level of inflation. The targeted monetary expansion used to be set on the basis of 
estimates of these two crucial parameters. In practice, the monetary targeting framework was used in 
a flexible manner with feedback from developments in the real sector. 
In the wake of financial sector reforms and opening up of the economy in the 1990s, appropriateness 
of  the  monetary  targeting  framework  was  questioned  with  the  changing  inter-relationship  between 
money,  output  and  prices.  Accordingly,  the  Reserve  Bank  switched  over  in  1998-99  to  a  multiple 
indicator approach. With this approach, interest rates or rates of return in different markets (money, 
capital  and  government  securities  markets),  along  with  data  on  currency,  credit  extended  by  banks 
and  financial  institutions,  fiscal  position,  trade  flows,  capital  flows,  inflation  rate,  exchange  rate, 
refinancing and transactions in foreign exchange available on high-frequency basis, are all examined 
along with output in framing monetary policy. 
The specific features of the Indian economy, including its socio-economic characteristics predicate the 
investing of the monetary authority with multiple objectives for some time to come. While it could be 
desirable in the interest of clarity and transparency to stack up the objectives in a hierarchy, the jury is 
still  out  on  the  merits  of  public  announcement  of  the  policy  weights  assigned  to  each  objective. 
Flexibility in the setting of monetary policy should override consideration of transparency so that public 
indication  of  weighting  patterns  associated  with  objectives  should  not  solidify  into  a  binding  rule. 
Moreover,  continuous  monitoring  of  the  underlying  macro  economic  and  financial  conditions  for 
monetary policy purposes will necessitate a continuous re-balancing of weights assigned to various 
objectives. In a pragmatic sense, therefore, it should suffice for the monetary authority to indicate the 
main objectives and an ordinal ranking, at best, to reflect the reading of underlying developments. 
2 
 BIS Review 66/2007
A  single  objective  for  monetary  policy,  as  is  usually  advocated,  particularly  in  an  inflation  targeting 
framework, is a luxury that India cannot afford, at least over the medium term. The cause of monetary 
policy is not lost, however; analytically, it can be shown that even if one of the multiple objectives is 
nominal among others that may be real, it can serve as the quintessential nominal anchor and enable 
monetary policy to work. This view is supported by a pragmatic and influential strand in the literature 
which  questions  the  recent  proliferation  of  inflation  targeting  as  a  monetary  policy  framework 
(Friedman,  2000;  McCallum,  1981).  As  regards  inflation  targeting,  as  the  monetary  policy  regime 
fulfilling the single mandate advocacy, the jury is still out. Even though there has been an increase in 
the  number of  central  banks  adopting  inflation  targeting  since  the  early  1990s,  a  number  of  central 
banks, notably the Federal Reserve, retain multiple objectives. I am not a monetary scholar, but I do 
feel that, given the current domestic and international complexities, we need to continue with a flexible 
framework  for  monetary  policy.  The  least  we  need  in  the  current  circumstances  is  a  less  simplistic 
approach. 
“In India, we have not favoured the adoption of inflation targeting, while keeping the attainment of low 
inflation as a central objective of monetary policy, along with that of high and sustained growth that is 
so important for a developing economy. Apart from the legitimate concern regarding growth as a key 
objective, there are other factors that suggest that inflation targeting may not be appropriate for India. 
First, unlike many other developing countries we have had a record of moderate inflation, with double 
digit  inflation  being  the  exception,  and  largely  socially  unacceptable.  Second,  adoption  of  inflation 
targeting  requires  the  existence  of  an  efficient  monetary  transmission  mechanism  through  the 
operation of efficient financial markets and absence of interest rate distortions. In India, although the 
money market, government debt and forex market have indeed developed in recent years, they still 
have  some  way  to  go,  whereas  the  corporate  debt  market  is  still  to  develop.  Though  interest  rate 
deregulation  has  largely  been  accomplished,  some  administered  interest  rates  still  persist.  Third, 
inflationary  pressures  still  often  emanate  from  significant  supply  shocks  related  to  the  effect  of  the 
monsoon on agriculture, where monetary policy action may have little role. Finally, in an economy as 
large  as  that  of  India,  with  various  regional  differences,  and  continued  existence  of  market 
imperfections in factor and product markets between regions, the choice of a universally acceptable 
measure of inflation is also difficult” (Mohan, 2006b). 
It is important to recognise the reality of multiple objectives of monetary policy in India. Nonetheless, it 
needs to be appreciated that relative to the past, we need to communicate better on the objective of 
price  stability  and  as  firmly  as  possible,  albeit  without  necessarily  a  precise  numerical  objective. 
Indeed, why should a monetary policy invested with multiple objectives choose to quantify only one – 
the inflation rate? Indeed, setting such a precise numerical objective for inflation runs the risk of loss of 
central bank credibility in the context of the dominance of supply side shocks emanating from sources 
such as monsoon failure and administered pricing of various agricultural commodities and petroleum 
products. Whereas the share of agriculture in GDP has been declining and is now less than 20 per 
cent,  the  sector  continues  to  be  extremely  important  since  the  majority  of  the  population  remains 
dependent on agriculture. Therefore, setting precise numerical targets for inflation is fraught with the 
risk of loss of reputation across a large constituency. 
Nevertheless,  as  the  Indian  economy  becomes  increasingly  open  with  fuller  capital  account 
convertibility,  the  objective  of  progressively  bringing  inflation  down  to  near  international  levels  and 
maintaining price stability assumes greater importance. The experience of successfully bringing down 
inflation from persistent higher levels since the late 1990s to around 5 per cent in recent years has 
already brought down inflation expectations significantly.  
As  we  place  greater  emphasis  on  low  inflation  and  price  stability,  we  also  need  to  improve 
communication with respect to the understanding of inflation. At present, headline inflation in India is 
indicated by the weekly release of the All India Wholesale Price Index (WPI). Most countries use the 
Consumer Price Index (CPI) instead. The CPI is difficult to use in India because of the existence of 4 
indexes of CPI, each reflecting the consumption basket of different sets of consumers in urban and 
rural areas. 
An appropriate inflation indicator should (i) reflect price changes of constituent items accurately and (ii) 
provide some understanding of headline inflation. Whereas it is feasible to construct an economy wide 
consumer price index on the lines of the harmonized consumer price index (HICP) adopted in the UK 
and the Euro Area, it is not clear how useful it would be as an indicator of the general price level, given 
the widely differing consumption baskets as between rich and poor, between rural and urban areas 
and even between regions in India. In fact, a measure of producer prices to which the wholesale price 
index (WPI) is akin, is likely to be more representative and familiar across the country, since these 
BIS Review 66/2007 
 3
prices are more likely to be uniform across the country. Accordingly, the commodity/services based 
price index should be seen as useful more as an indicator/information variable than as defining the 
inflation objective. Moreover, the WPI is available on a weekly basis, with a two week lag, whereas the 
CPI indices are only available on monthly basis, and with a 2 month lag. 
Monetary policy should be more explicitly associated with managing inflation expectations rather than 
current inflation. Accordingly, the guiding criterion for inclusion of a variable in the inflation indicators 
panel should be the information content on future inflation. An important sub-set would be real sector 
indicators  of  future  inflation  such  as  variability  of  output  around  trend/potential,  capacity  utilisation, 
inventory,  corporate  performance,  industrial/  investment  expectations  and  other  indicators  of 
aggregate demand. We have initiated greater quantitative technical work in these areas over the last 
couple of years to better inform our monetary policy making with a forward looking approach. 
The Reserve Bank has also initiated inflation expectation surveys so that we can have some direct 
indicators of changing inflation expectations of the public. These quarterly surveys are still in the pilot 
testing stage so their results are not yet in the public domain. But the initial results look promising.  
The more complex is the mandate for the central bank, the more is the necessity of communication 
(Mohan,  2005).  The  Reserve  Bank  of  India  clearly  has  complex  objectives.  Apart  from  pursuing 
monetary policy, financial stability is one of the overriding concerns of the RBI. Within the objective of 
monetary policy, both control of inflation and providing adequate credit to the productive sectors of the 
economy so as to foster growth are equally important. This apart, the Reserve Bank acts as a banking 
regulator,  public  debt  manager,  government  debt  market  regulator  and  currency  issuer.  Faced  with 
such multiple tasks and complex mandate, there is an utmost necessity of clearer communication on 
the part of the Reserve Bank. 
A  significant  step  towards  transparency  of  monetary  policy  implementation  is  formation  of  various 
Technical  Advisory  Committees  (TACs)  in  the  Reserve  Bank  with  representatives  from  market 
participants, other regulators and experts. In line with the international best practices and with a view 
to further strengthening the consultative process in monetary policy, the Reserve Bank, in July 2005, 
set  up  a  Technical  Advisory  Committee  on  Monetary  Policy  (TACMP)  with  external  experts  in  the 
areas of monetary economics, central banking, financial markets and public finance. The Committee 
meets at least once in a quarter, reviews macroeconomic and monetary developments and advises 
the Reserve Bank on the stance of monetary policy. The Committee has contributed to enriching the 
inputs and processes of monetary policy setting in India. Whether any further institutional changes are 
necessary, however, remains an open question. 
Development of monetary policy instruments and transmission process 
III.  
Consistent  with  the  structural  changes  in  the  monetary  policy  framework,  improvements  in  the 
channels  of  transmission  emerged  early  on  as  a  concurrent  objective  in  order  to  enhance  policy 
effectiveness. Monetary policy clearly cannot work without adequate monetary transmission and the 
appropriate monetary transmission cannot take place without efficient price discovery of interest rates 
and exchange rates in the overall functioning of financial markets and their integration. Therefore, the 
corresponding  development  of  the  money  market,  Government  securities  market  and  the  foreign 
exchange market became necessary. Accordingly, from the 1990s, the RBI simultaneously undertook 
the  development  of  the  domestic  financial  market  spectrum,  sequenced  into  the  process  of 
deregulation of interest rates, the withdrawal of statutory pre-emptions, the qualitative improvement in 
monetary-fiscal coordination and the progressive liberalisation of the exchange and payments regime, 
including  the  institution  of  a  market  oriented  exchange  rate  policy.  The  development  of  financial 
markets  in  India  encompassed  the  introduction  of  new  market  segments,  new  instruments  and  a 
sharper focus on regulatory oversight. 
We  have  made  a  carefully  calibrated  transition  from  an  administered  interest  rate  regime  to  one  of 
market  determined  interest  rates  over  a  period  of  time,  while  minimising  disruption  and  preserving 
financial stability. This approach also provided market participants adequate time to adjust to the new 
regime. 
The growing market orientation of monetary policy has tilted the choice of instruments decisively from 
direct to more indirect and market-based monetary policy measures. Until the early 1990s, statutory 
pre-emptions in the form of cash reserve ratio (CRR) and statutory liquidity ratio (SLR) requirements 
locked  away  nearly  65  per  cent  of  bank  deposits,  severely  eroding  the  profitability  of  the  financial 
system and effectiveness of monetary policy. The SLR was brought down from 38.5 per cent of net 
4 
 BIS Review 66/2007
demand and time liabilities (NDTL) in early 1992 to 25 per cent in October-1997. The CRR had been 
reduced progressively from 15 per cent in 1991 to 4.5 per cent in 2003, before it had to be increased 
again in steps to 6.5 per cent in the current monetary tightening phase. Monetary maneuverability has 
now been strengthened further with removal of the erstwhile floor of 3 per cent and ceiling of 20 per 
cent  in  CRR  through  a  statutory  amendment.  The  statutory  minimum  SLR  of  25  per  cent  has  also 
been removed to provide for greater flexibility in the RBI’s monetary policy operations. 
The key policy development that has enabled a more independent monetary policy environment was 
the  discontinuation  of  automatic  monetisation  of  the  government's  fiscal  deficit  since  April  1997 
through an agreement between the Government and the Reserve Bank of India in September 1994, 
marking  a  unique  milestone  in  monetary-fiscal  coordination.  Another  important  institutional  change 
was the freeing of the RBI’s balance sheet from the burden of exchange guarantees accumulated in 
the  pre-reform  era.  Subsequently,  enactment  of  the  Fiscal  Responsibility  and  Budget  Management 
Act, 2003 has strengthened the institutional mechanism further: from April 2006 onwards, the Reserve 
Bank  is  no  longer permitted  to  subscribe  to  government  securities  in  the  primary  market.  This  step 
completes  the  transition  to  a  fully  market  based  system  for  Government  securities.  Looking  ahead, 
consequent to the recommendations of the Twelfth Finance Commission, the Central Government has 
now ceased to raise resources on behalf of State Governments, which now have to access the market 
directly. Thus, State Governments' capability in raising resources will be market determined and based 
on  their  own  financial  health.  For  ensuring  a  smooth  transition,  institutional  processes  are  being 
revamped towards greater integration in monetary operations. 
Given  the  pivotal  role  of  the  money  market  in  transmission,  efforts  initiated  in  the  late  1980s  were 
intensified over the full spectrum. Following the withdrawal of the ceiling on inter-bank money market 
rates in 1989, several financial innovations in terms of money market instruments such as certificate of 
deposits, commercial paper and money market mutual funds were introduced in phases. Barriers to 
entry  were  gradually  eased  by  increasing  the  number  of  players  and  relaxing  the  issuance  and 
subscription norms in respect of money market instruments, thus fostering better price discovery. In 
order to improve monetary transmission as also on prudential considerations, steps were initiated in 
1999 to turn the call money market into a pure inter-bank market and, simultaneously, to develop a 
repo  market  outside  the  official  window  for  providing  a  stable  collateralised  funding  alternative, 
particularly  to  non-banks  who  were  phased  out  of  the  call  segment,  and  banks.  The  Collateralised 
Borrowing and Lending Obligation (CBLO), a repo instrument developed by the Clearing Corporation 
of India Limited (CCIL) for its members, with the CCIL acting as a central counter-party for borrowers 
and lenders, was permitted as a money market instrument in 2002. With the development of market 
repo and CBLO segments, the call money market has been transformed into a pure inter-bank market, 
including  primary  dealers,  from  August  2005.  A  recent  noteworthy  development  is  the  substantial 
migration of money market activity from the uncollateralised call money segment to the collateralised 
market  repo  and  CBLO  markets.  Thus,  uncollateralised  overnight  transactions  are  now  limited  to 
banks  and  primary  dealers  in  the  interest  of  financial  stability.  Technological  upgradation  has 
accompanied  the  development  of  the  money  market.  Efforts  are  currently  underway  to  introduce 
screen-based negotiated quote-driven dealings in call/notice and term money markets. Information on 
overnight rates and volumes would be disseminated by the RBI in order to enable market participants 
to assess the liquidity conditions in an efficient and transparent manner. 
The  government  securities  market was moved  to  an  auction-based  system  in 1992  to  obtain  better 
price  discovery  and  to  impart  greater  transparency  in  operations.  This  was  a  major  institutional 
change, which, along with the freeing of the money and foreign exchange market and the phasing out 
of  automatic  monetisation  of  fiscal  deficits,  created  a  conducive  environment  for  the  progressive 
deregulation that was to follow. The setting up of well capitalised Primary Dealers (PDs) for dealing in 
Government securities  followed  in  1995,  backed up  by  the  introduction  of  Delivery  versus  Payment 
(DvP)  for  Government  securities,  adoption  of  new  techniques  of  floatation,  introduction  of  new 
instruments,  particularly  Treasury  Bills  of  varying  maturities  and  repos  on  all  Central  Government 
dated securities and Treasury Bills of all maturities by April 1997. 
Since April 1992, the entire Central Government borrowing programme in dated securities has been 
conducted through auctions. In 2005, the Reserve Bank put in place an anonymous order matching 
system to improve price discovery, and settlement procedures for mitigating risks. To further activate 
trading and improve the depth of the securities market, the introduction of a “when issued” market has 
also been announced recently. All these measures have brought about significant changes and a new 
treasury culture is developing, contributing to the formation of the term structure of interest rates. The 
BIS Review 66/2007 
 5
demand for government securities is now driven more by considerations of effective management of 
liquidity rather than by statutory liquidity requirements. 
The Indian foreign exchange market has been widened and deepened with the transition to a market-
determined exchange rate system in March 1993 and the subsequent liberalisation of restrictions on 
various  external  transactions  leading  up  to  current  account  convertibility  under  Article  VIII  of  the 
Articles of Agreement of the International Monetary Fund in 1994. Since the mid-1990s, banks and 
other authorised entities have been accorded significant freedom to operate in the market. Banks have 
been allowed freedom to fix their trading limits and to borrow and invest funds in the overseas markets 
up to specified limits. They have been allowed to use derivative products for hedging risks and asset-
liability management purposes. Similarly, corporates have been given flexibility to book forward cover 
based on past turnover and are allowed to use a variety of instruments like interest rates and currency 
swaps, caps/collars and forward rate agreements. The swap market for hedging longer-term exposure 
has developed substantially in recent years. A number of steps have also been taken to liberalise the 
capital account covering foreign direct investment, portfolio investment, outward investment including 
direct  investment  as  well  as  depository  receipt  and  convertible  bonds,  opening  of  Indian  corporate 
offices  abroad  and  the  like.  In  recent  years,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  delegated  exchange  control 
procedures  to  banks  and  authorised  dealers  to  such  an  extent  that  there  is  hardly  any  need  to 
approach the Reserve Bank for any approval. These reforms are being reflected in vibrancy in activity 
in various segments of the foreign exchange market with the daily turnover over US $ 28 billion (as at 
the end of April 2007). 
A  key  area  of  emphasis  in  the  development  of  financial  markets  in  India  is  the  provision  of  the 
appropriate technological infrastructure for trading, clearing, payment and settlement. Since the late 
1990s,  the  establishment  of  a  modern,  robust  payments  and  settlement  system  consistent  with 
international  best  practices  has  emerged  as  an  important  objective  of  the  RBI.  A  three-pronged 
strategy of consolidation, development and integration has been pursued in this regard. Consolidation 
revolves  around  strengthening  the  existing  payment  system  by  providing  the  latest  levels  of 
technology.  The  developmental  dimension  includes  real  time  gross  settlement,  centralised  funds 
management, securities settlement and structured electronic financial messaging. Other key elements 
in  the  technological  content  of  market  development  are  electronic  clearing  (introduced  in  1994), 
electronic  finds  transfer  (1996),  quick  funds  transfers  with  centralised  settlement  in  Mumbai  (2003), 
negotiated dealing system (NDS), screen based order matching system (2002) for electronic reporting 
of trades and online dissemination system and submission of bids for primary issuance of government 
securities  and  a  Clearing  Corporation  of  India  Ltd.  (CCIL),  promoted  by  banks,  financial  institutions 
and primary dealers for clearing and settlement of trades in foreign exchange, government securities 
and  other  debt  instruments,  commenced  operations  in  April  2001.  The  CCIL  acts  as  a  central 
counterparty (CCP) to all transactions and guarantees settlement of trades executed through its rules 
and regulations eliminating counterparty risks in adherence to international best practices. Oversight 
over the payments and settlement system is vested in a National Payments Council, and Board for 
Payment and Settlement Systems established within the RBI. 
As may be seen from this brief description of the various measures that had to be taken to develop the 
market and institutional framework for efficient monetary policy transmission, development of markets 
is an arduous and time consuming activity that requires conscious policy making and implementation. 
Markets do not develop and function overnight: they have to be created, nurtured and monitored on a 
continuous  basis  before  they  start  functioning  autonomously.  Efficient  transmission  of  monetary 
impulses clearly needs integration of markets.  
Issues 
Interest rate deregulation is essential to smoothen the transmission channels of monetary policy and 
to enhance the signaling effects of policy changes. Whereas considerable progress has been made in 
this direction, full deregulation is constrained by the need for various policy interventions in the context 
of a still developing economy. The Government had nationalised most of the banking system in 1969 
in order to ensure the spread of banking throughout the country. Whereas new private sector banks 
have now been introduced since the mid 1990s, public sector banks still account for 70 per cent of 
banking assets. These banks need to continue to perform various public policy activities, particularly in 
the area of agriculture, small and medium enterprises, and the cause of overall financial inclusion. This 
can  also  include  certain  degree  of  credit  allocation  and  interest  rate  directions.  Hence,  monetary 
transmission can get muted at the margin.  
6 
 BIS Review 66/2007
The Government also fixes certain administered interest rates on a number of small saving schemes 
and on provident funds, along with providing certain tax incentives, in the absence of well developed 
social  security  systems.  As  banks  have  to  compete  for  funds with  small saving  schemes,  the  rates 
offered  on  long-term  deposits  mobilised  by  banks  sometimes  have  to  be  set  at  levels  higher  than 
would  have  obtained  under  competitive  market  conditions.  In  fact,  this  has  been  observed  to  be  a 
factor  contributing  to  downward  stickiness  of  lending  rates,  which  has  some  implications  for  the 
effectiveness of monetary policy. This is a reality that we have to appreciate and live with given the 
absence  of  social  security  coverage  and  adequate  safety  nets  in  the  country.  These  small  savings 
schemes administered by the government through the wide reach of post offices, and some through 
commercial banks, provide small savers access to tax savings instruments that are seen as safe and 
stable. Whereas they do have some impact in terms of blunting monetary transmission mechanisms, 
they  can  perhaps  be  seen  as  contributing  to  overall  financial  stability.  Benchmarking  these 
administered interest rates to market determined rates has been proposed from time to time. Whereas 
some rationalisation in schemes has indeed been done, more progress will depend on the emergence 
of  better  social  security  and  pension  systems,  and  perhaps  easier  access  to  marketable  sovereign 
instruments.  
While  the  government  securities  market  is  fairly  well  developed  now,  the  corporate  debt  market 
remains  to  be  developed  for  facilitating  monetary  signaling  across  various  market  segments.  We 
understand, however, that it has been difficult to develop the corporate bond market in most countries. 
Almost half the world's corporate bond market is in the US, and another 15 per cent in Japan. Among 
other countries, while the UK has a long standing bond market, the European bond market has only 
began  to  really  develop  after  European  monetary  integration  and  introduction  of  the  Euro.  Among 
developing  countries,  it  is  perhaps  only  South  Korea  that  has  a  reasonably  well  developed  bond 
market.  
In  the  absence  of  a  well  developed  corporate  debt  market,  the  demand  for  debt  instruments  has 
largely concentrated on government securities with the attendant implications for the yield curve and, 
in turn, for monetary transmission. The secondary market for corporate debt has suffered from lack of 
market making resulting in poor liquidity. Corporates continue to prefer private placements to public 
issues for raising resources in view of ease of procedures and lower costs.  
There is a need for development of mortgage-backed securities, credit default swaps, bond insurance 
institutions for credit enhancement, abridgment of disclosure requirements for listed companies, credit 
information  bureaus,  rating  requirements  for  unlisted  companies,  real  time  reporting  of  primary  and 
secondary trading, and eventual retail access to the bond market by non-profit institutions and small 
corporates. A concerted effort is now being made to set up the institutional and technological structure 
that would enable the corporate debt market to operate. Furthermore, the on-going reforms in the area 
of  social  security  coupled  with  the  emergence  of  pension  and  provident  funds  are  expected  to 
increase the demand for long-term debt instruments. In the process, the investor base for government 
securities  would  be  broadened,  extending  the  monetary  transmission  across  new  players  and 
participants. 
For monetary policy to be more effective, the monetary transmission process has to be improved on a 
continuous basis so that price discovery is better. In this endeavour, we need to keep developing the 
various  financial  markets,  increase  their  connection  with  credit  markets,  remove  distortions  in  the 
market and reverse current tendency to move back to administered interest rates.  
Development of financial markets 
IV.  
There  has  been  a  great  deal  of  progress  in  developing  the  money  market,  government  securities 
market and forex market. With greater capital account openness, we need to develop them further to 
enable market participants to absorb greater volatility and shocks. Each of these markets needs to be 
deeper. In the context of progress towards further capital account convertibility, the market participants 
are going to be faced with increased risks on multiple accounts: volatility in capital flows, volatility in 
asset prices, increased contagion and state of ability of legacy institutions in managing risks. 
Money market 
The money market remains fragmented with different segments giving rise to different overnight rates. 
The call money market, which remains an uncollateralised market has now become a pure inter-bank 
market amongst banks and primary dealers with the withdrawal of non-banks. Alongside, primarily for 
BIS Review 66/2007 
 7
non-bank participants at the shorter end, there is the market repo outside the repo market under the 
liquidity  adjustment  facility.  This  is  a  collateralised  segment  of  money  market.  The  collateralised 
borrowing and lending obligation (CBLO) market, operated by the CCIL amongst its members is yet 
another collateralised money market instrument. With the decision to move gradually towards a pure 
inter-bank call/term money market, there is a need to remove the operational/regulatory constraints in 
the repo market. One of the perceived hurdles in the development of the repo market is the inability to 
rollover contracts. To enable continuous access to funds from the repo market, rollover of repos has 
been allowed with migration to DvP III.  
The issue remains what further developments are needed in terms of eligible collaterals, membership, 
etc to integrate the different segments of the money market so that the money market as a whole is 
enabled to cope better with market fluctuations in the run-up to fuller capital account convertibility. An 
important gap in developing the money market is that term money market is still to emerge and hence, 
the evolution of yield curve remains inadequate. We need to explore what is to be done to build this 
market with further opening of capital account.  
Interest rate derivatives 
The need for a well developed interest rate derivatives market cannot be overemphasised in providing 
effective  hedging  tools  for  interest  rate  risks  present  in  the  balance  sheet  and  in  facilitating  trading 
based on two-way view on interest rates, which is not possible in the underlying cash market in the 
absence  of  short  selling.  Deregulation  of  interest  rates,  which  helped  in  making  financial  market 
operations efficient and cost effective, has brought to the fore a wide array of risks faced by market 
participants.  To  manage  and  control  these  risks,  several  instruments  such  as  Forward  Rate 
Agreements (FRA) and Interest Rate Swaps (IRS) were introduced in July 1999, which could provide 
effective  hedges  against  interest  rate  risks.  Further,  in  June  2003,  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  had 
issued guidelines to banks/primary dealers/FIs for transacting in exchange traded interest rate futures, 
which  were  introduced  on  the  exchanges.  There  has  also  been  a  sharp  increase  in  the  volume  of 
transactions in the OTC products. Though there has been a significant increase in the number and 
amount of contracts, participation in the markets continues to remain limited mainly to select foreign 
and private sector banks and PDs. In fact, PDs are expected to be market makers in this segment. 
Since some difficulties have been experienced in the operation of the exchange traded interest rate 
futures market, we are now in the process of reviewing the structure so that it can become an active 
market for interest rate discovery and hedging. 
Despite the growing volumes in the OTC derivatives market, as is the case globally, there had been 
some  apprehensions  regarding  the  appropriate  legal  backing  for  these  instruments.  This  issue  has 
now  been  addressed  with  an  appropriate  amendment  to  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  Act.  OTC 
derivatives are now clearly legally valid, even if they are not traded on any recognised stock exchange. 
Exchange traded derivatives have their own role to play in the debt market – but by their very nature 
they have to be standardised products. OTC derivatives, on the other hand can be customised to the 
requirements of the trading entities. Thus, both OTC and exchange traded derivatives are essential for 
market development.  
A  central counter  party  based  clearing arrangement for  OTC derivatives  would  reduce counterparty 
risk and extend the benefits of netting. Accordingly, in order to strengthen the OTC derivatives market 
and to mitigate the risks involved, a clearing arrangement for the OTC interest rate derivatives also 
need to be considered. This measure would strengthen the OTC interest rate derivatives market, and 
provide greater transparency as need through adequate reporting requirements.  
While everywhere in the world, most trading is in the OTC segment, there is no reason why we cannot 
innovate and have electronic based, order matched trading to have a wider reach and also thereby 
enhance  liquidity  in  the  market.  Work  is  now  afoot  to  provide  for  an  exchange  traded  system  for 
corporate bonds.  
As we make arrangements for the operation of better markets for interest rate discovery, trading and 
hedging  instruments,  I  would  like  to  stress  the  need  and  importance  of  sound  and  adequate  risk 
management  practices  by  market  participants  in  the  derivatives  market.  International  experience 
teaches us the need for greater care in handling these instruments. I would expect that the market 
players  not  only  put  in  place  an  appropriate  risk  management  policy  and  procedures  for  these 
products, but would also give equal importance to the skills development of their human resources to 
handle these instruments and to appreciate the underlying risks. As interest rate derivatives grow, an 
8 
 BIS Review 66/2007
area which requires attention relate to accounting and disclosures. The relevant standards need to be 
comprehensive and benchmarked to international standards. 
Government securities market 
Following the enactment of the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Act, 2003, from April 
2006 onwards, the Reserve Bank is no longer permitted to subscribe to government securities in the 
primary  market.  In  order  to  ensure  a  smooth  transition  to  the  new  regime,  restructuring  of  current 
institutional processes has already been initiated (Mohan, 2006a). These steps are helping to achieve 
the desired integration in the conduct of monetary operations.  
In the new milieu, the Reserve Bank may need to carry out greater open market operations (OMO) in 
the secondary market. Such operations could be qualitatively different from its LAF or MSS operations, 
which are guided by considerations of liquidity management primarily at the shorter end. The issue is 
what should be the determining factor for such secondary market operations. Generally, by controlling 
the short-term interest rate while letting markets determine the rest of the yield curve, the central bank 
attempts to transmit monetary policy impulses across the yield curve. The sovereign yield curve in turn 
influences  the  lending  and  deposit  rates  in  the  economy.  Once bank  lending  gets  affected,  interest 
rates  impact  real  variables  such  as  consumption  and  investment,  which  in  turn  impact  output  and 
inflation levels. However, the government securities market is yet to emerge fully as a deep and liquid 
market across different maturities. Given such a state, in the interest of monetary transmission, there 
is a case for secondary market operation across the yield and maturity spectrum in the government 
securities market and more so, in the context of RBI’s withdrawal from the primary market. 
Efforts are being made to improve the retail holding of government securities since the Government 
securities  market  still  lacks  in  depth  and  is  dominated  by  banks  and  financial  institutions  often 
exhibiting  uni-directional  perceptions  about  liquidity.  To  attract  retail  participation  in  government 
securities market, one of the foremost tasks ahead is to create an environment that provides a safe 
and secure investment avenue for small investors with adequate returns and liquidity. In this context, 
the RBI is emphasising the provision of demat holding facility for non-institutional retail/small investors 
for  risk  mitigation  in  scrip  losses  or  settlement  of  deals  in  the  secondary  market.  Non-competitive 
bidding has also been introduced since January 2002 for direct access to the primary issues for non-
sophisticated investors. 
As part of its constant endeavour to improve the facilities for trading and settlement in the Government 
securities market, the Reserve Bank had formally launched, on August 1, 2005, an electronic Order 
Matching  trading  module  for  Government  securities  on  its  Negotiated  Dealing  System  (NDS-OM  in 
short). The NDS-OM is an additional facility available to the participants and the participants continue 
to have the option of using the current reporting and trading platform of the NDS. While the NDS-OM 
now  accounts  for  a  significant  share  of  the  total  traded  volume  in  government  securities,  the 
countrywide,  anonymous,  screen  based,  order  driven  system  for  trading  in  government  securities 
introduced in the stock exchanges (NSE, BSE and OTCEI) in January 2003 has continued to suffer 
from very poor trading volumes, which need to be looked into for revival. 
Corporate debt market 
In  order  to  activate  the corporate debt  market,  the government had  appointed  an expert committee 
(Chairman: R.H. Patil) to provide directions on how this is to be done (Government of India, 2005). A 
key  point  that  I  would  like  to  emphasise  is  that  learning  from  the  experience  of  developing  the 
Government  securities  market,  we  need  to  proceed  in  a  measured  manner  with  well  thought  out 
appropriate  sequencing  for  developing  the  corporate  debt  market.  Financial  market  development 
involves  action  on  a  number  of  fronts  with  the  key  objective,  obviously,  being  to  enable  the  most 
efficient allocation of resources to the most productive uses and efficient intermediation from savers to 
investors. In other words, banking development, equity market development, debt market development 
all go hand in hand. And within the debt market, an efficient Government securities market is essential 
for price discovery and for providing reliable benchmarks to price corporate bonds off the credit risk 
free yield curve. 
The key problem is that for a corporate bond market to function, we need a large number of issuers, a 
large  number  of  investors  and  issues  of  a  large  size.  It  may  be  noted  that  each  of  the  problems 
mentioned  in  respect  of  corporate  bonds  has  been  addressed  in  the  context  of  development  of 
G-securities market. That goes to show that the problems are not insurmountable but only that it takes 
BIS Review 66/2007 
 9
some  time  to  resolve.  But  we  have  just  begun  and  work  is  now  in  progress.  It  is  true  that  the 
Government securities market took a long time to develop, despite being much simpler. The corporate 
debt market being much more complex, would require some extra effort to move ahead. In short, we 
have a long way to go but we have to make a determined effort. 
Exchange rate policy 
V.  
Our exchange rate policy in recent years has been guided by the broad principles of careful monitoring 
and management of exchange rates with flexibility, without a fixed target or a pre-announced target or 
a  band,  coupled  with  the  ability  to  intervene  if  and  when  necessary,  while  allowing  the  underlying 
demand and supply conditions to determine the exchange rate movements over a period in an orderly 
way. Subject to this predominant objective, the exchange rate policy is guided by the need to reduce 
excess volatility, prevent the emergence of destabilising speculative activities, help maintain adequate 
level of reserves, and develop an orderly foreign exchange market.  
The Indian market, like other developing countries markets, is not yet very deep and broad, and can 
sometimes  be  characterised  by  uneven  flow  of  demand  and  supply  over  different  periods.  In  this 
situation,  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  has  been  prepared  to  make  sales  and  purchases  of  foreign 
currency  in  order  to  even  out  lumpy  demand  and  supply  in  the  relatively  thin  forex  market  and  to 
smoothen jerky movements. However, such intervention is not governed by a predetermined target or 
band around the exchange rate. As the foreign exchange exposure of the Indian economy expands, 
the role of such uneven demands can be seen to reduce. 
With this approach, we have achieved flexibility along with stability in the external sector. Increased 
earnings from exports of services and remittances coupled with enhanced foreign investment inflows 
have  provided  strength  to  the  external  sector.  Reflecting  the  strong  growth  prospects  of  the  Indian 
economy, the country has received large investment inflows, both direct and portfolio, since 1993-94 
as  compared  with  negligible  levels  till  the  early  1990s.  Total  foreign  investment  flows  (direct  and 
portfolio) increased from US$ 111 million in 1990-91 to US$ 24,748 million in 2006-07. Over the same 
period, current account deficits remained modest – averaging one per cent of GDP since 1991-92 and 
in fact recorded small surpluses during 2001-04. With capital flows remaining in excess of the current 
financing requirements, the overall balance of payments recorded persistent surpluses leading to an 
increase  in  reserves,  which  have  now  reached  US$  1,99,179  million  at  end-March  2007.  The 
emergence of foreign exchange surplus lending to continuing and large accretion to reserves since the 
mid  1990s  has  been  a  novel  experience  for  India  after  experiencing  chronic  balance  of  payment 
problems  for almost  four  decades.  These  surpluses began  to  arise  after  the  opening  of  the  current 
account, reduction in trade protection, and partial opening of the capital account from the early to mid 
1990s. 
India’s integration with the world economy is also getting stronger, with implications for the conduct of 
exchange rate policies in the future. Trade in goods (i.e., exports plus imports) as a proportion of GDP 
increased  from  14.6  per  cent  in  1990-91  to  32.5  per  cent  in  2005-06;  while  gross  current  account 
receipts and payments as percentage of GDP increased from 19.4 per cent to 50.2 per cent over the 
same period, reflecting the buoyant growth in Indian trade in services. The trade deficit is also as high 
as  6.4  per  cent  of  GDP.  Correspondingly,  in  the  capital  account,  gross  flows  (total  inflows  plus 
outflows) have more than doubled as a proportion of GDP: from 12.1 per cent in 1990-91 to 32.4 per 
cent  (US$  260  billion)  in  2005-06.  Thus,  the  Indian  economy  is  today  substantially  exposed  to  the 
international economy and arguably more open than even the United States in terms of these metrics.  
Issues 
Dutch disease 
In recent years, the growth in current payments has been accompanied by healthy growth in current 
receipts  –  in  both  goods  and  services,  thus  providing  for  some  confidence  in  the  sustainability  of 
current trade patterns and financial stability. Current receipts pay for up to about 90 per cent of current 
payments. Within current receipts, merchandise exports are being rapidly exceeded in terms of growth 
rates  by  software  earnings,  currently  at  2.9  per  cent  of  GDP.  Besides,  private  transfer  receipts, 
comprising mainly remittances from Indians working abroad, seemed to have acquired a permanent 
character and have risen steadily to constitute around 3 per cent of GDP in recent years, impervious to 
exchange rate movements. These factors have strengthened the capability of the Indian economy to 
10 
 BIS Review 66/2007
sustain higher current account deficits (CADs) than in the past. Net capital flows have thus regularly 
exceeded the CAD requirements by a fair measure, enabling large accretions to the reserves. 
The large inflow of remittances and major and sustained spurt in software exports coupled with capital 
inflows have the potential for possible overvaluation of the currency and the resultant erosion of long-
term competitiveness of other traditional and goods sectors – popularly known as the Dutch disease. 
Given  the  fact  that  more  people  are  in  the  goods  sector,  the  human  aspects  of  the  exchange  rate 
management  should  not  be  lost  sight  of.  Therefore,  the  Dutch  Disease  syndrome  has  so  far  been 
managed  by  way  of  reserves  build-up  and  sterilisation,  the  former  preventing  excessive  nominal 
appreciation and the latter preventing higher inflation. However, the issue remains how long and to 
what extent such an exchange rate management strategy would work given the fact that we are faced 
with  large  and  continuing  capital  flows  apart  from  strengthening  current  receipts  on  account  of 
remittances and software exports. This issue has assumed increased importance over the last year 
with increased capital flows arising from the higher sustained growth performance of the economy and 
significant enhancement of international confidence in the Indian economy. 
Liquidity management 
Volatility  in  capital  flows  and  hence  in  liquidity  has  marked  the  period  during  2001-07  and  posed 
considerable problems in liquidity and exchange rate management. Sharp shifts in capital flows can be 
explained  as  partly  frictional  and  arising  from  seasonal  and  transient  factors,  partly  cyclical  and 
associated with the pick up in growth momentum and the induced demand for bank credit, and partly 
led  by  growth  expectation.  Moreover,  the  absorption  of  external  savings  is  also  dependent  on  the 
stage of a business cycle that a country may be going through. Further, the stage of business cycle 
and the timing of capital flows may not coincide. The early years of this decade were characterised by 
low industrial growth and hence the absorptive capacity of the country was constrained. As we have 
entered an expansionary phase, the current account has widened and the potential for some greater 
absorption has manifested itself.  
The volatile capital flows have warranted appropriate monetary operations to obviate wide fluctuations 
in market rates and ensure reasonable stability consistent with the monetary policy stance. In fact, the 
Indian  experience  illustrates  the  tight  link  between  external  sector  management  and  domestic 
monetary management. What may be small movements in capital flows for the rest of the world can 
translate into large domestic liquidity movements distorting market exchange and interest rates in a 
developing country. Just as foreign exchange reserves can act as a shock absorber, on the external 
front, we had to look for a parallel liquidity shock absorber for domestic monetary management.  
In this context, a new instrument, named as the Market Stabilisation Scheme (MSS) has evolved as a 
useful  instrument  of  monetary  policy  to  sustain  open  market  operations.  The  MSS  was  made 
operational from April 2004. Under this scheme, which is meant exclusively for liquidity management, 
the  Reserve  Bank  has  been  empowered  to  issue  Government  Treasury  Bills  and  medium  duration 
dated  securities  for  the  purpose  of  liquidity  absorption.  The  scheme  works  by  impounding  the 
proceeds of auctions of Treasury bill and Government securities in a separate identifiable MSS cash 
account maintained and operated by the RBI. The amounts credited into the MSS cash account are 
appropriated only for the purpose of redemption and / or buy back of the Treasury Bills and / or dated 
securities issued under the MSS. MSS securities are indistinguishable from normal Treasury Bills and 
Government dated securities in the hands of the lender. The payments for interest and discount on 
MSS securities are not made from the MSS Account, but shown in the Union budget and other related 
documents transparently as distinct components under separate sub-heads. The introduction of MSS 
has  succeeded,  in  principle,  in  restoring  LAF  to  its  intended  function  of daily  liquidity  management. 
Since its introduction in April 2004, the MSS has served as a very useful instrument for medium term 
monetary and liquidity management. It has been unwound in times of low capital flows and greater 
liquidity  needs  and  built  up  when  excess  capital  flows  could  lead  to  excess  domestic  liquidity.  In 
principle, the MSS is designed to sterilise excess capital flows that are deemed to be durable or semi-
durable. In practice this is difficult to discern ex-ante: hence the range of MSS instruments in terms of 
their duration can effectively modulate the sterilisation on an ex-post basis. 
Our  strategy  of  introducing  this  new  MSS  instrument  to  manage  excess  capital  flows  and  reduce 
volatility in the exchange rate reflects the overall issue of global capital flows that many developing 
countries  are  facing,  particularly  in  Asia.  Net  private  flows  (equity  +  debt)  have  increased  from  an 
average of about US$ 180 billion over the five year period 1998 to 2002, to about US$ 650 billion in 
2006, amounting to about 5 per cent of their GDP (World Bank, 2007). Absorption of such a volume of 
flows would imply a corresponding current account deficit of about 5 per cent of GDP. What should be 
BIS Review 66/2007 
 11
the  approach  to  exchange  rate  determination  in  such  circumstances?  To  what  extent  is  the  current 
account balance a good guide to evaluation of the appropriate level of an exchange rate? To what 
extent  should  the  capital  account  influence  the  exchange  rate?  What  are  the  implications  of  large 
current  account  deficits  for  the  real  economy?  Are  they  sustainable  and,  if  not,  what  are  the 
implications  for  financial  stability  in  developing  countries?  In  India's  case,  as  mentioned,  we  have 
almost  always  had  a  modest  current  account  deficit  though,  because  of  remittances  and  service 
exports, the trade deficit has widened significantly in recent years. These are the issues that we have 
to deal with as we negotiate fuller capital account convertibility, but I believe these are wider questions 
that are engaging most countries in Asia. 
Going forward, there will be a continuous need to adapt the strategy of liquidity management as well 
as  exchange  rate  management  for  effective  monetary  management  and  short-term  interest  rate 
smoothening.  The  key  questions  we  continue  to  face  with  are  what  should  be  the  instruments  and 
modes of management of liquidity in the interest of growth and financial stability and how much should 
capital flows affect exchange rate. These issues become even more relevant under a freer regime of 
capital flows. Global developments are expected to have an increasing role in determining the conduct 
of  monetary and  exchange  rate  policies  in our  countries.  In an  environment  of  global convergence, 
retaining independence of monetary policy may become increasingly difficult, calling for hard choices 
in terms of goals and instruments.  
VI.  
Fiscal situation and the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Act 
Some progress 
Public finances have exhibited a mixed trend in the reforms period. After witnessing some correction 
till 1996-97, public finances underwent deterioration, reflecting a variety of factors such as the decline 
in tax revenues (as per cent to GDP) in consonance with the cyclical downturn of economic activity, as 
well as the effects of the 5th Pay Commission award. Indeed, the combined fiscal deficit of the Centre 
and States was higher in 2001-02 than that in 1990-91. Since 2002-03 onwards, public finances have 
witnessed a significant improvement, reflecting both policy efforts at fiscal consolidation as well as the 
upturn  in  economic  activity  (Table  1).  A  noteworthy  development  at  the  federal  level  is  the 
transformation of state level sales taxes into the Value Added Tax (VAT), which has introduced a large 
measure  of  rationality  and  uniformity  in  the  state  tax  system.  The  state  sales  tax  system  had  also 
suffered from great complexity in terms of multiplicity of rates and special provisions. A vital feature of 
this  tax  reform  has  been  the  consultative  process  among  all  the  states  as  mediated  by  the  central 
government, which then resulted in this consensus for massive reform.  
Table 1: Combined Deficit Indicators: Centre and States 
(As per cent of GDP) 
Year 
Fiscal Deficit  Revenue Deficit 
Primary Deficit 
2001-02  
2002-03  
2003-04  
2004-05  
2005-06  
2006-07  
10.0 
9.6 
8.5 
7.5 
7.4 
6.4 
Source: Reserve Bank of India 
7.0 
6.6 
5.8 
3.7 
3.1 
2.2 
3.7 
3.1 
2.1 
1.4 
1.6 
0.8 
12 
 BIS Review 66/2007
Issues 
Notwithstanding the recent correction, combined public debt remains high (almost 79 per cent of GDP 
at  end  March  2006).  The  latest  most  significant  measure  taken  is  the  introduction  of  the  Fiscal 
Responsibility  and  Budget  Management  Act  (FRBM)  in  2004,  which  enjoins  the  government  to 
eliminate its revenue deficit and reduce its fiscal deficit to 3 per cent of GDP by 2009. Similar acts 
have  been  passed  by  most  state  governments  (25states  so  far).  So  fiscal  responsibility  has  now 
become  part  of  our  legislative  commitments.  Together,  they,  however,  amount  to  a  total  deficit  of 
about six per cent of GDP, which is considered high by global standards.  
After the award of the 5th Pay Commission in 1997, public finances had come under strain and hence 
public savings had become negative. Now the growth process has clearly recovered and we seem to 
be  on  a  sustainable  path  of  annual  GDP  growth  in  excess  of  8.5  per  cent.  The  8.5  per  cent  plus 
growth would itself place in demand for higher government wages and the 6th Pay Commission has to 
come, complicating the fiscal consolidation process. 
Achieving the FRBM target of zero revenue deficit by 2008-09 requires continued focus on containing 
expenditures, increase in tax revenues and reduction in tax exemptions. Revenue augmentation would 
critically depend upon improvement in tax/GDP ratio as non-tax revenue is set to decline in the coming 
years. In this context, the reversal of the declining trend in tax-GDP ratio is welcome. This increasing 
trend  needs  to  be  maintained  through  further  widening  of  the  tax  base  and  curtailment  in  tax 
exemptions. It is in this context that the erosion of tax base on account of various exemptions poses a 
cause for concern.  
With the attainment of a sustainable higher growth path in excess of 8.5 per cent annual real GDP 
growth, the prospects for continued fiscal consolidation have improved. Tax revenues have become 
buoyant with continuing healthy growth in corporate profits and personal incomes. Furthermore, the 
introduction  of  the  value  added  tax  (VAT)  system  at  the  state  level  provides  further  ground  for 
optimism. What we will need to guard against are the usual demands for exemptions that contribute to 
erosion of the tax base. 
An  important  point  to  note  in  relation  to  the  Indian  fiscal  situation  is  that,  despite  the  long  term 
persistence of high fiscal deficits by any standards, India has not been subject to banking or financial 
market turbulence. Our fiscal parameters have not been too different from some of the countries that 
have  experienced  the  most  turbulence,  such  as  Turkey  and  Argentina.  In  fact,  it  is  because  of  our 
inadequate fiscal performance that India did not have investment grade rating until earlier this year. 
The main reasons why India has been able to maintain financial stability in the presence of such fiscal 
stress  is  that  almost  all  the  sovereign  debt  has  been  domestic,  except  for  bilateral  and  multilateral 
external  borrowing,  which  itself  has  been  small  proportionately.  India  has  eschewed  sovereign 
borrowing in external markets, thereby insulating ourselves from external volatility in exchange rates 
and interest rates. The move to increased market borrowing has also been useful in providing market 
signals  on  the  cost  of  borrowing.  Finally,  coordination  between  monetary  policy,  domestic  debt 
management, and financial sector policies in the Reserve Bank and the Government has also helped 
in this regard.  
Strengthening of financial sector/banks 
VII. 
The  financial  system  in  India,  through  a  measured,  gradual,  cautious,  and  steady  process,  has 
undergone  substantial  transformation.  It  has  been  transformed  into  a  reasonably  sophisticated, 
diverse  and  resilient  system  through  well-sequenced  and  coordinated  policy  measures  aimed  at 
making the Indian financial sector more competitive, efficient, and stable. The overall capital adequacy 
ratio of the banking sector as a whole has increased from 10.4 per cent at end-March 1997 to 12.3 per 
cent  at  end-March  2007.1  The  asset  quality  of  the  banking  sector  has  recorded  a  significant 
improvement: the ratio of net non-performing assets to net advances has declined from 8.1 per cent at 
end-March  1997  to 2.0  per cent  at end-March  2007  despite  tightening of  NPA  classification  norms. 
The profitability of banks as defined by the return on assets increased from 0.7 per cent in 1996-97 to 
0.9 per cent in 2006-07. Intermediation cost of banks has declined from 2.9 per cent in 1995-96 to 
                                                      
1   Data for 2006-07 are unaudited and provisional. 
BIS Review 66/2007 
 13
around  2  per  cent  by  2006-07.  The  financial  system  is  now  robust  and  resilient,  and  is  enabling 
accelerated economic growth in an environment of stability. 
Consistent  with  the  policy  approach  to  benchmark  the  banking  system  to  the  best  international 
standards with emphasis on gradual harmonisation, in a phased manner, all foreign banks operating in 
India  and  all  Indian  commercial  banks  having  foreign  operations  are  required  to  start  implementing 
Basel  II  with  effect  from  March  31,  2008,  while  other  commercial  banks  are  required  to  implement 
Basel  II  by  March  31,  2009.2  Recognising  the  differences  in  degrees  of  sophistication  and 
development  of  the  banking  system,  it  has  been  decided  that  the  banks  will  initially  adopt  the 
Standardised  Approach  for  credit  risk  and  the  Basic  Indicator  Approach  for  operational  risk.  After 
adequate skills are developed, both by the banks and also by the supervisors, some of the banks may 
be allowed to migrate to the Internal Rating Based (IRB) Approach. Although implementation of Basel 
II  will  require  more  capital  for  banks  in  India,  the  cushion  available  in  the  system  –  at  present,  the 
Capital to Risk Assets Ratio (CRAR) is over 12 per cent – provides some comfort. In order to provide 
banks  greater  flexibility  and  avenues  for  meeting  the  capital  requirements,  the  Reserve  Bank  has 
issued  policy  guidelines  enabling  issuance  of  several  instruments  by  the  banks  viz.,  innovative 
perpetual  debt  instruments,  perpetual  non-cumulative  preference  shares,  redeemable  cumulative 
preference shares and hybrid debt instruments. 
The Reserve Bank founded the Board for Financial Supervision (BFS) in 1994 to upgrade its practice 
of  financial  supervision  of  banks.  In  course  of  time,  development  financial  institutions,  specialised 
term-lending  institutions,  non-banking  financial  companies  (NBFCs),  urban  co-operative  banks  and 
primary  dealers  (PDs)  have  all  been  brought  under  the  supervision  of  the  BFS.  A  set  of  prudential 
norms for the commercial banking sector had been instituted as early as 1994 with regard to capital 
adequacy,  income  recognition  and  asset  classification,  provisioning,  exposure  norms  and  more 
recently, in respect of their investment portfolio.  With the aim of regulatory convergence for entities 
involved  in  similar  activities,  prudential  regulation  and  supervision  norms  were  also  introduced  in 
phases for DFIs, NBFCs, co-operative banks and PDs.  
In tandem with the gradual opening up of the economy, the regulatory and supervisory framework was 
spruced up comprising of a three-pronged strategy of regular on-site inspections, technology-driven 
off-site  surveillance  and  extensive  use  of  external  auditors.  As  a  result  of  improvements  in  the 
regulatory and supervisory framework, the degree of compliance with the Basel Core Principles has 
gradually  improved.  The  supervisory  framework  has  been  further  upgraded  with  the  institution  of  a 
framework of Risk-based Supervision (RBS) for intensified monitoring of vulnerabilities. A scheme of 
Prompt  Corrective  Action  (PCA)  was  effected  in  December  2002  to  undertake  mandatory  and 
discretionary 
financial/prudential 
parameters.  In  view  of  the  growing  emergence  of  financial  conglomerates  and  the  possibility  of 
systemic  risks  arising  therefrom,  a  system  of  consolidated  accounting  has  been  instituted.  A  half-
yearly  review  based  on  financial  soundness  indicators  is  being  undertaken  to  assess  the  health  of 
individual institutions and macro-prudential indicators associated with financial system soundness. The 
findings arising thereof are disseminated to the public through its various Reports. 
The bankruptcy procedures for containing the level of NPAs have been strengthened over the years. 
Debt Recovery Tribunals (DRTs) were established consequent to the passing of Recovery of Debts 
Due to Banks and Financial Institutions Act, 1993. With a view to putting in place a mechanism for 
timely and transparent restructuring of corporate debts of viable entities facing problems, a Scheme of 
Corporate Debt Restructuring (CDR) was started in 2001 outside the purview of BIFR (i.e., Board for 
Industrial and Financial Reconstruction), DRT and other legal proceedings. Similar guidelines on debt 
restructuring of viable or potentially viable SME units were issued in September 2005. To provide a 
significant  impetus  to  banks  to  ensure  sustained  recovery,  the  Securitisation  and  Reconstruction  of 
Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest (SARFAESI) Act was passed in 2002 and was 
subsequently  amended  to  ensure  creditor  rights.  With  a  view  to  increasing  the  options  available  to 
banks for dealing with NPAs, guidelines were also issued on sale/ purchase of NPAs in July 2005. 
Subsequently,  a  few  Asset  Reconstruction  Companies  have  been  registered.  Thus,  the  bankruptcy 
procedures  for  recovery  of  bad  debts  have  been  streamlined  over  the  years  even  though  the  Sick 
Industrial Companies Act (SICA) continues to be in vogue.  
troubled  banks  based  on  well-defined 
intervention  against 
                                                      
2   They have, however, the option of implementing Basel II with effect from March 31, 2008 as well. 
14 
 BIS Review 66/2007
in  both 
financial 
intermediaries  and  non-financial  entities. 
A further challenge for policy in the context of fuller capital account openness will be to preserve the 
financial stability of the system as greater deregulation is done on capital outflows and on debt inflows. 
This will require market development, enhancement of regulatory capacity in these areas, as well as 
human  resource  development 
In 
consonance  with  the  objective  of  enhancing  efficiency  and  productivity  of  banks  through  greater 
competition – from new private sector banks and entry and expansion of several foreign banks – there 
has been a consistent decline in the share of public sector banks in total assets of commercial banks. 
Notwithstanding  such  transformation,  the  public  sector  banks  still  account  for  nearly  70  per  cent  of 
assets and income. Public sector banks have also responded to the new challenges of competition, as 
reflected in their increased share in the overall profit of the banking sector. This suggests that, with 
operational flexibility, public sector banks are competing relatively effectively with private sector and 
foreign  banks.  Public  sector  bank  managements  are  now  probably  more  attuned  to  the  market 
consequences  of  their  activities  (Mohan,  2006a).  But  it  is  also  they  who  face  the  most  difficult 
challenges in human resource development. They will have to invest very heavily in skill enhancement 
at all levels: at the top level for new strategic goal setting; at the middle level for implementing these 
goals; and at the cutting edge lower levels for delivering the new service modes. Wide disparities exist 
within  the  banking  sector  as  far  as  technological  capabilities  are  concerned:  the  percentage  of 
“computer literate” employees as percentage of total staff in 2000 was around 20 per cent in public 
sector  banks  compared  with  100  per  cent  in  new  private  and  around  90  per  cent  in  foreign  banks 
(Reserve Bank of India, 2002). Data reported by the RBI suggests that nearly 71 per cent of branches 
of public sector banks are fully computerised. However, computerisation needs to go beyond the mere 
“arithmeticals”,  to  borrow  a  term  from  the  Report  of  the  Committee  on  Banking  Sector  Reforms 
(Government of India, 1998), and instead, needs to be leveraged optimally to achieve and maintain 
high service and efficiency standards. Given the average age of 45 years plus for employees in the 
public  sector  banks,  they  will  also  face  new  recruitment  challenges  in  the  face  of  adverse 
compensation structures in comparison with the freer private sector. 
The issue of mixed ownership as an institutional structure where government has controlling interest is 
a salient feature of bank governance in India. Such aspects of corporate governance in public sector 
banks  is  important,  not  only  because  public  sector  banks  dominate  the  banking  industry,  but  also 
because,  it  is  likely  that  they  would  continue  to  remain  in  banking  business.  To  the  extent  there  is 
public ownership of public sector banks, the multiple objectives of the government as owner and the 
complex principal-agent relationships needs to be taken on board. Over the reform period, more and 
more public sector banks have begun to get listed on the stock exchange, which, in its wake, has led 
to greater market discipline and concomitantly, to an improvement in their governance aspects as well. 
The  broadbased  and  diversified  ownership  of  public  sector  banks  has  brought  about  a  qualitative 
difference  in  their  functioning,  since  there  is  induction  of  private  shareholding  as  well  as  attendant 
issues  of  shareholder’s  value,  as  reflected  by  the  market  capitalisation,  board  representation  and 
interests of minority shareholders. Given the increased technical complexity of most business activities 
including banking and the rapid pace of change in financial markets and practices, public sector banks 
would need to devise imaginative ways of responding to the evolving challenges within the context of 
mixed ownership. 
Another aspect of greater capital market openness concerns the presence of foreign banks in India. 
The  Government  and  Reserve  Bank  outlined  a  roadmap  on  foreign  investment  in  banks  in  India  in 
February 2005, which provides guidelines on the extent of their presence until 2009. This roadmap is 
consistent with the overall guidelines issued simultaneously on ownership and governance in private 
sector banks in India. The presence of foreign banks in the country has been very useful in bringing 
greater competition in certain segments in the market. They are significant participants in investment 
banking and in development of the forex market. With the changes that have taken place in the United 
States and other countries, where the traditional barriers between banking, insurance and securities 
companies have been removed, the size of the largest financial conglomerates has become extremely 
large. Between 1995 and 2004, the size of the largest bank in the world has grown three-fold by asset 
size, from about US $ 0.5 trillion to US $ 1.5 trillion, about one and a half times the size of Indian GDP. 
This has happened through a great degree of merger activity: for example, J.P. Morgan Chase is the 
result of mergers among 550 banks and financial institutions. The ten biggest commercial banks in the 
US now control almost half of that country's banking assets, up from 29 per cent just 10 years ago 
(Economist,  2006).  Hence,  with  fuller  capital  account  convertibility  and  greater  presence  of  foreign 
banks over time, a number of issues will arise. First, if these large global banks have emerged as a 
result of real economies of scale and scope, how will smaller national banks compete in countries like 
India,  and  will  they  themselves  need  to  generate  a  larger  international  presence?  Second,  there  is 
BIS Review 66/2007 
 15
considerable discussion today on overlaps and potential conflicts between home country regulators of 
foreign banks and host country regulators: how will these be addressed and resolved in the years to 
come?  Third,  given  that  operations  in  one  country  such  as  India  are  typically  small  relative  to  the 
global  operations  of  these  large  banks,  the  attention  of  top  management  devoted  to  any  particular 
country  is  typically  low.  Consequently,  any  market  or  regulatory  transgressions  committed  in  one 
country by such a bank, which may have a significant impact on banking or financial market of that 
country, is likely to have negligible impact on the bank's global operations. It has been seen in recent 
years that even relatively strong regulatory action taken by regulators against such global banks has 
had negligible market or reputational impact on them in terms of their stock price or similar metrics. 
Thus,  there  is  loss  of  regulatory  effectiveness  as  a  result  of  the  presence  of  such  financial 
conglomerates.  Hence, 
that  such  global 
conglomerates bring and some regulatory and market structure and competition issues that may arise. 
Along  with  the  emergence  of  international  financial  conglomerates  we  are  also  witnessing  similar 
growth  of  Indian  conglomerates.  As  in  most  countries,  the  banking,  insurance  and  securities 
companies  each  come  under  the  jurisdiction  of  their  respective  regulators.  A  beginning  has  been 
made in organised cooperation between the regulators on the regulation of such conglomerates, with 
agreement  on  who  would  be  the  lead  regulator  in  each  case.  In  the  United  States,  it  is  a  financial 
holding company that is at the core of each conglomerate, with each company being its subsidiary. 
There is, as yet, no commonality in the financial structure of each conglomerate in India: in some the 
parent  company  is  the  banking  company;  whereas  in  others  there  is  a  mix  of  structure.  For  Indian 
conglomerates to be competitive, and for them to grow to a semblance of international size, they will 
need continued improvement in clarity in regulatory approach. 
tension  between 
the  benefits 
inevitable 
there 
is 
Concluding remarks 
VIII.  
I have described at length the evolution of India's macroeconomic and monetary management over 
the  last  decade  and  a  half  to  demonstrate  the  complexity  of  such  management  in  the  context  of  a 
developing  economy  that  manages  its  opening  up  to  the  rest  of  the  world  in  a  gradual  manner. 
Monetary policy and exchange rate regimes have necessarily to be operated as fuzzy or intermediate 
regimes  not  obeying  the  almost  received  wisdom  of  purist  approaches.  The  judgement  on  the 
legitimacy  of such  a  regime  must  be  based  on  their  efficacy  as  revealed  by  the  outcomes.  On  this 
count, I believe that India's macroeconomic, monetary and financial managers can justifiably claim a 
reasonable degree of success: economic growth is high and accelerating; inflation has shifted to lower 
sustainable  levels;  savings  and  investments  are  growing;  financial  markets  have  been  growing  and 
developing in an orderly manner; the health of the banking system has improved continuously and is 
approaching best practice standards; the external account is healthy in the presence of robust trade 
growth  in  both  goods  and  services;  and  increasing  capital  flows  indicate  growing  international 
confidence in the Indian economy; and the Indian exchange rate has been flexible in both directions 
providing for reasonable market determination, in the presence of central bank forex interventions. 
These are the achievements of the past. As we ascend to a higher growth path, and as we have fuller 
capital account convertibility, we will face newer challenges and will have to continue to adapt. The 
key point is that with greater capital account openness, we have to develop markets such that market 
participants, financial and non financial, are enabled to cope better with market fluctuations. As we do 
this, we need to be cognizant of the vast range of capabilities of different market participants in as 
diverse  a  country  as  India:  from  subsistent  farmers  to  the  most  sophisticated  financial  market 
practitioners. 
References 
Ahluwalia, M.S. (2002), “Economic reforms in India since 1991: has gradualism worked?”, Journal of 
Economic Perspectives, Vol. 16, No. 3, pp. 67-88. 
Friedman, Benjamin (2000), "The Role of Interest Rates in Federal Reserve Policymaking", Working 
Paper 8047, National Bureau of Economic Research.  
Government  of  India  (2005),  Report  of  High  Level  Expert  Committee  on  Corporate  Bonds  and 
Securitization,  (Chairman:  R.  H.  Patil),  available  at  http://finmin.nic.in/downloads/reports/Report-
Expert.pdf. 
16 
 BIS Review 66/2007
McCallum,  Bennett  T.  (1981),  "Price  Level  Determinancy  with  an  Interest  Rate  Policy  Rule  and 
Rational Expectations", Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 8. 
McKinsey  &  Company  (2005),  Indian  Banking  2010:  Towards  a  High  Performing  Sector,  Mumbai: 
McKinsey & Company. 
Mohan,  Rakesh  (2005),  "Communications  in  Central  Banks:  A  Perspective",  Reserve  Bank  of  India 
Bulletin, October 2005. 
Mohan, Rakesh (2006a), “Recent Trends in the Indian Debt Market and Current Initiatives”, Reserve 
Bank of India Bulletin, April 2006. 
Mohan,  Rakesh  (2006b),  "Evolution  of  Central  Banking  in  India",  lecture  delivered  at  the  seminar 
organized  by  the  London  School  of  Economics  and  the  National  Institute  of  Bank  Management  at 
Mumbai on January 24, Reserve Bank of India Bulletin, June 2006. 
Reserve Bank of India (2002), Report on Trends and Progress of Banking in India, 2001-02, Mumbai: 
Reserve Bank of India. 
World Bank (2007), Global Development Finance, Washington D.C: World Bank. 
BIS Review 66/2007 
 17
