Michael C Bonello: Malta's economy on the path to the euro 
Remarks  by  Mr  Michael  C  Bonello,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malta,  at  a  Round  Table 
organised by the Austrian National Bank, Brussels, 13 June 2007.  
 This  Round  Table  is  being  held  shortly  after  the  release  of  the  Convergence  Reports  which  the 
European Commission and the European Central Bank prepared at the request of Cyprus and Malta, 
and the recommendation of the Commission to the EU Council to allow these two countries to adopt 
the  euro  on  1  January  2008  on  the  grounds  that  they  have  achieved  a  high  degree  of  sustainable 
convergence.  
And  yet,  only  four  years ago  as  Malta was  preparing  to  accede  to  the  EU,  qualifying  for  euro  area 
membership seemed a distant and uncertain prospect. This evening I propose to illustrate the nature 
of the challenge that Malta faced, how the task has been approached and what measures are being 
taken to ensure a smooth integration into the euro area. 
The Central Bank of Malta has been at the forefront in advocating an early adoption of the euro, and 
for good reason. With a GDP of around €4.9 billion and a population of 400,000 living in an area of 
316  km2,  Malta  is  the  smallest  and  most  densely  populated  EU  Member  State.  It  has  no  natural 
resources and is one of the most open economies in the EU, with average import and export-to-GDP 
ratios of over 80%. These characteristics constitute a challenge for policymakers in that key economic 
variables  are  prone  to  volatility,  being  highly  sensitive  to  external  events  and  to  shocks  in  specific 
sectors or individual enterprises which, though small in absolute terms, can have a disproportionately 
large impact in a small country context. 
Such  an  economy  clearly  stands  to  benefit  from  joining  a  monetary  union,  particularly  in  terms  of 
greater stability and policy credibility.1 From a central banker’s viewpoint, moreover, a key advantage 
is the elimination of the risks inherent in managing a small, vulnerable currency. Permanently fixing the 
Maltese lira / euro exchange rate, moreover, did not appear to be a radical change. The ECU, and 
since 1999, the euro, had in fact been the main reference currency in the exchange rate baskets since 
1989. By 2002 the euro already carried a weight of 70%. 
Furthermore,  Malta’s  only  devaluation,  which  took  place  in  1992,  confirmed  that  exchange  rate 
adjustments are not the most effective means for safeguarding an open economy’s competitiveness. 
The initial advantage derived from the devaluation was soon reversed, owing to the inflationary impact 
of  compensatory  wage  increases  resulting  from  a  partial  wage  indexation  mechanism  and  the  high 
import content of inflation. 
If  anything,  the  irrevocable  fixing  of  the  exchange  rate  and  the  economic  policy  co-ordination  and 
monitoring  procedures  of  EMU  seemed  to  offer  a  congenial  environment  for  implementing  the 
structural changes necessary for a lasting improvement in the country’s international competitiveness. 
The benefits of the euro for individuals and businesses, its contribution to a more effective participation 
of  Maltese  enterprises  in  the  Single  Market  and  the  possibility  of  using  the  euro  as  a  means  of 
competing on international markets were also important considerations.  
But while there were many compelling reasons for an early adoption of the euro, there was also an 
understanding of the need to avoid the economic costs of a premature entry. Consequently, there was 
some hesitation in adopting an ambitious reform programme. 
These concerns were well-founded. At the time Malta was preparing to join the EU, the economy was 
emerging from a period of stagnation, a widening output gap and a slow pace of productivity growth. In 
addition, while the Government planned to reduce the budget deficit from almost 10% of GDP in 2003 
to below 3% by 2006, an adjustment of that magnitude clearly presented considerable political risks, 
not least because some fiscal tightening was already underway. The unemployment rate, meanwhile, 
was edging upwards in response to the ongoing restructuring process and the further liberalisation of 
markets as a result of EU accession, making any further retrenchment painful for most households.  
                                                      
1   For a fuller treatment of Malta’s case for adopting the euro, see Malta’s Strategy for Participating in Economic and Monetary 
Union and Adopting the Euro, Government of Malta, Central Bank of Malta, April 2005. 
BIS Review 77/2007 
 1
At the same time, many indicators suggested that Malta was well suited to participate in the EU single 
currency area. The economy was already closely integrated with the EU through trade and finance; it 
had close similarities with the euro area in the sectoral composition of output and employment, as well 
as  in  terms  of  business  cycle  synchronisation;  and  it  also  enjoyed  a  relatively  high  level  of 
development (the price level and per capita GDP both stood at around 70% of the euro area average). 
Furthermore,  the  large  euro  area  countries  had  long  been  among  Malta’s  most  important  trading 
partners and sources of foreign direct investment. 
As  for  the  Maastricht  criteria,  the  only  serious  doubts  centered  on  the  fiscal  criteria.  As  noted 
previously, exchange rate stability was never an issue and the strong presence of the euro in Malta’s 
currency basket had also fostered convergence in interest rates. In fact, the interest rate criterion had 
been met long before EU accession. Fulfilling the inflation criterion was not considered an obstacle 
either, as the inflation rate had been generally below the EU reference value, and the upward risks 
were largely related to the impact of the VAT increase planned for January 2004. Although inflation 
continued to exceed the EU limit for most of the period from the second half of 2004 until the autumn 
of 2006, this mainly reflected the introduction of measures aimed at aligning energy and fuel prices 
more closely with market rates at a time of spiralling oil prices. Malta is totally dependent on oil, not 
only for electricity generation but also for water production. 
Against this background, the authorities had two options: either to use the fact that Malta did not meet 
the fiscal criteria to maintain the status quo and delay the implementation of sensitive reforms, with the 
risk of undermining growth prospects; or to use the adverse impact of globalization on Malta’s current 
account and the vulnerability of the fixed exchange rate regime to highlight the urgent need for a faster 
pace of reform, while holding out the promise of the expected benefits of the euro. 
The  authorities  chose  the  latter  approach,  including  a  rather  ambitious  programme  of  fiscal 
consolidation  and  a  unilateral  commitment  to  maintain  the  Maltese  lira/euro  exchange  rate  at  the 
central parity rate in ERM II. This appeared a natural way to buttress the economy’s long record of 
exchange rate stability, though it was also dictated by the need to counter harmful speculation at the 
time about the level of the exchange rate. 
Three years after EU accession, that bold decision appears to have paid off. Economic growth rose to 
3.3% in 2005 and 2006, and is expected to stay around that level; the unemployment rate stabilised, 
then eased slightly; and FDI flows, which have always been important, strengthened further. The gap 
between productivity growth and wages narrowed to the point that unit labour costs are now increasing 
negligibly or falling, depending on the measure used. 
In 2006 the fiscal deficit ratio dropped below the 3% reference value for the first time in several years, 
with the structural balance net of temporary measures shedding around 3.7 percentage points since 
2003. The debt ratio also trended downwards and is expected to fall below the 60% limit by 2009. 
As the base effect of the energy price hikes started to abate, moreover, the HICP inflation rate has 
stayed below the EU reference value since last November. Meanwhile, the Maltese lira continued to 
trade at the central parity rate against the euro in ERM II and the long-term interest rate converged 
further towards the reference value. 
As for the economic recovery, although this partly reflects stronger demand in Malta’s main trading 
partners,  it  also  owes  something  to  the  reforms  implemented  in  recent  years.  These  included 
measures aimed at increasing participation in the labour market and improving its functioning. School 
curricula  have  been  modified  and  training  opportunities  broadened.  There  has  also  been  heavy 
investment  in  ICT  infrastructure  and  education,  as  well  as  better  targeted  financial  and  technical 
support to SMEs, including a privately-managed venture capital institution. On the fiscal front, steps 
have been taken to reform the pension system and to avoid abuse of the social benefit system and tax 
evasion. 
In  some  areas,  however,  the  pace  of  reform  has  been  modest  and  the  Central  Bank  of  Malta  has 
repeatedly called for the remaining weaknesses to be addressed. In particular, more effort is required 
to  ensure  that  domestic  inputs  are  priced  competitively,  and  hence  the  need  for  continued  wage 
moderation;  to  raise  productivity  levels;  and  to  ensure  faster  progress  towards  key  Lisbon  Agenda 
objectives  such  as  educational  attainment  and  innovation.  Measures  aimed  at  strengthening  the 
economy’s  physical  infrastructure  and  the  quality  of  its  human  capital,  a  more  efficient  delivery  of 
support  services  by  the  public  and  private  sectors,  and  enhanced  competition  both  in  product  and 
resource markets are crucial in this regard. This is the only way to increase the economy’s capacity to 
2 
 BIS Review 77/2007
respond  flexibly  and  competitively  to  new  challenges  and  opportunities,  and  thus  derive  the  full 
benefits of EMU.  
A  high  level  of  economic  convergence  and  flexibility,  however,  are  not  sufficient  for  a  successful 
transition to the euro. This also requires both careful logistical planning and public acceptance of the 
single currency. 
As  for  the  former,  the  necessary structures  have been  in  place  for  two  years and  they seem  to  be 
working well. At the apex stands the National Euro Changeover Committee (NECC), which has drawn 
up a national Master Plan. The Central Bank of Malta is represented on the Steering Committee which 
oversees the work of the NECC, it participates in the financial sector committee of the NECC and it is 
also present on a task force responsible for co-ordinating national training activities related to the euro. 
On  a  daily  basis,  moreover,  the  Central  Bank  of  Malta  liaises  closely  with  the  NECC,  the  Malta 
Bankers’ Association and other entities which for years now have been participating in joint technical 
meetings  covering  key  operational  areas,  including  the  functioning  of  money  and  capital  markets, 
payment systems and the gathering of statistical data. 
The Bank also has an internal plan, encompassing some 200 different tasks as well as time frames 
within which they need to be completed, for an orderly transition to the euro. This plan was drawn up 
using  a  bottom-up  approach,  with  each  department  developing  its  own  programme  for  adapting 
structures and procedures to the policy and operational requirements of EMU.  
Plan  implementation  is  on  track.  Steps  have  already  been  taken  to  align  the  monetary  operations, 
accounting  and  financial  reporting  frameworks  with  those  of  the  Eurosystem.  The  Bank  has  also 
completed most of the necessary upgrades to its IT hardware and operating systems to ensure that it 
can exchange information and settle transactions with the Eurosystem in a seamless fashion. 
As far as the Cash Changeover Plan is concerned, this too is on schedule. The physical facilities for 
the storage and distribution of cash have been completed, the test run for the minting of Malta’s euro 
coins has commenced and arrangements for the procurement of euro notes are about to be finalised. 
The Central Bank of Malta’s preparatory process for integration in the Eurosystem has undoubtedly 
benefited from its participation in ESCB committees and from the bilateral contacts established with 
many Eurosystem central banks, including the Oesterreichische Nationalbank and the Central Bank 
and  Financial  Services  Authority  of 
the  Twinning  Arrangement  on 
communication  strategy  in  which  we  participated  with  Cyprus.  Some  Eurosystem  central  banks, 
moreover, have responded favourably to requests for entering into cooperative arrangements with the 
Bank for the implementation of specific operations, such as in the field of reserve management. 
As for the public mood, price perceptions will probably remain a source of apprehension, at least in the 
immediate  period  ahead.  Although  68%  of  Maltese  respondents  who  participated  in  the  latest 
Eurobarometer survey said that they are in favour of a relatively early euro adoption, some responses 
to the other questions suggest that the Maltese are not indifferent to what they hear about the possible 
negative effects of the single currency. 
The percentage of respondents who consider that the euro will be of personal or national benefit,2 for 
example, is smaller than that of those who favour early adoption. And the main concern is not unlike 
that  in  the  current  euro  area  Member  States.  It  is  not  about  the  ability  of  the  ECB  to  deliver  price 
stability  over  the  medium-term.  It  is  primarily  about  a  temporary  increase  in  price  levels  after  the 
changeover, a fear which has been reinforced by what is reported in the Italian media. Indeed, 65% of 
Maltese respondents believe that the euro will result in a one-time increase in prices. And this despite 
the fact that around 60% considered that the euro will deliver price stability in the medium-term; and 
that a large majority are aware of the various initiatives that are being taken to limit price abuse and 
consider that the dual display of prices3 is helping people get used to the new currency.4
Ireland,  our  partner 
in 
                                                      
2   53% and 43%, respectively. 
3   According to the April 2007 NSO survey, 91.4% of respondents. 
4   The first observation is based on the results of Flash Eurobarometer Survey No. 207. The second and third observations are 
based on the National Statistics Office survey which was conducted a few weeks after the completion of fieldwork for the 
Eurobarometer survey. While corroborating many of the findings reported in the Eurobarometer survey, including the same 
level of concern about potential price abuses, the NSO survey reveals some facts which are not  discernible through the 
questions featuring in the Eurobarometer survey, including the two reported here. 
BIS Review 77/2007 
 3
What is equally striking is the fact that while a high level of education and young age are correlated 
with  a  positive  attitude  towards  the  euro,  there  is  no  discernible  pattern  across  age  groups  or 
education  levels  when  it  comes  to  expectations  about  the  potential  inflationary  impact  of  the 
changeover. Apprehension is widespread. 
These  findings  suggest  the  need  for  a  communications  campaign  that  gives  the  issue  of  inflation 
perceptions  priority  attention,  as  well  as  for  effective  price  monitoring  mechanisms.  Measures  are 
being taken on both fronts. 
Inflation  perceptions  are  being  addressed  in  TV  slots,  newspaper  articles  and  official  statements. 
These messages will be intensified in the coming months.  
As far as pricing abuses are concerned, the national euro Master Plan has invited businesses to adopt 
dual display from January 2007 and makes it mandatory from the day the irrevocable conversion rate 
is  fixed  until  the  end  of  June  2008.  The  dual  display  of  prices  has  gained  momentum  since  the 
introduction of the Fair-pricing Agreements in Retailing (FAIR) initiative towards the end of last year as 
a voluntary, self-regulating mechanism whereby businesses commit to refrain from increasing prices 
simply as a result of the changeover. They, in turn, benefit from nationwide publicity recognising their 
commitment to adopt a code of conduct.5 In addition, consumers are constantly encouraged to use the 
national telephone helpline not only to seek information, but also to report cases of suspected non-
compliance with the guidelines. 
With  the  assistance  of  international  experts,  including  the  Austrian  Price  Commission,  a  Euro 
Observatory has also been set-up to monitor and analyse pricing trends during the changeover period. 
The unit is supported by 70 Euro Assistants who carry out fieldwork in towns and villages across the 
island. Separately, one of the two largest trade unions in Malta has been running an independent price 
monitoring exercise, to be followed soon by a name and shame campaign. This exercise involves the 
participation of mystery shoppers who monitor an extensive list of products and services. 
More  recently,  a  special  deposit  scheme  was  launched  to  provide  residents  with  a  one-time 
opportunity  to  regularise  their  position  in  respect  of  cash  and  deposits  not  previously  declared  for 
income  tax  purposes.  The  objective  is  to  mitigate  the  risk  of  inflationary  pressures  arising  from  the 
sudden conversion of these financial assets into real assets, which would reinforce the view that the 
euro creates inflation.  
If I had to draw any conclusions from Malta’s experience, I would first say that the prospect of euro 
adoption has served as an additional, and welcome, impetus to fiscal consolidation and to structural 
reform. As a result, the economy should not only be more prepared for take on the policy disciplines of 
EMU,  but  also  be  better  equipped  to  deal  with  an  increasingly  challenging  global  economic 
environment. 
Second,  while  a  successful  integration  in  the  euro  area  demands,  apart  from  solid  economic 
foundations, public acceptability of the single currency, opinion surveys in Malta seem to confirm that 
public perceptions do respond to a targeted information campaign. Such a campaign is in hand, but 
the  adjustment  process  is  slow  and  is  occasionally  fraught  with  perceptions  that  are  seemingly  in 
conflict with each other. Myths are not easily dispelled! 
                                                      
5   Around  a  half  (5000)  of  all  Maltese  outlets  have  already  applied  and  around  3250  have  been  awarded  the  FAIR  mark, 
meaning that around 25% of all eligible outlets are actually participating. (Figures from May edition of Euro Times). 
4 
 BIS Review 77/2007
