Jean-Claude Trichet: The euro and the dollar – pillars in global finance 
Closing  remarks  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
conference organised by the European Commission and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York “The 
euro and the dollar: pillars in global finance”, New York, 17 April 2007. 
 Introduction  
Ladies and gentlemen,  
Let  me  start  by  thanking  the  organisers  of  this  conference  –  the  European  Commission  and  the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York – for inviting me to speak at this extremely interesting conference. 
You have addressed the main topics: macroeconomic developments and growth, achievements and 
challenges  of  financial  integration  within  the  European  Union  (EU),  regulatory  convergence  in  the 
United States and the EU, and the role of US and EU financial markets in the global economy. In my 
closing  remarks,  I  would  like  to  address  the  state  of  European  financial  integration  and  I  will  touch 
upon these conference themes. I will first address the relationship between financial integration and 
economic  growth;  and  then  I  would  like  to  highlight  the  main  achievements  and  challenges  of 
European  financial  integration  by  referring  to  the  role  of  financial  markets  and  their  framework 
conditions, above all financial infrastructures, market standards and codes, and financial regulation.  
I would also like to draw your attention to a new report entitled “Financial integration in Europe”, which 
the European Central Bank (ECB) published for the first time just three weeks ago.1 The main purpose 
of this report, which will become an annual publication, is to contribute towards the advancement of 
European  financial  integration  and  to  raise  public  awareness  of  the  role  of  the  ECB  and  the 
Eurosystem in supporting the financial integration process in Europe. My remarks today will also draw 
on some of the findings of this report.  
The implications of European financial integration for economic growth 
Financial integration is of key importance for the ECB, given the relevance for the conduct of the single 
monetary policy: a well-integrated financial system enhances the smooth and effective transmission of 
monetary policy impulses throughout the euro area. Today, I would like to highlight a further economic 
implication  of  financial  integration,  namely  that  it  raises  the  economy’s  potential  for  stronger  non-
inflationary economic growth.  
Generally speaking, financial systems serve to channel funds from those economic agents that have a 
surplus  of  savings  to  those  with  a  shortage;  and  to  trade,  hedge,  diversify  and  pool  risks.  These 
functions are facilitated by financial integration. As a result, there is a better sharing and diversification 
of risk and a greater potential for stronger non-inflationary economic growth. 
Regarding risk sharing, it is interesting to note that in the US, according to a particularly interesting 
research, capital markets would smoothe out 39 % of the asymmetric shocks to gross state product 
(the  equivalent  of  our  GDP),  the  credit  channel  would  smoothe  out  23 %  of  such  shocks  and  the 
federal  government,  through  the  fiscal  channel,  13  %.  25  %  of  the  shocks  would  not  be  smoothed 
out.2 Hence in the United States financial markets and financial institutions would contribute 62 % to 
the absorption of state idiosyncratic shocks. The effect is very substantially higher than the effect of 
the  federal  budget.  We  see  from  the  US  example  that  the  financial  channel  can  be  much  more 
important  than  the  fiscal  channel  and  that  is  a  particularly  important  additional  reason  to  speed  up 
financial integration in Europe.  
Financial integration is also very important for stimulating economic growth in Europe via its impact on 
the  development  of  the  European  financial  system.  Financial  development  refers  to  the  process  of 
financial innovation, and to the institutional and organisational improvements in a financial system that 
                                                      
1   See the ECB’s website at http://www.ecb.int/pub/pdf/other/financialintegrationineurope200703en.pdf. 
2   See P. Asdrubali; B. Sorensen; O. Yosha, “Channels of Interstate Risk Sharing: United States 1963-1990”, The Quarterly 
Journal of Economics, Vol. 111, No. 4, November 1996, pp. 1081-1110. 
BIS Review 37/2007 
 1
reduce asymmetric information, increase the completeness of markets, add possibilities for agents to 
engage  in  financial  transaction  through  (explicit  or  implicit)  contracts,  reduce  transaction  costs  and 
increase  competition.  Progress  in  financial  development  can  obviously  also  occur  in  perfectly 
integrated markets. 
Therefore,  by  speeding  up  the  reallocation  of  capital  from  declining  to  evolving  and  promising 
industries  –  the  Schumpeterian  process  of  “creative  destruction”  –  both  processes  of  financial 
integration  and  financial  development  positively  influence  the  efficiency  of  a  financial  system, 
ultimately leading to a higher potential for economic growth. For example, a research study by London 
Economics  estimates  the  benefits  of  the  integration  of  European  bonds  and  equity  markets  to  be 
around 1% of GDP growth over a ten-year period, or approximately €100 billion.3
Whereas an indicator for the degree of integration of a European financial market could build on the 
law of one price, a possible indicator for the degree of development of the financial system could be 
the size of a market. Let me take as an example the size of an economy’s capital markets. An overall 
indicator  would  measure  total  financing  in  the  economy  by  aggregating  bank  credit  to  the  private 
sector, stock market capitalisation and the outstanding amount of domestic debt securities issued by 
the private sector. If this indicator is calculated as a share of an economy’s GDP, we see that the US 
is a region with one of the largest capital markets relative to its own economy: a broad estimation for 
the period 2000-05 gives a figure of around 450% for the US and around 220% for the euro area.4
But let me also give you an example of an integrated and developed financial market segment where 
the euro segment stands up to the transatlantic comparison, such as the over-the-counter interest rate 
derivatives  market:  the  euro  segment’s  notional  amounts  outstanding  reached  around  €82  trillion  in 
June 2006, compared with the equivalent US dollar segment of around €70 trillion.5  
To  sum  up,  the  introduction  of  the  euro  has  brought  about  huge  benefits  resulting  from  increased 
financial integration. And as the process of European financial integration is gradually taking place, it 
is also important to be aware of the related process of financial development. In the first edition of the 
new  ECB  report,  we  focus  on  the  concept  of  financial  integration.  However,  as  the  efficiency  of  a 
financial  system  also  depends  on  other  factors,  such  as  the  degree  of  financial  development,  we 
envisage widening the report’s scope over time.  
Achievements and challenges of European financial integration 
Let  me  now  highlight  some  major  achievements  and  remaining  challenges  of  European  financial 
integration.  Both  can  best  be  identified  on  the  basis  of  an  assessment  of  the  state  of  European 
financial  integration.  We  do  this  with  the  help  of  a  set  of  quantitative  indicators  that  the  ECB  has 
developed and which are described in our report.6  
In  a  nutshell,  the  evidence  confirms  that  the  degree  of  integration  varies  according  to  the  market 
segment, and that integration is generally more advanced in those market segments that are closer to 
the single monetary policy. Let me focus on a few selected aspects related to financial markets and 
their  framework  conditions,  such  as  financial  infrastructures,  market  standards  and  codes,  and 
financial regulation.  
With respect to the euro area money market, the unsecured money market reached a stage of “near-
perfect”  integration  almost  immediately  after  the  introduction  of  the  euro.  One  of  our  indicators,  the 
cross-country standard deviation of the average overnight lending rates among euro area countries, 
was as low as three basis points in early 1999 and has since decreased to between one and two basis 
point.  This  success  has  been  sustained  in  particular  by  the  high  degree  of  integration  of  the  large-
value payment systems and our TARGET system. The launch of our new single technical platform, 
                                                      
3   London Economics (2002), “Quantification of the macroeconomic impact of integration of EU financial markets”, Report to 
the European Commission. 
4   See “The  role of financial markets and innovation for productivity  and growth in Europe”, ECB Occasional Paper No 55, 
forthcoming. 
5   See the BIS Quarterly Review, March 2007, Table 21B. 
6   The data underlying the, at present, 42 indicators are published and updated twice per year on the ECB’s website. See at 
http://www.ecb.int/stats/finint/html/index.en.html. 
2 
 BIS Review 37/2007
TARGET2,  in  November  this  year  will  promote  further  financial  integration,  in  particular  through  a 
harmonised service level, a single price structure, and a harmonised set of cash settlement services. 
It is, however, also a fact that the euro area short-term debt securities market has witnessed only a 
limited  degree  of  cross-border  activity.  This  may  partly  be  due  to  the  fact  that  short-term  debt 
securities issued by euro area residents have very similar risk characteristics and therefore offer little 
scope  for  international  diversification.  Our  respective  indicator,  which  gives  the  share  of  short-term 
debt securities issued by euro area residents and held by other euro area residents, shows a rising 
trend – from 7% in 2001 to over 12% in 2005 – but the absolute numbers are small when compared to 
the corresponding indicators for the bond and equity market.  
With respect to the absolute size of the short-term debt securities market, I would like to emphasise 
the Short-Term European Paper (STEP) initiative. The STEP initiative promotes the development of a 
pan-European short-term paper market through market players’ voluntary compliance with a core set 
of standards encompassed in the STEP Market Convention, which was signed in June 2006. By the 
end  of  March  this  year,  35  STEP-compliant  programmes,  amounting  to  €201  billion,  had  been 
launched under the STEP label. The ECB regularly produces statistics on yields and volumes in the 
STEP market and publishes them on its website.7
With  respect  to  bond  markets,  euro  area  cross-border  holdings  of  long-term  debt  securities  have 
increased strongly – from about 10% at the end of the 1990s to nearly 60% in 2005 – suggesting that 
investors are increasingly diversifying their portfolios across the euro area. As a way of testing the idea 
that, in integrated markets, bond yields would react to common factors, rather than local ones, one can 
also make a regression of changes in bond yields of individual governments against changes in yields 
of  a  benchmark  bond.  In  the  ECB’s  new  report,  we  show  that  the  estimated  coefficients  of  this 
regression varied substantially up to 1998, but converged afterwards towards 1, which is the level of 
perfect  integration,  suggesting  that  the  euro  area  government  bond  market  has  reached  a  very 
advanced stage of integration. 
Finally,  the  quantity-based  measure  of  euro  area  equity  market  integration  also  indicates  a  rising 
degree of integration in the equity markets. Between 1997 and 2005 euro area residents doubled their 
holdings of equity issued in another euro area country to reach nearly 30%. This implies that, following 
the introduction of the euro, euro area investors have significantly reallocated their equity portfolio from 
domestic holdings to holdings elsewhere within the euro area.  
As a remaining challenge to the integration of euro area securities markets, I note that the euro area 
securities clearing and settlement infrastructure underpinning both bond and equity markets is not yet 
sufficiently  integrated.  Several  initiatives  to  achieve  an  efficient  and  integrated  market  infrastructure 
are  underway.  Last  November,  for  example,  at  the  European  Commission’s  request,  the  relevant 
European industry associations and their members signed a “European Code of Conduct for Clearing 
and  Settlement”.  In  essence,  this  Code  aims  to  foster  competition  and  efficiency  of  clearing  and 
settlement  in  the  EU,  by  ensuring  the  transparency  of  prices  and  services,  interoperability  between 
exchanges, central counterparties and central securities depositories, and unbundling in the provision 
of  services.  The  Code  represents  the  first  self-regulatory  approach  in  the  area  of  EU  clearing  and 
settlement.  The  ECB  welcomes  this  initiative  and  acknowledges  the  commitment  by  the  industry  to 
implement the Code. A Monitoring Committee by the European Commission, the ECB and CESR will 
assess whether the – voluntary – compliance with the Code will be effectively achieved. 
In this respect, let me also mention that the Eurosystem considers developing a single platform for the 
settlement of securities in central bank money – the so-called TARGET2-Securities. The scope of this 
project  is  restricted  to  the  settlement  layer  of  the  post-trading  activity  regarding  securities  settled  in 
central bank money and does not involve custody services and other activities, which remain separate 
economic activities performed by the central securities depositories. The present step is the definition 
of user requirements, and these will benefit from a public consultation.  
Last  but  not  least,  I  would  like  to  mention  the  European  retail  banking  markets,  which  are  less 
integrated  than  the  other  euro  area  financial  market  segments  and  which  also  still  display 
fragmentation in the retail payment infrastructure. However, we also see progress in some fields.  
                                                      
7 
 See  at  http://www.ecb.int/stats/money/step/html/index.en.html#data.  The  data  are  published  weekly  on  the  first  business 
day of each week, referring to each day of the previous week. 
BIS Review 37/2007 
 3
For  example,  the  current  fragmentation  of  the  European  retail  payment  infrastructures  is  being 
addressed  by  the  so-called  SEPA  project  that  has been  initiated  by  the  European  banking  industry 
with a view to creating a single euro payments area. The Eurosystem supports this project in a catalyst 
role, by providing guidance to banks and the payments industry in setting objectives and defining high-
level  requirements.  I  am  very  glad  to  report  that  the  self-regulatory  approach  chosen  for  SEPA  is 
working well and that we expect the European banking industry to launch the first SEPA instruments 
according to schedule on 1 January 2008. 
Also, a number of indicators point to increasing cross-border banking activities in the euro area, such 
as the growing cross-border share in the financial holdings of banks and the cross-border mergers and 
acquisitions.  I  would  like  to  emphasise  the  fact  that  cross-border  banking  is  first  and  foremost  a 
market-driven  process.  Still,  the  public  sector  can  play  a  significant  role  in  providing  an  adequate 
policy  framework.  According  to  our  assessment,  which  we  also  explain  in  our  new  report,  the  EU 
supervisory  arrangements  have  been  substantially  enhanced  by  two  significant  measures:  the 
extension  of  the  Lamfalussy  approach  to  the  banking  sector  and  the  adoption  of  the  Capital 
Requirements Directive (CRD), which transposes in the EU the new regulatory framework for banks’ 
capital  adequacy  as  agreed  by  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision.  Both  measures 
contribute to increasing cooperation and coordination between supervisors on a cross-border basis. 
The CRD provides for better home-host supervisory cooperation, among other things, by enhancing 
the role of the authority responsible for the consolidated supervision. For now, I would summarise the 
situation by saying that the ECB is supportive of the Lamfalussy framework and that this framework 
should be fully exploited to show its full potential. A review of the Lamfalussy approach is scheduled to 
take  place  by  the  end  of  this  year  and  this  will  enable  us  to  evaluate  the  overall  functioning  of  the 
current institutional arrangements.  
In this context, I would also like to mention that regulatory convergence is important not only within the 
EU  but  also  in  a  global  context.  In  this  respect,  the  ECB  supports  the  EU-US  Financial  Markets 
Regulatory  Dialogue  and  believes  it  can  serve  as  a  forum  where  solutions  to  important  regulatory 
issues on both sides of the Atlantic can be sought. Examples where progress is being made include 
the equivalence and convergence of accounting standards, the revised proposal for de-registration of 
foreign firms from US markets, and the recent announcement regarding the cooperation between the 
US and EU in audit oversight. Furthermore, the ECB supports the European Commission’s objective 
to deepen the financial dialogue with other countries, such as China and Japan, as highlighted in the 
White Paper on Financial Services Policy 2005-2010.  
Ladies and gentlemen,  
This  brings  me  to  the  end  of  my  remarks.  I  see  this  conference  today  as  another  crucial  step  in 
increasing  our  mutual  awareness  and  understanding  of  such  issues.  I  very  much  look  forward  to 
continuing this fruitful transatlantic dialogue that is so beneficial to us all.  
Thank you very much for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 37/2007
