Ernesto Gouveia Gove: The challenges in extending financial services 
throughout Mozambique 
Speech by Mr Ernesto Gouveia Gove, Governor of the Bank of Mozambique, on the occasion of the 
XXXI Consultative Council, Nampula, 26 January 2007. 
 Honourable Governor of Nampula Province 
Excellency 
Honourable President of Nampula City Council 
Excellency 
Distinct Former Governors of the Banco de Moçambique, Dr. SérgioVieira, Dr. Prakash Ratilal, Dr. 
Eneas Comiche and Dr. Adriano Maleiane 
Dear President of the National Institute of Statistics 
Dear Representatives of Niassa Provincial Government 
Dear members of the Board of Directors of the BM 
Dear representatives of the Financial Institutions 
Dear Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
First of all, I would like to express, on behalf of the Board of Directors and the employees of the Banco 
de Moçambique and personally, our satisfaction and gratitude for having accepted the invitation for a 
joint reflection on a current topic of our economy. 
Your presence in this conference room is of indubitable meaning, since it shows the sympathy and 
commitment  towards  the  common  problems  we  face  in  our  country  and  particularly  in  the  financial 
system, whose solution overcomes the simple will of each of us. 
Allow  me  to  refer  in  a  special  way  to  the  presence  of  the  Former  Governors  of  the  Banco  de 
Moçambique,  personalities  whose  leadership  and  competence  marked,  at  its  time,  the  nearly  three 
decades of the history of our institution. 
I  would  also  like  to  take  this  opportunity  also  to  express  the  profound  regard  of  the  Banco  de 
Moçambique to all the banking institutions that operate in our market, the private and public financial 
institutions, the public in general and to all the international community, for all the support they have 
provided  to  elevate  the  financial  system,  contributing  to  the  development  of  the  economy  and 
reduction of absolute poverty in the country. 
This is the second day of our XXXI Consultative Council. 
In  yesterday’s  session,  besides  the  analysis  of  the  implementation  of  the  Recommendations  of  the 
XXX  Consultative  Council,  we  analysed  the  execution  of  our  Strategic  Plan,  the  report  on  human 
resources, titled “Balanço Social do Banco” and yet we discussed other important domestic matters, 
and stressed the relevant role of the colleagues who retired last year. 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
The  recent  history  regarding  the  evolution  of  our  financial  system  shows  notable  development  and 
growth in terms of the number of institutions, diversification and modernization of products, thanks to 
the market opening to private financial institutions in the sequence of financial and economic reforms 
began in the 80’s, and which witnessed great move as from 1990. In effect, of a total of three banks 
and one insurance company that the country had in 1987, currently the number has moved to a total 
of (12) twelve banks, 11 (eleven) credit cooperatives, 56 (fifty-six) micro-finance institutions, besides 4 
(four) insurance and leasing companies and others, as well as a notable implementation of electronic 
systems of international standards. 
However,  this  development  is  characterized  by  a  tendency  towards  the  concentration  of  institutions 
and financial services in the main cities of the country, situation that became worse with the closing of 
BIS Review 30/2007 
 1
some branches in the rural areas, creating within the authorities and in the society in general, a great 
concern, given that it is in these areas where the majority of our population is concentrated. 
In fact, the numbers show that the 228 (two hundred and twenty-eight) bank branches existing in the 
country  only  cover  28  (twenty-eight)  districts,  which  means  that  the  remainder  100  (one  hundred) 
districts,  which  comprise  about  79%  of  the  national  territory,  do  not  possess  any  banking 
representation, in other words, a vast group of people are deprived of financial services. 
The  disproportions  are  still  more  evident  if  we  consider  that  the  three  main  cities  of  the  country, 
Maputo, Beira and Nampula, have altogether 132 (one hundred and thirty-two) branches, that is, 58% 
of the total branches, of which Maputo city, alone, absorbs about 45%. 
In Maputo City, for example, each branch serves 11,592 inhabitants, while in Milange and Angoche, 
the coverage is of 411,267 and 258,594 inhabitants, respectively. Analysing the prevailing situation in 
another  perspective,  it  is  concluded  that  in  Maputo  city  there  is  a  branch  in  each  2.85  square 
kilometres against 15,871 square kilometres in Montepuez and 14,150 square kilometres in Mueda, 
which shows the long way still to be pursued. 
With  regard  to  other  kinds  of  services  and  financial  products,  namely  ATM’s  (Automated  Teller 
Machines) and POS (Point of Sale) devices, it is concluded that there are differences provided that 
they are also concentrated in Maputo (Province and City), as they represent 69% of the total national 
coverage. 
In order to invert the situation, the authorities have devised a number of legal and regulating measures 
aimed  at  promoting  micro  finance,  on  one  side  and,  on  the  other  side,  the  establishment  of  banks 
through to the areas of the country with minor financial services. Similarly, it is worth referring that the 
Government, in the context of its Five-Year Term Program, has been undertaking efforts in order to 
create conditions in terms of infrastructures, namely, roads, bridges, telecommunications and electric 
power network. 
We are conscious that, even though, there are constraints that should be cleared, but this is the real 
country we have and under which we should work, being necessary to continue seeking innovative 
ideas in order to face the current and future challenges. 
The view that the authorities have about the expansion of financial intermediation is that it cannot only 
be confined to the physical presence of bank branches in rural areas. It should be done in a broad and 
integrated  way,  making  use  of  the  advantages  offered  by  the  information  technology  systems.  We 
need to find an adequate combination between the traditional and electronic banking, maximizing the 
use of products such as ATM’s, POS, Internet banking and mobile banking. In this engineering, the 
mailing services can and should be asked to play an important role as bank correspondents, making 
savings on their behalf and responsibility and rendering other kind of financial services. 
The  principal  idea  is  that  the  financial  sector  must  also  associate  itself  clearly  to  the  efforts  of  the 
Government  and  other  economic  agents,  as  well  as  the  society  in  general,  towards  the 
accomplishment of the major objective of creating wealth in order to eradicate poverty in the country. 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
The objective of expanding banking institutions and financial services through to the rural areas is in 
line with the Government strategy, which defines district as the pole of planning and development of 
our  economy.  We  are  certain  that  these  two  factors  will  interact  contributing  towards  the  same 
purpose, taking into account that, for the growth of districts, it will be necessary to continue to endow 
them with financial and human resources as well as infrastructures, similarly important for the financial 
sector to flourish. 
At the micro-finance level, we should stress the valuable contribution given by the authorities through 
the  Micro-finance  Support  Program,  which  aims  specifically  at  expanding  micro-finance  activities 
through to the rural areas. 
There are experiences of countries with characteristics like ours, which confirm to be possible for the 
financial system to serve as the encouraging factor for development of economic and financially poor 
regions.  Countries  like  Ghana,  Kenya  and  Nigeria,  for  instance,  can  serve,  at  the  level  of  our 
continent, as the source of inspiration in the process of promotion and development of micro-finance 
institutions. 
2 
 BIS Review 30/2007
Although the cases of relative failure observed since the 70s until the present days are not at all to be 
neglected, in the micro-finance domain, however, we have to note that Asia is a continent replete with 
successful experiences. 
With respect to cases of success, three institutions deserve relevance for their contribution in the fight 
against  poverty  in  their  respective  countries:  The  Bank  for  Agriculture  and  Agricultural 
Cooperatives,  (BAAC),  of  Thailand  founded  in  1966,  the  “BRI  Unit  Desa”  System  of  the  Bank 
Rakyat of Indonesia (BRI-UD), founded in 1984 and the Grameen Bank (GB) of Bangladesh created 
in 1983, which today hold a portfolio of savers to the tune of 4.4, 14.5 and 2.1 million, respectively. 
The history of Grameen Bank is very simple, but very rich in terms of learning aspects. Its founder, Mr 
Mohammad Yunus, began his activity as money lender, granting loans to 42 poor people who needed 
an individual amount equivalent to USD 27. That was in this way that everything started for the case, 
which today is the world reference in the field. 
The success obtained in terms of the fight against poverty and the increased potential of business in 
the  areas  where  he  operated,  encouraged  him  to  create  a  rural  bank.  Besides  the  information  I 
referred to, recent data pointed out that today the bank employs 18,796 workers, and holds a portfolio 
of 6.61 million loan beneficiary clients, of which 97% are women and, a network of 2,226 branches. 
Mohammad  Yunus  and  the  Grammen  Bank  were  awarded  the  2006  Peace  Nobel  Prize,  thanks  to 
their devotion to the cause of the more needed population of their country. 
It is not possible to ensure social and political stability with high poverty indices the reason why the 
fight  against it  is a  priority  that cannot be  postponed.  Besides,  recognising  this  fact,  the Norwegian 
Committee of Nobel Prize supported its decision to award the prize in the following terms: “The long 
lasting Peace cannot be achieved without opening a way so that a large number of people is poverty 
free” end of quotation. 
It  was  considering  all  the  potential  financial  intermediation  for  economic  growth  that,  in  the  present 
year, we chose for debate in our XXXI Consultative Council the topic: Bancarização da Economia – 
Extensão  dos  Serviços  Financeiros  para  as  zonas  Rurais,  (Banking  the  Economy  –  Expanding 
Financial  Services  to  the  Rural  Areas),  believing  it  to  be  a  current  matter  of  national  interest  and 
importance for our reality where the district was assumed as the pole of development. 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
The hosting of our Consultative Council here in Nampula is a sign especially addressed to financial 
institutions and operators, to show that we should expand our activities beyond the Capital city. And 
for that reason we are grateful for the presence in this session of the Governor of Nampula Province 
and other representatives of the north region provinces. 
We are conscious that the attainment of the will for greater expansion of financial services throughout 
the national territory requires the intervention, with appropriate measures, by several interested parts: 
the Government, the private sector, and ourselves – Banco de Moçambique! 
Our  strategy  of  reinforcing  the  level  of  expansion  of  banking  institutions  throughout  the  country, 
facilitating and encouraging the enlargement of financial services, had an important landmark with the 
process already underway, which consists of opening five branches of the Banco de Moçambique in 
similar number of Provinces. 
Until now branches have been inaugurated in Quelimane and Maxixe cities, with plans to open Pemba 
branch next week. This process will come to the end with the inauguration of branches in Lichinga and 
Tete by the end of the first semester of 2007. 
The Banco de Moçambique territorial expansion is within the performance of its role as central bank, 
namely, as the authority of the national payment systems, supervisor of institutions, issuing bank, and 
manager of money circulation. Therefore, we are conscious that the branches will facilitate our mission 
and  will  contribute  to  the  (i)  reduction  of  storing  costs  and  transport  of  banknotes  and  coins  by 
commercial banks, (ii) intermediation of Government financial operations (iii) deposits and withdrawal 
of  banknotes  and  coins  of  the  Metical  by  the  banking  system,  (iv)  licensing  of  foreign  exchange 
operations and (v) support and supervision of micro-finance institutions. 
The urgency in expanding banking institutions throughout the country becomes similarly relevant in the 
context  of  regional  economic  integration  programs  underway  within  the  SADC,  as  well  as  in  the 
African continent. The creation of a single SADC central bank, and later an African central bank, will 
require  a  sound,  modern  financial  system,  with  territorial  coverage,  otherwise  institutions  of  other 
BIS Review 30/2007 
 3
member  countries  of  the  region  will  reach  this  segment  of  the  market  rapidly,  which  is  presently 
ignored by the domestic financial service network. 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
We are certain that in the current conditions, the enlargement of financial services to less favoured 
areas of the country, requires the provision of a number of non banking external factors as well as 
fiscal and non fiscal incentives. 
Therefore,  bringing  into  debate  a  package  of  measures  aimed  at  encouraging  the  enlargement  of 
financial  services  throughout  the  country,  we  intend  to  get  contributions  from  representatives  of 
various transversal areas herein represented so that we can improve further the referred project with 
the  purpose  of  ensuring  the  adoption  of  more  effective  actions  that  stimulate  investments  for  the 
expansion and extension of financial services in Mozambique as quickly as possible, increasing the 
financial intermediation. 
We are not eluded in relation to the challenges we have forward, including in the macroeconomic plan, 
provided  that  stability  is  an  essential  element  for  investments  in  the  context  of  more  banking 
institutions throughout the country to take place effectively. 
We ended 2006 with a considerable reduction of inflation and the data we have been monitoring in 
2007 suggest the continuous reduction and control of inflation. In the same way, with respect to the 
trend  of  the  Metical  exchange  rate  in  relation  to  the  USD,  available  data  pointed  out  to  a  greater 
stability  in  2007,  in  an  environment  of  greater  convergence  between  the  USD  rates  in  different 
segments of our foreign exchange market. 
These data show a scenario that encourages us to review some of the monetary policy instruments 
managed  by  the  Banco  de  Moçambique.  In  this  context,  during  February,  we  will  reduce  the 
Mandatory Reserve rate that the banking institutions should constitute at the Banco de Moçambique, 
and we will accommodate its regime of constitution in line with our objectives of a major deepening of 
money market operations and a major financial intermediation in the country. 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Before I finish, I would like to express my gratitude to all those who, in a devoted and patriotic way, 
involved themselves in the process of introduction of the Metical of the New Family, integrating various 
working committees, or travelling throughout this country from Maputo to Rovuma and from Indico to 
Zumbo, visiting villages, towns, districts and Provinces, carrying out the heroic mission of informing 
our population of the importance and objectives behind this process. 
The mission is not yet finished, but it is not fairly a lack of modesty if we assert that the process was 
successful, taking into account similar experiences we have heard of. In this final stage of the process, 
I would like to urge, particularly, the economic agents involved in the commercialization campagins, in 
rural shops and all the institutions whose activity runs in the countryside, to serve as catalyst agents of 
the exchange process, using banknotes and coins of the Metical of the New Family in all transactions 
held with the public in order for about 6% to 7% of the remainder former families of the Metical to be 
changed in short time and within a peaceful environment. 
To  end,  I  would  like  to  invite  everyone  to  participate  in  the  debate,  in  a  frank  and  open  way, 
expressing  your  opinions  and  experiences  on  the  challenges  of  expanding  banking  institutions  and 
extending financial services through to the rural areas. 
Thank you very much. 
4 
 BIS Review 30/2007
