Mohd Razif bin Abd Kadir: Malaysia’s life insurance industry 
Speech by Mr Mohd Razif bin Abd Kadir, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 
official launch of Axa Affin Life Insurance Berhad, Kuala Lumpur, 30 January 2007. 
 It is indeed an honour to be here this morning to witness the launching of Axa Affin Life Insurance 
Berhad. The launch of Axa Affin Life Insurance Berhad today marks an important development where 
two players from different financial industries, i.e. Affin Holding Bhd and Axa Asia Pacific Holding Ltd., 
forge a strategic alliance to attain synergy for mutual business advantage. I wish to congratulate both 
companies on this momentous event. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
The  financial  landscape  had  undergone  tremendous  transformation  in  the  last  decade.  The  life 
insurance  industry  continues  to  sustain  strong  performance  amidst  challenges  in  a  competitive 
environment. The evolution in the financial landscape saw a shift in customers' preference, emergence 
of more complex products and increasing diversity in delivery channels. The growing acceptance by 
the insuring public for financial protection in the form of insurance coverage has gained prominence 
especially for investment linked products which currently commands a market share of more than 40% 
of new business. This period also witnessed the growing importance of bancassurance as a channel 
for marketing life insurance products. 
The life business written via the bancassurance channel currently accounts for almost 50% of the new 
business written in the life insurance sector. This potential is further supported by a survey conducted 
in 2004 which I believe remains relevant. The survey revealed that customers, despite the availability 
of  banks'  virtual  network,  prefer  to  visit  branches  to  conduct  their  dealings;  there  is  a  high  level  of 
confidence  and  trust  generally  placed  by  the  public  in  banks;  and  the  strong  preference  among 
consumers  for  insurance  products  with  a  high  savings  content  that  enhances  the  complementary 
elements of insurance and banking products. 
This development provides significant competitive advantages for financial institutions and insurance 
companies  which  have  partnered  and  adopted  an  integrated  approach  to  market  their  financial 
products by leveraging significantly on the banking network. With close to 3200 bank branches located 
throughout  the  country,  the  banks'  customer  base  constitutes  a  significant  market  potential. 
Furthermore,  the  insurance  and  takaful  penetration  ratio  is  currently  only  at  44%  of  the  Malaysian 
population. In this regard, there is huge potential that is left remaining untapped. 
Despite the tremendous benefits that can be reaped from bancassurance, this opportunity, however, 
has  not  yet  been  fully  harnessed.  To  date,  an  estimate  of  only  less  than  8%  of  Malaysian  banking 
customers  have  relationships  that  include  insurance  products  and  services.  Even  though  growth  of 
bancassurance registered an encouraging trend, it is only driven by a small number of banking groups. 
In view of the high success penetration rate of bancassurance service providers and the fact that bank 
backed insurance companies have ready pool of the banking customers within the group to tap, they 
should  seriously  explore  the  bancassurance  route  to  exploit  the  effectiveness  of  bancassurance  to 
gain new market share. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I  am  confident  that  the  commitment  of  Axa  Affin's  foreign  partner  to  introduce  its  best  practices  in 
Malaysia and its strategy to "Think Global Act Local" in terms of product innovation, operational and 
distribution strategy will go a long way towards ensuring the success of this new business venture, 
founded on the sound relationship they have nurtured via the general insurance entity, i.e. Axa Affin 
Assurance Berhad. This would also contribute to the development of the industry through the transfer 
of  expertise,  providing  leadership  in  innovation  and  expanding  the  range  of  quality  products  and 
services available to Malaysian consumers. 
Having such strategic partnerships which allows equity participation from international players of up to 
49%  under  BNM  new  liberalized  operating  environment  would  enable  insurers  to  leverage  on  the 
experience and financial capabilities of the foreign partner and this would allow them to grow in size. 
They would also have the capacity to improve their competitiveness and enter into foreign markets, 
taking more complex risks and expand their product portfolio more significantly. 
BIS Review 11/2007 
 1
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
On  the  regulatory  front,  allow  me  to  share  with  you  what  the  future  holds  for  the  regulatory 
developments that would predominantly shape the future direction of the life insurance industry. The 
Bank's  future  regulatory  orientation  will  be  characterized  by  a  heightened  focus  on,  and  alignment, 
with  risk;  anticipatory,  rather  than  reactionary  interventions;  a  clear  goal  to  promote  efficiency, 
innovation  and  competition  by  ensuring  that  regulation  is  proportionate  in  relation  to  its  costs  and 
benefits;  greater  use  of  incentive  approaches  to  achieve  desired  institutional  behaviours  and 
outcomes; an expanded regulatory toolkit that leverages more extensively on the inherent checks and 
balances  built  into  the  system;  and  an  increased  focus  on  market  conduct  and  harnessing  active 
consumerism  to  reinforce prudential  regulation  and supervision.  In  this  regard,  I  wish  to  emphasise 
that  in  the  course  of  designing  any  regulatory  framework,  the  Bank  will  continue  to  involve  all 
stakeholders particularly the industry for better appreciation of new policies introduced. 
The insurance industry is expected to continue its positive growth momentum in the near term. Growth 
in  the  life  sector  should  continue  to  receive  support  from  the  encouraging  demand  for  savings  and 
investment-driven  products  such  as  endowment  and  investment-linked  insurance.  The  increasing 
awareness among the consumers of the importance of risk protection, relatively low penetration level 
and large mortality protection gap also underpin strong future growth opportunities for life insurers in 
the  more  traditional  risk  product  lines  such  as  term  (including  credit-related  term)  insurance.  Also 
contributing to the growth opportunities for risk products is the growing preference among the more 
sophisticated  consumer  segments  for  unbundled  investments  and  protection  solutions  which  offer 
greater flexibility with investment choices, without affecting protection levels. 
Amidst these prospects and as the financial services industry transitions to a more deregulated and 
market-driven environment, the regulatory and supervisory approach will continue to evolve into one 
that is more principle and risk-based, providing greater operating flexibility to insurers. In this regard, 
the proposed risk-based regulatory regime which includes the new risk based capital framework that is 
going  to  be  introduced  in  due  course  is  a  move  in  this  direction.  This  would  further  strengthen  the 
incentives  for  improved  risk  management  practices  of  insurance  companies.  The  new  requirement 
would also facilitate more efficient capital structures that are more reflective of the different risk profiles 
of individual institutions, whilst providing greater investment flexibility to insurers without compromising 
on prudential standards. Such insurance companies would be well-positioned to reap the opportunities 
abound in the insurance market place. 
Under  this  risk-based  regulatory  regime,  the  responsibility  for  the  implementation  of  sound  risk 
management and market conduct governance, as well as assessment of risks and management of the 
financial  condition  of  an  insurer,  will  increasingly  rest  with  the  Board  of  Directors  and  Senior 
Management  of  the  insurer.  This will ensure  that  the  financial  system  is  able  to  continuously  adapt 
whilst maintaining a clear focus on sound risk management that will continue to be a critical pillar to 
support  a  resilient  insurance  industry.  It  will  also  enhance  public  confidence  in  the  efficiency  and 
performance  of  the  financial  system  to  contribute  to  the  overall  development  of  the  economy.  This 
approach  is  also  a  move  towards  a  differentiated  regulatory  and  supervisory  approach  whereby 
companies that demonstrate strong corporate governance standards and risk management practices 
will  be  accorded  'lighter  regulatory  touch',  which  implies  that  they  will  be  given  greater  regulatory 
flexibility. 
This  underscores  the  importance  of  capacity  building  by  the  financial  institutions  in  research  and 
development  and  re-engineering  of  business  processes  in  search  of  operational  excellence  and 
enhanced  customer  service  delivery.  A  strong  culture  of  excellence  is  therefore  vital:  one  that  is 
embedded in all levels of the organisation; one that fosters and rewards innovation and service quality. 
A  customer-centric  focus  is,  and  will  continue  to  be,  the  winning  formula  for  a  successful  financial 
services provider. In particular, insurers must ensure suitability of products sold or advice given; play 
an  active  role  in  enhancing  financial  capability  of  consumers;  and  ensure  policyholders  are  treated 
fairly. 
This  regulatory  approach  will  basically  benefit  those  companies  that  are  efficiently-run  and  well-
capitalised. In this regard, Axa Affin will benefit from this new regulatory approach if it puts in place a 
risk management system that could be used to capitalize incentives accorded by the new framework. 
The synergies derived from the strengths of the bank and the experience of foreign insurance partner 
should  be  harnessed  to  benefit  from  this  new  environment,  particularly  in  the  bancasurance  line  of 
business. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
2 
 BIS Review 11/2007
I am confident that Axa Affin Life should be able to strategise itself by optimizing and leveraging on 
each others' strength and expertise, experience and infrastructure so as to offer diversified products 
and enhanced customer service. 
On that note, it is my pleasure to officially launch Axa Affin Life Insurance Berhad and wish Axa Affin 
Life Insurance Berhad every success in its endeavours and I look forward to its contribution towards 
further development of the domestic insurance industry. 
Terima Kasih. 
BIS Review 11/2007 
 3
