Randall S Kroszner: Renomination to the Board 
Testimony of Mr Randall S Kroszner, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve System, before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, US Senate, 
Washington DC, 2 August 2007. 
 Chairman Dodd, Senator Shelby, and Members of the Committee, I am pleased to have the 
opportunity to appear before you today as a nominee to serve a new term on the Board of 
Governors of the Federal Reserve System. I am honored that President Bush has nominated 
me to serve another term on the Board. If I am confirmed by the Senate, I will work to the 
best of my abilities to fulfill the significant responsibilities of this office.  
During the last quarter century, the Federal Reserve has achieved much success in reducing 
and stabilizing inflation and inflation expectations. This success has helped to contribute to a 
tendency for the fluctuations in employment and output to be lower than in the past and a 
reduction in the frequency and severity of recessions. If confirmed, I would continue to work 
with Chairman Bernanke and the other members of the Federal Open Market Committee to 
continue  to  underscore  the  role  of  long-term  price  stability  in  achieving  prosperity  and 
maximum employment. 
The Federal Reserve also has a fundamental responsibility to consumers and users of the 
banking  and  financial  system.  Discriminatory  or  abusive  lending  practices  should  not  be 
tolerated, and the privacy of individuals and their financial data must be protected. Since I 
joined the Federal Reserve, we have undertaken a number of initiatives to better protect and 
to  better  inform  consumers.  These  include:  issuing  guidance  on  non-traditional  mortgage 
products and on subprime mortgages and improving our collaboration with the state banking 
supervisors; launching a pilot project in collaboration with other federal agencies and state 
regulators  to  examine  non-depository  lenders  for  compliance  with  consumer  regulations; 
improving  disclosures  for  privacy  notices  and  credit  cards;  improving  the  handbook  on 
adjustable-rate mortgages (ARM) that creditors are required to give to all ARM applicants, 
and  committing  to  propose  new  rules  before  the  end  of  the  year  to  require  that  lenders 
provide  other  mortgage  disclosures  more  quickly  and 
loan 
advertisements; undertaking a series of hearings, including one I chaired in June, to assess 
the impact of specific practices in the mortgage market, and committing to propose new rules 
exercising our authority to ban unfair or deceptive practices under the Home Ownership and 
Equity  Protection  Act.  If  I  am  confirmed,  I  will  continue  to  place  the  highest  priority  on 
protecting consumers while ensuring that creditors continue to provide credit responsibly.  
An important part of my research as an economics professor at the University of Chicago, 
and my practical policy work as a member of the Council of Economic Advisers, was devoted 
to banking and financial regulation as well as banking and financial crises. The safety and 
soundness  of  the  U.S.  banking  and  payments  systems  is  critical  to  achieving  economic 
growth,  maximum  employment,  and  general  economic  stability,  and  the  Federal  Reserve 
works closely with other regulators to achieve this goal. The Federal Reserve also has an 
important  role  to  play  in  responding  to  and  mitigating  the  impact  of  financial  crises  and 
shocks. If confirmed, I would continue to work vigorously to protect and promote the safety 
and soundness of the system. 
Thank you once again for holding this hearing, and I look forward to your questions. 
improve  mortgage 
to 
BIS Review 86/2007 
 1
