T T Mboweni: The benefits of being a good host – the FIFA World Cup and the 
South African economy 
Address  by  Mr  T  T  Mboweni,  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  at  the  Corporatesport 
Directors’ Dinner, Johannesburg, 20 March 2007. 
Honoured guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
 Introduction 
1.  
It is not often that I land up sharing the podium with someone like Mr Jake White, coach of our national 
rugby team. After all, what does a sports coach and a central bank Governor have in common? This is 
probably  a  question  that  some  of  you  are  currently  pondering  over.  Perhaps,  one  common  aspect 
centres around the target that both of us have. For Mr White it is to win matches and tournaments, 
while  in  my  case  it  is  to  ensure  that  inflation  remains  within  the  target  range.  There  is  a  subtle 
difference  however.  As  long  as  Mr  White  meets  his  target,  then  everyone  is  happy  (apart  from  the 
opposition). Meeting the inflation target does not necessarily keep all South Africans happy – this is 
particularly evident when we have to increase interest rates in order to keep inflationary pressures in 
check. Consumers, and usually the highly indebted ones, always complain when there are increases 
in interest rates while pensioners argue that it is a case of too little too late. So the issue of whose job 
is easier is still very much an open question. However, I am definitely not going to get involved in a 
scrum  or  a  lineout  with Jake  in  order to  answer  this  question.  I  have  no  intention  of  giving  away  a 
penalty, being sin-binned or being cited afterwards. Whatever the case, I do not think that we should 
swap roles. I don’t know how Mr White would do as a central banker, but I am certain that the national 
team is better off not having me as their coach. 
I feel on safer ground sharing a platform with Mr Tim Modise. Both of our jobs involve communication, 
and  he communicates on  behalf  of  a  sport  that  I  passionately  follow.  I  am  an  ardent  Kaizer Chiefs 
supporter, but regrettably we will have to wait till next year for renewed league glory. I am pleased at 
least that if it is not my team that is leading the pack, it is a team from Tshwane where the Bank is 
based.  I  will  leave  rugby  to  Mr  White, and  let  me  rather  use  this  occasion  to  highlight  some  of  the 
economic benefits for South Africa of hosting major international events, in particular sporting events 
such as the FIFA World Cup.  
Hosting of mega events 
2.  
The  wave  of  globalisation  that  has  swept  across  the  world  for  more  than  two  decades  has  had  an 
impact on communities beyond the economic and financial spheres. It has also impacted on the way in 
which  global  communities  interact  in  areas  such  as  education  and  sport.  As  the  world  becomes 
increasingly  integrated,  more  opportunities  have  emerged  for  countries  to  host  and  organise  what 
today  have  become  known  as  mega  events.  Since  1994,  South  Africa  has  become  an  important 
venue for hosting such events. 
Hosting major sporting, cultural and economic events is of significance for many countries since it can 
provide an important catalyst for growth and development. As a result of this potential, professionals 
from  various  disciplines  such  as  marketing,  finance,  economics  and  tourism  have  shown  increased 
interest  in  understanding  the  dynamics  of  hosting  mega  events.  Today,  universities  in  the  United 
States  of  America,  the  United  Kingdom  and  Australia  offer  courses  on  various  aspects  of  sport 
education, including sport marketing and sport tourism. This trend is also becoming evident in South 
African tertiary education and is likely to intensify in the future.  
South Africa has had its fair share of hosting major sporting events since 1994 such as the African 
Cup of Nations in 1994, the Rugby World Cup in 1995, and the Cricket World Cup in 2003. In addition, 
South  Africa  has  also  hosted  major  conferences  which  have  attracted  global  interest.  The  most 
important of these have inter alia included the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Growth in 
2002  which  attracted  more  than  60  000  delegates,  as  well  as  the  United  Nations  Conference  on 
BIS Review 27/2007 
 1
Racism in 2001, to mention but a few. Major conference and convention centres have been built in 
most of our major cities and most of them have had a high degree of utilisation. 
This year, the South African Reserve Bank in collaboration with the South African National Treasury 
will be hosting the G-20 meeting of Ministers of Finance and Central Bank Governors. Preparations for 
this meeting will be ongoing for most of the year. Preparatory meetings are held both in South Africa 
and  other  member  countries.  These  events  will  attract  high  level  officials  to  South  Africa  from  the 
world’s  most  important  economies.  Three  major  meetings  will  be  held  in  South  Africa  during  the 
course of this year. 
Apart from successfully hosting these events, South Africa has also bid to host the two most important 
global sporting spectaculars, namely the 2006 FIFA World Cup finals and Cape Town’s bid to host the 
2004  Olympic  Games.  South  Africa  narrowly  failed  to  win  these  bids,  but  fortunately  our  second 
attempt to host the FIFA World Cup finals was successful and as you all know, we will be hosting the 
event in 2010. 
The economic implications of hosting mega events 
3.  
There  has  been  growing  interest  in  the  economic  consequences  of  hosting  mega  events.  The 
economic  advantages  of  hosting  such  events  do  not  automatically  outweigh  the  costs.  In  an 
environment of scarce resources, the opportunity costs of hosting mega events always attract close 
scrutiny.  Governments  are  generally  required  to  commit  considerable  resources  to  hosting  these 
events; resources that could have been used elsewhere in the economy. In some instances, this may 
involve an acceleration of spending, an additional allocation or a diversion of expenditure from other 
uses  or  regions.  For  example,  a  successful  bid  for  the  2004  Olympic  Games  could  have  seen 
resources  being  diverted  from  other  areas  of  the  country  to  Cape  Town,  whereas  the  World  Cup 
games should see a wider distribution of benefits.  
A further problem relates to correctly estimating the costs. For example, it was reported last Thursday 
that the expected cost of the London Olympic Games in 2012 is already more than four times higher 
than estimated at the time of the successful bid. Finally, these costs have to be weighed up against 
the  expected  revenue  and  other  positive  spin-offs,  which  are  also  difficult  to  quantify.  In  many 
instances, the revenue stream remains long after the event is held, but so does the financing of the 
costs. 
Numerous  studies  have  been  commissioned  in  various  countries  to  determine  the  economic  and 
financial implications of hosting mega events See Bohlmann H R: Predicting the Economic Impact of 
the 2010 FIFA World Cup on South Africa. May, 2005. University of Pretoria. Working paper 2006-11, 
for a review of these studies. The Montreal Olympic Games in 1976 are considered by many to have 
been an economic and financial failure. Hosting the Olympics in Montreal plunged the city into a huge 
debt  burden  which  was  only  repaid  in  full  in  recent  years.  Similarly,  studies  have  shown  that  the 
benefits to Korea from hosting the FIFA World Cup finals in 2002 fell far short of initial expectations. 
The country was left with an over-supply of large stadiums, some of which have subsequently been 
demolished.  
Notwithstanding  these  negative  outcomes,  most  countries  reap  a  positive  net  benefit  from  hosting 
these events. The broad conclusion is that proper planning for mega events tends to generate positive 
spin-offs both in the short and long run. 
A study conducted by the Los Angeles Sports and Entertainment Commission following the 1984 Los 
Angeles Olympic Games estimated that income from tourism increased by almost US$9 billion as a 
result  of  hosting  the  games.  The  study  concluded  that  hosting  major  events  could  be  beneficial  to 
cities if carefully planned. 
The  Barcelona  Olympic  Games  of  1988  are  today  considered  a  model  of  how  to  plan  for  a  mega 
event.  The  Barcelona  Games  were  integrated  into  an  urban  renewal  strategy  and  the  economic 
outcome of Barcelona hosting the Olympic Games was significant. Unemployment in Barcelona was 
reduced significantly from 18.4 per cent to 9.6 per cent between 1986 and 1992 and from 20.9 per 
cent to 15.5 per cent in the country as a whole. Overall growth in Barcelona is said to have increased 
at a pace never seen before, even a decade after hosting the Games.  
Similarly,  the  Sydney  Olympic  Games  which  took place  in  2000  were  planned  in  such  a  way  as  to 
generate positive spin-offs well beyond the actual event. In the case of Sydney, city planners focused 
on infrastructural development of the venues for the games such that these venues could be used for 
2 
 BIS Review 27/2007
subsequent  sporting  events.  It  has  been  claimed  that  the  Sydney  Olympic  Games  were  beyond  a 
sporting triumph.  
As we are all aware, South Africa has won the 2010 FIFA World Cup finals bid and preparations to 
host this event are in progress. There is considerable reputational risk associated with the hosting of 
the  2010  World  Cup  finals,  and  the  success  of  the  World  Cup  finals  in  Germany  puts  even  more 
pressure on us to raise the bar. We stand to benefit from the experience and advice of countries that 
have successfully hosted similar events. As I noted earlier, we have already hosted numerous events, 
although none perhaps on the scale of the FIFA World Cup finals. 
Research has shown that South Africa also stands to benefit from hosting the 2010 FIFA World Cup 
finals.  According  to  a  Grant  Thornton  study  conducted  in  2003,  the  event  is  expected  to  contribute 
about R21 billion for the economy as a whole, generate about R7 billion in tax revenue and create 
about  150  000  jobs.  It  is  not  possible  to  fully  and  accurately  estimate  the  potential  gains  to  the 
economy  from  hosting  the  World  Cup  finals  ex-ante.  However,  there  is  little  doubt  that  with  proper 
planning and interventions by all the relevant stakeholders the potential benefits can be maximised. 
The spin-offs in terms of tourism, communications and television technology, transport infrastructure to 
name but a few are significant. Tourism has become an increasingly important source of revenue to 
the economy and now accounts for about 10 per cent of total export receipts, almost double that of 10 
years ago. This number is expected to increase further as a result of the World Cup finals. 
Growth and investment in South Africa 
4.  
Preparations  for  the  World  Cup  come  at  a  time  when  the  economy  has  been  experiencing  strong 
economic growth. The persistent adherence to prudent macroeconomic policies by the authorities has 
resulted in the country’s solid economic performance in recent years. South Africa has experienced 
the longest upswing in its business cycle lasting almost 7.5 years to date. The average growth rate 
between 1994 and 2003 measured around 3 per cent, but in the last 3 years, growth has averaged 5 
per  cent.  In  the  fourth  quarter  of  2006,  annualised  growth  measured  5,6  per  cent.  The  growth  has 
been spread across all sectors of the economy with the exception of agriculture. 
Underpinning this strong growth has been a positive trend in investment growth. It is of interest to note 
that gross fixed capital formation as a ratio to GDP was around 12 per cent at the beginning of the 
decade. It is now around 19 per cent. This is a significant shift in the economy which we should not 
lose  sight  of,  and  a  trend  that  is  likely  to  continue  in  the  light  of  the  Government’s  Asgisa  growth 
strategy.  Central  to  this  strategy  is  a  strong  focus  on  infrastructural  investment.  As  indicated  in  the 
latest  Budget  Review,  government  and  public  enterprise  infrastructure  expenditure  over  the  next  3 
years is estimated to amount to R416 billion. This investment should not only raise current growth, but 
will also allow for sustained future growth over the medium to long term through improved transport, 
communication  and  electricity  provision.  These  improvements  are  expected  to  ease  bottlenecks  to 
current and future growth and exports. This is particularly the case when it comes to investment in 
transport infrastructure, whether rail, air, road or the ports.  
Government has made special budgetary allocations totaling R8,4 billion for the building of stadiums. 
This is in addition to what municipalities have committed. Furthermore, over R9 billion will be allocated 
by national government for municipal transport, roads and precinct upgrades relating to the Word Cup 
games. Apart from these budget provisions, the investment requirements for the event dovetail well 
with the planned infrastructural investment over the next few years. The 2010 World Cup finals will 
help to maintain the focus on infrastructural and investment expenditure projects such as the Gautrain, 
new stadiums and communications technology, to name a few. Much needed airport expansions are 
also  taking  place  in  anticipation  of  an  influx  of  tourists  for  this  event.  As  noted in  the  latest  Budget 
speech by the Minister of Finance, the impetus provided by the World Cup has resulted in a revolution 
in municipal planning for public transport and forward thinking about urban development.  
The World Cup and monetary policy 
5.  
Where does monetary policy fit in to all of this? Of course, when the World Cup finals begin in 2010 we 
will be keen spectators and supporters of Bafana Bafana, but there is not much we can do to directly 
impact on the fortunes of the team. I will leave that in the capable hands of Mr Carlos Parreira and his 
team. We have to keep our eyes on a different ball and a different goal. Through this exciting growth 
BIS Review 27/2007 
 3
phase that we are experiencing, monetary policy has to ensure that inflation is kept under control. In 
other words we have to ensure that we maintain inflation within the 3-6 per cent target for CPIX.  
Excessively high growth brings with it potential inflationary pressures which monetary policy has to be 
sensitive to. In economic parlance, this refers to the output gap, which is the difference between the 
potential  non-inflationary  output  of  the  economy  and  actual  output.  From  a  monetary  policy 
perspective, we have to determine whether the growth we are experiencing is purely cyclical. If this is 
the case, we are likely to experience inflationary pressures which would require a reaction on our part. 
However if the current growth trend is structural, that is, if it reflects an increase in the potential output 
of the economy then these developments are not necessarily inflationary and are sustainable. 
Unfortunately,  estimating  potential  output  is  not  a  simple  task  and  estimates  are  subject  to  a  high 
degree of uncertainty. Our view is that in the light of the enormous structural changes and productivity 
growth  in  the  economy,  much  of  the  higher  growth  we  have  experienced  in  recent  years  is  of  a 
structural nature. Current research in the Bank estimates that the potential output of the economy is 
now at least around 4,5 per cent or more. This can be compared to estimates of around 3 per cent or 
less during the 1990s. We appear to be well on the way to achieving the 6 per cent sustainable growth 
that  Asgisa  is  targeting,  and  the  spin-offs  from  events  such  as  the  FIFA  games  will  go  a  long  way 
towards ensuring that this is a sustainable story. At the same time, monetary policy will have to remain 
vigilant to ensure that growth occurs in a stable macroeconomic environment of price stability.  
Growth and the current account of the balance of payments 
6.  
One of the consequences of high growth and investment has been an expanding deficit on the current 
account  of  the  balance  of  payments.  In  recent  months,  international  financial  markets  have  viewed 
current account deficit countries as being more vulnerable to capital movements and consequently to 
exchange rate adjustments. Current account deficits in excess of 6 per cent of GDP have appeared in 
South  Africa  during  the  course  of  last  year  and  caused  quite  a  bit  of  excitement  in  the  analyst 
community. 
In the fourth quarter of last year we experienced a significant widening in the current account deficit, 
with the deficit on the trade account of the balance of payments having more than doubled from the 
third  to  the  fourth  quarter  of  2006.  As  we  noted  in  the  last  MPC  statement,  much  of  the  import 
momentum in the fourth quarter, however, can be ascribed to the 140 per cent increase in the volume 
of oil imports compared to the third quarter. It is important to highlight that the related inventory build-
up appears to be exceptional and it is unlikely that oil imports will be sustained at these levels. In fact, 
had there been the normal import volumes of oil during the final quarter of last year, the deficit-to-GDP 
ratio for that quarter would have been comfortably less than 6 per cent of GDP. 
South Africa has been able to finance the current account deficit with relative ease precisely because 
of  the  positive  growth  prospects  in  South  Africa.  It  also  needs  to  be  pointed  out  that  the  current 
account deficit also represents the other side of the coin of robust capital expenditure and the growth 
the country has been experiencing. A substantial part of increased imports have been capital goods 
and  intermediate  goods,  which  will  contribute  to  the  increase  in  the  productive  capacity  of  the 
economy and increased exports going forward.  
The  MPC  will  continue  to  monitor  the  developments  around  the  current  account  deficit  and  the 
potential  risk  to  the  inflation  outlook  stemming  from  possible  currency  depreciation.  It  is,  however, 
important for the market to analyse the drivers of the current account deficit, understand the underlying 
trends and qualitative dimensions rather than to concentrate on what the mere figure as a percentage 
of GDP is and possibly draw inappropriate conclusions. 
Conclusion 
7.  
There is a big difference between winning the bid for the World Cup finals, and adequately preparing 
for this event. While we cannot afford to be complacent, I am convinced that South Africa has what it 
takes to successfully host this event and to reap positive benefits for the economy as a whole. We 
should  embrace  the  opportunities  of  hosting  mega  events  as  part  of  the  process  of  creating  more 
opportunities for all of our citizens. The World Cup finals attract a huge global audience, apart from the 
actual visitors, and such exposure can only be positive for the country. 
4 
 BIS Review 27/2007
Finally, we have a busy sporting year ahead of us, with the current cricket world cup games on the go, 
and the rugby World Cup finals just around the corner. In monetary policy decision making, we rely 
somewhat on our forecasts for inflation. My current central forecast is that both the cricket and rugby 
teams are going to do well this year. As with any forecast, we have to assess the risks to the forecast. 
In both cases I would venture to say that the risks are firmly on the positive side, and that there is a 
good probability that we will be showing off two lots of silverware by the end of this year. Allow me to 
wish Mr White and the Springboks all the best in their endeavours in the rugby World Cup finals in 
France. We are fully behind you and believe that you have what it takes to bring the cup home. You 
dare not disappoint the people of South Africa. 
I thank you. 
BIS Review 27/2007 
 5
