Ewart S Williams: The Heritage and Stabilization Fund of Trinidad and Tobago  
Address  by  Mr  Ewart  S  Williams,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Trinidad  and  Tobago,  at  the 
Heritage and Stabilization Fund Forum, Port-of-Spain, 2 May 2007. 
 Why the Forum? 
The HSF is a most important national asset. It is a sizable sum which, in principle, could become a 
very significant sum of money over time. These sums are to be held in trust for future generations. 
Accordingly, it requires constant oversight of all stakeholders, starting with the Parliament but including 
civil society, business and all those who have an interest in the country’s economic development. 
Viewed from this perspective, the main objectives of this public information programme are: 
1. 
to create a better understanding of the workings of the Fund and ensure transparency of the 
process; 
to foster compliance with the new laws, procedures and policies; 
to create social ownership; and 
to avoid misinformation and to create realistic expectations. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
What are the objectives of the Fund? 
The Fund has two primary objectives. 
Firstly, to insulate fiscal policy and the economy from swings in international oil and gas prices (let’s 
call this the Stabilization objective). 
Secondly,  to  accumulate  savings  from  the  country’s  exhaustible  assets  of  oil  and  gas  for  future 
generations. The future generation will not benefit from these savings through annual cheques as was 
done by Alaska but through Government’s ability to maintain expenditures over the long term when oil 
and gas revenues are gone. 
While  not  a  specific  objective,  the  Fund,  by  holding  resources  abroad,  could  provide  a  cushion  to 
monetary policy in the face of volatile external flows. 
Why should the Fund cover stabilization? 
As you know, we ended up with a hybrid fund to cover stabilization and savings for future generations. 
The  simple  answer  is  because  of  our  heavy  dependence  on  the  energy  sector.  While  the  sector 
accounts for a mere 3 per cent of total employment, as is shown in the slide, the sector accounts for 
45  per  cent  of  GDP;  91  per  cent  of  merchandise  exports  and  62  per  cent  of  fiscal  revenues. 
Specifically, in respect of the budget, 43 per cent of every dollar of expenditure is financed by energy 
sector  revenues.  Thus,  let’s  say  oil  and  gas  revenues  decline  by  one-half,  in  the  absence  of  a 
stabilization fund, expenditures would need to be reduced by 21 per cent. Sudden sharp reductions 
in  government  expenditures  (of  this  magnitude)  could  have  serious  adverse  effects  on  government 
programmes.(Particularly, in view of the lumpiness of government investment projects). 
This is what happened in the 1980s when oil prices declined from US$36 to US$15 per barrel, forcing 
government expenditures to be cut by 40 per cent, even after the Government had recourse to foreign 
borrowing of about US$1 billion. 
Many commentators have raised a very valid concern that, in the event of a secular decline in oil and 
gas prices, drawdowns for stabilization could consume the entire Fund over time. To deal with 
this,  the  law  sets  a  floor  of  US$1  billion  beyond  which  no  drawings  can  be  made  for  stabilization 
purposes. A five-year review built into the legislation also allows this floor to be raised as the Fund 
grows. 
BIS Review 50/2007 
 1
• preserve the capital (somewhat like having the oil and gas remain in the ground); and 
• live off the interest. 
Inter-generational savings 
The major objective of the Fund is top generate inter-generational transfers (savings for the future). 
This  could  be  justified  by  the  fact  that  Government  revenue  from  the  exploitation  of  non-renewable 
resources  differs  from  other  tax  revenue  in  that  it  partly  represents  a  depletion  of  wealth,  and  that 
some of this wealth needs to be saved for fiscal sustainability and for inter-generational equity. 
Essentially, what the HSF does is to convert depleting resources into a permanent source of income. 
By saving some of the oil revenues and investing it wisely, we may be able to: 
• 
• 
Thus, when the oil resources are depleted, the income from the Fund would flow into the budget to 
preserve government expenditures. [The idea is that the earnings from the Fund would replace the 
energy taxes as oil and gas resources are depleted]. 
Of course this requires a critical mass of savings (built up over a period) to generate sufficiently large 
income flows. 
The  question  is  sometimes  raised:  Why  not  spend  all  the  oil  revenues  on  infrastructure  to broaden 
productive capacity to serve future generations – in our case there is the argument of our limited 
implementation  capacity  which  is  already  stretched.  More  broadly,  tying  public  expenditure  to 
available revenue invariably leads to some poor quality projects. 
So that’s the basic rationale behind the Fund. 
How is the HSF supposed to work? 
As Minister Enill noted, 60 per cent of any excess revenues will be credited to the Fund which will be 
invested in foreign assets and with a long-term focus. 
Conversely, the Government will be able to draw from the Fund when actual revenues are more than 
10  per  cent  below  budgeted  revenues.  They  could  draw  60  per  cent  of  the  shortfall  subject  to  a 
maximum. 
In order to avoid the excess or shortfall from being manipulated, the law specifically defines the basis 
on which “budget revenues” are to be projected, i.e. using an eleven-year projected price of oil and 
gas to be obtained from a defined independent source such as the IMF or other independent sources. 
Also there is the valid argument that a sustained decline in oil prices would trigger a depletion of the 
Fund to sustain expenditures. The legislation seeks to deal with this eventuality by imposing a capital 
of US$1billion beyond which no drawings could be made. The intention is to adjust this capital over 
time. 
Minister Enill also spoke about the governance structure of the Fund which is specified in law. This 
structure provides for four main actors: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Parliament; 
the Minister of Finance; 
the Board of the HSF; and 
the Central Bank. 
Roles and responsibilities 
1. 
2 
 Parliament 
- 
Has passed the enabling legislation that would continue to have oversight of the 
Fund exercised through review of annual reports and audited financial statements. 
BIS Review 50/2007
2.  
3. 
4.  
    Minister of Finance 
- 
Advises  the  President  on  the  appointment  of  the  Board  in  accordance  with  the 
legislation; 
Makes deposits to HSF according to formula prescribed in the legislation; 
Makes withdrawals from the HSF in accordance with the legislation. 
Annual reporting to the Parliament. 
The Board 
- 
Is basically responsible for the arrangement of the Fund but has delegated some of 
the functions to the Central Bank; 
Within this context it will decide on the Investment Objectives and Strategic Asset 
Allocation; 
Reviews the performance of the HSF; 
Reports quarterly and annually to the Minister of Finance (who in turn will report to 
the Parliament). 
Central Bank 
- 
Responsible  for  day-to-day  management  of  the  Fund  (to  meet  Investment 
Objectives of the Board); 
Reports quarterly and annually to the Board. 
The Public also a role to play in the oversight of the Fund. Before expanding a bit on the nature of 
these  responsibilities,  let  me  clarify  that  currently  the  Central  Bank  has  responsibility  for  the 
management of the country’s foreign exchange reserves. Excluding the HSF, these reserves currently 
amount to US$5.4 billion. 
But,  there  is  a  difference  in  the  management  philosophy  underlying  of  the  Central  Bank  reserves 
(official  reserves)  and  the  management  of  oil  funds,  like  the  HSF.  The  objective  of  Central  Bank 
reserve  management  is  capital  preservation  and  thus  the  investment  strategy  involves  middle  to 
low-risk tolerance. 
In the case of oil funds like the HSF – the rate of return assumes greater importance and thus risk 
tolerance  tends  to  be  moderate  to  high.  The  objective  is  to  maximize  expected  investment  returns 
while meeting a set of risk constraints. 
Responsibilities of the Board 
The main task of the Board is to define the risk tolerance of the Fund and consequently to set a target 
for portfolio returns. The target rate of returns comes out of a complex modeling exercise that takes 
into  consideration  several  factors  including:  information  on  oil  and  gas  production  and  reserves; 
projected  oil  and  gas  prices;  possible  drawdowns  from  the  Fund;  and  the  projected  government 
spending path. These factors will yield a profile of the size of the Fund while the investment strategy 
will influence the flow of returns. 
Having determined the target portfolio returns, the Board will decide on the mix of assets that could 
meet the target portfolio returns. This mix is called the Strategic Asset Allocation. 
Perhaps I could provide an example of the Strategic Asset Allocation for the official reserves. 
The Bank manages the country’s foreign exchange reserves in three tranches: 
- 
- 
- 
A Working Capital Tranche – largely in money market instruments; 
A Liquidity Tranche – in fixed income securities and money market instruments; and 
An  Investment  Tranche  with  a  higher  percentage  of  fixed  income  securities  but  at  longer 
maturities.  This  tranche  is  managed  partly  by  external  managers  and  partly  by  the  Bank 
staff. 
BIS Review 50/2007 
 3
The Strategic Asset Allocation for the official reserves is consistent with low- to medium-risk tolerance 
and is heavily concentrated on bonds and money market instruments. 
To earn higher returns and with greater risk tolerance for the HSF, consideration will need to be given 
to  a  more  aggressive  investment  strategy.  For  example,  empirical  evidence  suggests  that  although 
equities are considered riskier in the short term, a portfolio combining equities and fixed income assets 
could give a higher rate of return over the long run horizon relevant for the HSF. 
Central Bank’s responsibilities 
Currently, the Central Bank manages the official reserves partly through in-house management and 
partly through external investment managers. 
In the case of the HSF, with emphasis on higher returns and consequently greater risk tolerance, the 
idea  will  be  to  focus  more  on  external  investment  managers  with  a  record  of  achievement  in  the 
chosen asset classes. The selection of these external managers will be done with technical support 
from the World Bank Treasury and consistent with best practice procurement standards. 
The selection process is likely to involve: (i) the issuance of RFP’s to selected international investment 
management firms; (ii) an evaluation of their investment philosophies and performance records as well 
as risk management and operational capabilities of these firms; (iii) paying visits to a shortlist of these 
managers to get a better insight into their investment processes and models. 
After  negotiating  contracts  with  the  selected  managers,  the  process  involves  the  negotiation  of  a 
Custodian  who  provides  safe  keeping  for  the  financial  assets  and  trade  settlement  services  to  the 
international investment manager. 
The  legislation  requires  that  close  attention  be  paid  to  disclosure  and  accountability. 
Specifically, it calls for quarterly reports by the Central Bank to the Board, and an annual report from 
the Minister of Finance to the Parliament. In addition, the Annual audited accounts of the Fund are to 
be laid in Parliament. Best practices require that some or all of these reports are made public. The 
Norwegian Fund is cited as an example of best practice in disclosure and transparency. As a practical 
matter, we will have to build the capacity and infrastructure to deliver this level of transparency over 
time. 
What are the next steps? 
• 
   With the passage of the HSF legislation, the HSF account has been formally established. For 
the time being, the funds will continue to be invested by the Central Bank, in line with the 
Bank’s current Strategic Asset Allocation. 
An important next step is the appointment of the HSF Board which has the responsibility for 
defining the Strategic Asset Allocation and benchmarking. 
Preparation  of  the  delegation  agreement  between  the  Board  and  the  Central  Bank  as 
envisaged in the legislation. 
With  the  technical  assistance  from  the  World  Bank,  work  will  begin  soon  on  the  Strategic 
Asset Allocation to be recommended to the Board. The arrangements with the World Bank 
provide for continuing training of Central Bank staff in sovereign asset management. When 
the work on the Strategic Asset Allocation is sufficiently advanced, work will need to start on 
the selection of External Managers. 
A public information and disclosure strategy will need to be developed. 
• 
This is a demanding timetable and we will work to have everything in place by year end. 
As regards public information we would hope to have more of these sessions on specific aspects of 
the HSF operations and on our role in the process. 
Thank you for accepting our invitation to this launch. 
[There  was  considerable  discussion  as  to  whether  there  should  be  two  separate  funds  –  one  for 
stabilization  and  the  other,  a  heritage  fund  –  the  former  invested  in  short-term  instruments  and  the 
heritage fund invested with a longer term focus. 
4 
 BIS Review 50/2007
The  main  argument  against  two  funds  was  that  the  division  would  imply  unnecessary  operational 
rigidity and compromise the objective of maximizing returns. While this is true, it must be recognized 
that having one Fund serving both stabilization and savings purposes will provide its own challenges 
in terms of defining an appropriate liquidity and maturity distribution of the portfolio.] 
BIS Review 50/2007 
 5
