Ingimundur Fridriksson: Turbulence in Iceland's financial markets in 2006  
Keynote address by Mr Ingimundur Fridriksson, Governor of the Central Bank of Iceland, at the UBS 
conference  “Annual  Reserve  Management  Seminar  for  Sovereign  Institutions”,  Thun,  Switzerland, 
4 June 2007. 
 Where is Iceland? What is it? Why do we want to know about it? In the first half of 2006, hardly a day 
passed  without  Iceland  and  Icelandic  banks  being  mentioned  in  newspapers  and  financial  journals 
around  the  world.  Although  attention  is  often  welcome,  this  was  not  necessarily  true  of  all  the 
discussion about Iceland and its banks a year ago. The coverage was highly critical, in some ways 
rightly so but in other ways not. 
When I was asked to address this conference, the turbulence in the Icelandic financial markets in the 
first half of 2006 was doubtless fresh in the organisers’ minds. So I was asked to discuss that episode 
and how the Central Bank of Iceland monitored it and responded. As well as covering this topic I shall 
add  some comments  on  recent  developments and prevailing  conditions.  But  first  a  few  facts  and  a 
brief description of the background are needed. 
Iceland is an advanced industrial economy with one of the highest national incomes per capita in the 
world. Through membership of the European Economic Area, Iceland is part of the European single 
market and has the same financial infrastructure as in the European Union. The Icelandic economy 
has  witnessed  huge  changes  in  recent  years  following  the  deregulation  of  cross-border  capital 
movements in the 1990s and market liberalisation. In the 1990s, the Central Bank of Iceland adhered 
to a fixed exchange-rate regime with tolerance limits, which was supposed to provide an anchor for the 
core policy of keeping inflation under control. The arrangement was successful then and for much of 
that  decade  inflation  in  Iceland  was  close  to  or  below  the  OECD  average.  Over  time  it  became 
increasingly  clear  that  a  fixed  exchange  rate  was  incompatible  with  full  deregulation  of  capital 
movements.  Bearing  this  in  mind  and  because  a  floating  exchange  rate  would  arguably  suit  the 
Icelandic economy better, the tolerance limits were extended in phases from 2.25% at the beginning of 
the 1990s to 9% early in 2000. 
In the course of the 1990s, an episode of overheating began. It originated in a massive increase in 
foreign  investment  in  the  aluminium  sector  but  gradually  became  driven  by  private  consumption. 
Inflationary  pressures  amplified  and  the  current  account  deficit  widened  sharply  to  10%  of  GDP  in 
2000. Market expectations shifted and the Icelandic currency, the króna, began to depreciate. Over 
the year and a half from spring 2000, the króna depreciated by one-third. The Central Bank raised its 
policy rate, although its hands were partly tied by the fixed exchange rate regime. It also repeatedly 
intervened in FX market trading to defend the króna, significantly eroding its net foreign reserves. 
To cut a long story short, it was decided to introduce a new monetary framework in March 2001. An 
inflation target was set for the Central Bank and the króna was floated. By that time it had already 
fallen to the lower tolerance limit. The króna then depreciated further, driving up inflation which rose 
beyond 9% in January 2002. A rapid reduction in inflation followed, the target was attained by the end 
of the year and the policy interest rate was quickly lowered. 
Inflation remained below or close to target until the middle of 2004. Later that year, major investments 
were decided in the aluminium and power sectors. Shortly afterwards, sweeping structural changes in 
the  housing  mortgage  market  caused  a  surge  in  bank  lending  and  domestic  demand.  The  current 
account also deteriorated significantly. In the face of mounting inflationary pressures, the Central Bank 
steadily raised its policy rate (undiscounted yield) from 5.3% in spring 2004 to 14.25% at the end of 
last year, where it still remains. Higher interest rates caused the króna to appreciate and it ended up at 
a  historical  high,  especially  in  late  2005.  Following  earlier  comments  to  that  effect  in  its  Monetary 
Bulletin in December 2005, the Central Bank pointed out that the króna was at its strongest in real 
terms since 1988. One assumption in the inflation report presented then was that the exchange rate 
would remain unchanged over the forecast horizon. The Bank described this assumption as unlikely to 
hold.  In  historical  terms,  the  real  exchange  rate  has  only  remained  so  high  for  short  periods.  The 
Central  Bank  thus  openly  stated  its  view  that  the  exchange  rate  was  unsustainably  high  and  must 
weaken. However, the timing and pace of the depreciation was unknown. 
BIS Review 60/2007 
 1
Following the privatisation programme that was completed in 2003, the Icelandic banks expanded very 
rapidly.  Privatisation  unleashed  an  enterprising  spirit  and  the  resolve  and  ambition  to  enter  new 
territory. The banks sharply stepped up their activities outside Iceland by acquiring foreign financial 
companies and establishing branches. 
These  radical  changes  are  reflected  in  the  growth  of  the  three  largest  Icelandic  banks’  total  assets 
from the equivalent of 96% of GDP at the end of 2000 to roughly eightfold GDP at the end of 2006. A 
distinctive feature of Iceland’s financial sector is that no foreign banks operate directly in the country. 
However,  the  domestic  banks  have  become  less  Icelandic,  so  to  speak.  The  greater  part  of  their 
operations are now in other countries. The bulk of their revenues and profits are generated abroad, in 
the other Nordic countries, the UK, Luxembourg and elsewhere in Europe. As a result, their revenue 
base  is  significantly  broader  and  they  are  less  exposed  to  cyclical  fluctuations  in  the  Icelandic 
economy  than  before.  All  the  same,  if  the  Icelandic  economy  were  to  weaken  significantly,  reports 
about it could affect the banks’ potential for securing foreign financing. 
In expanding abroad, the banks relied heavily on very favourable global financial market conditions, 
which were reflected in a glut of liquidity and low interest rates. Perhaps the banks were not prudent 
enough  about  making  contingencies  if  the  climate  should  change.  Easy  access  to  ever-increasing 
borrowed funds in global bond markets could not be taken for granted forever. In the second half of 
2005, doubts were first raised about the banks’ ability to fund their activities as before and refinance 
their  outstanding  debt.  Conceivably,  the  context  was  a  market-wide  reassessment  of  risk.  For  the 
Icelandic  banks,  this  was reflected  in  rising  CDS  spreads  and  yields  on  their  bond  issues  in  global 
secondary markets. 
In the first half of 2006, international financial journals published critical analyses of the position of the 
banks,  their  recent  rapid  growth,  heavy  borrowing,  relatively  short  maturities  and  the  enormous 
refinancing requirement they faced. Other aspects of the banks’ operations, and their ownership, also 
came under scrutiny. Early in 2006 Fitch Ratings downgraded its sovereign outlook for Iceland from 
stable to negative. The rating downgrade, harsh criticism of the banks and the Icelandic economy in 
general,  and  interest  rate  and  exchange  rate  movements  in  other  countries  caused  the  króna  to 
depreciate by one-quarter in the first half of 2006, and share prices on Iceland Stock Exchange also 
fell by one-quarter from their peak in February until mid-year. The access of the Icelandic banks to 
foreign  credit  in  traditional  markets  was  seriously  curtailed.  Negative  coverage  of  the  banks  and 
Icelandic  economy  went  hand  in  hand  at  this  time,  both  temporarily  eroding  international  investor 
confidence. The reputation of Iceland’s economy and banks was tarnished. 
From an Icelandic perspective, the first months of 2006 were therefore characterised by a currency 
depreciation,  falling  equity  prices  and  international  discussion  about  the  viability  of  Icelandic  banks 
and  macroeconomic  imbalances  in  Iceland.  A  massive  economic  downswing  was  even  predicted, 
possibly comparable to the southeast Asia crisis of the late 1990s. This was a development we had 
not particularly expected or prepared for. Interestingly, not only did Iceland feel the tangible effects of 
changes in sentiment in global financial markets – the turbulence in Iceland also reverberated through 
a number of distant countries with which we have no business contact. This shows that Iceland had 
become integrated into the global financial market. 
It  was  obvious  that  the  Icelandic  banks  and  authorities  faced  a  major  challenge  that  called  for  a 
serious response. The banks responded with greatly increased communication about their activities, 
financial position and other targets of criticism. They made various reforms, answered other points in 
detail,  slowed  down  their  expansion,  tapped  new  credit  markets  and,  last  but  not  least,  refuted 
predictions  that  the  turnaround  in  external  conditions,  weaker  króna,  lower  Icelandic  equity  prices, 
higher  finance  costs,  etc.  would  have  to  dent  their  profitability  severely.  As  it  turned  out,  the  three 
largest  commercial  banks  reported  record  profits  in  2006  and  ended  the  year  with  their  strongest 
capital  adequacy  ratios  since  the  Basel  Accord  went  into  effect,  as  well  as  building  up  very  strong 
liquidity.  In  the  autumn  the  banks  announced  that  they  had  completed  refinancing  of  all  their  loans 
maturing that year and virtually all their 2007 maturities, thereby dispelling doubts about their ability to 
refinance outstanding debt. The liquidity risk that loomed in the first half of 2006 was a thing of the 
past. In their refinancing arrangements the banks rested the EMTN market that had been their main 
source of capital and successfully tapped others, mainly in the US but also in Australia and Japan. 
Some have now successfully returned to the EMTN market. 
The  first  signs  of  a  change  in  foreign  investor  sentiment  towards  the  Icelandic  banks  appeared  in 
higher  CDS  spreads  for  their  bonds  in  secondary  markets,  which  had  been  in  the  range  of  0.1  to 
0.15%. They began to inch up late in 2005, rose sharply in the first half of 2006 and peaked around 
2 
 BIS Review 60/2007
mid-year close to 0.8%. At that time, this trend was very much at odds with CDS spreads on issues by 
comparable banks in other countries. Towards the end of last year spreads began to decrease again 
and have narrowed steadily to only marginally higher than before the market turned uneasy at the end 
of 2005, at near 0.2% to 0.25%. The only conclusion to be drawn is that with their operational reforms, 
strong  communication,  successful  financing  arrangements,  building  of  liquidity  and  ongoing  strong 
business  performance,  the  banks  have  largely  reclaimed  their  former  position  in  the  eyes  of  global 
investors. 
The authorities, and the Central Bank in particular, focused their efforts on communication about the 
character  and  structure  of  the  economy,  the  current  position  and  outlook,  and  other  relevant 
information.  The  Central  Bank’s  regular  Monetary  Bulletin  includes  inflation  and  macroeconomic 
forecasts and a detailed analysis of economic developments. Once a year the Central Bank publishes 
a separate Financial Stability report and a more detailed and comprehensive edition than otherwise 
was produced in spring 2006 in response to prevailing conditions. It sought to address as many points 
as possible that had been raised by foreign analysts in the preceding months. The Bank’s financial 
stability  analysis  has  been  described  by  international  reviewers  as  professional  and  transparent.  It 
strove to fulfil such expectations a year ago in difficult circumstances. In the Bank’s view this aim was 
achieved and the report played an important role in explaining the position of the Icelandic financial 
sector at that time. Another crucial factor was that the Central Bank tightened the monetary stance 
sharply by raising its policy rate by 3.75 percentage points during the year and signalling clearly to the 
markets a firm commitment to bring inflation back to target after it had risen substantially as a result of 
the  króna  depreciation.  Without  a  credible  monetary  policy,  the  króna  would  undoubtedly  have 
depreciated by more than it actually did last year, which could have undermined financial stability. 
In  other  respects  the  authorities  –  in  particular  the  Financial  Supervisory  Authority  and  the  Central 
Bank – responded with even closer monitoring of the banks’ position, not least their financing, liquidity 
and  risk  management.  The  Bank  remained  especially  alert  until  autumn  2006  and  strengthened  its 
contingency  plans  at  the  same  time.  The  banks  were  very  well  aware  of  this  close  monitoring  and 
cooperated fully. At the beginning of 2006 a Memorandum of Understanding on contingencies, which 
had  been  under  preparation  for  some  time,  was  signed  between  the  government  ministries 
responsible  for  financial  markets,  the  Central  Bank  and  the  Financial  Supervisory  Authority,  and  a 
contingency exercise was held which actually had been planned well in advance. The Central Bank 
kept a close watch on market developments and the views of foreign commentators. Along with other 
government  authorities  and  the  Financial  Supervisory  Authority  it  communicated  a  wealth  of 
information and held numerous meetings with foreign analysts and media in spring 2006, in Iceland 
and abroad. 
At the beginning of 2006 the Central Bank announced a decision to boost its foreign reserves. This 
was done later in the year with an international issue of five-year Treasury Eurobonds. The proceeds 
were  deposited  in  the  Central  Bank, more  than  doubling  the reserves  from  the  equivalent  of  7%  of 
GDP  to  almost  15%.  The  proceeds  from  the  loan  will  not  be  used  for  other  purposes.  The  Bank’s 
capital was also boosted. The main rationale for increasing the reserves and capital was to strengthen 
the Bank in performing its functions in a much expanded financial sector, and to address comments 
from rating agencies and others about the Bank’s inadequate foreign liquidity relative to Iceland’s large 
foreign  debts,  which  are  overwhelmingly  in  the  private  sector.  There  was  no  other  motive  behind 
boosting  the  reserves  and  the  Central  Bank  has  underlined  the  importance  of  not  creating  moral 
hazard. 
Unease in the markets lasted until mid-2006, when it calmed down significantly. By then, the króna 
had depreciated by one-quarter and around mid-year the real exchange rate was close to the twenty-
five-year average. In historical terms it was much more normal than in the second half of 2005, i.e. 
before the depreciation in the first half of last year. This is an important fact to bear in mind, i.e. that 
the króna depreciated from an unsustainable and far higher real exchange rate than was compatible 
with external balance of the economy. The change was actually normal and necessary, and formed 
part of the pressing external adjustment of the economy. 
Since  the  middle  of  last  year,  the  króna  has  been  fairly  stable.  It  has  fluctuated  within  a  relatively 
narrow corridor which it has only moved beyond in a few exceptional cases. So far this year it has 
strengthened.  Since  the  beginning  of  2007  the  nominal  exchange  rate  has  on  average  been  14% 
weaker than the average for the last quarter of 2005. Nonetheless, the real exchange rate is still high 
in historical terms. There is no doubt that the tight monetary stance has been crucial in maintaining the 
relatively stable exchange rate over the past year or so. 
BIS Review 60/2007 
 3
To  fight  the  overheating  of  the  economy  that  was  brought  about  by  increased  investment  in  the 
aluminium  and  power  sectors  and  changes  in  the  domestic  capital  markets,  the  Central  Bank  was 
forced  to  raise  its  policy  interest  rate,  as  I  mentioned  earlier,  above  the  prevailing  level  in  other 
industrialised countries. In a climate of excess liquidity, historically very low global interest rates and 
risk-seeking investors, it was only to be expected that investors would notice high-yield instruments in 
Icelandic  currency.  So  no  one  need  have  been  surprised  when  the  first  króna-denominated  bonds, 
known as glacier bonds, were issued in the global market in autumn 2005. Issuance was driven by 
carry trades and global investors’ search for yields, and partly also by the demand for credit in Iceland. 
Despite  the  great  deal  of  information  that  is  generally  available  about  the  economic  position  and 
outlook in Iceland, and the Central Bank’s very candid appraisal of the exchange rate of the króna in 
autumn 2005, which I have already described, it seems certain that many investors in glacier bonds, at 
least  during  the  first  months  of  issuance,  had  not  examined  the  potential  risks  properly.  Investors 
probably bore in mind Iceland’s high sovereign rating in their decisions but ignored the risk that the 
króna might still depreciate, given that the real exchange rate was far above the average for the past 
quarter-century. At least, this risk was obscured by high interest rates. In the turmoil in early 2006, 
various investors in glacier bonds, institutional investors in particular, are likely to have closed their 
positions from autumn 2005 and thereby contributed to the depreciation of the króna, losing sizeable 
funds in the process. 
Glacier bond issuance has gone in waves, largely in line with global movements in carry trades. It was 
substantial in autumn 2005, dropped sharply in the first half of 2006, then picked up in the autumn and 
has been fairly large since then. Currently the outstanding amount of glacier bonds is equivalent to 
roughly  a  third  of  GDP.  The  first  issues  matured  in  autumn  2006  and  several  others  since  then. 
Maturities  have  not  sent  tremors  through  the  FX  market,  even  when  relatively  large  issues  mature. 
This  is  consistent  with  the  experience  of  countries  such  as  New  Zealand,  where  “kiwi  bonds” 
denominated in the New Zealand dollar have been issued for much longer than glacier bonds. Large 
issues of glacier bonds will mature shortly and it cannot be ruled out that they will cause some unease. 
There have been a number of effects from the glacier bond issuance. Derivatives in connection with 
these issues have dampened the impact of Central Bank policy rate changes on other interest rates in 
domestic  financial  markets.  Glacier  bonds  thereby  delayed  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy 
measures, diverting more of its impact into the exchange rate channel. Another effect of glacier bonds 
was to make the current account deficit easier to fund. It caused a surge in trading in the domestic 
interbank  and  bond  markets,  deepening  them  and  producing  more  reliable  price  formation. 
Nevertheless the exchange rate of the króna is very sensitive to changes in the markets where carry 
trade investors seek funding as well as in other high-yield markets. Glacier bonds therefore expose the 
exchange  rate  to  volatility  in  the  event  of  sudden  shifts  in,  for  example,  investor  sentiment  or 
incentives for carry trades. Turbulence in markets in the early part of last year and in February this 
year is proof of this. An offsetting factor may be that the bonds are probably distributed very widely 
across investors and portfolios. To an important extent, the investors appear to be European ones who 
are likely to hold their paper until maturity. 
Carry trades are highly sensitive to changes in global financial conditions. This makes them impossible 
to predict if conditions shift. In Iceland it has sometimes been claimed that carry trades prevent the 
Central Bank from lowering its policy rate. The Bank disagrees. Its forecast published in March this 
year indicates that inflation will decelerate rapidly in the second half of this year and into 2008, and will 
be close to target after the middle of next year. One of the forecast assumptions is that the policy rate 
will be lowered in the final quarter of this year and continue to come down next year and into 2009. 
Such  a  development  need  not  affect  carry  trades.  However,  it  could  depend  on  the  scale  of  the 
reduction in the current account deficit. The more that it narrows, the less risk investments in Icelandic 
currency  should  entail,  other  things  being  equal.  Under  such  circumstances,  conditions  may  well 
emerge in which carry trades can continue with a smaller interest rate differential between Iceland and 
abroad  than  has  been  the  case  in  recent  times.  Nonetheless,  the  Central  Bank  underlines  that 
investors should be aware of the risk involved in investing in króna-denominated bonds. It is clear, as 
already  mentioned,  that  some  investors  in  glacier  bonds  have  not  made  the  effort  to  acquaint 
themselves properly with this risk. 
The  way  that  events  unfolded  in  2006  was  instructive.  It  is  important  to  point  out  that  no  serious 
incidents or credit events ever arose and if there had been a risk of a real financial crisis a year ago – 
which we considered unfounded – it is scarcely present now. Many lessons can be learned from last 
year’s  experience.  First,  the  open  financial  system  and  free  capital  movements  gave  opportunistic 
investors the chance to discover Iceland. Their trading has a range of positive effects but also poses a 
4 
 BIS Review 60/2007
risk of heightened volatility and fluctuations in exchange rates and interest rates. Icelandic financial 
companies have expanded rapidly overseas, and too rapidly in some people’s view. Meteoric growth 
tends to raise questions anyway, and when small institutions are involved from a country that has not 
had  a  high  profile  in  the  banking  world,  these  questions  may  be  more  aggressive  and  critical  than 
otherwise. Icelandic banks discovered this last year. They have learnt a valuable lesson and clearly 
realise  the  importance  of  transparency  and  open  communication,  and  the  need  for  leeway  in  their 
funding and good credit ratings. This experience must not be forgotten. General market discipline and 
scrutiny will help to prevent that from happening. 
For  government  authorities,  it  is  important  to  pursue  balanced  and  credible  economic  policies  and 
ensure that the administrative and financial infrastructure remain solid, including strong and efficient 
financial supervision. The Central Bank tightened its monetary stance sharply last year, one result of 
which was a lower rate of inflation than otherwise. The Treasury has shown a surplus for many years 
and  privatisation  proceeds  were  deployed  to  retire  debt.  Today,  the  Treasury’s  foreign  debt  is  not 
higher than the Central Bank’s foreign reserves, i.e. roughly 15% of GDP, and its domestic debt only 
10% of GDP. Financial supervision has been boosted and will be strengthened further. It is in line with 
best European practice. 
Iceland’s  economic  imbalances  are  waning  and  the  inflation  rate  and  current  account  deficit  are 
coming down, the latter from a record level in 2006. The financial sector is on a firmer footing than a 
year ago. The headline of the Central Bank’s Financial Stability report for 2007 was The commercial 
banks are more resilient. However, the battle is not over and risks may still be present. The current 
account deficit is still large. Tighter conditions for funding it could undermine the exchange rate and 
rekindle higher inflation and instability. While the banks have strengthened their liquidity and have a 
larger  share  of  deposits  on  the  liabilities  side  of  their  balance  sheets  and  fewer  challenges  in  their 
refinancing, they still rely on easy access to international credit markets. A shift in investor sentiment 
about the banks, or in general risk assessment in the markets, could tighten liquidity and lead to less 
favourable  borrowing  terms.  Thus  prudence  is called  for,  along  with  contingencies  for  facing  tighter 
conditions  and  awareness  that  changes  can  take  place  very  suddenly.  Iceland’s  currency  is  the 
smallest in the world with an inflation targeting framework and a floating currency. The króna probably 
tends to be more volatile than currencies of larger countries, which will cause sharper fluctuations in 
yields on króna-denominated investments. While major currencies are certainly prone to volatility, the 
crucial consideration is that exchange rate movements have a much greater impact on small, open 
economies  than  on  larger  ones.  The  globalisation  of  Iceland’s  financial  markets  means  that,  in  the 
short run at least, the exchange rate of the króna is determined less by economic aggregates than 
before. International conditions have much greater impact, such as changes in exchange rates and 
interest rates in other advanced industrial countries. 
One consequence of the unease in 2006 has been that many more people, including investors in the 
Icelandic  market,  now  know  about  Iceland,  the  Icelandic  economy  and  Icelandic  banks,  and  watch 
them  more  often  and  more  closely.  One  lesson  of  last  year’s  experience  was  that  events  in  or 
connected with  Iceland  can  cause  contagion  in  other  countries, so  that  it  is  important  now  to know 
what  is  going  on  there.  And  more  people  these  days  definitely  do  know  more  about  Iceland  than 
simply that it is the country that produced Björk and Eidur Gudjohnsen. 
BIS Review 60/2007 
 5
