Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj: Brief review of Bahrain’s financial market 
developments 
Speech by His Excellency Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj, Governor of the Central Bank of Bahrain, at 
the TradeQuest Challenge Awards Presentation and Luncheon, Manama, 28 April 2007. 
 Your Excellencies, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, Good Afternoon.  
Assalam Alaikum Wa-Rahmatullahi Wa Barakatuh 
It  is  a  pleasure  for  me  to  be  here  today,  and  to  show  my  support  for  the  TradeQuest  Challenge 
programme. I should like to take this opportunity to thank all those who have supported this initiative, 
be they the financial community, the schools, or the participants and their parents. 
Programmes such as these are collective efforts, and require the support of many. However, I should 
like to thank in particular the Bahrain Institute of Banking & Finance and the American Association of 
Bahrain, for their efforts in jointly establishing and managing this annual competition. 
Special congratulations are of course also due to the students who took part in this year’s competition, 
for their commitment to learning about the world of financial markets and investment. 
Before we start presenting the students with their well-earned certificates, I hope you will allow me if 
just say a few words about the significance of this programme, and its relevance to the development of 
Bahrain’s financial markets. 
Bahrain,  as  I  am  sure  you  are  all  aware,  has  a  long  and  distinguished  track  record  as  the  leading 
financial centre in the GCC. Today, financial services accounts for almost 27% of the country’s GDP, 
and  creates  an  equally  significant  share  of  high  value  added  employment  in  the  economy.  It  is  no 
exaggeration to say that the health of the financial services industry is of strategic importance to the 
continued economic well-being of this country. 
A key element in our success as a nation in this field has been the emphasis placed on developing our 
own human resources. International and regional institutions come to Bahrain, in part, because there 
is a relatively strong supply of well qualified Bahrainis whom they can hire. In turn, this country benefits 
from the wealth that is created by these financial institutions, and the training and experience gained in 
the workplace. 
Fundamental to this human resources equation, is that we have people who understand finance and 
develop an interest in working in this industry. Programmes such as these, therefore, play a valuable 
role  in  introducing  young  people  to  the  world  of  finance,  and  hopefully  giving  them  an  interest  in 
possibly pursuing a future career in the financial services industry. 
For  those  who  have  set  their  sights  on  other  careers,  the  experience  gained  from  this  programme 
nonetheless still provides participants with an understanding of the world of business and finance, and 
the opportunity to develop analytical skills, which will serve them well in other fields of activity. 
For those of you sufficiently interested in the world of finance to pursue it further, I would encourage 
you  to  do  so.  The  financial  sector  in  Bahrain  is  growing  strongly  and  represents  many  varied 
opportunities, be it within banking, insurance or the capital markets. 
I expect this growth to continue going forward, and the CBB is facilitating this process with its own 
efforts aimed at updating regulations and supervisory capacity. 
To  conclude,  programmes  such  as  these  serve  a  valuable  role  in  helping  educate  our  younger 
generation  about  the  world  of  finance  and  investment  in  a  practical  and  relevant  manner,  and  thus 
ultimately in helping support the further development of our financial services sector. 
On that note, I thank you all again, and congratulate the students on their participation. 
BIS Review 41/2007 
 1
