Jean Claude Trichet: Hearing before the Economic and Monetary Affairs 
Committee of the European Parliament  
Speech by Mr Jean Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at a hearing 
before the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee of the European Parliament, Brussels, 
11 September 2007. 
 les  membres  de 
la  Présidente,  Mesdames  et  Messieurs 
Madame 
Economique et Monétaire,  
La  crise  du  marché  américain  des  prêts  immobiliers  subprime  et  son  impact  potentiel  sur 
l’Europe  ont  suscité  beaucoup  d’intérêt  au  cours  des  dernières  semaines.  Je  souhaiterais 
tout  d’abord  vous  fournir  de  plus  amples  informations  sur  les  interventions  de  la  BCE  en 
réaction  à  la  forte  volatilité  enregistrée  sur  les  marchés  financiers.  En  second  lieu, 
j’évoquerai brièvement la situation économique et monétaire et reviendrai plus en détail sur 
les  raisons  sous-jacentes  à  nos  récentes  décisions  de  taux.  Zum  Abschluss  möchte  ich 
einige vorläufige Schlussfolgerungen aus Sicht der Finanzmarktstabilität ziehen. 
la  Commission 
 Let me begin by providing you some further information about the recent events in financial 
markets and the ECB’s interventions. In July and early August, the crisis in the so-called US 
sub-prime  mortgage  market  intensified  and  appetite  of  global  investors  for  risky  assets 
declined.  Market  volatility  increased  in  all  asset  classes.  Stock  prices  declined  and 
government  bonds  benefited  from  safe-haven  investment  flows.  In  this  context,  several 
investment  funds  holding  asset-backed  securities  suspended  withdrawals.  A  number  of 
European banks admitted direct or indirect exposures to the US mortgage market. Yet it is 
important to remark that the credit losses were not significant enough to materially impact the 
soundness of core financial institutions.  
Initially, the impact was felt in the US dollar money market, where domestic and international 
banks were raising short-term liquidity in order to cope with the liquidity needs of a number of 
“special vehicles” or “conduits” that had difficulty to refinance themselves on the commercial 
paper  market.  On  Thursday  morning  9th  of  August,  the  tensions  also  spread  to  the  euro 
money  market.  These  unprecedented  circumstances  called  for  commensurate  actions. 
Therefore,  the  ECB  injected  additional  liquidity  in  the  money  market  in  order  to  restore 
orderly conditions.  
Let me briefly describe our operations in more detail. Our first operation was carried out on 9 
August and matured the following day. It was a non-regular overnight operation where the 
ECB provided liquidity to banks at a fixed rate of 4.00 percent, which is the level of our key 
policy  rate.  This  liquidity  was  provided  through  so-called  reverse  repurchase  agreements. 
These are transactions whereby the ECB purchases a given amount of eligible assets on the 
understanding  that  these  will  be  repurchased  by  the  counterparty  at  a  given  price  the 
following day. We pre-announced that we would fulfil 100 percent of the bids submitted by 
banks.  This  allowed  us  to  gauge  the  amount  of  exceptional  liquidity  needs  in  the  banking 
system  as  a  whole  and  to  contribute  to  calming  down  the  overnight  money  market  under 
these circumstances. As a result of this operation, the calm on the very short-term money 
markets was restored for the rest of the day.  
During  the  following  three  business  days,  the  ECB  conducted  similar  overnight  liquidity-
providing operations through variable rate tenders with a minimum bid rate of 4.00 percent. 
In  the  case  of  variable  rate  tenders,  counterparties  are  asked  to  indicate  both  the  desired 
amount of money and the interest rate at which they wish to obtain it. The Eurosystem then 
satisfies  first  the  bids  with  the  highest  interest  rates.  The  use  of  a  variable  rate  in  these 
BIS Review 100/2007 
 1
subsequent  overnight  liquidity-providing  operations  was  in  line  with  our  usual  practice. 
Thanks to these operations, on each day from 9 to 14 August the ECB provided additional 
euro  liquidity  above  what  is  needed  by  the  banking  system  under  normal  circumstance.  It 
rolled over a progressively smaller amount  on each day, as the rates and amounts bid by 
banks in our tenders became progressively lower.  
On 14 August, the first Tuesday following the start of the tensions in the money market, the 
ECB  resorted  to  its  standard  instrument  for  market  operations,  namely  its  one-week  main 
refinancing operation which is usually allotted on Tuesdays. With a view to ensuring orderly 
conditions  in  the  money  markets,  the  ECB  allotted  significantly  larger  amounts  of  liquidity 
than  it  would  have  under  normal  circumstances.  The  same  approach  was  adopted  in  the 
subsequent one-week main refinancing operations on 21 and 28 August and 4 September. 
Thanks to this relatively generous allotment, money market rates with maturities up to one 
week were brought back to usual levels.  
However, tensions remained in money market rates for maturities above one week. In order 
to support a normalisation in this money market segment, the ECB decided to implement two 
supplementary  longer-term  refinancing  operations,  the  first  decision  being  taken  on  21 
August and the second on 6 September, both with the usual maturity of three months. 
In preparing and deciding upon the various operations, the Eurosystem remained, as usual, 
in  close  contact  with  other  central  banks,  including  in  particular,  but  not  exclusively,  the 
Federal  Reserve,  the  Bank  of  Japan,  the  Bank  of  England,  the  Bank  of  Canada  and  the 
Swiss National Bank. These other central banks also took steps, each within the parameters 
of their own operational framework. When comparing the steps taken by the various central 
banks, it is important to take account of these differences in operational frameworks. 
In any case, it is important to stress that the Eurosystem has shown its capacity to react both 
promptly and effectively to these challenges. I am convinced that, given the circumstances, 
we did the right thing at the right level at the right time. 
Monetary policy stance 
Through these liquidity operations, the ECB fulfilled one of its key responsibilities, namely to 
ensure an orderly functioning money market. I will now turn to our primary objective, namely 
that of delivering price stability over the medium term and be credible in the delivery of price 
stability over the medium and long term. I would like to emphasize that our primary mandate 
calls for our monetary policy stance to deliver price stability in the medium term. Once the 
level of interest rates is decided we have the responsibility to ensure the smooth functioning 
of the segment of the money market that we influence. The two responsibilities are clearly 
separated and should not be mixed. 
On  6  September  the  Governing  Council  decided  to  leave  the  key  ECB  interest  rates 
unchanged. The incoming macroeconomic data confirmed that risks to price stability remain 
on  the  upside  over  the  medium  term,  as  identified  by  both  our  economic  and  monetary 
analysis. The incoming macroeconomic data also again confirmed the strong fundamentals 
of  the  euro  area  economy  and  support  a  favourable  medium-term  outlook  for  real  GDP 
growth. Data on activity in the third quarter – from various confidence surveys and indicator-
based  estimates  –  remain  overall  favourable.  The  latest  data  on  unemployment  indicate 
improving labour market conditions and the global economic activity is expected to remain 
robust,  as  the  likely  slowdown  in  the  United  States  is  expected  to  be  largely  offset  by  the 
continued strong growth in emerging markets. This outlook is also reflected in the September 
2007 ECB staff macroeconomic projections for the euro area, which foresee average annual 
real GDP growth in a range between 2.2% and 2.8% in 2007, and between 1.8% and 2.8% in 
2008.  
The  monetary  analysis  confirms  the  prevailing  upside  risks  to  price  stability  at  medium  to 
longer-term horizons. On the basis of the latest available data, covering the period to the end 
2 
 BIS Review 100/2007
of  July,  the  underlying  rate  of  monetary  and  credit  expansion  remains  strong.  This  is 
reflected in the rapid growth of the broad monetary aggregate, M3 and the strength of MFI 
loans  to  the  private  sector,  which  continue  to  increase  at  double-digit  rates  on  an  annual 
basis. 
Against this background, our monetary policy stance is still on the accommodative side with, 
inter alia, money and credit growth vigorous in the euro area. At the same time, the financial 
market  volatility  and  reappraisal  of  risk  of  recent  weeks  have  led  to  an  increase  in 
uncertainty. Given the current high level of uncertainty, the Governing Council has deemed it 
appropriate  to  gather  additional  information  and  carefully  examine  all  new  data,  before 
drawing further monetary policy conclusions. Accordingly, the Governing Council will monitor 
very closely all developments. On the basis of our assessment, by acting in a firm and timely 
manner, we will ensure that risks to price stability over the medium term do not materialise 
and that inflation expectations are firmly anchored in line with price stability, which is even 
more important in the current context of financial market volatility and increased uncertainty. 
In this respect, the Governing Council will continue to pay great attention to future financial 
market developments. 
Financial stability 
I  would  like  to  conclude  my  introductory  remarks  by  drawing  some  tentative  lessons  for 
financial stability and supervision of this episode.  
Let  me  first  qualify  how  we  see  the  current  situation.  We  are  experiencing  a  market 
correction with a significant reappraisal of risk, the possibility of which we had been warning 
about for quite some time. I can recall that in my appearances before you and elsewhere, I 
had said that we were diagnosing a level of risk appreciation in global financial markets that 
was signalling an under-appreciation of risks in general. This was illustrated in particular, but 
not exclusively, by the relatively low level of spreads, the low level of risk premia and the low 
level of volatility across a wide range of financial markets. In the very first issue of the ECB 
Financial Stability Review published in December 2004 we had said that a high level of risk 
appetite was encouraging a search for yield among investors across a wide range of markets 
and  asset  classes.  This  phenomenon  went  on  for  several  years  together  with  a  very 
significant  degree  of  innovation  and  creativity  in  global  financial  markets  which  was 
improving financial efficiency but also creating new sources of risk.  
As I just said we are now in a correction phase which can, as frequently observed in such 
situations,  comprehend  episodes  of  hectic  behaviour,  a  high  level  of  market  volatility  and 
elements of over-shooting.  
We  had  seen  a  distinct  possibility  that  the  ongoing  deterioration  of  the  creditworthiness  of 
borrowers  in  the  US  sub-prime  mortgage  market  could  be  a  trigger  for  more  broad-based 
market correction. We had said this in our Financial Stability Review published as recently as 
last June. The most important channel for the propagation of the correction turned out to be 
the  maturity  mismatch  and,  therefore,  the  strains  placed  on  the  balance  sheets  of  special 
purpose  vehicles  and  conduits  which  had  funded  medium-term  positions  in  asset  backed 
securities  –  where  sub-prime  mortgages  were  an  important  element  –  with  short-term 
financing commercial papers. It was the difficulties these vehicles faced in rolling over their 
short-term funding which created much of the strains we saw in money markets.  
Now, I know that you are particularly interested in the lessons we can draw from the present 
episode. As we are not yet at the end of it, I would say that at this stage we must be prudent 
in drawing definitive conclusions. That said, I believe there are a number of areas where we 
know lessons will have to be drawn by the international community and where orientations 
for appropriate improvements can be seen.  
First,  over  the  past  decade,  we  have  experienced  a  tremendous  increase  in  the 
sophistication  of  financial  instruments.  While  the  positive  effect  of  these  innovations  has 
BIS Review 100/2007 
 3
been to allow market participants to better share risk, some negative aspects have clearly 
been  highlighted  by  the  ongoing  episode.  In  particular,  the  degree  of  complexity  of  some 
products that are designed for the purposes of re-packaging and selling debt instruments has 
become  overwhelming.  Although  I  would  be  very  hesitant  to  impose  limitations  on  the 
creativity of market participants in their pursuit of innovation and enhanced efficiency of the 
financial  markets,  in  my  view,  instruments  and  structures  that  cannot  be  fully  understood 
even  by  those  who  bear  the  ultimate  responsibility  of  the  level  of  risk  taken  by  financial 
institutions  should  not  be  acquired  or  set  up  by  banks  and  investors  who  are  lacking 
sufficient sophistication in the management of the risks. At the same time, the responsibility 
of  those  originating  such  new  products  should  not  be  understated  either,  as  the  current 
episode has demonstrated that the underlying assumptions in the pricing models for complex 
instruments are not always robust to changing financial market conditions. Investment banks 
have  become  very  active  in  this  area  and  a  part  of  the  dramatic  increase  in  derivatives 
markets  and  financial  leverage  that  we  have  witnessed  has  been  favoured  by  the 
underpricing of risk, of which the ECB has repeatedly warned about in the recent past.  
Second, much attention has been focused on the role played by rating agencies prior to the 
current market correction. It is true that the very small number of large global rating agencies 
is  a  real  issue  for  the  present  functioning  of  global  finance.  Potential  conflicts  of  interest, 
where  they  exist,  would  have  to  be  dealt  with  and  possible  benchmarks  for  improved 
behaviour could be worked out. In any case an important lesson of the current risk re-pricing 
is that investors must never take the opinion of rating agencies as a substitute for their own 
credit analysis and due diligence.  
Third,  the  current  events  highlight  the  importance  of  further  improving  financial  sector 
surveillance  activity  by  financial  regulators  and  the  risk  management  practices  of  financial 
institutions. The new Basel II capital accord, which is currently being implemented, will bring 
substantial  benefits  in  this  sense.  Indeed,  Basel  II  strongly  relies  on  significantly  improved 
risk  management  in  determining  the  appropriate  capital  buffers  for  banks.  Despite  these 
improvements, the degree of sophistication of financial markets calls for constant investment 
in stress-testing practices in order to ensure that banks are aware of the potential losses they 
might  accrue  even  in  highly  unlikely  scenarios.  The  Basel  Committee  for  Banking 
Supervision, where the relevant authorities are represented, is playing a very important role 
in this field. Another area where progress could and should be made is the area of liquidity. 
Appropriate  harmonisation  of  the  various  national  rules  and  requirements  appears  to  be 
particularly opportune in the light of the recent events. 
Fourth,  we  have  to  continue  reflecting  on  how  to  deal  with  all  non-regulated  entities.  The 
main  channels  of  propagation  of  the  present  turbulences  have  been  the  non-regulated 
constituency  of  so-called  conduits  and  special  investment  vehicles  and  not  the  highly 
leveraged non-regulated institutions like hedge funds and private equity funds. I would say at 
this  stage  that  we  should  implement  rapidly  what  is  already  crystallized  in  international 
consensus on hedge funds, namely the recommendations of the Financial Stability Forum. 
And we have to improve very substantially our handling of conduits and special vehicles.  
Looking forward, some tentative policy implications can be identified from a financial stability 
perspective. First, we need to restore confidence as we have a paradox that there is a large 
number  of  high  quality  assets  which  investors  are  currently  treating  as  if  they  were  not 
creditworthy. Now, it seems to me that the one important reason why we observe such a lack 
of  confidence  is  because  we  do  not  have  sufficient  transparency.  This  is  an  area  that  we 
need  to  look  at  very  carefully,  to  see  which  measures  should  be  taken  to  improve 
transparency.  Let  me  remind  you  that  after  the  Asian  crisis  we  drew  that  conclusion:  the 
absence of sufficient transparency had driven a number of investors and market participants 
to consider that each particular issuer in Asia was to be treated with great caution and fear, 
because  they  were  not  sure  of  the  accuracy  of  the  information  and  data  which  were 
displayed.  The  international  community  drew  the  conclusion  that  it  was  necessary  to 
increase transparency in particular as regards monetary policy, fiscal policy and the level of 
4 
 BIS Review 100/2007
reserve assets in these emerging markets. And it worked, in my opinion, pretty efficiently. So 
again, it is a lesson that we learnt in the past.  
I am now at your disposal for questions. 
BIS Review 100/2007 
 5
