Vittorio Corbo: Conditions and prospects of the Chilean economy 
Speech  by  Mr  Vittorio  Corbo,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Chile,  at  a  Conference 
organised  by  the  Exporters'  Association  of  Manufacturers  and  Services  (ASEXMA), 
Santiago, 25 July 2007. 
 The world economy 
The world economy continues along a prolonged and robust expansionary phase that started 
in 2002. This expansion has been especially dynamic in the past four years, with an average 
annual  growth  rate  of  4.9%,  reaching  5.4%  in  2006,  the  highest  growth  rate  in  over  thirty 
years.  Projections  by  Consensus  Forecast,  weighted  by  purchasing  power  parity,  place 
growth for this year at 4.9%. If they prove correct, this will be the best five-year period since 
the early nineteen seventies. To put it in perspective: long-term annual growth of the world 
economy runs close to 3.5%.  
World  growth  is  now  not  only  high  but  also  more  balanced  in  comparison  with  previous 
years.  The  American  economy  is  slowing  down,  reflecting  the  correction  in  the  housing 
sector  while,  in  contrast,  the  euro  zone,  Japan  and  emerging  economies  are  gaining 
strength. The correction of the housing sector in the US, with a 16% plunge in investments in 
housing  the  first  quarter  of  2006  has  resulted  almost  in  a  whole  percentage  point  less 
aggregate  growth.  The  adjustment  has  been  deeper  and  lengthier  than  forecasted.  In 
addition, the set of housing indicators show that the correction is still under way. At the same 
time,  the  adjustment  of  low-quality  mortgage  credits  continues  to  deepen,  adding  to  the 
decline in housing demand. So far, the economy has absorbed both the housing correction 
and  the  worsening  of  credits  fairly  well.  Although  more  stringent  criteria  have  been 
introduced  regarding  approval  of  loans  to  more  risky  clients,  effects  on  other  borrowers’ 
categories have been very limited.  
Meanwhile,  private  consumption  has  lost  some  strength,  affected  by  housing  prices 
correction and the high prices of gasoline. Still, the strength in the labor and stock markets 
continue to support it. As a result, a soft landing and increased dynamism in coming quarters 
seem more likely, in a time where the inventory correction cycle is coming to an end and the 
manufacturing  industry  is  beginning  to  pick  up.  The  risk  remains,  however,  that  the 
household sector adjustment will have deeper effects on private consumption and will extend 
the  low  growth  period.  Surprisingly,  despite  the  strong  correction  in  the  housing  market, 
employment  in  the  construction  sector  has  declined  modestly  and  the  unemployment  rate 
has remained at 4.5%. 
In the euro zone, growth has been accelerating. The widespread dynamism of the German 
economy  stands  out,  benefiting  from  increased  efficiency  and  competitiveness  thanks  to 
major reforms implemented in recent years. Growth is driven by exports and investment, but 
private consumption also plays a part. In contrast, Italy is slowing down, while France grows, 
but not as strongly as Germany. In Japan, good news comes from the labor market – with 
unemployment at 3.8%, the lowest rate in eight years – and from private consumption that is 
waking up after a long period of stagnation. 
Emerging  Asia  continues  to  show  high  growth  rates,  led  by  China  and  India.  In  particular, 
China surprised with an annualized growth rate of 11.9% the second quarter. Growth is fairly 
widespread  with  important  contributions  from  retail  sales,  investment  in  fixed  assets  and 
exports.  
Despite sharp rises in world prices of foods and fuels, CPI inflation has remained stable in 
the U.S., the euro zone and Japan. In the U.S., recent indicators show a fall in core inflation 
and are more consistent with inflation converging to the ceiling of the comfort zone defined 
by the Fed’s open market committee. In the euro zone, despite 1.9% of annual inflation in the 
BIS Review 87/2007 
 1
past two months, output growing above potential, combined with the closing of output gaps 
and  strong  credit  growth,  there  is  a  higher  risk  of  inflation  acceleration,  which  has  led  the 
ECB  to  continue  with  its  process  of  monetary  policy  normalization.  In  Japan,  although 
inflation is still low, with an expanding economy, the Bank of Japan introduced two rises of 25 
basis  points  each  in  the  policy  rate  to  reduce  distortions  and  vulnerabilities  associated  to 
excess liquidity. In China and other emerging economies, inflation is increasing. 
One of the consequences of this prolonged cycle of high world growth is global utilization of 
resources  (i.e.,  productive  capacity  and  labor)  being  at  its  highest  level  in  25  years.  The 
combination  of  high  rates  of  resource  utilization,  large  recent  rises  in  prices  of  foods  and 
fuels,  and  great  international  liquidity  increases  the  risk  of  inflation  acceleration,  with  a 
repercussion on the market’s expectations on the future course of policy rates. In the U.S., 
the evidence of a moderate deceleration of growth and of a decline in inflation has driven 
financial  markets  to  project,  on  average,  that  the  policy  rate  will  remain  unchanged, 
approaching  the  baseline  scenario  that  the  Fed  has  been  communicating  for  some  time 
already.  Financial  market  expectations,  however,  are  split  between  one  group  foreseeing 
cuts in the policy rate and another that now foresees rises. The main source of uncertainty 
originates in the future course of growth and inflation. The second quarter should feature a 
strong increase in measured growth, but future growth is still a question mark.  
About the euro zone, the market anticipates that, in order to hold inflation around the target – 
annual inflation below but close to 2% – the ECB will need to raise the policy rate a couple of 
times during the next 12 months by 25 basis points each. In the case of Japan, markets also 
project two rises in the policy rate over the next 12 months.  
On the other hand, long term interest rates are on the rise in industrial economies, mainly 
reflecting increased real rates rather than an increase in inflation expectation or of duration 
premiums.  The  increases  in  long-term  interest  rates  may  be  indicating  better  growth 
prospects in the U.S. now that a soft landing is more likely. However, overall global financial 
conditions are very accommodating, with risks premium that, although beginning to rise, are 
very close to their record lows. This, despite the flight to quality phenomenon observed in the 
past several weeks as a result of perceived risk increase because of the market status of 
low-quality mortgage loans in the U.S. In any case, the levels of market volatility in emerging 
economies are significantly smaller than they have been in earlier episodes.  
The dollar has depreciated against the currencies of industrial economies, responding to the 
evolution of the business cycle. In the past few days, this has been aggravated by concern 
about  how  the  U.S.  housing  market  situation  will  unfold.  The  Chilean  peso,  similarly  to 
currencies in the rest of emerging economies, has also appreciated against the U.S. dollar 
due to weakness of the latter. Exporting or import-substituting sectors that are selling their 
produce at a dollar price not too different from the price they were getting towards the end of 
2001, have possibly endured a large loss of profitability. This is directly associated with the 
multilateral depreciation of somewhat more than 40% suffered by the dollar in the world since 
then.  
In  connection  with  the  expansionary  cycle  of  the  world  economy,  and  also  with  the 
depreciated dollar, prices of copper, oil and derivatives – especially gasoline – are picking up 
again. The rise in commodities’ prices has now spread to foods. 
For the year 2008, projections from Consensus Forecast foresee global growth similar to that 
of  2007  but  with  a  rebound  in  the  U.S.  and  a  slight  deceleration  in  the  euro  zone  and  in 
emerging economies, influenced by the process of monetary normalization implemented to 
keep inflation under control. 
Such a favorable global scenario may continue longer, but it can also deteriorate if a number 
of  latent  risks  materialize.  The  most  important  ones  facing  the  world  economy  are:  (1)  a 
deeper deceleration in the U.S. as a result of a stronger adjustment in the housing sector that 
ends  up  shocking  the  rest  of  the  economy  and  the  world;  (2)  an  acceleration  of  inflation 
because of supply-side shocks in a global economy with little output gaps, which generates a 
2 
 BIS Review 87/2007
sudden and large increase in the monetary policy rates of industrial economies, especially 
the U.S. and the euro zone; (3) an unforeseen sharp increase in risk premiums and a liquidity 
shortage affecting asset prices and world activity as a result of an unexpected increase in 
inflation in the developed world or a shock in financial markets, at a time when risk premiums 
are in unusually low levels. There is widespread incertitude regarding the potential effects of 
such  a  shock  on  financial  markets,  since  the  resilience  of the  new  financial securities  and 
intermediaries to this type of shocks is yet to be tested.; (4) deeper distortions and tensions 
created by severe global imbalances, which might result in an increase of protectionism and 
a disorderly correction of international parities to sudden changes in capital flows financing 
those  imbalances,  affecting  financial  markets  and  asset  prices;  and  (5)  the  ever  present 
geopolitical perils. 
The Chilean economy 
The Chilean economy has reaped the benefits of the dynamic world economy through a very 
significant  terms-of-trade  improvement  that  accumulates  70%  since  2002,  and  through  a 
strengthening  of  markets  for  our  exports.  Part  of  the  better  terms  of  trade  goes  to  foreign 
owners of mining projects in the form of profits and dividends, but a substantial fraction stays 
in Chile in the form of greater profits and dividends paid to companies owned by nationals 
(including  the  State  as  the  owner  of  the  copper  corporation  CODELCO),  increased  tax 
collection  and  better  salaries  and  bonuses  to  workers  producing  the  commodities.  The 
expansionary effects of this gain in terms of trade become larger as it is believed to be more 
permanent. The favorable external conditions, the stronger fiscal impulse – associated to the 
more permanent portion of the copper price increase – and the good financial conditions are 
behind this solid expansion, leaving behind the unexpected deceleration experienced by the 
Chilean economy in the third quarter of last year.  
On the demand side, private consumption remains strong, growing more than 7% per annum 
in the first quarter of this year. Consumption is backed by the sustained growth in salaried 
employment and good financial conditions. But the main change has been the recovery of 
fixed capital investment which went from an average increase of 2.4% during the last three 
quarters  of  2006,  to  a  solid  7.9%  in  the  first  quarter  of  this  year.  Behind  this  strong 
investment  are  good  corporate  profits  and  favorable  credit  conditions,  the  progressive 
exhaustion of output gaps and good prospects for growth. In addition, exports of goods and 
services have strengthened, going from average growth of 3.8% in the last three quarters of 
2006, to an average around 10% in the first quarter of 2007. Recent fuel price hikes begun in 
January have acted as a brake to the expansion of private consumption, through their effect 
on households’ disposable income.  
The  renewed  strength  of  output  has  also  contributed  to  a  remarkable  improvement  in  the 
labor  market,  with  significant  job  creation  and  reduction  in  the  seasonally-adjusted  rate  of 
unemployment. 
From a longer perspective, in the past 13 quarters GDP has grown at an average annualized 
quarterly  rate  of  6%,  considerably  above  trend  GDP  growth.  Over  the  same  period,  the 
seasonally-adjusted rate of unemployment went down from 9.5% in 2003 to only 6.8% in the 
quarter ending last May. 
The  evaluation  available  with  partial  data  for  output  and  domestic  expenditure  over  the 
second  quarter  of  this  year  is  that  domestic  activity  continues  to  be  strong,  exceeding 
projections  in  the  last  Monetary  Policy  Report  of  May.  In  particular,  the  monthly  index  of 
economic activity IMACEC grew at an annual average rate of 5.7% in April/May, spreading to 
the  various  components  of  aggregate  demand,  namely  private  consumption,  public 
consumption,  fixed  capital  investment  and  exports  of  goods  and  services,  especially  non-
copper.  The  baseline  scenario  in  May’s  Monetary  Policy  Report  projected  for  this  year  a 
growth rate in the range of 5% to 6%, biased upward. With the evidence accumulated this 
year so far, the probability that the risks considered in said Report will materialize increases, 
BIS Review 87/2007 
 3
taking this year’s growth to the upper part of the range. Important elements to consider are 
the  strength  of  consumption  and  the  recovered  dynamism  of  investment.  Private-sector 
expectations have internalized this higher growth expectations in their 2007 GDP projections. 
The aggravation of natural gas restrictions, combined with low rainfall, has increased the risk 
of  energy  shortage  and  higher  costs.  For  the  moment,  the  impact  is  believed  to  be  non-
significant,  except  obvious  effects  on  electricity,  gas  and  water,  and  have  concentrated 
mainly in smaller value added from electric generation. However, this is an element of risk in 
the  internal scenario that  must  be monitored  with  special  care,  in  particular  because  of its 
medium-term implications.  
Regarding inflation, the main development of the past few months have been sharp rises in 
the prices of non-perishable foods (i.e. grains, powdered milk and others) and of fuels, which 
combined with the also sudden increase in the prices of perishable foods, have resulted in a 
major  rise  of  measured  CPI  inflation,  way  above  projections  in  May’s  Monetary  Policy 
Report. 
As a result, CPI and CPIX variation stands at 3.2% per annum, while CPIX1 inflation stands 
at  3.5%.  The  rebound  of  CPIX1  inflation  has  reflected  the  sharp  increase  in  the  prices  of 
some  non-perishable  foods,  the  CPIX  has  been  influenced  by  the  above  plus  the  rise  in 
electric  rates,  and  the  CPI  by  all  the  above  plus  the  rise  in  prices  of  fuels  and  perishable 
foods. The different measures of trend inflation have risen in recent months, in line with the 
reduction  in  output  gaps  and  the  upturn  of  the  prices  of  foods.  In  contrast,  labor  cost 
pressures are limited despite the strong increase in the wage index.  
Short-term  inflation  expectations  have  also  changed,  and  there  is  widespread  belief  that 
inflation  will  be,  in  the  short  term,  higher  than  foreseen  in  May’s  Monetary  Policy  Report. 
Short-term  inflation  expectations  one  year  ahead  are  close  to  4%.  Over  a  longer  horizon, 
expectations  remain  well  anchored  to  3%,  reflecting  the  credibility  of  the  Central  Bank’s 
commitment with target inflation.  
Long-term interest rates have increased recently, partly because of the rise in international 
rates  for  the  same  maturities  and  because  of  stronger  growth  rates.  Meanwhile,  nominal 
rates have been also influenced by higher observed inflation. Growth rates of monetary and 
credit aggregates have moderated but are still high. Despite these changes in the margin, 
financial conditions are still positive.  
Favorable terms of trade and a fiscal policy where government spending is tied to the Central 
Government’s  permanent  income  have  helped  avoid  a  major  real  appreciation  and,  at  the 
same  time,  have  permitted  to  accumulate  public  resources  to  guarantee  that  future 
expansion  of  public  spending  will  be  less  dependent  of  commodity  price  cycles.  In  fact, 
despite the enormous terms-of-trade gain of the last four years, the actual real exchange rate 
is today slightly higher than the average of the past 15 years.  
Because  monetary  policy  operates  with  a  lag,  in  a  monetary  policy  system  such  as  the 
inflation  targeting  regime  adopted  by  the  Central  Bank  of  Chile,  it  has  to  ground  itself  in 
economic  prospects  24  months  ahead  and  their  implications  on  projected  inflation.  Within 
this context, persistently high economic growth signals a future additional narrowing of output 
gaps that, in a context of supply shocks on the prices of foods and fuels, and a monetary 
policy rate below the neutral interest rate by any estimation anticipates that, in the most likely 
scenario,  it  will  be  necessary  to  reduce  the  monetary  stimulus  in  coming  months  to  drive 
annual  inflation  projected  over  the  policy  horizon  to  3%.  This  process  of  monetary 
normalization  is  favored  by  medium-  and  long-term  inflation  expectations  well  anchored 
around the target, where agents preview that the Central Bank will do whatever it takes to 
prevent inflation from deviating away from the target in the policy horizon. If inflation stays 
too  high  for  too  long,  there  is  the  risk  of  it  affecting  medium-  and  long-term  inflation 
expectations more permanently, thus making convergence with the target more difficult and 
costlier.  As  usual,  future  changes  to  the  monetary  policy  rate  will  depend  on  incoming 
information and its implications on projected inflation. 
4 
 BIS Review 87/2007
Consistently, the higher inflation rates of the past several months has prompted a revision to 
market expectations with respect to the future course of monetary policy, switching from a 
prolonged maintenance of the rate to two to three rises of 25 basis points each before year’s 
end.  
Price stability is one factor behind long-term economic growth. In order to ensure that GDP 
will grow for a long time more than  5% – the estimated rate of trend GDP growth – while 
keeping inflation under control, it is necessary to increase the rate of trend GDP growth and 
this does not depend on demand elements but rather on factors determining the growth in 
supply, such as policies and institutions that affect the increase in the amount and quality of 
the labor force, the amount and quality of capital stock and the productivity with which both 
factors are used in production. 
the  best  policy 
integrated.  Here,  as  elsewhere, 
Chile and global risks 
Globalization  and  strong  growth  of  the  world  economy  have  opened  great  development 
opportunities  for  the  Chilean  economy,  but  at  the  same  time  have  increased  the  risks  of 
shocks coming from abroad. The natural question is what should be the policy regime that 
most adequately could maximize the benefits of interacting with a world that becomes ever 
more 
includes 
macroeconomic  policies  and  institutions  that  contribute  to  stability,  to  keeping  a  sound 
financial  system  and  easing  the  adjustments  to  less  favorable  world  scenarios.  Chile’s 
present  policy  regime  (i.e.,  mature  inflation  targeting  regime  with  floating  exchange  rate, 
fiscal policy whereby government spending is tied to the public sector’s permanent income, 
thus enhancing its solvency before transitory terms of trade improvements, and an efficient 
system to regulate and supervise the baking system) increases resilience and facilitates the 
adjustment of the Chilean economy to less favorable external scenarios. 
This  policy  framework  permits  to  prevent  episodes  of  unsustainable  expansion  and  crises 
that accompanied terms of trade cycles in the past. In particular, with inflation expectations 
well  anchored  around  3%,  the  Central  Bank  of  Chile  can  apply  countercyclical  monetary 
policy. Furthermore, the flexible exchange rate helps to make foreign exchange adjustment if 
and when circumstances so warrant. 
is  prudence.  This 
Final remarks 
The world economy is headed toward completing its most dynamic five-year period in over 
thirty years. Strong growth in the world and in China and India are driving a very good terms 
of trade scenario, together with good access to our products in world markets. Thanks to its 
openness and to its macroeconomic policy framework, Chile has reaped the benefits of this 
good  scenario  both  in  the  sense  of  reaching  average  growth  close  to  the  trend  and  in 
accumulating resources that may permit to prevent a real appreciation while ensuring funding 
for public spending, should the terms of trade deteriorate. This policy framework permits to 
prevent episodes of unsustainable expansion and crises that came with terms of trade cycles 
in the past. 
BIS Review 87/2007 
 5
