Rachel Lomax: The MPC comes of age 
Lecture  by  Ms Rachel  Lomax,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  at De Montfort University, 
Leicester, 28 February 2007. 
I am very grateful to Gareth Ramsay for his help in preparing this speech, and also James Proudman, Tony Yates and other 
Bank  colleagues  for  their  help  in  preparing  this  speech,  and  to  a  number  of  colleagues  at  the  Bank  of  England  for  useful 
comments. 
 Introduction 
1  
It’s a great pleasure to be in Leicester tonight, particularly given my long association with De Montfort 
University, as a Governor. 
Tonight  I want  to  focus my  remarks on  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee,  which  is  ten  years  old  this 
year. This is a blink of an eye in the life of the Old Lady of Threadneedle Street as she approaches 
313. But UK monetary policy frameworks have lived dangerously and died young. For them, ten years 
is  good  going.  To  mark  the  occasion  the  Treasury  Committee  has  launched  a  special  enquiry.  An 
impressive weight of written evidence has already been published, including a detailed review by the 
Bank of England. 
Everyone agrees that the UK has experienced an unprecedented degree of economic stability over 
the past decade. The average rate of inflation has come down from nearly 10% in the seventies and 
eighties, to 2.5% since 1993, and the volatility of inflation has fallen very sharply. At the same time, 
output growth has been higher on average and less volatile.1 The change has been stunning. To be 
fair  though,  it  predates  the  formation  of  the  MPC  by  several  years;  and  other  countries  have 
experienced a similar, if not so pronounced, improvement in performance. 
There  is  considerable  agreement  that  better  monetary  policy  is  partly  responsible  for  this  better 
outcome,  though  there  is  an  ongoing  debate  about  exactly  how  much  was  also  due  to  unusually 
benign global economic conditions, including the impact of globalisation. 
Whatever the outcome of that debate, we clearly cannot bank on a trouble-free future. But we can and 
should  look hard  at  the way  our current  monetary  policy  framework  is operating,  to  give  it  the  best 
chance  of  coping,  if  necessary,  with  a  harsher  climate.  So  tonight  I  want  to  consider  what  was  so 
special about the MPC; and ten years on, ask how age and success has changed it; and what we can 
do to preserve its youthful vigour. 
Historical background 
2  
The MPC has come to personify the monetary policy framework that was put in place when Gordon 
Brown made the Bank of England independent in 1997. But by monetary policy frameworks, I mean 
the broader set of rules and procedures for taking decisions about interest rates. 
Prior  to  1992,  such  frameworks  often  took  the  form  of  a  commitment  to  maintain  a  fixed  exchange 
rate,  most  recently  as  a  member  of  the  ERM.  But  these  proved  hard  to  sustain  –  sterling  was 
repeatedly  devalued,  at  great  political  cost  to  the  Government  of  the  day.  Perhaps  the  most 
controversial frameworks took the form of commitments to meet targets for the growth in the money 
supply. These were meant to act as rules, which would tie the hands of politicians, but they proved 
ineffective,  not  least  because  the  underlying  economic  relationships  broke  down.  There  were  also 
periods – notably the 1970s – when there was no discernible monetary policy framework at all; when 
monetary policy was in eclipse and Governments relied on incomes polices to control inflation. These, 
too, were a dismal failure. 
                                                      
1 
Inflation has averaged 2.5% since 1997, with a standard deviation of 0.8%. In the two decades to 1992, it averaged 9.6%, 
with a standard deviation of some 5.6%. Over the past decade, output has grown steadily, averaging 2.8%, with a standard 
deviation of 0.7%, compared with an average of 2% and a standard deviation of 2.5% over the seventies and eighties. 
BIS Review 20/2007 
 1
All these frameworks suffered from one of two basic problems. They either lacked credibility, or they 
lacked sufficient flexibility for policy-makers to respond intelligently to events. So it is little surprise that 
they were associated with two decades of poor macroeconomic performance. 
Sterling’s exit from ERM in the autumn of 1992 led to an overhaul in the way monetary policy was 
conducted, with the adoption of an explicit target for inflation, and a number of moves to make the 
process of policy-making more transparent through the publication of minutes of what was popularly 
known as the Ken and Eddie show, and a new Inflation Report, produced by the Bank. 
What was special about the 1997 arrangements? 
3  
In the event, 1992 marked a break with the past. But while the policy innovations of the 1993-97 years 
were showing promise, the framework remained relatively informal. And decisions about interest rates 
stayed in the hands of the Chancellor. 
The  change  in  Government  in  1997  led  to  a  far-reaching  effort  to  institutionalise  and  depoliticise 
monetary policy arrangements. A new Bank of England Act stipulated that the objective of monetary 
policy  should  be  domestic  price  stability,  and  only  ‘subject  to  that’  to  support  the  Government’s 
objectives for output and employment. The Act left responsibility for setting an annual remit for inflation 
in the hands of the Chancellor; but it gave the Bank ‘operational independence’ to set interest rates to 
meet this target. Interest rate decisions were to be taken by Committee of nine, which was to include 
four appropriately qualified external members. 
With  these  changes,  the  UK  had  a  fully  articulated,  credible  domestic  monetary  policy  framework, 
underpinned  by  statute,  which  gave  the  Bank,  through  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee,  an 
independent role in meeting an explicit inflation target. 
What  was  the  defining  characteristic  of  this  approach  to  policy,  and  other  broadly  contemporary 
frameworks developed by countries like Canada, New Zealand and Sweden? The best short answer is 
encapsulated in a term originally coined in 1997 by two US academics, Ben Bernanke and Frederick 
Mishkin (now Chair and member of the FOMC respectively). It is ‘constrained discretion’2. 
Bernanke described this as “an approach that allows monetary policy-makers considerable leeway in 
responding  to  economic  shocks,  financial  disturbances,  and  other  unforeseen  developments. 
Importantly,  however,  this  discretion  of  policy-makers  is  constrained  by  a  strong  commitment  to 
keeping inflation low and stable.”3
In the UK, the Government is constrained by the institutional framework, which is set in statute. And 
the MPC is constrained by the need to meet the inflation target. But while the MPC are told what to do, 
they are not told how to do it. At the operational level, there is a lot of discretion. 
The commitment to meet the inflation target is fundamental, as a matter of law and economics. As 
long  as  it  is  credible,  such  a  commitment  will  help  to  anchor  people’s  expectations  about  future 
inflation, and stabilise their response to unexpected shocks. But the scope to exercise discretion about 
how  long  temporary  inflation  disturbances  will  be  tolerated  is  critically  important  too,  for  the 
performance  and  long  term  credibility  of  the  framework.  Of  course  it  must  be  used  with  integrity  – 
saying one thing and doing another, for short term advantage, is toxic. 
This  approach  was  reflected  in  the  Open  Letter  procedure,  which  was  an  explicit  part  of  the  1997 
arrangements. This recognised that the MPC would not attempt to bring inflation back to the target 
immediately following a large shock, but required the Governor to write a letter to the Chancellor if, as 
a result, inflation deviated from the (then) 2.5% target by more than one percentage point. 
As Ed Balls commented in a lecture in 20014: 
                                                      
2 
“Inflation  Targeting:  A  new  framework  for  monetary  policy?”,  Ben  Bernanke  and  Frederic  Mishkin,  Journal  of  Economic 
Perspectives, 1997. 
“Constrained Discretion and Monetary Policy”, remarks by Ben Bernanke before the Money Marketeers of NY University, 
New York, February 2003. 
“Delivering Economic Stability”, Oxford Business Alumni Annual Lecture by Ed Balls, June 2001. 
BIS Review 20/2007
3  
4 
2 
 “Some have assumed it [the requirement to write an open letter] exists for the Chancellor to discipline 
the  MPC  if  inflation  goes  outside  the  target  range.  In  fact  the  opposite  is  true……  In  the  face  of  a 
supply-shock, such as a big jump in the oil price, which pushed inflation way off target, the MPC could 
only  get  inflation  back  to  2.5  per  cent  quickly  through  a  draconian  interest  rate  response  –  at  the 
expense  of  stability,  growth  and  jobs.  Any  sensible  monetary  policymaker  would  want  a  more 
measured  and  stability-oriented  strategy  to  get  inflation  back  to  target.  And  it  is  the  Open  Letter 
system which both allows that more sensible approach to be explained by the MPC and allows the 
Chancellor publicly to endorse it.” 
Constrained discretion also provides much needed room for learning. Monetary policy remains more 
art than science, and its practice is riven with uncertainties and risks. As the present Governor put it in 
a  lecture  delivered  in  19975:  ‘Inflation  targets  are  a  practical  response  to  the  fact  that  knowledge 
increases over time.’ 
So a framework of constrained discretion combines much needed scope to implement policy flexibly, 
in  the  light  of  both  circumstances  and  experience,  with  the  credibility  benefits  of  committing  policy-
makers  to  secure  a  pre-determined  outcome  for  inflation.  That,  in  essence,  was  the  key  difference 
from the failed experiments of the past. 
The development of the MPC 
4  
The MPC got off to a good start. It inherited an inflation rate that had been low for the past 5 years. 
And the financial markets welcomed it by reducing the risk premia on UK assets. 
No one had very clear expectations about how it would behave or how it might think. While it inherited 
some technical features of the previous regime, the new Committee had quite a lot of scope to define 
its own operating procedures and intellectual framework. If not a blank sheet of paper, it was a book 
with many pages still to fill. As time has gone by, whole volumes have been filled. The Committee’s 
procedures and thinking have matured. It has acquired patterns of behaviour and earned a name for 
itself. 
There have been a number of stages in the Committee’s development. Early on the MPC took steps to 
set out the intellectual framework within which it would be operating, to promote public understanding 
and enhance credibility. Over time, the Committee’s thinking has evolved, as members have rotated 
on and off the group, and as the Bank has struggled to understand developments in the wider world. 
And, as a result of taking more than 100 policy decisions, the MPC has acquired a track record, which 
has allowed others to draw their own conclusions about its likely behaviour in different circumstances. 
Practice in other central banks has developed too, as inflation targeting has spread, and all central 
banks have become more transparent in their communications. This has raised the bar for a central 
bank that wants to stay at the leading edge of monetary policy practice. 
Finally, the MPC has acquired an enviably high reputation as a result of its overall performance and 
the unprecedented stability of the economy over the past decade. 
In short, the world has moved on, and the MPC has acquired a past and an identity. 
Ten  years  is  too  soon  for  a  mid-life  crisis,  but  middle-aged  members  of  the  audience  will  readily 
recognise the pressures that advancing years can bring. Sometimes we are tempted to bask in past 
success, whether or not it is fully earned. In our better moments, we reflect on all that we have learnt, 
through bad times as well as good. But there are days when we peer in the mirror and ask anxiously 
whether we have lost our freshness and drive. Have we become too set in our ideas and in our ways? 
Have others stolen a march on us? Have we become, to a degree, prisoners of our own past Maybe 
even victims of our own perceived success? 
The only way to deal with such fears is to confront them. That is a far larger task than I can do justice 
to tonight, and it needs to be part of a continuing effort to improve our performance. But let me try and 
give you an overview of some of the main issues in the remainder of my remarks. 
                                                      
5  
“The Inflation Target five years on”, lecture delivered by Mervyn King at the London School of Economics, October 1997. 
BIS Review 20/2007 
 3
Intellectual development 
I want to start with the MPC’s intellectual development. 
As the world around us changes, it throws up new policy challenges which force us to examine old 
ideas and develop new ones. So the MPC has been on an intellectual voyage of discovery since it 
was established. 
The formation of the MPC unleashed a ferment of intellectual debate and activity inside the Bank. It 
was a thrilling time for those who were closely involved. The Committee had to set out how it thought 
about the world, first of all for itself, and then for the outside world. You can still see evidence of all this 
activity on the Bank’s website – in speeches describing how the MPC saw the world, and in books 
which set out the MPC’s models of the economy. 
But  the  world  does  not  stand  still.  Over  the  last  decade,  the  Committee,  and  the  Bank  staff  who 
support  it,  have  had  to  confront  some  enormous  changes  in  the  economic  environment.  The 
Committee’s thinking has had to evolve to meet this challenge. 
Without going into detail – that would require another speech – let me give you a flavour of some of 
the questions with which we have been grappling during my own time on the Committee alone. 
First, we have had to understand the implications of some very big movements in asset prices, both 
domestically and globally. House prices have risen steadily, tripling since 1997, to reach record levels 
relative to household incomes and rents. Share prices soared in the run up to the millennium, then 
slumped,  but  have  subsequently  recovered.  There  has  been  a  long  running  debate  among  central 
bankers  about  how  they  should  respond  to  asset  price  booms  –  and  possible  busts  –  with  some 
arguing that there is a case for taking pre-emptive action, over and above what might be warranted to 
meet the inflation target over the normal two to three year horizon. There have been members of the 
MPC on both sides of this argument. 
Second, there has been an acceleration in the pace of globalisation. The entry into the global market 
economy  of  China,  India  and  Eastern Europe  is  effectively  doubling  the  world  economy’s  supply  of 
workers  –  from  1.5bn  to  3bn.  This  is  having  pervasive  effects  on  wages,  prices  and,  potentially, 
economic relationships in developed countries in ways we need to understand in order to set interest 
rates. 
Third, the last few years have seen the largest recorded entry of foreign workers to the UK. This has 
increased the supply capacity of the economy, as well as boosting demand, but the precise scale and 
likely duration of these effects are very hard to judge. How is migration changing the ground rules by 
which we set policy? If labour shortages were to cause more migration, rather than higher wages, we 
would be in a rather different world from the one we are used to. 
Finally,  there  has  been  a  major  surge  in  energy  prices  in  the  past  three  years  –  first  a  doubling  in 
global oil prices, and then an even larger rise in natural gas prices which was specific to the UK. Up 
until  now  at  least,  the  UK  and  the  global  economy  appear  to  have  weathered  the  impact  of  these 
major cost shocks remarkably well. But precisely because the world has moved on so much since the 
1970s, it has not been straightforward to predict or understand the impact of higher energy prices on 
the inflationary process. (I will return to this subject later in my remarks). 
The  MPC  tackles  challenges  like  these  all  the  time:  you  will  see  these  questions  discussed  in  the 
minutes  of  our  policy  meetings,  in  our  speeches,  and  in  the  quarterly  Inflation  Report.  We  also 
commission research into these questions, which we publish in academic papers. This is not research 
for its own sake; it is carried out to help Committee members, present and future, do a better job. We 
need to keep refreshing our intellectual capital. Half a century ago, Governor Cobbold famously said 
that  the  Bank  of  England  is  a  bank,  not  a  study  group.  Nowadays,  the  best  central  banks  have 
something of the study group about them. 
Anniversaries are a good moment to take stock. So the TC enquiry and other events will prompt us to 
review what we have learnt, and to identify where there are gaps in our knowledge. 
Procedures and communications 
The 1997 institutional reforms did more than take political considerations out of interest rate decisions. 
They were intended to convince people that the inflation target regime was here to stay. The idea was 
to  align  expectations  of  future  inflation more closely  to  the  target,  by  putting monetary  policy  in  the 
4 
 BIS Review 20/2007
hands of technocrats whose behaviour would epitomise professionalism. The pre-announced monthly 
cycle  of  meetings,  regular  quarterly  Inflation  Report  forecasts,  and  set  briefing  routines,  were  very 
much  part  of  the  package.  The  goal  of  these  new  arrangements  was  to  make  the  system 
understandable and predictable to outsiders. 
After a sharp burst of activity in the late 1990s, the processes and procedures surrounding monetary 
policy  have  now  settled  down.  We  still  use  much  the  same  internal  processes  and  means  of 
communicating with the outside world as we did a decade ago. 
But the outside world has not stood still, in at least two respects. 
First, over time the MPC has established a track record of actions and communications which people 
have, as intended, learnt to parse with great precision. There is a cottage industry in interpreting its 
every utterance, in the light of its past behaviour, in order to predict its next actions. Any deviation from 
past behaviour is assumed to be deliberate and considered. 
A topical example is the market reaction to the latest interest rate rise. The formal position has always 
been that the MPC may change rates at any one of its policy meetings. And in the early days of the 
Committee that’s pretty close to what happened. But since 2001, as a matter of fact, rates have been 
much more likely to change in the months when we publish a new quarterly Inflation Report. That was 
why the January rate rise caused such surprise even though commentators were fully expecting a rate 
rise  to  accompany  the  February  Inflation  Report.  Indeed,  such  was  the  surprise  that  the  market 
immediately revised up its expectations for future interest rates. And there was a measurable increase 
in uncertainty, as different interpretations of the Committee’s unusual action were debated across the 
wires. 
This  episode  highlights  the  difficult  balance  which  the  mature  Committee  needs  to  strike  between 
innovation and predictability. Today’s Committee members – only one of whom has been there since 
the  beginning  –  quite  reasonably  do  not  want  to  be  unduly  constrained  by  the  habits  of  their 
predecessors. But the passage of time has given ‘the Committee’ a collective personality. So changing 
established patterns of behaviour requires at least as much care and explanation as in the early days 
of the framework. 
Second, even if we have not changed our procedures very much over the past decade, other central 
banks  have.  They  have  become  much  more  transparent.  And  the  debate  about  how  much  central 
banks  should  communicate  –  and  how  –  has  moved  on,  among  academics,  central  bankers  and 
central bank watchers. 
For example, a long-standing issue is how much central banks should say about their expectations of 
future interest rates. The traditional concern has been that commentators would mistake a projection 
for a commitment, the risk being that when interest rates did not change as projected this would be 
damaging to credibility. 
However,  in  recent  years  other  central  banks  have  moved  increasingly  towards  giving  indications 
about the likely path of interest rates, given their forecast for the economy. Some inflation targeting 
central banks – Norway, New Zealand and Sweden – are now publishing charts which show how they 
expect to change policy rates to achieve their targets6. 
Should the MPC follow this trend? If you follow press reports of our regular Inflation Report forecasts, 
you  might  be  forgiven  for  thinking  we  already  have.  But  actually  no:  our  forecasts  take  market 
expectations for interest rates as their starting point, and we leave commentators to draw their own 
inferences.  We  have  maintained  the  position  that  we  do  not  give  hints  about  future  interest  rate 
changes. Naturally we are looking closely at what happens elsewhere and we will want to learn from 
their experience – though of course, since the MPC is not a consensual body, it would be a significant 
complication to get it to agree an explicit path for interest rates. 
                                                      
6  
In addition, the Bank of Canada now includes text in its monetary policy report which indicates whether or not rates will have 
to change from their current level to meet the inflation target. 
BIS Review 20/2007 
 5
Have we become prisoners of our past success? 
Let me come, finally, to the biggest, and most difficult of the issues I want to raise tonight – namely the 
extent to which the stability of the past decade has conditioned expectations of what the MPC can and 
should do, in ways which may be both helpful and unhelpful to its ability to do its job. 
The so-called Great Stability of the past decade has bestowed on the MPC the great gift of credibility –
a golden halo which eluded monetary policy-makers in the UK for most of the twentieth century. 
What part has the MPC played in its own success? It’s difficult to say. But it is hard to believe that luck 
played no role. My own view is that the MPC has benefited from a virtuous circle. As we have kept 
inflation close to target, people have increasingly come to expect us to do so in the future, and to act 
on the assumption that inflation will stay low. These expectations have underpinned the wages they 
have bargained for, and the prices they have set. And that behaviour has helped us to keep inflation 
under control in the face of destabilising events. 
However, the unusual degree of stability, and the prestige it has conferred on central bankers, may 
also  have  bred  some  less  helpful  attitudes:  such  as  complacency  about  the  ease  with  which  the 
economy can absorb shocks, and unrealistic expectations about what monetary policy can achieve. 
Just  to  be  clear:  monetary  policy  can  pin  down  average  inflation  over  the  medium  term.  It  can  not 
deliver inflation at target at all times and in all circumstances, and certainly not in combination with 
rock-steady growth in output. 
Let me illustrate these points by looking more closely at one of the key challenges I mentioned earlier, 
the impact of higher energy prices over the past two years. 
Since 2004, global oil prices have more than doubled, a far sharper rise than at any time since the 
1970s,  when  as  some  of  you  may  recall,  inflation  took  off,  eventually  peaking  at  25%.  Then,  last 
winter, UK wholesale gas prices surged, as a result of supply and storage problems that were, in large 
part, specific to our market. The resulting increases in household gas and electricity bills have had a 
large  direct  impact  on  inflation.  By  December,  they  alone  were  directly  contributing  1pp  to  the 
measured inflation rate. 
These energy price shocks are now starting to unwind, at least for now. The oil price has fallen back, 
although  the  outlook  remains  uncertain  –  the  thin  margin  of  spare  capacity  continues  to  make  oil 
prices unusually sensitive to all kinds of news, from politics to weather and supply. We can have more 
confidence that the gas price shock is ebbing. The temporary supply and storage issues which caused 
the  price  spike  last  winter  have  been  addressed.  Together  with  a  milder  winter,  this  has  helped  to 
bring wholesale prices back to where they were two years ago, and retail prices have started to fall 
back. 
So, just as energy price increases have boosted inflation over the recent past, it now seems likely that 
energy price falls are going to reduce it – possibly quite sharply – over the year ahead. Indeed we 
expect inflation to fall below the target by the end of 2007. 
Let me make two observations about this episode. 
First, looking back over the past three years, the big picture is that inflation has stayed surprisingly 
low, and output growth remarkably stable, given the scale of these cost increases. Inflation has never 
deviated by more than 1 percentage point from the 2 per cent target. 
But second, judging by the media and public reaction to the rise in inflation over the past few months, 
it  is  clear  that  even  a  small  deviation  in  inflation  from  target can  now  look  very  significant after  the 
stability of the past decade. 
This illustrates both the helpful and unhelpful legacy of a decade of remarkable stability for the UK 
economy. 
On the helpful side, there is no doubt that a highly credible monetary policy framework has helped to 
contain inflation, in the face of a very large cost shock. The UK has become a low inflation economy 
since the 1970s and people expect the MPC to keep it that way. That affects the way they behave 
when they take decisions about wages and prices. 
The less helpful legacy is that even a small movement in inflation away from target – one percentage 
point  –  has  prompted  some  highly  coloured  media  coverage,  and  may  have  unsettled  people’s 
expectations about where inflation is headed in the short run. 
How does this less helpful legacy affect the policy debate? 
6 
 BIS Review 20/2007
Remembering  the  earlier  discussion  of  constrained  discretion,  a  temporary  spike  in  inflation,  as  a 
result of a large cost shock like the recent rise in energy prices, is exactly the sort of shock to which 
policy-makers  should  be  able  to  react  flexibly  within  an  inflation  targeting  framework.  That  enables 
them to avoid excessive volatility in output and employment, as long as public expectations of inflation 
over the medium term remain pegged to the inflation target. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  MPC  can  never  afford  to  ignore  evidence  that  medium-term  inflation 
expectations are becoming dislodged: anchoring these expectations is fundamental to the success of 
the framework. But direct evidence of inflation expectations is very hard to come by; the measures we 
have are patchy and poor. 
So there is a difficult dilemma here, which the MPC has been grappling with over the past few months. 
And  it  has  left  me  with  a  nagging  worry.  My  concern  is  this.  If  the  price  of maintaining  the  public’s 
confidence is that we have to try to keep inflation within a whisker of the target at all times – even in 
the  face  very  large  shocks  –  the  flexibility  that  is  such  an  important  feature  of  our  present 
arrangements may get significantly eroded7. 
That is why the Open Letter procedure remains important – and why it is a great pity that it has been 
widely misrepresented as a punishment, rather than as an opportunity for the MPC to explain itself. 
Our  monetary  policy  framework  can  only  offer  flexibility  as  long  as  it  remains  credible.  But  our 
credibility needs to reflect reality. It is important that the unprecedented stability of the past decade 
does not lead people to believe that central banks can walk on water. They can’t. When that becomes 
clear – as at some stage it will – I see some risk that people will be excessively disillusioned. 
So  let  me  end  by  being  very  clear  about  what  I  regard  as  reality.  The  MPC  cannot  keep  inflation 
exactly  on  target,  at  all  times  and  in  all  circumstances.  Large  price  shocks  will  sometimes  drive  us 
away from target, and we need to be able use our judgement in deciding how to react. But we can and 
will  keep  inflation  close  to  target  on  average.  Short  run deviations  from  the  target should not  leave 
anyone in any doubt about that. 
Conclusions 
The stability of the period since 1992 has been almost as unexpected as the falling of the Berlin Wall, 
and every bit as welcome. It remains something of a puzzle and we cannot assume it will continue 
indefinitely. 
We  do  not  know  quite  how  big  a  part  the  MPC  has  played  in  achieving  this  outcome.  But  it  has 
certainly been shaped by it. Success – however earned – has its price. It may have bred expectations 
of the MPC and what monetary policy can deliver which are frankly unrealistic – and unsustainable in 
the longer term. 
In the original concept, the defining characteristic of inflation targeting and the MPC was the scope it 
offered for exercising constrained discretion. We need to hang on to that big idea. 
                                                      
7 
I  would  have  a  similar  concern  if  people  came  to  believe  that  the  MPC  could  keep  output  growing  steadily,  quarter  by 
quarter, irrespective of wider economic circumstances. 
BIS Review 20/2007 
 7
