Loi M Bakani: Recent financial sector and economic developments in Papua 
New Guinea  
Address by Mr Loi M Bakani, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Papua New Guinea, at the opening of 
the  Kimbe  Branch  of  ANZ  Bank 
(PNG)  Limited,  Kimbe,  New  West  Britain  Province, 
23 November 2006. 
 Acknowledgement 
Honourable Sinai Brown, MP, Minister for Public Services 
Mr. Garry R. Tunstall, Managing Director of ANZ Bank (PNG) Limited 
Mr. Peter Madden, CEO, Post PNG 
Bishop Alphonse Chaupa, Kimbe Diocese representing Churches in WNB 
Business and Community Leaders 
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen. 
I would like to thank the ANZ Bank for inviting the Governor of the Bank of PNG Mr. Wilson Kamit CBE 
to  the  official  opening  of  its  Kimbe  branch.  However,  he  is  unable  to  attend,  as  he  is  on  his  way 
overseas for an official engagement. He has asked me to represent the Central Bank. 
Introduction 
1.  
The  Bank  of  PNG  is  proud  to  see  continued  positive  developments  in  the  financial  system  and 
encourages the expansion of banking network throughout the country. Today, the people of West New 
Britain province have every reason to be joyful as they celebrate this important occasion – the opening 
of  the  Kimbe  branch  of  the  ANZ  Bank.  ANZ  Bank  joins  Westpac  and  BSP  to  bring  the  number  of 
commercial  bank  branches  in  the  province  to  three,  thus,  providing  an  additional  option  of  banking 
services for the general public. 
The opening of this ANZ Kimbe branch highlights another milestone in the development of our banking 
and  financial  system.  The  Central  Bank  is  glad  to  be  invited  because  such  events  gives  us  an 
opportunity to talk about the developments that are occurring in our financial sector and the economy 
at large. 
Financial sector reform and role of the Central Bank 
2.  
I will talk on the developments in the financial sector and the current economic conditions later. Let me 
first mention the underlying framework, which gave rise to the current positive developments we are 
now seeing in PNG. 
A major Government initiative was the reforms to the financial sector, which began in 2000. A new 
Central Banking Act and Banks and Financial Institutions Act were enacted. These gave the Central 
Bank a focused set of objectives, increase its independence and improved regulation and supervision 
of the financial system. The Central Banking Act also limited the Government’s access to Central Bank 
financing and introduced a new Board with wider community representation. More recently, two other 
legislations  were  taken  on  by  the  Central  Bank  due  to  the  experiences  of  poor  supervision  and 
regulatory  oversight  leading  to  mismanagement  of  these  industries.  These  are  the  Superannuation 
(General Provisions) Act and Life Insurance Act. 
The new Central Banking Act and Bank and Financial Institutions Act have enabled the Central Bank 
to  undertake major  initiatives  in  the  financial  sector.  These  included  preparing  the  then  PNGBC  for 
privatization,  dealing  with  fast-money  schemes,  and  enforcement  actions  against  non-compliant 
institutions such as the Workers Mutual Insurance (PNG) Limited. We have introduced a number of 
new  prudential  standards  for  banks  and  supported  the  microfinance  industry.  We  continue  to  work 
closely with all these financial institutions to ensure our people receive a safe and reliable financial 
service. 
BIS Review 12/2007 
 1
Recent economic developments 
3.  
Let  me  now  briefly  discuss  the  positive  economic  developments  we  have  experienced  since  2002. 
PNG  is  currently  enjoying  the  most  favorable  and  stable  macroeconomic  climate  since  gaining 
independence in 1975. Throughout 2006, PNG continued to experience improved economic activity 
with  increased  confidence  by  the  business  community  in  the  Government’s  macroeconomic 
management.  Strong  economic  performance  is  reflected  by  the  major  macroeconomic  indicators, 
which  include  rising  employment  levels,  increased  exports,  higher  credit  growth  from  the  banking 
system, and prudent fiscal management. 
These  developments  have  enabled  us  at  the  Bank  of  PNG  to  maintain  a  neutral  monetary  policy 
stance,  which  has  laid  the  foundation  for  economic  growth.  We  have  achieved  and  maintain  low 
inflation, a stable exchange rate and low interest rates. These achievements are consistent with The 
Bank of PNG’s objective of achieving and maintaining Price Stability. Our foreign reserves reached a 
historical level of US$1497.5 million (equal to approx. K4.5 billion) on 10 November 2006 and is still 
around this level today. 
The  West  New  Britain  province  is  a  significant  provider  of  non-mineral  foreign  exchange  reserves, 
through the exports of palm oil, cocoa and forestry, combined with tourism. Between 2000 and 2003, 
the province exported on average K256 million or 18 percent of total log exports and K1,408 million or 
62 percent of total palm oil exports from PNG. 
The Government presented its 2007 National Budget last week, continuing the prudent fiscal stance it 
has adopted and in line with the Medium Term Development Strategy. With windfall tax revenue from 
the  high  international  commodity  prices,  and  improved  economic  activity,  the  Government  plans  to 
increase its development expenditure and reduce public debt. 
The IMF has just completed its annual Article IV mission to PNG and is very pleased with our progress 
to date. The World Bank has also expressed similar views on our economic management. 
Given the favorable macroeconomic conditions, the challenge for all of us is how we can sustain these 
gains  over  the  long  term.  I  therefore  encourage  you  all  to  continue  to  engage  in  various  economic 
activities and agriculture production, and urged you to utilize the various financial services provided 
only by licensed financial institutions, such as the commercial banks. 
Recent developments in the financial sector 
4.  
Turning to the financial sector, as at the end of September 2006, our financial sector comprises of four 
commercial banks, eleven licensed financial institutions (LFIs), twenty-two savings & loan societies, 
two  micro  banks  (one  of  which  is  a  pilot  project)  seven  superannuation  funds,  two  investment 
managers, five fund administrators, five life insurance companies and two life insurance brokers. 
Total  assets  of  the  financial  sector,  as  at  the  end  of  September  2006  was  K10.5  billion.  The 
commercial  banks  holds  65.5  percent  of  total  assets  of  the  system  followed  by  ASFs  with  25.5 
percent.  Licensed  financial  institutions  and  savings  &  loan  societies  hold  7.3  percent  each  and  life 
insurance  companies’  accounts  for  1.7  percent.  Total  deposits  and  loans  of  the  deposit-taking 
institutions were K6.2 billion and K2.6 billion, respectively and are mostly with commercial banks. 
Our  financial  system  is  sound  and  healthy  and  it  is  the  role  of  the  licensed  financial  institutions  to 
support business financing propositions to enhance economic activity. The biggest challenge for the 
banking industry is how to provide banking services to the rural communities where such services are 
nonexistent. 
Postal service network and District Treasury Rollout Program 
5.  
One of the government’s medium term development strategies for delivery of banking and financial 
services to our rural areas is through its District Treasury Rollout Program. This is in view of lack of 
development in the rural areas. Another positive development is the provision of banking services via 
the  postal  service  network.  This  is  done  in  partnership  with  Post  PNG  and  the  commercial  banks 
including  ANZ  Bank.  This  is  a  welcome  development  in  PNG  and  we  should  embrace  such 
development because it is bringing financial services to our rural communities. 
2 
 BIS Review 12/2007
Development of the microfinance sector 
6.  
I  earlier  mentioned  microfinance.  This  is  another  category  of  financial  institutions  that  can  impact 
positively on the lives of our people, especially in the rural areas with the provision of micro-financial 
services.  We  have  heard  of  the  many  success  stories  in  other  developing  countries  with  similar 
features  to  PNG.  These  include  Bangladesh,  India,  Sri  Lanka  and  many  African  countries.  The 
Government  of  PNG  has  recognized  the  huge  potential  of  microfinance.  Assistance  was  therefore 
sought from the Asian Development Bank and other partners to develop a project called the PNG-ADB 
Microfinance and Employment Project. The Project aims to provide sustainable microfinance services 
to  viable  formal  and  informal  enterprises  and  savings  services  to  the  wider  population.  This  would 
encourage  private  sector  development,  employment  creation  and  further  development  the  financial 
system. 
As  the  Chairman  of  the  Project’s  Steering  Committee,  I  am  aware  of  the  Wau  Microbank’s  plan  to 
expand its network to other provinces in PNG but has to apply for a full license from the Bank. The 
Central Bank has granted approval for another microfinance company, the PNG Microfinance Limited 
to  expand  to  Kimbe.  Further,  we  are  aware  the  Provincial  Administration  in  West  New  Britain  has 
allocated  funds  for  a  micro  bank  in  the  province.  If  all  these  materialize,  the  micro  banks  can 
complement the three commercial bank branches in providing better banking and financial services to 
the province. 
Threats and challenges to growth and sustainability of the financial sector 
7.  
Financial sector growth and sustainability cannot be achieved alone by the government undertaking 
major legislative reforms or the Central Bank formulating and implementing sound monetary policy and 
carrying out an effective supervision of the financial system. Equally important is the need to adopt 
and implement good governance in the financial sector. 
Emphasis  on  corporate  governance  and  the  requirement  to  ensure  ‘fit  and  proper’  persons  to  hold 
positions on the board and management cannot be emphasized enough. We continue to emphasis 
that  good  governance  should  be  the  top  priority  of  all  financial  institutions  that  come  under  our 
surveillance and supervision. 
The Board and Management of these institutions have a fiduciary responsibility to ensure that deposits 
of the public are not lent out recklessly to borrowers who do not meet best practice of lending by banks 
and licensed financial institutions. Further, it is also their responsibility to ensure that shareholders do 
not dictate, influence or even interfere with the running of the institutions as they have a paramount 
duty to protect the interest of depositors/savers. 
PNG is a dynamic economy with a growing financial system and in order to meet these challenges the 
Bank is working with other stakeholders in further reviewing the Superannuation Act and the Savings 
and Loan Societies Act to ensure institutions regulated under these legislation meet the requirements 
and continue their prudent management. 
Fast money schemes (FMS) 
8.  
Whilst  the  Bank  is  doing  everything  within  its  powers  to  protect  the  banks  and  licensed  financial 
institutions with which the public has deposited their savings, the Bank also confronts a new kind of 
problem. This is to do with the activities of fast money schemes. 
The operators of these fast money schemes have been lying to people about their activities so that 
they  continue  to  rob  them  of  their  hard-earned  savings.  The  information  that  they  present  to  the 
unsuspecting investors/public are full of lies, deceit and fraud. For instance, the latest false information 
going around is that the Bank of PNG is holding onto their billions of kina. They tell the unsuspecting 
investors to be patient and it is only a matter of time before the Governor of the Bank signs papers to 
release their billions of dollars or kina. They also circulated a false letter of guarantee carrying a forged 
signature of the Governor. 
We  are  aware  that  the  activities  of  FMS  are  widespread  in  the  West  New  Britain  province.  Three 
weeks  ago,  our  officers  conducted  an  investigation  into  FMS  activities  in  the  West  New  Britain 
province. They confirmed the existence of three schemes operating in the province; namely Papalain, 
U-Vistract  and  Christian.  There  may  be  other  small  ones.  I  am  told  some  operators  of  these  FMS 
intend to contest the coming 2007 national elections to get into power and get the Central Bank to 
BIS Review 12/2007 
 3
release  their  billions  of  kina.  THIS  IS  AN  OUTRIGHT  LIE,  A  DECEITFUL  ACT,  AND  FRAUD!  The 
Central Bank does not have any money belonging to fast-money schemes. 
I want to inform the public that the Bank of PNG is an independent institution of the Government and is 
the banker to the government, not to the public. The commercial banks and other licensed financial 
institutions provide banking and financial to the general public. For fast-money scheme operators to 
pass the blame to the Bank of PNG for withholding their monies from overseas is a blatant lie. They 
themselves have used up the depositors’ money. The truth is that neither the Central Bank nor the 
commercial banks are holding any money that belongs to the FMS. 
The public must stop listening to the lies of these con men and their scams and must not put any more 
money into them because they will not see their money again. I also appeal to Radio West New Britain 
NOT to allow airtime to these illegal schemes to spread their lies and continue deceiving our people 
and stealing their hard-earned income. If you have already contributed, go and demand your money 
back. We must all act together to stop the spread of this illegal and evil activity. 
Conclusion 
9.  
To conclude, the Government and the Bank of PNG has put in place appropriate policies, which have 
led  to  improvements  in  our  macroeconomic  performance.  All  of  us,  the  business  community  and 
development partners must now build on these achievements to ensure that the gains are passed on 
to everyone. 
With  one  more  bank  now  established  in  Kimbe,  this  will  increase  access  to  banking  and  financial 
services for a wider section of our communities. Money should circulate easily within this province and 
outside. With money circulation increasing, the Bank of PNG has introduced a Clean Banknote Policy 
to ensure our currency maintains its quality, standards, and security. I ask you all to return any soiled 
and damaged banknotes to the banks to be returned for destruction so that new ones can be issued. 
Do not continue to use old banknotes. 
The people of West New Britain province now have three banks in operation. This is a clear sign of the 
confidence the banking sector has in the people and the local economy here. You must use the banks 
and other licensed financial institutions to conduct your financial transactions. They are safe because 
the  Bank  of  PNG  keeps  an  oversight  on  them.  Look  after  your  banks  and  financial  institutions. 
Safeguard them and support them. They provide an important service in the community. Banks and 
other businesses have closed down branches in many provinces due to criminal activities, vandalism 
and  mismanagement.  Let  us  ensure  that  this  will  not  happen  in  Kimbe  and  the  West  New  Britain 
province. 
I again urge you all not to lose your money in illegal, unlicensed and fraudulent money schemes. Do 
not invest in FMS. You are sure to lose your money that you worked hard to earn and will never get it 
back. Always know that the FMS will disappear or die when you stop giving them your money in return 
for financial promises of billions of kina that will never come. 
The  economic  conditions  are  conducive  and  future  prospects  continue  to  look  positive  for  PNG. 
Therefore, work on your oil palm, cocoa and coconut blocks, your fishing and forestry projects, and 
other economic activities. Then put your financial gains in the banks and financial institutions that are 
licensed and supervised by the Central Bank, where they are safe; not in money schemes. 
On behalf of the Board and Management of the Bank of PNG, I would like to congratulate ANZ Bank 
on  the  opening  of  its  branch  in  Kimbe,  and  look  forward  to  its  future  plans  to  expand  its  branch 
network throughout PNG. 
Thank you for listening. 
4 
 BIS Review 12/2007
