Toshihiko Fukui: Developments in Japan’s economy and an overall 
review of the central bank’s conduct of monetary policy 
Statement  by  Mr  Toshihiko  Fukui,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  concerning  the  Bank's 
Semiannual Report on Currency and Monetary Control, before the Committee on Financial 
Affairs, House of Councillors and House of Representatives, 1-2 November 2007. 
 Introduction 
The Bank of Japan submitted its Semiannual Report on Currency and Monetary Control for 
the  second  half  of  fiscal  2006  to  the  Diet  on  June  8,  2007.  I  am  pleased  to  have  this 
opportunity to present an overall review of the Bank's conduct of monetary policy. 
Developments in Japan's economy 
I.  
Japan's economy is expanding moderately. 
Exports have continued to increase due to the expansion of overseas economies. Business 
fixed  investment  has  also  continued  to  trend  upward  against  the  background  of  high 
corporate  profits.  The  positive  effects  of  the  strength  in  the  corporate  sector  have  been 
feeding through moderately into the household sector. Although nominal wages per worker 
have been somewhat weak, employee income has been rising moderately with the increase 
in the number of employees. The positive effects of the strength in the corporate sector have 
also continued to be passed on via various other channels, for example, increased dividends. 
In this situation private consumption has been firm. With the rise in demand both at home 
and abroad, production has continued to be on an increasing trend. 
Looking  forward,  Japan's  economy  is  likely  to  continue  its  sustained  expansion  with  a 
virtuous circle of growth in production, income, and spending in place. However, instability in 
global financial markets stemming from the U.S. subprime mortgage problem continues, and 
there is uncertainty regarding global economic developments, for example downside risks to 
the  U.S.  economy.  Although  overseas  economies,  taken  as  a  whole,  are  likely  to  keep 
expanding  as  growth  in  economies  other  than  the  United  States  is  likely  to  remain  high, 
developments  in  global  financial  markets  and  the  global  economy  continue  to  warrant 
attention. 
On the price front, the three-month rate of change in domestic corporate goods prices has 
been positive, mainly due to the rise in international commodity prices. The year-on-year rate 
of  change  in  the  consumer  price  index  (excluding  fresh  food)  has  been  around  0  percent. 
From a longer-term perspective, however, it is projected to continue to follow a positive trend 
as the output gap continues to be positive. 
As for financial conditions, the environment for corporate finance has been accommodative. 
In  the  CP  and  corporate  bond  markets,  the  issuing  environment  has  been  favorable.  The 
lending  attitudes  of  private  banks  have  continued  to  be  accommodative.  Under  these 
circumstances,  the  amount  outstanding  of  lending  by  private  banks  has  been  increasing 
moderately, and the amount outstanding of CP and corporate bonds issued has been above 
the previous year's level. 
Conduct of monetary policy 
II.  
Regarding the conduct of monetary policy, the Bank's basic thinking has been that (1) given 
the extremely accommodative financial conditions, the level of interest rates is to be raised if 
Japan's economy is to follow a path of sustainable growth under price stability, and (2) the 
BIS Review 135/2007 
 1
pace of increase in interest rates should be determined in accordance with improvements in 
the  economic  and  price  situation  without  any  predetermined  view.  Weak  inflationary 
pressures  have  given  the  Bank  latitude  in  conducting  monetary  policy.  The  actual  interest 
rate adjustments have therefore been slow based on a thorough assessment of the future 
path of the economy and prices and its likelihood, as well as both upside and downside risks. 
The  Bank's  basic  thinking  in  this  regard  will  remain  the  same  in  the  conduct  of  future 
monetary  policy.  In  other  words,  while  confirming  that  Japan's  economy  remains  likely  to 
follow a path of sustainable growth under price stability and assessing relevant upside and 
downside risk factors, the Bank will adjust the level of interest rates gradually in accordance 
with improvements in the economic and price situation. The Bank is determined to conduct 
monetary policy appropriately based on careful assessment of economic activity and prices 
as  well  as  the  situation  of  financial  markets  at  home  and  abroad,  thereby  contributing  to 
sustainable economic growth under price stability. 
Disposal of stocks purchased from financial institutions 
III.  
The  Bank  implemented  a  stock  purchasing  program,  which  was  not  a  monetary  policy 
measure, between November 2002 and September 2004. Through this program, the Bank 
purchased  stocks  held  by  financial  institutions  in  order  to  encourage  them  to  reduce  their 
market risks associated with stockholdings. The total book value of the stocks held by the 
Bank under this program was approximately 1.6 trillion yen as of the end of September 2007, 
and  the  Bank  has  started  to  dispose  of  these  stocks  in  the  market  from  October  2007  as 
scheduled. In disposing of them, the Bank will strive to avoid any financial losses and also to 
minimize the impact on the stock market by carefully spreading its sales out over a period. 
Conclusion 
Let  me  close  my  remarks  by  noting  that  in  the  latest  issue  of  the  Outlook  for  Economic 
Activity and Prices, which was decided and released on October 31, the Bank presented its 
assessment  of  economic  activity  and  prices  and  its  basic  thinking  on  the  future  course  of 
monetary policy that I have explained today. 
2 
 BIS Review 135/2007
