Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj: Challenges facing Islamic financial 
institutions 
Speech by His Excellency Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj, Governor of the Central Bank of 
Bahrain,  at 
Islamic  Banking  Conference  2007,  Manama, 
9 December 2007. 
the  14th  Annual  World 
 Fellow  Governors,  Excellencies,  distinguished  guests,  ladies  and  gentlemen.  On  behalf  of 
the  Central  Bank  of  Bahrain,  may  I  welcome  you  all  to  the  Inaugural  Plenary  Session  of 
today’s conference. May I take this opportunity to thank the sponsors and organisers of this 
Conference which this year concentrates on the mechanisms to encourage the growth of the 
Islamic banking industry whilst containing its risks. 
Over  the  last  20  years  we  have  seen  the  establishment  of  several  of  Islamic  banks  and 
financing companies as well as Islamic banking windows as banks have rushed to satisfy the 
appetite  of  investors  and  consumers  for  Sharia  compliant  products  to  finance  assets  from 
cars  and  houses  to  aircraft  and  project  finance.  However  as  banks  have  flourished  in 
number, there is increasing evidence that banks will find it difficult to maintain the pace of 
innovation  that  marked  the  1990s.  Islamic  banks  seem  to  be  increasingly  focused  on  real 
estate and asset finance but not moving into other financial or liquid instruments with active 
secondary  markets.  Perhaps  we  can  take  this  opportunity  to  look  at  the  challenges  facing 
Islamic banking and see how the industry, its regulators and stakeholders may respond. 
The  first  challenge  is  the  success  of  Islamic  Banking.  The  sensational  growth  that  has 
brought Islamic banks such high profits over the past five years coupled with high levels of 
liquidity have meant that Islamic banks have not had to fight for funding or ideas. The result 
is that we are seeing too many Islamic banks with the same business models and structures.  
The availability of plentiful liquidity coupled with the explosion of real estate projects in the 
MENA region have conspired to breed a level of, dare I say it, complacency in some Islamic 
banks. Many Islamic investment banks are project-driven and do not have a steady source of 
"bread  and  butter"  revenue  to  tide  them  over  any  slumps  in  economic  activity.  This  is  in 
contrast to many of the major conventional banks with loan books, overdraft and credit card 
facilities to provide steady revenue to cover overheads. 
Another challenge facing Islamic banks is the multiplicity of Sharia boards and judgements. 
This  leads  to  a  lack  of  homogeneity  for  some  products  on  the  one  hand,  and  a  lack  of 
uncertainty  by  clients  as  to  whether  a  product  developed  in  one  jurisdiction  is  Sharia 
compliant  in  a  neighbouring  jurisdiction.  Islamic  financial  products  need  some  level  of 
harmonisation in terms of product features to gain mass acceptance. We at the Central Bank 
of Bahrain are working with the International Islamic Financial Market to set certain standards 
on some capital and money market products, but banks themselves could work more closely 
to establish common disclosure standards for the costs of financing. 
Additionally, we at the Central Bank have noted the continuing need for high quality human 
resources within Islamic banks. Islamic banking has been growing so fast that it has been 
difficult  for  banks  to  find  enough  skilled  or  qualified  staff.  This  is  why  the  CBB  has 
participated with Islamic institutions in Bahrain in setting up the Waqf fund to provide financial 
and technical support in upgrading current training programs and introduce new ones. It is 
hoped  that we  will  begin  to  see  a  larger  number  of  financiers  qualified  in  Sharia  –  related 
subjects in the near future. Such initiatives can only be to the benefit of Islamic banking and I 
urge more institutions to participate in the funding and support of the fund and its works.  
I  think  at  this  point  I  should  talk  about  governance  challenges  facing  Islamic  financial 
institutions. 
BIS Review 149/2007 
 1
A  major  issue  which  is  growing  in  importance  is  Sharia  compliance  and  how  to  provide  a 
satisfactory  framework to assure investors and other stakeholders that the activities of the 
bank are within the permitted scope of Sharia. Islamic banks have various mechanisms to 
ensure Sharia compliance in the products and activities of the institution. The first and most 
obvious body is the Sharia Supervisory Board. This body produces judgements or fatwas on 
products or structures that the bank intends to provide. The next body is the Internal Sharia 
Review function which performs post-facto reviews of the activities of a bank. The last body 
is the external auditor which, in addition to verifying the accounts of the bank, also checks to 
ensure that the bank correctly followed AAOIFI Sharia standards. 
There are differing perceptions about the respective scope of authority of these three bodies 
and  therefore  there  is  a  need  to  reach  consensus  on  the  functions  of  these  respective 
bodies.  This  is  clearly  an  area  where  the  institutions,  Sharia  scholars  and  the  standard 
setters  need  to  agree  upon  what  constitutes  best  practice  and  set  an  agreed  set  of 
standards. 
The  next  challenge  is  that  of  accounting  standards.  There  are  currently  some  60  AAOIFI 
accounting, auditing, governance and Sharia standards. This body of work is testimony to the 
commitment  and  continuing  efforts  of  AAOIFI  since  its  establishment  in  1990  to  the 
development of accounting and auditing standards for Islamic institutions. However, products 
continue  to  develop  rapidly  and  concepts  such  as  “fair  value”  have  come  to  centre  stage. 
Conventional  accounting  standards  have  responded  accordingly.  Two  such  examples  are 
IAS 39 and IFRS 7. Corresponding modifications to existing AAOIFI standards have not yet 
been made. This means that, for rating purposes or competitive reasons, Islamic banks may 
need  to  follow  IFRS  where  AAOIFI  standards  do  not  fully  cover  the  concerned  product  or 
disclosure.  This  lack  of  equivalent  AAOIFI  standards  is  making  difficulties  in  producing 
financial statements for Islamic banks. Additionally, both AAOIFI and IFSB standards need to 
be  adopted  by  more  institutions  and  regulators  to  reinforce  their  status  as  the  benchmark 
standards in Islamic finance. 
I trust that the above challenges need to be addressed by regulators, Islamic banks and the 
support organisations to consolidate the position of Islamic finance. Please accept my best 
wishes for a rewarding and stimulating conference. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 149/2007
