Ardian Fullani: The importance of economic research 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the workshop “Economic 
research in South-Eastern Europe”, Tirana, 15 November 2007. 
 Dear ladies and gentlemen! 
It is a great pleasure to be here today and open the proceedings of the workshop “Economic 
research in Southeast Europe“. First, allow me to express my thanks to the representatives 
from  the  respective  central  banks  for  their  participation  in  this  workshop  and  all  the  other 
guests  present  today.  Let  us  hope  that  this  workshop  will  serve  as  a  catalyst  for  a  more 
intensified exchange of experiences among our region in the field of economic research. This 
process  is  of  special  importance  with  a  view  to  improving  the  standards  of  economic 
research and for enhancing our know-how in this area. 
Undoubtedly,  timely  and  accurate  economic  research  is  vital  for  undertaking  more  sound 
economic  policies  for  boosting  a  stable  and  non-inflationary  growth  and  for  coping  with 
various risks under a dynamic and rapid integration of our economies.  
From  a  central  bank’s  viewpoint,  economic  research  should  aim  at  reaching  an  optimal 
balance between the significance to the monetary policy or financial stability, their quality and 
timely  availability.  When  compared  to  the  academic  economic  research,  a  central  bank’s 
economic  research  should  manifest  the  same  quality,  but  be  positioned  on  assisting  the 
monetary  policy  decision-making  process.  Otherwise,  their  added  value  is  overwhelmingly 
reduced. The role of research in the monetary policy decision-making process becomes even 
more important under the inflation targeting regime that the Bank of Albania will fully adopt in 
the  near  future.  Economic  literature  defines  inflation  targeting  framework,  inter  alia,  as 
“comprehensive and multi-dimensional information, analyses and statistics”.  
As in many central banks which adopt the inflation targeting regime, the Bank of Albania has 
oriented its resources for economic research, mainly to understanding the process of inflation 
and of its forecasting, and to understanding the transmission mechanism of monetary policy. 
The building of a macroeconomic model for the Albanian economy is of special importance to 
the economic research of the Bank of Albania. Moreover, issues related to the real, foreign, 
financial  and  the  fiscal  sectors,  as  well  as  other  issues  related  to  the  improvement  of 
economic statistics are in focus.  
Undoubtedly,  the  constant  improvement  of  economic  research,  of  their  ethics,  quality  and 
significance to monetary policy should be of high priority. The Bank of Albania is conscious of 
the fact that research in the abovementioned areas should be further consolidated.  
Dear friends!  
Allow  me  to  state  my  opinion  that  from  the  strategic  point  of  view  the  consolidation  of 
research  requires  the  improvement  of  economic  data,  the  enhancement  of  cooperation 
between the public administration institutions and the academia, as well as between various 
countries, and the absorption and increase of human capacities in this area. Following my 
speech I would like to briefly explore these three issues.  
Economic research uses the economic data as its core input. Consequently, the availability 
and  quality  of  economic  data  represent  a  key  factor  to  the  development  of  timely  and 
accurate economic research, to the maximisation of benefiting from them, as well as to the 
minimization  of  wrong  decision-making  and  the  costs  it  carries  over.  Unfortunately,  the 
availability  and  quality  of  these  data  cannot  be  labelled  as  satisfactory.  In  addition  to 
problems  of  collecting  and  calculating  the  statistical  basis,  the  data  base  is  related  to  and 
influenced  by  the  speed  and  various  stages  of  the  development  of  the  Albanian  economy 
and by the changes of policies promoted by the taking place of these stages. The Bank of 
BIS Review 132/2007 
 1
Albania has continuously and will constantly call on the improvement of economic data. In 
this context, today’s workshop places special emphasis on the discussion of the estimations 
and approximation of some economic time series for some important economic indicators, as 
well  as  on  their  role  in  the  development,  ethics  and  the  quality  of  research  of  empirical 
nature.  
Economic research is essential for a wide range of areas. Hence, no institution can and less 
can  a  small  central  bank  cope  by  itself  with  all  the  needs  for  economic  research.  Quite 
contrary, the institutions need to identify the areas and issues of economic research where 
they possess certain comparative advantages and then, closely cooperate with each other. 
In  this  context,  the  cooperation  between  the  institutions  of  public  administration  and  the 
academia,  the  cooperation  between  different  countries  and  the  establishment  of  research 
nets on various areas are of prime importance. They would not only enhance the efficiency in 
carrying  out  the  research,  but  also  stimulate  the  professional  critique  and  opposition  and 
reach higher standards.  
The  research  mission  described  above,  clear  and  well-defined  within  the  framework  of  a 
central bank should not be understood as an isolate mission. The studies can not take place 
in  a  closed  environment.  They  need  debate  and  exchange  of  ideas  with  the  academy, 
business and other interested stakeholders. In this regard, it is my pleasure to state that the 
Bank of Albania has made its research subject to reviews in activities organized particularly 
for this purpose (inflation targeting, round tables, Friday workshops, etc). I invite you to do 
the same thing even during this activity. In view of debate and discussion, we have made 
constant efforts to attract academy and intellectuals in the discussion of our works. The Bank 
of Albania has introduced the “series of Friday seminars”, as an infrastructure to promote this 
debate. Twice a month this forum invites the interested persons within and outside the Bank 
of Albania to discuss their research on topics of economic nature. The activity is as much 
open for home and foreign researchers from the academy and business as it is open for the 
Bank of Albania employees. In this point, I should emphasize that we expect and encourage 
more  interest  by  home  and  foreign  academics  for  this  series  of  seminars.  I  invite  the 
academy and all the researchers to consider this invitation as a repeated one and become 
more and more active in discussing the strategies and development of economic policies.  
The  Bank  of  Albania  is  entirely  open  and  invites  all  the  stakeholders  to  boost  this 
cooperation.  Today’s  workshop  represents  in  itself  a  concrete  example  of  interest  for 
cooperation between the parties and of our aim to boost it further. Moreover, distinguished 
personalities  from  the  finance  and  the  academia  have  been  present  in  various  lectures, 
workshops or conferences. I am personally involved in this open discussion through a cycle 
of  lectures  held  in  the  Albanian  universities  and  in  eminent  and  prestigious  European 
universities. 
Young economists who represent the future and a key basis of human capacities should be 
also encouraged to do economic research. We aim at establishing a culture of research and 
of  a  supportive  structure  with  new  elements  that  do  have  not  only  the  desire  but  also  the 
necessary  knowledge  to  study  the  economic  phenomenon.  To  this  purpose,  the  Bank  of 
Albania organizes annually the Governor’s Award for the Best Diploma, which encourages 
the students of economics to carry out economic research, mainly focused on the areas of a 
central bank’s activity.  
In conclusion, I encourage you to consider the benefits deriving from the useful critics and 
recommendations during this workshop. I also hope that your participation in this workshop 
results useful, in terms of exchanging the know-how on various issues and in particular, on 
the ethics and econometrical techniques.  
It  is  with  pleasure  that  I  declare  this  workshop  open  and  I  invite  you  to  deepen  our 
knowledge! 
Thank you! 
2 
 BIS Review 132/2007
