Frederic S Mishkin: Financial instability and the Federal Reserve as a 
liquidity provider 
Remarks by Mr Frederic S Mishkin, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve System, at the Museum of American Finance Commemoration of the Panic of 1907, 
New York, 26 October 2007. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website.  
 In  my  remarks  today  I  would  like  to  address  the  issue  of  financial  instability  from  two 
perspectives: First, I will offer a conceptual framework that helps us understand why periods 
of financial instability arise, and second, I will describe how the Federal Reserve has used 
the  provision  of  liquidity  to  reduce  the  damage  to  the  economy  during  such  periods  of 
turmoil.1  
The interest of the Federal Reserve in financial stability does not arise out of a concern for 
the functioning of financial markets as such or out of a desire to aid distressed investors or 
institutions. Rather,  the  Federal  Reserve  vigorously  promotes  financial  stability  because  of 
the  intimate  connection  between  a  stable  financial  system  and  solid  macroeconomic 
performance.  The  financial  system,  comprising  financial  markets  and  institutions,  channels 
funds to those individuals or firms that have productive investment opportunities. The better 
the  financial  system  performs  this  role,  the  more  efficiently  credit  flows  from  lenders  to 
borrowers  and  the  more  efficiently  the  economy  operates.  A  period  of  financial  instability 
arises when a shock to the financial system prevents it from channeling funds efficiently to 
productive uses; as I will describe, such a shock generally relates to problems in the flow of 
information.  Unless  checked,  such  a  seizing-up  of  the  financial  system  can  lead  to  a 
precipitous  drop  in  lending  and  a  steep  decline  in  economic  activity.  Therefore,  a  stable 
financial system is of vital importance for the Federal Reserve if it is to pursue its statutory 
goals of maximum sustainable employment and stable prices.  
Asymmetric information and financial instability 
We can better understand how financial instability can arise if we recognize the problem of 
asymmetric information – when one party to a financial contract has much less information 
than  the  other  party.  For  example,  the  borrower  is  usually  much  better  informed  than  the 
lender concerning the potential risks and returns associated with the investment projects to 
be  financed  by  a  loan.  Asymmetric  information  leads  to  two  basic  problems:  adverse 
selection and moral hazard. Generally speaking, adverse selection arises when investments 
that are most likely to produce an adverse outcome are the most likely to be selected. For 
example,  investors  who  intend  to  take  on  large  amounts  of  risk  are  the  most  likely  to  be 
willing to seek financing. When the problem of asymmetric information is particularly severe 
in the marketplace, lenders may decide to cut back on lending even though good credit risks 
exist.2 Clearly, minimizing adverse selection requires that lenders screen out bad credit risks. 
Moral hazard occurs when the lender is subjected to the hazard in which the borrower has an 
incentive to engage in activities that are undesirable from the lender's point of view, that is, 
                                                 
1  
I thank Mark Carlson, William English, and Roberto Perli for their comments and assistance on this speech. 
Note  that  my  comments  here  reflect  my  own  views  and  not  necessarily  those  of  others  on  the  Board  of 
Governors or the Federal Open Market Committee. 
2   This outcome is a feature of the classic "lemons problem" first described by Akerlof (1970). 
BIS Review 123/2007 
 1
activities that make it less likely that the loan will be repaid. For example, a borrower may 
have an incentive to invest in high-risk projects in which the borrower does well if the project 
succeeds but the lender bears most of the loss if the project fails. Again, if this conflict of 
interest  between  the  borrower  and  lender  becomes  particularly  pronounced  in  the 
marketplace, many lenders might decide that they would rather not make loans, which leads 
to  suboptimal  lending  and  investment.  To  minimize  moral  hazard,  lenders  must  impose 
restrictions (known as restrictive covenants) that penalize borrowers for engaging in certain 
activities; lenders must monitor those activities, and they must enforce the restrictions if the 
borrower violates them. 
Over  time,  the  financial  system  has  developed  a  variety  of  mechanisms  to  deal  with 
informational  asymmetries.  These  mechanisms  include  a  strong  network  of  financial 
intermediaries,  sound  and  resilient  financial  markets,  innovative  financial  products  that 
spread risk to the investors most willing and able to bear it, and effective supervisory and 
regulatory  frameworks.  However,  even  the  strongest  financial  system  is  not  immune  to 
shocks.  When  such  shocks  interfere  materially  with  information  flows,  the  problems  of 
adverse  selection  and  moral  hazard  can  overwhelm  the  mechanisms  intended  to  control 
them. As lenders pull back and liquidity becomes scarce, a period of financial instability can 
ensue,  carrying  with  it,  as  I  mentioned  at  the  outset,  the  threat  of  a  serious  decline  in 
economic activity through a virtual cessation of lending.  
Broadly speaking, at least four types of shocks can lead to financial instability. The first type, 
and the one that has been the catalyst of many past crises, is a sharp increase in interest 
rates.  Higher  interest  rates  increase  the  likelihood  that  borrowers  will  be  poor  credit  risks 
because  those  taking  on  more  risk  are  the  most  willing  to  pay  the  higher  rates;  not 
surprisingly,  lenders  have  many  times  responded  to  sharp  increases  in  interest  rates  by 
cutting back the supply of loans, which results in credit rationing. 
The other types of shocks are a sudden increase in uncertainty, a deterioration of corporate 
and household balance sheets, and weakened financial intermediaries. Some of these have 
clearly  manifested  themselves  in  the  episode  that  has  affected  global  financial  markets  in 
recent months. In general, an increase in uncertainty makes it harder to obtain information 
about borrowers, thereby deterring lending, and may arise from the failure of a large financial 
institution,  a  market  crash,  a  recession,  or,  as  in  the  latest  episode,  an  inability  to  value 
complex financial products. Weak borrower balance sheets are also a deterrent to lending 
because they worsen credit risk and thus make the problems of adverse selection and moral 
hazard more prominent. The harmful effects of balance sheet deterioration were evident in 
recent months, when concerns about borrower financial positions caused lenders to demand 
a  substantial  premium  on  loans  and  even  to  drastically  cut  the  flow  of  credit.  Finally, 
problems  in  the  banking  sector  may  also  be  a  catalyst  for  financial  instability  because 
financial  intermediaries  that  find  themselves  with  weakened  financial  positions  typically 
respond by cutting their lending.  
A central bank can respond to an episode of financial instability by temporarily providing the 
liquidity that financial intermediaries are unwilling or unable to supply. Central banks typically 
inject  liquidity  into  the  system  via  the  banking  sector,  but  the  intent  is  clearly  to  have  the 
liquidity spread from there. From banks, liquidity typically finds its way to financial markets 
and to nonbank institutions that are unable to access securities markets. Thus, injections of 
liquidity have the potential to directly address the causes of financial instability and therefore 
to  counteract  the  pernicious  effects  of  financial  instability  on  broad  macroeconomic 
conditions. With this understanding, we can now turn to some history. 
The panic of 1907 and the creation of the Federal Reserve 
During the National Banking Era, which began in 1865 and ended in 1914, when the Federal 
Reserve  began  operations,  reserves  were  channeled  to  New  York  banks,  which  became 
providers  of  liquidity  to  the  financial  system  through  the  New  York  Clearinghouse. 
2 
 BIS Review 123/2007
Nevertheless,  the  banking  system  periodically  suffered  panics,  as  the  demand  for  liquidity 
often exceeded what New York institutions could provide. These panics, in turn, caused large 
numbers of banks to fail or at least suspend the conversion of deposits into currency. During 
these episodes, interest rates tended to spike and equity markets to decline, often sharply.3  
The Panic of 1907, the subject of this conference, was the last panic of the National Banking 
Era  and  one  of  the  most  severe.  During  the  summer  of  1907,  U.S.  financial  institutions, 
especially those in New York, came under increasing pressure as interest rates crept up and 
U.S. gold reserves declined; those movements were due in part to increases in interest rates 
abroad as foreign central banks sought to maintain their gold reserves.4 The panic started in 
October  with  a  run  on  the  Knickerbocker  Trust  Company,  one  of  the  largest  financial 
institutions  at  the  time.  The  stock  market  crashed,  and  the  resulting  surge  in  demand  for 
liquid assets by banks that had New York correspondents, as well as by the general public, 
caused  a  sharp  rise  in  interest  rates,  the  failure  of  a  number  of  financial  institutions,  and 
widespread suspensions of convertibility of deposits into currency. The subsequent banking 
crisis arguably turned a mild recession into a sharp, though fairly short, contraction.  
As  a  result  of  the  1907  crisis,  the  Congress  set  up  the  National  Monetary  Commission  to 
consider whether the federal government should more actively manage the nation's money 
supply. The committee's recommendations led to the creation of the Federal Reserve. Thus, 
an important impetus for the establishment of the U.S. central bank was the desire to prevent 
panics such as the one in 1907, whose detrimental effects on the rest of the economy were 
not lost on policymakers.5  
At the time, the belief was widespread that the inelasticity of the currency contributed to the 
weakness  of  the  financial  system.  The  supply  of  high-powered  money  –  which  included 
national  bank  notes,  specie,  U.S.  notes,  and  silver  certificates  –  was  relatively  fixed 
(inelastic) in the short run. Thus, even fairly moderate increases in demand for high-powered 
money  led  to  higher  interest  rates.  In  addition,  some  of  the  increases  in  the  demand  for 
money were not random; they were associated with the crop cycle and were thus seasonal.6 
Just  as  no  existing  mechanism  or  institution  could  quickly  supply  the  liquidity  needed  to 
respond to a rise in the demand for money, none could supply it to resolve the ensuing crisis. 
The  establishment  of  the  Federal  Reserve  provided  the  nation  with  an  institution  that  was 
able to expand the money supply to virtually eliminate seasonal fluctuations in interest rates 
and  thus  mitigate  the  stress  such  fluctuations  might  put  on  the  financial  system.  The 
policymakers involved in establishing the Federal Reserve also believed that the institution 
would  be  able  to  meet  the  needs  of  the  financial  system  at  times  when  there  was  an 
unanticipated scramble for liquidity. The founders tended to focus on the ability to rediscount 
commercial loans at the discount window, which was seen as a way of providing an elastic 
currency that would eliminate crises or at least mitigate them.7  
                                                 
3   As discussed, for example, in Sprague (1910); Mishkin (1991); and Calomiris and Gorton (1991). 
4   A  description  of  what  occurred  in  this  panic  is  in  Sprague  (1910);  Friedman  and  Schwarz  (1963);  Mishkin 
(1991); Tallman and Moen (1998); and Odell and Weidenmier (2004). 
5   Following the panic of 1907, Senator Aldrich noted that "the shrinkage in values of securities and property and 
the  losses  from  injury  to  business,  resulting  from  and  incidental  to  the  crisis,  amounted  to  thousands  of 
millions of dollars" (Aldrich, 1908). 
6   As discussed, for example, in Miron (1986). 
7   According to Charles Hamlin, the first head of the Federal Reserve Board, "[During periods of hoarding,] each 
bank retreats into its own citadel at the sound of danger and at a time when it should be drawing upon its 
reserves to help the business man of the community, it stays aloof, piling up reserves… such a state of affairs 
will  never  occur  again  under  the  Federal  reserve  system.  The  mobilization  of  reserves  and  the  turning  of 
commercial  paper  [loans]  into  a  liquid  investment,  will  enable  every  bank  to  draw  down  its  reserves  with 
confidence that it can replace them at will if it has proper commercial paper at its disposal" (Hamlin, 1914). 
BIS Review 123/2007 
 3
The Federal Reserve as a liquidity provider 
In past research, I have examined the importance of liquidity provisions by central banks in 
overcoming the problem of asymmetric information, exacerbated by the increase in interest 
rates,  and  the  uncertainty  that  generally  accompany  a  financial  crisis  (Mishkin,  1997). 
Increased  liquidity  can  help  restrain  rising  interest  rates  and,  amid  an  environment  of 
heightened  uncertainty,  enable  the  institutions  best  able  to  make  judgments  about  the 
creditworthiness of prospective borrowers to provide credit.  
Over time, the Federal Reserve has used various methods to provide liquidity to the financial 
system.  At  first,  the  ability  to  rediscount  paper  was  seen  as  the  main  tool  with  which  to 
provide liquidity. At other times, the Federal Reserve has changed interest rate ceilings or 
used open market operations. Since 2003, the operation of the discount window has altered 
significantly. The new facility allows banks in sound financial condition to borrow at will at a 
rate  above  the  target  federal  funds  rate.  The  facility  can  be  used  to  provide  liquidity  to 
financial institutions during a crisis in which financial markets become dysfunctional as well 
as during other periods of financial tightness that are not the result of a systemic event. 
Even with the Federal Reserve System in place, periods of financial stress have arisen since 
World War II. I will briefly review a few of the more recent ones and focus on the role of the 
Federal  Reserve  as  a  liquidity  provider  in  mitigating  them.  The  first  of  these  more  recent 
episodes  arose  from  the  1970  bankruptcy  of  the  Penn  Central  Corporation,  an  important 
issuer  of  commercial  paper.  Policymakers  and  market  participants  worried  that  the 
bankruptcy  of  such  a  major  issuer  would  have  a  chilling  effect  on  the  commercial  paper 
market, as uncertainties about the quality of other issuers would impede them from rolling 
over  their  commercial  paper  to  obtain  short-term  financing.8  The  Penn  Central  bankruptcy 
thus had the potential to send other companies into bankruptcy and possibly trigger a full-
scale  financial  panic.  To  forestall  this  possibility,  the  Federal  Reserve  provided  liquidity  to 
financial markets in two ways. First, the Federal Reserve Banks let the depositories in their 
respective  Districts  know  that  the  discount  window  was  available  to  enable  them  to  make 
loans  to  customers  who  could  not  roll  over  their  commercial  paper.  Second,  the  Federal 
Reserve (along with the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the Federal Home Loan 
Bank  Board)  suspended  the  interest  rate  ceilings  imposed  by  the  Federal  Reserve's 
Regulation Q on some large certificates of deposit, thus providing banks another means of 
financing increases in loans. 
The  second  recent  episode  of  financial  instability  was  the  stock  market  crash  of  1987.  A 
significant concern during this episode was the possibility of a breakdown in the clearing and 
settlement systems in the equity and futures markets. To keep those markets functioning in 
an orderly fashion, brokerage firms needed to obtain massive amounts of credit from banks 
to  meet  margin  calls  from  the  clearing  and  settlement  institutions.  However,  although 
brokerages  were  clearly  in  need  of  additional  funds  to  finance  their  activities,  banks  were 
understandably  nervous  about 
the 
unprecedented market movements.9 In response, the Federal Reserve issued a statement 
affirming its readiness to serve as a source of liquidity to support the economic and financial 
system.  The  Federal  Reserve  underscored  its  commitment  to  providing  liquidity  by 
conducting  open  market  operations  in  a  high-profile  manner  and  earlier  than  usual.10  The 
Federal Reserve also communicated with market participants to support efforts to coordinate 
a market response (Greenspan, 1994).  
the  health  of  securities 
the  wake  of 
firms 
in 
                                                 
8   A discussion of this episode is in Maisel (1973); Brimmer (1989); and Mishkin (1991). 
9   Brimmer (1989) and Mishkin (1991) also discuss this episode. 
10   Carlson (2007) has a more detailed account of the Federal Reserve response to that episode. 
4 
 BIS Review 123/2007
What is remarkable about this episode is the relatively limited amount of liquidity extended by 
the Federal Reserve: In the immediate aftermath of the crash, it temporarily injected through 
open  market  operations  about  $12  billion,  which  at  the  time  was  a  notable  but  not 
exceptional amount. Because the Federal Reserve acted promptly (within a day) to prevent 
the  financial  system  from  seizing  up,  banks  were  not  as  reluctant  to  lend  their  funds  to 
securities firms as they presumably would have been in the absence of a stabilizing action 
from the central bank. Thus, the Fed did not need to lend directly to the banks to encourage 
them  to  lend  to  the  securities  firms  that  needed  funds  to  clear  their  customers'  accounts. 
Confidence was restored, and the fear of crisis subsided quickly.  
The  ability  of  the  Federal  Reserve  to  provide  liquidity  was  also  vital  following  the  terrorist 
attacks on September  11, 2001, which disrupted payment, settlement, and communication 
systems  needed  to  transfer  funds  among  financial  institutions.  Unable  to  receive  funds  for 
their normal operations, many of these institutions turned to the central bank. The Federal 
Reserve  responded  by  injecting  a  considerable  amount  of  liquidity  into  the  system,  both 
through  discount  window  loans  (which  soared  from  around  $200  million  in  the  days 
immediately  before  the  attacks  to  a  maximum  of  $46  billion)  and  repurchase  agreements 
(which  jumped  from  $25  billion  to  a  peak  of  more  than  $80  billion).  Further,  the  Federal 
Reserve helped facilitate the provision of dollar liquidity abroad by arranging swap lines with 
foreign  central  banks.  Thanks  to  these  steps,  credit  continued  to  flow  through  the  system 
during the episode, and serious macroeconomic consequences were avoided. 
The final episode of financial instability I want to discuss is the market turbulence of the past 
few  months.  Concerns  originating  in  the  subprime-mortgage  sector  sparked  a  pullback  in 
risk-taking in a variety of markets. As investors sought safety and liquidity, the issuance and 
trading of structured financial products slowed sharply or, in some cases, completely ceased; 
some  asset-backed  commercial  paper  could  not  be  rolled  over;  yields  in  the  Treasury  bill 
market fluctuated considerably; and spreads in interbank funding markets rose to unusually 
high  levels.  To  prevent  these  problems  from  turning  into  a  severe  credit  crunch  for 
households and corporations alike, the Federal Reserve used several tools to inject liquidity 
into the system. In particular, on August 10, the Federal Reserve announced that it would 
conduct  open  market  operations  necessary  to  promote  trading  in  the  interbank  market  at 
close to the target federal funds rate and noted that the discount window was available as a 
source  of  funding.  On  August  17,  the  Federal  Reserve  Board  approved  a  reduction  of  50 
basis  points  in  the  discount  window's  primary-credit  rate  and  announced  changes  in 
practices to allow the provision of term financing to depository institutions in solid financial 
condition  for  as  long  as  thirty  days.  Also,  to  help  address  the  heightened  safe-haven 
demands for Treasury securities, the Federal Reserve announced a temporary reduction – 
from 100 basis points to 50 basis points – in the minimum fee for borrowing securities from 
the System Open Market Account. Although market functioning has certainly not yet returned 
to normal, and while it is still too early to judge their ultimate success, these actions, along 
with  the  policy  easing  decided  at  the  September  FOMC  meeting,  have  helped  improve 
conditions  in  several  short-term  funding  markets  and  instill  confidence  in  investors  that 
liquidity would be available if needed.  
Policy issues 
As  I  have  just  recounted,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  been  able  to  reduce  the  negative 
macroeconomic  consequences  of  bouts  of  financial  instability  by  providing  liquidity  to 
markets and institutions at times of need. The provision of liquidity should thus be seen as a 
key tool for the Federal Reserve in its quest to achieve its statutory objectives of maximum 
sustainable employment and price stability. The episodes I reviewed here also suggest that 
the more quickly liquidity can be provided when financial instability occurs, the more effective 
it may be. As I mentioned earlier, the Federal Reserve's quick response to the stock market 
crash of 1987 is noteworthy because it meant that only a small amount of liquidity, and no 
direct lending, was needed to restore normal market conditions. 
BIS Review 123/2007 
 5
Although the provision of liquidity is undoubtedly a useful tool, it is not without potential costs. 
Improperly managed, it can lead to increased incentives for banks to take on excessive risk – 
that is, it can create another form of moral hazard. That additional moral hazard will worsen, 
rather than enhance, the stability of the financial system. The risk of moral hazard increases 
if the central bank is perceived to be lending frequently to insolvent financial institutions. That 
concern,  however,  is  addressed  in  the  United  States  by  the  Federal  Deposit  Insurance 
Corporation Improvement Act of 1991, which establishes certain constraints on the Federal 
Reserve's ability to lend to troubled institutions, and by the guiding principle for the operation 
of the Federal Reserve's primary-credit facility, namely, to lend only to sound institutions and 
on good collateral.11 The need to limit moral hazard by not lending to insolvent institutions 
indicates  that  central  banks  must  have  information  sufficient  to  determine  whether  an 
institution with access to the discount window is indeed healthy. That consideration is one 
reason that central banks benefit from having some supervisory responsibility for institutions 
with access to the discount window (Mishkin, 1994; Bernanke, 2007).  
Moral hazard could also arise when a central bank lends in response to liquidity problems, 
but I would argue that the risk of that happening might be lower than in the case of lending to 
troubled  institutions.  I  have  in  mind  situations  in  which  markets  become  impaired  for 
exogenous reasons. In those circumstances – when financial institutions that are otherwise 
perfectly  solid  are  at  risk  of  failure  because  market  infrastructures  are  disrupted  or,  more 
generally, when financial instability originates outside the banking sector – an intervention by 
the  Federal  Reserve  would  certainly  be  beneficial,  and  the  creation  of  perverse  incentives 
would probably be limited.  
The traditional recommendation for the prevention of financial crises goes back to Thornton 
(1802) and Bagehot (1873), who argued that, during a panic, the central bank should be a 
lender of last resort that lends freely at a penalty rate. Charging a penalty rate is another way 
to limit the possible moral hazard arising from liquidity provisions because it gives institutions 
an  incentive  to  maintain  liquidity  sufficient  to  avoid  borrowing  at  a  high  rate.  Indeed,  the 
Federal  Reserve's  standing  facility  charges  an  interest  rate  above  the  target  federal  funds 
rate for exactly that reason (Madigan and Nelson, 2002).  
The  Thornton-Bagehot  criterion  is  an  important  principle,  but  central  banks  must  also 
determine the appropriate penalty rate to apply under the circumstances. For example, when 
financial instability originates outside of the banking sector, liquidity made available to banks 
may  allow  them  to  channel  funds  to  the  part  of  the  financial  system  that  has  seized  up, 
thereby helping the recovery of that sector. Indeed, that mechanism seems to have been at 
work during the Penn Central bankruptcy episode. However, if banks must pay a substantial 
penalty rate to acquire the extra liquidity, they may find it unprofitable to extend loans to the 
troubled sector. In such circumstances, the central bank may judge that a lower penalty rate 
for borrowing at the discount window is warranted for a time. Lowering the discount rate may 
also help underscore the central bank's intent to provide adequate liquidity to promote the 
functioning of financial markets. The Federal Reserve took just such an action on August 17 
of this year, when it lowered the rate for primary credit by 50 basis points.  
When even depository institutions in sound financial condition are constrained in their access 
to  funding  because  of  information  problems  or  operational  disruptions,  open  market 
operations may be incapable of providing reserves to the specific banks in need of funding. 
Having a discount facility at its disposal provides a central bank with a more targeted tool for 
coping with financial disturbances without promoting inflationary tendencies.  
But wouldn't lending at a reduced rate exacerbate moral hazard? That seems to me to be 
unlikely so long as two fundamental principles are observed. First, any such lending should 
                                                 
11   The Federal Reserve’s secondary-credit program, which applies to institutions not eligible for primary credit, 
also requires good-quality collateral. 
6 
 BIS Review 123/2007
be  temporary  and  implemented  only  in  the  highly  unusual  circumstance  in  which  systemic 
risk is clearly present; that restriction should prevent market participants from expecting such 
lending  to  become  a  normal  part  of  doing  business  (Brimmer,  1989).  Second,  commercial 
banks – to the extent that they lend out the funds obtained from the central bank – should 
remain responsible for their own credit judgments, even in extreme situations.  
Conclusion 
The Congress has given the Federal Reserve a dual mandate to achieve both price stability 
and maximum sustainable employment. The Federal Reserve's role as a provider of liquidity 
to cope with episodes of financial instability has been, and will continue to be, critical to its 
success  in  achieving  this  mandate.  How  best  to  perform  that  role  is  something  that  both 
academics and policymakers will continue to think about for a long time. 
References 
Aldrich,  Nelson  (1908).  Congressional  Record,  Feb.  10,  p.  1755.  Cited  in  Robert  L.  Owen 
(1919), The Federal Reserve Act, New York: Century, pp. 29-30.  
Akerlof,  George  A.  (1970).  "The  Market  for  ‘Lemons’:  Quality  Uncertainty  and  the  Market 
Mechanism", Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 84 (August), pp. 488-500.  
Bagehot, Walter (1873). Lombard Street: A Description of the Money Market. London: King. 
Reprint (1962), Westport, Conn.: Hyperion Press.  
Bernanke,  Ben  S.  (2007).  "Central  Banking  and  Bank  Supervision  in  the  United  States," 
speech  delivered  at  the  Allied  Social  Science  Association  Annual  Meeting,  Chicago, 
January 5. 
Brimmer,  Andrew  F.  (1989).  "Distinguished  Lecture  on  Economics  in  Government:  Central 
Banking and Systemic Risks in Capital Markets", Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 3 
(Spring), pp. 3-16. 
Calomiris,  Charles  W.,  and  Gary  Gorton  (1991).  "The  Origins  of  Banking  Panics:  Models, 
Facts,  and  Bank  Regulation",  in  R.  Glenn  Hubbard,  ed.,  Financial  Markets  and  Financial 
Crises. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 109-75. 
Carlson, Mark (2007). "A Brief History of the 1987 Stock Market Crash with a Discussion of 
the  Federal  Reserve  Response",  Finance  and  Economics  Discussion  Series  2007-13. 
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, May.  
Friedman,  Milton,  and  Anna  J.  Schwarz  (1963).  A  Monetary  History  of  the  United  States 
1867-1960. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
Greenspan,  Alan  (1994).  "Statement  and  Comments  of  Alan  Greenspan,  Chairman  of  the 
Federal Reserve," in Banking Industry Regulatory Consolidation, U.S. Senate, Committee on 
Banking,  Housing,  and  Urban  Affairs,  Senate  Hearing,  103  Cong.  2  Session,  March  2. 
Washington: Government Printing Office.  
Hamlin, Charles S. (1914). "The Federal Reserve System as Established and in Operation", 
speech delivered to the New York Chamber of Commerce, New York, December 3, in New 
York Times, "Financial Panics Things of the Past," December 4. 
Madigan,  Brian  F.,  and  William  R.  Nelson  (2002).  "Proposed  Revision  to  the  Federal 
Reserve's Discount Window Lending Programs", Federal Reserve Bulletin, vol. 88 (July), pp. 
314-19. 
Maisel, Sherman J. (1973). Managing the Dollar. New York: Norton. 
BIS Review 123/2007 
 7
Miron, Jeffrey A. (1986). "Financial Panics, the Seasonality of the Nominal Interest Rate, and 
the Founding of the Fed", American Economic Review, vol. 76 (March), pp. 125-40. 
Mishkin,  Frederic  S.  (1991).  "Asymmetric  Information  and  Financial  Crises:  A  Historical 
Perspective",  in  R.  Glenn  Hubbard,  ed.,  Financial  Markets  and  Financial  Crises.  Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, pp. 69-108. 
Mishkin, Frederic S. (1994). "Preventing Financial Crises: An International Perspective", The 
Manchester School of Economic and Social Studies, vol. 62, pp. 1-40. 
Mishkin, Frederic S. (1997). "The Causes and Propagation of Financial Instability: Lessons 
for  Policymakers  (145  KB  PDF)",  presented  at  "Maintaining  Financial  Stability  in  a  Global 
Economy," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson 
Hole, Wyo., August 28-30, pp. 55-96. 
Odell,  Kerry  A.,  and  Marc  D.  Weidenmier  (2004).  "Real  Shock,  Monetary  Aftershock:  The 
1906 San Francisco Earthquake and the Panic of 1907", Journal of Economic History, vol. 64 
(December), pp. 1002-27. 
Sprague,  Oliver  M.  (1910).  History  of  Crises  under  the  National  Banking  System. 
Washington: National Monetary Commission. 
Tallman,  Ellis,  and  Jon  Moen  (1998).  "Gold  Shocks,  Liquidity,  and  the  United  States 
Economy  during  the  National  Banking  Era",  Explorations  in  Economic  History,  vol.  35 
(October), pp. 381-404. 
Thornton, Henry (1802). An Inquiry into the Nature and Effects of the Paper Credit of Great 
Britain. London. Reprint (1962), New York: Kelley. 
8 
 BIS Review 123/2007
