Jean-Claude Trichet: The process of European economic and financial 
integration 
Keynote speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the 
Journalist Symposium “Konvent für Deutschland”, Berlin, 5 December 2007. 
 Introduction1  
1.  
Es  ist  mir  eine  große  Ehre,  als  Gastredner  zu  diesem  Journalisten-Symposium  in  Berlin 
geladen  zu  sein,  um  über  die  wirtschaftliche  und  finanzielle  Integration  in  Europa  zu 
sprechen.  Der  Gedanke  ist  nicht  neu.  Bereits  als  der  Vertrag  von  Rom  vor  einem  halben 
Jahrhundert unterzeichnet wurde, stand der freie grenzüberschreitende Verkehr von Waren, 
Dienstleistungen,  Kapital  und  Personen 
im  Mittelpunkt  der  Bemühungen  der 
innereuropäischen Politik, die schließlich zum europäischen Binnenmarkt führen sollten.  
[It is a great pleasure for me to be invited as a guest speaker to this Journalist Symposium in 
Berlin to talk about European economic and financial integration. The idea of financial and 
economic  integration  is  not  new.  Even  at  the  time  the  Treaty  of  Rome  was  signed,  half  a 
century  ago,  the  prime  focus  of  intra-European  policies  was  on  facilitating  the  free  flow  of 
goods,  services,  capital  and  people  across  national  frontiers,  an  initiative  which  was  to 
become the Single Market.] 
If you will allow me, I will now continue in English.  
Today,  the  European  Union  comprises  27  countries  and  a  population  totalling  494  million 
people,  with  Romania  and  Bulgaria  joining  in  January  of  this  year.  The  impressive 
enlargement of the EU has gone hand in hand with the successful creation of Economic and 
Monetary Union among 13 of the EU countries and 317 million citizens. The 13 will become 
15  in  January  of  next  year,  when  Cyprus  and  Malta  join  the  euro  area,  adding  another  1 
million people to the population of the euro area. 
However, Europe still needs to make progress to fully reap the benefits from the euro. In this 
respect, achieving the objective of the “Konvent für Deutschland”, which is to enhance the 
ability to make reforms in Germany, is urgently needed. This brings me to the issue I should 
like  to  address  today,  namely  that  of  European  economic  and  financial  integration.  First,  I 
should like to share with you some facts on the process of economic and financial integration 
in  Europe.  Second,  I  should  like  to  talk  about  economic  adjustment  processes.  Smooth 
adjustment  processes  are  further  enhanced  by  economic  and  financial  integration  and  are 
crucial for the proper functioning of the European economies.  
Economic and financial integration in Europe  
2.  
Allow me now to elaborate on three aspects of economic integration in Europe, namely trade, 
labour mobility and business cycle synchronisation.  
i) 
First,  economic  integration  has  been  reflected  in  a  marked  increase  in  intra-euro 
area  trade  in  goods  and  services.  Let  me  mention  some  figures.  The  share  of 
exports and imports of goods in terms of GDP within the euro area increased by 6 
percentage points between 1998 and 2006, to stand at around 32% of GDP. The 
                                                 
1  
I  should  like  to  thank  Malin  Andersson  for  her  input  into  this  speech,  Klaus  Masuch  and  Hans-Joachim 
Klöckers for their helpful comments, as well as Katherine Brandt, Annalisa Ferrando, Arne Gieseck, Matthew 
Hart, Christophe Kamps and Andrea Lüske for their additional contributions. 
BIS Review 145/2007 
 1
share  of  intra-euro  area  exports  and  imports  of  services  increased  by  about  2 
percentage points in this period, to almost 7% of GDP.  
As  trade  integration  within  the  euro  area  becomes  stronger,  the  region  is  also 
becoming more open to the outside world. The share of extra-euro area exports and 
imports  of  goods  rose  by  about  9  percentage  points  between  1998  and  2006,  to 
around 33% of GDP.  Over the same period, the share of  extra-euro area exports 
and imports of services increased by about 2 percentage points, to almost 10% of 
GDP.  German  extra-euro  area  trade  contributed  particularly  strongly  to  these 
developments,  increasing  from  31%  of  German  GDP  in  1998  to  51%  in  2006. 
German trade is a good example of the fact that the euro area is an open economy 
and  not  a  “fortress  Europe”.  By  comparison,  in  the  United  States,  exports  and 
imports of goods are lower, representing about 22% of GDP and trade in services 
6% in 2006.  
A  second  aspect  of  the  process  of  economic  integration  is  the  degree  of 
synchronisation or co-movement between different cyclical positions across the euro 
area countries. This degree of synchronisation has increased since the beginning of 
the  1990s.  In  other  words,  a  large  number  of  euro  area  economies  now  share 
similar business cycles.  
In addition, the decline in inflation differentials across the euro area countries has 
been impressive in recent years. The level of dispersion is currently at a lower level 
than  that  among  14  US  Metropolitan  Statistical  Areas.2  Dispersion  in  real  GDP 
growth  rates  across  the  euro  area  countries  has  been  fluctuating  around  a  level 
similar  to  the  one  observed  in  output  growth  across  regions  within  the  United 
States.3  
Labour mobility within the EU constitutes a third aspect of economic integration that 
I should like to mention. Labour mobility offers additional choices to workers. It can 
dampen  the  effects  from  country-specific  shocks  and  decrease  the  risks  of  wage 
pressures  as  labour  markets  tighten.  Available  evidence  suggests  that,  overall, 
cross-border labour mobility is still limited within the European Union with regulatory 
barriers  still  existing,  even  within  the  euro  area  itself  with  respect  to  labour  from 
Slovenia,  for  example.  Germany  belongs  to  the  countries  which  currently  prevent 
labour  mobility  from  some  EU  countries.  This  comes  at  a  time  when  many 
companies  are  reporting  problems  in  finding  properly  skilled  labour.  For  instance, 
the German industry currently reports very significant shortages of labour, according 
to a survey by the European Commission.  
ii) 
iii) 
Comparable figures on labour mobility for the EU and the United States are difficult to obtain 
and  any  such  figures  should  be  interpreted  very  cautiously.  Still,  in  the  United  States, 
geographical labour mobility appears to be far higher.  
Let  me  now  turn  to  financial  integration  in  Europe.  The  introduction  of  the  euro  has 
contributed  to  intra-European  financial  integration  which,  in  turn,  has  facilitated  the  free 
                                                 
2   At the beginning of the 1990s, the dispersion in inflation rates across the countries, which now belong to the 
euro area, was, on average, around 6 percentage points (standard deviation measured in unweighted terms). 
So far this year, the inflation dispersion was only 0.5 percentage point. Dispersion among 14 US Metropolitan 
Statistical Areas has moved around 1 percentage point over the past two decades. Dispersion in real GDP 
growth rates across the euro area countries has been fluctuating around a level of 2 percentage points over 
the past few decades. 
It  should  be  stressed  that  while  some  differences  are  temporary,  others  are  more  persistent.  Sustained 
differences in economic growth or inflation rates between some euro area countries are normal in a monetary 
union, to the extent that they are related to catching-up phenomena. However, it is also true that persistent 
differentials which reflect structural rigidities are a concern. 
3  
2 
 BIS Review 145/2007
movement  of  capital  in  the  euro  area.  Financial  integration  strengthens  competition  and 
raises  the  potential  for  stronger  non-inflationary  economic  growth.4  It  also  improves  the 
smooth and effective transmission of the single monetary policy throughout the euro area.  
Financial  integration  also  helps  financial  systems  to  channel  funds  from  those  economic 
agents  that  have  a  surplus  of  savings  to  those  with  a  shortage;  in  particular,  it  enables 
agents  to  effectively  trade,  hedge,  diversify  and  pool  risks.  As  a  result,  there  is  a  better 
sharing and diversification of risk.  
According  to  academic  research,  in  the  United  States,  over  the  period  1963-90,  capital 
markets smoothed out 39% of the shocks to gross state product (the equivalent to GDP), the 
credit  channel  smoothed  out  23%  and  the  federal  government,  through  the  fiscal  channel, 
13%.5  Around  25%  of  the  shocks  were  not  smoothed  out.  Hence  financial  markets  and 
financial  institutions  contributed  62%  to  the  absorption  of  idiosyncratic  state  shocks.  We 
therefore see from the US example that the financial channel can be much more important 
than the fiscal channel. This is an additional reason for speeding up financial integration in 
Europe. In a more recent study, it was found that the situation in the euro area countries has 
begun to converge towards that of the United States as inter-euro area country capital flows 
increase.  It  was  found  that  in  what  would  become  the  euro  area  countries  (excluding 
Luxembourg), capital markets would have smoothed out about 10% of the country-specific 
shocks to GDP between 1993 and 2000.6  
A set of indicators, published by the ECB, points to an increasing degree of integration of 
euro area financial and banking markets since 1999.7 Moreover, the size of capital markets – 
in  terms  of  the  ratio  of  the  total  value  of  stock,  bond  and  loan  markets  to  GDP  –  has 
increased substantially since 1999, and has the potential to grow even further, as seen from 
a comparison with the United States. In the period 1995-99, it was 177% of GDP in the euro 
area and 279% in the United States; in 2005-06 it had increased to 256% in the euro area, 
and 353% of GDP in the United States. In Germany this ratio rose from 202% to 229% of 
GDP. 
Integration  in  retail  banking,  by  contrast,  has  been  slow  so  far.  There  are  still  significant 
differences in bank deposit and lending interest rates across euro area countries. In the euro 
area,  the  cross-country  dispersion  is  higher  than  the  intra-regional  dispersion  of  the  same 
rates in the United States.8  
This notwithstanding, overall there is evidence of growing economic and financial integration 
among the countries of the European Union. The adoption of the euro has contributed to this 
development  by  reducing  information  costs,  enhancing  price  transparency  and  eliminating 
exchange  rate  risk  between  countries  in  the  euro  area.  Nonetheless,  in  some  fields,  a  lot 
                                                 
4   A  research  study  conducted  by  London  Economics  estimated  the  benefits  of  the  integration  of  European 
bonds  and  equity  markets  to  be  around  1%  of  additional  GDP  over  a  ten-year  period.  London  Economics, 
2002,  “Quantification  of  the  macroeconomic  impact  of  integration  of  EU  financial  markets”,  Report  to  the 
European Commission. See also “EU Productivity and Competitiveness: an Industry Perspective. Can Europe 
Resume the Catching-up Process?” by Mary O’Mahony and Bart Van Ark, European Communities, 2003, for a 
comparison of the financial sector contribution to annual labour productivity growth in the United States and 
the euro area. 
5   See P. Asdrubali, B. Sørensen and O. Yosha, 1996, “Channels of interstate risk sharing: United States 1963-
1990”, Quarterly Journal of Economics Vol. 111. 
6   See S. Kalemli-Ozcan, B. Sørensen and O. Yosha, 2004, “Asymmetric shocks and risk sharing in a monetary 
union: Updated evidence and policy implications for Europe”, CEPR Discussion Paper No. 4463. 
7   “Financial integration in Europe”, ECB, 2007. 
8   C.  Kok-Sørensen  and  T.  Werner,  2006,  “Bank  interest  rate  pass-through  in  the  euro  area;  a  cross-country 
comparison”, ECB Working Paper No. 580. 
BIS Review 145/2007 
 3
remains  to  be  done,  for  example,  that  of  increasing  intra-euro  area  labour  mobility  and 
financial integration in retail banking.  
Adjustment processes in the euro area 
3.  
Economic and financial integration are prerequisites for the smooth functioning of the euro 
area. In a monetary union like the euro area, where regional monetary and exchange rate 
policies  are  no  longer  available  options,  it  is  important  to  ensure  that  market  adjustment 
mechanisms function properly. Such mechanisms are needed in order to prevent a country 
or  region,  after  experiencing  a  country-specific  shock,  from  entering  into  a  period  of 
protracted low growth and higher unemployment, or into a long period of overheating.  
There  are  many  factors  that  can  improve  the  resilience  of  the  euro  area  economies  to 
adverse  shocks.  In  this  context,  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  contributes  to  the  proper 
functioning  of  adjustment  mechanisms  within  the  euro  area  by  ensuring  price  stability,  by 
being  credible  in  ensuring  price  stability  and  therefore  by  anchoring  such  price  stability  in 
economic agents’ expectations and decisions. This anchoring of expectations is important for 
enabling  market  participants  to  set  suitable  prices.  And  let  me  add  that  the  best  way  to 
anchor  inflation  expectations  is  through  an  independent  and  accountable  central  bank. 
German history provides the best possible example of this. 
Well-designed  structural  policies  that  enhance  flexibility  in  product  and  labour  markets  are 
crucial  for  absorbing  shocks  more  effectively.  Needless  to  say,  the  responsibility  for  the 
implementation of such policies is in the hands of national governments, of parliaments, and 
of social partners. 
In this context, the Lisbon strategy is a fundamental and ambitious programme designed to 
draw Europe’s attention to the urgency of structural reforms. Such reforms improve long-term 
growth  prospects  in  the  euro  area  by,  on  the  one  hand,  positively  affecting  labour 
participation and, on the other, improving labour productivity growth through the promotion of 
innovation and technological change. We know very well that structural reforms often face 
both  resistance  from  economic  agents  and  sensitivities  in  public  opinion.  Therefore,  it  is 
essential to understand and communicate that the medium to long-term benefits of structural 
reforms will significantly outweigh any short-term cost. The ECB therefore strongly supports 
governments  in  their  implementation  of  structural  reforms.  For  instance,  in  Germany,  the 
labour  market  reforms,  implemented  a  few  years  ago,  have  significantly  contributed  to  job 
creation,  lower  unemployment  and  the  recent  economic  upswing.  It  is  essential  that  those 
results  are  not  jeopardised  by  interrupting  or  even  reversing  the  reform  process. 
Unemployment in Germany is still high and further reforms are required to better utilise the 
labour potential here in this country.  
More specifically, on the labour market, economic flexibility can be promoted by removing the 
institutional  barriers  to  flexible  wage  and  price-setting  mechanisms.  Let  me  stress  that 
governments  and  social  partners  share  responsibility  for  ensuring  that  wage  determination 
appropriately  takes  into  account  labour  market  conditions  at  the  industrial,  sectoral  and 
regional  level  and  does  not  jeopardise  competitiveness  and  employment.9  Governments 
should be aware that wage setting in the public sector very often serves as a role model for 
the private sector. Moreover, sufficient wage differentiation is needed to improve employment 
opportunities for less skilled workers and in regions or sectors with high unemployment. In 
this respect, excessive wage regulations are undermining job creation, in particular for young 
and  less  qualified  workers  as  well  as  for  all  those  who  face  problems  entering  the  labour 
                                                 
9   See,  for  example,  the  analysis  of  the  role  of  wage  developments  in  the  1970s  in  explaining  European 
unemployment in O. Blanchard, “The medium run”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, No. 2, 1997, pp. 
89-141. 
4 
 BIS Review 145/2007
market. In particular, setting minimum wages at levels which are not in line with productivity 
reduces the employment chances of less skilled workers and of the unemployed.  
As  seen  in  Germany  following  unification,  the  period  of  adjustment  can  be  painful,  but 
reforms  and  unit  labour  cost  moderation  are  finally  paying  off  and  they  are  contributing  to 
robust  growth.  I  remember  some  observers  arguing  several  years  ago  that  much  stronger 
wage increases were needed in Germany for higher growth. The recent evidence does not 
confirm  this  view.  On  the  contrary,  the  increased  competitiveness  seen  in  the  German 
economy  –  thanks  to  moderate  unit  labour  cost  developments  –  has  been  an  important 
prerequisite for the very strong job creation observed in recent years.  
Not only in Germany, but also in the euro area as a whole, employment growth has been 
impressive  in  the  eight  and  a  half  years  since  the  euro  changeover.  Employment  growth 
amounts  to  14.9  million  persons  in  the  euro  area,  as  opposed  to  only  3.8  million  in  the 
previous eight and a half years. 
Reforms  are  also  needed  in  product  markets.  Let  me  first  stress  the  importance  of  fully 
completing  the  Single  Market,  particularly  in  services  and  network  industries.  A  deeper 
integration  of  markets  would  stimulate  price  flexibility  by  fostering  competition  and  open 
product markets. Greater cross-border competition and the integration of markets across the 
euro area countries would contribute to lower prices. It could also enhance the adjustment 
processes in the individual countries in the event of asymmetric shocks or differing cyclical 
developments.  
It  is  also  important  to  promote  further  financial  market  integration  and  the  development  of 
readily  available  opportunities  for  portfolio  diversification.  This  would  help  to  attenuate  the 
impact of country-specific shocks, as I mentioned earlier. 
National authorities can make a substantial contribution to ensuring the proper functioning of 
adjustment mechanisms within the euro area by conducting a well-designed fiscal policy. As I 
have stressed on many occasions, the best contribution fiscal policy can make to the proper 
functioning of the euro area is by being sustainable and medium-term oriented, fully in line 
with the orientations of the Stability and Growth Pact. Moreover, fiscal policy can and should 
also focus on increasing the effectiveness and efficiency of the public sector itself through 
high quality expenditure and tax policies. Large and inefficient public sectors are putting a 
brake on growth by imposing a high tax burden on the economy and channelling resources 
into unproductive uses.  
In this respect, we welcome the efforts of the German government to reduce the regulatory 
burden  further.  In  addition,  the  latest  fiscal  developments  in  Germany  have  been 
encouraging.  For  the  first  time  since  German  reunification,  the  general  government  is 
expected to record a balanced budget, after having recorded a deficit above the Maastricht 
Treaty’s threshold of 3% of GDP over the period from 2002 to 2005. While partly based on 
revenue-increasing  measures,  such  as  the  increase  in  the  standard  VAT  rate  at  the 
beginning of the year, the success with fiscal consolidation can also be significantly attributed 
to expenditure restraint. Indeed, the share of government expenditure to GDP has dropped 
by 4½ percentage points over the past four years, reaching a level considerably lower than 
the euro area average. At the current juncture, it is important that the government stay on 
course, maintaining moderate expenditure growth while strengthening the incentives to work 
and  invest.  If  policies  continue  on  the  path  of  structural  expenditure  restraint  and  lasting 
improvement in fiscal balances, Germany could become a fiscal role model in the euro area 
and would be well prepared for fiscal challenges in the short and long run.  
It  is  particularly  important  that  countries  prepare  themselves  for  less  favourable  economic 
conditions and the rising fiscal burden, in the longer run, associated with population ageing. 
In this context, the gradual increase of the pension age in Germany is an important step in 
the right direction. It will help to reduce the large ageing-related fiscal burden on the younger 
and active generations. 
BIS Review 145/2007 
 5
Let  me  finally  mention  the  crucial  issue  of  competitiveness,  which  is  one  of  the  most 
important market-based adjustment mechanisms in a monetary union.10 Competitiveness is 
usually  assessed  on  the  basis  of  various  measures  of  cost  and  price  competitiveness11, 
complemented  by  accounting  for  some  “non-price”  factors,  such  as  the  quality  and  the 
technological content of the goods produced. 
A special feature of competitiveness differentials in the euro area is their persistence. Over 
the period between 1999 and 2006 there is a difference of up to around 25 percentage points 
between the euro area countries with the lowest and highest cumulative growth rates for unit 
labour costs for the economy as a whole. Germany and Austria belong to the first group of 
countries, while Ireland, Portugal and Greece belong to the second. Persistent differences in 
competitiveness  may  be  a  normal  phenomenon  when  an  economy  is  in  the  process  of 
sustainable  catching-up,  leading  to  a  higher  level  of  per  capita  income,  or  whenever  an 
economy  has  to  cope  with  structural  changes  or  past  shocks  of  any  nature  that  would  be 
reflected in a new relative price equilibrium. 
That  being  said,  persistent  losses  in  relative  cost  competitiveness  can  also  relate,  for 
instance, to a number of structural rigidities leading to inertia in price and wage formation. 
They  may  be  worrying  signals  for  an  economy,  indicating  a  need  for  caution.  Hence, 
developments in price and cost competitiveness across the euro area economies need to be 
closely monitored.  
It  is  important  for  all  parties  concerned  –  the  private  sector,  social  partners,  the  national 
public  authorities  –  to  contribute  to  flexibility  in  prices  and  wages.  In  this  manner, 
economically unjustified losses of competitiveness would be avoided and the risk of possibly 
protracted adjustment costs through the competitiveness channel minimised.  
Conclusion 
4.  
Ladies and gentlemen, let me conclude. The single currency and Economic and Monetary 
Union  have  been  an  impressive  and  remarkable  success,  perhaps  Europe’s  most 
remarkable since the Treaty of Rome was signed. It is up to all of us to consolidate this great 
success and ensure that it is reinforced in the years to come. As regards monetary policy, 
Europe  can  count  on  the  European  Central  Bank  and  the  Eurosystem  to  be  faithful  to  its 
primary  mandate  and  to  deliver  price  stability  in  the  medium  run  to  our  317  million  fellow 
citizens.  As  regards  other  policy  areas,  which  do  not  depend  on  the  central  bank,  let  me 
stress  the  three  areas  where  sound  policies  are  absolutely  of  the  essence:  sound  fiscal 
policies, fully in line with the Stability and Growth Pact; structural reform policies, fully in line 
with  the  Lisbon  strategy  and  the  achievement  of  the  Single  Market;  and  last  but  not  least 
appropriate monitoring of the relative cost competitiveness indicators in the euro area.  
It  is  encouraging  to  see  that  past  reforms  have  contributed  to  job  creation  and  reduced 
unemployment. It is important that governments continue in this direction and do not reverse 
past reforms just at the point when they are starting to bear fruit. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
                                                 
10   See,  for  an  extensive  discussion  of  adjustment  mechanisms,  “The  EU  economy  2006  review:  adjustment 
dynamics in the euro area – experiences and challenges”, European Commission, 2006 and F. P. Mongelli 
and J. L. Vega, “What effects is EMU having on the euro area and its member countries? An overview”, ECB 
Working Paper No. 599, 2006. 
11   In  2007,  the  ECB  started  to  publish  price  competitiveness  measures,  the  Harmonised  Competitiveness 
Indicators (HCIs). See the box entitled, “The introduction of harmonised competitiveness indicators for euro 
area countries”, in the February 2007 issue of the ECB’s Monthly Bulletin. 
6 
 BIS Review 145/2007
