Toshihiko Fukui: Developments in economic activity and prices in Japan 
and the conduct of monetary policy 
Summary of a speech by Mr Toshihiko Fukui, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting 
with business leaders, Osaka, 5 November 2007. 
 Introduction 
In  the  year  since  I  last  spoke  to  you  here,  Japan's  economy  has  continued  to  expand 
moderately,  with  a  virtuous  circle  of  growth  in  production,  income,  and  spending  in  place. 
Although there are uncertainties regarding overseas economies and global financial markets, 
the economy is likely to continue its moderate but sustained expansion. In the Outlook for 
Economic  Activity  and  Prices  (hereafter  the  Outlook  Report),  released  at  the  end  of  last 
month, we have provided an outlook that, toward fiscal 2008, our economy will grow, under 
stable prices, at an average pace of around 2 percent, which is somewhat above its potential 
growth rate. 
Today, I would like to explain the Bank of Japan's view regarding developments in economic 
activity and prices and the basic thinking behind its conduct of monetary policy. 
I.  
The current situation and the outlook for Japan's economy 
I would first like to touch upon the current situation of Japan's economy. 
Japan's  economy  as  a  whole  has  continued  to  expand  moderately,  although  the  pace  of 
improvement in the household sector has been somewhat slow relative to the strength in the 
corporate  sector.  Exports  to  the  United  States have  been  somewhat  weak,  but  the  overall 
exports have continued to increase steadily as overseas economies taken as a whole have 
kept  growing.  In  this  situation,  firms  have  continued  to  reinforce  their  capacity  to  supply 
products by increasing fixed capital with a view to capturing profit opportunities in overseas 
markets.  The  increase  in  corporate  activity  driven  by  strong  exports,  coupled  with  the 
extremely  accommodative  financial  conditions,  has  led  to  growth  in  business  fixed 
investment  among  a  wider  range  of  industries,  including  domestic  demand-oriented 
industries.  However,  since  business  fixed  investment  has  continued  to  increase  at  a  rapid 
pace for the last several years and the level of capital investment is already high, the pace of 
growth  is  likely  to  decelerate  gradually.  The  September  Tankan  (Short-Term  Economic 
Survey  of  Enterprises  in  Japan)  indicated  that  steady  growth  in  business  fixed  investment 
would  continue,  and  the  pace  of  increase  would  slow  gradually.  It  also  indicated  that 
corporate profits have been high, and business sentiment has remained generally favorable 
although some cautiousness was reported in certain sectors. 
The  positive  influence  of  the  strength  in  the  corporate  sector  is  feeding  through  into  the 
household sector slowly but steadily. Wages per worker have been somewhat weak mainly 
due to the following factors: firms, particularly small ones, have been restraining labor costs 
in  the  face  of  greater  exposure  to  global  competition  and  capital  market  discipline,  and 
increased  materials  prices;  and  with  the  high-salaried  baby-boomer  generation  retiring,  an 
increasing number of relatively low-salaried workers, such as new graduates and part-time 
workers, have been recruited. Meanwhile, the number of employees has been increasing at 
a  year-on-year  rate  of  around  1  percent,  and  employee  income  has  continued  rising 
moderately. At the same time, strength in the corporate sector has been filtering through into 
the household sector via various channels, for example, increased dividends. While spending 
on  clothes  and  other  daily  necessities  has  been  somewhat  weak,  growth  in  spending  in 
areas where firms have increasingly been providing new products and services designed to 
meet consumer needs has been high as evidenced by, for example, strong sales of digital 
BIS Review 132/2007 
 1
appliances.  Spending  behavior  has  thus  varied  with  the  type  of  goods  and  services,  but 
private consumption, taken as a whole, has remained firm. 
In  sum,  our  economy  is  currently  experiencing  moderate  expansion.  The  virtuous  circle  of 
growth in production, income, and spending is likely to remain intact against the background 
of the expansion of the global market and the extremely accommodative financial conditions, 
although there are uncertainties regarding overseas economies and global financial markets. 
In this situation, upward pressures on prices are likely to build up gradually. Looking at recent 
developments in price indices, while the domestic corporate goods price index (CGPI) has 
been rising mainly due to increases in international commodity prices, higher materials prices 
have  not  been  passed  through  to  the  retail  level  as  much  as  at  the  wholesale  level.  This 
seems to indicate that with intensifying competition among firms due partly to globalization 
and  deregulation,  many  firms  are  restraining  increases  in  prices  through  improvements  in 
productivity and various cost reduction measures. In this situation, the year-on-year rate of 
change in the consumer price index (CPI, excluding fresh food) has remained at around 0 
percent.  However,  if  the  economy  continues  to  grow  at  a  rate  exceeding  its  potential, 
resource utilization, namely in labor and production capacity, will increase further. In such a 
situation, it is expected that supply and demand conditions for consumer goods and services 
will further tighten and that this will exert upward pressure on consumer prices as more firms 
pass  on  higher  costs  to  consumers.  Moreover,  unit  labor  costs  (labor  costs  per  unit  of 
output), although currently still declining, are likely to stop falling as wages begin to show a 
gradual upward trend. 
With these understandings, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (excluding fresh food) 
is likely to be around 0 percent in the short run, but is expected gradually to rise in the longer 
run.  However,  the  pace  of  increase  is  likely  to  be  moderate,  given  that  the  sensitivity  of 
prices  to  changes  in  the  output  gap  is  declining  due  to  factors  such  as  economic 
globalization and deregulation. The rate of increase is projected to be around 0 percent in 
fiscal 2007 and around 0.5 percent in fiscal 2008. 
Developments in overseas economies 
II.  
I have so far outlined the most likely projection. However, any kind of projection is subject to 
upside and downside risks. 
The first risk concerns developments in overseas economies. 
The  global  economy  has  been  expanding  strongly,  registering  high  growth  of  around  5 
percent  since  2004.  It  is  the  first  time  since  the  early  1970s  that  the  global  economy  has 
registered  such  high  growth  over  a  period  of  this  length:  until  2003,  the  growth  rate  was 
around 3 to 4 percent. The high growth of the global economy is to a great extent attributable 
to  the  fact  that  emerging  economies  have  taken  off  one  after  another  and  have  been 
increasing their presence in the global economy. 
In the U.S. economy, the correction in the housing market is continuing, but business fixed 
investment and private consumption continue to be on a moderate increasing trend although 
the pace of increase is decelerating. If the housing correction does not spread to other areas 
of the economy and the economic slowdown is only moderate, the global economy is likely to 
continue to expand steadily with the slowing of U.S. economic growth being offset by high 
growth in emerging economies such as the BRICs. This was also the consensus view among 
delegates at the G-7 and International Monetary Fund meetings in October. 
As  you  all  know,  global  financial  markets  have  been  volatile  since  the  summer  due  to  the 
heightening of concern about the U.S. subprime mortgage problem. This recent volatility in 
global financial markets could be regarded as laxity in risk evaluation in the continued benign 
global  economic  and  financial  environment  being  reversed  by  market  forces  of  self-
correction. However, if the correction in the U.S. housing market intensifies or the effects of 
2 
 BIS Review 132/2007
swings  in  financial  markets  become  unexpectedly  widespread,  private  consumption  and 
business  fixed  investment  may  become  weaker  than  expected  due  to  the  negative  wealth 
effect,  credit  tightening,  and  deterioration  in  business  and  consumer  sentiment,  thereby 
leading to further deceleration in U.S. economic growth. Although the European economy is 
likely to expand steadily, growth may slow depending on the effect of volatile global financial 
markets on financial conditions. If these risks related to the U.S. and European economies 
were  to  materialize,  this  may,  depending  on  the  extent,  affect  growth  of  other  economies 
such  as  emerging  economies,  and  this  could  cause  global  economic growth  to  be  weaker 
than expected. 
In view of the high rate of growth that the global economy has maintained, attention should 
also be paid to inflationary pressures. In the United States, inflationary pressures may not 
subside as a result of higher resource utilization, namely in labor and production capacity, 
coupled  with  developments  in  crude  oil  prices.  The  Chinese  economy  continues  to  grow 
strongly, but there are signs of overheating, particularly in fixed asset investment, indicating 
that economic activity and prices may deviate upward from the expected path. Because of 
the  strong  growth  of  the  global  economy  and  geopolitical  risks,  international  commodity 
prices such as crude oil prices remain elevated, and they may affect the global economy and 
the price situation depending on future developments in these prices. 
Thus,  there  is  a  risk  that  disruptive  changes  in  overseas  economies  or  global  financial 
markets  may  affect  Japan's  economy  through  changes  in  exports  and  imports,  corporate 
profits, and financial market conditions such as foreign exchange rates and long-term interest 
rates. 
Swings in financial and economic activity 
III.  
The  second  risk  concerns  possible  larger  swings  in  financial  and  economic  activity  as  a 
result of a misallocation of resources under continuing accommodative financial conditions. 
Some argue that recent developments in yen carry trades are a sign of such a potential risk. 
In Japan, there have so far been only limited effects on financial conditions stemming from 
the  U.S.  subprime  mortgage  problem  and  the  subsequent  volatility  in  overseas  financial 
markets, and the lending attitude of financial institutions has remained positive. The issuing 
environment  for  CP  and  corporate  bonds  has  been  favorable.  Japan's  current  economic 
circumstances, with the financial positions of both firms and financial institutions improving 
and  real  interest  rates  remaining  very  low,  are  such  as  potentially  to  encourage  assertive 
financial and economic activity. According to the Prefectural Land Price Survey released in 
September, the rate of increase in land prices in the three major metropolitan areas (Tokyo, 
Osaka, and Nagoya) has accelerated against the background of increases in redevelopment 
projects and steady demand for office space. These developments may also cause activity of 
both firms and financial institutions to accelerate. If greater assertiveness should be based 
on  optimistic  assumptions  regarding  future  sales  and  profits,  financing  costs,  foreign 
exchange rates, and asset prices, the result could well be a misallocation of resources in the 
long  run  as  agents  become  over-extended  in  financial  markets  or  pour  funds  and  other 
resources  into  inefficient  economic  activities.  Such  developments  may  push  up  economic 
growth in the short run, but lead to later downward adjustments and hamper the sustainability 
of economic growth. 
Sensitivity of prices to changes in the output gap 
IV.  
These  upside  and  downside  risks  to  the  outlook  for  economic  activity  may  affect  prices 
should  they  materialize,  but  there  are  also  upside  and  downside  risks  unique  to  price 
developments that could cause prices to deviate from the projection. 
The sensitivity of prices to changes in the output gap has been declining in recent years. This 
tendency has been taken into account in our projection for prices mentioned earlier, but the 
BIS Review 132/2007 
 3
degree  of  decline  is  uncertain  and  the  sensitivity  of  prices  may  turn  out  to  be  lower  than 
assumed  in  the  projection.  If  factors  strongly  restraining  wage  growth  remain  despite 
prolonged  economic  expansion,  downward  pressure  on  prices  from  labor  costs  would 
persist.  Moreover,  if  the  positive  influence  of  the  strength  in  the  corporate  sector  feeds 
through into the household sector more slowly than expected due to sluggish wage growth, 
supply and demand conditions for consumer goods and services may not improve as much 
as  the  output  gap  suggests.  In  such  a  situation,  prices  may  not  be  responsive  to  the 
improvement in the economic situation. 
On  the  other  hand,  if  the  economy  continues  to  grow  at  a  pace  exceeding  its  potential 
through fiscal 2008, it is likely that the utilization of resources such as labor and production 
capacity will rise further and the output gap will show further tightening of supply and demand 
conditions.  Inflation  expectations,  which  have  been  low  and  stable,  may  rise  with  higher 
resource utilization, particularly in labor, along with increased prices of crude oil and other 
international  commodities.  Moreover,  although  firms  are  likely  to  continue  to  restrain  labor 
costs, they may change their attitude with the aim of hiring or retaining skilled workers. These 
potential changes would exert upward pressure on prices. 
Conduct of monetary policy 
V.  
Next, I would like to elaborate on the future conduct of monetary policy, keeping in mind the 
projection for economic activity and prices and the possibility that they may deviate from the 
projection. 
The  Bank  assesses  the  economic  and  price  situation  from  two  perspectives  and  then 
outlines  its  thinking  on  the  future  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  taking  account  of  the 
"understanding  of  medium-  to  long-term  price  stability"  (in  numerical  terms,  a  range 
approximately between 0 and 2 percent in the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI), which 
is the level of inflation that each member of the Policy Board understands, when conducting 
monetary policy, as being consistent with price stability over the medium to long term. 
To  further  your  understanding  of  the  two  perspectives,  I  would  like  to  assess  the 
developments  in  economic  activity  and  prices  that  I  have  explained  based  on  these  two 
perspectives.  The  first  perspective  involves  assessing  whether  the  most  likely  outlook  for 
economic  activity  and  prices  will  remain  on  the  path  of  sustainable  growth  under  price 
stability.  As  I  said  earlier,  it  is  likely  that  Japan's  economy  will  continue  its  sustained 
expansion with a virtuous circle of growth in production, income, and spending in place, and 
this is the Bank's baseline scenario. The year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (excluding 
fresh food) is likely to be around 0 percent in the short run, but is expected gradually to rise 
in the longer run. In sum, under the first perspective, we are of the view that, through fiscal 
2008, Japan's economy is likely to realize sustainable growth under price stability. 
The second perspective extends the time horizon and assesses the risks, taking account of 
the cost incurred should they materialize, even though the probability of this happening may 
be  low.  Since  I  have  already  referred  to  these  risks  as  possible  upward  and  downward 
deviations  of  the  economy  and  prices,  let  me  review  these  risks  briefly.  There  are 
uncertainties  regarding  overseas  economies  and  global  financial  markets  and  if  their 
situation changes significantly, Japan's economy will inevitably be affected. There is also a 
possibility  that  prices  will  continue  not  to  rise  despite  the  improvement  in  economic 
conditions. Lastly, attention should continue to be paid to the risk that the stimulative effect of 
monetary policy may be further amplified with the improved prospects for economic activity 
and prices. If, for instance, the expectation takes hold that interest rates will remain low for a 
long  time  regardless  of  developments  in  economic  activity  and  prices,  this  may  result  in 
medium-  to  long-term  risks  of  larger  swings  in  the  economy  and  inflation  rate  through 
misallocation of funds and resources. 
4 
 BIS Review 132/2007
I  would  now  like  to  talk  about  the  Bank's  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  bearing  in  mind  the 
assessment  above.  The  Bank's  basic  thinking  has  been  that  (1)  given  the  extremely 
accommodative  financial  conditions,  the  level  of  interest  rates  is  to  be  raised  if  Japan's 
economy is to follow a path of sustainable growth under price stability, and (2) the pace of 
increase  in  interest  rates  should  be  determined  in  accordance  with  improvements  in  the 
economic  and  price  situation  without  any  predetermined  view.  So  far,  weak  inflationary 
pressures  have  given  the  Bank  latitude  in  conducting  monetary  policy.  The  actual  interest 
rate adjustments have therefore been slow based on a thorough assessment of the future 
path of the economy and prices and its likelihood, as well as both upside and downside risks. 
The  Bank's  basic  thinking  in  this  regard  will  remain  the  same  in  the  conduct  of  future 
monetary policy. That is, while confirming that the Japanese economy remains likely to follow 
a  path  of  sustainable  growth  under  price  stability  and  assessing  relevant  upside  and 
downside risk factors, the Bank will adjust the level of interest rates gradually in accordance 
with improvements in the economic and price situation. We believe that, from the long-term 
perspective, the conduct of monetary policy in such a manner will prevent the risk of larger 
swings in economic activity and prices from materializing and will help to realize sustainable 
growth under price stability. 
Conclusion 
Japan's economy is expanding moderately. Corporate activity has been increasing due partly 
to  strong  exports,  as  can  be  seen  here  in  the  Kansai  region,  and  the  positive  influence  is 
clearly spreading throughout the wider economy as evident in the declining unemployment 
rate.  In  order  for  Japan's  economy  to  continue  sustainable  growth  in  the  face  of  various 
challenges  including  the  declining  population,  it  is  crucial  for  all  regions  and  industries  to 
persist  with  their  efforts  to  innovate.  Since,  along  with  the  Kanto  and  Tokai  regions,  the 
Kansai region is pulling Japan's economy forward, I fully anticipate that your originality and 
inventiveness will continue to play a leading role. As for the Bank, we will continue to support 
your efforts through our conduct of monetary policy. 
BIS Review 132/2007 
 5
