Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: Globalisation and public perceptions 
Dinner speech by Mr Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central Bank, at the joint meeting of the GEPA-GPA-GSPA, Brussels, 3 December 2007. 
 Introduction1  
1. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It’s pleasure for me to be with you tonight to talk about a fascinating subject: globalisation.  
In  accepting  this  invitation  a  few  weeks  ago,  and  having  just  read  Ed  Leamer’s  wonderful 
survey  of  The  World  is  Flat  in  the  Journal  of  Economic  Literature2,  I  tried  myself  to  fully 
exploit the benefits that globalisation offers us, according to economists. I thus sent an e-mail 
to Bangalore, India, asking someone to draft a dinner speech on globalisation. The following 
morning a well-written piece appeared in my inbox, with an invoice of little more than €100 
(Bangalore has also started invoicing in euros!). I was happy. After all, the time it would take 
me to write a 30 minutes speech on globalisation would certainly exceed €100! But then I 
asked myself if you would be happy. Would you invite me next time? Maybe next time you 
would  call  Bangalore  directly,  and  perhaps  also  Bollywood  to  hire  an  actor  to  deliver  the 
speech. My anxiety increased, and I started working hard on my speech, together with my 
collaborators  in  the  ECB,  to  try  maintaining  my  competitive  advantage.  In  the  meantime  I 
understood why people are so concerned about globalisation!  
I would like to address the issue of globalisation from the perspective of the public opinion, 
which seems to be quite different from that of economists like you and me. For economists, 
who focus on economic performance, it is difficult not to be enthusiastic about globalisation. 
Let's consider a few facts: the world economy has rarely grown as strongly as in the past 
decade, despite several shocks. In the emerging economies, hundreds of millions of people 
have  been  lifted  from  poverty  and,  most  noticeably  in  China,  a  middle  class  is  appearing. 
Since the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989, the number of people engaged in market activities 
and  no  longer  trapped  in  a  subsistence  economy  has  practically  doubled,  from  1.5  to  3 
billion.  
Globalisation is, however, not only an economic phenomenon. It has many facets, each of 
which is complex in itself: there is the socioeconomic dimension, the environmental aspect, 
questions of national identity, and, of course, the highly sensitive issue of migration. It is also, 
to  an  important  extent,  a  cultural  phenomenon.  Nevertheless,  the  economic  aspect  of 
globalisation remains the most pressing aspect in the public opinion. In my speech today I 
will try to look more deeply into that perspective.  
I should also say from the outset that these reflections will certainly not lead me to call for a 
stop  to  globalisation.  None  of  us  wants  to  see  a  repetition  of  the  1930s.  The  challenge 
however remains to minimising the costs so as to increase acceptance by our societies. I will 
not try to offer definite prescriptions; many people in this audience are much better qualified 
than me to do just that. Instead, I will try to raise some issues that I see as problematic or still 
unresolved, and hope to stimulate the debate at tomorrow’s conference. 
I’d  like  to  touch  upon  three  issues;  first,  public  perceptions  of  globalisation;  second,  the 
evidence on costs and benefits of globalisation, with particular reference to the euro area; 
                                                 
1   The  views  expressed  reflect  only  those  of  the  author.  I  thank  R.  Anderton  and  L.  Stracca  for  input  and 
comments as well as A. Mehl and R. Straub for providing background analysis. 
2   See Leamer (2007). 
BIS Review 144/2007 
 1
third, the opportunities and challenges raised by financial globalisation. In my conclusions, I 
will also elaborate on the role of Europe in this process. 
Perceptions of globalisation 
2.  
How does the public perceive globalisation? I would like to underline 4 “stylised facts” that 
can be drawn from existing analyses.3  
First, Europeans are more inclined to view globalisation with concern. Taking the EU as a 
whole, public opinion is evenly split between supporters and opponents of globalisation. The 
situation varies considerably across countries. Anxiety about globalisation is very noticeable 
in  France  (but  is  also  high  in  Greece),  in  particular  in  relation  to  its  impact  on  jobs.  By 
contrast, support is high in Scandinavian countries, such as Denmark and Sweden. Support 
for globalisation overall seems stronger in the rest of the world. For example, in the United 
States a majority of the population considers globalisation as inherently good.  
Second,  cultural  competence,  i.e.  the  ability  to  interact  effectively  with  people  of  different 
cultures and education, are inversely related to the degree of concern about globalisation. 
Indeed, support is strongest among high-skilled workers in mature economies, while political 
orientation of both skilled and unskilled workers does not appear to matter decisively. The 
relative lack of support for globalisation among lower-skilled workers and the least educated 
could indicate that they are uncertain about the general costs and benefits of globalisation, 
but  see  the  individual  costs  and  benefits  more  clearly,  perhaps  more  rationally.  Concerns 
about  the  economic  costs  of  globalisation  for  certain  groups  in  society  have  led  to  the 
creation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund, an EU initiative which aims to help 
workers made redundant as a result of changing global trade patterns to find another job as 
quickly as possible. I should also note that, generally speaking, surveys indicate that people 
in  the  EU  are  not  protectionist,  though  they  are  somewhat  more  so  in  France.  However, 
Europeans  are  more  inclined  to  support  redistribution,  and  this  is  in  keeping  with  recent 
results in the literature indicating that Europeans are more concerned about inequality more 
than the Americans.4  
Third,  there  is  no  prima  facie  evidence  that  measures  of  reported  happiness  or  “Life 
satisfaction” are negatively affected by globalisation. Regression analysis suggests a positive 
relationship  between  “Life  satisfaction”  in  OECD  countries  in  the  mid-2000s  against  the 
ranking of each OECD country in a Globalization Index (See Figure 1).5 More globalisation 
seems to make people happier, at least according to this simple bivariate evidence, although 
the correlation could also mean that happier countries tend to become more globalised.6  
Fourth, and this an important issue to which I will turn later in my speech, EU citizens believe 
that globalisation is influenced far more by the EU than by national governments. Indeed, it is 
unlikely  that  any  European  country  can  have  sufficient  weight  to  influence  the  course  of 
globalisation and the “rules of the game” of the global economy. Only the EU as a whole can 
                                                 
3  
I  draw  here 
including  Eurobarometer  (2007),  CCFR  (2006)  and 
WorldPublicOpinion  &  CCFR  (2007).  Note  that  the  methodology  across  opinion  is  not  necessarily  directly 
comparable. 
from  a  range  of  opinion  polls, 
4   See Alesina, Di Tella and MacCulloch (2004). They show that concern for inequality is high among the poor 
and the leftist in Europe, while it is restricted to rich leftists in the United States. 
5   This is the A.T. Kearney/FOREIGN POLICY Globalization Index, which tracks and assesses changes in four 
key components of global integration, incorporating measures such as trade and investment flows, movement 
of  people  across  borders,  volumes  of  international  telephone  traffic,  Internet  usage,  and  participation  in 
international organizations. The data used refer to 2006. 
6   There  is  also  evidence  in  the  literature  that  trade  openness  positively  contributes  to  Life  Satisfaction;  see 
Bjornskov, Dreher and Fischer (2007). 
2 
 BIS Review 144/2007
have enough “punch” to turn things in the direction that European citizens want. This creates 
a “demand” for more “Europe” in the globalisation process, to which Europe does not seem 
to be responding in the right way. I will come back to this later.  
In  my  opinion,  policy-makers  (including  central  banks)  have  to  take  these  perceptions 
seriously. In economics, perceptions shape reality. It’s therefore important to understand how 
globalisation, and the concerns that it generates in households and companies, affects the 
latter’s behaviour.  
Let me give you an example provided by Robert Shiller.7 Suppose that a young person is 
uncertain whether to pursue a career in which she has real talent but which is fraught with 
risks, say, as a molecular biologist, or something less risky but  with lower value  added. A 
highly  uncertain  economic  environment,  with  rapid  technological  progress  and  the  looming 
prospect of offshoring naturally increases risks for individuals. If such a risk is perceived as 
falling entirely on the shoulders of individuals, a bad equilibrium may be reached, one where 
high  value-added  jobs  that  require  long-term  investment,  such  as  molecular  biologist,  are 
shunned, while jobs less threatened by off-shoring (say, hairdresser or restaurant owner) are 
in  greater  demand.8  The  hypothesis  is  that  economic  uncertainty  and  a  high  degree  of 
competition may have an adverse effect on jobs and tasks that require long-term investment. 
This may lead to under-investment in society.  
I raised this issue with Ned Phelps a few days ago, as we met at a conference. He looked at 
me a bit puzzled and said: “It sounds like a very European way of thinking!”. I guess I should 
turn the issue back to you.  
Mobility is another issue that raises concerns in our societies. In the global economy, being 
mobile definitely provides a competitive edge. In the European Union, only a tiny fraction of 
its workers work in another EU country and there are many obstacles to such mobility, not 
last the portability of the pension regime. Another issue that is present in the public mind is 
the share of wages and profits in total income, which has been shifting in favour of profits in 
the past decade on a global basis, though it is not beyond dispute that the two phenomena 
are related.9 This creates the risk that globalisation is seen by the public as something which 
only  benefits  the  corporate  world  (and  their  top  managers),  while  in  fact  consumers  and 
workers should be the main beneficiaries.  
Again, these are issues that policy-makers, including central bankers, have to recognise and 
take  seriously.  We  need  to  acknowledge,  in  particular,  that  globalisation  produces  both 
winners and losers, at least temporarily. Moreover, as I will argue, even winning in absolute 
terms but losing in relative terms might be problematic, and can create a powerful backlash 
against  globalisation.  An  efficient  system  to  protect  individuals  from  the  negative  fallout  of 
globalisation and encourage them to be entrepreneurial and risk-taking is therefore essential.  
Let me now turn to the economics of globalisation and, in particular, to the existing empirical 
evidence. 
3.  
Globalisation, technological innovation and income distribution: the evidence 
The effects of globalisation on the euro area: a “redux” 
3.1  
I would like to briefly review the effects of globalisation on the euro area economy. But before 
I do so, we should remind ourselves that there are various other forces at play, in addition to 
                                                 
7   See Shiller (2003). 
8   See Mukoyama and Sahin 2004) for similar considerations in an agency context. 
9   On the global nature of the rise in the profit share see Ellis and Smith (2007). 
BIS Review 144/2007 
 3
globalisation, such as Economic and Monetary Union and the launch of the euro, along with 
EU  policies  such  as  the  Single  Market  and  also  new  information  and  communication 
technology  which  has  not  only  reduced  the  costs  of  transporting  goods  and  information 
across the globe but also created new international production and supply chain options. Of 
course,  globalisation  and  these  other  economic  forces  are  intertwined  and  their  individual 
effects are difficult to distinguish.  
In  respect  of  the  euro  area,  globalisation  has  clearly  stimulated  the  growth  of  its  external 
trade as well as the flows and stocks of its foreign assets and liabilities. The trade openness 
has  increased  markedly  over  time,  especially  since  the  early  1990s,  and  is  growing  more 
rapidly than that of either the US or Japan. Meanwhile, the ongoing strength of capital flows 
is reflected in the considerable rise in outward and inward FDI, which has virtually doubled as 
a percentage of GDP since 1999.  
In particular, globalisation has been driving the strong growth of extra-euro area imports, with 
outsourcing  to  low-cost  countries  and  the  internationalisation  of  production  playing  an 
important  role.  Over  the  past  six  years,  the  share  accounted  for  by  low-cost  countries  in 
extra-euro  area  manufacturing  imports  has  increased  from  just  over  one-third  to  almost  a 
half.  Among  those  countries,  China  and  the  EU’s  new  Member  States  were  the  main 
contributors  to  the  increase,  with  their  shares  roughly  doubling  since  the  mid-1990s.  One 
benefit  of  the  relatively  cheaper  imports  from  these  low-cost  countries  is  that  they  are 
estimated to have dampened euro area manufacturing import prices by about 2 percentage 
points between 1996 and 2004. In addition to such direct effects, other more indirect effects 
are  also  putting  downward  pressures  on  prices.  For  example,  increased  imports  from  low-
cost  countries  may  have  moderated  import  prices  and  mark-ups  on  goods  imported  from 
high-cost  trade  partners,  as  well  as  put  downward  competitive  pressures  on  euro  area 
domestic profit margins, prices and wages. Indeed, despite the significant upward pressure 
of globalisation on oil and other commodity prices, there is evidence that the joint effect of all 
the various globalisation-related impacts on prices has been mildly disinflationary so far.  
Globalisation, inequality and the “race to the bottom” 
3.2  
At the same time, some of these globalisation mechanisms – particularly those relating to the 
labour market – are causing concerns. For instance, as competition from low-wage countries 
increases,  the  bargaining  power  of  domestic  workers  and  unions  may  have  weakened 
somewhat, as a result of fears of a potential relocation of production abroad. This may have 
fostered wage moderation in industrial economies and partly explain the rise in inequality in 
many developed countries.  
Between 1990 and the early 2000s, some measures of income inequality, such as the Gini 
coefficient,  increased,  though  the  picture  varies  substantially  from  country  to  country  and 
does not appear to be a generalised phenomenon (with an increase in the UK, China and the 
US, no change in India, and falling inequality in France and Brazil).10 However, the finding of 
a generalised increased in income inequality in the last decade is not uncontroversial in the 
literature.  
The  impact  of  globalisation  over  the  past  20  years  has  differed  across  countries,  also 
depending  on  the  structure  of  labour  markets.  It  seems  that  labour  market  adjustment  to 
globalisation  –  characterised  by  increased  competition  from  low-wage  countries  –  is 
occurring mainly via changes in the relative wages of the lower-skilled in the flexible labour 
markets  of  the  US  and  the  UK,  while  the  more  rigid  labour  markets  of  continental  Europe 
have primarily resulted in declines in the relative employment of the less-skilled in the euro 
area  countries.  In  any  event,  the  simple  bivariate  cross-country  evidence,  at  least  among 
                                                 
10   For a recent survey of these trends, see IMF (2007). 
4 
 BIS Review 144/2007
OECD countries (see Figure 2), suggests that more globalised countries have less, not more, 
income inequality. Again, I should stress that this is just prima facie evidence. I am not sure 
that  these  correlations  survive  in  a  multivariate  setting  and  when  subjected  to  rigorous 
econometric tests. 
As I said earlier, it is very difficult to disentangle the effects of globalisation and outsourcing 
on wages from that of other factors, such as the impact of skill-biased technological change 
on labour demand. Indeed, most of the empirical work on this issue suggests that the main 
reason for the decline in demand for less-skilled labour is due to technology rather than the 
trade-related impacts of globalisation. Nonetheless, globalisation and technological progress 
go hand in hand and, for the public, the former is much easier to criticise than the latter, for 
obvious reasons.  
Concerns  about  a  link  between  globalisation  and  income  inequality  can  simultaneously 
explain two stylised facts in the public’s perception of globalisation. First, it can explain why 
globalisation  is  viewed  sceptically  in  developed  countries,  especially  by  the  less  well-off, 
despite the fact that even they are better off in absolute terms. In fact, there is substantial 
empirical  evidence  indicating  that  in  developed  countries  people  pay  more  attention  to 
relative  income,  possibly  more  so  than  absolute  income.11  Those  who  lose  out  from 
globalisation in relative terms may resent it, even if they gain in absolute terms. Second, it 
explains  why  support  for  globalisation  is  higher  in  developing  countries,  where  arguably 
concern  for  absolute  (rather  than  relative)  income  should  be  larger  (since  income  is  just 
above, and in some cases still below, the subsistence level).  
Competitiveness concerns are also growing on the exports side as the emergence of global 
trade players, such as China, has resulted in a shrinking of the market shares of advanced 
economies, such as the euro area. Nevertheless, extra-euro area export volumes have been 
growing above their historical trend in recent years due to the persistently robust growth in 
foreign  demand  which,  in  turn,  seems  to  be  driven  by  globalisation  forces.  However, 
competitiveness  is  a  key  issue  and  important  questions  remain  on  how  exposed  the  euro 
area and its members are to competition from emerging economies. Competitiveness may, in 
turn, depend in part on how closely the specialisation of the euro area resembles that of new 
global competitors such as China. On the whole, euro area exporters tend to specialise in 
medium-tech  sectors  but  seem  somewhat  over-weighted  in  labour-intensive  product 
segments where China has a natural comparative advantage. Meanwhile, the US and Japan 
seem to have responded to globalisation by increasing high-tech exports, which may be the 
path the euro area will have to take in the future.  
The increasing importance of competitiveness in this environment also raises concerns that 
globalisation is triggering a “race to the bottom” between countries and putting pressure on 
governments  to  reduce  job  protection,  welfare  benefits  and  social  insurance.  At  the  same 
time,  globalisation  and  the  liberalisation  of  trade  and  factor  mobility  may  also  erode  the 
income  and  capital  tax  bases  by  making  both  capital  and  high-skilled  workers  more 
internationally  mobile.  This  supposed  diminishing  of  the  powers  of  nations  to  finance  and 
carry out “welfare state” functions comes just at the time when globalisation may be exposing 
economic  agents  –  particularly  the  low-skilled  –  to  more  risk  and  job  insecurity  and  when 
income redistribution may become more necessary. Hence, some argue that globalisation-
induced  reductions  in  social  expenditure  are  also  fostering  the  growth  of  inequality  in 
disposable incomes in developed nations. 
Much of the empirical work on this issue finds no strong evidence of globalisation-induced 
changes  in  either  the  level  or  composition  of  public-spending.12  There  is  evidence,  if 
                                                 
11   See, e.g. Clark et al. (2007). 
12   See, e.g., Dreher, Sturm and Urspring (2006). 
BIS Review 144/2007 
 5
anything,  of  a  slightly  positive  relationship  between  social  expenditure  as  a  share  of  GDP 
and  the  degree  of  Globalization  in  OECD  countries  (See  Figure  3).  The  Scandinavian 
countries,  for  example,  are  in  the  top  league  of  all  measures  of  globalisation  but  are  also 
characterised  by  very  high  social  spending  (though  this  “model”  has  recently  been  under 
some pressure).  
A  recent  study  on  these  issues  has  argued  that  EMU  may  be  associated  with  higher 
inequality in disposable incomes in the euro area, possibly due in part to greater competition 
from economic integration, but it seems largely explained by the lower social spending in the 
euro  area  countries  under  EMU.13  Interestingly,  the  same  research  claims  that  EMU  has 
resulted  in  improved  economic  performance  which  may  partly  reflect  smaller  inefficiency 
losses from redistribution effects on effort incentives.  
These  issues  go  to  the  heart  of  EMU.  On  the  one  hand,  greater  competition  and  the 
implementation of structural reforms in product and labour markets under EMU means that 
changes in supply and demand for various skill groups will be reflected in a widening of wage 
differentials  between  various  types  of  labour  in  the  euro  area  countries.  This  greater 
responsiveness  of  wages  to  market  forces  will  benefit  the  euro  area  by  making  it  more 
competitive  in  the  long  run.  On  the  other  hand,  globalisation  and  greater  competition  will 
cause some dislocation and require relatively more adjustment for some sectors and workers 
than for others. Indeed, survey evidence suggests that the perceived labour market risk is 
higher for workers in more internationalised sectors (Scheve and Slaughter 2004) and that 
opposition  to  economic  integration  is  stronger  from  individuals  who  are  theoretically  more 
likely to be damaged by it – such as low-skilled workers in countries that receive low-skilled 
migration inflows.  
Bearing in mind these points and issues, the way forward must be to continue implementing 
structural  reforms  in  product  and  labour  markets  so  that  the  euro  area  countries  can  fully 
reap the benefits of both globalisation and EMU. A more flexible euro area economy would 
also facilitate innovation and help exporters improve competitiveness and move more rapidly 
into the most appropriate sectors and products. Policies which facilitate education, training 
and both job search and job mobility will also strengthening the euro area economy.  
Financial globalisation 
4.  
Let me also touch briefly on financial globalisation. One of the most impressive aspects of 
globalisation is the spectacular rise in cross-border financial flows. Between the mid-1980s 
and  2004,  the  sum  of  mature  economies’  foreign  assets  and  liabilities  as  a  share  of  GDP 
grew threefold. In theory, this should have resulted in an improvement in the global allocation 
of  capital,  enhancing  risk  sharing  across  countries  and  consumption  stabilisation  vis-à-vis 
income shocks. As you know, not all of this financial globalisation is working in the textbook 
way. While FDI flows are generally in the right direction, that is “downhill” (from developed, 
capital-rich  countries  to  emerging,  capital-poor  countries),  that  is  not  the  case  for  portfolio 
flows, that tend to move “uphill”. This has created a rather paradoxical situation, in which the 
world’s  richest  economy  maintains  a  large  current  account  deficit  largely  financed  by  poor 
countries.  
Research  has  revealed  that  not  all  countries  benefit  in  the  same  way  from  financial 
globalisation;  in  order  to  fully  reap  its  benefits,  a  country  must  have  strong  institutions,  in 
particular  a  sound  legal  and  supervisory  system.14  This  is  all  the  more  so  as  financial 
globalisation  is  inevitably  associated  with  financial  innovation,  to  the  point  that  the  two 
phenomena overlap and become hard to distinguish. The rising importance of certain non-
                                                 
13   Bertola (2007). 
14   See Kose, Prasad, Rogoff, and Wie (2006). 
6 
 BIS Review 144/2007
bank intermediaries, such as hedge funds and private equity, and new financial instruments, 
such  as  structured  products,  has  taken  place  on  a  global  scale.  Moreover,  financial 
globalisation  makes  individual  financial  markets  and  systems  more  vulnerable  to  cross-
border contagion, and we have a sobering reminder of this in the current market turmoil.  
The  combination  of  globalisation  and  innovation  in  finance  has  contributed  to  a  growing 
asymmetry of information in capital markets, at least in some segments of the market.15 This 
is  particularly  the  case  for  structured  products,  which  often  originate  in  one  country,  are 
repackaged in another, and sold in a third. It is fair to say that not only retail investors, but 
also bank and financial managers do not have the financial education, the resources and the 
time to understand all the risks inherent in these types of product.  
Asymmetric information entails two different types of risk. The first type is that the informed 
party takes advantage of its information lead at the expense of the less informed. This has 
obvious implications in terms of income and wealth (re-)distribution from the less informed 
party (say, a retail investor) to the more informed one (say, financial industry managers), a 
risk that is certainly heightened by the complexity of the financial products in question. The 
second  type  is  that,  once  this  redistribution  occurs,  a  strong  backlash  is  created,  with  the 
public turning against all actors and products in that market. On the other hand, the financial 
industry  has  a  special  status  peculiar  precisely  because  of  the  asymmetric  nature  of  the 
information  it  processes  and  the  systemic  implications  of  its  developments.  This  is  why, 
differently from others, the financial industry is supervised by public authorities.  
Financial  turmoils,  such  as  the  one  we  are  currently  experiencing,  expose  financial 
globalisation  and  the  policies  implemented  to  govern  it  to  criticism.  In  particular,  some 
observers  criticize  the  fact  that  policies  are  implemented  to  support  the  financial  system, 
while similar policies are denied to other sectors when facing similarly critical moments. The 
reason  for  such  a  support  is  precisely  that  the  financial  sector  is  special  and  requires 
regulation  and  supervision.  This  reasoning,  however,  is  based  on  two  principles.  First,  the 
supervisory  authorities  are  able  to  distinguish  between  sound  and  unsound  institutions. 
Second,  the  unsound  institutions,  and  in  particular  the  managers  responsible  for  unsound 
decisions, will not be helped and will be replaced. 
One can question whether these two basic principles are being fully respected in the current 
turnmoil. First, it has proven very difficult for supervisory authorities to assess the soundness 
of institutions. Authorities have basically relied on the self-assessment of financial institutions 
and  their  publicly  disclosed  accounts,  without  the  possibility  of  questioning  them.  In  fact, 
financial institutions themselves seem to have had, at some point, little knowledge about their 
own situation, and the assumptions underlying their own disclosures have not always been 
fully transparent. Market participants are evidently still full of doubts about the soundness of 
their counterparties, as reflected in the still very large credit spreads in the money market. It 
appears  that  supervisory  authorities  do  not  have  much  more  information  than  the  other 
market participants on the creditworthiness of major institutions. 
Second, those responsible for wrong investment decisions do not seem so far to having been 
penalised substantially, in a way that will discourage similar behaviour in the future. Several 
top  managers  have  stepped  down  from  their  positions  with  huge  payment  compensation. 
Broader responsibilities for internal risk management and control, in particular within financial 
institutions’  boards,  do  not  seem  to  having  been  fully  scrutinised.  It  might  be  too  early  to 
judge,  but  one  of  the  causes  of  the  recent  turnmoil  has  certainly  been  poor  internal 
governance. Unless this issue is properly addressed the risk of creating moral hazard cannot 
be underestimated. Furthermore, it would be difficult to accept that those who will suffer the 
most from this phase of turbulence will be those that trusted the financial institutions’ advice 
                                                 
15   Of course, financial globalisation and innovation have also contributed to create new safe assets, notably for 
savers in emerging economies, thereby alleviating asymmetric information. 
BIS Review 144/2007 
 7
on their savings or borrowing, while those that provided the advice and made the investment 
will be able to walk away with only their bonuses affected. This would validate the concerns, 
that already exist, about the effects of financial globalisation on the concentration of financial 
wealth  worldwide.  The  distribution  of  financial  wealth  is  one  order  of  magnitude  more 
unequal compared with income.16  
A final lesson from the current turmoil is that the complexities of finance in a globalised world 
call for more financial education, especially for the poorer members of society. The degree of 
financial literacy of the population, according to the evidence, raises concern as to people’s 
ability to reap the benefits of globalisation. These are matters which central banks and other 
policy-making authorities should have a keen interest in pursuing. 
To  sum  up,  the  recent  financial  turmoil  will  not  make  financial  globalisation  more  popular. 
Unless  policy  authorities,  starting  from  those  in  charge  of  financial  supervision,  draw  the 
appropriate lessons and have the courage to recognise what went wrong and how their task 
can  be  improved,  they  risk  loosing  the  confidence  of  citizens,  and  ultimately  their 
independence.  In  Europe,  a  reflection  on  the  degree  to  which  the  current  Lamfalussy 
framework can be pushed to accommodate a much increased cooperation between national 
supervisory authorities is certainly required. 
What can Europe do? 
5.  
To summarise, policy-makers should acknowledge more fully the negative perceptions of the 
European  public  opinion  towards  globalisation.  In  addition  to  uttering  the  globalisation-is-
good-for-you mantra, policy-makers should make it clear that they are aware of the painful 
adjustment costs for those workers and firms confronted with increasing global competition. 
The same policy-makers need to ensure that the necessary policy steps are taken to help 
those individuals and groups adjust to the new circumstances. 
What  is  the  role  for  Europe  in  all  this?  As  I  said,  European  citizens  are  aware  that  the 
challenges of globalisation can hardly be tackled at the local level. There thus seems to be 
an important role to be played by European institutions in the governance of globalisation. So 
why is this not happening? 
There may be two related reasons.  
The first is that for Europe to be more effective at the global level, it has to act in a united 
way. Such unity requires that actions conducted at the national level are more coordinated or 
even replaced by a European actor. The creation, or strengthening, of a European actor is 
objected, in many areas, by the national policy makers. “Turkeys don’t vote for Christmas” is 
a  dictum  that  would  apply  well  to  the  case.  Over  the  last  few  years  national  political  or 
technocratic  players  have  developed  a  resistance  to  the  continuous  strengthening  of  the 
European policy role and increasingly defended their national prerogatives, opposing further 
devolution of power to the European level. The argument – which is related to the second 
reason why Europe is not more present on the world scene – is that such a devolution is not 
supported by the people of Europe, often forgetting that no occasion is lost by national policy 
makers  to  blame  Europe,  or  the  euro,  for  any  problem,  including  those  that  arise  from 
domestic  policy  failures.  The  blame-Europe  game  has  become  a  favourite  sport  in  some 
capitals. 
The second reason is that Europe, and its institutions, are seen as too distant by the people 
of Europe. Europe is not seen as addressing and solving the problems that globalisation is 
posing  to  its  citizens.  This  is  largely  due  to  the  fact  that  the  main  tools  to  address 
globalisation  and  its  effects  are  not  in  the  hands  of  Europe  but  rather  in  the  national 
                                                 
16   See Davies et al. (2006). 
8 
 BIS Review 144/2007
policymakers’  hands.  Structural  policies,  affecting  education,  welfare,  research  and 
development,  labour  markets,  are  largely  within  national  policies.  The  Lisbon  agenda  only 
sets benchmarks and best practices, but it’s up to the countries to implement the policies. 
There seems to be a vicious circle. European citizens fear globalisation and want that the 
latter  is  governed  so  that  the  poorest  and  more  fragile  are  helped  in  the  process  of 
adaptation  to  a  global  economy.  EU  countries  individually  can  do  little  by  themselves  to 
govern globalisation, as they can hardly interact with the other big players, such as the US, 
China,  India  and  the  Emerging  world.  A  stronger,  more  united,  Europe  would  be  required. 
The Member States are not allowing this to happen. On the one side they do not  want to 
deprive themselves with their remaining – largely illusory – powers. On the other side, they 
tend  to  blame  Europe  for  not  being  able  to  solve  the  problems  raised  by  globalisation. 
Europe thus seems powerless in the view of its citizens, who blame it for being so weak. 
What’s the way out? A stronger Europe and at the same time a Europe closer to its citizens: 
this is what seems to be missing. It’s ultimately an issue of leadership. Only leaders can have 
the vision of providing Europe with the necessary powers and at the same time being closer 
to  the  needs  of  the  citizens.  Unfortunately,  the  Leaders  of  Europe  are  chosen  not  by  the 
people of Europe, but by the national representatives. It might burn down, in the end, to the 
national  representation  fearing  of  being  overshadowed  by  the  European  leadership  and 
lacking  the  courage  of  contributing  to  shape  it.  Until  such  a  fear  will  prevail,  European 
citizens are likely to continue fearing globalisation, much more than others around the world. 
Thank you for your attention. 
References 
Alesina, A., R. DiTella and R. MacCulloch (2004): “Inequality and happiness: are Europeans 
and Americans different?”, Journal of Public Economics, 88, pp. 2009-2042. 
Anderton,  R.,  Brenton,  P.  and  Whalley.  J.  (2006)  Globalisation  and  the  Labour  Market: 
Trade,  Technology  and  Less-Skilled  Workers  in  Europe  and  the  United  States  (2006: 
Routledge, London) edited by Robert Anderton, Paul Brenton and John Whalley.  
Bertola,  G.  (2007),  “Economic  integration,  growth,  distribution:  does  the  euro  make  a 
difference”,  paper  presented  at  the  2007  DG-ECFIN  Annual  Research  Conference  on 
“Growth  and  income  distribution  in  an  integrated  Europe:  does  EMU  make  a  difference?”, 
Brussels, 11-12 October 2007. 
Bjornskov, C., Dreher, A. and J. A. V. Fischer (2007): „The bigger the better? Evidence of the 
effect of government size on life satisfaction around the world”, Public Choice, 130, pp. 267-
292. 
Clark, A., Frijters, P. and M. A. Shields (2007): “Relative income, happiness and utility: an 
explanation of the Easterlin paradox and other puzzles”, IZA Discussion Paper No. 2840. 
Chicago  Council  on  Foreign  Affairs 
http://www.ccfr.org/. 
Davies, J. B., Sandstrom, S., Shorrocks, A. and E. N. Wolff (2006): “The World Distribution of 
Household Wealth”, working paper. 
di Mauro, F. and Anderton, R. (2007), “The External Dimension of the Euro Area: Assessing 
the Linkages”, Cambridge University Press, London. 
Dreher,  A.,  Sturm,  J.  and  Urspring,  H.  (2006),  “The  impact  of  globalisation  on  the 
composition  of  government  expenditures:  evidence  from  panel  data”.  Swiss  Institute  for 
Business Cycle Research, Working Paper no. 141. 
Ellis,  L.  and  K.  Smith  (2007):  “The  global  upward  trend  in  the  profit  share”,  BIS  Working 
Paper No. 231. 
“Public  opinion  survey 
reports”, 
(2006), 
BIS Review 144/2007 
 9
Eurobarometer 66 (2007), http://ec.europa.eu/public_opinion/standard_en.htm. 
IMF  (2007),  “Globalisation  and  inequality”,  World  Economic  Outlook,  September  2007, 
Washington DC. 
Kose,  A.,  E.  Prasad,  K.  Rogoff,  and  S.-J.  Wie  (2006b),”Financial  Globalization:  A 
Reappraisal”, NBER Working Paper 12484. 
Leamer, E. E. (2007): “A flat world, a level playing field, a small world after all, or none of the 
above? A review of Thomas Friedman’s The World is Flat”, Journal of Economic Literature, 
45, 1, pp. 83-126. 
Mukoyama,  T.  and  A.  Sahin  (2004):  “Repeated  moral  hazard  with  persistence”,  Economic 
Theory 
Scheve,  Kenneth  and  Matthew  Slaughter  (2006),  “Public  opinion,  international  economic 
integration,  and  the  welfare  state.”  In  Samuel  Bowles,  Pranab  Bardhan,  and  Michael 
Wallerstein  (eds.),  Globalization  and  Egalitarian  Redistribution,  Princeton,  NJ:  Princeton 
University Press. 
Schulze,  G.  and  Urspring,  H.  (1999),  “Globalisation  of  the  economy  and  the  nation  state”, 
The World Economy 22, 295-352. 
Shiller, R. (2003): The New Financial Order: Risk in the 21st Century, Princeton University 
Press. 
WorldPublicOpinion and The Chicago Council on Global Affairs (2007), “World public favours 
globalization 
jobs”, 
http://www.worldpublicopinion.org/pipa/articles/btglobalizationtradera/. 
but  wants 
environment 
protect 
trade 
and 
and 
to 
Figure 1. Globalisation ranking and life satisfaction across OECD countries 
Data refer to the mid 2000s. Data on Life Satisfaction from the World Values Survey, fourth 
wave. The globalization ranking is the ranking of countries in the A.T. Kearney/FOREIGN 
POLICY Globalization Index. 
10 
  BIS Review 144/2007
Figure 2. Globalisation ranking and Gini coefficient of income inequality across OECD 
countries 
Data refer to the mid-2000s. The globalization ranking is the ranking of countries in the A.T. 
Kearney/FOREIGN POLICY Globalization Index. The Gini coefficient data are OECD. 
Figure 3. Globalization ranking and social expenditure as a share of GDP across OECD 
countries 
Data refer to the mid-2000s. The globalization ranking is the ranking of countries in the A.T. 
Kearney/FOREIGN POLICY Globalization Index. Data on social expenditure are OECD. 
  BIS Review 144/2007 
  11
