David Longworth: Liquidity, liquidity, liquidity 
Remarks by Mr David Longworth, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Investment 
Industry Association of Canada, Toronto, 3 October 2007.  
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the Bank of Canada’s website.  
 Good evening. It's a pleasure to be here.  
Sound financial investment is important to individuals, to firms, and to society as a whole. By 
definition, investment is forward looking, and thus our future financial well-being is shaped by 
the soundness of the investment decisions we make today.  
History shows that sound investment requires confidence, and one of the key elements that 
underpin  confidence  is  liquidity.  Indeed,  Governor  Kevin  Warsh  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
Board says that liquidity, is, in fact, a form of confidence.1 The events that ensued from the 
U.S.  subprime-mortgage  crisis  have  tested  the  confidence  of  many  investors,  and  raised 
questions about where all the liquidity – which seemed so plentiful a few months ago – has 
gone. 
Now, one of the great things about our two official languages is that we often have several 
words  to  describe  one  thing  –  or  more  accurately,  to  distinguish  between  slightly  different 
forms of one thing. We have snow, sleet, and slush – though not, I hope, until December. Et 
nous  avons  des  amis,  des  copains,  et  des  camarades.  But  sometimes,  when  it  might  be 
useful  to  have  several  words  to  distinguish  between  similar  concepts,  we  have  only  one 
word, and that word is forced to take on several meanings. "Liquidity" is such a word – it's 
used to mean slightly different things in different contexts. 
In my remarks this evening, I'd like to examine three concepts of liquidity that are of interest 
in  economics  and  finance.  The  first  I'll  call  macroeconomic  liquidity,  which  has  to  do  with 
"overall  monetary  conditions,"  including  interest  rates,  credit  conditions,  and  the  growth  of 
monetary and credit aggregates. The second is market liquidity, which refers to how readily 
one can buy or sell a financial asset without causing a significant movement in its price. A 
third form of liquidity that I'll be touching on very briefly is balance sheet liquidity, which refers 
broadly  to  the  cash-like  assets  on  the  balance  sheet  of  a  firm  (or  household).  For  non-
financial firms, balance sheet liquidity is often measured by the short-term liquid assets on 
their balance sheet. For banks, which must manage their liquidity very closely, balance sheet 
liquidity  is  reflected  in  a  detailed  breakdown,  by  maturity,  of  their  assets  and  liabilities  – 
especially  those  coming  due  in  the  short  term.  The  ability  of  banks  to  fund  themselves  is 
often referred to as funding liquidity. The common element in these concepts is that liquidity 
is the ability to obtain cash – either by turning assets into cash on short notice or by having 
access to credit.  
I'll focus largely on the first two concepts, macroeconomic and market liquidity. In each case, 
I'll  suggest  why  liquidity  matters,  both  in  a  general  sense  and  to  policy-makers,  and  I'll 
describe how it's measured. Then, I'll discuss the state of liquidity, in its various forms, both 
before the summer turbulence and after. I'll conclude by describing the current situation and 
saying a few words about the Bank of Canada's role with respect to each type of liquidity. 
                                                 
1   K.  Warsh.  "Market  Liquidity:  Definitions  and  Implications."  Speech  to  the  Institute  of  International  Bankers 
at: 
Annual  Washington 
http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/Warsh20070305a.htm. 
in  Washington, 
D.C.,  March 
Conference, 
Available 
2007. 
BIS Review 111/2007 
 1
Macroeconomic liquidity 
As I noted earlier, I am using the term macroeconomic liquidity to refer to "overall monetary 
conditions." 
Any economy, whether national or global, functions best when there's enough – but not too 
much – liquidity.  
So,  how  much  is  the  right  amount  in  a  national  economy?  The  answer  depends  on  the 
central bank's objectives. In Canada, our monetary policy objective is to meet the inflation 
target.  This  goal  has  been  achieved  with  considerable  success  since  the  target  was 
introduced  in  1991.  In  general,  when  inflation  is  tending  to  remain  on  target,  liquidity  is 
adequate.  If  there  were  too  much  liquidity  in  the  economy,  inflation  would  threaten  to  rise 
above  target.  If  there  were  too  little,  inflation  would  tend  to  fall  below  it.  To  put  this  same 
notion  in  different  terms,  the  risk  of  having  too much,  or  too  little,  liquidity  in  our  domestic 
economy is essentially the same risk that is posed by future inflation being higher or lower 
than the target. 
The key indicators of macroeconomic liquidity, in terms of price, are the policy interest rates 
and  the  term  structure  of  interest  rates  paid  by  borrowers.  In  terms  of  quantity,  the  key 
indicators are the growth of monetary and credit aggregates and the state of credit conditions 
more  generally.  In  normal  times,  central  bankers  tend  to  place  more  emphasis on  interest 
rates  than  on  monetary  and  credit  measures.  Nevertheless,  the  growth  rates  of  monetary 
and  credit  aggregates  do  appear  to  have  some  explanatory  power  regarding  the  future 
evolution of spending and inflation, and are thus useful additional indicators of liquidity. For 
example, in Canada, real M1 measures help to predict near-term growth in real GDP. And 
the M2-family aggregates help to predict core CPI inflation one to two years ahead.2  
One particularly important aspect of macroeconomic liquidity is the liquidity that central banks 
make available to the financial system on a day-to-day basis – often referred to as central 
bank money. In Canada, this typically comes through the provision of settlement balances in 
the wholesale payments system – the Large Value Transfer System (LVTS) – supplemented, 
when required, by open market purchase and resale agreements. The goal of this provision 
is to keep our key policy rate, the overnight rate, close to the target we set for it. As well, our 
standing liquidity facilities, made available to LVTS participants at the end of the day, provide 
liquidity, as required, to individual financial institutions at 25 basis points above the overnight 
rate.3,4  
Finally, to get a sense of global macroeconomic liquidity, one can aggregate macroeconomic 
liquidity across countries to obtain average world real interest rates and the average growth 
of monetary and credit aggregates. These measures will tend to be reflected over time in the 
behaviour of global spending and average global inflation rates. 
Global macroeconomic liquidity sets the backdrop against which we make monetary policy in 
Canada.  This  liquidity  can  affect  the  foreign  demand  for  Canadian  products  and, at  times, 
can influence the prices of Canadian imports.  
A key point is that, because Canada has a flexible exchange rate regime, we can achieve the 
inflation target over time – regardless of the degree of liquidity in the global economy. This is 
                                                 
2   D. Longworth. "Money in the Bank (of Canada)." Bank of Canada Technical Report No. 93, February 2003. 
Available at: http://www.bankofcanada.ca/en/res/tr/2003/tr93-e.html. 
3   When LVTS participants are in deficit at the end of the day, and therefore need to access the standing liquidity 
facilities,  aggregate  participant  deposits  at  the  Bank  of  Canada  will  exceed  the  target  for  net  settlement 
balances. 
4   As discussed at the end of this speech, these facilities also respond to temporary difficulties in funding liquidity 
experienced by LVTS participants. 
2 
 BIS Review 111/2007
because  such  a  regime  allows  us  to  have  a  monetary  policy  that  is  independent  of  other 
countries. 
Now I'll turn to liquidity in financial markets. 
Liquidity in financial markets 
Market liquidity refers to the extent to which one is able to quickly and easily buy and sell 
financial assets in the market, without moving the price. Market liquidity captures the aspects 
of immediacy, breadth, depth, and resiliency in markets. Immediacy refers to the speed with 
which a trade of a given size and cost can be completed. Breadth, often measured by the 
bid/ask spread, refers to the costs of providing liquidity. Depth refers to the maximum size of 
a  trade  for  any  given  bid/ask  spread.  Resiliency  refers  to  how  quickly  prices  revert  to 
fundamental values after a large transaction.  
Generally speaking, the more liquid the market, the better. But there is an important caveat – 
if  market  participants  come  to  expect  that  market  liquidity  will  always  be  ample,  and  they 
acquire assets with the assumption that they can liquidate their positions quickly and at fairly 
predictable  prices,  they  may  end  up  taking  on  more  risk  than  has  been  factored  into  the 
purchase price. And this could sow the seeds of a nasty correction in the event of a shock 
and a rapid decline in market liquidity. That said, liquidity is the lifeblood of markets.  
Over the past 50 years, and particularly in the past 10 to 15 years, we've seen a significant 
trend  increase  in  liquidity  in  financial  markets  around  the  world,  including  the  markets  for 
bonds  and  other  fixed-income  products,  and  those  for  equities,  derivatives,  foreign 
exchange, and commodities. 
What gave rise to this increase in market liquidity? 
First,  there  have  been  structural  factors  in  markets  themselves.  The  appearance  of  new 
players, the introduction of new financial instruments, and advances in technology have all 
added  to  the  liquidity  of  financial  markets.  New  participants,  such  as  hedge  funds,  have 
become active in  many  financial markets, thus introducing new capital into these markets, 
adding  to  their  liquidity.  Financial  innovation,  typically  enabled  by  technology,  has  often 
supported  the  liquidity  of  financial  markets.  The  growth  of  electronic  trading  systems  and 
innovation  in  back-office  systems  have  lowered  trading  costs  and  increased  price 
transparency and competition, and, in the end, resulted in greater liquidity.  
In  addition  to  these  structural  factors,  two  other  significant  long-term  developments  have 
underpinned the growth of liquidity in financial markets. First, efficiency gains in the financial 
sector, better inventory management, and better macro policy – including monetary policy – 
resulted  in  what  has  come  to  be  called  the  "Great  Moderation,"  which  was  a  significant 
reduction in the variability of output, inflation, and long-term interest rates across most G-7 
countries,  starting  in  the  mid-1980s.5  And  this  moderation  has,  in  turn,  contributed  to  the 
liquidity  of  financial  markets  by  reducing  some  of  the  fundamental  sources  of  financial 
volatility  and  risk.  Second,  globalization  has  resulted  in  more  liquid  financial  markets. 
Globalization  has  significantly  increased  international  capital  flows,  since  many  emerging-
market countries have relaxed their capital controls. Globalization has also helped to spread 
financial innovation, in part through the operations of large international banks. 
This  increase  in  market  liquidity  has  generally  been  beneficial.  It  has  tended  to  place 
downward  pressure  on  volatility  –  prices  have  typically  become  less  sensitive  to  large 
transactions and usually absorb news more easily. 
                                                 
5   D.  Longworth.  "Inflation  and  the  Macroeconomy:  Changes  from  the  1980s  to  the  1990s."  Bank  of  Canada 
Review, Spring 2002. Available at: http://www.bankofcanada.ca/en/review/2002/r02-3-ea.html. 
BIS Review 111/2007 
 3
So that's a look at macroeconomic and market liquidity. Now I'd like to provide a snapshot of 
the liquidity situation before the summer turbulence. 
Liquidity before the summer turbulence 
Let me start with the state of macroeconomic liquidity. 
For  several  years,  the  world  economy  has  been  characterized  by  ample  liquidity.  In 
comparison with historic norms, long-term real interest rates have been low, and money and 
credit have grown fairly quickly in most G-7 countries and in such emerging-market countries 
as  China  and  India.  The  major  reason  for  the  unusually  low  long-term  real  interest  rates 
appears  to  be  a  high  level  of  desired  savings  relative  to  desired  investment.  Interestingly, 
despite ample (or perhaps overly ample) global liquidity – which historically has led to rising 
inflation – inflation has been fairly well contained around the globe. Central banks have been 
keeping their eyes on inflation and have not hesitated to raise policy rates as required. 
Parenthetically, I would add that a number of other developments – developments that did 
not really contribute to global macroeconomic liquidity – may have left the impression that 
there was a "wall of liquidity" out there. These developments include the rapid growth, in real 
terms, of the global economy; an increase in the ratio of financial assets to GDP; increases in 
corporate  holdings  of  cash;  growth  in  many  of  the  major  "real-money  accounts,"  such  as 
pension funds, central bank reserves, and sovereign wealth funds; the ongoing reinvestment 
of  fixed-income  assets  that  come  to  maturity;  and  the  payouts  that  occur  when  firms  are 
acquired. Against a backdrop of low real interest rates, much of this money was involved in a 
"search for yield," and, in this search, the prices of risky assets were bid up. 
The situation in Canada before August was similar to the global one – that is, it was marked 
by  ample  macroeconomic  liquidity.  Indeed,  the  Bank  of  Canada's  July  Monetary  Policy 
Report Update noted that there were upward pressures on inflation, and that the growth of 
household and business credit, as well as the growth of monetary aggregates, was robust. 
We  therefore  raised  the  policy  interest  rate  to  4.5  per  cent  and  expressed  the  view  that 
"some modest further increase in the overnight rate" might be required to bring inflation back 
to target over the medium term. 
As  for  market  liquidity,  it  had  generally  been  growing  over  the  past  few  years.  Bid/ask 
spreads were narrow, and volatility was low in foreign exchange markets and in equity and 
fixed-income  markets.  Shocks,  when  they  occurred,  were  contained  –  that  is  to  say,  they 
didn't spread widely across markets – and episodes of volatility subsided fairly quickly.  
And shocks did occur. Four episodes come to mind: the May 2005 downgrade of Ford and 
GM debt; the sell-off of risky assets in May and June of 2006; the collapse of the American 
hedge fund, Amaranth Advisors, in September of 2006; and finally, the "flight to quality" in 
February of this year. 
These episodes were apt to be costly for those directly affected and reminded investors that 
investments  pose  risks,  and  that  prudence  requires  that  these  risks  be  understood  and 
managed.  Overall,  however,  because  these  episodes  were  well  contained  and  of  short 
duration,  they  may  have  left  investors  too  complacent,  and  therefore  contributed  to 
postponing  an  overdue  repricing  of  risk.  Indeed,  central  banks,  including  the  Bank  of 
Canada, had for some time identified the possibility of "a significant price reversal in riskier 
assets."6  
Let me now describe how the late summer turbulence in financial markets affected various 
forms of liquidity. 
                                                 
6   This phrase is taken from the Bank of Canada's December 2005 Financial System Review, p 4. 
4 
 BIS Review 111/2007
How recent events in financial markets have affected liquidity 
Throughout  the  year,  delinquency  rates  and  foreclosures  associated  with  subprime 
mortgages  in  the  United  States  have  been  rising.  These  mortgages  have,  over  the  years, 
been  increasingly  repackaged,  or  securitized,  into  asset-backed  securities  (ABSs)  such  as 
residential  mortgage-backed  securities  (RMBSs).  More  recently,  these  RMBSs,  along  with 
other assets and ABSs, have been further repackaged into other structured products, such 
as  collateralized  debt  obligations  (CDOs)  and  asset-backed  commercial  paper  (ABCP). 
Because  the  magnitude  of  the  delinquencies  and  foreclosures  was  unexpected,  it  is  not 
surprising that we have seen a repricing of many assets with exposure to the U.S. subprime-
mortgage market. 
The  subsequent  downgrade  by  credit  agencies  of  many  CDO  tranches  –  especially  those 
that included U.S. subprime mortgages – made market participants aware of the risk inherent 
in these products, and also made them realize that credit risk more broadly may not have 
been priced appropriately. So, to the extent that the repricing of credit risk that we have seen 
in recent months has, in fact, been a renormalization of the value of risk, these events are to 
be welcomed.  
Many  of  these  structured  products  lack  transparency  –  particularly  those  backed  by  other 
structured  or  securitized  products,  such  as  ABCP  backed  by  CDOs.  It  is  often  difficult  for 
investors to determine the underlying assets that ultimately provide the cash flow for these 
products  –  and,  therefore,  to  determine  their  direct  exposures.  While  securitization  helps 
disperse  risk  to  those  more  willing  to  bear  it,  it  can  also  obscure  to  the  investor  in  which 
instruments  and  with  which  actual  and  potential  counterparties  the  ultimate  risk  resides. 
Because of this lack of transparency, uncertainty among market participants began to build in 
early  August,  and  perceptions  of  counterparty  risk  rose.  Bid/ask  spreads  widened,  market 
depth diminished, and market liquidity evaporated. 
As  events  unfolded  around  the  world,  the  rate  on  overnight  collateralized  transactions  in 
Canada moved above the target overnight rate in the second week of August. This market 
response was not unique to Canada. The overnight interbank rates in the United States and 
Europe also moved above the respective target policy rates and became very volatile.  
As a result, central banks, including the Bank of Canada, moved quickly to provide significant 
amounts of liquidity to their financial systems in the form of central bank money, which, as I 
noted earlier, is a key aspect of macroeconomic liquidity. Shortly after mid-August, conditions 
in the Canadian overnight market began to improve. From that time until the recent technical 
pressure, stemming partly from month-end payment flows, the Bank of Canada had not had 
to  intervene  intraday:  total  settlement  balances  had  steadily  decreased,  and  the  overnight 
rate had remained slightly below target.  
After all that has occurred over the past two months, it would seem that the most pronounced 
impact – aside from major, ongoing concerns regarding the structured-product market – has 
been an increase in the spreads in money markets – whether in ABCP, corporate paper, or 
bankers' acceptances – of most industrialized countries. Market liquidity in these particular 
markets has not returned to its former state. While short-term funding for banks was always 
accessible through the money market, we went through a period in which it was very difficult 
to  obtain  funding  beyond  a  week  or  two.  Perceptions  of  increased  counterparty  risk, 
combined with precautionary hoarding of funds by financial institutions, helped to create that 
situation.  This  precautionary  behaviour  has  occurred  because  financial  institutions  are 
uncertain about the extent of their potential exposure to ABCP (which they will have to take 
back on to their balance sheets, since they are the sponsors or liquidity providers), or to the 
financing of previous leveraged buyout transactions.  
In the past couple of weeks, however, there have been an increasing number of transactions 
at  longer  terms  in  world  money  markets,  including  the  Canadian  market  for  bankers' 
acceptances, and spreads have narrowed somewhat. However, liquidity in money markets is 
still quite limited in Canada and abroad. 
BIS Review 111/2007 
 5
The  situation  in  money  markets  contrasts  with  that  in  other  markets,  such  as  spot  foreign 
exchange  and  equity  markets,  where  repricing  has  occurred  and  market  liquidity  has 
returned. These markets are functioning reasonably well. Liquidity in corporate bond markets 
is  somewhere  between  these  two  situations,  with  highly  rated  firms  having  little  difficulty 
accessing market funding (though at higher spreads than before August), while access for 
low-rated firms is significantly constrained.  
I  would  now  like  to  turn  to  the  current  situation.  In  particular,  I  will  look  at  the  Bank  of 
Canada's role for each type of liquidity. 
The current situation and the Bank of Canada's role 
With respect to the provision of central bank liquidity to the financial system, let me stress 
that the Bank's goal continues to be to keep the overnight interest rate close to its target. We 
will continue to monitor the situation in the overnight market and adjust settlement balances 
and undertake open market purchase and resale operations as necessary, as we have done 
in recent days in response to upward technical pressure. This pressure does not appear to 
be linked to changes in the rest of the money market. 
With respect to overall domestic macroeconomic liquidity, we set the overnight interest rate 
to  keep  inflation  near  its  2  per  cent  target  over  the  medium  term.  Our  next  fixed 
announcement  date  is  16  October.  Between  now  and  then,  we  will  be  reviewing  all  the 
relevant factors affecting the inflation projection. At the time of our last announcement, we 
noted that there are significant upside and downside risks to the outlook for inflation. On the 
upside,  there  is  a  possibility  that  household  demand  in  Canada  could  be  stronger  than 
anticipated, while on the downside, the ongoing adjustment in the U.S. housing sector could 
be  more  severe  than  anticipated  and  could  spill  over  to  the  U.S.  economy  more  broadly. 
Recently, the Canadian dollar has moved sharply above the trading range assumed in the 
July  Monetary  Policy  Report  Update,  and  we  need  to  look  at  the  causes  of  this 
strengthening, should it persist. And, as always, we need to assess the effect of movements 
in  the  exchange  rate  on  the  balance  of  aggregate  demand  and  supply  in  the  Canadian 
economy. In addition, there is uncertainty about the extent and duration of the tightening of 
credit  conditions  in  Canada  and,  hence,  about  the  tempering  effect  this  will  have  on  the 
growth of domestic demand. As I noted earlier, the Bank monitors Canadian credit conditions 
closely, and we will be looking at the level of interest rates paid by households and firms, as 
well as at any changes in the availability of credit granted to them for spending on goods and 
services. Over the summer, credit spreads rose all along the term structure, but, because of 
significant declines in risk-free rates, increases in the level of interest rates paid by firms are 
largely confined to short-term maturities, where credit spreads have risen the most. 
With  respect  to  the  direct  participants  in  the  Large  Value  Transfer  System,  Canada's 
wholesale payments system, the Bank of Canada's Standing Liquidity Facilities are available 
at the end of each day, on an overnight basis, for individual institutions that have a shortfall in 
their settlement balances because of temporary difficulties with their funding liquidity. 
Many observers have asked whether there is more that the Bank of Canada could be doing 
to deal with the market liquidity situation in money markets, as well as the funding liquidity 
situation of banks. We have been asking ourselves the same question. While it is true that 
many term money market spreads remain abnormally wide, the market is functioning. There 
have  been  increasing  numbers  of  term  money  market  transactions,  and  spreads  are 
beginning to narrow. In these circumstances, there does not appear to be anything that the 
Bank of Canada could usefully do to improve the functioning of this market. 
Indeed,  the  best  contribution  the  Bank  of  Canada  can  make  in  this  situation  is  to  keep 
inflation low and stable by maintaining macroeconomic liquidity at an appropriate level, and 
to keep the overnight interest rate close to its target. With these conditions in place, market 
liquidity  should  be  restored,  over  time,  through  the  operation  of  normal  market  forces.  A 
6 
 BIS Review 111/2007
helpful backdrop is the overall strength of the Canadian economy, supported by a high level 
of balance-sheet liquidity in Canadian non-financial corporations.  
Conclusion 
Liquidity is essential to the well-functioning of both the real economy and financial markets.  
The Bank of Canada carefully monitors and analyzes liquidity in all its guises as part of our 
ongoing assessment of the economy and the financial system. Throughout this most recent 
period  of  financial  market  stress,  the  Bank  has  paid  particular  attention  to  both  the  nature 
and the adequacy of liquidity – in the macroeconomy, in financial markets, and in balance 
sheets.  
We will continue to monitor events as they unfold, and we will take appropriate policy actions 
as required. 
BIS Review 111/2007 
 7
