Jean Claude Trichet: Hearing before the Economic and Monetary Affairs 
Committee of the European Parliament  
Speech by Mr Jean Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at a hearing 
before the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee of the European Parliament, Brussels, 
9 October 2007. 
 les  membres  de 
la  Présidente,  Mesdames  et  Messieurs 
Madame 
la  Commission 
Economique et Monétaire, je me réjouis d'apparaître devant votre commission aujourd'hui et 
de  poursuivre  notre  dialogue  fructueux.  La  situation  sur  les  marchés  financiers  suscite 
toujours  beaucoup  d’intérêt.  Aujourd’hui,  je  reviendrai  d’abord  brièvement  sur  la  situation 
économique et monétaire, en expliquant les raisons sous-jacentes à nos récentes décisions 
de taux. Ensuite, je vous fournirai de plus amples informations sur les opérations de politique 
monétaire de la BCE en réaction aux tensions enregistrées sur le marché monétaire ainsi 
que  sur  les initiatives  en  cours  visant  à  améliorer  le  cadre  relatif  à  la  réglementation,  à  la 
surveillance  et  à  la  stabilité  financières.  Schließlich  möchte  ich  ein  paar  Anmerkungen 
machen  zu  den  Produktivitätsentwicklungen  in  Europa,  die  wir  in  letzter  Zeit  beobachtet 
haben,  sowie  zu  den  Kriterien,  die  erfüllt  sein  müssen,  um  dem  Euro-Währungsgebiet 
beizutreten. 
Economic and monetary developments 
Since  my  previous  appearance  before  the  European  Parliament  a  month  ago,  the  new 
economic  data  which  have  become  available  have  confirmed  our  view  that  risks  to  price 
stability remain on the upside over the medium term, as identified by both our economic and 
monetary  analyses.  As  already  indicated  on  several  occasions,  unfavourable  effects  from 
energy prices will have an important impact on headline inflation over the coming quarters. 
Owing mainly to such effects, deriving from the marked decline in energy prices a year ago 
and  the  recent  substantial  increase  in  oil  prices,  the  inflation  rate  is  expected  to  remain 
significantly  above  2%  in  the  near  future,  including  the  first  months  of  2008,  before 
moderating again. In 2008, largely as a consequence of capacity constraints and relatively 
tight labour markets, inflation is expected to remain around 2% on average. 
As  regards  economic  activity,  it  appears  that  the  sustained  real  economic  growth 
experienced in the euro area in the first half of 2007 has continued over the summer. The 
economic  fundamentals  support  a  favourable  medium-term  outlook  for  economic  activity. 
While  euro  area  consumer  and  business  confidence  indicators  declined  in  September, 
mainly reflecting the financial market correction, they remain above their historical averages 
and  continue  to  point  to  ongoing  sustained  growth  during  the  second  half  of  the  year. 
Available  forecasts  for  2008  confirm  the  Governing  Council’s  main  scenario  of  real  GDP 
growing  at  around  trend  potential.  This  scenario  is  based  on  the  expectation  that  global 
economic activity will remain robust, with the moderation of economic growth in the United 
States  largely  offset  by  the  continued  strength  of  emerging  market  economies.  Given  the 
financial  market  volatility  and  the  reappraisal  of  risks  in  recent  weeks,  this  assessment 
remains surrounded by heightened uncertainty. On balance, risks to this outlook for growth 
are judged to lie on the downside. 
The  monetary  analysis  confirms  the  prevailing  upside  risks  to  price  stability  at  medium  to 
longer-term horizons. On the basis of latest available data, covering the period to the end of 
August, the underlying money and credit expansion remains strong. However, strong money 
and credit growth may have been influenced by temporary factors, such as the flattening of 
the  yield  curve  and  recent  financial  market  volatility.  The  headline  figures  may  therefore 
overstate the underlying money and credit growth.  
BIS Review 114/2007 
 1
In August, the flow of loans to households and non-financial corporations remained strong. 
However,  financing  conditions  have  tightened  somewhat  in  the  context  of  financial 
turbulence,  although  financing  costs  are  not  exceptionally  high  by  historical  standards.  As 
regards  developments  in  the  bank  lending  behaviour,  there  are  some  signs  showing  an 
impact  of  recent  financial  market  volatility.  The  results  reported  in  our  October  2007  bank 
lending survey point to some net tightening of the credit standards in the third quarter of 2007 
both on loans to large enterprises and loans to households for house purchases, following a 
prolonged  period  where  credit  standards  were  eased  or  remained  unchanged.  Looking 
ahead, banks expect to further tighten credit standards in the fourth quarter of 2007. 
The ECB’s monetary policy stands ready to counter upside risks to price stability, in line with 
its  Treaty  mandate  to  maintain  price  stability  as  the  primary  objective  of  monetary  policy. 
Under current circumstances, particular caution is required in assessing any potential impact 
of  recent  financial  market  developments  on  the  real  economy.  Before  drawing  further 
monetary policy conclusions, the Governing Council deems it necessary to gather additional 
information and carefully examine all new data. 
Against this background, on 4 October 2007 the Governing Council of the ECB decided to 
leave the key ECB interest rates unchanged. The Governing Council will monitor very closely 
all developments. By acting in a firm and timely manner, and based on its assessment, the 
Governing  Council  will  ensure  that  risks  to  price  stability  over  the  medium  term  do  not 
materialise  and  that  inflation  expectations  are  firmly  anchored  in  line  with  price  stability, 
thereby favouring an environment conducive to sustained economic growth, well-functioning 
markets and job creation. This is even more important at times of financial market volatility 
and increased uncertainty. In this respect, the Governing Council will continue to pay great 
attention to future financial market developments. 
Monetary policy operations 
Ladies and gentlemen, once the Governing Council has defined the monetary policy stance 
necessary for maintaining price stability in the medium term, the ECB has the responsibility 
to ensure the smooth functioning of the segment of the money market that we influence. As I 
explained last month, these two responsibilities are clearly distinct and should not be mixed.  
The  ECB  continued  to  intervene  in  the  money  market  in  order  to  ensure  its  smooth 
functioning.  Some  tensions  indeed  remained  in  the  money  markets,  in  particular  for 
maturities beyond one week. These tensions were fostered by the increase in liquidity needs 
related to banks’ usual behaviour at the end of the quarter, when they need to adjust their 
balance sheets. Money market interest rates have remained more volatile than usual and our 
recent operations have attracted strong demand. On 11 September, we conducted a second 
supplementary long-term refinancing operation with the usual maturity of three months at a 
variable  rate  with  no  pre-announced  allotment  amount,  while  the  regular  long-term 
refinancing  operation  was  conducted  on  26  September  as  scheduled.  In  addition,  we 
continued to allot in the regular main refinancing operations significantly larger amounts of 
liquidity  than  we  would  have  done  under  normal  circumstances,  while  aiming  at  balanced 
liquidity conditions at the end of the maintenance period.  
Some tentative signs of improvement can now be seen in the money markets, in particular in 
the  commercial  paper  market.  Tensions  still  remain,  in  particular  in  the  so-called  Asset 
Backed  Commercial  Paper  market  segment,  which  has  been  at  the  root  of  the  tensions. 
However, unlike during the peak of the difficulties in August, there is now some differentiation 
between commercial papers with different underlying assets or different credit of sponsoring 
banks. Lately, paper of higher quality could be placed more easily, and at better prices, than 
some  weeks  ago.  Thus,  a  more  discriminating  market  would  seem  to  be  emerging  in  the 
ABCP market. 
2 
 BIS Review 114/2007
Financial stability  
Let  me  now  provide  you  with  an  update  of  the  recent  developments  regarding  euro  area 
financial stability. Last month, I drew some very tentative lessons from the events as we saw 
them evolving at the time. By now we have learned more, but the lessons to be drawn still 
remain tentative and provisional.  
As  I  told  you  last  month,  the  re-assessment  of  risk  –  which  is  still  ongoing  –  reflects  the 
materialisation of some of the vulnerabilities that had previously been identified by the ECB 
as well as by the global central banking community.  
Since our last meeting, we have witnessed tentative signs of normalisation in some parts of 
the  credit  and  financial  markets.  Nonetheless,  as  regards  the  prospects  going  forward  I 
would certainly tend to agree with those who caution against complacency. The situation in 
certain parts of the euro area money markets remains complex, and banks are still reluctant 
to lend to each other in the unsecured interbank term money markets. In a number of cases 
the present episode of market correction will impact banks’ profits. Fortunately, several years 
of  rather  favourable  economic  and  financial  developments,  as  well  as  better  risk 
management,  have  significantly  improved  the  resilience  of  the  euro  area  banking  system, 
placing  the  core  financial  institutions  in  a  rather  comfortable  position  to  absorb  the  recent 
disturbances.  
Our baseline scenario is that the process of adjustment in the money and credit markets will 
take  place  in  an  orderly  manner.  Nevertheless,  it  cannot  be  excluded  that  this  positive 
baseline scenario could yet be challenged by some low-probability but potentially high impact 
negative events. Therefore, there is no room for complacency at the present juncture.  
The first priority remains the need to restore confidence among the various participants of the 
global credit market. Today, we still have the paradox that there are large amounts of high 
quality assets which investors are currently treating as if they have poor credit quality. Last 
month, I tentatively identified three potential and non-exclusive remedies to this situation ; I 
will  again  stress  them  today  and  I  will  even  add  a  fourth  one.  First,  there  is  a  need  to 
increase  transparency  and  further  improve  risk  management  –  including  liquidity  risk 
management – relating to complex structured products. Second, an assessment of the role 
played  by  rating  agencies  needs  to  be  undertaken.  Third, a  review  of  certain  areas  of  the 
regulatory framework, such as the treatment of liquidity risk should be carried out. Fourth, the 
case  of  non  regulated entities  should  continue  to  be  examined  very  carefully,  not only  the 
“highly  leveraged”  non  regulated  institutions  but  also  the  other  entities  like  “conduits”  and 
“special  vehicles”:  the  case  of  the  “highly  leveraged”  has  already  been  examined  by  the 
Financial Stability Forum and orientations have been suggested. 
I  am  pleased  to  see  that  international  and  EU  level  initiatives  are  already  underway  to 
address  these  issues.  Whilst  it  is  still  too  early  to  draw  definitive  conclusions,  there  is  a 
common understanding on the need for finding solutions that can be applied consistently at 
the global level.  
Concerning the international level, I welcome the initiative of the Financial Stability Forum, 
following a proposal by the G-7, to set up a high-level working group to analyse the causes of 
the current turmoil and to propose appropriate recommendations.  
Concerning 
the  European 
initiatives  are  under  way 
Commission and the Member States, with the close association of central banks. A roadmap 
identifying  both  the  key  issues  to  be  analysed  as  well  as  the  bodies  in  charge  will  be 
submitted  today  to  the  ECOFIN  for  approval.  The  ECB  is  strongly  supportive  of  these 
initiatives taken at both levels and will actively contribute to the work. 
the  European 
involving 
level, 
BIS Review 114/2007 
 3
Productivity trends in Europe 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  let  me  now  share  with  you  some  thoughts  on  recent  productivity 
trends  in  Europe.  Notwithstanding  robust  employment  growth  in  the  euro  area  over  the 
recent economic upswing, labour productivity data for the euro area remained very positive 
overall  in  2006.  Notably,  data  confirmed  a  clear  acceleration  in  labour  productivity  growth 
(per  person)  in  2006  to  1.4%,  up  from  0.7%  in  2005.  Against  this  background,  some 
observers  had  made  an  upbeat  assessment  of  recent  labour  productivity  developments, 
arguing that the euro area was ready to embark on a period of prosperous economic growth 
founded  on  the  successful  implementation  of  structural  reforms.  These  improvements, 
however, were mainly due to cyclical rather than structural improvements. On a year-on-year 
basis, labour productivity growth reached 1.7% in the fourth quarter of 2006 but declined to 
1.4%  in  the  first  quarter  of  2007  and  fell  further  to  0.8%  in  the  second  quarter  of  2007. 
Overall, its current level is in line with its average rate of 0.9% over the past ten years.  
From  a  longer-term  perspective,  labour  productivity  developments  in  the  euro  area  are 
characterised  by  a  sustained  slowdown  since  the  early  1960s,  which  mainly  reflects  both 
lower growth in innovation and other efficiency gains and lower growth in capital used per 
unit of labour. These disappointing developments in the euro area are in sharp contrast with 
the positive developments in the United States. The strong productivity performance of the 
US  economy  has  been  ultimately  attributed  to  the  development  of  new  information  and 
communication  technologies  (ICT)  in  combination  with  the  overall  flexibility  of  the  US 
economy. 
The bulk of the cross-Atlantic gap in labour productivity growth can be explained in terms of 
differences in more traditional, ICT-using sectors, where European firms do not seem to have 
exploited  the  benefits  of  the  availability  of  new  technologies  to  their  full  extent.  Over  the 
period 1995 to 2004, compared with the preceding 15 years, labour productivity growth fell 
especially  in  market  services,  including  distribution,  financial  and  business  services.  This 
evidence is broadly in line with the notion that ICT have the largest impact on productivity 
growth  indirectly,  namely  by  sparkling  product  and  process  innovations  and  by  facilitating 
complementary  innovations.  The  contribution  from  traditional  services  sectors  (namely 
distribution, financial and personal services) to euro labour productivity growth declined from 
0.4 percentage points over the period 1980-1995 to 0.2 percentage points over the period 
1995-2004.  In  contrast  the  contribution  went  up  from  0.6  to  1.4  percentage  points  in  the 
United States over the same periods. 
Today, there is a broad agreement that the structural rigidities that characterise the euro area 
economy  in  comparison  with  the  United  States  are  responsible  for  this  development  in 
Europe. In particular less flexible labour markets, a lower degree of competition in product 
markets and higher barriers to entry for new firms as well as a less developed capital market 
– are seen as the main factors explaining the relatively poor productivity performance in the 
euro area. Therefore, the Governing Council fully supports all the structural reforms that will 
permit  to  achieve  the  single  market,  enhance  competition  and  promote  flexibility  in  all 
markets  of  goods  and  services  as  well  as  in  the  labour  markets,  so  as  to  enable  firms  to 
better profit from technological progress and innovation. 
Criteria for joining the euro area 
Ladies and gentlemen, I would like to end with some remarks on the criteria for joining the 
euro  area.  The  convergence  criteria  are  stipulated  in  the  Treaty  and  have  therefore  been 
agreed upon by all parties involved. It should be clear that there is one set of criteria for all 
EU  countries.  The  ECB  applies  the  criteria  in  the  same  way  as  in  the  past  and  we  have 
always  stressed  that  convergence  should  be  sustainable.  A  consistent  set  of  rules  and  a 
consistent  application  over  time  will  reinforce  the  credibility  of  the  process  of  euro  area 
enlargement. This will, in turn, facilitate the sustainability of convergence. The framework is 
flexible  enough  to  accommodate  the  country-specific  features  of  all  countries  that  want  to 
4 
 BIS Review 114/2007
adopt  the  euro.  I  would  also  like  to  emphasise  that  meeting  the  convergence  criteria  in  a 
sustainable manner before joining the euro area is in the interest of all parties concerned and 
above all for the candidate countries themselves. 
I am now at your disposal for questions. 
BIS Review 114/2007 
 5
