Bandid Nijathaworn: Reserves accumulation and global investment-
savings adjustment – an Asian perspective 
Speech by Dr Bandid Nijathaworn, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the seminar 
on  “New  trends  in  reserve  management  and  its  meaning  for  the  international  financial 
system”, organized by The Reinventing Bretton Woods Committee and the People’s Bank of 
China (PBOC), Shanghai, 2 November 2007. 
 First,  let  me  thank  the  Reinventing  Bretton  Woods  Committee  and  the  PBOC  for  the 
invitation and for the excellent arrangement. Reserves accumulation and external surplus are 
important issues at this time, and their significance to the global financial markets deserves 
greater  attention  by  all.  Thailand,  being  a  small  economy  with  external  surplus,  is  also  a 
small  part  of  this  development.  So,  today’s  meeting  provides  a  good  opportunity  for  us  to 
discuss this issue. 
Between 1995 to September last year, global reserves rose from US$ 1.3 trillion to US$ 4.8 
trillion, a large part of which was observed in Asia. The latest number now is probably much 
higher, and a number of important features of the recent increase in global reserves have 
been noted. 
First, the size and the rapidity of the increase was not totally expected by the market and 
policymakers. Second, which is most important, is that the increase mirrors a regime shift in 
the external payments position between developed and developing economies, and involves 
a  large  number  of  countries.  This  is  to  say  while  the  deficits,  i.e.  the  net  borrowings,  lie 
almost entirely with the US, the surpluses or the net lenders are identified with Japan, China, 
East Asia, the oil exporting economies, and other emerging markets including Latin America. 
And the third is the financing of the deficits, as well as the reinvestment of official reserves, 
which are now a major component of global capital lows. 
The  key  issues  therefore  are  whether  this  process  can  go  on?  Is  it  a  permanent  or  a 
temporary  phenomenon?  And  what  would  be  the  implications  for  the  global  economy  and 
financial markets. 
Today,  I  want  to  comment  on  these  issues.  Specifically,  I  will  discuss  the  major  forces 
underlying external surplus and reserves accumulation from an Asian perspective. Next, I will 
comment on policies that are needed globally to address this problem. 
To begin, reserves accumulation is essentially the mirror image of the evolution of the US 
external deficits. Two popular views explaining this phenomenon have been put forward. The 
first is the export-led development model, i.e. the new Bretton Woods, which sees reserves 
accumulation  as  a  consequence  of  an  attempt  to  maintain  export-led  development, 
especially in Asia. The second explanation is the global-saving glut hypothesis, of which the 
glut is driven by the transformation of emerging markets from net borrowers to net lenders in 
the international capital market. 
Both interpretations I think have merits, and reserves accumulation is probably a reflection of 
both.  But  the  point  that  really  should  be  emphasized  is  that  external surplus and  reserves 
accumulation, for the most part, are a reflection of the dynamic of the adjustment in global 
investment and saving that has taken place since the Asian financial crisis. This dynamic has 
been  instigated  by  the  configuration  of  policies  pursued  by  the  major  economies  and  by 
emerging markets, as well as by the development of financial institutions and markets around 
the world that has sped up and influenced the direction of global capital flows. 
But why the Asian financial crisis as a starting point? To me, the Asian financial crisis marks 
a number of important watersheds in the global financial relationship. 
BIS Review 134/2007 
 1
First,  the  crisis  reaffirms  the  dominant  roles  of  market  and  globalized  capital.  Second,  the 
severity  of  the  crisis  led  many  emerging  economies  to  rethink  their  policies  of  relying  on 
external help for crisis prevention and resolution. And this has led to consideration to self-
insure against risk of crisis, with reserves accumulation becoming an important aspect of this 
consideration. And third, sharp adjustments in relative prices, especially real exchange rate 
and  real  interest  rates  after  the  crisis,  brought  into  play  the  major  forces  that  led  to  the 
adjustment in global investment and savings, as well as reserves accumulation. 
Today, I want to identify three factors as the major forces contributing to external surplus and 
reserves accumulation. The first is the process of global investment-savings adjustment that I 
have  noted.  The  second  is  the  policy  configuration  in  the  US,  especially  the  easing  of 
monetary policy that plays a crucial role in promoting expenditure of US households. And the 
third is financial innovation and the deepening process of financial globalization, especially in 
the  US,  that  facilitates  risk  allocation  and  enhances  access  to  credit  by  households.  The 
growth of credit derivatives and sub-prime mortgages are two examples of the developments 
that have taken place. 
On the global basis, these forces have led to a widening of the US current account deficits 
that  was  matched  by  surpluses  elsewhere.  As  for  East  Asia,  in  terms  of  the  investment-
savings gap, the increase in surplus essentially reflects a fall in investment as opposed to a 
rise in savings as is the case for China and the oil-exporting economies. 
In  the  Thai  case,  a  deep  currency  depreciation  after  the  crisis  led  to  a  shift  in  profitability 
towards tradeables, and induced a major shift in resource allocation. Also, the damage to the 
banking  sector  compromised  credit  growth  and  the  subsequent  expansion  of  domestic 
demand,  as  the  ability  of  the  financial  sector  to  take  risk  became  more  constrained.  As  a 
result,  there  was  a  sharp  fall  in  domestic  demand,  especially  private  investment.  And 
exports, by default, became the key engine for growth. 
Similar adjustment was observed throughout East Asia. The adjustment led to a turnaround 
in the external current account, a decline in external indebtedness, and a rise in international 
reserves, all of which helped strengthen the region’s external position. Given the weakness 
in  domestic  demand,  limiting  large  currency  appreciation  becomes  a  necessity  for  some 
economies  to  support  economic  recovery.  And  with  weak  domestic  demand,  pursuance  of 
banking  reform  was  an  important  policy  to  normalize  lending  and  credit  growth.  On  top  of 
this,  liberalization  to  allow  more  capital  outflows  also  became  an  instrument  of  choice  in 
managing the macroeconomic impact of rapid capital inflows. 
On  the  demand  side  of  global  capital,  policy  configuration  in  the  US  was  instrumental  in 
allowing  the  external  surplus  of  emerging  markets  to  be  absorbed  through  the  US  current 
account deficits. The key mechanism, as I noted, has been the easing of US monetary policy 
that  has  helped  support  global  growth  through  the  expansion  of  US  demand.  With  private 
investment in the US still recovering from the stock-market correction in early 2000$s, lower 
interest  rate  and  greater  access  to  credit  significantly  increased  US  consumption  at  the 
expense of a fall in private savings. As a result, the US external imbalance widened while 
reserves accumulation by emerging markets increased. 
The  next  question  is  can  this  go  on?  And  is  reserves  accumulation  a  temporary  or  a 
permanent feature of the international monetary system? 
To answer this question, one has to distinguish between stock and flows. On the flows side, 
given reserves accumulation essentially mirrors external surpluses of emerging markets, the 
pace  of  reserves  increase  going  forward  is  more  likely  to  ease.  This  is  because  the 
adjustment process that is now ongoing will reduce the imbalance. The more the adjustment, 
the less will be the additional flows, and hence the pace of reserves accumulation. 
But to be successful, the adjustment will require both expenditure reduction, through higher 
US real interest rates, and expenditure switching through a US dollar depreciation. So far, 
the burden of adjustment is more on the dollar than on interest rates. Another thing to keep in 
2 
 BIS Review 134/2007
mind is that the process of adjustment is likely to take time as it requires a shift in resource 
allocation.  This  point  was  brought  out  clearly  by  the  Asian  experience.  But  as  surpluses 
decline, the pace of reserves accumulation will ease. 
In such process, a key risk to watch is the possibility that financial adjustment, driven by the 
forces of market, can outpace the adjustment in the real sector, thus potentially creating a 
disorderly movement. Therefore, we need better coordination of policies amongst countries 
to ensure an orderly adjustment process. 
What  role  can  reserves  accumulation  play  in  this  process?  It  has  been  pointed  out  that 
reserves accumulation can help smooth the process by limiting an abrupt US dollar decline, 
while  enabling  emerging  markets  to  continue  support  the  global  economy  by  maintaining 
growth. This is a so-called /falling with a parachute1 scenario. In addition, the recycling of 
official reserves to the US market can help limit the pace of interest rates adjustment in the 
US, thereby supporting a smoother correction in US output. 
As for emerging markets, strong reserves positions help emerging markets to be in a better 
position  to  weather  the  impact  of  market  volatility  that  may  occur  during  the  adjustment 
process. A case in point is the recent experience with the US sub-prime problem. 
Compared  with  other  markets,  the  impact  of  the  US  sub-prime  has  been  more  limited  for 
Asia. This is because direct exposure to subprime CDOs is relatively small compared to the 
overall assets of the Asian banking system. 
Moreover,  a  number  of  positive  developments  have  taken  place  since  the  Asian  financial 
crisis  that  has  made  the  region  more  resilient  to  such  a  downturn.  First,  the  financial 
positions  of  banks  and  corporate  are  much  stronger  with  reduced  indebtedness  and  less 
mismatch, as well as improved balance sheets. 
Second,  Asian  economies  are  much  stronger  in  terms  of  external  position,  especially  the 
levels  of  reserves  that  can  comfortably  cushion  the  outflows.  And  third,  the  economies 
overall  have  become  more  flexible  both  in  terms  of  policy  regime  and  the  key  prices.  All 
these  have  put  Asian  economies  in  a  much  firmer  footing  to  cope  with  the  second-round 
effects of the sub-prime crisis. 
Let me now turn to policies that are needed for an orderly process of adjustment. 
In  the  short-term,  an  orderly  movement  in  the  US  dollar  is  key  for  ensuring  an  orderly 
process of adjustment. The risk at this time is that market forces and expectation can lead to 
a  disorderly  movement.  Hence,  foreign  exchange  intervention  remains  a  viable  option  to 
guide an orderly adjustment. At the same time, to ensure no disruption to the financing of the 
US deficits, there may be a need to consider broadening the scope of investing in US assets 
especially  the  physical assets.  This  is  to  ensure  continued  interest  in US  assets  at  a  time 
when some segments of US financial assets may be less appealing than before on account 
of the ongoing stress in the credit market. 
But  in  the  longer-term,  we  need  to  look  at  this  process  of  adjustment  from  a  global 
perspective and the key to the issue would be to rebuild a stronger domestic demand growth 
outside  the  US.  Doing  so  would  require  stimulating  public  investment  in  infrastructure 
especially  in  Asia,  as  well  as  continuing  with  the  financial  reform  to  support  private 
investment and credit expansion. And finally, greater flexibilities in prices will also go a long 
way in promoting an efficient resource allocation. All these points are not new, but they are a 
good reminder of what needs to be done. 
Since,  our  theme  today  is  on  the  new  trends  in  reserves  management,  let  me  end  my 
remarks with a few points on reserves management and financial markets. 
Reserves management is essentially the flip side of reserves accumulation. In terms of the 
stock  of  reserves,  notwithstanding  a  successful  adjustment  in  the  global  imbalance,  the 
relative  importance  of  countries,  as  measured  by  their  reserves  positions,  is  unlikely  to 
change significantly in a foreseeable future from the position we are in today. 
BIS Review 134/2007 
 3
This  is  because  reserves  accumulation  to  date  reflects  successive  years  of  external 
surpluses  rather  than  borrowed  reserves.  Going  forward,  productivity  improvement  and 
continued  careful  policy  management  by  emerging  markets  will  help  maintain  this  relative 
position. Therefore, for some or for most countries, the regime shift that we are seeing now 
may be more of a permanent feature. 
So,  the  world  is  now  different,  and  this  change  needs  to  be  recognized  more  fully  by  the 
market. More importantly, the configuration of policies at the international level, especially by 
the Bretton Woods institutions, also need to adapt to this shift. 
On reserves management, the size of reserves that we have now in emerging markets, the 
fiscal  costs  associated  with  reserves  accumulation,  and  the  opportunity  cost  of  investing 
excess  reserves,  all  these  may  induce  reserves  managers  to  explore  opportunities  for 
enhancing  returns  by  adopting  more  aggressive  investment  policies.  Such  actions  will 
undoubtedly  affect  financial  markets.  On  this,  it  is  important  to  remind  ourselves  that  this 
style  of  investment  can  also  come  into  conflict  with  the  mandate  of  central  banks  in 
preserving stability and orderly markets. So, the challenge is to achieve a proper balance. 
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
4 
 BIS Review 134/2007
