Ewart S Williams: The internal auditor in our emerging financial 
environment 
Feature  address  by  Mr  Ewart  S  Williams,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Trinidad  and 
Tobago,  at 
Internal  Auditors  Anniversary  Dinner,  Port-of-Spain, 
27 September 2007. 
Institute  of 
the 
 Let me thank the Trinidad and Tobago Chapter of the Institute of Internal Auditors for their 
invitation  to  address  you  on  the  occasion  of  your  19th  Anniversary.  I  am  delighted  for  the 
opportunity, though the invitation reminded me that life is so full of contradictions. 
I must confess that for the five years I have been at the Central Bank I have had more of my 
fair share of run-ins with my auditors – both with my internal and external auditors. I hasten 
to add however, that I emerged from each encounter with a clearer understanding of the role 
of the auditor, with tremendous respect for the internal and external auditors I dealt with; and 
with a keen appreciation of how critical but how thankless the job of an auditor was. 
I  must  also  concede  that  from  the  vantage  point  of  the  Central  Bank  as  regulator,  it  has 
become exceedingly clear that we cannot have effective financial sector supervision in the 
absence  of  close  collaboration  with  the  auditing  profession.  I  am  also  convinced  that  for 
efficient  financial  markets,  the  auditing  profession  is  critical  to  promoting  credibility  and 
confidence  among  shareholders  and  investors,  and  for  promoting  market  discipline.  But  I 
would come back to these issues after some brief reflections on how the auditing profession 
has evolved. 
I  don’t  know  if  you  remember,  but  it  was  not  so  long  ago  that  internal  auditing  was 
considered a boring and perhaps an unnecessary hassle. And then starting around the end 
of  the  1990s,  a  series  of  well-publicized  international  financial  scandals  changed  all  that. 
Accountants  and  auditors  became  suddenly  intriguing  in  2002  with  the  collapse  of  Arthur 
Anderson  because  of  its  involvement  in  the  scandals  surrounding  Enron.  Revelations  of 
significant  corporate  governance  and  accounting  failures  at  Parmalat  and  Shell  served  to 
demonstrate that these concerns were indeed world-wide, not just in the United States. As 
The  Economist  Magazine  said,  “these  scandals  added  unwanted  color  to  a  grey 
profession”. 
But  the  attention  was  initially  unwanted  and  perhaps  unhelpful,  for  the  judgment  was  that, 
while in most of the cases high corporate officials betrayed the trust of their shareholders and 
put their hands into the till, equal blame was put to the auditing profession – both internal 
and external – because they did not do their jobs; they abdicated their responsibilities. 
As you know, these scandals created suspicion of large corporations and raised the cost of 
capital in international financial markets. In the final analysis, the verdict was that it was the 
weaknesses  in  a  few  companies  and  major  audit  firms  that  were  responsible  for  the 
significant increase in the cost of capita across financial markets. 
As  you  know,  in  the  US,  these  scandals  led  to  the  enactment  of  the  Sarbanes-Oxley  Act, 
which  has  been  described  as  one  of  the  most  far-reaching  reforms  of  American 
business  practices.  The  Act,  for  instance,  made  corporate  management  responsible  for 
maintaining  “an  adequate  internal-control  structure  and  procedures  for  financial  reporting. 
Company auditors were required to attest to management’s assessments of these controls 
and to disclose any material weaknesses. The Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX, as it is called) also 
created the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board to help re-establish the trust that 
investors could rely on the quality of audits. One of the mandates of the Board was to ensure 
that  emphasis  on  high-quality  professionalism  for  accountants  and  auditors  became  the 
standard. 
BIS Review 110/2007 
 1
that 
faithfully  communicate 
financial  statements  and  other  disclosures 
Not unexpectedly the corporate scandals and Sarbanes-Oxley have had their impact on our 
corporate environment here in Trinidad and Tobago. 
For example: 
• 
like in the US, to address some obvious conflict of interest, the large auditing firms 
have ceased to do a variety of non-audit work for their clients; 
large firms are paying closer attention to corporate governance; 
they are establishing independent audit committees; 
boards are having a closer look at company loans to executives; and 
internal audit departments are being given more recognition and more resources. 
• 
• 
• 
• 
As  I  indicated  earlier,  recent  developments  have  also  heightened  the  importance  of 
accounting  and  auditing  standards  to  the  financial  sector  supervisory  framework.  As  you 
know  financial  innovation  has  increased  the  complexity  of  certain  types  of  financial 
transactions.  At  the  same  time,  new  accounting  standards  and  anti-money  laundering 
statutes  have  created  additional  information  and  disclosure  requirements  for  financial 
institutions.  The  purpose  of  the  new  accounting  standards  is  to  provide  the  foundation  for 
credible 
the 
institution’s operating results and overall health. And the more the accountants come up with 
new proposals to capture the essence of the financial transactions, the greater the onus on 
the auditor to provide independent verification. 
Perhaps an even greater justification for intensified collaboration between the auditor – both 
internal and external – has been the changing pattern of financial sector regulation. As you 
may  know  over  the  past  few  years,  the  Central  Bank  has  moved  to  streamline  the 
examination  process  to  make  it  more  focused  on  risk-management.  Our  financial 
regulation strategy now emphasizes: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Unlike  in  the  past  when  the  focus  was  mainly  on  capital  and  operating  results,  the  new 
regulatory strategy requires the Central Bank to take a far greater interest in the corporate 
governance of financial institutions. Understanding how institutions are managed is now the 
key. The hallmark of our regulatory approach is to identify problems early – well before they 
manifest themselves in the financial statements when it is usually too late to act effectively. 
Early intervention allows us to work with management and boards to effect remedial actions. 
Early  identification  of  problems  essentially  involves  a  qualitative  assessment  of  an 
institution’s  risk  management  processes  and  methodology,  its  internal  control  environment 
and its compliance mechanisms. As regulators we cannot do this alone. 
This is where  you, as internal auditors, have a critical role to play. This  is where  the 
work of the internal audit and the supervisory function are closely aligned, specifically in the 
identification,  management  and  mitigation  of  risk,  and  ensuring  that  the  institution’s 
operations are conducted effectively, efficiently and in compliance with applicable laws and 
regulations. 
Increasingly over the last decade operations risk has taken on greater prominence within the 
context  of  enterprise  risk  management  systems.  As  you  know,  operations  risk  arises  from 
inadequate  or  failed  internal  processes,  people  or  systems  or  from  external  events. 
Operations risk has always been a part of banking but it has become a greater threat to the 
safety of financial institutions in the contemporary financial environment. This is because the 
Active oversight by Management and the Board of Directors; 
Clearly defined policies, procedures and authority; 
Comprehensive risk measurement and risk mitigation; and 
Adequate systems of internal controls. 
2 
 BIS Review 110/2007
institutions  themselves  have  become  more  complex  and  their  products  and  services  have 
become  more  numerous  and  varied.  In  addition,  advances  in  information  technology  have 
greatly  increased  the  speed  at  which  vulnerabilities  in  one  institution  can  escalate  into 
serious problems in other institutions. Consequently, there has been an increasing incidence 
of failure linked to operations risk. 
In 2003, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, the main international standards-
setting body for bank supervision, identified as a cardinal principle the responsibility of the 
Board  of  Directors  “to  ensure  that  the  bank’s  operational  and  risk  management 
framework  is  subject  to  effective  and  comprehensive  internal  audit  by  operationally 
independent,  appropriately  trained  and  competent  staff”.  That’s  the  mandate  that  all 
banks face and that’s the challenge for all of you internal auditors. 
What  this  implies  is  that  internal  auditors  must  provide  assurance  that  management  is 
appropriately  identifying  and  managing  risks  that  arise,  both  from  business  operations, 
and  from  the  systems  supporting  those  operations.  As  Regulator,  we  also  look  to  the 
internal audit function to provide us with evidence of action taken to improve the control 
framework and mitigate risk. 
At this stage I would like to risk a comment, again from the vantage point of the Regulator, 
on  how  well  our  Audit  profession  seems  to  be  matching  up  to  its  onerous 
responsibilities. And I must confess that here I am not making a distinction between internal 
and external auditors; I am lumping them both in the same basket. 
Let me first state categorically, that I have every respect for the auditing profession and the 
professional  manner  in  which  most  of  its  members  conduct  their  work.  However,  I 
would be less than candid if I did not mention that there are too many instances where as 
regulators, we are confronted with poor examples of quality audits. 
Auditors  are  required  to  sign  off  on  financial  statements  and  to  vouch  for  the  presence  of 
adequate internal controls. In too many cases, we have evidence that the job was not done 
with the thoroughness that is required. 
As I mentioned earlier, regulators and other stakeholders place great reliance on the audit 
opinion  and  basic  auditing  principles  require  that  these  opinions  are  qualified  when,  for 
example: 
• 
A  company  is  insolvent,  with  insufficient  assets  to  support  the  company’s 
liabilities; or 
The  accounting  system  is  so  untidy  that  the  auditors  cannot  reasonably  be 
expected to arrive at an informed judgment of the company’s health; or 
When the balance sheet clearly omits some of the contractual obligations of 
the  company  –  such  as  outstanding  policy  claims,  in  the  case  of  insurance 
companies. 
  Some other areas of concern that we sometimes encounter are: 
• 
Long delays in issuing management letters, sometimes well after the audit itself 
has been completed; 
Too liberal an interpretation of standard accounting rules; and 
• 
Sometimes, inexplicable and undue compromises on corporate governance issues. 
• 
We  should  be  reminded,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  that  the  1989  auditors’  reports  gave  an 
excellent bill of health to the Workers Bank, right up to the moment when the Central Bank 
had to intervene because of insolvency. 
More recently, the Central Bank intervened in two insurance companies against the backdrop 
of successive unqualified audit reports. 
BIS Review 110/2007 
 3
I have focused on examples from the financial sector, because that’s the sector I know best. I 
am sure that there are as many, if not more occasions in the non-financial corporate 
sector where audit reports do not reflect the true reality. 
I would like to raise one other challenge that internal auditors are likely to face, particularly in 
smaller institutions, where there is not sufficient talent to go around. This challenge has to do 
with maintaining the independence of the internal auditor. 
Internal  auditors  are  in  a  unique  position  to  obtain  an  informed  perspective  of  the 
organizations for which they work. As such, they are in the best position to assist and advise 
Management  on  developing  the  broad  principles  that  should  govern  the  risk  management 
and internal control environment. 
On  the  other  hand,  to  be  effective,  internal  auditors  need  to  be  independent  and  cannot 
assume a line-management role for control activities, including those they helped to design. 
Accordingly,  internal  auditors  need  to  be  continually  alert  to  conflicts  of  interest.  It  is  a 
situation that calls for delicate professional judgment to promote a win-win situation. 
Let me close by again emphasizing that by and large our internal audit profession has served 
the  country  well.  I  am  sure  that  your  dedication  and  quality  efforts  have  contributed  to 
strengthening our corporate sector and to avoiding some of the pitfalls other countries have 
faced. But you must ensure adherence to the highest professional standards. 
Perhaps one way of doing that is for the Institute of Internal Auditors, as the governing body 
of the auditing profession to take a more aggressive leadership role, by implementing some 
form of structured oversight of the auditing  profession. This oversight would be in keeping 
with  what  now  exists  in  several  parts  of  the  world  –  in  both  developed  and  developing 
countries. I am sure you know that the continued absence of appropriate oversight carries 
potential legal and reputational risks, especially for financial institutions which operate in a 
fiduciary capacity. 
And my final suggestion to you, individually and as a group, is to continue upgrading your 
skills. Improvements in technology, the quick pace of financial innovation and evolving risk-
management  techniques  will  ensure  that  businesses  will  use  increasingly  complicated 
configurations of products and financial structures. The internal auditor needs to stay abreast 
if you are to add value and help your organization accomplish its objectives while bringing a 
systematic and disciplined approach to risk management, control and governance. 
And the answer is training, and learning new technical skills. I thank you once again. 
4 
 BIS Review 110/2007
