Savenaca Narube: Development of the capital market in Fiji 
Opening  address  by  Mr  Savenaca  Narube,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji,  at  the 
official opening of the CMDA Provincial and Tikina Investment Companies Workshop, Suva, 
28 November 2007. 
 Mr. Daryl Tarte, Chairman of the Board of CMDA 
Mrs. Mereia Volavola, Chief Executive Officer of CMDA 
Workshop Participants 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Introductory remarks 
Good Morning 
It  is  my  pleasure  to  be  here  with  you  this  morning  at  the  opening  of  Capital  Markets 
Development Authority Workshop for Provincial and Tikina Investment Companies. Let me 
say  that  I  am  extremely  delighted  that  the  CMDA  has  decided  to  reach  out  to  this  very 
important segment of the market in its endeavour to develop the capital market. I therefore 
congratulate  CMDA  for  organising  this  workshop.  The  timing  is  appropriate,  the  market  is 
ready for you, the institutional arrangements are in place and all we need are viable projects 
and your decision to use the market place for your financial needs. 
The workshop’s theme – “Capital Markets – Growing Your Company” – is very relevant at 
this point in time as we all work together to grow the Fiji economy.  
Economic growth 
We at the Reserve Bank talk a lot about economic growth or in fact lifting the rate that we 
grow. I have said many times before and I will say that again today that if we continue to 
grow at our current average rate of less than 3 percent we will double our economy in about 
50 years and that is a lifetime. Other countries are doing it at half that period or even less. 
We must therefore collectively aim at raising our growth rate to over 5 percent per year. At 
that rate we will double the economy in less than twenty years and what a difference that 
makes. 
One should then pose the question: What do we need to do to raise this growth rate to over 5 
percent per year? Obviously a lot of things! And more ironically we know what those things 
are! On the macro level, one of the key things we need to do is to lift the level of investment 
from its current level of about 15 percent of GDP to over 25 percent. This translates to about 
$600 million investment per year. Can we do it? Of course we can! We had done it in the 
past and we can do it again. The average investment level of all developing countries in the 
world is about 25 percent of GDP. So, this level is well within our reach. 
The  next  question  therefore  becomes:  How  can  we  lift  investment  to  25  percent  of  GDP? 
There are many factors to this such as political stability, the quality of our infrastructure, the 
efficiency of the approval process and the cost of doing business. These are very important 
issues and we need to do all we can now to deliver them to the investors. 
However,  I  would  like  to  focus  on  one  important  issue  and  that  is  the  role  of  the  capital 
market in raising this investment and thereby promoting economic growth. This, I believe, is 
the central theme of this workshop. 
BIS Review 140/2007 
 1
Definition of capital market  
Before I go and identify this role of the capital market, I would like to ensure that we are all at 
the same level of understanding of what the capital market mean. Capital is of course money 
– most of us know that. The market is just like the Suva market. But unlike selling and buying 
of cassava and dalo that happens in the Suva market, we buy and sell money in the capital 
market. Money or capital becomes a commodity just like cassava and dalo. 
There are different levels of market where money is traded. They are differentiated from one 
another basically by the maturity of the products that are sold and bought in the market. For 
instance,  the  money  market  refers  to  the  short  end  of  the  market  where  products  of  the 
shortest maturity are traded. These products include treasury bills and promissory notes up 
to say one year in maturity. You will find commercial banks as investors in this segment of 
the market. This is the fastest growing market in Fiji and is now the largest. 
Then  there  is  the  capital  market  which  includes  longer  term  products.  There  are  two 
components of this capital market – there are bonds and there are, what we call, equity or 
shares. The largest component of this market in Fiji is, of course, government bonds. The 
bonds are termed as fixed income securities because the interest rate that they pay is fixed. 
The equity share of this market has also grown with 4 companies listed in 1996 to now over 
15. Unlike the fixed income from bonds, the return you get from equities varies according to 
the performance of the company. You will normally find the long term players like insurance 
companies and pension funds in this segment of the market. I would like to think that most of 
you in this workshop may find that this where you can be sourcing most of your funds.  
Finally,  there  is  the  wider  financial  market  where  almost  everything  to  do  with  money  is 
included. I will only focus on the capital market. 
Role of the capital market 
Now what does the capital market offers to investors like you? I would like to think a lot more 
than you may have thought of. Let us examine this in detail. 
Like all things in life there are two sides to the market – you have a seller and a buyer. On 
one side, we have a buyer and in this case one who has a project and is looking for money. 
We normally call this person or company the issuer. On the other side, we have the seller 
who is selling money. We call this person the investor. What the capital market does is to 
bring the two sides together.  
Compare this with depositing your money with commercial banks which is the traditional way 
to  save  money  for  many  of  us.  We  deposit  our  money  with  them  and  they  in  turn  pay  us 
interest. The banks then invest our monies by lending it out to borrowers. In this case, rather 
than the capital market, it is the commercial bank that brings the two sides together. But note 
three subtle differences here: 
   The owners of the money that is the depositors do not have any say in where their 
money go to and what projects that are funded from their deposits; 
The  depositors  do  not  have  any  say  in  the  interest  rate  that  they  get  from  their 
deposits; and 
The depositors do not have any say in the interest rate that their money is lent out 
for. 
Depositing your money may the best way to save for some of us. It has its advantages. The 
major one would be that the saver does not bear the risk of lending out his money. The risk is 
collectively shared with all other depositors.  
The  capital  market  however  gives  you  an  alternative  source  of  saving.  What  are  the 
differences in using the capital market for savers? 
2 
 BIS Review 140/2007
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
Diversify your savings options; 
Secondly, the value of your money may appreciate over time unlike deposits where 
the principal remains the same; 
Thirdly,  you  have  a  longer  choice  of  maturity  than  the  normal  3  year  maximum 
maturity in fixed deposits; 
Fourthly, it may give you a better return on your money; 
Fifthly, you decide on what project or company that you want you money to go to; 
and 
Lastly, if you need the money, you can break the investment perhaps at a lower cost 
than breaking a term deposit.  
Diversify your sources of funds; 
May get you a lower cost of funds; 
May avoid fees and charges; and 
Equity funding does not fetch interest costs; 
If you are a borrower, the capital market can: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
Mind you there are also risks to using the capital market and I am sure that you will cover 
these issues in detail in your sessions today. 
I hope that I have given you a flavour of what the capital market can do for you. 
Let  us  get  back  to  the  question:  How  does  all  these  support  investment  and  economic 
growth? 
There are basically two ways: 
1. 
One, it may encourage more savings. Fiji savings rate is very low. If we remove the 
mandatory savings through FNPF, our saving rate is even lower. For investment to 
happen,  we  need  to  generate  more  savings.  Successful  countries  are  normally 
associated with higher savings rate; and  
Two, it directly promotes more investment by giving the one borrowing the money 
alternative sources of funds. With diversified sources of funds, more investors can 
emerge  or  more  investments  are  made  thus  taking  us  towards  the  target  of  25 
percent of GDP. 
2. 
Development of the capital market 
It is therefore extremely important that we develop the capital market in Fiji. I must say that 
we have come a long way since the establishment of the CMDA. I was very much involved in 
the establishment of the Authority as the groundwork was done at the Reserve Bank. I can 
remember some of the ground breaking decisions that were taken then. They have begun to 
bear fruit. 
Of  course,  one  of  the  key  roles  of  the  Authority  is  to  regulate  the  market  to  ensure  that 
everyone plays by the rule. The underlying aim is to protect the investors’ interest. This is 
very important. Confidence in the operation of the market is critical to people like you using 
the market. A lot has been achieved over the years in this regulatory area.  
I  recall  that  one  of  the  other  major  roles  that  we  identified  the  Authority  to  have  was  to 
develop the market. That was why the word “Development” was specifically included in the 
name of the Authority. How can one supervise a market that was not there in the first place? 
This  meant  that  the  CMDA  had  to  strike  the  right  balance  between  regulation  and 
development.  
BIS Review 140/2007 
 3
in 
I said that the market has developed in the last fifteen years. But I still have a sense that we 
still have some way to go. The challenge therefore is to take stock and re-examine our route. 
Are  there  constraints  that  we  still  need  to  overcome?  If  so  how  can  we  do  that  and  who 
should do it?  
I recall some years ago when the Minister for Finance asked a group of us to actually do this 
stock  take  and  advise  him  on  how  we  can  take  the  capital  market  further.  We  identified 
several issues and I would to share these with you this morning.  
1. 
2. 
The capital market was in need of deepening on both products and participation; 
The  investors  were  dominated  by  FNPF  both  in  fixed  income  and  equity.  The 
proposed deregulation of FNPF could diffuse this dominance; 
the  market  was  negligible.  To  promote  a  wider 
Individual  participation 
participation,  we  recommended  that  the  share  investment  scheme  of  the  FNPF 
should be extended to government and government guaranteed bonds; 
There was a need to increase awareness on all aspects of the capital market; 
The preparation of prospectus was costly. Avenues where this cost can be reduced 
should be examined. The possibility of government assistance in this area should be 
considered; 
Government should consider issuing bonds only earmarked for small investors; 
We should establish what we call market makers; 
Government to use brokers to float its bonds and treasury bills; and 
The  CMDA  Act  should  be  reviewed  to  strengthen  the  role  of  CMDA  and  to 
incorporate the lessons learnt from the last ten years of development. I agree with 
Mrs. Mereia Volavola that it was about time that changes were made to the Capital 
Market  Act,  Companies  Act,  Foreign  Investment  and  other  legislations  to  further 
enhance Fiji’s economic growth.  
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
The Minister in his Budget Speech last Friday mentioned that CMDA would study the impact 
of real time settlement on market trading activities in 2008. I support such a modernisation 
and I wish the CMDA all the best with this project. We at the Reserve Bank of Fiji recently 
launched a real time gross settlement system or FIJICLEAR.  
Provincial companies 
I said at the beginning that I was very glad that CMDA has brought this group together to talk 
about  you  using  the  capital  market  more.  As  I  look  across  our  provinces,  I  note  the 
increasing venture into businesses and investment. I fully support this move. It is inevitable.  
At  the  same  time,  I  am  impressed  with  the  amount  of  savings  that  we  can  generate  at 
provincial and district levels. We had our Nadroga Day earlier this month and the opening 
contribution alone was over $100,000. We do have the ability to generate these high levels of 
savings. 
I wonder how much of such savings are being generated at our provincial, district and village 
level each year? I think that it can be a substantial sum.  
What kind of return are we getting from these savings? What we perhaps need to strengthen 
is our investment side of those savings. And this is in my view where the capital market can 
help out. It can bring us closer to other forms of investment. 
I also note that most of the provincial companies are engaged in the building and rental of 
office  complexes.  Funding  is  mainly  through  bank  long  term  loans.  Loan  repayments  are 
4 
 BIS Review 140/2007
made from rental income and contributions. Again, the capital market can provide a viable 
option to funding these projects.  
Financial performance 
Let me end with three related issues on investment: 
• 
  The first is the concept of the real cost of capital. Provincial companies fund a lot of 
investment through “soli” which is given free of interest. If we had borrowed these 
funds what would be our total cost of capital? 
Second,  records  from  the  Registrar  of  Company’s  Office  revealed  very  little 
information  on  the  financial  records  of  provincial  companies.  Is  governance  an 
issue?  We  all  know  that  financial  management  and  accountability  are  extremely 
important to business and I see that you will be addressing these issues during the 
workshop. 
Third, what is the shareholder’s return on these investments? 
Lastly,  can  we  learn  from  the  past?  I  think  we  can  and  we  should.  The  recent 
offering of the Yatu Lau Company Limited is very interesting. I will follow the current 
public float of $1.5 million with interest and wish the company every success. I note 
that the company has put in place sound governance structures to ensure that the 
business of the company is separated from the business of the provincial council 
Concluding remarks 
Finally, I would like to sincerely thank Mrs. Mereia Volavola for her kind invitation. I also wish 
to thank all the presenters who have given up their valuable time from their busy schedules 
to share their knowledge with the participants today.  
Official opening 
I  now  have  much  pleasure  in  declaring  this  workshop  for  provincial  and  investment 
companies “Capital Markets – Growing Your Company” open. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 140/2007 
 5
