Lucas Papademos: ECB Financial Stability Review December 2007 
Opening remarks by Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice President of the European Central Bank, at 
the press briefing on the occasion of the publication of the December 2007 ECB Financial 
Stability Review, Frankfurt am Main, 12 December 2007. 
 Introduction 
I. 
My colleagues and I would like to welcome you to today’s press briefing on the occasion of 
the  publication  of  the  December  2007  edition  of  the  ECB  Financial  Stability  Review.  The 
financial  stability  assessment  contained  in  the  Review  has  been  prepared  with  the  close 
involvement of the ESCB Banking Supervision Committee. It is for the most part based on 
information that was available up until 9 November 2007, the “cut-off” date for this Review.  
The  primary  objective  of  the  FSR  is  to  identify  and  evaluate  the  main  sources  of  risk  and 
vulnerability to financial stability and to provide a comprehensive assessment of the capacity 
of  the  euro  area  financial  system  to  absorb  adverse  disturbances.  The  December  2007 
edition of the Review places special emphasis on the financial market turmoil, which is also 
the  focus  of  the  overview  chapter.  This  edition  of  the  Review  addresses  several  topical 
issues in 19 boxes and also contains five Special Feature articles. The choice of the content 
of  some  of  these  boxes  and  articles  has  been  motivated  by  the  financial  market 
developments over the past few months.  
In  my  presentation,  I  will  first  devote  some  time  to  the  ongoing  financial  market  turmoil. 
Second, I will review the risks and vulnerabilities in the external environment as well as in the 
euro area financial and non-financial sectors, which are partially affected by the re-pricing of 
financial risk. I will conclude with an overall assessment of the risks to euro area financial 
stability, as we currently see them.  
2. 
The financial market turmoil 
Causes 
2.1  
Starting with the market turmoil, the principal and underlying cause for the market tensions 
and  volatility  that  erupted  in  August  is  that,  over  the  past  few  years,  several  intertwined 
vulnerabilities were created by a mutually reinforcing interplay between three developments: 
(1) a strengthening investor risk appetite and a search for yield; (2) a sizeable expansion of 
financial  market  liquidity  from  mid-2003  onwards;  and  (3)  the  increasingly  widespread 
adoption by banks of the “originate and distribute” business model.  
More specifically, in an environment of historically low risk-free asset yields, the search for 
yield by investors made it necessary to seek and acquire alternative assets offering higher 
returns but associated with greater risks. These assets included complex structured finance 
products that are relatively illiquid. The “search-for-yield” phenomenon is evidenced by the 
compression of credit spreads and the decline in market volatility over the past four years 
(see chart on the left of slide 3).  
Against this background, banks pursuing the “originate and distribute” business model met a 
growing base of highly receptive investors willing to include in their portfolios riskier loans re-
packaged  into  increasingly  complex  structured  credit  products.  While  the  “originate  and 
distribute”  business  model  facilitated  a  wider  distribution  of  credit  risk  across  the  financial 
systems, there were growing concerns among the global central banking community that this 
model was reducing the degree of transparency concerning the ultimate location of risks in 
the  financial  system.  The  amount  of  loans  securitised  in  euro  denominated  markets  has 
BIS Review 148/2007 
 1
grown over the past three years (see chart on the right of slide 3). The tendency of European 
banks to resort to securitisation of loans has allowed them to dispose of the credit risk and at 
the same time it has fuelled banks’ loan growth on the supply side.  
Before elaborating on the risks emanating from the interaction of the three aforementioned 
factors, it might be worth recalling how the ECB saw the situation six months ago, before the 
financial market turmoil gathered pace. In this context, let me refer to some pertinent quotes 
and conclusions included in the June 2007 FSR (see slide 4).  
• 
First, we had highlighted the potential of the US sub-prime mortgage market crisis 
deepening and spreading to other markets, to which euro area financial institutions 
could have exposures.  
Second, we had stressed the prospect of financial market liquidity abruptly drying up 
when investor risk aversion rises and had warned that an abrupt and sharp decline 
in market liquidity could reveal vulnerabilities in the financial system.  
Third, concerns had been expressed about the implications of the growing reliance 
on rating agencies in credit risk assessment.  
Fourth, we had discussed the possible loosening of standards and compromising of 
counterparty risk management at the margin by some banks in an environment of 
intensifying competition about lucrative fee income.  
Fifth,  we  pointed  out  that  reduced  financial  market  liquidity  had  the  potential  to 
hamper  banks’  ability  to  sell  securitised  risky  loans  and  thus  adversely  affect  the 
credit cycle.  
    Propagation channels 
2.2.  
Let me now elaborate on the various stages and the propagation of the turbulence as this is 
useful for the assessment of the prospects for the financial markets and for deriving some 
lessons.  At  the  early  stages  of  the  crisis,  when  it  was  still  contained  to  the  US  sub-prime 
mortgage markets, delinquency rates on US sub-prime mortgages increased markedly after 
mid-2005, for two main reasons. First, the interest rate charged on sub-prime mortgages is 
initially much lower than for a standard mortgage, but it is typically reset to a much higher 
rate, usually after a two to three year period. Second, high rates of house price inflation since 
the early 1990s had encouraged some households to borrow for house purchases with the 
intention of refinancing, or repaying the mortgage, before the reset date. Once interest rates 
on these mortgages started to rise, and house prices began to moderate and subsequently 
to fall, many borrowers were unable to service their loans, sometimes even before the reset 
date  if  they  had  been  aggressively  betting  on  further  house  price  increases.  The 
developments in delinquency rates and house price inflation are shown in the charts on slide 
5.  
What are the prospects for the sub-prime mortgage markets? Recall that the typical fixed-
rate period for adjustable-rate mortgages is two to three years, after which they are reset and 
tied to one of a number of common indices, which are closely related to market interest rates. 
Notwithstanding  a  slight  decrease  in  these  indices  as  of  recently,  an  estimated  USD  400 
billion of sub-prime mortgages will face a reset in interest rates over the next two years.  
The surge in delinquency rates quickly translated into falling values of residential mortgage-
backed securities (RMBSs), especially those backed by the most recently originated vintages 
of loans. The values of such securities, and the indices of credit default swaps (CDSs) on 
such securities, have mostly continued to deteriorate until today (see chart on the left of slide 
6); Box 2 of the Review examines these issues in detail.  
The fact that claims on the cash-flows generated by sub-prime mortgages were embedded in 
a broad array of structured credit products, often layered on top of one another, explains why 
2 
 BIS Review 148/2007
the unexpectedly severe credit losses on the underlying US sub-prime mortgages  and the 
risk of potential future credit losses had such widespread effects on the financial system.  
The announcement by some rating agencies in early July that they would downgrade many 
asset-backed securities (ABSs) and collateralised debt obligations (CDOs) backed by pools 
of  sub-prime  mortgages  and  that  they  would  be  revising  their  methodologies  for  assigning 
new ratings resulted in a loss of confidence in ratings and caused investors to fundamentally 
reassess the expected distribution of returns on a wide variety of structured finance products 
and the risks embedded in these products. These developments contributed to an increase 
in risk aversion and a substantial decline in market liquidity (as illustrated in the chart on the 
right  of  slide  6)  and  resulted  in  a  sharp  drop  in  issuance volumes  in  structured  credit  and 
leveraged loan markets.  
One  of  the  main  channels  of  propagation  and  amplification  of  the  financial  market  turmoil 
proved to be the off-balance sheet vehicles created by banks for clients or for themselves to 
invest  in  structured  finance  products.  Money-market  fund  managers  and  other  investors 
apparently  had  underestimated  the  exposure  they  were  incurring  towards  the  risks  in  US 
sub-prime  mortgages  by  purchasing  asset-backed  commercial  paper  (ABCP)  issued  by 
these  vehicles.  Box  8  of  the  Review  provides  a  detailed  explanation  of  the  various  ABCP 
structures and how they were affected by the market turmoil. Ultimately, a liquidity squeeze 
was  triggered  in  the  unsecured  interbank  money  markets  because  of  the  larger-than-
expected  funding  liquidity  needs,  or  perceived  future  needs,  of  some  banks  with  liquidity 
commitments  to  off-balance  sheet  vehicles,  which  had  become  unable  to  roll  over  a  large 
share of their ABCP in the market. At the same time, other financial institutions with liquidity 
balances tended to hoard them.  
Box 9 of the Review discusses the various reasons for this hoarding behaviour which has 
persisted  until  the  present.  The  first  is  an  adverse  selection  problem:  counterparties  with 
liquid  balances  have  found  themselves  unable  to  distinguish  between  financial  institutions 
that have sizeable exposures to structured credit products and those who do not. Second, 
banks  have  hoarded  liquidity  for  precautionary  reasons  because  of  heightened  uncertainty 
about their own potential funding liquidity needs. Third, money-market funds have also built 
up  precautionary  liquid  balances  to  cover  the  risk  of  potential  redemption  requests  by 
investors.  
I will not review here in detail the central bank operations that aimed to ensure the orderly 
functioning of the money market as they have been discussed on several occasions, and are 
summarised  in  the  Review.  The  ECB  acted swiftly  and  decisively,  with  several  refinancing 
operations,  including  initially  operations  of  very  short  maturities  and  then  of  three-month 
maturity  to  address  tensions  in  the  term  money  market.  It  has  also  provided  additional 
liquidity,  above  the  benchmark  allotment  amount,  in  the  context  of  the  regular  main 
refinancing operations (MROs) but has continued to aim at balanced liquidity conditions at 
the end of the maintenance period. These operations have had stabilising effects on money 
market rates, by reducing the volatility of the very short-term interbank rate around the key 
policy  rate  of  the  ECB  and  by  containing  pressures  in  the  interbank  term  money  market. 
They have thus contributed to mitigating the effects of the turmoil on the financial system and 
the economy.  
However,  tensions  have  persisted  in  the  term  money  markets,  as  shown  by  the  spreads 
between  euro  deposit  rates  of  different  maturities  and  EONIA  swap  rates  which  have 
remained at elevated levels (see the chart on the left of slide 7). Continuing pressures have 
characterised  the  term  money  markets  globally,  including  the  US  dollar,  euro  and  pound 
sterling money markets (as shown by the chart on the right of slide 7). A main reason for this 
is the persistence of uncertainties surrounding the financial positions and liquidity needs of 
financial institutions.  
BIS Review 148/2007 
 3
Lessons 
2.3  
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  lessons  that  have  been  learned  so  far  from  the  market  turmoil. 
Although it is too early to draw definite conclusions, a number of weaknesses that have been 
revealed by the turmoil could be generally considered as a consequence of inadequate risk 
management  by  some  institutions  and  insufficient  market  discipline.  But  let  me  be  more 
specific and point to four broad areas of weakness in risk management which partly relate to 
the originate-and-distribute banking model and concern (i) the monitoring, assessment and 
management of credit risk; (ii) the management and pricing of funding liquidity risk ; (iii) the 
assessment  of  counterparty  risk  and  (iv)  the  role  of  the  so-called  conduits  and  structured 
investment vehicles in such a model and in the transmission of tensions from the credit and 
structured finance product markets to the money markets. Many of these weaknesses had 
been  previously  identified.  But  they  combined  in  such  a  way  that  few  had  anticipated  the 
potential severity of their joint impact on the core money markets.  
Several issues related to these risks and weaknesses require further examination, which is 
currently  being  undertaken  by  various  fora,  namely  the  Financial  Stability  Forum  and  the 
Basel Committee for Banking Supervision.  
One  important  issue  concerns  the  valuation  of  complex  structured  finance  products. 
Investors who had assumed that the model-based ratings for structured credit products had 
similar statistical properties to those for corporate bonds discovered that these products were 
very  different.  For  example,  the  so-called  bespoke  Collateralised  Debt  Obligations  (CDOs) 
have  became  impossible  to  value  in  an  acceptably  precise  manner  and,  at  the  current 
juncture,  efforts  are  made  to  either  mark-to-market  the  products  using  some  comparable 
tradable asset prices or the latest available price quotes.  
Another problem – closely related to the valuation issue – is the role the rating agencies have 
played in the development of structure finance products and the propagation of the turmoil as 
well  as  the  excessive  reliance  of  investors  on  ratings  in  their  credit  risk  assessments. 
Questions have also been raised about the potential conflicts of interest in the activities of 
rating agencies.  
Finally,  with  regard  to  funding  liquidity  risk,  an  important  ingredient  in  the  turmoil  which 
contributed to the propagation of tensions from the credit markets to the money market, was 
the maturity mismatch on the balance sheets of ABCP conduits. The risks associated with 
these  funding  mismatches  were  further  aggravated  when  market  liquidity  evaporated  from 
the markets for complex structured credit products. In addition, it became clear that banks 
often  did  not  have  adequate  contingency  plans  in  place  to  deal  with  unexpected  funding 
liquidity needs arising from the contingent liquidity facilities they had provided to conduits or 
to deal with the risk that they would face difficulty in syndicating the bridge loans they had 
extended to finance leveraged buyouts.  
Looking forward, at the current juncture the outlook for the subsequent evolution of the sub-
prime originated turmoil is highly uncertain. In order to obtain some indication on the possible 
propagation of market tensions, I would like to refer to Box 5 in the Review which focuses on 
the  interactions  between  credit  and  market  de-leveraging  cycles.  It  concludes  that  in  an 
environment in which bank loans are widely used as collateral for asset-backed securities, a 
sudden  increase  in  borrower  default  rates  could  have  implications  on  the  financial 
performance  of  banks  not  only  via  credit  risks,  but  also  through  market  and  income  risks. 
From  this  perspective,  an  important  issue  for  the  euro  area  and  global  financial  stability 
outlook is the way in which the ongoing re-pricing of credit risk feeds into the evolution of the 
credit cycle. 
A crucial channel that will determine the impact of money market tensions and the re-pricing 
of credit risk on the credit cycle and the real economy is the extent to which they will affect 
banks’ lending behaviour and, consequently, the financing conditions of households and the 
corporate sector. Indications of a considerable tightening of lending standards have already 
emerged on both sides of the Atlantic (see chart on the left of slide 9). In addition, there are 
4 
 BIS Review 148/2007
signs that corporate default rates – which reached historically low levels in recent years – are 
forecast to increase both in the US and in the euro area (as shown in the chart on the right of 
slide  9).  In  the  event  that  continued  or  increased  market  tensions  and  volatility  would 
constrain banks’ ability to extend credit to the non-financial sectors, the turn in the broader 
credit cycle could be accelerated and the downside risks to economic activity could increase. 
So far, however, bank credit expansion to the private sector in the euro area has remained 
robust. 
The external macro-financial environment 
3.  
Let me now turn to the other risks and vulnerabilities that have been identified in the FSR 
which  pertain  to  the  external  environment  and  the  euro  area  financial  and  non-financial 
sectors. Most of these risks have been previously stressed, but recent developments have a 
bearing on the likelihood that they materialise or on the expected impact on the euro area 
financial system and economy.  
The significant appreciation of the euro vis-à-vis the US dollar over the past months has had 
some  implications  for  the  outlook  for  the  adjustment  of  global  imbalances,  notably  for  the 
financing of the US current account deficit (see the chart on the left of slide 10). The financial 
market re-pricing seems to have triggered a noticeable change in the pattern of capital flows 
to the US. In July 2007, foreign net acquisitions of US long-term securities declined sharply 
and  investors  rebalanced  their  portfolios  towards  short-term  instruments.  In  the  following 
month, the US recorded net outflows from long-term securities (particularly equities), as well 
as a decrease in short-term liabilities. Although some of this capital appeared to flow back 
into the US capital markets in the months that followed, these events underlined the potential 
of  a  disorderly  unwinding  of  imbalances  in  the  case  of  financing  challenges  for  the  US 
external deficit.  
Aggregate demand and inflation pressures globally, and in the euro area in particular, have 
been affected by the substantial and persistent rise in oil prices, although the simultaneous 
appreciation of the euro has dampened the impact on the euro area economy. Limited spare 
capacity  amid  robust  demand  especially  from  emerging  economies,  and  continued 
geopolitical and supply risks are likely to keep oil prices at elevated levels as can be inferred 
from  futures  markets.  However,  there  is  considerable  uncertainty  which  is  skewed  to  the 
upside,  as  indicated  by  the  implied  distribution  for  future  oil  prices,  extracted  from  options 
contracts (see chart on the right of slide 10). 
Euro area corporate and household sectors 
4.  
Turning  to  the  vulnerabilities  in  the  euro  area  economy,  while  the  financial  position  of  the 
euro  area  corporate  sector  has  remained  relatively  sound  at  an  aggregate  level,  the 
likelihood of a turn in the credit cycle, while still low,  may have risen. This is because the 
amount of debt on firms’ balance sheets has continued to grow, as has the cost of rolling 
over short-term debt. Corporate profitability, although high, could be adversely affected by a 
less favourable macroeconomic outlook, tighter credit standards and the higher cost of debt.  
One issue highlighted on several occasions throughout the current year is the risk associated 
with  leverage  buy-out  (LBO)  transactions.  The  financing  packages  granted  to  the  largest 
LBO  projects  finalised  in  2006  and  2007  were  characterised  by  excesses  that  bear  some 
similarities to the practices in the US sub-prime mortgage markets. A further deterioration of 
financing  conditions  could  cause  some  of  the  firms  involved  to  default,  with  adverse 
consequences  to  the  collateralised  loan  obligation  (CLO)  market  where  LBO  loans  are 
frequently  used  in  asset  pools.  In  addition,  a  number  of  new  large  LBO  deals  have  been 
delayed  or  restructured  and  some  planned  transactions  have  been  withdrawn  from  the 
market  due  to  the  turmoil  (see  chart  on  the  left  of  slide  11).  All  in  all,  most  market-based 
indicators  suggest  that  the  current  outlook  for  the  euro  area  non-financial  corporate  credit 
BIS Review 148/2007 
 5
quality,  while  deteriorating  somewhat,  still  remains  overall  fairly  solid.  Default  rates  have 
remained low, but they started to rise in the second half of 2006 for the first time since 2003 
and  are  expected  to  rise  further  in  the  period  ahead.  The  balance  between  credit  rating 
upgrades  and  downgrades  of  non-financial  corporations  remained  at  a  level  close  to  that 
observed over the previous years. 
With regard to risks in the euro area household sector, despite some heterogeneity across 
euro area countries, the latest available data confirm a gradual moderation in the annual rate 
of house price inflation. In those countries where overvaluation appears to be most acute, 
house market price developments continue to represent a source of risk for household sector 
balance sheets, although income growth will typically be a more decisive determinant of the 
overall risk to household finances in euro area economies. At the same time, the growth rate 
of lending to households for house purchases has continued to decrease on average in the 
euro area, suggesting that the liability side of the households’ balance sheet has also grown 
more slowly (see chart on the right of slide 11).  
However, 
the  continuing  rise,  although  at  moderating  pace,  of  household  sector 
indebtedness and the signs of vulnerability in some housing markets add to the credit risk 
faced  by  euro  area  banks  in  the  short  to  medium  term.  All  in  all,  vulnerabilities  could  be 
exposed  in  those  parts  of  the  euro  area  where  residential  real  estate  valuations  are 
particularly  stretched,  where  households  are  highly  leveraged,  and  where  borrowing  has 
taken place primarily at variable interest rates and where loan-to-value ratios are high. The 
analysis presented in Box 6 concludes that due to the on average relatively comfortable loan-
to-value  ratios,  it  would  take  a  sizeable  house  price  decline  in  addition  to  any  adverse 
disturbance to the debt servicing capacity of mortgage borrowers before banks would incur 
large credit losses.  
Euro area financial institutions  
5.  
During the past few weeks, the focus on the implications of the financial market turmoil has 
concentrated  on  its  potential  effects  on  banks’  balance  sheets  and  profitability.  While  the 
financial  conditions  of  euro  area  large  and  complex  banking  groups  (LCBGs)  has  further 
improved in the first half of 2007, the extent of the negative impact of the ongoing credit risk 
re-pricing on their financial condition will become clear gradually as they report their full year 
2007 audited financial results.  
Based on data obtained from publicly available sources, Box 11 in the Review presents an 
analysis of the outcome of a simple stress-test pertaining to 21 LCBGs’ funding needs and 
capital ratios. Among these euro area LCBGs, 18 have exposures to ABCP programmes and 
9  to  leveraged  loan  warehousing  risks.  In  aggregate,  the  exposures  correspond  to  an 
additional  funding  requirement  for  these  banks  which  represent  5.2%  of  their  total 
outstanding  loans,  or  10.4%  of  their  deposit  base.  This  additional  funding  requirement, 
should it materialise, is likely to adversely affect these institutions’ earnings prospects.  
In a stress scenario where these exposures are fully taken back onto the balance sheets of 
the sponsoring banks, but where no potential second round effects are accounted for, some 
banks  would  see  their  capital  ratios  declining  quite  substantially,  but  even  the  worst  hit 
institutions would still remain solvent (see chart on the left of slide 12). However, because 
many LCBGs may also target some particular capital ratio above the regulatory minima in the 
pursuit of higher credit ratings, deteriorating capital ratios could have adverse consequences 
for their credit quality and future funding costs. 
All  in  all,  it  cannot  be  excluded  that  the  market  re-pricing  process  could  become  more 
disorderly, possibly revealing further and, so far hidden, risk exposures. Moreover, dividend 
policies  could  be  adversely  affected  for  several  institutions.  In  addition,  those  LCBGs  that 
rely  on  funding  from  non-deposit  sources,  and  those  that  are  particularly  active  in  the 
securitisation  businesses,  could  see  their  revenues  decline  significantly.  Reflecting  these 
6 
 BIS Review 148/2007
concerns,  forward-looking  financial  market  indicators,  such  as  banks’  CDS  spreads  and 
share prices, currently suggest that challenges pertaining to the banking sector are likely to 
remain in the near future (see the chart on the right of slide 12).  
The market turbulence has also raised concerns about the extent and nature of euro area 
insurers’  exposures  to  structured  credit  products.  Against  that  background,  some  insurers 
have  chosen  to  disclose  their  exposures  to  the  US  sub-prime  mortgage  asset-backed 
securities at the end of the first half of 2007 as shown in box 17 in the Review. These data 
shows that the exposures in general are limited, on average less than 1% of overall invested 
assets, and that they mostly relate to high-rated investment segments. These rather limited 
exposures, especially when compared with the US monoline insurers, can be explained by 
the differences in business models of euro area insures and by the fact that they had limited 
appetite for high levels of credit risk. Nevertheless, while euro area insurers might have fairly 
limited  direct  exposure  to  US  sub-prime  mortgages  or  more  generally  to  structured  credit 
products, secondary effects of the ongoing credit market turmoil might be of greater concern.  
Overall assessment of the financial stability outlook 
6.  
Let  me  now  provide  an  overall  assessment  of  the  risks  to  the  outlook  for  the  euro  area 
financial stability, as we see it at the current juncture.  
With  financial  systems  undergoing  a  process  of  de-leveraging  and  re-intermediation,  the 
uncertainty surrounding the financial stability outlook for the euro area has heightened. This 
uncertainty could persist for a considerable period of time until it becomes clearer how the 
total  valuation  and  income  losses,  which  could  be  sizeable,  facing  the  euro  area  financial 
system will be spread across individual financial institutions. Clarity will also be needed on 
how liquidity providers intend to deal with their commitments to off-balance sheet investment 
vehicles,  and  how  much  risk  will  eventually  flow  back  onto  the  balance  sheets  of  banks. 
Moreover,  until  conditions  in  the  US  housing  market  show  signs  of  improvement,  the 
possibility  of  further  tensions  surfacing  in  structured  credit  markets  cannot  be  excluded, 
especially if credit quality were to deteriorate in the broader US mortgage market.  
As the adjustment process in the financial sector over the coming months is likely to prove 
challenging, the financial system could be more vulnerable than before to the crystallisation 
of  other  risks  that  have  been  identified  in  previous  issues  of  the  FSR  and  which  remain 
relevant.  
Specifically, these risks are related to the following facts and developments: First, within the 
euro area, the substantial increase in household sector indebtedness together with signs of 
vulnerability in some housing markets adds to the credit risk facing euro area banks in the 
short  to  medium  term.  Second,  the  surge  of  leverage  in  parts  of  the  corporate  sector, 
especially that associated with LBO activity, raises the possibility of an adverse turn in the 
credit  cycle  involving  a  rise  in  the  default  rates  of  the  most  heavily  indebted  firms.  Third, 
although so far the hedge fund sector was relatively unaffected by the recent market turmoil, 
some uncertainties remain regarding hedge funds’ exposures to credit markets, as well as 
their  leverage  and  liquidity  risk.  Finally,  outside  the  euro  area,  persistently  wide  global 
imbalances continue to pose a risk that they will be unwound in a disorderly manner. This 
could  bring  about  further  tensions  in  global  capital  markets  and,  if  this  risk  were  to 
materialise,  it  could  pose  a  challenging  test  for  the  risk  management  and  loss-absorption 
capacities of key financial institutions.  
All in all, the risks to euro area financial system stability have materially increased over the 
past 6 months. 
There are, however, several mitigating factors: 
The economic outlook remains broadly favourable and, although pockets of vulnerability can 
be  identified,  the  balance  sheets  of  households  and  firms  are  largely  in  good  shape, 
BIS Review 148/2007 
 7
supporting  the  overall  creditworthiness  of  the  non-financial  sector.  Moreover,  the  capital 
positions of core financial firms are also generally sound.  
This  overall  positive  assessment  of  shock-absorbing  capacity  should  not  provide  any 
grounds  for  complacency  given  the  heightened  uncertainties.  In  an  environment  where 
balance  sheet  conditions  could  unexpectedly  change,  vigilance  is  of  the  essence  and 
financial institutions in particular should step up their efforts to effectively manage the risks 
that may lie ahead.  
In  this  respect,  recently  launched  initiatives  and  measures  that  are  being  taken,  both  by 
policy-makers  and  by  the  financial  industry,  aimed  at  restoring  confidence  and  addressing 
the  weaknesses  that  have  been  revealed  by  the  market  turmoil  should  contribute  to 
strengthening  the  resilience  of  the  financial  system.  I  would  like  to  stress  particularly  the 
importance of the new Basel II Capital Accord, which is to be fully implemented by January 
2008. Indeed, the new accord strongly relies on significantly improved risk management in 
determining  the  appropriate  level  of  capital  buffers  for  banks.  Nevertheless,  and  despite 
these improvements, the degree of sophistication of financial markets also calls for constant 
investment  in  stress-testing  methods  and  practices  in  order  to  ensure  that  banks  have  full 
understanding  of  the  potential  losses  they  might  incur  in  highly  unlikely  but  plausible 
scenarios and that they are adequately prepared to address the associated risks. 
 
 
  8 
 BIS Review 148/2007
    9
BIS Review 148/2007 
     10 
 BIS Review 148/2007
    BIS Review 148/2007 
 11
    12 
 BIS Review 148/2007
    13
BIS Review 148/2007 
     14 
 BIS Review 148/2007
  BIS Review 148/2007 
 15
