Hermann Remsperger: 2007 Financial Stability Review of the Deutsche 
Bundesbank 
Speech  by  Professor  Dr  Hermann  Remsperger,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main, 29 November 2007. 
 Ladies and gentlemen 
The Bundesbank’s Financial Stability Review has now become an institution. Nevertheless, I 
probably  don’t  have  to  give  a  detailed  explanation  of  why  the  authors of  the  2007  edition, 
which  we  completed  on  21 November,  were  faced  with  particular  challenges.  This  was 
essentially due to the fact that there is still ongoing uncertainty in the financial system. I shall 
come back to that in a moment.  
Let me first stress once again, however, that we – like the IMF, BIS and other central banks – 
had basically long been expecting a correction of risk premiums, which had been strikingly 
low for some time. The fact that a deterioration in the macroeconomic setting – specifically, 
the US mortgage market – might trigger a sweeping reassessment of financial risks was on 
our radar. Not least, two years ago we already pointed out the risks stemming from “exotic” 
types  of  mortgage  loans.  However,  I  don’t  know  anyone  bold  enough  to  claim  to  have 
accurately predicted the breadth and depth or the ramifications of the current problems.  
The  distortions  emanating  from  the  US  subprime  mortgage  market  have  been  placing  a 
strain on the international financial system now for several months in a way that constitutes a 
challenge for us all. That applies both to the diagnosis and the cure.  
Before my colleague, Professor Zeitler, goes into detail about the banks, I would like to give 
you a brief outline of the main thread running through the “Financial markets” section of the 
Financial  Stability  Review.  This  key  idea  links  (1) the  causes  of  the  financial  market 
turbulence with (2) the current situation and (3) the possible lessons that we can draw from 
the distortions. 
Transparency has suffered 
I  
Put concisely, in our Stability Review we conclude that the financial market turbulence is due, 
not  least,  to  a  decline  in  transparency  in  the  financial  system.  Contributory  factors  in  this 
have  been,  first,  new  financial  instruments  that  are  frequently  opaque;  second,  market 
players that are new or that have gained in importance and that are often not supervised or 
hardly  supervised  at  all;  and,  third,  a  new  business  model  in  which  loans  are  originated, 
securitised, and then, finally, sold to investors.  
Above all in the USA, this “originate-to-distribute” model was partly responsible for too many 
excessively  risky  loans  being  granted.  Only  now  is  it  gradually  becoming  clear  in  what 
portfolios these risks ultimately end up. These structural developments took place in a setting 
of abundant monetary liquidity and increasing financial globalisation.  
Ongoing uncertainty 
II 
We  have  given  a  detailed  account  of  the  tense  situation  in  the  financial  markets  in  our 
Stability Review. Today’s press conference gives me the opportunity to look at the situation 
somewhat more from the current juncture. In doing so, I would like to highlight the following 
three points.  
My first point goes somewhat beyond the current juncture, in fact, because it relates to the 
macroeconomic  projections.  What  is  crucial  is  that  at  least  some  potential  developments 
BIS Review 144/2007 
 1
already  incorporated  in  the  risk  scenario  have  now  become  a  reality  and  are  therefore  of 
greater relevance to the baseline scenario. That applies especially to the exchange rate and 
the  massive  increase  in  the  price  of  oil.  The  resulting  dampening  effects  for  Germany  will 
lead to a flattening but not a cessation of growth. The degree of flattening is likely to depend, 
not  least,  on  the  future  development  of  global  growth.  The  direct  impact  of  the  financial 
market disruptions on growth in Germany will, in our view, be limited.  
In  making  my  second  point,  having  discussed  the  macroeconomic  risks,  I  am  directly 
revisiting the financial markets. The last few days, in particular, have made it clear to us here 
that  we  are  essentially  dealing  with  two  overlapping  developments.  One  of  these 
developments is characterised by the fact that the problems emerging in the third quarter are 
still having an impact. An end to the necessary adjustments in the US real estate market is 
still  not  in  sight,  for  example.  If  anything,  the  incidence  of  defaults  on  variable-interest 
mortgage  loans  is  likely  to  grow  further.  An  extended  period  of  adjustment  has  to  be 
expected in the market for credit risk transfers, too. 
An  additional  development  consists  essentially  in  the  fact  that  other  financial  market 
segments  are  being  affected  by  adverse  factors.  The  government-sponsored  Freddie  Mac 
and Fannie Mae mortgage associations are but one example. 
My  third  point,  finally,  is  that  the  recent  problems  in  the  financial  system  were,  over  time, 
heading  more  and  more  in  the  direction  of  the  banks.  First,  risk  premiums  rose  and  the 
securitisation  markets  faltered.  Then,  however,  financial  institutions  found  themselves  in  a 
situation where they were forced into an unplanned and unwanted expansion of their balance 
sheets because they were unable to resell loans as planned. Furthermore, they were drawn 
on through liquidity lines to special-purpose vehicles. In this way, risks were transferred back 
into the banking system. At the same time, the assets taken back on to the books have to be 
backed by capital. This means that, with the approach of the annual financial statements as 
well, the banks’ capital base is coming somewhat more sharply into focus. Over the past few 
years, however, this capital base has improved visibly thanks to large profits and is therefore 
able to cushion the strains.  
International bodies working at full stretch  
III 
While  we  are  still  held  in  the  grip  of  the  current  events  in  the  financial  markets  and  the 
associated major uncertainties, the international bodies are already working at full stretch on 
analysing the causes and implications of the distortions in the financial markets. At the centre 
of  these  activities  stands  the  Financial  Stability  Forum.  The  FSF’s  function  is  mainly  as  a 
coordinator,  whereas  many  of  the  specific  tasks  have  to  be  performed  by  the  member 
institutions, such as the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision and the Committee on the 
Global Financial System. On behalf of the G7, the FSF has set up a working group chaired 
by Mario Draghi. This working group will prepare a comprehensive report for the G7 meeting 
in spring.  
This  report  will  contain,  above  all,  an  analysis  of  the  shortcomings  in  the  international 
financial system. On this basis, any need for action can then be identified. 
The  working  group’s  focal  points  are  consistent  with  the  insights  which  we  at  the 
Bundesbank  have  gained  so  far  and  have  outlined  in  the  Stability  Review  as  an  interim 
assessment  of  the  financial  market  turbulence.  This  concerns  four  key  areas:  risk 
management,  accounting,  ratings  and  the  regulatory  framework  –  and,  therefore,  in  large 
part,  issues  of  adequate  transparency  in  the  financial  system.  Improving  transparency  is 
something in which all the parties involved in the “originate-to-distribute” model – originators, 
arrangers,  investors  and,  not  least,  the  rating  agencies  –  must  and,  out  of  benign  self-
interest, will play a part.  
Ratings of structured financial products, in particular, are subject to model risks and the risk 
that assumptions about, say, the development of macroeconomic data or default correlations 
2 
 BIS Review 144/2007
turn  out  in  retrospect  to  be  unsustainable.  The  assumptions  made  should  therefore  be 
disclosed. In the necessary evolution of the rating methodology, thought also has to be given 
to examining how the rating results will respond to a variation of the assumptions in stress 
tests and scenario analyses, which should likewise be made transparent.  
As  the  risk  characteristics  of  structured  financial  products  differ  markedly  from  those  of 
traditional  bonds,  it  seems  to  me  that,  not  least,  the  use  of  a  separate  rating  scale  for 
structured  financial  products  would  be  a  promising  way  to  help  create  the  necessary 
transparency.  
At the same time, however, I would like to warn against exaggerated expectations. The more 
complex the financial products become, the more difficult it will be to create transparency. 
But  this  is  where  the  financial  institutions  themselves  also  have  a  responsibility  to  make 
greater  transparency  possible.  A  tendency  towards  simpler  financial  products  could  also 
bring back more light into the financial system.  
Last but not least, at the international level we shall certainly also have to take a good look at 
the  experience  of  money  market  management  during  the  financial  turbulence.  For  the 
Bundesbank, I would like to emphasise how much the operational framework as well as the 
operational capability in the Eurosystem proved their effectiveness. In short, we have passed 
a crucial test but are still faced with challenges.  
BIS Review 144/2007 
 3
