Caleb M Fundanga: Central bank independence – a Zambian perspective 
Opening  remarks  by  Dr  Caleb  M  Fundanga,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Zambia,  to  the 
symposium  “Central  Bank  Independence:  Does  it  hurt  the  Treasury?”,  Livingstone, 
12-13 November 2007. 
 to 
this 
to  you  all 
The Chairperson 
The Guest of Honour, the Hon Minister of Finance and National Planning 
The Attorney General 
Honourable Minister of Southern Province 
Honourable Members of Parliament present 
Fellow Central Bank Governors present 
His Worship the Mayor of the City of Livingstone 
Deputy Central Bank Governors present 
Senior Treasury Officials present 
The Executive Secretary of SADC 
Members of the Diplomatic Corps and Representatives of International Organisations 
present 
Distinguished Invited Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
On behalf of the Bank of Zambia and indeed on my own behalf, I would like to extend a very 
important  symposium  entitled  “Central  Bank 
warm  welcome 
Independence: Does it Hurt the Treasury?” To our colleagues from outside Zambia, I wish 
to extend a special welcome to you to Zambia, in particular to Livingstone, our tourist capital. 
Like the rest of Zambia, Livingstone is a city of tranquility with an easygoing African charm. 
The city is not short of interesting sites and places to visit. It hosts the Victoria Falls, also 
known  among  the  locals  as  “Mosi-o-Tunya,  the  Smoke  that  Thunders”  and  is  one  of  the 
world’s  seven  wonders!  There  is  also  a  game  park,  a  well-stocked  curio  market  and  the 
Mukuni  Cultural  Village,  among  the  many  attractions.  I  therefore  urge  you  to  find  time  or 
indeed stay an extra day or more to sample this special menu that Livingstone can offer. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, this symposium comes at a time when the economic performance 
of our country has significantly strengthened as partly reflected in a 6.2% growth in real GDP 
and single digit inflation of 8.2% for 2006. During the month of October 2007 inflation edged 
downward  to  9.0%.  Commercial  banks’  lending  rates  have  also  exhibited  an  investment-
supportive trend while the Kwacha has relatively been stable. Further, we have observed an 
improvement in the fiscal operations of the Government, which is supportive of the country’s 
inflation and growth objectives. 
Chairperson,  despite  these  achievements,  our  country  like  so  many  other  developing 
countries,  still  faces  some  challenges.  Notable  among  these  is  the  urgent  need  to 
consolidate  and  build  the  gains  so  far  attained.  In  particular,  the  need  to  attain  sustained 
price and financial systems stability can hardly be overemphasized. 
Chairperson, allow me to make a few comments on the issue we are all gathered here for, 
that  is,  Central  Bank  Independence  vis-à-vis,  the  Treasury.  The  issue  of  central  bank 
independence has taken some degree of prominence in the region, to the extent that it is one 
of  the  core  principles  underlying  the  draft  SADC  Model  Central  Bank  Bill  which  is  being 
actively  pursued  by  the  Committee  of  Central  Bank  Governors  in  the  Southern  African 
Development Community (SADC). 
In fact the issue of central bank independence, Ladies and Gentlemen, is as old as central 
banking itself, having been debated on and off over the past couple of hundred years. Many 
of  the  “transitional  economies”  of  Eastern  Europe  also  have  adopted  reforms  aimed  at 
BIS Review 136/2007 
 1
making  their  central  banks  more  independent.  19th  and  20th  century  economists  such  as, 
David Ricardo and John Maynard Keynes have all added their views to the subject. There 
seem to be consensus that central banks must be given a charter which includes a strong 
commitment to price stability, and the freedom and sufficient scope to pursue it. This means 
that  while  central  banks  may  not  have  goal  independence,  they  should  have  instrument 
independence.  One  need  not  dwell  on  the  desirability  of  price  stability.  Economies  work 
better  if  investment  and  wage  decisions  are  not  thwarted  and  confused  by  high 
inflation.  However,  the  fears  in  some  respects  are  associated  with  the  financing  of  fiscal 
deficits that governments in the developing world from time to time have to run to meet, for 
instance,  social  obligations  or  indeed  provide  public  goods.  This  indeed  is  a  genuine  fear 
(including others that may be identified) that this symposium must address. 
There  are  arguments  that  there  is  a  fundamental  conflict  between  independence  and  an 
obligation to finance the budget deficit – a conflict which often is resolved at the expense of 
price stability. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, it is in this regard that the Bank of Zambia and Professor Collier 
with the support of the UK Department for International Development partnered to hold this 
international symposium whose objectives include: 
(i) 
enhancing  understanding  of  advantages  of  central  bank  independence  among 
central  bankers,  Government,  banks,  non-bank  financial  institutions,  the  business 
community, academics and other stakeholders; 
drawing  lessons  and  sharing  experiences  of  central  bank  independence  in 
developed, emerging and developing countries; 
appreciating  the  political,  economic  and  legal  aspects  of  operationalising  greater 
independence for central banks; and 
exploring ways of enhancing fiscal and monetary coordination. 
(iv) 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  the  selection  of  papers  to  be  presented  and  discussed  at  this 
Symposium will provide a platform for sharing ideas required for practical solutions aimed at 
improving the Bank’s service delivery. As we tackle issues of inflation, exchange rates, and 
other  key  macroeconomic  indicators,  let  us  use  this  forum  to  outline  some  of  the  past 
developments  and  challenges  that  lie  ahead  of  us  as  we  aim  to  taking  Zambia’s  financial 
sector to higher heights. 
Lastly, let me say that while we can all learn from what other central banks have done, each 
country should establish the legal framework for its central bank, and allow for its evolution, 
in  ways  which  best  fit  that  country’s  own  history  and  institutions.  I  have  no  doubt  that  the 
symposium will be thought-provoking and highly participatory. 
May I wish all of you a good symposium and a memorable stay in Livingstone and Zambia in 
general. 
I thank you. 
(ii) 
(iii) 
2 
 BIS Review 136/2007
