T T Mboweni: Fasten your seatbelts! Monetary policy challenges in 
turbulent times 
Remarks  by  Mr  T  T  Mboweni,  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  at  the  13th 
Chintaman Deshmukh Memorial Lecture, organised by the Reserve Bank of India, Mumbai, 
2 November 2007. 
 Governor Reddy, 
Deputy Governors of the Reserve Bank of India 
Honoured Guests 
The Consul General of the Republic of South Africa Members of the India-South Africa 
Business Forum 
Ladies and Gentleman 
Introduction 
1.  
Thank  you  for  your  kind  invitation.  I  am  delighted  to  be  in  India  for  the  first  time  at  this 
juncture  as  you  celebrate  the  60th  anniversary  of  your  independence  and  enjoy  the 
international spotlight as the result of your splendid economic performance. 
It is a great pleasure and privilege to deliver this address today for two main reasons. Firstly, 
this lecture is in honour of a truly great person, Mr Chintaman Deshmukh. The contribution of 
Mr  Deshmukh  to  the  Indian  economy  cannot  be  exaggerated  as  is  borne  out  by  his  long 
service to this country as Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, member of the Planning 
Commission  of  the  Government  of  India,  Minister  of  Finance,  Vice-Chancellor  of  the 
University  of  Delhi  and  as  President  of  the  Indian  Statistical  Institute  from  1945  to  1964, 
amongst  others.  Secondly,  I  understand  that  this  lecture  series  has  been  graced  with  the 
presence of some truly remarkable speakers. I am indeed very grateful to be accorded the 
privilege to deliver this the 13th lecture in this series. 
The relationship between South Africa and India is a very strong one today. This relationship, 
however, goes back a long way in history. President Nelson Mandela, the former President 
of  the  Republic  of  South  Africa  encapsulated  this  quite  well  when  he  said  that  “India  and 
South Africa are two countries held so closely by bonds of sentiment, common values and 
shared experience, by affinity of cultures and traditions and by geography”1. The contribution 
of one of your and our favourite sons, Mohandas Karamchand (Mahatma) Gandhi, and the 
support received from the Indian authorities during the liberation struggle went a long way 
towards assisting South Africa to achieve democracy in 1994. The important role that India 
played in South Africa’s transition to democracy is without question and highly appreciated 
back home. 
Currently,  strategic  relationships  on  the  bilateral  and  multilateral  fronts  hold  promising 
opportunities of mutual benefit for both our countries. Already, bilateral trade between India 
and  South  Africa  has  increased  by  well  over  100  per  cent  in  the  past  four  years  and  a 
Preferential Trade Agreement between South Africa and India aims to treble trade by 2010. 
In  addition,  South  Africa  has  been  benefiting  from  India’s  rich  entrepreneurial  and 
educational skills base, with many teachers and other skilled personnel being employed in 
various institutions in our country. 
                                                 
1  
India Digest, vol 4, 1996. 
BIS Review 125/2007 
 1
(Arcelor  Mittal), 
telecommunications 
South Africa is currently India’s biggest investment partner in sub-Saharan Africa, serving as 
an important entry point into the rest of Africa. Indian investments in our country have grown 
significantly  over  the  years,  and  have  become  more  diverse,  ranging  from  vehicles  (Tata, 
Mahindra),  steel 
(Neotel)  and  pharmaceutical 
companies such as Ranbaxy. Investments from South Africa to India are also growing. South 
African Breweries acquired stakes in various Indian breweries. Other areas in which South 
African companies have invested include insurance, diamond exploration and infrastructure. 
In February 2006, Airports Company of South Africa (ACSA) won the contract for upgrading 
the Mumbai Airport. I also gather that SASOL is interested in a coal-to-synthetic automotive 
fuel  project  in  India  and  many  other  South  African  companies  have  signed  up  marketing 
contracts with Indian companies in the pharmaceutical sector. 
On  the  multilateral  front,  initiatives  such  as  that  involving  India,  Brazil  and  South  Africa 
(IBSA) and Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa (BRICSA) provide useful platforms 
for  the  strengthening  of  ties  between  our  two  countries  and  the  South-South  economic 
relations in general. In addition, over the last few years India, South Africa, Brazil and China 
have  been  recognised  as  systematically  important  countries  to  the  extent  that  they  have 
been regularly invited to the G-7 meetings in order to contribute to the discussion on global 
economic and financial matters. On the one hand, this participation has taken place usually 
on the fringes of the main G-7 meetings, thus raising the question about the seriousness with 
which the G-7 countries give to these meetings. On the other hand, these four countries have 
started to meet on a regular basis in order to strengthen co-operation on issues of common 
interest. 
As you may well be aware, one of the burning issues at the moment relates to increasing the 
“voice”  or  representation  of  emerging  market  economies  in  the  international  financial 
institutions such as the IMF and World Bank. This issue, together with other matters relating 
to the reform of the Bretton Woods Institutions have also been key agenda items addressed 
this year during the preparatory meetings for the G-20 meeting of Ministers of Finance and 
Central Bank Governors. As we know, South Africa currently chairs the G-20 Forum and it 
will  be  our  pleasure  and  privilege  to  welcome  the  Indian  G20  delegation  in  South  Africa 
during November. There are many issues which are the centre of focus to the G-20 this year, 
but most prominently are the fiscal elements of growth and development and the impact of 
commodity prices on member countries. South Africa and India do not only share common 
policy positions on many of these issues, but have also been very active in advocating the 
interests of emerging market economies in this new world order. 
Both countries have benefited from the economic reforms implemented over the last decade 
or so. However, both countries have similar economic challenges which in the main relate to, 
inequality, poverty alleviation and the reduction of unemployment. As a central banker, I wish 
to dwell on some issues and challenges facing monetary policy in emerging markets. 
The Great Moderation 
2.  
One  of  the  defining  characteristics  of  global  economic  developments  over  the  last  three 
decades has been termed the “Great Moderation” – the sustained decline in the volatility of 
output  and  inflation.  This  development  has  been  due  to  the  structural  changes  that  many 
economies have undergone. Some have attributed these changes to the implementation of 
better policy options and others to simply good luck. Professor Kenneth Rogoff of Harvard 
University  has  argued  on  many  occasions  that  improved  competitiveness  as  a  result  of 
increased  globalisation  coupled  with  better  policies  has  had  a  major  positive  impact  on 
inflationary  trends  in  many  countries.  The  declining  trend  in  inflation  since  1990  is  clearly 
evident in India and South Africa. Inflation in India has declined steadily from an average of 
10,3 per cent between 1990 – 1994, to 8,9 per cent between 1995-1999 and to 4,3 per cent 
in this decade. Similarly in South Africa, inflation has declined from an average of 12,5 per 
cent, to 7,3 per cent and to 5,1 per cent over the same time periods. 
2 
 BIS Review 125/2007
The economic growth performance of both countries has also been quite impressive. Since 
1990,  India  has  experienced  average  growth  rates  of  around  6  per  cent  per  annum, 
increasing to an impressive 9 per cent in the last two years. It is now widely expected that the 
Indian economic growth rate trajectory would be very close to, if not, in double digit territory 
in  the  short  to  medium  term.  South  Africa  has  not  been  performing  badly  either,  with  an 
average economic growth rate of about 3,4 per cent per year since the advent of democracy 
in 1994, compared to an average of below 1 per cent in the previous decade. Over the last 
three  years,  however,  growth  has  averaged  about  5  per  cent  and  the  current  trend  in  the 
economic growth rate is the longest experienced in the country's recorded history. 
Improved macroeconomic performance: some side-effects 
3.  
A side-effect of strong economic growth in many emerging market countries is the growing 
middle  class.  This  has  been  particularly  true  for  both  India  and  South  Africa.  The  rapid 
emergence  of  this  middle  class  brings  opportunities  that  will  have  a  significant  impact  on 
future  prosperity  but  also  poses  a  rather  unique  set  of  challenges  for  policymakers.  With 
increasing  affluence,  there  is  bound  to  be  a  change  in  consumption  levels  and  patterns. 
Related policy concerns centre on the implication of these changes on the demand for credit, 
the level of imports and the effect on asset markets. 
Then,  there  is  the  added  concern  that  the  unequal  distribution  of  wealth  brings  with  it  a 
tension between the haves and the have-nots. Under these circumstances, the broadening of 
access to financial services becomes an important policy objective. It is well recognised that 
the financial inclusion of the lower echelons of society into the financial sector is a powerful 
contributory factor to poverty alleviation through, for example, the provision of microfinance. 
As the demand for consumer finance increases, a greater range of financial instruments are 
needed and the financial sector will need to adapt. 
Over the past few decades, alongside financial deepening, household debt levels have been 
on the rise across a number of countries, both in developing and advanced countries. Rapid 
increases in household indebtedness have been associated with increases in asset prices, 
mainly house prices. These developments have indeed increased the probability of defaults, 
stemming in the main from adverse external shocks and rising interest rates. 
Whilst  household  debt  ratios  in  emerging  market  countries  like  South  Africa  are  low  in 
comparison  to  developed  countries,  the  rapid  rise  in  household  debt  and  credit  levels  has 
raised some concerns. In addition, high levels of inequality could mean that some groups are 
more  affected  than  others.  Hence,  the  close  monitoring  of  lending  practices  and  detailed 
reviews of credit standards can contribute towards the integrity and stability of the financial 
system.  In  the  case  of  South  Africa,  an  Act  of  Parliament  (the  National  Credit  Act)  was 
introduced to address this issue. It is still too early to ascertain the impact that this Act has 
had  on  borrowing  and  lending  practices  in  South  Africa.  There  is  little  doubt  that  positive 
outcomes may be realised. 
The role of monetary policy 
4.  
Central  Bankers  have  more  often  than  not  found  that  the  role  of  monetary  policy  in  the 
economic growth process is not fully understood or appreciated by all stakeholders. Let me 
use  the  South  African  case  to  illustrate  this  difficulty.  Monetary  policy  in  South  Africa  is 
implemented within an inflation targeting framework – the target range being an inflation rate, 
namely CPIX (headline inflation less mortgage interest costs) of between 3 and 6 per cent. 
CPIX inflation in South Africa has been outside the upper end of the target range for the past 
six  months.  In  addition,  there  has  been  a  deterioration  in  the  inflation  outlook.  This  has 
mainly been (initially) as a result of higher international food and fuel prices as well as robust 
consumer spending. However, underlying pressures have also become more broad-based. 
Although  credit  growth  has  slowed  somewhat  in  response  to  previous  monetary  policy 
BIS Review 125/2007 
 3
tightening, persistently high food and fuel costs have meant that the risks to the outlook are 
on  the  upside.  Inflation  expectations  have  consequently  risen  to  the  top  end  of  the  target 
range, with possible adverse implications for wage and price-setting decisions. 
These  risks  to  the  outlook  have  necessitated  the  tightening  of  monetary  policy  from  7  per 
cent in May 2006 to 10,5 per cent currently. The tightening of monetary policy has not gone 
down well in all parts of society. Not everyone appreciates that sacrifices – albeit short term 
sacrifices – are sometimes needed to secure medium to long term benefits. In general, due 
recognition is not always accorded to the role that price stability plays in securing sustainable 
economic activity. In our modern world where remote controls and microwave ovens are the 
order  of  the  day,  not  everyone  –  market  participants  included  –  always  comprehend  or 
appreciate that monetary policy operates with a relatively long lag. So in essence, one of our 
primary  challenges  as  Central  Bankers  relates  to  the  issue  of  regular  and  consistent 
communication. 
Communicating  monetary  policy  has  become  complicated  because  the  transmission 
channels have become somewhat clouded. Structural changes in the economy have had an 
impact  on  functional  relationships,  with  the  result  that  the  transmission  mechanism  of 
monetary policy has become more complex. Advances in econometrics and economic theory 
have  facilitated  the  construction  of  sophisticated  structural  models  incorporating  complex 
behavioural relationships. 
However,  as  Professor  David  Hendry  argues,  forecast  errors  are  very  often  the  result  of 
unanticipated  large  changes  or  shocks  within  the  forecast  period2.  Hence,  anecdotal 
evidence that provides a better understanding of the risks to the inflation outlook is essential 
to  monetary  policy-making.  As  the  Chairman  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Board,  Mr  Ben 
Bernanke recently remarked, good economic forecasts “involve art as well as science”3. 
The recent South African experience has shown that some of the conventional observations 
do not always hold in practice. For example, the South African currency (the Rand) has on 
more than one occasion weakened when interest rates were increased or appreciated when 
interest rates were lowered or when they remained unchanged. 
Furthermore, emerging market currencies in general are subject to extreme volatility resulting 
from  shifts  such  as  was  the  case  with  the  USD  recently,  having  an  impact  on  domestic 
monetary  conditions.  An  added  challenge  relates  to  the  fact  that  many  emerging  market 
countries have a relatively short track record of credible monetary policy. Credibility is earned 
over time and yet it is central to the anchoring of inflation expectations. 
Communication is further complicated by the global context in which inflationary pressures 
occur.  On  the  one  hand,  there  are  downward  inflationary  pressures  as  a  result  of  lower-
priced goods due to globalisation. On the other hand, increased trade protectionism, coupled 
with rising commodity prices due to robust world growth, pose risks to price stability. 
China and India play a significant role in the global economy today. This assertion to many is 
without  question.  The  disinflationary  benefits  of  globalisation  have  been  manifested  in 
China’s contribution to lower global inflation over the last decade, through lower import prices 
of  manufactured  goods,  more  specifically  clothing  and  footwear.  India  has  also  played  an 
important role through the supply of low-cost knowledge based services such as in the field 
of  information  and  communications  technology  (ICT).  However,  the  utopia  of  strong 
economic  growth  with  low  inflation  may  be  reversed  as  China  and  India,  because  of  their 
appetite for commodities, contribute to the surge in commodity prices, notably in base metals 
                                                 
2   Clements, M. P., and Hendry, D. F. (2002). Explaining forecast failure in macroeconomics. In Clements, M. P., 
and Hendry, D. F. (eds.), A Companion to Economic Forecasting, pp. 539-571. Oxford: Blackwells. 
3   Bernanke, B.S (2007). “Inflation expectations and inflation forecasting”. Monetary Economics Workshop of the 
National Bureau of Economic Research Summer Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts. 
4 
 BIS Review 125/2007
and  minerals,  especially  oil  prices. China  and  India  have  been  the  world’s  fastest growing 
energy markets with oil demand currently increasing at around 6 per cent for China and 5 per 
cent for India. As is not foreign to this gathering, oil prices have reached nominal high levels 
recently,  thus  placing  upward  pressure  on  inflation  and  complicating  the  task  of  monetary 
policy, specifically in the anchoring of inflation expectations. 
Regarding the commodity boom, South Africa is faced with a double-edged sword. Whilst the 
demand for commodities boosts export revenues, surging energy price increases have had a 
significant upward pressure on import costs and inflation in South Africa. 
Global financial market integration 
5.  
Global financial market integration has increased significantly in recent years, posing further 
challenges to the conduct of monetary policy. There are divided opinions on the advantages 
and  disadvantages  of  global  financial  market  integration,  but  to  a  large  extent  most  would 
agree  that  globalisation  has  been  positive  insofar  as  it  has  imposed  market  discipline  on 
policymakers.  There  are  many  who  think  that  globalisation  increases  economic  growth 
prospects  and  reduces  volatility.  In  some  respects,  globalisation  and  financial  market 
integration also make policymakers aware of the importance of independent central banks. 
Market  participants  are  more  comfortable  in  situations  where  central  banks  are  see  (and 
actually are) going about their primary objectives without fear, favour or interference from not 
only the political executive but all other stakeholders. 
One  of  the  main  challenges  of  this  new  global  environment  relates  to  the  so-called 
“contagion effect”. The 1997/1998 global financial crisis is one example. Another more recent 
example relates to developments in the US sub-prime market. To begin with the 1997/1998 
crisis,  economies  with  relatively  weak  macroeconomic  fundamentals  were  punished  the 
most. South Africa, in particular, at the time suffered from capital outflows, a depreciation of 
the  currency  and  subsequently  inflationary  pressures.  As  a  result,  monetary  policy  had  to 
flow with the tide, and interest rates were increased by a full 7 percentage points between 
April and September 1998. However, as painful as the process was, not only for South Africa 
but most emerging markets, lessons have been learnt and major reform of existing financial 
structures and adjustment in macroeconomic policies emerged. 
The  1997/1998  crisis  highlighted  concerns  surrounding  debt  sustainability.  As  a 
consequence,  many  emerging  market  countries  reduced  their  domestic  and  external  debt, 
and in the process, reduced currency mismatches which in some respects rendered these 
emerging markets less vulnerable to currency depreciation. There have also been efforts to 
reduce  the  external  vulnerability  through  debt  buybacks,  while  reserves  accumulation  has 
also been gathering pace over the past few years. India’s reserves are the world’s seventh 
largest at over USD250 billion. While South Africa’s are but a fraction of this, one needs to 
bear in mind that we have moved from a position of a negative net open forward position of 
almost USD26 billion at the end of 1998, to positive net reserves of US$28 billion, the result 
of which means that today the country boasts an investment grade rating. 
Furthermore, central banks have shifted towards market-based instruments which enhance 
their ability to respond to shocks. India is one such example, with the increased use of repo 
and reverse repo operations since the early 2000s, increasing the role of interest rates in the 
transmission mechanism of monetary policy. In South Africa’s case, we have come a long 
way  in  terms  of  the  development  of  our  own  bond  market,  a  process  in  which  the  South 
African Reserve Bank played a major role for a very long time. Today, we have a very deep 
and  liquid  bond  market,  if  not  the  most  liquid  bond  market  in  the  emerging  market 
economies. 
The positive impact of these financial market and macroeconomic developments have been 
put to the test on numerous occasions since the 1997/1998 crisis. The most recent event has 
been that of the US sub-prime mortgage market. This episode has been well documented 
BIS Review 125/2007 
 5
and I shall therefore not spend time on its detail. As you are aware, it was a liquidity and 
credit crisis, emanating from financial institutions having exposure to the sub-prime market 
and thereby incurring huge losses as delinquencies and foreclosures increased in the wake 
of tighter monetary policy. Although the sub-prime mortgage market was an issue related to 
the  US,  the  adverse  developments  were  transmitted  to  other  developed  and  emerging 
markets without much relation to domestic developments. 
At  the  height  of  the  crisis,  developed  and  emerging  market  equities  were  sold.  Foreign 
exchange markets witnessed a significant increase in volatility as carry trades were rapidly 
unwound and emerging market spreads rose significantly between late July and mid-August. 
However, the rise in emerging market debt spreads was not quite as pronounced as that of 
credit markets in developed economies. Spread movements also reflected higher risk credits 
moving the market in either direction. 
Although South African financial markets were affected by the events surrounding the sub-
prime  crisis,  our  money  markets  were  relatively  unaffected.  Our  banking  system  had  very 
little  exposure  to  the  sub-prime  market  and  liquidity  conditions  domestically  remained 
healthy. As  such, there was no need for the South African Reserve Bank to provide extra 
liquidity to markets. Throughout this turmoil, the principal challenge for the Monetary Policy 
Committee  has  been  to  address  inflation  concerns.  Inflation  developments  in  South  Africa 
have been such that at a time when global monetary policy seems generally to have turned 
from a tightening bias to an easier or neutral stance, our MPC has had to tighten monetary 
policy. 
Since  the  recent  turmoil  experienced  in  financial  markets,  money  market  conditions  have 
eased considerably, most notably in the US, following the Fed’s decision to cut interest rates 
by a cumulative 75 basis points. Money market conditions in Europe, however, remain a little 
more  strained,  probably  partly  due  to  the  fact  that  a  significant  amount  of  the  structured 
investment products were in fact purchased by European and other overseas investors. Up 
until  the  end  of  October,  financial  markets  recovered,  with  equity  markets  in  particular 
bouncing  back  to  levels  higher  than  at  the  time  of  the  turmoil.  However,  experience  has 
taught us that financial market gains could easily be reversed in times of uncertainty. 
Emerging  markets  could  still  feel  the  impact  of  an  abrupt  and  sustained  change  in  global 
financial conditions and international investor appetite for risk. Such a scenario could play out 
in the event of a significant slowing in global growth and rapid reversal of capital inflows in 
spite of better macroeconomic fundamentals. In a more globalised world, emerging market 
economies may be more vulnerable to shocks originating in developed economies than was 
the  case  previously.  Under  these  circumstances,  extreme  vigilance  on  the  part  of 
policymakers  remains  the  order  of  the  day.  The  current  uncertainties  in  global  financial 
markets will remain fixed on the radar screens of policymakers for some time to come. 
Conclusion 
6.  
In an interdependent world, the effects of uncertainties will not only be exaggerated but could 
also  affect  innocent  third  parties.  We  have  to  remain  vigilant  to  global  and  domestic 
developments in order to ensure that prosperous outcomes are not unduly threatened. Under 
these circumstances, policymakers have to ensure that strong economic fundamentals are 
maintained. The role of monetary policy in this process should not be underestimated. For 
emerging  economies,  like  India  and  South  Africa,  the  challenge  remains  to  reinforce  and 
build on the achievements of the last decade or so. 
Thank you very much, once again dear colleagues and Governor Reddy for inviting me to 
deliver this address. I will leave this remarkable country truly inspired and I am certain that 
this is not my last visit to this beautiful country. 
Thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS Review 125/2007
