Jean-Claude Trichet: The growing importance of emerging economies in 
the globalised world and its implications for the international financial 
architecture 
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the Tenth L 
K  Jha  Memorial  Lecture,  organised  by  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  Mumbai,  26  November 
2007. 
 I.  
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a great honour for me to give this lecture to pay tribute to the memory of the late Shri 
Lakshmi Kant Jha. 
L.K.  Jha  was  a  man  of  many  talents:  a  distinguished  administrator,  a  diplomat  and  an 
eminent  economist.  He  was  the  first  Chairman  of  the  General  Agreement  on  Tariffs  and 
Trade in the late 1950s and Governor of the Reserve Bank of India in the late 1960s. He held 
several important positions in the Government of India. In the course of his career, L. K. Jha 
also  became  a  respected  member  of  the  Brandt  Commission.  As  some  of  you  perhaps 
remember, this commission advocated a new world economic order in which the developing 
countries, including India, would have a more equitable share. L. K. Jha sadly left us about 
20 years ago. However, if he and other members of the Brandt Commission were to look at 
the  world  economy  today,  they  would  be  probably  surprised  to  see  how  much  it  has 
changed. And one of the most important of these changes is precisely the growing share of 
the rapidly developing economies, which we now term the emerging markets, in the global 
economy.  India  represents  one  striking  example  of  this  success.  Together  with  other 
emerging markets, India is playing a crucial role in the process of globalisation of the world 
we live in. 
Some  might  think  that  this  is  a  new  phenomenon.  It  is  not.  India  has  been  at  the  core  of 
globalisation since its very outset. Let us just remember how it all started. Globalisation did 
not start 20 years ago, when capital controls around the world began to be lifted. It did not 
start  50  years  ago,  when  multilateral  discussions  on  trade  were  launched.  Nor  did 
globalisation start 150 years ago, with the industrial revolution. Nor did it start 600 years ago, 
with  the  voyage  of  Christopher  Columbus  to  America.  Of  course,  this  voyage  marked  the 
linking of two continents, Europe and America. But there is one thing which we tend to forget. 
Christopher  Columbus  did  not  want  to  travel  to  America.  He  wanted  to  reach  India!  His 
ambition  was  not  to  discover  a  new  continent.  It  was  to  open  an  alternative  route  to  India 
using  knowledge  about  the  spherical  nature  of  the  earth  to  sail  directly  west  across  the 
“Ocean  Sea“,  i.e.  the  Atlantic.  India  was  part  of  the  globalisation  process  from  its  very 
historical outset, as much as it is part of it today. 
In this lecture, I would like to share some of my thoughts on the growing importance of India 
and other emerging economies in the globalised world. This group of economies is not easy 
to define, I admit. The term “emerging markets“ was coined by the World Bank more than a 
quarter of a century ago, but it only started to become popular in the mid-1990s.1 From a 
handful of such economies, mostly in East Asia, the circle has gradually expanded to include 
several countries in Latin America, central and eastern Europe, and the Middle East, as well 
                                                 
1   The term was coined in 1981 by Antoine W. van Agtmael of the International Finance Corporation of the World 
Bank. 
BIS Review 138/2007 
 1
as a few countries in Africa.2 India, alongside Brazil, China and Russia, is among the largest 
of  the  emerging  markets,  which  are  expected  to  become  the  giants  of  the  twenty-first 
century. But I would also like to offer some reflections on the implications of these changes. 
Not only are emerging markets becoming larger players in the global economy. They will also 
need to assume growing responsibilities in a global context. This means that the rules of the 
game must develop accordingly. And this is notably reflected in important developments over 
recent  years  in  the  international  financial  architecture,  the  network  of  institutions  and  fora 
which are involved in the governance of the world economy in macroeconomic and financial 
matters. 
I will therefore elaborate on these two aspects: first, the importance of the emerging markets, 
which is already significant and is likely to grow further; and second, on the implications of 
this growing role for the governance of the world economy in macroeconomic and financial 
matters. 
The growing importance of the emerging markets in the global economy 
II.  
The  growing  importance  of  the  emerging  markets  is  striking  in  several  respects:  in 
demographic  terms,  in  economic  terms  –  both  at  the  macroeconomic  level  and  at  the 
microeconomic level – and, perhaps even more promising, in cultural and scientific terms. 
Demographic importance 
Consider  first  population.  Emerging  market  countries  are  home  to  over  half  of  the  world’s 
population. India, with a population of more than 1.1 billion, is evidently one of the world’s 
two population giants, together with China. But it is also a young giant, which is still growing! 
Indeed, expected demographic trends suggest that India could overtake China as the world’s 
most populous country within the next two decades, according to projections by the United 
Nations.3 Moreover, due to the profound economic transformations that are ongoing, many of 
the emerging markets are faced with rapid urbanisation and massive migrations from rural 
areas  to  cities.  Cities  in  emerging  markets  have  therefore  grown  in  size  considerably.  At 
present,  seven  of  the  ten  largest  metropolitan  areas  in  the  world  are  located  in  emerging 
markets. Mumbai – where I have the privilege of speaking today – is the world’s sixth largest 
city.  Its  population  –  about  18  million  –  compares  with  that  of  some  industrial  countries  in 
their entirety; for instance, it is close to the population of Australia. 
Economic importance: macro and micro evidence 
The numbers are startling in terms of population, but they are also increasingly impressive in 
terms  of  economic  size.  Emerging  markets  account  for  almost  40%  of  world  GDP  at 
purchasing power parity, although still only 20% at market value. While these economies are 
already large, they continue to grow vigorously, at more than 7% per annum on average over 
the  past  six  years,  over  2%  percentage  points  above  the  world  average.  India  has  been 
growing  even  more  rapidly,  at  close  to  8%  per  annum  over  this  period.  The  emerging 
                                                 
2   For the purposes of this lecture, the term “emerging markets” refers to a group of economies selected from the 
EU's neighbouring regions, Latin America and Asia, in line with the article entitled “Financial flows to emerging 
market economies: changing patterns and recent developments” published in the January 2005 issue of the 
ECB's Monthly Bulletin (pp. 59-73). These economies comprise, on the European fringe, Russia and Turkey; 
in Latin America, Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico and Venezuela; and in Asia, China, Hong Kong 
SAR, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore, South Korea, Taiwan and Thailand. This definition may in some 
instances be slightly modified depending on data availability, however. 
3   The  period  of  “demographic  dividends”  –  characterised  by  faster  labour  force  than  population  growth,  a 
support to economic activity - is therefore expected to end in China, but not in India. See R. Cooper , “How 
integrated are Chinese and Indian labour into the world economy?”, mimeo, February 2006. 
2 
 BIS Review 138/2007
markets have therefore become one of the main engines of world growth, with a projected 
contribution  of  over  a  half  this  year.4  The  vigour  of  growth  in  emerging  markets  and  its 
resilience are good news for all of us. It suggests that the world economy may be better able 
to rely on the dynamism of these economies, in particular should growth in other regions lose 
some momentum.  
Emerging countries’ citizens have reaped the benefits of such rapid development with higher 
standards of living. Over the last decade, GDP per capita has risen by 30% on average, to 
reach over USD 9,000. In India, the rise has been even faster, with a doubling of real GDP 
per capita in the last ten years. The integration of emerging economies into global markets 
for goods and services has been similarly swift. If you look at world exports of goods and 
services,  the  combined  share  of  emerging  markets  doubled  between  the  early  1990s  and 
2006,  to  reach  roughly  30%.  Again,  the  integration  of  India  into  global  markets  has  been 
even faster. India’s share in world exports of goods and services tripled between the early 
1990s and 2006, to close to 1.5%, with a notable acceleration in the last three years, due to 
dynamic exports of services, of course including IT and IT-enabled services. 
Let me turn now to the microeconomic evidence for the growing importance of the emerging 
markets,  which  is  perhaps  even  more  striking.  Here  are  a  few  examples.  Four  companies 
among  the  world’s  20  largest  in  terms  of  market  value  originate  from  emerging  markets.5 
Two  oil  and  gas  firms,  one  Russian  and  one  Chinese,  rank  in  the  top  ten.  Moreover, 
according to Forbes, seven of the 20 richest individuals in the world are from the emerging 
markets, with three from India alone.6 The number of millionaires (in terms of US dollars or 
euro) is rapidly rising; Forbes estimates that there were some 80,000 in India in 2005.7 Of 
course, that is not to say that the challenges posed by income distribution are not among the 
highest priorities of most emerging market countries, including India. Eliminating poverty is at 
the top of the agenda. 
Long-term economic outlook 
The  present  looks  promising  for  emerging  market  economies,  but  the  future  seems  even 
brighter. The projections for long-term growth, based on demographic trends and models of 
capital  accumulation  and  productivity,  tell  us  that  emerging  markets  are  likely  to  become 
even weightier in the world economy tomorrow than they are today. Of course, projections at 
very  distant  horizons  are  somewhat  speculative,  but  they  do  offer  an  insight  into  possible 
secular developments. In this respect, one study found startling results regarding the growth 
prospects of emerging markets. India, together with Brazil, Russia and China, could be over 
half  the  size  of  today’s  six  largest  industrialised  economies  by  2025,  and  in  less  than  40 
years they could overtake them.8 Looking ahead to 2050, China would be the world’s largest 
economy  and  India  would  be  its  third  largest,  behind  the  United  States.  A  similar  picture 
emerges from other studies, with some nuances.9  
                                                 
4   See IMF, “World Economic Outlook”, September 2007. 
5   See  Forbes'  Global 
2000 
list 
2000_Rank.html). 
(http://www.forbes.com/lists/2007/18/biz_07forbes2000_The-Global-
6   See 
Forbes' 
list 
of 
billionaires 
(http://www.forbes.com/lists/2007/10/07billionaires_The-Worlds-
Billionaires_Rank.html). 
7   See Merrill Lynch and Capgemini, “World Wealth Report, 10th Anniversary”, 1996-2006. 
8   See D. Wilson and R. Purushothaman “Dreaming with BRICs: the path to 2050”, Global Economics Paper No 
99, Goldman Sachs, 1 October 2003. 
9   See e.g. J. Hawksworth “The world in 2005: how big will the major emerging market economies get and how 
can  the  OECD  compete?”,  Price  Waterhouse  Coopers,  March  2006;  S.  Poncet  “The  long-term  growth 
prospects of the world economy: horizon 2050”, CEPII Working Paper No 2006, 16 October 2006. 
BIS Review 138/2007 
 3
If  history  is  any  guide,  these  developments  are  unsurprising.  It  suffices  to  recall  how 
significant  India’s  weight  in  the  world  economy  was  two  millennia  ago,  when  the  Middle 
Kingdoms were ruling in India and the Roman empire was ruling in Europe and North Africa. 
At that time, India was by far the world’s largest economic power, accounting alone for about 
a third of world output.10 Moreover, at par with China, it subsequently remained the largest 
economy  in  the  world  for  several  centuries,  until  the  eve  of  the  industrial  revolution.  Seen 
from  this  long-run  perspective,  the  rapidly  growing  importance  of  India  in  today’s  world 
economy  seems  to  be  a  return  to  normality.  The  developments  we  observe  today  are 
therefore  likely  to  be  the  precursor  of  a  profound  rebalancing  in  the  distribution  of  world 
output  tomorrow.  These  developments  call  for  constant  monitoring  and  cooperation  in  the 
international  community,  however.  It  cannot  be  excluded  that  this  process  of  rebalancing 
might  be  “non-linear“, with  episodes  of  discontinuity,  perhaps  also  including  economic  and 
financial crises somewhere down the line. 
Cultural and scientific importance 
But allow me to also consider the emerging markets from a different angle, which you will 
perhaps  find  surprising  for  a  central  banker.  We  central  bankers  are  known  to  look  at 
countries through the unexciting lenses of numbers, facts and figures. This is entirely true. 
But we are convinced that economic figures are closely associated with the scientific overall 
level  of  one  particular  society  and  that  cultural  developments  and  influence  are  closely 
related to economic success. It is therefore not surprising that emerging countries are rapidly 
growing in influence, importance not only economically but also culturally. 
Speaking of the cultural and scientific importance of a nation which has historically been at 
the source of European languages, literature and mathematics is paradoxical! 
Turning to the present times, there are a vast array of indicators that underscore the growing 
influence of the contemporary culture and science of emerging economies in general and of 
India in particular. Being here in India, I am bound to mention film-making as a first example. 
As you will know, India is the largest world producer of films, with over 900 in 2005, ahead of 
the European Union, with about 800, and the United States, with about 700.11 Of course, this 
is  due  to  the  success  of  “Bollywood“,  a  label  now  well-known  across  the  world.  Other 
emerging markets, such as China and Russia, rank among the top ten film producers. Take 
the internet as a second example. The internet plays a crucial role in making the world more 
globalised,  and  here  too  the  weight  of  emerging  markets  is  already  impressive.  There  are 
almost  as  many  internet  users  in  India  (close  to  40  million)  as  the  entire  population  of  a 
country such as Spain.12 Asia is the region with the highest number of internet users, even 
when Japan is excluded, with over 310 million. It is ahead of North America, with 230 million 
users.  Last,  consider  my  final  example:  the  number  of  Nobel  prizes  awarded.  Here  again, 
emerging market countries are rapidly growing in importance. In the ten years starting from 
1980, 24 nationals from emerging market countries were awarded a Nobel prize. Within only 
six  years  of  the  new  millennium,  this  figure  is  already  almost  as  high  (22).  All  in  all,  the 
growth  in  the  economic  weight  of  emerging  market  countries  and  the  rise  in  their  cultural 
importance are very much developing in a synchronised manner. 
                                                 
10   See A. Maddison The World economy: Historical Statistics, OECD, 2003. 
11   See  European  Audiovisual  Observatory, 
“World 
film  market 
(http://www.obs.coe.int/oea_publ/market/focus.html). 
trends 
 focus 
2006” 
12   See Internet World Stats (http://www.internetworldstats.com/stats.htm). 
4 
 BIS Review 138/2007
Euro area perspective 
Before I move on to the implications of the growing importance of emerging countries for the 
governance of the world economy in macroeconomic and financial matters, let me briefly tell 
you how we in the European Central Bank see the growing role of the emerging markets. To 
us, the message is clear: the growing role of the emerging markets is good news for the euro 
area, the group of 13, soon to be 15, European countries, with 320 million fellow citizens, that 
share the euro as their single currency. In particular, vigorous growth in emerging markets 
increases  the  demand  for  those  goods  and  tradable  services  where  the  euro  area  has 
comparative  advantages.  Emerging  market  competition  also  strengthens  the  incentives  to 
make  further  progress  in  terms  of  structural  reforms  in  our  economies,  which  are,  in  any 
case, needed.  
The euro area, in addition, has the potential to take advantage of the new opportunities that 
the  development  of  the  emerging  markets  creates.  Our  exports  and  imports  of  goods  and 
services account for around one-fifth of GDP, more than in the United States or in Japan. In 
this  respect,  the  euro  area  is  also  increasingly  open  to  the  emerging  markets.  Our  trade 
relations with emerging Asia, Russia and with central and eastern European economies have 
strengthened noticeably over time. The share of emerging markets, taken together, in euro 
area trade has grown from about one-third, when the euro was introduced in 1999, to more 
than 40% today. Trade relations with India have equally strengthened over time. The euro 
area is also largely open financially. If I focus on emerging markets, perhaps one of the most 
interesting developments in recent years is that the euro area has become an increasingly 
attractive  destination  for  foreign  direct  investment  from  the  largest  of  these  economies, 
although starting from very low levels. Indeed, between 1999 and 2005 the stock of foreign 
direct  investment  from  Brazil,  Russia,  India  and  China  in  the  euro  area  tripled,  to  reach 
around  €12  billion.  This  is  good  news,  as  these  investments  represent  a  new  source  of 
capital,  with  potentially  beneficial  effects  on  euro  area  growth.  Moreover,  they  might  help 
European firms access emerging markets more easily than on their own. 
The bottom line of my brief overview is: emerging market countries are increasingly important 
global players in all dimensions, be they economic, financial, cultural or scientific. This is a 
welcome, systemic, development. In turn, this has important implications for the governance 
of the global economic and financial system. What are indeed these implications? This is the 
second issue I would like to address today. 
Implications for the international financial architecture 
III. 
It  is  evident  that  the  systemic  evolution  we  are  witnessing  in  the  global  economic  and 
financial system calls for systematic changes in the global policy framework. There are new 
players.  They  are  gaining 
they  also  have  more 
responsibilities in the global arena and that the rules of the game need to adapt in order to 
keep pace. 
But  there  is  another  reason.  Globalisation  has  put  all  economies  around  the  globe  in  the 
same  boat.  Something  that  happens  in  one  economy  is  often  no  longer  a  mere  domestic 
event. Its implications can sometimes extend to the entire global system. Remember how 12 
years ago the Tesobonos crisis in Mexico developed from a local phenomenon into an issue 
for the international financial community.13 Remember the Asian crisis.14 Remember how the 
importance.  This  means 
that 
in 
                                                 
13   See,  for  instance,  S.  Edwards,  “On  crisis  prevention:  lessons  from  Mexico  and  East  Asia”,  NBER  Working 
Paper, No. 7233, July 1999. 
14   For an overview of the lessons to be drawn from the Asian crisis, see T. Ito et al., “Ten Years After the Asian 
Crisis:  What  Have  We  Learned  or  Not  Learned?”,  Editors'  Overview,  Asian  Economic  Policy  Review,  June 
2007 - Vol. 2, issue 1, pp. 1-17. 
BIS Review 138/2007 
 5
global  system  had  to  digest  crises  in  Russia  and  Argentina  as  well  as  the  bursting  of  the 
technology bubble around the turn of the millennium.15 All economies which have a systemic 
importance  should  therefore  be  involved  in  discussing  and  participating  in  the  collegial 
response of the international community to issues of global relevance. 
This is why the governance of the world economy in macroeconomic and financial matters 
has been changing rapidly in terms of both format and substance. 
Implications for the format  
Consider  first  format.  The  various  international  institutions  and  fora  which  are  involved  in 
international  policy  dialogue  on  macroeconomic  and  financial  affairs  have  strived  over  the 
past ten years or so to better integrate emerging markets. Let me take three examples. One 
of the most important of these fora is the Group of Seven or G7, where finance ministers and 
central bank governors of the seven most important industrialised nations of the world meet 
several times a year to discuss issues of mutual interest. The G5, soon to become the G7, 
was created as an informal forum in the 1970s. It is sometimes criticised for not reflecting the 
political  and  economic  realities  of  the  twenty-first  century.  I  have  had  the  privilege  of 
attending  all  its  meetings  over  the  past  18  years.  My  experience  is  that  the  G7  meetings 
have proven an invaluable forum for cooperation on macroeconomic policies and for giving, 
when appropriate, signals to market participants. The G7 is adapting to the new political and 
economic realities through what is termed “outreach“. The G7 countries have acknowledged 
the necessity of involving other players in their discussions. In particular, it is now standard 
practice  for  finance  ministers  and  governors  from  emerging  economies  –  and  sometimes 
also from developing countries – to be invited to join these discussions. This is the case for 
oil-producing  countries,  in  particular.  For  instance,  in  spring  2006  finance  ministers  from 
certain oil-exporting countries joined the G7 in a discussion on global imbalances. 
At  the  level  of  heads  of  state  and  government  another  important  step  was  made  a  few 
months  ago.  A  new  form  of  informal  cooperation  between  G8  members  (i.e.  the  Group  of 
Seven and Russia) and important emerging economies has been launched. Challenges have 
become  global.  Global challenges  require  global  solutions.  And  global  solutions  cannot  be 
found without the active participation of important players, from both mature and emerging 
market  economies.  India  is  of  course  part  of  these  important  emerging  economies,  as  are 
Brazil, China, Mexico and South Africa. At their meeting in Heiligendamm last summer, the 
G8 countries and these important emerging economies committed to embark on a high-level 
dialogue on issues of global dimension, issues which will be at the top of the agenda in the 
years ahead. They include, for instance, cross-border investment, research and innovation, 
energy efficiency and development. The Heiligendamm process is a very welcome one.  
The  creation  of  the  informal  grouping  of  the  G20  in  1999  is  a  major  change  in  global 
governance,  fully  taking  into  account  the  structural  transformation  associated  with  the 
growing importance of the emerging economies. It was created to examine major economic 
and financial global issues at the time of the Asian crisis, fully recognising that all economies 
that had a systemic influence should be partners at the global level.  
Since  1999  the  G20  has  turned  out  to  be  a  very  important  international  policy  forum  for 
dialogue  and  consensus-building  among  systemically 
important  economies,  both 
industrialised and emerging. India held its presidency in 2002. I have a very vivid memory of 
this meeting in Delhi where, for the first time, the international community through the G20 
endorsed  the  idea  of  the  voluntary  “Principles“  for  prevention  and  solution  of  sovereign 
crises, which I had myself suggested when it appeared that the “SDRM“ was not workable. 
The  G20  has  facilitated  consensus  on  crucial  policy  issues  of  the  international  reform 
                                                 
15   In particular, on the Russian crisis see e.g. B. Pinto, E. Gurvich and S. Ulatov, “Lessons from the Russian 
Crisis of 1998 and Recovery, Managing Volatility and Crises: A Practitioner's Guide”, 2004, draft. 
6 
 BIS Review 138/2007
in  a  process  of  peer  review 
agenda. It has organised several workshops to deepen the understanding of issues of global 
relevance  and  has  engaged 
to  promote  countries’ 
implementation of market-based economic systems. In the early years of its existence, the 
G20 put special emphasis on financial stability and crisis prevention, including aspects such 
as prudent debt management, domestic financial deepening and exchange rate regimes. Its 
agenda has widened since then. It now includes also the global policy challenges ahead of 
us, such as development, energy and climate change. In my view, it is the format of the G20 
which  makes  it  a  success.  Not  too  large,  not  too  small!  Its  composition  and  size  strike  a 
balance  between  giving  the  G20  a  high  degree  of  legitimacy  while  at  the  same  time  also 
allowing frank dialogue between the members. In recent years, the G20 has also played an 
active  role  in  contributing  to  the  reform  of  the  Bretton  Woods  institutions,  the  International 
Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  and  the  World  Bank.  It  has  been  committed  to  strengthening  their 
credibility, effectiveness and legitimacy. It has also followed closely the progress made with 
policy and internal governance issues. 
Alongside the G7 and the G20, significant reform efforts are indeed under way at the IMF to 
adapt the institution to a new environment and a new set of players. This is my last example 
of the substantial developments that the governance of the world economy is experiencing in 
terms of format. The key issues here are quota and voice, two important elements defining 
the  representation  of  Fund  members.16  In  addition,  the  way  the  IMF  carries  out  its  policy 
work is changing. For instance, last year saw the launch of the first multilateral consultations, 
an innovative approach that aims to bring together countries with a shared responsibility for 
global  issues.  These  first  multilateral  consultations  were  dedicated  to  one  of  the  key  risks 
weighing on the world economy, namely global imbalances. The consultations involved both 
mature and emerging economies, including the euro area, the United States, Japan, China 
and Saudi Arabia, again illustrating the fact that large current imbalances are no longer an 
issue for mature economies only, but a truly global issue. We at the ECB welcomed these 
discussions as a way to foster the implementation of the agreed strategy to address global 
imbalances.  Evidently,  these  discussions  are  also  of  relevance  to  India.  Large  current 
account  imbalances  worldwide  go  hand-in-hand  with  sizeable  cross-border  capital  flows. 
India  has  been  confronted  with  challenges  posed  by  strong  capital  inflows.  This  is  why 
addressing imbalances is in the interest of the international community as a whole. 
Implications for the substance  
Not  only  the  form  but  also  the  substance  of  the  governance  of  the  world  economy  in 
macroeconomic  and  financial  matters  is  changing.  This  will  be  my  last  point.  The 
macroeconomic  and  financial  situation  in  emerging  economies  today  looks  strong.  But  we 
know  it  was  not  always  so.  We  have  seen  both  good  and  bad  times.  This  is  why  many 
initiatives  have  been  taken  to  strengthen  the  resilience  of  countries’  macroeconomic  and 
financial  performance  and  policies  following  the  string  of  crises  of  the  1980s  and  1990s. 
Reforms can obviously take many forms. But there are three guiding principles which, in my 
view, should always be kept in mind: transparency, good practices and dialogue. 
Allow  me  to  take  transparency  first.  Investors,  borrowers,  lenders  and  economic  agents  in 
general  cannot  make  proper  decisions  without  adequate  information.17  Easy  access  to 
information facilitates investment decisions, the management of risk and market discipline. 
This  in  turn  gives  appropriate  incentives  in  the  conduct  of  macroeconomic  and  structural 
                                                 
16   See,  for  instance,  M.  Skala,  C.  Thimann  and  R.  Wölfinger  'The  search  for  Columbus'  egg  –  finding  a  new 
formula to determine quotas at the IMF', ECB Occasional Paper, no. 70, August 2007. 
17   For  recent  –  more  formal  –  treatment  of  the  role of  information  and  transparency  see,  e.g.,  D.  Kahneman, 
“Maps of Bounded Rationality: Psychology for Behavioral Economics”, American Economic Review, 2003, 93 
(5), pp. 1449-75 or S. Morris and H.S. Shin, “Social value of public information”, American Economic Review, 
2002, 92(5), pp. 1521-1534. 
BIS Review 138/2007 
 7
for  macroeconomic  and  data 
policies.  Easy  access  to  information  also  allows  investors  to  better  differentiate  across 
economies, borrowers and companies. Ultimately, this helps to lessen herding behaviour and 
contagion  when  market  volatility  increases.  This  is  why  transparency  is  so  crucial.  And  in 
recent  years,  a  lot  of  progress  has  been  made  to  enhance  transparency  and  to  facilitate 
access  to  information  as  well  as  its  dissemination  to  market  participants.  I  give  you  one 
example. Ten years ago, the nature of economic and financial data and the way they were 
reported varied significantly across countries. Even simple concepts, such as debt, could be 
understood  very  differently  around  the  world.  This  severely  constrained  our  ability  to 
compare financial vulnerability across countries. But thanks to work carried out at the IMF, 
the  special  standards  for  dissemination  of  economic  and  financial  data  have  become  a 
widely recognised benchmark to which a large and increasing number of countries adhere. 
Of  course,  there  are  still  areas  where  more  work  needs  to  be  done.  One  of  them,  for 
instance,  is  the  reporting  to  the  IMF  on  the  currency  composition  of  countries’  foreign 
exchange reserves. But overall, things are moving in the right direction. 
Adopting good practices is a second principle which should continue to guide our efforts in 
reforming  the  governance  of  the  world  economy  in  macroeconomic  and  financial  matters. 
Here  again,  there  have  been  a  number  of  achievements.  A  large  array  of  standards  and 
codes 
transparency,  banking  supervision,  corporate 
governance,  accounting,  and  payment  and  settlement  systems  have  been  subject  to 
international agreements. Such standards bring together what is widely considered as good 
practice  or  guidelines  in  a  particular  domain.  They  enhance  domestic  and  international 
stability.  In  this  respect,  the  IMF  and  the  Financial  Stability  Forum  –  the  only  forum  for 
cooperation among national and international entities in charge of supervision – have singled 
out 12 of these standards as being of particular importance for a sound and stable economic 
and  financial  system.  But  the  work  of  the  international  community  has  gone  beyond 
standard-setting. It now also focuses on implementation. Progress has been made towards 
publicly  examining  countries’  compliance  with  standards  and  codes.  And  there  is  one 
important lesson that we can draw from this experience. The international community does 
not  always  need  to  rely  on  rules  and  unilateral  enforcement  to  make  progress  on  certain 
fronts. Goodwill and, at times, peer pressure, can also work. 
Closely related to this is the need to maintain a constant dialogue between the public and 
private  sectors,  the  last  principle  to  bear  in  mind  in  reforming  the  international  financial 
architecture. Principles agreed by all relevant players on a voluntary basis can at times be 
preferable to rules decided and enforced unilaterally by public authorities. This proved to be 
particularly  true  for  the  “Principles  for  stable  capital  flows  and  fair  debt  restructuring  in 
emerging  markets“  that –  as  I  already  mentioned  –  were  endorsed  by the  G20  in Delhi  in 
2002. Following defaults on the part of several emerging market borrowers, the international 
community  realised  the  need  to  resolve  financial  crises  in  a  more  orderly  fashion  and  to 
improve  sovereign  debt  restructuring  mechanisms.  Debtor  countries  and  private  investors 
agreed  on  best  practices  and  guidelines  for  information-sharing,  dialogue  and  close 
cooperation  both  in  normal  times  and  in  periods  of  financial  distress.  Since  I  suggested 
myself such a voluntary code of conduct at the IMF Annual Meetings in 2001, I am glad to 
see  that  these  principles  are  increasingly  recognised  as  an  important  framework  for 
cooperative action by debtors and creditors. But looking ahead, they might also serve as an 
example  in  other  domains.  One  such  domain,  for  instance,  could  be  the  sector  of  highly 
leveraged and non-regulated entities – which could develop as actively as possible voluntary 
benchmarks for good practices, as also recommended by the Financial Stability Forum. 
Concluding remarks 
IV. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
New continents are not discovered every day. When Christopher Columbus died in 1506 in 
Valladolid, he was still convinced that his journeys had taken him to the coasts of India, and 
8 
 BIS Review 138/2007
not to America. It is indeed always difficult to identify change, especially when such change 
is systemic. What we have seen in the last 20 years since L. K. Jha left us is such systemic 
change. And we have learned that we have to be ready for it. 
We  have  learned  indeed  that  the  world  economy  is  changing  constantly.  The  emerging 
economies,  which  played  a  relatively  modest  role  in  the  global  economy  20  years  ago, 
occupy  a  far  more  important  place  today,  but  one  which  will  be  dwarfed  in  importance  by 
their role in the future. 
We have further learned that, since the world economy is evolving constantly, the rules of the 
game have to be continuously adapted. International institutions and fora are changing and 
adjusting.  Many  initiatives  have  been  taken  and  implemented.  Altogether  this  should  help 
make the global economic and financial system more resilient. 
But  we  have  also  learned  that  it  is  never  time  for  complacency.  The  next  crisis  is  always 
different from the previous one. Both industrialised and emerging countries have to continue 
to work to keep up with new developments and challenges. Efforts to ensure global stability 
and prevent crises have to be made constantly, by all of us, and should be guided by the 
principles of transparency, good practices and dialogue between relevant players. 
In this context, I am confident that mature and emerging economies, among them India, will 
continue to work in close cooperation in the years ahead to ensure that these important goals 
are met. 
I thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 138/2007 
 9
