Jean Claude-Trichet: The emergence of China in the global economy – a 
European perspective 
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the China-
Europe Business Meeting, Frankfurt am Main, 8 November 2007. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is with great pleasure that I am here, today, to address this distinguished audience on such 
an interesting and topical issue such as the emergence of China in the global economy. 
“Globalisation”  is  the  catch-word  often  used  to  describe  the  current  era,  and  one  of  those 
evocative  terms  that  everybody  tends  to  grasp  in  quite  different  ways:  some  as  a  threat, 
others as an opportunity. This also applies to one important ingredient of globalisation, which 
everyone would probably recognise as its most distinctive feature today: the impressive rise 
of countries such as China – but also Brazil, Russia, or India – in the world economy. These 
are  only  the  most  prominent  economies  in  a  much  broader  group  which  the  World  Bank 
labelled as “emerging countries” for the first time in 1981. 
When  focusing  on  China,  however,  it  would  be  more  appropriate  to  talk  about  a 
“re-emerging” country. Together with India, China was indeed estimated to account for nearly 
half  of  world  output  in  1820,  on  the  verge  of  the  industrial  revolution.  And  after  a  historic 
trough in the mid-1970s of around 8% of world GDP, these two countries are now “back on 
stage”, expected as they are to become the world’s first and third largest economies by 2050. 
The  emergence  of  China  and  its  impact  on  the  global  economy  have  both  been  well 
documented. As you all know, this topic has in recent years attracted the attention of public 
opinion,  especially  with  regard  to  the  economic  relations  between  China  and  the  United 
States.  This  relationship  –  one  of  the  cornerstones  of  our  global  economy  today  –  has 
brought great benefits to both economies and to the world at large, but it has often also been 
surrounded  by  no  small  amount  of  debate,  for  instance  with  regard  to  the  contribution  of 
China to the US current account deficit. 
US-China developments have thus far been the focus of much debate, but what has perhaps 
received less attention is Europe’s stake in this whole issue, particularly in the context of the 
impressive  expansion  of  its  economic  ties  with  China  over  the  past  few  years.  A  famous 
London-based economics magazine has recently gone as far as criticising European policy 
makers for having taken much longer than their American counterparts to “wake up” to the 
challenge  posed  by  China’s  rise.1  I  believe  that  this  impression  has  more  to  do  with  the 
specificities of the institutional setting of Europe than with a lack of awareness and initiative 
from individual European policy makers.  
To be sure, today I will mainly take a European perspective on China. In doing so, I will first 
deal with two global aspects of the emergence of China that are of particular interest to my 
institution: its potential impact on (i) inflation dynamics and (ii) the patterns of international 
capital flows. I will then focus on (iii) the growing economic ties between Europe and China 
and  their  implications.  Finally,  I  will  conclude  by  providing  a  few  comments  on  (iv)  the 
constructive  relations  of  European  policy  makers,  including  the  European  Central  Bank 
(ECB),  with  our  Chinese  colleagues,  in  the  broader  framework  of  international  policy 
cooperation. 
                                                 
1   See “The China trade syndrome” in the Charlemagne section of the Oct 4th issue of The Economist. 
BIS Review 128/2007 
 1
Two important channels: inflation and capital flows 
1.  
The growing weight and impact of China on the global economy has become an indisputable 
fact that no policy maker or business leader can ignore.  
China overtook the UK to become the fourth largest economy in the world in 2006 in terms of 
nominal  GDP  and  is  already  the  second  largest  economy  when  measured  in  PPP  terms. 
According to the latest IMF projections China could overtake Germany in 2008 and become 
the third largest world economy after the US and Japan. 
In terms of contribution to global GDP growth in 2006, China accounted for 11.2% of global 
real GDP growth in 2006, compared to 14.5% for the US. On the basis of its relative weight 
in PPP terms it accounted for 31% of global real GDP growth compared to 10.4% for the US.  
It  will  not  surprise  you  if  I  start  by  addressing  the  implications  for  price  stability.  Although 
money  and  monetary  policy  ultimately  determines  inflation,  globalisation  seems  to  have 
embedded  some  effects  on  inflation  in  the  short  term.  This  takes  the  form  of  a  two-sided 
coin. The doubling, from around 1.5 to 3 billion, of the global labour force after the fall of the 
Berlin wall – with new workers coming from formerly planned economies in the 1990s and 
then  from  population  giants  such  as  China  –  has  exerted  downward  pressure  on  import 
prices of manufactured goods and on wage demand in mature economies, also compressing 
firms’  price-cost  mark-ups.  But  there  have  been  other,  opposite  forces:  certain  resources, 
such as oil and minerals, have become relatively scarcer given the increasing demand from 
emerging economies. Accordingly, this has been a source of upward pressure on headline 
inflation in the past few years.  
For  these  reasons,  measuring  the  overall  short-term  impact  of  emerging  countries  on 
inflation remains a challenge. This becomes even more difficult when trying to disentangle 
the  specific  effect  of  China  on  recent  price  developments  in  the  euro  area.  In  this  regard, 
what we can, at present, say with a sufficient degree of confidence is that there has been a 
downward Chinese effect on euro area manufacturing import prices via both the increasing 
share of Chinese imports in euro area imports – an issue on which I will come back later – 
and  the  relatively  lower  prices  of  Chinese  goods.  Based  on  highly  detailed  data 
disaggregated  both  by  sectors  and  countries  over  the  period  1995-2004,  the  level  of  euro 
area import prices from China and the new EU member states are estimated on average to 
have  been  substantially  lower  than  the  price  of  imports  from  more  mature  economies. 
Overall, it is estimated that the increase in import penetration from low-cost countries over 
this  period  may  have  dampened  euro  area  import  prices  for  manufactured  goods  by  an 
average of approximately 2 percentage points each year, an effect almost equally accounted 
for by China and the new EU member states.  
Most recently, however, a noteworthy feature of the Chinese economy has been a significant 
upturn in domestic inflationary pressures, with consumer price inflation increasing from 1% in 
July  2006  to  6.2%  in  September  2007,  largely  on  account  of  higher  food  prices.  This  has 
been coupled with some increase in Chinese export prices in recent months. Nonetheless, 
ongoing  and  expected  developments  in  domestic  prices  and  costs  in  Europe  and  China 
suggest that potential increases in import prices in the euro area originating from this country 
remain  relatively  contained.  In  particular,  the  ongoing  rise  in  import  shares  from  China 
combined  with  its  continuing  lower  price  levels  should  on  the  whole  continue  to  put 
downward pressure on euro area import prices. 
A second dimension of particular interest to the ECB concerns the current configuration of 
international  capital  flows  and  its  global  and  domestic  implications.  A  group  of  less  than 
twenty emerging countries – especially China, but also oil exporters, Russia and a few other 
economies  in  Asia  –  have  become,  so  to  speak,  the  “financiers  of  the  world”.  They  are 
indeed large net savers with hefty current account surpluses. China’s surplus, in particular, 
has increased very rapidly in recent years, from 1-3% of GDP in the early 2000s to 9.5% in 
2006,  and  is  projected  by  the  IMF  to  reach  11.8%  this  year.  As  a  result  of  large  current 
account  surpluses  in  economies  such  as  China,  and  despite  the  fact  that  other  emerging 
2 
 BIS Review 128/2007
countries remain external borrowers, the “Southern hemisphere” of the world is – taken as a 
whole – financing the “Northern hemisphere”. Since a significant number of years, capital is 
flowing from “poorer” to “richer” economies, especially to the United States. 
Aside from “official” capital outflows related to the investment of central bank reserves China 
is also attracting increasingly large net FDI inflows. In 2006 China became the third largest 
recipient  of  FDI  in  the  world  and  is  the  largest  FDI  destination  amongst  developing 
countries.2  Although  most  FDI  flowing  into  China  originates  within  the  Asian  region,  FDI 
flowing from Europe has also increased significantly over the last few years. Net inflows of 
FDI from the EU into China accounted for € 5.3 billion in 2005 up from € 2.9 billion in 2003.  
Among  many  others,  one  facet  of  this  surprising  development  has  to  do  with  the  still 
incomplete nature of globalisation, which has progressed more rapidly in the real economic 
than  in  the  financial  sphere  for  emerging  countries.  A  sound  and  deep  financial  system 
cannot  be  created  overnight,  and  most  emerging  countries  still  have  underdeveloped 
domestic financial systems, for instance in terms of low liquidity, insufficient supply of local 
safe  financial  assets,  and  borrowing  constraints  on  the  investment  and  the  consumer 
spending side. China is no exception in this respect, and may currently be confronted with 
significant domestic financial challenges. This has contributed, among several other factors, 
not only to higher savings rates in China, but also to a sizeable re-channelling of Chinese net 
savings into financial investments abroad. 
Interestingly,  however,  in  the  case  of  China  –  given  its  exchange  rate  policy  and  capital 
account restrictions – this process has almost exclusively taken the form of accumulation of 
official cross-border assets via reserve accumulation and, from end-September this year, the 
establishment  of  a  sovereign  wealth  fund,  China’s  Investment  Company.  The  Chinese 
balance of payments has indeed been experiencing not only a strong trade surplus, but also 
net private capital inflows, including inward foreign direct investment and – most recently in 
2007 – portfolio inflows.  
The  ensuing  “twin”  current  and  capital  account  surpluses  have  produced  a  strong  upward 
exchange rate pressure in the economy and, as a result, the People’s Bank of China (PBC) 
has  continued  to  intervene  massively  in  the  foreign  exchange  market.  At  the  end  of  July, 
foreign exchange reserves were equal to around US$1.4 trillion, or more than 45% of GDP. 
Reserve accumulation, amounting to about US$1 billion per working day in 2006, has more 
than doubled to above US$2 billion per working day in the first seven months of 2007. 
It is well known that reserve accumulation, although partly sterilised, is one of the drivers of 
excess liquidity and credit growth in the Chinese economy. In this context, I took note with 
interest  that  that  Premier  Wen,  Governor  Zhou,  and  numerous  other  Chinese  authorities, 
have  repeatedly  cited  the  fast  growing  trade  surplus  and  excess  liquidity  and  investment 
growth as some of the key domestic imbalances that the country needs to resolve in order to 
achieve a more sustainable growth pattern.3  
Trade relations between Europe and China 
2.  
Trade between the European Union (EU) and China has expanded at an impressive pace, 
particularly  after  China  joined  the  World  Trade  Organisation  (WTO)  at  the  end  of  2001. 
According to Eurostat, in 2005 China became the second largest trading partner of the EU, 
having moved up from  the fourth place in 1999. And last year China displaced the United 
States as the largest source of EU imports. In 2006 China accounted for 14.2% of total EU 
                                                 
2   See 2006 World Investment Report by the UN Conference on Trade and Development. 
3   See, for example, the speech by Premier Wen Jiabao to the Davos World Economic Forum on 7 September 
2007. 
BIS Review 128/2007 
 3
imports and 5.4% of total EU exports. As regards the euro area, in 2006 China accounted for 
10.3% of euro area imports and 3.9% of our exports.  
From  China’s  perspective,  the  weight  of  the  EU  in  its  total  trade  has  grown  even  more 
impressively. According to Chinese statistics, the EU is now the first trading partner of China, 
after overtaking both the United States and Japan in 2005. The EU accounted for 19.2% of 
China’s total exports (the US for 21.5%) and 12.8% of its total imports (the US for 8.4%).The 
dramatic growth in the headline trade figures conceals a large divergence in the growth rates 
of  EU  imports  from  and  exports  to  China.  Whereas  the  EU  enjoyed  a  trade  surplus  with 
China at the beginning of the 1980s, trade relations are now characterised by a sizeable and 
widening EU deficit vis-à-vis this partner country: approximately €128 billion in 2006, up from 
€55 billion in 2002. This represents the largest bilateral trade deficit of the EU. 
One frequently mentioned aspect of the EU-China trade relationship is that the distribution of 
total EU exports to China across individual EU member states is much more concentrated 
than the distribution of EU imports from China. This reflects various factors, including the fact 
that  China’s  investment-led  growth  pattern  has  thus  far  offered  relatively  better  export 
opportunities for those European economies that have specialised in the production of capital 
goods. 
Some  analysts  have  argued  that  this  unequal  distribution  of  the  “export  benefits”  –  as 
opposed to what they define, wrongly in my opinion, as “import costs” – of expanding trade 
with  China  explains  why  it  has  been  relatively  more  difficult  for  Europeans  than  for 
Americans to agree on whether China on the whole constitutes an economic “opportunity” or, 
rather, a “threat”.4
I strongly disagree with this point of view, and would like to explain why. 
Rapidly rising imports of low-cost consumer goods from China is nothing to be necessarily 
afraid  of,  since  it  can  bring  important  benefits  to  European  consumers  as  well  as  to  the 
economy at large. Access to lower-priced goods boosts the purchasing power of consumers 
and, as mentioned, the broader economy can potentially also benefit from lower underlying 
inflationary pressures.  
If one looks at the product structure of EU trade with China, it becomes also clear that much 
of it reflects the relative comparative advantages of these two economies. Indeed, most of 
the rise in the trade deficit of the EU with China is explained by our imports of: (i) Information 
Communication  Technology  (ICT)  products  (33%  of  total  EU  imports  from  China);  and  (ii) 
textiles and clothing (13.2%). China is indeed the main source of EU imports for these two 
types of goods.5  
China is, at the same time, the main world exporter of these two categories of goods. In both 
cases this reflects the trend for global corporations to re-locate the production of such goods 
to  China  in  order  to  take  advantage  of  lower  labour  costs.  Even  in  the  case  of  so-called 
“high-tech” goods like ICT, China’s role is still, to a significant extent, confined to the labour 
intensive assembly of electronic components which it imports.6  
Interestingly, the EU has a trade surplus with China when it comes to goods like power and 
non-electrical  machinery,  as  well  as  transport  equipment.  China  is  our  second  most 
important external market for these two categories of goods, which account for 43% of the 
                                                 
4   See again “The China trade syndrome” in the Charlemagne section of the Oct 4th issue of The Economist. 
5   EU trade data are taken from Eurostat, based on SITC product classification. 
6   See, for example, the 2006 OECD report “OECD Information Technology Outlook”. 
4 
 BIS Review 128/2007
total  EU  exports  to  China.  This  reflects  the  comparative  advantage  of  Europe  in  the 
production of more capital-intensive goods.7  
We should not ignore the competitive challenge faced by those European manufacturers and 
workers whose business remains tied to the production of those goods that make up the bulk 
of our imports from China. Still, it should be noted that a number of them are well placed to 
gradually overcome the challenge from China by relying increasingly on some of Europe’s 
own comparative advantages, such as innovation, skilled labour, technology, and the ability 
to produce high-quality products attached to brand names with a reputation for excellence. 
Of course, while greater competition from China is welcome, this must be “fair” competition 
and in line with WTO rules. As a general rule, producers should never be placed at an unfair 
disadvantage  with  respect  to  exporters  receiving  direct  or  indirect  public  subsidies  or 
engaging in dumping behaviour. 
An  undervalued  exchange  rate  can  also  pose  a  negative  externality  to  producers  in  other 
countries.  Indeed,  the  widening  of  the  euro  area’s  trade  deficit  with  China,  which  gained 
particular momentum after 2003, has paralleled a steady depreciation of the renminbi against 
the  euro.  Even  after  China  reformed  its  exchange  rate  regime  in  July  2005,  the  euro  has 
continued  to  appreciate  against  the  renminbi.  Although  the  renminbi  has  since  2005 
appreciated  by  around  10-11%  against  the  US  dollar  and  the  Japanese  yen,  it  has 
depreciated continuously against the euro, loosing about 8% of its value against the single 
currency. Over the same period, China’s trade surplus vis-à-vis the euro area has grown by 
more than 20%. 
Concluding remarks 
3.  
The  ECB  has  always  maintained  an  open  and  constructive  dialogue  with  the  Chinese 
authorities,  particularly  with  our  direct  counterpart,  the  People’s  Bank  of  China  and  its 
chairman,  Governor  Zhou.  A  key  ingredient  in  this  fruitful  co-operation  has  always  been 
mutual  exchange  of  information  on,  and  understanding  of,  the  economic  challenges  our 
economies are confronted with. 
Regular, frequent contacts with high level officials from the PBC and the Chinese Ministry of 
Finance  at bilateral  or multilateral  level  –  including  in  the occasion  of  the  Global economy 
meetings of central bank governors in Basel as well as the active participation in the annual 
EU-China macroeconomic and financial dialogue co-organised by the European Commission 
– have helped the ECB to become increasingly aware of the many challenges faced by the 
Chinese  authorities  as  they  seek  to  transform  their  country  into  a  modern,  market-based 
economy. I personally have learned a great deal about China through these exchanges, and 
profess  great  admiration  for  the  remarkable  achievements  made  by  China  in  its  drive  to 
modernise the economy.  
Having  outperformed  all  expectations  in  terms  of  real  economic  growth  performance,  the 
Chinese authorities are now rightly focussing their efforts on achieving a more balanced and 
sustainable pattern of domestic growth, which would also provide one important contribution 
to the smooth resolution of global imbalances. The Chinese authorities have recently spelled 
out  their  domestic  policy  plans  also  at  a  multilateral  policy  level,  for  instance,  in  the 
framework  of  the  recent  multilateral  consultations  convened  by  the  International  Monetary 
Fund  (IMF):  “(…)  boosting  domestic  demand,  particularly  consumer  demand,  and 
rebalancing  investment  and  consumption;  (…)  further  promoting  balanced  external  sector 
                                                 
7   EU trade data from Eurostat based on SITC product classification. 
BIS Review 128/2007 
 5
development;  (…)  speeding  up  financial  reform;  and  (…)  further  improving  the  exchange 
regime (…) in a gradual and controllable manner”.8
Further improving the exchange rate regime is, therefore, first and foremost in China’s own 
best interest, as repeatedly emphasised by Chinese authorities on many other occasions. On 
21 July 2005 the ECB was indeed amongst the first in the world to welcome through a press 
release China’s decision to increase the flexibility of its currency through the adoption of a 
new exchange rate regime. 
More than two years later, I wish to recall the statement I have signed a few weeks ago, on 
19  October,  in  Washington  DC  together  with  the  other  G7  Finance  Ministers  and  Central 
Bank  Governors.  We  wrote  that  allowing  for  “an  accelerated  appreciation”  of  China’s 
“effective exchange rate” is an important element China’s economic policy strategy, also in 
view of the “rising current account surplus and domestic inflation” in this country.  
As part of the ongoing dialogue of the EU with China, at the end of this month I will travel 
with Messrs. Juncker and Almunia to Beijing, where we will further discuss macroeconomic 
issues  with  our  Chinese  partners.  I  am  sure  that  this  will  provide  a  good  opportunity  to 
identify and share the common interests of the European Union and China. 
In conclusion, there is no doubt that the global economy has benefited enormously from the 
emergence  of  China  and  that  this  new  giant  has  brought  new  opportunities  as  well  as 
challenges  to  Europe.  In  order  for  both  China  and  the  world  economy  to  continue  to  reap 
these benefits, it is essential that China increasingly assumes the global responsibilities that 
inevitably accompany its growing economic clout. 
I thank you for your attention. 
                                                 
8   Quotation from the IMF’s press release No. 07/72 “International and Monetary Financial Committee Reviews 
Multilateral Consultation” (14 April 2007). 
6 
 BIS Review 128/2007
