Savenaca Narube: A few words on Fiji’s economy and financial system 
Opening  address  by  Mr  Savenaca  Narube,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji,  at  the 
official  opening  of  Credit  Corporation’s  new  head  office  at  10  Gorrie  Street,  Suva, 
19 November 2007. 
 Your Excellency, The Papua New Guinea High Commissioner to Fiji, Mr. Peter Eafeare 
Sir Henry ToRobert, former Chairman of Credit Corporation (for 14 years) and former 
Governor Bank of Papua New Guinea (for 21 years)  
Mr. Noreo Beangke, Group Managing Director Credit Corporation  
Mr. Rob Allport, the first General Manager of Credit Corporation Fiji Limited 
Board Directors of Credit Corporation 
Mr. Ross McDonald, Managing Director, Credit Corporation Fiji Limited 
Distinguished Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Introductory remarks 
A Good Evening to you all 
I am pleased to be here this evening for the opening of Credit House – Credit Corporation Fiji 
Limited’s new head office. 
I take this opportunity to congratulate Credit Corporation for its 15 years of service to Fiji. I 
have watched the growth of the company with interest during these 15 years. It has come a 
long  way.  Its  assets  have  grown.  The  quality  of  its  loan  book  has  significantly  improved. 
Apart from its head office in Suva, it has opened offices in Nadi and Lautoka. The number of 
its employees has risen to over forty. Its products have expanded and now include lease and 
asset  purchasing,  fleet  leasing,  personal  finance,  insurance  premium,  pre-finance  vehicles 
and investment facilities. 
Understandably, the first few years of operations in Fiji were difficult for CCFL. They have 
come through well. CCFL now have a sound business with prudent financial management 
and I am pleased to say in compliance with Reserve Bank requirements. The Corporation 
can look back at its 15 years in Fiji with great satisfaction. 
I can confidently state that Credit Corporation has played a valuable role in advancing Fiji’s 
financial system and economic development. 
Credit Corporation Fiji Limited 
CCFL’s entry into the Fiji market in 1992 was instrumental in bringing finance and increasing 
competition to that secondary market. Its financing reaches out to many key sectors like the 
bus industry, pine, timber and logging and the major transport industry for ten-wheeler trucks 
and  trailers.  In  addition,  I  am  told  that  they  also  have  as  clients  both  large  and  small 
businesses and across all sectors of agriculture financing the movement of farm produce and 
cane  harvesters  in  the  sugar  industry  as  examples.  This  segment  of  the  economy  is 
extremely  important  in  sustaining  livelihoods  in  the  rural  communities  and  they  need  our 
support. Many of these businesses have now grown into successful enterprises that are now 
fully integrated into the banking system as a direct result of CCFL’s initial support for them. 
CCFL has also enabled many individuals to gain access to finance. They have funded taxis, 
mini-buses,  carriers,  tour  operators,  rental  and  hire  cars,  and  working  capital  for  many  of 
those that could not for one reason or another access the commercial banking system. 
BIS Review 141/2007 
 1
CCFL also  brought much needed competition into the capital markets. Its Interest Bearing 
Deposit (IBD) is at a very competitive interest rate. This has brought significant benefits to 
both small and large investors alike and to many non-profit organizations. 
CCFL  is  a  good  corporate  citizen  and  plays  its  part  in  the  finance  industry.  It  was 
instrumental  in  the  establishment  of  the  Finance  Companies  Association  in  2004  and  Mr. 
Ross McDonald CCFL’s Managing Director was its first Chairman. The Association plays a 
vital role in liaison with the Reserve Bank on financial issues and in developing policies to 
meet the needs of the industry. CCFL also makes its staff available to act on government 
committees and Boards where you will remember Mr. McDonald was a former Chairman of 
the Fiji Sugar Corporation. 
Licensed finance companies 
Let me add a few more words about licensed finance companies in general. The Reserve 
Bank recently put out a paid advertisement that advised the public that Credit Corporation 
Limited,  Home  Finance  Company  Limited  and  Merchant  Finance  &  Investment  Company 
Limited  are  the  only  finance  companies  that  are  licensed  and  supervised  by  the  Reserve 
Bank  of  Fiji.  The  Bank  advised  the  public  to  exercise  caution  when  investing  with  finance 
companies that are not licensed by the Reserve Bank. The Bank will take appropriate legal 
action  against  unlicensed  finance  companies  that  are  found  to  be  carrying  out  banking 
business in Fiji. 
Financial system 
Fiji needs a sound and efficient financial system to promote business and investment. In this 
regard, let me say that Fiji’s financial system is sound. 
The credit ceiling that was put in place in December last year has been effective in slowing 
down annual credit growth to about 7 percent in September from about 27 percent a year 
ago.  The  slowdown  in  the  economy  has  also  contributed  to  this  low  credit  growth.  I  am 
comfortable with this current rate f credit expansion by commercial banks. We will review the 
credit ceiling at the end of this year. 
Let me assure you that the Reserve Bank continues to encourage commercial banks to lend 
to priority sectors for investment and to the micro, small and medium sized enterprises. At 
this point, we have allowed banks to exceed their credit ceiling by over $185 million. 
As you know, the credit ceiling only applies to commercial banks. Earlier in the year, we had 
discussed  with  the  credit  institutions  like  CCFL  the  possibility  of  imposing  a  similar  credit 
ceiling  on  them  if  the  need  arose.  Credit  growth  of  credit  institutions  has  also  slowed 
considerably and the need for a credit ceiling has largely dissipated. 
In  modernising  Fiji’s  financial  system,  we  were  very  pleased  to  launch  Fiji’s  real  time 
automated  payments  system  or  FIJICLEAR  on  16  October.  Fiji  is  the  first  country  in  the 
South  Pacific  to  have  such  a  state  of  the  art  payments  system.  FIJICLEAR  will  improve 
efficiency  in  making  and  receiving  payments  as  well  as  help  safeguard  financial  stability. 
Payments  using  FIJICLEAR  will  deliver  funds  the  same  day  compared  with  3  to  6  days 
required  to  clear  cheques.  I  take  this  opportunity  to  encourage  you  to  use  FIJICLEAR  for 
speed,  certainty,  reliability  and  convenience.  I  would  like  to  thank  Ross  and  the  Finance 
Companies Association for their support and guidance as we embarked on this project. 
The Fiji economy 
Let me say a few words about the economy. 
2 
 BIS Review 141/2007
An  economic  contraction  is  expected  for  2007.  In  2008,  a  mild  economic  recovery  of  2 
percent is expected led mainly by the tourism industry contributing to growth in the wholesale 
&  retail  trade  and  hotels  &  restaurants  and  transport  &  communication  sectors.  Based  on 
latest  information,  we  expect  better  outcomes  for  the  agriculture,  forestry  and  fishing  and 
manufacturing sectors. With the reopening of the Vatukoula gold mine, we expect a positive 
contribution to the mining and quarrying sector. 
We have revised these economic figures. The new economic projections will be announced 
on Budget Day this Friday. 
Fiji’s  balance  of  payments  still  remains  a  concern  due  to  the  poor  performance  of  our 
traditional exports.  The increase in oil  prices  will  only  further  widen  Fiji’s  trade  deficit.  The 
policies towards dampening import demand seem to be effective. But we must work together 
to  grow  our  exports.  At  the  Bank,  we  recently  announced  changes  to  the  Export  Finance 
Facility which will assist the export sector access credit at a relatively low interest rate. We 
have also removed the local content requirement. We hope that these changes will make the 
facility more attractive to the commercial banks and exporters. 
With the recent stability in the level of our foreign reserves, we have relaxed the limits on 
payment  for  credit  cards  for  expenditure  abroad,  cash  drawings  and  delegated  limits  on 
import payments. We have received positive feedback on these policies. We will continue to 
review  exchange  control  policies  regularly  to  ensure  that  they  are  practical,  relevant  and 
appropriate. 
Concluding remarks 
Finally,  I  would  like  to  thank  Mr.  Ross  McDonald  for  his  kind  invitation.  I  thank  Credit 
Corporation Fiji Limited for their support and cooperation with the Reserve Bank’s policies 
and guidelines and also for the role that it has played in Fiji’s economic development. 
I congratulate Ross and his Team on the opening of your new head office. I also wish the 
CCFL Team all the best in its future endeavours. 
Official opening 
I now have much pleasure in declaring CCFL’s Credit House open. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 141/2007 
 3
