Radovan Jelašić: Remittances to Serbia 
Speech by Mr Radovan Jelašić, Governor of the National Bank of Serbia, on the occasion of 
the international conference on remittances, Berlin, 29 November 2007. 
 Dear Mrs. Minister, Mr. Minister, Your Excellency, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  would  be  true  to  say  that  citizens  of  Serbia  are  its  main  article  of  export  since  no  other 
“article“ brings in more foreign currency than the Serbian diaspora sending remittances from 
abroad. This is particularly true of the Serbian diaspora in Germany as over 700,000 Serbian 
nationals still live there – let us be clear on this, I am referring to those still holding Serbian 
passports, or better to say, Yugoslav passports! 
Though our fellow citizens have left Serbia, and done so for various reasons of economic or 
political  nature,  in  order  to  obtain  better  employment  opportunities  or  to  flee  the  war-torn 
regions,  etc.  –  they  all  share  a  common  denominator.  All  of  them  are  sending  money  to 
Serbia. And, they are sending lots of it! Based on our estimates, around USD 3, 0 billion or 
8.1% of the GDP was sent to Serbia in 2006, of which over USD 300 million from Germany 
alone! These transactions have two important aspects: social – assistance to those who had 
stayed behind, care for the elderly, supporting relatives, and economic – investment in the 
SMEs, residential building, purchase of property, investment in their own or their children’s 
education, etc. 
However, our estimates show that only half of all remittances take the formal route, i.e. reach 
Serbia  through  banking channels,  which certainly  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  quality  of  the 
banking  sector  in  Serbia  since  80%  of  the  sector  is  in  majority  ownership  of  well  ranked 
strategic owners from the EU countries - Austria, Italy, France and Greece. This means that 
the majority of such money is brought into Serbia by people crossing borders, which naturally 
has a negative impact on all those participating in such dealings: 
• 
there  are  side-effects  to  money  senders  in  terms  of  undesirable  costs,  safety 
exposure and loss of tax benefits (if the aim is to support relatives);  
money recipients must pick up the money and hopefully take it to a bank, which is 
not a simple matter as they do not fully qualify for use of banking products, such as 
credit cards, mortgage loans, etc.  
 Why is money still being transferred in this manner? The answer lies primarily in tradition, 
and lack of information. For that particular reason, the web page GELDTRANSAIR.DE, which 
was activated today, will be of particular significance. The NBS is doing its best not only to 
advertise this page, but also to update its content and to provide technical support. Last but 
not  least,  I  think  of  this  page  as  being  “ours“.  Hence,  I  suggest  that  we  do  not  focus  on 
traditional ways of money transfer only, but give our support to alternative ways as well, e.g. 
money transfer via mobile phone, especially of small amounts, or via the Internet! 
If I were still living in Frankfurt which I left eight years ago, I would certainly be among the 
first users of this web page as the main source of information for transactions to Serbia. But I 
can see its advantages from the point of view of the National bank as well, and feel certain 
that we shall make the best use of its potentials. 
Dear Mrs. Minister and Mr. Minister, allow me to express my most sincere gratitude for all 
that Germany has done for the development of the democratic Serbia. Financial assistance 
we received from  Germany over the last seven years is higher than that received from all 
other donors taken together. This speaks more than thousand words. Once again, thank you 
very much! 
BIS Review 145/2007 
 1
