Jean-Pierre Landau: Some thoughts on securitization and financial 
turbulences 
Remarks by Mr Jean-Pierre Landau, Deputy Governor of the Bank of France, at the Paris 
EUROPLACE, Financial Forum, New York, 22 October 2007. 
 There is a paradox in the current situation. However we measure it (by the level of spreads 
or  volatility),  the  shock  created  in  credit  markets  by  losses  on  subprime  loans  is  without 
precedent.  And  yet,  the  losses  themselves,  while  significant  and  spectacular  for  some 
institutions, would not seem to pose a major risk to the health of the financial system. Most 
notable, the turbulences occurred in a very favorable macro economic environment. 
This disproportion between the cause and the effect points to some existing fragilities – that 
need to be addressed – in the securitized model of capital markets. There is no rush to take 
measures, even less regulate. But there is no room for complacency either. Rather, we need 
to  come  to  a  diagnosis  and  think  of  the  desirable  characteristics  of  a  robust  securitization 
model. 
The  current  model  of  securitization,  as  it  has  developed  in  the  last  decade,  has  two 
distinctive features: 
• 
One we were aware of: an increasing complexity of instruments, which combine an 
extensive use of derivatives with customization to individual investors' needs. This 
has made valuation and risk assessment more difficult. 
One we rediscovered during the turmoil: the fragility of off-balance sheet structures 
and vehicles which underpinned securitization. Conduits, especially SIVs, were not 
built to absorb shocks. Their relationships with sponsor banks are sometimes very 
ambiguous.  There  may  be  a  gap  between  the  legal  commitments  taken  by  the 
banks  through  liquidity  support  and  credit  enhancements,  and  the  “true”  level  of 
responsibility they felt obliged to take to protect their reputation. 
 This conjunction of complexity and fragility may have been too much for the system to bear. 
So it is worth to pause and ask ourselves whether we can eliminate those vulnerabilities and 
still  keep  the  benefits  associated  with  securitization,  especially  in  terms  of  financial 
innovation. 
One good starting point is to look at the economic and financial rationale for securitization. 
Securitization  is  meant  to  perform  two  functions:  the  first,  and  most  "advertised"  in  recent 
years,  is  to  allocate  and  distribute  risks,  hopefully  to  those  agents  and  investors  best 
equipped and most willing – to carry it. The "slicing and tranching" process allowed banks to 
offload credit risk from their balance sheets and transfer it to other financial investors. But, 
historically,  securitization  is  borne  out  of  the  more  simple  desire  to  shortcut  banking 
intermediation by using markets to directly match the needs of lenders and borrowers. Since 
both have different liquidity preferences, this usually involves the issuance of tradable – i.e. 
liquid-securities which can be sold to the ultimate investors. 
Thus,  a  well  functioning  securitized  system  would  meet  two  characteristics:  (1)  allow  for  a 
permanent  reallocation  of  risk  between  market  participants  according  to  their  preferences, 
expectations and risk aversion; and (2) make liquidity (market liquidity) permanently available 
throughout the system. 
The question we need to ask is how those two characteristics relate to each other. In other 
words,  what  is  the  link  between  liquidity  and  risk?  Here  we  could  use  a  very  simple 
framework. Investors have a perception that a market is liquid if they feel they can trade their 
assets (and positions) with no constraints and without moving prices by too wide a margin. 
BIS Review 128/2007 
 1
Liquidity  exists  when  there  are  counterparties  available  to  trade  at  any  moment  in  time.  It 
follows  that  liquidity  is  both  an  expression  and  a  consequence  of  the  ability  of  market 
participants  to  take  risks  on  each  other.  For  liquidity  to  exist,  therefore,  there  must  be  a 
general sense, in the market, that each participant (or, at least, most of them) are suitably 
equipped to face the risks they are taking. This is what we call confidence. 
Looking at discussions on the current phase of market turmoil, two views have emerged as 
to what determines confidence. 
The first view emphasizes information and transparency. Crisis of confidence and drying up 
of liquidity occur when there is too much opacity in the system, when investors are unable to 
assess risks, or when market participants do not trust whatever information is available. One 
good example is valuation. Valuation of complex instruments is currently at the forefront of 
discussions  between  regulators,  market  participants  and  investors.  There  is,  of  course,  a 
circularity  involved,  since  liquidity  depends  on  valuation,  fair  value  must  be  based  on  a 
market  price,  and  the  ability  to  price  an  asset  itself  depends  on  sufficient  liquidity  in  the 
market.  The  difficulty  to  get  out  of  this  circularity  in  periods  of  stress  is  currently  creating 
significant uncertainty. 
Another example is risk measurement. In a  securitized world, investors heavily depend on 
rating  agencies  for  information  about  the  risks  attached  to  various  instruments.  These 
agencies have been strongly criticized recently. It is not my purpose to enter into any blame 
game. Suffice it to say that there has been a deep misunderstanding between investors and 
rating agencies as to the scope and true meaning of ratings. Most investors were not fully 
aware  that  rating  did  not  encompass  liquidity  risk;  nor  did  they  realize  that  ratings  for 
structured  products  were  intrinsically  more  volatile  than  for  more  simple  "plain  vanilla" 
securities. The use of identical metrics for rating what are fundamentally different categories 
of assets certainly did not help and may have contributed to the confusion. 
Some  observers  have  argued  that  investors  should  be  faulted  for  relying  too  much  on 
ratings. Instead, the argument goes, they should do their homework and put themselves in a 
position to directly assess risks. But it is doubtful that we can dispense of the rating process. 
If each and individual investor had to carry their own due diligence, the costs of gathering 
information would be prohibitive and this would introduce important frictions in the functioning 
of the market. So, future work should concentrate on how to make the rating process clearer 
and more explicit and to preserve and strengthen its integrity. 
A second, alternative view, on the collapse and confidence and liquidity would point at the 
inadequation  of  capital  to  risk  in  the  new  securitized  model.  Ultimately,  the  ability  of  an 
investor to carry risk is determined by her capital base. Capital must be sufficient to absorb 
the  potential  losses  if  risk  materializes.  If  not,  confidence  may  vanish  and  liquidity  may 
disappear. To  quote  Stephen  Cecchetti1,  "in  the  context  of  financial  intermediaries,  capital 
plays the role of collateral". 
So,  for  the  securitized  model  to  work,  there  cannot  be  too  big  a  disconnect  between  the 
allocation of risk and capital in the system. This is true both at the aggregate level and for 
each individual issuer of securities. At the aggregate level, insufficient capital leads to excess 
leverage and, as a consequence, to excess fragility. For each individual issuer of securities, 
carrying risks with little (or no) capital increases the probability of a liquidity crisis. 
It may be that, as time goes by and we look  more closely at  what happened, this second 
view will gain in importance. I would note that cracks occurred in those places – the conduits 
and especially the SIVs – where there was no capital available to absorb shocks. Conduits 
and SIVs have no capital of their own, and they depend heavily on the liquidity support and 
credit enhancement from their sponsor banks, whose terms, and conditions, as I said, may 
                                                 
1   Market Liquidity and Short Term credit : The Financial Crisis of August 2007 ; 3 September 2007. 
2 
 BIS Review 128/2007
be variable and uncertain. And yet, they undertook maturity transformation on a significant 
scale.  So  those  risks  which  materialized  directly  translated  into  liquidity  shortage. 
Conversely, the reason why most hedge funds weathered the shock – at least until now – 
may  be  that  they  managed  to  strengthen  their  capital  base  by  imposing  strict  redemption 
rules to their investors. 
Strong  capital  will  not  guarantee  liquidity  in  all  circumstances.  There  can  be  panics  and 
sudden increases in the demand for liquidity. That's the job of Central Banks to help in those 
circumstances. But a strong capital base in the system – and in all its components – is likely 
to limit future liquidity shocks. 
In the period to come, Central Banks, regulators and market participants will debate on the 
ways  and  means  to  restore  the  securitized  model  on  a  robust  and  sound  basis.  The 
implementation  of  Basel  II  will  bring  significant  improvements  in  the  measure  and 
management of risks. Had it been into place some years ago, we may have avoided some of 
the problems we currently face. Other evolutions in the regulatory environment and business 
practices may prove necessary. But, as I said, now is the time to analyze and think. 
BIS Review 128/2007 
 3
