Vittorio Corbo: Farewell speech as Governor of the Central Bank of Chile 
Speech by Mr Vittorio Corbo, Governor of the Central Bank of Chile, on his departure from 
the Central Bank of Chile, Santiago, 6 December 2007. 
 Everything comes to an end.  
Today I complete my term as the Governor of the Central Bank of Chile, a post for which I 
was appointed on May 1st 2003 by the then President of the Republic, Mr. Ricardo Lagos. 
I want, first of all, to especially greet José de Gregorio, the new Governor of the Central Bank 
of Chile, who I am sure will lead this beloved institution through the roads of professionalism, 
independence and strength it requires for the good of the country and all Chileans. 
This is a very propitious opportunity to wish him great success in this great task. From the 
Board  and  as  Vice-Governor,  José  has  been  a  very  relevant  factor  in  the  advances  and 
accomplishments that our institution has made in the past several years.  
In his new position, he will be backed by a first-class Board and staff of high technical and 
professional level, capable of assuming with rigor and efficiency the Bank’s mission. 
I  also  want  to  acknowledge  my  fellow  Board  members  who  accompanied  me  during  this 
period.  Being  it  a  collegiate  entity,  nothing  would  have  been  achieved  without  their  active 
cooperation. 
And I want to greet Sebastián Claro, the new Board member of the Bank, who I am sure will 
quickly be immersed in the spirit prevailing in this institution. 
I believe that everyone here today share a legitimate pride because of the place this Bank 
has achieved both in the Chilean society and at the world level.  
Let  me  tell  you  what  happened  to  me  four  years  and  seven  months  ago,  when  President 
Lagos asked me if it would be a problem to me to be appointed Board member and Governor 
of  the  Central  Bank  for  such  limited  period,  which  was  the  remaining  of  the  term  of  my 
predecessor, Mr. Carlos Massad. I replied that it was not a problem, because it gave me time 
enough to propose and develop an agenda.  
It is no secret that I came to an institution that was living a crisis. My predecessor, in an act 
of great integrity, had chosen to resign in order to avoid the criticism that was building up 
against the Bank from affecting its institutional capital irreparably. I was aware then that, by 
accepting the post, I was assuming an enormous responsibility, which consisted essentially 
in protecting and strengthening its institutional capital. 
It  was,  therefore,  a  major  task,  that  started  precisely  by  introducing  policies  of  risk-
management, transparency and efficiency that would protect the Bank’s institutionality and 
autonomy. In global terms, it was tantamount to placing the Central Bank at the same level in 
management as it was in monetary and financial policy matters. I can say with satisfaction 
that it has been materialized during my period  and it is also largely stated in our strategic 
plan for the period 2006-2008. 
We then proposed to implement a risk-management culture, strengthening the work of our 
Comptroller department to operate by international standards in matters of internal control, 
risk management and corporate governance. 
We  gave  it  tools  that  grant  increased  autonomy  and  efficiency.  Today  the  Board  receives 
also  specialized  advisory  on  the  matter,  through  an  independent  audit  and  compliance 
committee,  made  up  by  highly  qualified  members.  All  of  this  has  helped  to  improve  our 
accountability and safeguard our autonomy. 
BIS Review 149/2007 
 1
In addition, to strengthen the Bank’s autonomy, this process had to come hand in hand with 
necessary  advancements  in  access  to  information,  in  matter  of  transparency  and  in 
communications, both internal and external. 
I  can  say  today,  on  the  day  that  I  leave,  that  I  feel  satisfied  with  our  advances  in  internal 
management,  of  administrative,  human  resources  and  risk-management  aspects,  all  under 
the  framework  granted  us  by  our  Constitutional  Organic  Law  that  sets  clearly  defined 
objectives  and  corporate  governance.  I  sincerely  thank  the  Bank’s  staff  that  took  in  these 
changes with responsibility and understanding and made them their own. 
The Central Bank of Chile supports its stronghold in the institution’s credibility and reputation. 
This can only be built with the rigorous and careful work of all the people that work in it. 
For this reason, parallel to decisions adopted with respect to internal management and the 
promotion of a risk-awareness culture, we continued to work on strengths already present in 
key  areas  of  the  Bank,  namely  the  Research,  Financial  Policy  and  Financial  Operations 
Division. 
In this sense, it is good to recall the whole process of reorganization introduced by the Board 
to  improve  the  Bank’s  efficiency,  taking  advantage  of  economies  of  scope  and  reducing 
transaction costs. 
Our  policy  of  transparency  and  diffusion  crystallized  in  the  creation  of  a  Department  of 
Communications,  that  later  evolved  into  a  Department  of  Institutional  Affairs  and  a 
Department of Communications Advise, with the purpose of providing an organized structure 
to  all  the  information  that  stems  from  the  Central  Bank  of  Chile  and  that  is  intended  to 
emphasize  equity  and  depth  in  the  delivery  of  information,  as  well  as  to  give  the  Chilean 
people a boost in their knowledge of economic matters. 
Regarding 
internal  management,  we  have  perfected  a  human  resources  selection 
mechanism  through  external  head  hunting  firms  for  managerial  posts,  and  open,  informed 
contests published on the website for other job positions. 
We have made great progress in our job appraisal policies, compensation structures to every 
employee and the setting of clear, measurable goals for levels 7 and up of the organizational 
chart.  Along  the  same  lines,  we  have  recently  approved  new  labor  policies  oriented  at 
integral  development,  in  order  to  contribute  to  the  institution’s  increased  efficiency  in 
achieving its goals and the personal fulfillment of the people who work in the institution. We 
have also advanced in a technological leveling project and we have implemented three-year 
periods for strategic planning. 
I am also proud to have presided over the Central Bank during a period where the average 
annual  inflation  rate  was  2.8%,  and  was  most  of  the  time  within  the  established  tolerance 
range and where the functioning of internal and external payments was totally normal. These 
are the objectives set forth by our Constitutional Organic Law. 
Unfortunately,  the  unusual  increases  in  the  prices  of  foods  and  energy  pushed  annual 
inflation above 7% toward this year’s end. This should be a transitory rise in inflation that will 
fade away in coming quarters, conditional to annual inflation expectations remain anchored 
around 3%.  
It is not pleasant to leave the Central Bank with such a high inflation figure. But I understand 
that  it  is  a  circumstantial  development  that  is  part  of  the  job,  and  that  the  highly  qualified 
Board and staff will take the appropriate decisions to achieve the objective to return inflation 
to 3% within the habitual policy horizon.  
We  have  applied  an  effective  monetary  policy  that  has  become  a  powerful  countercyclical 
tool, in light of the experience of recent years. But it would be of little use if we did not rely on 
the responsible fiscal policy that Chile has applied. 
2 
 BIS Review 149/2007
During my term, I was lucky to work with two top-level finance ministers, with whom I always 
had very fluent communication in the subjects of common concern. 
Both  of  them  understood,  among  other  issues,  the  importance  of  capitalizing  the  Central 
Bank  to  strengthen  its  equity  situation,  an  agreement  that  was  finalized  with  the  special 
support  by  Finance  Minister  Andrés  Velasco,  whereby  the  Bank  would  be  capitalized  at  a 
pace of half a percentage point of GDP per year over a period of five years. 
I  was  able  to  maintain  the  best  institutional  relationship  with  Congress.  During  my 
administration  I  had  the  chance  to  work  with  four  Senate  presidents  –  senators  Andrés 
Zaldívar, Hernán Larraín, Sergio Romero and Eduardo Frei Ruiz Tagle – and with presidents 
of  the  Finance  Commission  Alejandro  Foxley,  Carlos  Ominami  and  Camilo  Escalona.  Our 
relationship was always cordial and with strict observance of the provisions set forth in our 
Constitutional Organic legislation. 
Today we must all feel proud of the place that the Central Bank of Chile now occupies in the 
international  scene.  Several  measurements  rank  us  today  among  the  best  evaluated 
institutions  among  central  banks  around  the  world  in  various  aspects  of  our  day-to-day 
operation.  This  is  the  fruit  of  a  serious  and  very  patient  work  that  requires  dedication  and 
effort. 
I have also the satisfaction of having helped to complete the process of entry of the Central 
Bank of Chile as a member of the BIS (the Bank for International Settlements), and of having 
led a campaign to have smaller countries and those admitted in September 2003 participate 
in  its  bimonthly  meetings  on  the  global  economy.  This  campaign  succeeded  thanks  to  the 
support  of  Jean  Claude  Trichet,  Cristián  Noyer,  Tim  Geithner  and  especially  Jean-Pierre 
Roth.  As  a  result  of  this  campaign,  aside  from  Chile,  countries  like  Norway,  Denmark, 
Greece, Finland, Israel and New Zealand were able to also integrate the discussion on the 
global economy. 
Those meetings gather central bank governors of the main economies of the world, and are 
a great opportunity to be updated on the evolution of the global economy and strengthen the 
networks for interaction across central bankers. 
Internationally,  I  must  also  mention  the  great  recognition  that  has  the  work  of  our  Central 
Bank in other central banks and in international forums. 
Dear Board members, executives and all the staff: 
I  want  to  tell  you  all  that  I  am  deeply  grateful  for  having  had  the  opportunity  to  serve  my 
country  from  this  position.  It  has  been  a  true  privilege,  especially  for  the  opportunity  that 
provided  me  to  strengthen  this  institution  and  in  this  way  to  contribute  to  build  the  great 
reputation that this institution has today in the country and elsewhere. Traveling abroad as 
the Governor of the Central Bank is a great satisfaction because of the way our country is 
seen and respected. I have been the recipient of frequent praise for our country and for this 
Central Bank, which is the merit of each and every one of you. 
I have been lucky to have also had the unconditional support of my family, who has had to 
endure the heavy burden that this responsibility has placed on our lives. 
It is true that I would have liked to end my term with an inflation rate within the target range. 
Sadly,  some  circumstances  beyond  our  control  have  made  it  impossible.  But  I  am  certain 
that  this  is  a  temporary  phenomena  and  that  the  Central  Bank  is  very  well  prepared  to 
comply with its price stability objective. 
On  my  part,  I  leave  with  the  satisfaction  of  having  contributed  to  the  strengthening  of  this 
institution, so transcendental for the development and the welfare of the Chileans, to make it 
more credible, robust and efficient, but also more human, to earn prestige for our country and 
at the same time make it a great place to work in. 
BIS Review 149/2007 
 3
Here  we  have  people  of  the  top  level,  individuals  with  a  long  trajectory  and  also  with 
promising future. I ask you now to continue strengthening this institution to raise it to ever 
higher positions. 
I  am  grateful  for  all  the  support  that  the  Board  has  given  me  throughout  my  period  as 
Governor; I thank every manager, head of department and all the staff, from the highest to 
the lowest rank, for your patience, but above all, for the appreciation and affection you have 
shown me, especially in these last days.  
I take with me beautiful memories of all these years, which, I assure you, I will never forget.  
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 149/2007
