Jens Thomsen: The global economy in the years ahead  
Statement  by  Mr  Jens  Thomsen,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Denmark,  at  the  Indo-
Danish Business Association, Delhi, 9 October 2007. 
 Introduction (slide 1)  
The area I have been asked to address is the global economy in the years ahead. One of the 
trends in the economy which has been most noticeable – in the media and on the political 
agenda  over  the  latest  years  –  is  globalization.  I  will  therefore  examine  the  economic 
development from the angle of globalization.  
I will start by giving a brief overview of globalization which has been discussed vividly over 
the past decades and which is influencing an increasing number of areas of our economic 
and  every  day  live.  The  increased  international  coherence  has  changed  some  of  the 
characteristics  of  the  global  economy  on  the  very  big  scale.  I  will  address  some  points 
regarding these macro trends in a moment.  
Following this I will focus on the impact of globalization on the economy of the industrialized 
countries and especially Denmark so far, the challenges ahead and the answers which have 
been proposed to these challenges.  
1. 
Globalization basics  
Globalization in trade  
The  most  obvious  sign  of  globalization  has  been  trade,  meaning  an  increasing  amount  of 
trade  relative  to  production  globally.  This  is,  however,  not  a  new  trend  (Slide  2).  The 
increasing international trade has been a feature of the economic development over the past 
140 years interrupted by the world wars and the abolishment of the gold standard.1
The speed of trade integration has accelerated over the last decades and I will return to the 
reasons for this later on. World trade has grown five times in real terms since 1980, and its 
share of world GDP has risen from 36 percent to 55 percent over this period creating a more 
competitive  global  economic  environment  to  the  benefit  of  consumers  world  wide  and 
economic growth.2  
Financial globalization  
Another important aspect of globalization has been the increased financial integration in the 
past decades (slide 3). One measure, which can be used to measure the extent of financial 
integration, is the sum of external assets and liabilities relative to GDP. From the diagram it is 
obvious  financial  markets  have  become  much  more  integrated  and  that  we  are  moving 
towards a more global financial market. However the integration has only really took place for 
the  group  of  high  income  countries,  which  probably  can  be  partly  attributed  to  their  less 
restrictive capital controls in this group of countries.  
One of the benefits of financial integration, economic theory suggests, is growth facilitation. 
This owes to the technology transfers linked to investments which help increase efficiency. 
                                                 
1   D.A. Irwin, Long-run trends in world trade and income, World Trade Review (2002), 1:1, 89-100. 
2  
IMF, World Economic Outlook October 2007, chapter 4, p.33. 
BIS Review 123/2007 
 1
This is often one of the key arguments for the part of financial trade known as foreign direct 
investment  or  FDI.  Another  benefit  of  financial  globalization  is  the  increased  scope  for 
consumption  smoothing  for  individuals  and  countries.  As  the  business  cycle  of  emerging 
markets  often  is  decoupled  from  that  of  industrialized  countries,  the  possibility  of  global 
investment should also benefit investors in that they are able to spread their investment.  
However  financial  integration  is  also  associated  with  a  range  of  risks.  These  include  a 
possibility for greater volatility as capital inflow can be withdrawn in the face of a crisis or just 
a change in sentiments and "flight to quality" as we have seen in recent months; however, 
the effects on emerging economies have been small.  
The evidence suggests that the largest benefits from risk-sharing have accrued to advanced 
economies.  Countries  with  developed  domestic  financial  systems,  open  trade,  good 
governance and sound macroeconomic policies have not experienced greater volatility due 
to greater integration. Those without these “thresholds” have.3
Reasons for globalization  
The  shrinking  importance  of  geographical  distance  due  to  technological  progress  is  one 
important aspect of the increased interaction in the world economy (slide 4). This is largely 
due to the evolution of transportation measures, reduced cost and increased speed. It has 
been an ongoing process through the century and is thus less likely to be the reason for the 
recent up-surge in international trade. Communication possibilities through for example the 
internet has increased markedly over the past decades and has contributed to the increased 
globalization.  However,  the  most  significant  change  over  the  past  decades  has  been  the 
inclusion into the world economy of countries which were formerly very closed economies. 
The  integration  of  China,  India  and  the  former  communist  bloc  countries  into  the  world 
economy and the increasing support for international rules and institutions such as the WTO 
is thus one important explanation for the recent surge in international trade.  
2.  
Macro trends  
Growth contribution  
First, the relative importance of the economies in the global economy is changing fast with 
the (re)emergence of the large and populous countries of Russia, China and India into the 
global economy. In 2007 the IMF estimates that China will be the largest contributor to global 
growth and be the fourth largest economy; roughly the same size as the German (slide 5). 
India is still a much smaller economy than China and only comparable to that of Korea at 
twelfth in the world. But with the recent high growth rates, edging on 10 percent for India and 
steadily above for China the contribution to global growth has become pronounced.  
In terms of economic size we will – if present growth differences continue – at some point 
see  China  overtake  US  as  the  largest  economy  in  the  world  (slide  6).  This  is  however  a 
prospect which probably will not occur in the next twenty years. In this timeframe India is also 
likely to considerably move up the economic ladder and if the trends continue by 2030 India 
will possibly be the world's third largest economy. Of course all this is kind of speculative and 
depends very much on the future economic growth.  
Even though the Chinese economy is likely to become the world largest and India the third 
largest living standards are still very different between China, India and the western countries 
(slide 7). Today in India the average GDP per capita is roughly two percent of that of the US 
and roughly 5 percent of that of the US in China. This will go up markedly and a large extent 
                                                 
3  
IMF, Reaping the Benefits of Financial Globalization, Discussion Paper, June 2007. 
2 
 BIS Review 123/2007
of catching up from these countries will occur (slide 7/2) if we look to 2015 and especially if 
we look to 2030 when the living standard relative to the US will have increased by a factor 4 
for India and 6 for China (slide 7/3). If you contemplate that this is over 2 billion people I think 
it is remarkable.  
The trend of increasing importance of these economies will thus most likely continue in the 
coming years and will turn the world's economic focus to Asia. This trend will hopefully be 
supported by further lifting of trade restrictions where especially agriculture still has a lot of 
potential  for  increased  international  trade.  The  largest  risk  to  the  process  of  continued 
globalization is, taken from history, wars. The interwar period and the 2nd WW reduced the 
international trade and this was probably the only period in the last 150 years in which global 
trade grew slower than global GDP.4
Demographic trends  
The demographic development in past, present and future has been a factor contributing to 
shaping  the  world  economy  (slide  8).  China  and  India  have  in  the  last  twenty  years 
experienced a decreasing ratio of dependent individuals to individuals in the work force. This 
has  in  itself  helped  creating  the  economic  upturn.  In  the  case  of  China  this  profile  will, 
however,  start  to  change  around  2020  as  the  political  effort  to  limit  the  population  growth 
starts  to  have  an  impact  on  the  dependency  ratio,  due  to  fewer  newcomers  to  the  labour 
market. In approximately one and a half decade India's labour force will be larger than that of 
China.  
On  the  other  hand  most  European  economies  will  in  the  coming  years  experience  an 
increasing dependency ratio which will strain the public budgets and the economic growth. 
The US is not set to experience the same level of changing demographics.  
These  different  demographic  trends  will  certainly  play  a  part  in  determining  the  future 
dynamic areas of the world economy.  
Growth in inequality  
First, the average real wage has gone up for the poorest in almost all countries so if you look 
at it in an absolute sense globalization has helped benefit the poor. In a relative sense which 
inequality  naturally  is  the  results  are  more  mixed  (slide  9).  It  is  always  to  find  fully 
comparable data on this subject but these are the latest ones presented in a report by the 
IMF.5  
All in all globalization might have in itself translated into a slight inequality increase. Trade 
globalization has generally decreased inequality through increasing demand after the labour 
supply which has a comparative advantage in each country i.e. unskilled labour in developing 
countries.  Financial  globalization  and  especially  FDI  is,  however,  found  to  have  increased 
inequality. This is caused by the increased demand after skilled labour which FDI creates.6  
In most developed countries capital and highly skilled labour have increased their real wages 
and  share  of  income  while  the  real  wage  of  low  skilled  workers  has  stagnated  or  fallen 
leading  to  increased  inequality  as  shown  by  an  increased  Gini  coefficient.  In  many 
developing  countries,  however,  inequality  has  also  been  rising  significantly.  In  India  the 
increase  after  the  economic  reforms  in  the  early  nineties  has  only  been  marginal  while  in 
China inequality has been increasing rapidly. One of the reasons for this increase in China is 
                                                 
4   A.  Maddison,  Growth  and  Interaction  in  the  World  Economy  –  The  Roots  of  Modernity,  The  AEI  Press, 
WASHINGTON, D.C., 2005. 
IMF, World Economic Outlook October 2007, chapter 4. 
IMF, World Economic Outlook October 2007, chapter 4. 
5  
6  
BIS Review 123/2007 
 3
the inflexible labour markets which have contributed to an increased rural-urban divide even 
against the backdrop of a large migration towards the cities in these countries.  
As the increased inequality stems mainly from a share of the population becoming richer it is 
a  sign  of  the  economic  growth  more  than  anything  else  and  has  been  a  feature  of  most 
economic  restructuring  processes  historically  we  will  hopefully  see  that  the  inequality  will 
retract  when  the  economic  development  spreads  to  all  segments  of  society  in  India  and 
China.  Horizontally  the  rising  educational  level  also  in  developing  countries  will  eventually 
pull in the direction of decreasing inequality.  
Denmark in a globalized world  
3. 
Let me turn my focus away from these very large scale trends on a global scale and to a 
more  local  one  and  give  you  an  overview  of  the  impact  of  globalization  on  the  Danish 
economy (slide 10).  
The Danish economy has been doing very well these last years, with relatively high growth 
rates, record low unemployment and surpluses on the current account and the public budget. 
So  on  the  surface  the  Danish  economy  is  doing  very  well  against  the  backdrop  of 
globalization.  
As a historically open economy Denmark has for a long period of time been participating in 
world  trade.  The  change  of  the  Danish  agricultural  complex  from  vegetable  to  animal 
production in the beginning of the 19th century in the face of cheap grain from the US is an 
early example of Denmark adopting to globalization and changing trade conditions.  
The  size  of  Danish  import  and  exports  has  in  accordance  with  the  global  trend  been 
increasing  steeply  the  past  decades.  The  composition  of  exports  is  still  biased  heavily 
towards our main trading partners in Europe and the US. Only very recently has the trade 
with the emerging market countries taken off on the exports side. Regarding imports the size 
of the emerging markets is somewhat bigger but still the main portion of our foreign trade 
consists of trade with industrialized countries.  
Regarding foreign direct investment which is often associated with globalization and the Far 
East the main part is as for trade directed towards western countries and especially Europe 
(slide 11). However the Chinese share of the investments has been growing steadily and has 
overtaken that of Japan. Investments directed towards India has not as of yet really taken of.  
Some of the effects of globalization on the Danish economy are less visible, however, in the 
import export statistics (slide 12). Danish textile production has historically been rather large 
especially in certain areas of Jutland and the development in this industry branch provides a 
case  in  point  for  the  effect  of  globalization.  The  production  of  textiles  in  Denmark  has 
dropped  dramatically  in  past  years,  but  the  value  of  textile  export  has  been  increasing 
steeply. One should think that this was self-contradictory. But it is an indication that the work 
carried out in Denmark is now higher up the value chain and that the production itself has 
been outsourced to low wage countries. This is the success story of globalization and what 
should be aimed for when tackling the effects of the integration in high wage countries. Of 
course the change in the structure of the economy is not always as clear cut as in the textile 
case. But when observed on a broader scale the shift from an economy focusing on industry 
and  agriculture  and  towards  services  supported  by  globalization  is  visible  (slide  13).  The 
employment composition over the past decades has changed rather fast in Denmark.  
The  movement  up  the  value  chain  is  essential  for  the  Danish  economy  to  benefit  from 
globalization. In direct wage comparisons in the areas of production requiring lesser skilled 
workers Denmark is clearly not competitive in a strict wage sense (slide 14).  
Competitiveness of a business, however, comprises a number of factors and if you try to take 
account  of  all  these  factors  Denmark  is,  unsurprisingly,  much  more  competitive  (slide  15). 
The  strong  Danish  competitiveness  in  such  a  valuation  is  caused  by  a  general  strong 
4 
 BIS Review 123/2007
position in all the measured categories and in particular a high score on effective institutions, 
low  corruption  and  well  functioning  infrastructure.  The  booming  Danish  economy  also 
benefits the business climate. On the down side is of course high wages and taxes.  
The interest in the Danish labour market has increased markedly recently due to the relative 
success  and  very  low  unemployment  against  the  pressure  from  globalization.  This  has 
caused a lot of praise of the so-called flexicurity system (slide 16). The system consists of 
three  legs  namely  a  flexible  labour  market  and  a  generous  welfare  system  combined  with 
active labour market policies. The system in itself has not changed drastically over the past 
years; the active labour market policies i.e. activation rules have been tightened somewhat 
but it is less likely that this has changed the core of the working of the flexicurity system. The 
system does have some benefits in adapting to the globalizing issues such as the flexible 
workforce (slide 17). However, it should not be seen as the Holy Grail for all countries.  
One of the fears in a time of globalization has been workforce mobility between countries and 
the  risk  that  a  generous  welfare  system  would  attract  too  much  foreign  labour.  As  it  has 
turned out mobility in the new EU member states is higher than from in older member states 
(slide 18). But so far Denmark has in no sense been overrun by immigrants and very recently 
the government has proposed plans to attract more workers in the face of the tight Danish 
labour market.  
Other  factors  apart  form  economy  are,  however,  keeping  mobility  between  EU  member 
states on a much lower level than for instance in the US. These include language, cultural 
and regulatory barriers.  
In the 1970s and 1980s the solution of governments facing industries in difficulties was to 
provide  financial  support  or  subsidies  thereby  prolonging  the  pain  of  restructuring  the 
production. Fortunately this approach has given way to a more dynamic reasoning where the 
proposed political answer to the challenges posed by globalization to the western economies 
such  as  Denmark  today  is  to  rely  heavily  on  the  education  aspect.  Education  is  now 
perceived as the best way to ensure the crucial movement up the value chain (slide 19). This 
is obvious in the EUs approach which is called the Lisbon strategy to promote education and 
research as well as multiple strategies from Danish governments to counteract the negative 
effects from globalization. This includes the latest proposal from the Danish government. In 
this race to the top on education the Danish performance has been questioned in the debate.  
With a free education system and high marginal taxes one of the possible stumbling stones 
of the education effort is brain drain meaning the emigration of highly skilled individuals (slide 
20).  The  studies  on  the  extent  of  this  problem  suggest  that  the  scope  is  rather  small. 
Denmark has experienced a small net emigration of highly educated labour each year and 
generally the numbers are not giving cause for concern. In some groups notably PhD's and 
masters  of  natural  and  social  sciences  the  share  of  emigration  is  larger  and  the  return 
probability is lower. The return rate is in general around eighty percent suggesting that the 
decision to go abroad and come home again is affected by a long range of factors other than 
purely economical ones.  
BIS Review 123/2007 
 5
Slide 1 
Slide 2 
   6 
 BIS Review 123/2007
Slide 3 
Slide 4 
    BIS Review 123/2007 
 7
Slide 5 
Slide 6 
    8 
 BIS Review 123/2007
Slide 7 
Slide 8 
    BIS Review 123/2007 
 9
Slide 9 
Slide 10 
    10 
 BIS Review 123/2007
Slide 11 
Slide 12 
    BIS Review 123/2007 
 11
Slide 13 
Slide 14 
    12 
 BIS Review 123/2007
Slide 15 
Slide 16 
    BIS Review 123/2007 
 13
Slide 17 
Slide 18 
    14 
 BIS Review 123/2007
Slide 19 
Slide 20 
   BIS Review 123/2007 
 15
