Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Brief look at payment systems, financial 
markets and the micro-finance sector in Uganda 
Speech  by  Mr  Emmanuel  Tumusiime-Mutebile,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Uganda,  at  the 
farewell dinner of Mr Peter Rhode, Kampala, 28 September 2007. 
 Your Excellency the Ambassador of Germany 
Mr. Peter Rhode, Outgoing Director, GTZ/Financial System Development Programme, 
Chief Executives of Financial Institutions, 
Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
This evening, as you are all aware, we are attending a farewell dinner in honour of Mr. Peter 
Rhode, the outgoing Director of the GTZ Financial Systems Development Programme (FSD). 
Mr. Rhode has been Director of the GTZ / Financial Sector Development Programme since 
2002.  The  FSD  programme  has  several  project  components,  covering  a  number  of  areas 
including payment systems, financial markets, and the micro-finance sector. 
Under  the  able  leadership  of  Mr.  Peter  Rhode,  the  GTZ  Financial  Sector  Development 
Programme  has  played  an  important  and  commendable  role  in  the  development  of  the 
national payment system, financial markets and the micro-finance sector. 
Mr. Peter Rhode played an active and positive role in the acquisition and implementation of 
the  Real-Time  Gross  Settlement  (RTGS)  System,  otherwise  referred  to  as  the  Uganda 
National  Inter-bank  Settlement  (UNIS)  System.  Mr.  Rhode  personally  oversaw  the 
recruitment of a qualified and experienced consultant who worked with Bank of Uganda staff 
to carefully and objectively evaluate the RTGS bids. As an RTGS system is a critical national 
economic  infrastructure  that  facilitates  the  efficient  and  safe  transfer  of  monetary  value 
between  transacting  parties,  Bank  of  Uganda  is  grateful  to  Mr.  Rhode's  contribution  in 
implementing the system in Uganda. 
The East African Community is in the process of implementing an East African Cross Border 
payment  system  to  faciIitate  the  efficient  and  safe  transfer  of  monetary  value  within  the 
region.  As  the  community  becomes  more  economically  and  socially  integrated,  the 
implementation of an efficient cross border payment system to support increased levels of 
regional trade and social interaction becomes a strategic imperative. 
I am glad to note that Mr. Rhode has been supportive of the cross border payment system 
project, and GTZ has contributed to the enhancement of the Bank's technical capacity in the 
design and management of multi-currency cross border payment systems. 
During his term, Mr Rhode has placed a lot of emphasis on capacity building in the different 
areas  of  the  financial  sector.  Indeed,  the  FSD  programme  has  trained  staff  from  Bank  of 
Uganda,  Capital  Markets  Authority,  Uganda  Securities  Exchange,  and  the  micro-finance 
sector. 
Micro-finance  institutions  are  now  universally  recognised  as  important  tools  in  the  fight 
against poverty. They extend micro-credits to the poor and vulnerable, and such small credits 
have economically and financially transformed the lives of the poor. Over the last four years, 
Mr Rhode has been at the centre of this microfinance revolution. He has worked closely with 
the  Association  of  Micro-finance  institutions  in  Uganda  (AMFIU)  and  other  related 
organisations  to  build  capacity  and  facilitate  the  micro-finance  sector  to  offer  and  deliver 
professional  and  cost-effective  services.  Mr.  Rhode,  we  would  like  to  thank  you  not  only 
associating  with  the  poor,  but  also  positively  contributing  to  their  economic  transformation 
and well-being. 
BIS Review 114/2007 
 1
In conclusion, I must state that Bank of Uganda has immensely benefited from Mr. Rhode's 
breadth  of  experience,  depth  of  knowledge  and  his  singular  focus  and  commitment  to  the 
success  of  the  FSD  programme.  He  has  propelled  the  national  payment  system,  micro-
finance sector and the entire financial sector to greater heights. Indeed, his performance and 
record of achievements during his tenure have been both impressive and outstanding. 
As we bid farewell to Mr. Rhode, Bank of Uganda wishes to underscore its appreciation to 
the German Government through the GTZ/FSD for the support Uganda has received since 
the inception of the FSD programme. 
I understand that Mr. Rhode is retiring to the serene and scenic beauty of Cape Town. For a 
man whose career has not only been outstanding, but also dedicated to serving the poor, the 
vulnerable and the underprivileged in such countries as Nepal, Zambia and Uganda, there 
are  probably  not  many  places  that  would  compete  with  Cape  Town.  As  you  explore  the 
picturesque surroundings of Cape Town, its imposing mountain ranges and its world class 
wineries, please always remember that Uganda's financial sector will always treasure your 
contribution. 
Thank you Peter, and may God bless you. 
2 
 BIS Review 114/2007
