Svein Gjedrem: Interest rates, the exchange rate and the outlook for the 
Norwegian economy  
Speech by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), to the 
Mid-Norway Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Trondheim, 28 November 2007. 
The  text  below  may  differ  slightly  from  the  actual  presentation.  The  address  is  based  on  the  assessments 
presented  at  Norges  Bank’s  press  conference  following  the  Executive  Board’s  monetary  policy  meeting  on  31 
October and in Monetary Policy Report 3/07. 
 Introduction 
Monetary policy in Norway is oriented towards low and stable inflation with annual consumer 
price  inflation  of  close  to  2.5  per  cent  over  time.  The  objective  of  low  and  stable  inflation 
provides  the  economy  with  a  nominal  anchor.  This  means  that  all  economic  agents  – 
households and enterprises, whether large or small – can plan ahead on the assumption that 
inflation will be low and stable.  
In  a  small,  open  and  decentralised  market  economy  like  Norway,  and  with  our  particular 
industry structure, there will be cyclical fluctuations. When economic agents have confidence 
that  inflation  is  low  and  stable  over  time,  the  interest  rate  can  also  be  set  with  a  view  to 
dampening the fluctuations somewhat. 
Low inflation and solid growth in the Norwegian economy 
Inflation in Norway decelerated markedly from the late-1980s to the mid-1990s and has since 
been low and stable, and fairly close to, but somewhat lower than the target of 2.5 per cent, 
with considerably lower variability than earlier.  
After a period of very low inflation in 2004, inflation was on the rise through 2005. Thereafter, 
domestic  inflation  showed  an  unexpected  drop  in  2006.  Lower  electricity  prices  have 
contributed to a fall in total CPI inflation in 2007. Underlying inflation, i.e. inflation adjusted for 
tax changes and excluding energy products, was fairly stable for a long period at between 1 
and 1½ per cent. Underlying inflation has edged up gradually since late summer 2006. The 
most recent figures indicate that underlying inflation is now approximately 1½ per cent.  
The  Norwegian  economy  is  expanding  sharply  after  the  strong  upturn  began  in  summer 
2003. The upturn followed a period of slow growth from 1998 and a mild recession in 2002 
and into 2003. Growth has been stronger than in the cyclical upturn in the mid-1990s. We 
have  just  reached  the  end  of  an  unusually  long  period  of  economic  growth.  So  far  in  the 
cyclical  upturn,  the  mainland  economy  has  grown  by  an  average  of  just  over  4  per  cent 
annually. This year, growth appears to be over 5 per cent.  
Growth is very strong for such an advanced stage of the economic cycle. This is clear from a 
comparison with the upturns in the 1980s and 1990s. 
Unemployment has declined considerably and is now very low. The labour market is tight. 
Unemployment has not been as low since the latter half of the 1980s, and employment has 
risen  faster  this  year  than  in  living  memory.  It  is  estimated  that  the  number  employed  will 
increase by 3.5 per cent this year, which would be the strongest rise recorded in the post-war 
period.  The  number  of  vacancies  per  unemployed  has  never  been  higher.  There  is  a 
shortage of qualified labour in many industries. 
Although  unemployment  has  fallen sharply,  wage-earners’ share  of  corporate  value  added 
has been reduced, from around 75 per cent in the late 1980s to 70 per cent at the end of the 
1990s, and now stands at below 65 per cent. Solid productivity growth and high prices for 
export goods and goods supplied to the petroleum sector have contributed to the reduction in 
BIS Review 141/2007 
 1
the  wage  share  over  the  past  few  years.  The  ample  supply  of  labour  has  probably  had  a 
dampening  effect  on  wage  growth.  Increased  globalisation  may  have  provided  greater 
opportunities  for  Norwegian  enterprises  to  relocate  production  to  other  countries  if  labour 
costs  become  too  high.  This  probably  places  some  restraint  on  wage  demands  among 
workers in sectors where enterprises have such opportunities. 
Historically,  a  high  wage  share  has  tended  to  be  accompanied  by  low  unemployment. 
Developments in recent years have provided the basis for strong growth in employment while 
the wage share has fallen. 
Wage-earners  and  enterprises  have  both  fared  well.  Low  prices  for  imported  goods  have 
resulted in a subdued rise in consumer prices and a substantial increase in wage-earners’ 
real wages. High export prices have contributed to holding down the rise in enterprises’ real 
wages. Combined with high productivity growth, this has resulted in high corporate earnings 
and solid growth in employment. 
Utilisation of production resources in the economy, labour and fixed assets, has increased 
markedly  since  summer  2003.  Enterprises  in  Norges  Bank’s  regional  network  report  high 
capacity utilisation and limited capacity in most industries and regions and, as mentioned, a 
shortage  of  labour  in  almost  all  industries.  Some  municipalities  have  reported  that  the 
number  of  vacancies  is  higher  than  the  number  of  job-seekers.  There  are  also  reports  of 
shortages of other factor inputs. Not since the 1970s have there been such frequent reports 
of purely physical production constraints.  
Reports from enterprises in Region Central Norway are not very different from the rest of the 
country. All industries report solid growth. Growth appears to be strongest in retail trade and 
services, while the building and construction sector reports only moderate growth. Continued 
growth  is  expected,  but  capacity  problems  are  a  constraint  on  growth  in  a  number  of 
industries.  An  increasing  number  of  enterprises  report  that  they  have  limited  available 
capacity. For most enterprises, the labour supply is the most important constraint. Investment 
is  expected  to  continue  growing  in  all  industries  and  in  the  local  government  sector. 
Employment  is  also  growing,  except  in  the  building  and  construction  industry,  where 
employment growth now appears to have levelled off. Enterprises expect appreciably higher 
wage  growth  than  at  the  same  time  last  year.  Enterprises  state  that  higher  pay  is  an 
important edge in the competition for labour. 
After  a  long  period  of  high  housing  investment  and  rising  prices,  activity  in  the  housing 
market  now  appears  to  be  slowing.  Seasonally  adjusted,  house  prices  have  fallen  for  four 
consecutive months. In recent years, house price inflation has been accompanied by strong 
growth in household debt. Credit growth remains high. Higher interest rates and falling house 
prices may lead to slower consumption growth and a higher saving ratio ahead. 
There are large regional differences in house price developments, but the trend has been the 
same  since  year-end  2006.  House  price  inflation  is  decelerating  in  all  regions,  with  a  12-
month  decline  in  house  prices  in  Hedmark  and  Oppland  and  a  rate  close  to  zero  in 
Trøndelag.  
The strong rise in house prices has been accompanied by an increase in turnover up to the 
summer of this year. The stock of homes for sale has varied somewhat in recent years, but 
since summer 2006 there has been a sharp increase. This may explain some of the decline 
in house prices in recent months.  
The present economic expansion differs from previous upturns in that inflation has remained 
low  so  far  despite  strong  growth  and  increasing  capacity  utilisation.  There  are  several 
reasons for this. 
First, low import prices and high prices for our commodity exports have improved Norway’s 
terms  of  trade  appreciably.  Prices  for  oil  and  gas,  freight,  fish,  industrial  commodities  and 
engineering  products  have  increased  considerably.  Moreover,  Norwegian  importers  have 
gained access to new markets in central Europe and Asia which offer substantially cheaper 
2 
 BIS Review 141/2007
consumer goods. Norway’s terms of trade have improved by about 40 per cent since 2002. 
Recently, however the terms of trade have become slightly less favourable. This is partly due 
to weaker prices for Norwegian exports, such as metals. Slightly higher import prices have 
also had a negative impact. 
Second,  an  ample  supply  of  labour  has  boosted  output  growth.  A  strong  increase  in  the 
population  has  expanded  the  growth  capacity  of  the  Norwegian  economy  without  a 
comparable  increase  in  wages.  In  particular,  the  supply  of  foreign  labour  has  increased 
sharply after EU enlargement in 2004. Over the past two years, these labour inflows have 
accounted for over 30 per cent of growth in the labour force in Norway. At the same time, this 
has enabled Norwegian companies to be bolder in accepting new assignments and making 
investments, in the knowledge that they can procure labour throughout Europe.  
Third,  productivity  growth  has  been  unusually  high,  for  both  companies  competing  on 
international markets and those supplying goods and services to the domestic market. The 
result  is  lower  production  costs.  Banks  and  other  service  sectors,  in  particular,  have 
outperformed other countries in this respect. The business sector has been quick to adapt 
and change, and to make use of new technology that is available in an international market. 
This  is  probably  due  to  the  modernisation  of  the  functioning  of  the  economy  through  the 
1980s  and  1990s,  which  resulted  in  more  efficient  markets.  In  addition,  growth  in  labour 
productivity reflected a marked fall in sickness absence in 2004. 
The outlook for the Norwegian economy 
Monetary  policy  influences  the  economy  with  a  lag.  Norges  Bank  therefore  has  to  be 
forward-looking in its interest rate setting. Developments in prices and capacity utilisation in 
Norway  are  influenced  by  both  domestic  conditions  and  economic  developments  in  other 
countries. 
Since the end of June, global money and credit markets have been characterised by sharp 
fluctuations,  liquidity  shortages  and  reduced  risk  willingness.  The  turbulence  stems  from 
problems in the US mortgage market. Defaults on subprime mortgages in the US began in 
the second half of 2006. Securities portfolios had been developed around these mortgages. 
Uncertainty  arose  among  banks  and  investors  that  were  directly  or  indirectly  exposed  to 
losses  on  subprime  mortgages.  Expected  losses  on  mortgage-backed  securities  rose. 
Investors  became  gradually  less  willing  to  take  risk.  The  premium  on  corporate  securities 
increased markedly. The credit premium has been highest on the lowest rated securities, i.e. 
securities backed by subprime loans. 
Another  effect  of  the  turbulence  is  credit  migration,  i.e.  that  the  rating  of  securities  has 
changed as the consequences of the unrest have become apparent. For example, a security 
that had an AAA rating, may now be rated AA or lower. 
The turmoil spread rapidly to other parts of the financial markets. Banks that were directly 
involved, or had committed credit lines to other operators involved, were faced with growing 
uncertainty with respect to their liquidity needs and their own and other operators’ potential 
losses.  It  may  be  difficult  for  banks  to  manage  their  own  balance  sheets  because  of 
uncertainty  as  to  the  size  of  the  loans  they  will  be  left  holding  on  their  books  that  would 
otherwise have been financed in the bond market. As a result, they became very reluctant to 
lend money to one another. Money market rates increased markedly, also in Norway. 
The contagion to the Norwegian money market reflects Norwegian banks’ heavy reliance on 
foreign  funding.  The  eurodollar  market  has  been  a  frequently  used  source  of  financing  for 
Norwegian banks. This is both because banks provide substantial lending in US dollars, and 
because this market is used to procure liquidity in NOK. In the latter case, banks borrow in 
USD and then swap USD for NOK.  
BIS Review 141/2007 
 3
The  turbulence  in  financial  markets  and  uncertainty  related  to  developments  in  the  US 
housing market have led to a decline in market expectations concerning economic growth, 
and  central  bank  key  rates  have  fallen,  in  both  the  short  and  the  long  term.  There  is 
considerable uncertainty as to how long market unrest will last, and the impact it will have on 
the real economy. The Federal Reserve has cut its key rate on two occasions this autumn, 
which has contributed to a further downward revision of interest rate expectations in both the 
US and the rest of the world, including Norway. 
The interest rate differential between Norway and other countries can have an impact on the 
krone  exchange  rate.  In  the  short  term,  however,  the  factors  that  influence  the  krone 
exchange rate vary. In periods, there seems to be a link between high oil prices and a krone 
appreciation,  but  there  have  also  been  periods  when  the  krone  has  appreciated  while  oil 
prices  declined.  The  krone  appreciated  when  the  interest  rate  differential  against  other 
countries was high in 2002, but as interest rates in Norway moved down to the level among 
our  trading  partners,  the  value  of  the  krone  fell  back.  In  the  past,  we  have  observed  that 
market  turbulence  has  occurred  in  tandem  with  a  weaker  krone.  This  autumn  the  krone 
appreciated during the period of market turbulence, but has weakened somewhat in recent 
weeks, reflecting shifting themes in foreign exchange markets. However, it appears the krone 
will be a good 3 per cent stronger on average in the second half of this year than in the first 
half, and about 1.5 per cent stronger this year than last, which has a dampening impact on 
inflation. 
Given our inflation-targeting regime, we will be mindful of the effects of higher interest rates 
on the krone exchange rate when inflation is low. 
Global growth will also influence oil prices and developments in prices for other commodities. 
Oil  prices  are  high  and  futures  prices  indicate  that  they  will  remain  so.  The  price  of  Brent 
Blend has averaged close to USD 70 per barrel so far this year. In recent months, the price 
has been well above this level. Gas prices have also increased in recent years, reflecting the 
rise in oil prices and gas shortages in Europe. Gas prices fell somewhat in the first half of 
2007, partly as a result of the decline in UK gas prices and the fall in oil prices in the first half 
of  2007.  Both  UK  gas  prices  and  oil  prices  have  risen  again  this  autumn.  Gas  prices  are 
expected to remain at a high level, and the price of Norwegian gas may rise in the period 
ahead.  
A long period of high oil prices has boosted investment in oil and gas activities, leading to a 
strong  increase  in  domestic  activity  in  recent  years.  The  level  of  petroleum  investment  is 
historically  high  and  the  outlook  is  favourable.  The  discovery  rate  on  the  Norwegian 
continental shelf appears to be high this year. The number of applicants for new exploration 
activities  is  unusually  high.  Coupled  with  high  oil  prices,  these  factors  will  contribute  to 
increased activity on the Norwegian continental shelf in coming years. At the same time, the 
composition  of  production  is  changing.  Oil  production  is  on  the  decline  and  has  not  been 
lower since 1994. Gas production continues to rise, and in 2007 production started on the 
large Ormen Lange and Snøhvit gas fields. The Ministry of Petroleum and Energy projects 
that total petroleum production will gradually decline in the years ahead. 
Prices for commodities excluding energy have increased considerably since 2002. The rise 
in prices was particularly pronounced in spring 2006, when metal prices climbed by a full 45 
per cent from March to June. The rise in metal prices has been driven primarily by strong 
global economic growth, particularly in China and other emerging economies. Prices for food 
and  other  agricultural  products  have  also  increased  in  recent  years  as  a  result  of  rising 
production  costs  owing  to  higher  energy  prices.  Increased  demand  for  biofuel  has  also 
contributed as agricultural products and land are used in the production of biofuel. Growth in 
demand  for  commodities  is  expected  to  remain  high  in  the  years  ahead  and  supply  will 
probably  also  increase.  Prices  for  metals  are  expected  to  fall  somewhat,  but  probably  not 
back to the level in 2002. 
4 
 BIS Review 141/2007
Salmon  prices  fluctuate  widely  and  are  driven  by  a  variety  of  domestic  and  global  factors. 
Salmon prices rose sharply in summer 2006, driven by strong demand growth, particularly in 
Europe.  Enterprises  in  Norges  Bank’s  regional  network  report  growing  demand  for  high 
quality  salmon.  Avian  flu  and  other  crises  linked  to  meat  products  have  increased  the 
preference  for  fish  products.  In  the course  of  autumn  2006,  salmon  prices  fell  back  to  the 
levels  before  the  price  upswing,  driven  partly  by  somewhat  lower  demand  but  also  by  an 
increased supply of salmon.  
The orientation of fiscal and monetary policy 
The Government uses the central government budget to influence economic developments. 
Government petroleum revenues are transferred in their entirety to the Government Pension 
Fund – Global and invested in securities abroad. However, as part of the budget resolution, 
the Storting decides on an annual transfer from the Fund to cover the government budget 
deficit, excluding petroleum revenues and capital income earned by the Fund. This annual 
transfer – direct petroleum revenue spending – has been sharply reduced in recent years, 
but is expected to increase somewhat next year. Developments reflect a marked increase in 
the government’s general tax revenues as a result of the current period of strong expansion. 
This  in  turn  reflects  the  automatic  contribution  made  by  the  central  government  budget  to 
curbing cyclical fluctuations because more money accrues to the state in favourable periods 
than in adverse periods. 
If the economy had not been in a period of strong expansion and the economic situation had 
been  more  normal,  a  considerably  larger  transfer  from  the  Pension  Fund  to  the  Treasury 
would have been necessary in order to balance the budget. This cyclically adjusted transfer 
is estimated at a good NOK 71 billion this year, and just under NOK 77 billion in 2008, and 
has increased gradually over time. It is this estimate that underlies the plan drawn up by the 
Government  and  the  Storting,  referred  to  as  the  fiscal  rule.  The  rule  states  that  the 
Government  is  to  spend,  as  an  annual  average  through  the  business  cycle,  the  expected 
return  on  the  petroleum  fund  i.e.  4  per  cent.  Because  of  the  high  level  of  activity,  the 
Government has proposed somewhat lower petroleum revenue spending next year than the 
4 per cent of the Fund’s value at the beginning of the year.  
The  proposed  tax  programme  for  next  year  will  have  a  fairly  neutral  impact  on  economic 
activity.  Proposed  direct  and  indirect  tax  rates  will  generate  approximately  the  same 
government revenues as last year’s tax rates had they been left unchanged. However, the 
overall  central  government  budget  will  have  a  stimulatory  effect.  This  is  reflected  in  fairly 
strong nominal spending, which is higher than the rate of growth in mainland GDP that can 
normally be expected.  
Norges  Bank’s  interest  rate  setting  is  based  on  two  main  criteria  for  future  interest  rate 
developments.  First,  the  interest  rate  is  set  with  a  view  to  stabilising  inflation  close  to  the 
target in the medium term. The horizon will depend on the shocks to which the economy is 
exposed and their effects on the path for inflation and the real economy ahead. Second, the 
interest rate path shall provide a reasonable balance between the path for inflation and the 
path for capacity utilisation. In the assessment, potential effects of property prices and the 
krone exchange rate on the prospects for output, employment and inflation are also taken 
into account.  
The results of this trade-off are presented in the Monetary Policy Report in the form of a chart 
that presents baseline scenarios for the interest rate, inflation and capacity utilisation in the 
economy.  
In  Monetary  Policy  Report  3/07  it  was  pointed  out  that  the  inflation  outlook  is  marked  by 
opposing  forces.  The  rise  in  prices  for  domestically  produced  goods  and  services  is 
gathering pace. The Norwegian economy is still expanding, with unusually high demand for 
intermediate goods and labour. At the same time, the krone had appreciated markedly. This 
BIS Review 141/2007 
 5
may restrain inflation. The analysis implies that the key policy rate should be raised further, 
but to a lesser extent than envisaged in June.  
At its meeting on 31 October, Norges Bank’s Executive Board decided to leave the key rate 
unchanged at 5 per cent. At the same time, it was made clear that the key policy rate will 
probably remain in the interval 4¾-5¾ per cent until the next Report is published in March 
2008, unless the Norwegian economy is exposed to unexpectedly severe shocks. 
The projections are shrouded in uncertainty. The projections for inflation, output, the interest 
rate and other variables are based on an assessment of the current economic situation and 
the  functioning  of  the  economy.  We  have  illustrated  the  uncertainty  surrounding  the 
projections for the interest rate, inflation and capacity utilisation with fan charts. The wider the 
fans, the more uncertain the forecasts are. If economic developments are broadly in line with 
projections,  economic  agents  can  also  expect 
to  be 
approximately as projected. On the other hand, the interest rate path may shift in relation to 
the projected path if the economic outlook changes or if the effects of interest rate changes 
on output, employment and prices are different from those projected.  
Thank you for your attention. 
 
 
 
interest  rate  developments 
  6 
 BIS Review 141/2007
    BIS Review 141/2007 
 7
    8 
 BIS Review 141/2007
    BIS Review 141/2007 
 9
    10 
 BIS Review 141/2007
    BIS Review 141/2007 
 11
    12 
 BIS Review 141/2007
    BIS Review 141/2007 
 13
    14 
 BIS Review 141/2007
    BIS Review 141/2007 
 15
    16 
 BIS Review 141/2007
    BIS Review 141/2007 
 17
   BIS Review 141/2007
 18 
 