Guy Quaden: Assessment of the Lamfalussy architecture 
Welcome address by Mr Guy Quaden, Governor of the National Bank of Belgium, at a 3L3 
Meeting of the European Financial Regulators, Brussels, 26 November 2007. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Colleagues and Friends,  
It is both an honour and a great pleasure for me to welcome you to Brussels for the third 
meeting of the 3 level 3 Committees. Belgium is well suited to host a meeting on the selected 
topic, not so much because its capital inspired a fantastic architectural revolution, as it is a 
cradle of Art Nouveau, but rather because, besides being one of the countries hosting the 
European  Parliament,  the  Council  of  the  European  Union  and  the  European  Commission, 
Belgium is also the country of Baron Alexandre Lamfalussy, who lent his name to the now 
famous Lamfalussy architecture. 
The  theme  of  today's  meeting  is  a  very  good  choice  and  is  also  highly  topical.  As  key 
stakeholders  in  the  ever-increasing  cross-border  integration  of  financial  systems,  market 
participants quite legitimately demand an institutional framework that can sustain integration 
on  this  scale.  Therefore,  as  authorities,  it  is  essential  to  constantly  ensure  that  our 
institutional  architecture  remains  adapted  to  a  world  in  which  financial  institutions  operate 
across different countries, across different sectors, and integrate and centralise some of their 
key functions.  
This  institutional  framework  should  lay  the  foundations  for  a  competitive  and  dynamic 
financial sector, make sure it is secure and efficient, while at the same time limiting the cost 
of integration that comes with potential duplication of controls, divergent laws or inconsistent 
application of rules and regulations. The whole Lamfalussy architecture has been specifically 
devised  to  meet  market  participants'  demand  for  more  consistency.  At  each  level, 
considerable and commendable progress has been made towards faster, more efficient and 
more  consistent  rule-making  as  well  as  closer  convergence  of  supervisory  practices.  In 
addition, the Lamfalussy architecture has nurtured a culture of cooperation, fostering greater 
transparency and strengthening dialogue between rule-makers and with the private sector. 
Participation of all stakeholders in the review of the Lamfalussy architecture 
It is precisely because the Lamfalussy architecture is a key component of the rule-making 
process  in  Europe  that  it  is  crucial  to  assess  it  regularly.  Although  most  of  the  benefits 
associated with the Lamfalussy architecture and the contribution of each level are obvious to 
many of us, it is still essential to evaluate whether and how its functioning could be facilitated 
and  how  its  high-quality  output  could  be  improved  or  delivered  more  rapidly,  if  need  be. 
Since  any  such  assessment  requires  the  cooperation  of  all  stakeholders  involved,  I  am 
particularly  glad  that  each  level  of  the  Lamfalussy  architecture  could  be  represented  here 
today.  Indeed,  the  European  Parliament,  the  Council  and  the  European  Commission  have 
agreed to share their assessment, in what seems to be a very promising programme for this 
3 level 3 meeting. In addition, the simultaneous presence of members of CEBS, CEIOPS and 
CESR  gives  some  leverage  to  our  discussions  by  enabling  us  to  share  experience  that  is 
specific  to  each  committee  but  nevertheless  of  common  interest.  This  exchange  between 
committees is all the more beneficial because they have worked at a different pace in the 
past so there is real potential for what I could call cross-fertilisation.  
A  full  review  of  the  Lamfalussy  architecture  should  also  necessarily  involve  market 
participants.  Therefore,  they,  too,  will  get  a  chance  today  to  voice  their  concerns  on  the 
architecture  and  share  their  own  assessment  of  the  process.  The  report  of  the  Inter-
BIS Review 138/2007 
 1
institutional Monitoring Group, composed of 6 independent experts, has already unveiled part 
of  this  assessment.  The  recently-issued  report  is  a  major  contribution  that  provides  much 
food  for  thought.  Today's  3  level  3  meeting  will  give  us  a  chance  to  launch  a  fruitful 
discussion on its recommendations and will constitute a unique opportunity for each of the 
stakeholders  to  respond  to  it  and  to  exchange  opinions  about  the  challenges  facing  the 
current financial supervisory architecture.  
Link between supervision and crisis management 
To  be  complete,  the  assessment  of  the  Lamfalussy  architecture  should  also  take  into 
account  the  special  link  between  the  supervisory  framework  and  the  crisis  management 
framework. This link is especially important in the banking industry but it is also crucial for the 
insurance  and  securities  sectors  for  at  least  two  reasons.  Firstly,  a  banking  crisis  can 
potentially destabilise the whole financial sector. Secondly, banking, securities and insurance 
businesses  are  in  some  cases  combined  within  financial  conglomerates,  creating  potential 
channels for intra-group contagion.  
In the present period of turbulence and uncertainty, it is very important to look closely at this 
link. Although we may have to wait until the dust settles before we can identify all the causes 
and consequences of the crisis, I think we can already pinpoint some areas where level 3 
committees  have  succeeded  and  where  potential  shortcomings  have  been  observed.  I 
personally  believe  that  the  trust  and  mutual  knowledge  built  up  over  the  years  through 
regular contacts in each committee have helped foster multilateral exchanges of information 
and smooth cooperation between supervisory authorities during the crisis. However, we may 
want to examine today if there is a need to further intensify this multilateral cooperation, both 
in normal circumstances and in times of crisis. 
First, several ways to strengthen the links between authorities in normal times have already 
been  explored  and  sometimes  tried  out  in  practice.  Future  priorities  for  further  developing 
financial  supervision  in  the  European  Union  have  been  set  out  and several  instruments  to 
reinforce  cooperation  between  authorities  have  been  identified.  At  present,  we  need  to 
further work on the implementation of these measures and to monitor their efficiency.  
Secondly, with regard to potential improvements in the crisis management framework, let me 
first note that several observers had predicted that the shortcomings in our system would be 
striking  in  a  crisis  situation.  Similarly,  the  functioning  of  our  crisis  management  framework 
has been tested in crisis simulation exercises on several occasions over the last years and 
many suggestions have been made to improve it. The crisis that we have been dealing with 
over  the  last  few  months,  together  with  the  generally  satisfactory  functioning  of  our  crisis 
management  framework  up  to  now,  obviously  force  us  to  take  a  fresh  look  at  the  various 
suggestions that were made to improve the framework before the crisis arose. However, they 
do not excuse us from keeping a critical eye on our framework.  
All  suggestions  relating  to  improvements  in  the  supervisory  and  crisis  management 
framework may at the end of the day call for consideration to be given to making some legal 
changes and re-distributing responsibilities. Whatever changes might be needed, they should 
always ensure that we have a flexible enough crisis management framework to deal with any 
kind  of  crisis,  especially  as  each  one  is  different  and  has  elements  that  can  never  be 
anticipated. And it is essential for authorities to keep the right balance between the allocation 
of responsibilities in the supervisory and the crisis management frameworks. These two key 
concerns should obviously remain in the back of our minds when we review the Lamfalussy 
process today.  
2 
 BIS Review 138/2007
Concluding remarks 
To  conclude,  and  before  we  start  assessing  the  Lamfalussy  architecture,  I  would  like  to 
remind  you  what  architecture  is  all  about.  In  an  early  essay  in  the  first  century  AD,  the 
Roman  architect  Vitruvius  defined  the  essence  of  his  art  as  being  the  design  of  buildings 
meeting three different criteria. They first need to be durable and so should be strong, solid 
and based on sound foundations. Secondly, buildings need to be functional and convenient 
for the people using them. Thirdly, buildings need to be beautiful, and should raise the spirits 
of  those  who  are  living  or  working  in  them.  So,  as  you  can  see,  architects  need  a  mix  of 
different  abilities,  a  magic  combination  of  art  and  science.  Thanks  to  this  combination, 
architectural  works  of  art  have  become  a  cultural  symbol  of  Europe  over  the  years,  as 
demonstrated for instance by the illustrations on our bank notes.  
Similarly,  a  complex,  but  nonetheless  useful,  institutional  architecture  has  characterised 
European  integration.  Assessing  this  institutional  architecture  will  require  the  same 
architectural skills as those originally needed to set it up. Therefore, I would like to wish you 
today  an  open  and  constructive  discussion  combining  both  scientific  method  and  the 
visionary perception that characterised some of the most influential European artists. 
BIS Review 138/2007 
 3
