Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: Central banks, liquidity and a changing 
financial market infrastructure 
Speech by Ms Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central Bank, at the Joint Bank of France/European Central Bank conference on “Liquidity in 
interdependent transfer systems”, Paris, 9-10 June 2008. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I am very pleased to welcome you to this conference and I am grateful that I can do so also 
in the name of the Banque de France.  
Last week we celebrated the 10th anniversary of the ECB and the Eurosystem. Building on 
the  expertise  and  reputation  of  the  national  central  banks  of  the  euro  area,  the  ECB  has 
developed well and we are very proud that the Eurosystem as a team has delivered what we 
were supposed to: we have achieved our main objective of price stability in the euro area 
and – more closely linked to this conference – the smooth operation of payment systems.  
Given the fast pace of financial markets today, I often feel that the ECB has been around for 
ages. When I look around this beautiful Galerie Dorée, however, I feel that the ECB is still a 
very young institution. What I find reassuring is the fact that the euro represents a tangible, 
perhaps the most tangible, realisation of something that is even older than our conference 
venue:  the  idea  of  Europe.  Please  allow  me  to  quote  Jean  Monnet:  “Lorsqu’une  idée 
correspond à la nécessité de l’époque, elle cesse d’appartenir aux hommes qui l’ont inventée 
et elle est plus forte que ceux qui en ont la charge.” (When an idea meets the needs of the 
time, it ceases to belong to its creators and becomes more powerful than those responsible 
for it.) 
The well-being of Europe is closely linked to its economic prosperity. Economic well-being, in 
turn, depends crucially on a functioning financial system. I would like to take the opportunity 
of opening this conference to reflect on the more long-term trends in the financial sector with 
a special focus on liquidity in the context of market infrastructures. I will derive challenges 
from these trends that I think are particularly relevant for transfer systems. Finally, I will point 
out where I see the necessary and adequate responses of the private and public sector to 
these  challenges,  in  particular  the  Eurosystem’s  contribution  to  an  efficient  and  safe 
infrastructure. 
Different perspectives of liquidity 
2.  
Let  me  begin  with  a  short  reflection  on  liquidity.  If  we  lived  in  a  world  with  perfect  and 
complete  markets  as  envisaged  by  Arrow  and  Debreu,  liquidity  problems  would  not  exist. 
Everybody  would  be  able  to  make  fully  contingent  arrangements  to  insure  against 
unanticipated  short-term  needs  for  funds.  Well,  the  recent  financial  turmoil  has  painfully 
reminded  us  that  financial  markets  do  not  match  the  theoretical  ideal  world  of  the  “Arrow-
Debreu” model.  
What do we then mean when we speak of liquidity? In general, we can distinguish between 
at least three types of liquidity1:  
                                                 
1   See  also  Roger  Ferguson,  Philipp  Hartmann,  Fabio  Panetta  and  Richard  Portes  (2007),  “International 
Financial Stability”, Ninth Geneva Report on the World Economy, pp. 9-10. 
BIS Review 73/2008 
 1
   First, monetary or macroeconomic liquidity refers to a generally accepted medium of 
exchange. Such liquidity comprises central bank money and more broadly defined 
monetary aggregates.  
Second, market liquidity means the ability to trade an asset quickly and at low costs 
with little impact on its price.2  
A third concept is funding liquidity, which means the ease of firms, households or 
banks to meet their respective payment obligations with internal or external funds as 
they fall due. 
All  these  concepts  are  –  of  course  –  closely  interrelated.  Deviations  from  expected 
developments  in  any  of  these  areas  can  cause  severe  disruptions.  This  is  the  essence  of 
liquidity  risk.  In  the  context  of  transfer  systems,  which  are  the  focus  of  my  speech  today, 
liquidity  risk  is  defined  as  the  risk  that  a  counterparty  or  a  participant  in  a  payment  or 
settlement system will not settle an obligation at its full value when due.3 For example, the 
operational failure of a major institution in a real-time gross settlement (RTGS) system can 
turn  it  into  a  “liquidity  sink”.  This  would  have  a  negative  external  effect  on  the  liquidity 
positions of other banks. Liquidity risks could thus turn into a systemic risk when disruptions 
would spread across the financial system.4  
Overall,  liquidity  risk  is  a  crucial  feature  of  the  financial  sector  in  general  and  market 
infrastructure  in  particular.  This  is  ably  illustrated  by  an  interesting  special  issue  of  the 
Banque de France’s Financial Stability Report that focuses on liquidity.5
Trends in the financial sector  
3.  
Let me take a step back now and look at some long-term trends in the financial sector that 
have had an impact on liquidity management and market infrastructures.6  
First,  the  financial  sector  has  experienced  a  tremendous  amount  of  technological  and 
financial innovations. For example, real-time gross settlement systems with electronic book-
entries  have  become  state-of-the-art.  Such  RTGS  systems  reduce  credit  risk  exposure  in 
settlement,  whilst  increasing  the  demand  for  intraday  liquidity  and  collateral.  Financial 
innovation  has  also  triggered  a  significant  rise  in  the  number  of  derivatives  and  the 
associated trading volume, not least on over-the-counter derivatives markets.  
Second, financial globalisation has become manifest in the amount of cross-border financial 
flows and cross-border banking, but it goes much further. The increased global integration 
has  strengthened  the  natural  tendency  towards  concentrated  provision  of  infrastructural 
services, a tendency that is further accentuated in the context of the European single market.  
This  third  trend  of  increased  concentration  has  not  been  limited  to  market  infrastructures 
themselves.  The  emergence  of  key  global  players  in  banking  has  also  led  to  increased 
internalisation  of  payment  flows  in  correspondent  banks.  Correspondent  banks  perform 
payment  and  custody  services  for other  banks  and  have  in  some  cases  reached a  similar 
size  to  some  national  payment  systems.  Thus,  correspondent  banking  begins  to  blur  the 
                                                 
2   For  a  more  detailed  discussion  of  market  liquidity  and  its  relationship  to  monetary  liquidity,  see  the  box 
“Understanding financial market liquidity” in the ECB Financial Stability Review, June 2007. 
3   See the ECB glossary on the ECB website (http://www.ecb.europa.eu). 
4   For example, Mark Flannery suggests in “Financial Crises, Payment System Problems and Discount Window 
Lending”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 28(4), 2006, pp. 804-824, that payment systems can serve 
as a contagion mechanism from funding liquidity to the interbank (market) liquidity. 
5   The report is available at http://www.banque-france.fr/gb/publications/rsf/rsf_022008.htm. 
6   These trends are discussed at more length in e.g. Ferguson et al. (op. cit.). 
2 
 BIS Review 73/2008
distinction between intermediaries and infrastructure providers. Speaking of concentration, I 
would  also  like  to  mention  networks  of  interoperable  systems.  They  can  be  seen  as 
intermediate steps towards concentration or as alternatives.  
All  these  developments  have  contributed  to  lower  financing  costs,  new  investment  and 
business  opportunities,  and  general  welfare  gains  for  all  citizens.  At  the  same  time,  these 
trends  have  increased  the  relevance  of  market  infrastructures  and  pose  considerable 
challenges for liquidity managers and central bankers, at all their time horizons.  
I  want  to  stress  here  that  market  infrastructures  have  shown  a  considerable  degree  of 
resilience  and  functioned  well  during  the  recent  months.  This  is  a  great  achievement  that 
should not be taken for granted. However, some of the trends that I have mentioned have 
also played a prominent role during the recent financial turmoil. Thus, there is no reason to 
be complacent.  
Challenges resulting from these trends 
4.  
I  see  three  challenges,  especially  from  the  perspective  of  market  infrastructures,  resulting 
from  these  trends.  These  are:  growing  interdependencies;  the  potential  emergence  of  a 
global  monopoly;  and  the  need  for  well-functioning  financial  and  political  structures  at  the 
supranational level.  
Let  me  first  focus  on  increased  interdependencies  created  by  financial  globalisation  in 
conjunction  with  the  other  trends  that  I  have  just  mentioned.  The  significant  benefits  of 
financial  globalisation  come  at  the  cost  of  a  more  complex  global  financial  system. 
Previously, settlement flows, operational processes and risk management procedures could 
be considered largely from a national or even more a system-, institution- or market-specific 
perspective.  Today,  the  various  transfer  systems,  financial  institutions  and  markets  have 
become  highly  interdependent.  This  can  be  positive  when  the  associated  network  effects 
improve the safety and efficiency of payment and settlement processes. However, it can also 
be  negative  when  it  allows  an  easier  and  quicker  transmission  of  shocks  and  financial 
disruptions,  sometimes  in  indirect,  complex  ways.  The  financial  turmoil  has  once  again 
highlighted  how  negative  developments  in  one  market  segment  can  abruptly  spill  over  to 
other, seemingly unrelated, segments of the financial sector and across borders. One cause 
of the severity of the turbulence is that financial institutions had not sufficiently foreseen that 
liquidity can dry up in certain markets very quickly. Negative effects can be exacerbated if 
banks  do  not  have  access  to  sufficient  collateral.  The  interdependencies  of  payment  and 
settlement systems are very well described by a recently released Committee on Payment 
and  Settlement  Systems  (CPSS)  report  that  I  will  refer  to  again  when  discussing  the 
appropriate responses.7  
A second challenge arises from the potential emergence of a global monopoly. Economies of 
scale and network effects are prominent in fixed-cost-dominated infrastructure services. This 
has given rise to the rather utopian idea of a single integrated market infrastructure covering 
the whole world as the end-game of the process of financial globalisation and concentration. 
At  the  same  time,  a  global  monopoly  might  lead  to  a  single  point  of  failure  and  other 
economic costs associated with monopolies (such as the abuse of market power and a lack 
of  innovation).  However,  it  is  not  obvious  that  the  alternative  to  a  monopoly  –  that  is, 
networks  of  interoperable  systems  –  is  superior.  For  example,  are  a  small  number  of 
interoperable systems really less risky than a single system? 
A third challenge that I would like to highlight today concerns the difficulties in establishing a 
well-functioning  financial  and  political  structure  at  the  supranational  level.  This  challenge 
                                                 
7   CPSS  report  on  “The  interdependencies  of  payment  and  settlement  systems”,  Bank  for  International 
Settlements, Basel, June 2008. 
BIS Review 73/2008 
 3
reflects the general change of perspective on the financial sector. Over long periods, mature 
and often efficient financial structures had emerged on a national level, protected by – to a 
large  extent  appropriate  –  regulation,  supervision  and  oversight.  National 
financial 
communities had developed a certain degree of trust, transparency and cooperation. Today, 
the  perspective  has  changed  from  the  national  to  the  international  level.  However,  we 
frequently  face  a  geographical  and  legal  separation  between  the  entities  in  charge  of  the 
oversight of the system, relevant banking supervisors and the entity providing liquidity to the 
system.  An  important  thing  that  the  financial  turmoil  has  demonstrated  is  that  national 
degrees  of  trust,  transparency  and  cooperation  have  not  yet  been  replicated  on  an 
international, global level. This includes the existence of appropriate supervisory structures.  
Overall, we face the challenge to create the same seamlessly functioning financial system 
and market infrastructures on a supranational level that we have already today at national 
levels.  
Adequate responses to these challenges  
5.  
It is very important to find adequate responses to these challenges. This duty – for the sake 
of economic prosperity – falls to all of us, the private sector as well as public authorities.  
Let me begin with some responsibilities of the private sector because, I believe, we should 
rely on market solutions as much as possible. Financial market participants need to take into 
account  the  increased  interdependencies.  As  clearly  described  in  the  CPSS  report,  they 
need  to  adopt  a  holistic  approach  to  risk  management,  in  particular  as  banks  have 
increasingly relied on wholesale and secured funding. And they need to focus on liquidity and 
operational risk. I have the impression that the private sector is aware of this challenge and is 
preparing  the  necessary  response,  as  evident  from  the  initiatives  of  the  Institute  of 
International Finance, for example. Various committees, both at the international and the EU 
level, are assisting the private sector in its work. Now, it is necessary to not lose momentum 
and  to  implement  the  proposed  holistic  approach  to  risk  management.  This  means  that 
systems and institutions need to look beyond their own operations and direct exposures to 
understand the broad range of disruptions that might affect them. This is most important for 
infrastructure and service providers as well as for financial institutions that have a critical role 
in the global infrastructure. 
The  trend  towards  concentration  represents  the  second,  more  long-term  challenge  that  I 
have mentioned. I think that it makes a lot of sense to complement the European Monetary 
Union with  harmonised and efficient market infrastructures in certain areas. However, I do 
not expect the utopian idea of a single, globally integrated infrastructure to become reality. 
Technological  and  financial  innovation  provides  limits  to  concentration.  New  ideas,  the 
exploitation  of  market  niches  and  regulatory  changes  that  promote  competition  will  allow 
platforms to continue to have competitive advantages in some specialised areas. It is crucial 
that these platforms will be transparent, provide open access to potential users and enable 
interoperability with other platforms in order to reap the full benefits of financial globalisation. 
But  as  interoperability  requires  competitors  to  cooperate,  I  am  aware  that  achieving 
sustainable and efficient solutions is not always easy.  
Finally,  let  me  mention  one  particular  point.  As  recently  recommended  by  the  Financial 
Stability  Forum8,  market  participants  should  make  further  efforts  to  ensure  that  the 
settlement,  legal  and  operational  infrastructure  underlying  over-the-counter  derivatives 
markets is sound. I know that also the CPSS closely monitors developments in this area.  
                                                 
8   “Report of the Financial Stability Forum on Enhancing Market and Institutional Resilience”, April 2008. 
4 
 BIS Review 73/2008
Let me now turn to the responsibilities of public authorities . Just like the market, they need to 
take into account the increased interdependencies, concentration and required international 
perspective. Being a central banker, I think it is my task to focus on the various roles of a 
central bank as a liquidity provider, service provider, catalyst and overseer.  
The relevance of collateral for liquidity issues has been clearly recognised by central banks. 
During the past ten years, central banks have – especially in the context of the CPSS and 
other Basel committees – focused jointly their attention on the use of collateral in financial 
transactions, including the cross-border use of collateral.9 Cooperation in this respect is very 
useful  and,  especially  for  emergency  situations,  I  would  think  that  central  banks  –  by 
enabling the cross-border use of collateral – could make a positive contribution to financial 
stability. 
As a service provider, the Eurosystem has demonstrated with the successful launch of the 
large-value  payment  system  TARGET2  that  it  can  deliver  state-of-the-art  infrastructure. 
TARGET2  is  the  biggest  RTGS  (real-time  gross  settlement)  system  and  settles more  than 
350,000 transactions worth around €2.5 trillion every day. We in the Eurosystem have also 
worked  a  lot  together  with  market  participants  on  two  other  building  blocks  of  a  single 
European market infrastructure: TARGET2-Securities (T2S), a single settlement platform for 
securities,  and  CCBM2,  a  harmonised  solution  for  collateral  management  within  the 
Eurosystem. In today’s world, the availability of collateral has become the binding constraint 
for  intraday  liquidity  management.  Hence,  it  is  extremely  important  to  be  able  to  move 
collateral  quickly  and  safely  across  financial  systems,  borders  and  currencies.  TARGET2, 
T2S  and  CCBM2  are  three  complementary  and  mutually  beneficial  services  of  the 
Eurosystem for this purpose. In a recent ECB survey, banks have reported minimum annual 
savings of €53 million in liquidity and collateral management alone from T2S. Based on the 
figures from market participants, the very conservatively estimated benefits of T2S for direct 
users of T2S are at least €145 million per year in the baseline scenario. For the European 
economy  as  a  whole,  we  can  anticipate  dynamic  benefits  from  T2S  exceeding  one  billion 
euro per year.10 In addition, TARGET2 and T2S make use of counterparty risk-free central 
bank money for settlement, a feature that has become even more beneficial in light of the 
financial turmoil. 
The  Eurosystem  has  acted  as  a  catalyst  for  another  building  block  for  an  integrated 
European  market  infrastructure,  the  Single  Euro  Payments  Area  (SEPA).  The  same  holds 
true  for  the  interoperability  of  existing  systems.  As  specialised  infrastructures  are  likely  to 
remain,  the  relevance  of  interoperability  between  different  systems  stays  at  the  top  of  the 
agenda. 
Oversight is the third role of central banks in payment and settlement systems. In general, 
market  infrastructures  have  performed  well  during  the  financial  turmoil,  owing  largely  to 
effective  capacity  planning  by  service  providers  enabling  them  to  handle  recent  peaks  in 
volatility  and  trading.  Overseers  have  to  continue  to  monitor  the  safety  and  efficiency  of 
individual  payment  and  settlement  “critical”  infrastructure,  as  well  as  the  safety  of  the 
financial system as a whole. 
To  achieve  this,  the  increased  interdependence  requires  an  international  perspective  to 
oversight.  Overseers  need  to  cooperate  and  to  show  a  certain  degree  of  convergence  in 
order to avoid regulatory arbitrage and a “race to the bottom” of regulatory standards. I think 
that we have some scope for improvement on this dimension.  
                                                 
9   CPSS report on “Cross-Border Collateral Arrangements”, Bank for International Settlements, Basel, January 
2006. 
10   The 
ECB’s 
“T2S 
Economic 
Impact 
Assessment” 
is 
available 
at 
http://www.ecb.europa.eu/paym/t2s/pdf/eco_impact_080523.pdf. 
BIS Review 73/2008 
 5
Increased  interdependence  also  calls  for  a  second  dimension  of  cooperation,  namely 
between  oversight  of  market  infrastructures  and  banking  supervision.  For  example, 
correspondent banks appear to provide substantial non-collateralised intraday credits to their 
clients.  Traditional  capital  requirements,  however,  do  not  focus  on  the  intraday  liquidity 
aspects and on possible exposures during the day. Hence, it is crucial to ensure an adequate 
surveillance  of  these  intraday  risk  exposures  and  the  evolution  of  liquidity  and  collateral 
management at both system level and bank level. Recent work at the Bank for International 
Settlements and within the Eurosystem demonstrates that public authorities have recognised 
this necessity and started to address it.  
The ECB is strongly supportive of the various initiatives at the EU and global level and will 
contribute  to  the  pertinent  work.  I  firmly  believe  that  the  international  cooperation  among 
public authorities will continue to foster financial integration, development and stability. 
Conclusion 
6.  
Let me now briefly conclude. The financial turmoil has once again demonstrated that liquidity 
should  not  be  taken  for  granted.  I  have  highlighted  a  number  of  more  long-term  financial 
sector trends that have had an impact on liquidity management and market infrastructures. 
Altogether,  they  result  in  new  challenges  from  increased  interdependencies,  consolidation 
and the required international perspective on seamlessly functioning financial markets. The 
private  sector  and  public  authorities,  both  in  their  own  responsibilities  and  in  joint  efforts, 
need to continue to address these challenges.  
We have made considerable progress in our understanding of the relevant issues and the 
necessary  policy  conclusions,  as  evident  from  the  various  initiatives  that  I  mentioned. 
Financial  market  infrastructure  is  in  evolution;  its  improvement  remains  an  ongoing 
challenge.  This  conference  hosts  a  number  of  papers  and  panel  sessions  that  serve  as 
further examples of how we are improving our understanding of liquidity and interdependent 
transfer systems. I am looking forward to interesting insights and stimulating discussions that 
will no doubt be inspired by the outstanding surroundings here in the Galerie Dorée. 
6 
 BIS Review 73/2008
