Jean-Claude Trichet: How to increase the competitiveness of the 
European economy 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at the  panel 
discussion, Karlspreis Europa Forum, Aachen, 30 April 2008. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
I would first like to thank the organisers for inviting me to speak here today and share my 
views on how to increase the competitiveness of the European economy. Competitiveness in 
a broader sense can be understood as the ability of economies to thrive in an increasingly 
integrated international economy and to embark on a sustained path of high output growth 
that  enhances  people’s  wealth.  Competitiveness  is  therefore  related  to  macroeconomic 
stability and the ability to maintain the real value of people’s assets, as well as to structural 
factors that contribute to the long-term growth potential.1  
The  introduction  of  the  euro  has  been  recognised  as  a  remarkable  success  not  only  in 
Europe, but across the entire world. Since then, Monetary Union has been effective and very 
successful in providing the right framework for Europe to be performing and to create jobs. 
However, given the modest growth performance of the European countries and of the euro 
area in the past, improving structural factors to raise European competitiveness remains a 
major  policy  issue.  It  is  essential  to  overcome  these  constraints  to  growth  in  the  current 
environment,  where  the  European  economy  is  facing  a  number  of  important  challenges, 
including rapid technological change, accelerating globalisation and ageing populations.  
The successes of Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) 
With  the  introduction  of  the  euro,  a  completely  new  monetary  policy  framework  was 
introduced in Europe, with the ECB conducting a single monetary policy for the entire euro 
area. Despite the uncertainty that surrounded the transition to this new regime, the ECB and 
the euro have benefited from a very high level of credibility since the very first days of EMU. 
This  achievement  certainly  rests  on  the  constituent  features  of  the  ECB’s  institutional 
architecture, which gives a clear mandate to the ECB to safeguard price stability in the euro 
area, and grants it full independence in pursuing this mandate. Central bank independence is 
key for monetary policy to be credibly and effectively geared to price stability.  
From the very beginning, the successful launch of the euro and the strong credibility of the 
newly created monetary authority led to an impressive convergence of market interest rates 
at all maturities to the lowest interest rates prevailing prior to the euro.  
Of course, the credibility of the ECB in delivering price stability has to be maintained over 
time.  And  there  is  no  better  way  to  establish  a  reputation  than  by  allowing  the  public  to 
recognise  this  in  our  repeated  behaviour.  The  ECB  is  a  young  institution,  but  it  is  widely 
recognised  that  our  track  record  over  the  past ten  years  has  been  more  than  satisfactory. 
Since the introduction of the euro, there has been an average annual HICP inflation rate of 
slightly above 2%, despite a succession of very significant shocks (energy prices, commodity 
prices  and  food  prices  in  particular).  Prices  have  remained  relatively  stable,  with  average 
annual  inflation  rates  significantly  below  those  that  prevailed  in  most  of  the  countries 
                                                 
1  
In  a  more  narrow  sense,  the  concept  of  competitiveness  captures  countries’  ability  to  sell  their  products  in 
world markets. In this context, competitiveness is usually  discussed in terms of cost and price differentials. 
Finally, non-price factors, such as technological innovation or the quality of products, are probably even more 
important, but are usually harder to quantify. 
BIS Review 54/2008 
 1
participating in the euro area in the decades preceding the start of Stage Three of EMU. In 
the  same  vein,  inflation  volatility  has  been  significantly  lower  in  the  euro  area  than  it  was 
before EMU.  
This favourable track record has been acknowledged by financial markets and the public at 
large, with long-term inflation expectations derived from bond yields and surveys remaining 
successfully anchored at levels that are in line with the ECB’s definition of price stability. I 
would  like  to  stress  that  the  stability  of  medium  term  inflation  expectations  has  been 
remarkable,  considering  the  series  of  adverse  economic  disturbances  which  have  hit  the 
euro area since its inception. 
The success of the ECB’s monetary policy in delivering price stability and its determination to 
ensure  a  firm  anchoring  of  inflation  expectations  has  provided  significant  support  to  other 
European  Community  objectives,  notably 
conditions  and 
favourable 
macroeconomic  stability,  which  support  both 
investment  and  sustainable  economic 
expansion.2  The  euro  also  promotes  the  deepening  of  trade  and  financial  linkages  across 
euro area countries. There is clear evidence that the introduction of the single currency and 
the associated increase in price and cost transparency have fostered both intra and extra-
euro area trade in goods and services.3 In addition, the euro is acting as a catalyst towards a 
single  market  in  financial  services  and  a  gradual  portfolio  reallocation  from  holdings  of 
domestic  financial  instruments  to  holdings  of  financial  instruments  issued  elsewhere  within 
the euro area.  
financing 
Review of the past performance of the euro area 
Despite these successes in macroeconomic stability and increased integration, a comparison 
of  the  economic  performance  of  the  euro  area  with  that  of  other  industrialised  economies 
from a longer-term perspective, shows that Europe has scope to better develop its growth 
potential.4
One of the principal factors behind the euro area’s disappointing performance in the past is 
the low trend growth in labour productivity. Indeed, the growth in labour productivity in the 
euro  area  has  significantly  slowed  down  over  the  past  30  years.  During  the  1980s  hourly 
labour productivity in the euro area grew on average by 2.3%, while in the 1990s, it declined 
significantly  to  1.8%  and  further  decreased  to  1.2%  between  1999  and  2007.  In  contrast, 
hourly labour productivity growth in the US accelerated from 1.2% to 1.6% and 2.1% over the 
same periods.5  
What  lies  behind  these  disappointing  developments?  The  impressive  rise  in  the  overall 
employment rate in the euro area over the past decade, which partly reflects the progress 
made  on  structural  reforms,  wage  moderation  policy  and  immigration  flows  in  some 
                                                 
2   Most euro area countries have benefited from significantly more favourable financing conditions than in the 
1990s, which has supported private and public investment, as well as fiscal consolidation. For instance, in the 
euro area in the nine years following the introduction of the euro, real gross capital formation grew on average 
by 3.0% per year, compared with only 1.7% during the nine-year period preceding the introduction of the euro. 
3   Exports  and  imports  of  goods  and  services  within  the  euro  area  rose  from  about  31%  of  GDP  in  1998  to 
around  40%  of  GDP  in  2007.  The  completion  of  a  single  market  for  services  will  further  facilitate  trade  in 
services. The rate of increase in extra-euro area exports and imports of goods and services even exceeded 
that in intra-euro area trade, rising from about 32% of GDP in 1998 to almost 44% of GDP in 2007. Extra-euro 
area trade has, of course, also benefited from a period of strong external demand and increasing integration at 
the global level. 
4   Since 1999, for instance, the annual growth rate for the euro area has averaged 2.2% per year compared with 
2.7% in the United States. 
5   Source AMECO database. Data on hours worked per worker for the euro area for 2007 are assumed to be 
constant. Data on hours worked per worker for the US are estimated using the OECD data for 2006 and 2007. 
2 
 BIS Review 54/2008
European  countries,  has  undoubtedly  constituted  a  source  of  growth.6  At  the  same  time, 
specific policies aimed at increasing employment, particularly in the unskilled segment of the 
labour  market,  have  certainly  contributed  to  the  observed  slowdown  in  labour  productivity 
growth.  
However, the developments in labour supply are only part of the story. To a large extent, the 
slowdown in labour productivity growth can be attributed to a marked slowdown in total factor 
productivity  growth,  which  is  generally  taken  as  a  measure  for  technological  progress  and 
improvements  in  the  organisation  and  overall  efficiency  of  production.  In  the  1980s,  total 
factor productivity grew on average by 1.6%, before declining to 1.1% in the 1990s and 0.7% 
between 1999 and 2007.7 Those countries that have managed to exploit the efficiency gains 
generated, in particular, by new technology have enjoyed stronger labour productivity growth. 
For instance, in the last ten years, investment in information and communication technology 
in the United States has doubled that of the euro area.8  
There  are  many  factors  behind  the  decline  in  total  factor  productivity  growth.  Most 
prominently,  the  structural  features  of  the  European  economies  undermine  incentives  to 
invest in real and human capital, and reduce the flexibility of firms to smoothly and quickly 
adjust  to  their  new  environment,  including  innovations.  It  appears  that  the  structural 
characteristics  of  the  best  performing  industrialised  economies,  namely  a  more  flexible 
labour market, a higher degree of competition in product markets and lower barriers to entry 
for  new  firms,  have  been  more  conducive  to  exploiting  the  opportunities  provided  by  new 
technologies. 
The need for structural reform 
Pursuing  resolutely  structural  reforms  is  of  the  essence  to  improve  total  factor  productivity 
and  labour  productivity.  Well-functioning  and  integrated  markets  are  required  to  meet  the 
challenges posed by greater innovation, to increase the adjustment capacity of an economy 
and, ultimately, to make Europe more competitive and more dynamic.  
In the context of rapid technological change, a flexible labour market is essential to facilitate 
the adjustment of human capital to labour market needs. A high level of rigidity in the labour 
legislation  has  a  particularly  strong  negative  impact  on  industries  experiencing  rapid 
technological change, since it may prevent the efficient matching of workers to jobs in view of 
new job requirements. Unfortunately, progress in increasing contractual flexibility, particularly 
for permanent contracts, remains slow in several euro area countries.  
Flexible wage setting is also essential. In a number of economies, characterized by mediocre 
relative competitiveness, it is important that wage increases do not fully exhaust productivity 
gains and allow productivity performance to translate into improved competitive positions as 
measured  by  relative  costs.  In  this  context,  it  is  the  belief  of  the  Governing  Council  that 
features  that  enforce  wage  rigidity  and  lead  to  non-optimal  wage  setting,  in  particular, 
general indexation of nominal wages to the consumer price index, should be avoided. This is 
particularly relevant today: second-round effects stemming from the impact of higher energy 
and  food  prices  on  wage  and  price-setting  behaviour  must  be  avoided.  This  is  of  key 
importance  for  preserving  price  stability  in  the  medium  term  and,  in  turn,  the  purchasing 
                                                 
6   Since the start of EMU, the number of employed people has increased by more than 15 million in the euro 
area, compared with an increase of approximately 5 million in the nine preceding years, and the euro area 
unemployment rate has fallen to its lowest level since the early 1980s. 
7   Source European Commission. 
8  
ICT  investment  represented  4%  of  GDP  in  the  United  States  compared  with  2%  in  the  euro  area  over  the 
period 1995-2004 (source Groningen database). 
BIS Review 54/2008 
 3
power of all euro area citizens. The Governing Council is paying particularly close attention 
to wage negotiations in the euro area.  
Increasing  competition  by  establishing  efficient  and  well-functioning  product  markets  is 
equally fundamental. Many studies point to the potential of competition to boost productivity 
trends by improving production efficiency and enhancing the incentive to invest and innovate. 
In  the  European  Union,  significant  progress  has  been  made  on  strengthening  competition 
and  increasing  economic  integration  over  the  past  two  decades.  The  single  market  has 
already led to sizeable benefits for the European economy. The extension and deepening of 
the  internal  market  remains  a  priority  as  regards  further  financial  market  integration,9  the 
pursuit of effective competition in the energy market and the implementation of the Services 
Directive. The growing role of services in modern economies suggests that improvements in 
European  living  standards  and  competitiveness  will  crucially  depend  on  productivity 
improvements in this area. The aim of the Services Directive, for instance, is to improve the 
competitiveness not just of service enterprises, but of European industry as a whole. 
Finally, last but not least, to fully exploit productivity potential, the labour and product market 
reforms  I  have  just  mentioned  need  to  be  accompanied  resolutely  by  policies  that  support 
innovation  and  technological  change.  These  include,  inter  alia,  the  unlocking  of  business 
potential,  measures  to  support  innovation  through  higher  investment  in  research  and 
development, and policies aimed at improving human capital. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
                                                 
9   The  process  of  European  financial  integration  is  taking  place  gradually,  and  considerable  progress  has 
already been made. The degree of integration, however, varies across market segments, and integration is 
generally more advanced in those market segments which are closer to the single monetary policy. While the 
euro  area  banking  markets  for  wholesale  and  capital  market-related  activities  have  shown  clear  signs  of 
increasing  integration  since  the  introduction  of  the  euro,  the  retail  banking  segment  has  remained  more 
fragmented, leaving European firms and consumers unable to take full advantage of the benefits of EMU and 
the Single Market. 
4 
 BIS Review 54/2008
