Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Promoting financial independence in 
Uganda 
Speech  by  Mr  Emmanuel  Tumusiime-Mutebile,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Uganda,  at  the 
official opening of Uganda Finance Trust Ltd. Head Office at Katwe and unveiling of a new 
corporate identity, Katwe, 30 January 2008. 
 The Chairman and Board of Directors Uganda Finance Trust MDI Ltd,  
The Management and staff of Uganda Finance Trust MDI Ltd,  
Invited Guests,  
Ladies and Gentlemen  
I  would  like  to  thank  Uganda  Finance  Trust  for  inviting  me  to  this  auspicious  occasion  of 
launching  the  new  head  office,  and  main  branch,  and  the  unveiling  of  the  new  corporate 
identity  of  Uganda  Finance  Trust  Ltd.  I  congratulate  the  Board,  Management,  and  Staff  of 
Uganda Finance Trust on these achievements.  
Today's event is truly significant in the history of Uganda Finance Trust as an institution and 
as  a  strong  player  in  the  microfinance  industry.  Having  been  the  pioneer  microfinance 
institution  which  was  started  by  a  group  of  professional  women  in  1984,  Uganda  Finance 
Trust is living up to its mission of “Promoting Financial Independence” by providing unique 
financial  services  to  low  income  people  in  Uganda  hence  empowering  them  to  be 
independent financially.  
The then Uganda Women Finance Trust, started as an NGO in 1984 offering microfinance 
business to its customers when the savings capacity of the poor was still doubted. Of course 
in some other developing countries, it had already been proved that the poor can save and 
invest.  Uganda  Women  Finance  Trust  focused  mainly  on  low  income  households  and  the 
small scale entrepreneurs, who were least likely to receive the attention of formal financial 
service  providers.  When  it  became  clear  that  the  poor,  even  in  Uganda  can  save,  more 
microfinance institutions emerged, but Uganda Women Finance Trust remained outstanding 
for  its  focus  on  reaching  poor  women,  both  in  the  rural  and  urban  areas.  The  Uganda 
Women  Finance  Trust  opened  a  number  of  branches  countrywide,  gaining  national 
recognition as well as outreach and experience.  
In October 2004, Uganda Women Finance Trust was transformed from an NGO limited by 
guarantee, to Uganda Finance Trust (MDI) Limited, a company limited by shares. Then the 
Company  obtained  a  licence  as  a  Microfinance  Deposit-taking  Institution  in  October  2005 
and it became the fourth licensed MDI in the country. This not only led to Uganda Finance 
Trust redesigning its operations but also it set the stage for the Company to pursue financial 
sustainability.   
I am glad that the achievements so far made by Uganda Finance Trust Ltd have enabled the 
Company  to  continue  to  serve  its  original  targeted  clients.  Today,  Uganda  Finance  Trust 
operates  21  branches  across  the  country  and  serves  close  to  seventeen  thousand  clients 
(17,000), with an outstanding loan portfolio of Shs 14.9.billion and a customer deposit base 
of Shs 7.8 billion. However, I am made to understand that a large portion of the loan portfolio 
of Uganda Finance trust is still funded by long-term borrowing at market interest rates. This is 
costly. I would, therefore, encourage Uganda Finance Trust to endeavour to get access to 
relatively  cheap  funds  through  rigorous  mobilisation  of  deposits  so  that  the  institution  can 
ensure substantial reduction in product pricing and thereby continue with increasing outreach 
and market visibility.  
The  occasion  we  are  celebrating  today  is  a  clear  testimony  that  the  institution  has  now 
embarked on another phase signified by its “coming closer to its target clients” and “unveiling 
BIS Review 24/2008 
 1
of new corporate identity”. I believe the timing is right, particularly in the face of increased 
competition both from bigger and smaller institutions that are also aiming at the same clients. 
The  appropriate  positioning  of  the  institution's  corporate  identity  as  well  as  its  policies, 
procedures and practices, is critical. The challenge of attracting new clients and depositors, 
as well as retaining the existing ones will definitely increase. 
With reference to risk assessment evaluations which Bank of Uganda applies in examining 
financial  institutions,  I  note,  that  Microfinance  Deposit-taking  Institutions  (MDIs)  are 
particularly exposed to governance risk, credit risk, liquidity risk, operational risk, interest rate 
risk and reputation risk. On the other hand, I also note that the Institutions have in general 
experienced  stable  growth  in  capitalisation,  asset  quality,  management,  liquidity  and 
profitability.  With  particular  reference  to  Uganda  Finance  trust,  I  am  glad  to  note  that  the 
institution's  overall  performance  as  at  end  December  2007,  was  satisfactory  under  the 
CAMELS rating system. The risk management framework was adequate, signifying the fact 
that  the  institution  has  put  in  place  adequate  systems  to  identify,  measure,  monitor  and 
control  risk  inherent  in  its  operations.  The  challenge  for  the  Board  and  management  of 
Uganda Finance Trust is to meet regulatory requirements on an on-going basis through good 
corporate  governance  and  ensuring  continuous  observance  of  adequate  risk  management 
practices.  
On its part, Bank of Uganda will continue to ensure macroeconomic stability and to provide 
adequate  regulatory  environment  for  the  financial  sector.  The  supervisory  and  regulatory 
capacity of Bank of Uganda is strong. The risk based supervision methodology that is applied 
in  the  examination  of  financial  institutions,  enables  us  to  identify  the  warning  signs  in  the 
supervised institutions well in advance and to take appropriate corrective actions. We shall 
also  continue  to  work  closely  with  Government  Ministries  and  agencies  to  ensure  that 
operations  of  other  microfinance  institutions  are  properly  conducted.  The  proposals  for 
streamlining  policy  on  regulation  and  supervision  of  the  different  forms  of  microfinance 
institutions have already been undertaken by Government.  
You will note that of recent, Bank of Uganda has made public statements in the print media 
warning that the operations of unlicensed deposit taking business in Uganda constitutes an 
offence punishable under the provisions of the Financial Institutions Act 2004 and under the 
Microfinance  Deposit-taking  Institutions  Act  2003.  I,  therefore,  strongly  advise  the  general 
public  not  to  risk  losing  money  deposited  or  placed  in  unregulated  institutions.  In addition, 
Bank  of  Uganda  will  continue  dialogue  with 
for  Cooperative 
Development/Registrar for Cooperative Societies, and other stakeholders in the microfinance 
industry to ensure that the microfinance industry is governed in accordance with the relevant 
regulatory requirements.  
The Association of Micro Finance Institutions in Uganda (AMFIU) has also published lists of 
Micro  finance  institutions  and  SACCOS  affiliated  to  it  in  the  news  papers.  The  list  for 
registered  Cooperative  Societies  can  be  obtained  from  the  Registrar  of  Cooperative 
Societies/ Commissioner of Cooperative Development in the, Ministry of Trade, Tourism and 
Industry. I urge the public to take note of these developments.  
Finally,  it  is  now  my  privilege  and  honour  to  declare  the  new Uganda Finance Trust Ltd 
Head Office and Main Branch open and I, also, hereby unveil the new Corporate Identity.  
I thank you for your attention. 
the  Commissioner 
2 
 BIS Review 24/2008
