Tarisa Watanagase: Thailand – its resiliency and medium-term 
challenges 
Address  by  Dr  Tarisa  Watanagase,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the  Thailand 
Investment Forum, Euromoney Conferences, Bangkok, 13 May 2008. 
 Distinguished Speakers and Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I am delighted to join you at this gathering of prominent members of Thailand’s public and 
business  sectors.  This  year’s  Thailand  Investment  Forum  by  the  Euromoney  Conferences 
comes at an opportune time when we see clearer signs of the Thai economy gaining growth 
momentum,  supported  by  government  policy  measures  and  revival  of  private  sector 
confidence.  Nevertheless,  there  are  also  imminent  downside  risks  predominantly  from 
external fronts, which could hinder the continuation of this positive trend.  
I will focus the first part of my talk on Thailand’s resiliency to achieve healthy growth in 2008 
and  beyond.  The  second  part  will  highlight  key  issues  on  competitiveness  and  strength  of 
Thailand’s economic future in the face of trade and financial globalization. Judging from the 
list of experts from whom you will be hearing over the next two days, I would like to share 
with you my perspective from the policy making side. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Thailand’s  record  of  economic  resiliency  to  adverse  shocks  and  uncertainties  in  the  past 
should  clearly  demonstrate  the  strong  underlying  fundamentals.  In  2007,  notwithstanding 
political  uncertainties  which  dented  confidence  since  September  2006,  the  Thai  economy 
grew  by  4.8  percent.  Overall,  the  main  growth  driver  continued  to  be  net  exports,  which 
contributed  to  almost  60  percent  of  the  overall  GDP  growth.  While  demand  was  weak  in 
tandem with confidence, government pump-priming also helped achieve the favorable growth 
outcome.  Going  forward,  sustainable  economic  growth  can  be  achieved  through  several 
different  means.  But,  among  them,  the  prerequisite  is  maintaining  the  healthy  growth 
momentum with the right policy mix. I will elaborate on this point later.  
For  2008,  the  growth  prospect  hinges  largely  on  the  recovery  of  private  consumption  and 
investment, supported by increased government spending. This year, the strengths of these 
three  growth  engines  will  be  particularly  important,  since  exports  –  the  fourth  engine  –  is 
expected  to  moderate  in  line  with  the  global  economic  slowdown.  Overall,  the  Monetary 
Policy Committee expects the Thai economy to grow by 4.8-6 percent. Due to continued high 
prices of energy and food, headline inflation is expected to be in a range of 4.0-5.0 percent 
for the whole of 2008. Nevertheless, the MPC expects the core inflation forecast of 1.5-2.5 
percent. But, there are important risks to these forecasts.  
On the growth momentum, data for the first three months of 2008 point to GDP growth close 
to 6 percent, up from the previous quarter of 5.7 percent. During the first three months of this 
year,  private  consumption  and  investment,  which  constitute  almost  70  percent  of  total 
demand,  are  firming  up.  Meanwhile,  the  disbursement  rate  of  central  government  budget 
during the first half of fiscal year 2008 was also up from the same period last year. Moreover, 
we see a pick-up in consumption of durable goods as confidence increases, aided in part by 
the continued strong growth of farm income by 21.1 percent during the first quarter of 2008.  
As for the strength of the investment engine, private investment indicators have continued 
the uptrend while investor confidence has been boosted by the public investment plan over 
the next 5 years. During the first three months of this year, the Private Investment Index was 
up by 7.2 percent from the same quarter of 2007. Though we know that actual disbursement 
BIS Review 63/2008 
 1
of  government  investment  expenditure  may  not  occur  till  the  final  quarter  of  this  year,  the 
strong government commitment has already led to stronger investor confidence. Additional 
expenditure  for  land  acquisition  for  mega  projects  would  also  boost  domestic  demand  to 
some  degree.  This  should  prompt  the  pent-up  demand  for  private  investment,  which  has 
been held back over the past several years, to begin to materialize. 
Turning  to  the  external  sector,  the  strong  trading  partners’  demand,  seen  in  2007,  will 
unlikely reoccur in 2008. The world now expects the US economy to weaken substantially. 
Clearly, we will have to wait quite sometime for the clear upturn of the US economy after the 
US Fed’s sharp and substantial interest rate cuts to shore up the economy and confidence. 
Since the US crisis will most dominantly affect the Thai economy through the trade channel, 
we  also  have  to  watch  for  growth  trends  in  Europe  and  Asia  to  see  how  extensive  the 
adverse impacts of the US recession are.  
Nevertheless, during the first three months of 2008, the value of exports continued to grow 
strongly by 21.1 percent. But, this was outpaced by the growth of imports of 34.5 percent, 
resulting in a small trade deficit. However, we expect the overall trade balance in 2008 to be 
in surplus due to the expansion of exports to new markets. As for the current account, we 
expect that the surplus will amount to about 4-7 billion US dollar for the whole year, up from 
the surplus of 3.1 billion US dollar for the first quarter of 2008.  
At present, the focus of monetary policy is tilting more toward price stability. Data for April 
showed headline inflation at 6.2 percent and core inflation at 2.1 percent, respectively. These 
compared  to  the  average  first  quarter  data  of  5.0  percent  for  headline  inflation  and  1.5 
percent for core inflation. At this juncture, it is clear that global price pressure is yet to peak 
as world demand for oil and commodities continue to face tight demand-supply situation. We 
also  cannot  discount  the  possibility  of  potentially  adverse  geopolitical  events,  unfavorable 
weather condition, and further dollar slide which could drive up oil prices in the future.  
Up to now, monetary policy has remained accommodative to foster the growth momentum 
but  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  will  be  monitoring  inflation  developments  closely, 
especially the second round effect of energy prices feeding through to core inflation. The aim 
is to prevent higher inflation from dampening the anticipated recovery of consumption and 
derailing the pick-up in investment. Indeed, the MPC has been holding the policy rate, in light 
of the fact that the growth recovery has remained on track and supported by fiscal policy, 
while closely following inflation developments.  
As the MPC meets next Wednesday 21  May,  we will assess the latest data available and 
indicators on both growth and stability to decide on the appropriate stance of forward-looking 
monetary policy.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Undoubtedly,  the  risks  to  global  growth  and  inflation  will  not  make  macroeconomic 
management  an  easy  task  in  the  immediate  term.  But,  I  can  reassure  you  that  Thailand’s 
economy will maintain its resilience against potentially adverse developments, judging from 
the following four dimensions. 
First,  policymakers  today  have  sufficient  room  for  maneuvering  a  flexible  policy  mix  as  a 
result  of  continued  adherence  to  policy  discipline.  Our  fiscal  policy  is  not  constrained  by 
concern on public debt sustainability while monetary and exchange rate policies have room 
to  safeguard  economic  stability  and  smooth  out  short-term  fluctuations.  Indeed,  under  the 
new  Bank  of  Thailand  Act,  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  will  be  charged  with  legal 
responsibility  in  the  realm  of  both  monetary  policy  target  and  exchange  rate  policy  and 
management. 
The second source of resilience comes from the strength of our prudential and supervision 
of  financial  institutions.  In  this  regard,  the  Bank  of  Thailand’s  capacity  and  performance  in 
supervising  financial  institutions  has  been  assessed  against  international  best  practices  in 
the  context  of  the  joint  IMF/World  Bank  Financial  Sector  Assessment  Program  or  FSAP. 
2 
 BIS Review 63/2008
Indeed,  the  outcome  of  the  FSAP  assessment  was  very  satisfactory,  validating  our 
observance of international best practices. Moreover, the assessment results also strongly 
endorse the policy-making frameworks and transparency.  
As you may be aware, the new Financial Institutions Business Act (FIBA), which governs the 
framework  and  conduct  of  financial  institution  supervision,  is  designed  to  capture  the 
international  best  practices  of  financial  institution  supervision  according  to  Basel  Core 
Principles (BCP). With this law, the BOT can undertake consolidated supervision of financial 
conglomerates,  together  with  prompt  preventive  and  corrective  actions,  macro-prudential 
measures, and measures to improve consumer protection. Overall, our goal is to ensure that 
our regulatory and supervisory responses keep pace with the financial intermediaries and the 
products they offer. In this endeavor, the Bank of Thailand has put emphasis on robust stress 
testing,  enhanced  counterparty 
risk  management,  and  safe  and  efficient  market 
infrastructures.  
This leads me to the third source of resiliency. This is the continuous improvement in our 
financial  infrastructure,  legal  as  well  as  information,  and  the  intermediary  functions  of 
financial  institutions  within  the  economy.  We  now  have  more  effective  foreclosure  law,  a 
credit bureau, and accounting standards such as IAS 39 that conform to international best 
practices. Moreover, under the Deposit Protection Agency Act which will replace the current 
blanket deposit guarantee in place since 1997, the establishment of the Deposit Protection 
Agency should reduce banks’ moral hazard and enhance market discipline. That is by putting 
pressure on banks to improve financial strengths if they want to attract and retain depositors. 
As part of Thailand’s efforts to advance reforms, the Bank of Thailand will, under the second-
phased financial master plan, focus on improving efficiency and intermediary functions of the 
financial sector by reducing regulatory costs, enhancing legal and information infrastructure, 
and increasing the level of competition through further deregulation and liberalisation.  
Deregulation would potentially involve expanding business scope and enhancing the role of 
existing players, including banks, non-banks and other niche banks. One of the key factors 
for deciding the optimal number and type of new players would be the value added that new 
financial  institutions,  be  they  universal  banks  or  niche  banks,  could  bring  to  the  financial 
system,  such  as  technical  expertise  and  product  innovations.  Having  said  this,  I  wish  to 
emphasize that we will also closely look at the risks from potential concentration of market 
power and financial instability stemming from disorderly competition and exits. 
Last  but  not  least  is  better  governance  to  bring  about  better  risk  management.  For  the 
central  bank,  there  will  be  more  checks  and  balance  with  a  separate  chairman  from  the 
governor under the new BOT Act. In the private sector, the roles of Boards of Directors in 
providing oversights and setting guidelines for business decisions, and having in place the 
proper risk management systems are essential to deal with market excesses. The ultimate 
aim  is  to  enable  the  economy  to  adjust  flexibly  in  keeping  with  changes  in  the  financial 
environment. To facilitate this, key policies and regulations should focus on promoting market 
efficiency,  as  well  as  reducing  distortions  and  unproductive  risk-taking  behaviours  in  the 
economy.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The risks on growth and inflation make 2008 a very challenging year but we will be able to 
weather  it  because  there  is  room  for  the  right  policy  mix  and  we  can  capitalize  on  the 
economy’s  resiliency.  But  we  cannot  be  complacent  about  the  medium-term  challenges  of 
improving  and  maintaining  our  competitiveness.  Fortunately,  the  government  has  already 
committed  to  a  number  of  important  investment  projects  to  address  infrastructure 
deficiencies. 
the  entire  spectrum  of 
infrastructure,  including  the  modernization  of  public  transportation,  housing  and  water 
resource management, as well as health and education spending.  
investment  plans 
for  2008-2012 
focus  on 
Its 
BIS Review 63/2008 
 3
Let me share my thought, in particular, on Thailand’s education system which has immense 
implications  on  labor  productivity  and  labour  market  efficiency,  hence  competitiveness. 
Today,  more  than  half  of  the  Thai  labour  force  is  in  the  non-agricultural  sector  (including 
services), which is more averse to changes in global competition for trade and investment. 
Moreover, to maintain competitiveness, our economy needs the labour force that possesses 
higher  and  more  flexible  skill  sets  to  move  up  the  valued  added  chain  of  production  and 
trade.  
In reality, Thailand, just like other countries, has weakness in the mismatch of skills produced 
through  formal  schooling  from  those  which  firms  find  useful.  Government  policies  need  to 
address  this  weakness  quickly,  by  finding  ways  to  align  formal  education  with  training 
through  vocational  schools  and  apprenticeship  programs  organized  by  private  businesses. 
Key  questions  will  be  on  designing  appropriate  incentive  structures  for  players  in  the 
education and business sectors, while being mindful of social safety net considerations when 
businesses close. This is especially important because the agricultural sector now accounts 
for about 10 percent of the overall economy and cannot provide social-safety support for the 
non-agricultural sector should a downturn hit. 
In  addition  to  government  policies,  investors  and  firms  can  play  their  parts  in  helping  to 
improve labour skill and quality development.  This can be achieved through building more 
experience  in  the  workplace  by  investing  in  the  best  technology  and  capacity  to  use  that 
technology efficiently. Importantly, we also need to focus on the quality of investment that will 
help build skills and enhance production techniques that adds higher values and saves costs. 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
To close, let me highlight another important underlying strength of the Thai economy. In view 
of our unique location as the gateway to Indochina, with a population of about 160 million, we 
have  the  strength  of  a  potentially  much  bigger  market.  Within  ASEAN,  there  is  greater 
progress on the ASEAN blueprint, which lays out the strategic plan to achieve further trade 
and financial integration within 2015. In fact, with the AEC blueprint, we and the entire region 
stand to gain more from further trade and financial integration. Soon, Thailand will also be an 
integral  part  of  the  ASEAN  Community  under  the  new  ASEAN  Charter.  Indeed,  while  we 
continue  to  wait  for  the  resolution  of  WTO  negotiations,  Thailand  and  ASEAN  have  made 
progress on a number of free trade arrangements with Japan, China, Korea, Australia, and 
New Zealand.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I  hope  that  I  have  left  you  with  some  food  for  thought  for  the  two  days  that  you  will  hear 
directly  from  eminent  experts  of  various  fields.  As  a  veteran  central  banker,  I  believe  that 
over-optimism is just as dangerous as complacency in policy-making. Therefore, in today’s 
world of uncertainties and volatilities, vigilance and caution are crucial elements because the 
road ahead is likely to be a rocky one. But this should not prevent us from having a pleasant 
journey  toward  the  more  prosperous  future  for  the  Thai  economy.  The  central  bank  is  the 
only institution that has the legal responsibilities to preserve monetary and financial institution 
stability.  While  the  expectation  is  high,  I  can  assure  you  that  we  will  strive  to  fulfill  our 
responsibilities  the  best  we  can  to  ensure  that  the  economy  overcomes  any  difficult 
challenges that may lie ahead. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 63/2008
