Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: Celebrating 50 years of Europe 
Speech by Mr Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank,  at  the  Project  Europe  2.0,  Institute  of  International  &  European  Affairs,  Dublin, 
25 September 2008. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  it  is  a  pleasure  to  be  here  today  to  celebrate  Europe’s  50th 
anniversary.  
It’s quite nice to see that in Ireland anniversaries are still a reason for celebration 18 months 
after the effective date, although I’m not sure – judging from some recent polls – that in this 
country late celebrations are particularly beneficial to Europe. 
On the day after their 50th birthday most people tend to fall into a depression. To avoid it, 
they first have a medical check-up. Then they go on a diet and take up some new sport. I 
know what it’s like. I did it myself in the last couple of years! 
One of the things I feared most, for my own future, was to be affected by so-called “cognitive 
dissonance”,  a  problem  many  people  seem  to  develop  as  they  grow  older.1  You  start 
reminiscing  about  the  “good  old  days”  –  but  in  reality  they  weren’t  so  good.  You  tend  to 
remember only the nice things from your past, and see it all through rose-tinted glasses. As 
for the rest, well, you forget or suppress it. This is where nostalgia comes in. People end up 
thinking that the past was much better than the present, and much more pleasant than the 
future will be. They’d like to return to the past, their past. They become afraid of change and 
turn increasingly pessimistic. It’s a terrible way to grow older! 
At 50, Europe might be affected by this same syndrome. It should come as no surprise, since 
about 36% of Europe’s population is over 50, and the proportion is rising. Europeans seem to 
be nostalgic about an irretrievable past and increasingly afraid of the future. They tend to see 
developments over the years in a way quite different from the reality. One of the victims of 
this syndrome is the  European Union. The ultimate  victims, however, might be Europeans 
themselves. 
I won’t elaborate on the theory of cognitive dissonance, but I will provide some examples of 
its  symptoms  and  the  potential  implications  for  our  common  future.  I’ll  consider  four 
symptoms. The first is amnesia; in other words, Europeans seem to have forgotten what the 
European Union is about (assuming they knew it in the first place). The second symptom, 
derived from amnesia, is lack of consistency, which induces to create a link between facts 
and events that occur at the same time but which in fact are unrelated. The third symptom is 
myopia,  which  gives  people  a  distorted  view  of  the  world  around  them,  and  thus  the 
impression  that  nothing  changes  over  time.  The  fourth  symptom  is  denial,  in  particular 
concerning people’s own vitality.  
 Let me start with the first symptom: amnesia. People tend to forget what the European Union 
is  all  about.  It’s  not  even  clear  they  ever  knew  enough  about  it.  This  is  a  long-standing 
problem and has never really been tackled. The fact of the matter is that our citizens have 
little  idea  of  what  the  EU  is  and  how  it  functions.  This  lack  of  awareness  can  easily  be 
exploited, and indeed has been exploited, to paint a distorted picture of the Union. 
                                                 
1   Loosely  speaking,  cognitive  dissonance  is  the  uncomfortable  feeling  or  stress  caused  by  holding  two 
contradictory ideas at the same time. The theory of cognitive dissonance proposes that people have a drive to 
reduce this dissonance by modifying an existing belief, or rejecting one of the contradictory ideas. This can 
lead to confirmation bias and denial of discomforting evidence. 
BIS Review 116/2008 
 1
The picture that people have of the EU shows the Member States and the Union almost as 
opposing  forces,  rather  than  the  former  coming  together  to  make  up  the  latter.  When  the 
Union takes a decision, it somehow looks as if it was a third entity – “Brussels” – who took it, 
rather than representatives of the Member States. In fact, the main decision-making body in 
the EU is the Council, which comprises representatives of the Member States, elected at the 
national level. The same can be said about the Parliament, directly elected by the people. 
And also the Commission consists of persons appointed by the governments of the Member 
States.  
When  the  Union  takes  a  decision,  it  is  in  fact  the  Member  States  which  take  it,  through 
procedures established by the Union involving factors such as voting modalities and specific 
majority  thresholds.  When  the  Union  fails  to  take  a  decision,  it  is  ultimately  the  Member 
States  which  fail  to  do  so,  either  because  they  don’t  want  to  or  because  they  don’t  gain 
majority support for a proposal. 
The  Union  is  often  accused  of  excessive  regulation  and  interference.  Whose  fault  is  it?  It 
always seems to be the fault of Brussels’ bureaucrats, but they are not those who decide on 
regulations. They, at most, make formal proposals. It’s the governments and agencies of the 
Member States which ultimately are responsible for creating excessive regulation; they are 
the  ones  that  add  extra  conditions  to  take  into  account  national  circumstances  or  create 
exemption  or  special  regimes,  which  go  beyond  the  requirements  of  EU  directives  when 
transposing them into national law.  
The  confusion  is  compounded  when  accusations  of  overregulation  come  from  those  who 
attended  the  Council  meeting  that  led  to  a  particular  decision,  sometimes  just  afterwards. 
Voting in favour of a measure in Brussels and then criticising that same decision once back 
home is a favourite sport. No surprise that European citizens are confused. 
The Union is also often accused of immobility, of not being able to decide. But if the Union 
doesn’t  decide  it  is  because  the  Member  States  don’t  decide,  or  more  often,  because  the 
Member States don’t want the Union to take decisions. I will come back to this issue later. 
The other misrepresentation is about the competences of the Union. They are much more 
limited than people generally think, but they are often at the heart of the misunderstandings 
and frustration that the Union creates. Let me be more concrete here, and give you some 
examples. I understand that one of the reasons for some people voting against the Lisbon 
Treaty in this country was the fear that Brussels, i.e. the other Member States, would decide 
on taxation in Ireland. It should have been clear that decisions on taxation cannot be taken 
without  the  unanimous  consent  of  all  the  Member  States.  These  fears,  and  similar  ones 
about transfers of specific powers, were thus unjustified.  
Overall, the range of the Union’s competences is quite restricted. In the economic sphere, for 
instance,  with  the  exception  of  monetary  policy,  its  competencies  are  limited  to  the 
coordination of the Member States’ policies. Again, one of the issues raised in Ireland by the 
opponents  of  the  Lisbon  Treaty  seems  to  have  been  the  EU’s  inability  to  deal  with  the 
economic problems facing ordinary people, in particular income and employment. The motto 
would  be:  “Europe  is  doing  nothing  to  help  us  out!”.  But  protecting  people’s  income  and 
livelihoods  is  a  competence  of  the  Member  States,  not  the  Union.  While  it  is  certainly  an 
objective of the Union to achieve high living standards and high employment, as the Treaty 
says, the instruments to achieve these objectives are in the hands of the Member States.  
People should know more about the competences which have been transferred to the Union, 
like monetary policy which is conducted by the European Central Bank, and those that have 
remained in the hands of the Member States. The confusion, which is at times exacerbated 
by the Member States themselves, penalises the Union, which is perceived as being over-
powerful. 
One example is in the energy sector. In the face of the recent increase in energy prices and 
the overdependence of European countries on a limited number of suppliers, numerous calls 
2 
 BIS Review 116/2008
have been made from all the corners of Europe in favour of a European energy policy. But 
nothing  has  happened.  When  it  came  to  taking  decisions,  the  Member  States  showed  no 
desire  to  hand  over  their  powers  in  this  field.  The  lack  of  a  European  energy  policy  is 
nevertheless seen as a failure of the Union, rather than of the Member States. 
Europe is a complex construction, indeed. Its treaties, which are drafted as international legal 
documents rather than simple constitutional principles, are difficult to read. This is inevitable 
and  we  should  not  pretend  that  citizens  can  easily  understand  them,  when  even  some 
politicians cannot. However, what is more difficult to accept is that, after 50 years, some of 
the basic principles of how the Union functions and what its competences are remain poorly 
understood by our fellow citizens. 
Whose task is it to explain the basic facts about Europe? Should it be the role of European’s 
institutions, such as the Commission? The Commission has small representative offices in 
each country, and most of the time they are busy trying to correct inaccuracies thrown in the 
national  debates.  The  task  of  informing  citizens  about  Europe  can  only  be  effectively 
undertaken by the Member States, which have well-established educational programmes. 
The results – unfortunately – speak for themselves. And this is not without consequences, 
also for the politicians of the Member States. If the people of Europe don’t understand the 
Union  properly,  they  won’t  necessarily  understand  their  domestic  political  situation  any 
better.  Indeed,  polls  show  that  even  when  the  trust  in  European  institutions  declines,  it 
remains in most cases well above the national ones. In fact, some of the negative opinions 
expressed on the Union, including in electoral consultations, tend to reflect negative views 
about  national  politics.  This  is  the  worst  of  all  worlds  for  the  Union:  being  blamed  for 
something it’s not responsible for. 
 Let me turn to the second symptom, which derives from the first one, i.e. inconsistency. 
Over the last ten years the world economy has undergone substantial changes. I won’t list 
them all, but, to be sure, there has been a massive transfer of resources between and within 
countries. The change in the terms of trade has led to a huge transfer of purchasing power 
from  advanced  economies  to  oil  and  commodity  exporters  while  globalisation  has  brought 
considerable benefits to low-cost exporters of manufactured goods. Just to give an estimate, 
the transfer of purchasing power due to the increase in oil prices alone amounts to around 3 
trillion US dollars over the last decade, about 7% of advanced economies’ GDP.2  
The period between 2002 and 2007 saw the world economy grow at its fastest rate since the 
1970s.  However,  this  has  masked  notable  differences  between  advanced  and  emerging 
economies.  For  the  developing  world,  growth  has  been  at  its  strongest  since  the  Second 
World  War.  Advanced  economies,  on  the  other  hand,  have  recorded  a  worsened 
performance.  For  the  United  States,  in  particular,  the  last  decade  has  been  the  worst,  in 
terms of per capita income growth, for over 100 years, with the sole exception of the 1930s. 
Growth in Europe has also been quite modest compared with previous decades.  
A  significant  redistribution  of  income  has  also  taken  place  within  countries.  In  some 
advanced  economies,  notably  the  United  States  and  the  United  Kingdom,  the  index  of 
income  inequality  has  risen.3  In  general  there  has  been  a  stagnation  or  even  a  tendency 
towards a reduction in purchasing power for the lower-income groups, as a result of weaker 
income  growth  and  higher  price  increases  for  products  such  as  food  and  energy.  Income 
                                                 
2   Based  on  the  amount  of  net  oil  imports  by  advanced  countries,  comparing  a  scenario  with  oil  prices 
unchanged at 1999 levels with actual data. I thank Michael Fidora for this back-of-the-envelope calculation. 
3   For  an  extensive  treatment  see  A.  Brandolini  and  Smeeding  (2007):  “Inequality:  international  evidence”, 
prepared for the New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics. 
BIS Review 116/2008 
 3
growth disparities reflect increasing differences in human capital, access to technology and 
educational levels. Theory and past experience both suggest that competition from low-cost 
countries tends to penalise low incomes and employment advanced economies’ sectors with 
lower technological content.  
The  acceleration  of  technological  change  and  the  dismantling  of  barriers  to  trade  have 
increased  international  competition  and  brought  about  adjustment  in  a  much  shorter  time 
than expected. Advanced economies have thus felt severe strains in the last decade, and we 
can observe the political and social implications on a daily basis. The current US electoral 
campaign confirms that the issues are similar on both sides of the Atlantic. 
With one difference. In Europe, the last ten years have also been marked by the birth of the 
euro. And this is where the lack of consistency arises. The euro was created to bring about 
monetary stability in Europe. And this goal has been achieved. Inflation is low. Interest rates 
are  low,  reflecting  low  inflation  expectations.  The  European  Central  Bank  has  acquired 
credibility  by  conducting  a  monetary  policy  aimed  primarily  at  price  stability.  The  euro  has 
become the second international currency, trusted by investors all over the world.  
The  recent market  turmoil  should  encourage  us  to  think  about  what  could  have  happened 
without the euro, in terms of speculative pressures within Europe, exchange rate variability 
and interest rate levels. We would certainly have been worse off.  
Most  Europeans  tend  to  forget  about  the  advantages  they  have  acquired  over  the  years, 
even those been gained only recently. Being a member of the European Union and the euro 
area isn’t considered a big deal. On the other hand, many of the problems of everyday life 
are blamed on Europe or the euro. 
The  euro  is  sometimes  considered  responsible  for  problems  that  have  affected  our 
economies  in  the  last  few  years,  such  as  the  increase  in  housing  prices,  higher  food  and 
petrol prices, especially at the time of the cash changeover, and relatively subdued growth. 
As I have just mentioned, these problems have been experienced not only in the euro area 
but in all advanced economies, including those that don’t have the euro. I would contend that 
some  of  the  problems,  such  as  inflation  and  income  inequality,  have  been  even  greater 
outside the euro area. It is nevertheless difficult to explain to citizens that events taking place 
at the same time in a country are unrelated. The euro is an easy scapegoat. Attributing the 
fault  to  the  euro  is  an  easy  way  for  individuals  and  governments  to  avoid  taking 
responsibility.  
The  confusion  as  to  who’s  responsible  for  what  in  the  Union  and  the  simultaneous 
occurrence of the euro’s creation and other events that took place in our countries in the last 
decade have led many people to be inconsistent in their assessment of what the euro – and 
Europe more generally – has achieved in all these years.  
 Let me turn now to the third symptom, myopia. The difficulty to fully understand the causal 
relationship between events affecting our societies and our own lives derives in part from a 
form of short-sightedness concerning the world around us. As we grow older we tend to think 
that the world is the same as it always was. Maybe it’s a natural reaction to growing older. 
But in fact the world around us is changing, in a way that affects our lives and our ability to 
act. 
Europeans in particular have a tendency to think that the world hasn’t changed much over 
the last 10 to 20 years. More worryingly, they tend to believe that things won’t change much 
in the future. In reality, change has been all around us and will accelerate further in many 
areas. I won’t dwell on this issue, but the bottom line is that Europe is getting smaller and 
smaller,  while  other  continents  and  economies  are  growing.  20  years  ago  the  EU 
represented 28% of world GDP. In 2020, if recent trends continue, the figure could be less 
than 18%.  
4 
 BIS Review 116/2008
Individual  countries  within  Europe  are  also  becoming  smaller  and  less  powerful.  There  is 
nothing new in this. 50 years ago, the first President of the European Parliament, Paul-Henri 
Spaak,  noted  that  “Today,  Europe  consists  solely  of  small  countries.  The  only  relevant 
distinction  that  remains  is  that  some  countries  understand  this,  while  others  still  refuse  to 
acknowledge it”.  
20 years ago France and Germany together represented close to 10% of world GDP. Today 
this  percentage  is  7.5%.  By  2020,  if  recent  trends  continue,  it  will  be  reduced  to  5%,  less 
than Germany alone 20 years ago.  
Other regions and countries are emerging as major players, their size comparable to that of 
the whole European Union. Individual European countries are bound to have each a lesser 
role to play on the global arena. This is already the case in trade, international finance, the 
environment, energy. 
How  long  will  it  take  for  European  countries  to  realise  that,  in  terms  of  power,  they  have 
become  close  to  irrelevant?  Paul-Henri  Spaak’s  words  might  lead  one  to  think  that  this 
myopia affects only the larger countries of Europe. This might be true. But smaller countries 
can  suffer  from  another  type  of  short-sightedness.  Smaller  countries  are  used  to  having  a 
more limited role on the international scene. They tend to leave major decisions to the larger 
countries,  acting  more  as  critical  observers.  They  can  afford  to  do  so.  Indeed,  the  post-
Second World War world has developed in an environment largely dominated by the United 
States, with the cooperation of European countries. The US influence shaped relations in the 
field of international finance, world trade and macroeconomic policy. The rules and policies 
pushed forward by the United States, and its leadership in implementing them, were broadly 
accepted by Europeans. Even in the military field, the confrontation with the East took place 
under the protection of the US umbrella, even for countries that declared themselves neutral. 
In the coming years it will become more difficult for a single country alone, even the United 
States, to set standards and lead policies for the rest of the world. The emergence of other 
regions and countries with larger populations and soon similar income to that of the United 
States will challenge its leadership. International relations will have to be based increasingly 
on cooperation between equals rather than the leadership of one country, as they have been 
for the last 60 years. China, India and possibly also Brazil and Russia will play a greater role 
in global decisions.  
The key question in this scenario is: what will Europe, and European countries individually, 
do? 
They can ignore these developments and continue to act as followers of a leadership which 
will have become more varied, accepting the balance of interests that will have been agreed 
between the United States and the other systemically important countries. They can continue 
to free-ride, but the outcome might be quite different and not quite as pleasant as it has been 
up  to  now.  Alternatively,  they  can  organise  themselves  and  form  a  major  player  in  the 
international  community,  possibly  in  partnership  with  the  United  States.  All  European 
countries, not only the largest ones, will have to make this choice. To make Europe a key 
player will require the will of all its members. 
My  impression  is  that  European  citizens  would  be  less  frightened  of  the  challenges  of 
globalisation  if  they  felt  they  could  participate  in  its  governance.  The  problem  is  that 
globalisation  can’t  be  controlled  at  the  level  of  national  governments,  at  least  in  Europe. 
Europeans can participate in the governance of globalisation only if they stand united.  
Let me give you an example. The current financial market turmoil will have to lead to new 
financial regulation and supervision. In an increasingly integrated financial market, the new 
regulation and supervision will have to be the result of coordinated action on the part of major 
economies. This will involve accounting rules, prudential regimes, the treatment of offshore 
centres and hedge funds, etc. The new rules will have to be discussed and agreed across 
the Atlantic. The experience of the past few months suggests that the European contribution 
BIS Review 116/2008 
 5
can  be  particularly  useful  in  designing  a  more  stable  and  prudent  financial  system.  To 
promote its views Europe has to organise itself to speak with one voice at the negotiating 
table.  If  Europeans  are  divided,  unable  to  take  decisions,  they  will  have  to  accept  what’s 
decided elsewhere.  
Ultimately,  speaking  with  one  voice  and  taking  decisions  means  deciding  by  (qualified) 
majority. It means that each member accepts being put in a minority by the others, as in a 
democracy.  It  means,  ultimately,  increased  political  integration  in  Europe.  In  other  words, 
either  European  countries  move  towards  increased  political  integration  or  they  become 
irrelevant on major issues that are of relevance on the international scene. It may sound a bit 
blunt, but at least it’s spelt clearly! 
One  objection  to  the  choice  of  greater  political  integration  is  that  some  fundamental 
competences  are  inherent  to  nation  states  and  cannot  be  given  up  without  impairing  the 
political integrity of those states.  
 This brings me to the fourth, and for now final, symptom which seems to be affecting some 
Europeans,  i.e.  denial.  As  people  grow  older,  the  performance  of  certain  functions  – 
especially the more pleasant ones, which in some cases reflect power and potency – tends 
to be impaired. Science may to some extent help us to delay the slow but inevitable decay. 
On the other hand, it can also lead us into a dangerous state of denial.  
The same seems to apply to political power. As Europe and European countries grow older, 
and also smaller, they continue to deny the fact that their effective power is shrinking, if not 
disappearing. For instance, many fora in which several European countries participate have 
lost  relevance.  And  one  of  the  reasons  for  this  is  that  Europeans  are  over-represented  in 
these fora, which reduces their legitimacy. 
Let  me  give  you  the  example  of  the  International  Monetary  Fund  where  EU  countries  are 
represented  in  ten  different  constituencies,  out  of  24.  The  euro  area  countries  are  spread 
over eight constituencies. Some are even in constituencies in which all other countries are 
non-European; Ireland, for example, is in the same constituency as Canada and Caribbean 
countries.  
Given the way Europeans are organised, it’s no wonder the IMF is largely influenced by the 
United  States  and  that  Europeans  tend  to  punch  much  below  their  weight.  Furthermore, 
major decisions concerning the IMF are increasingly taken in other fora, typically the G7 or 
the G20, where only the four largest European countries are represented. The EU is also a 
member of the G20, but given the rotating EU presidency, it isn’t able to have a substantial 
impact on the discussion. 
The  most  logical  thing  to  do  would  be  to  pool  European  representation  in  the  IMF  and 
thereby obtain a power of veto like that of the United States so as to play a greater role. This 
would of course require some organisation within Europe to define a common policy, as is 
done for trade issues for instance. As the IMF has become an institution focused primarily on 
surveillance of the world economy, I see no reason for European countries, especially those 
with  a  common  currency,  to  have  differing  positions  on  the  major  issues  discussed  at  the 
IMF.  For  example,  I  see  no  reason  for  a  country  such  as  Ireland  to  have  positions  more 
similar to those of Canada and the Caribbean countries than to those of other members of 
the EU.  
If Europe had a single seat at the table, the national representatives that currently have a 
seat would have to leave it. And they seem to be very attached to their seats, because they 
believe  –  or  want  to  believe  –  that  from  this  position  they  have  been  able  to  substantially 
influence decisions. They often don’t understand – or don’t want to understand – that as long 
as they are seated at the table, while others who matter more are not, that table is not really 
worth sitting at. The main decisions will be taken elsewhere. 
6 
 BIS Review 116/2008
Again, to give an example, the recent reform of the voting shares of the IMF, which by the 
way reduced the overall voting power of Europe, wasn’t really decided in the IMF Executive 
Board itself but agreed in other fora, most notably the G7 and the G20.  
Those  who  would  have  to  leave  their  seat  at  the  table  are  obviously  in  a  state  of  denial, 
advancing quite absurd arguments. The oddest of all arguments against a single European 
seat  is  that  it  would  create  a  polarisation  in  the  governance  of  the  Fund,  with  two  major 
shareholders – the US and Europe – which would undermine its functioning. As if a unipolar 
governance,  with  only  one  major  shareholder  (the  United  States),  is  better  from  the 
perspective of any European country.  
 I have talked enough today about symptoms and syndromes. Let me conclude. 
Like anyone over 50, Europe needs to make sure it doesn’t become a hypochondriac. As I 
mentioned at the start of my speech, Europe might need to go on a diet. And maybe get a 
new look.  
The  diet  consists  in  streamlining  activities.  The  EU  seems  much  fatter  than  it  really  is. 
European institutions should stop continuously looking for new roles. The celebration of the 
10th anniversary of the euro ended with a series of recommendations, in particular from the 
Commission  and  the  European  Parliament,  for  new  roles,  but  with  no  resources  and  no 
powers. This gives the impression that the EU will have new competences, which is not true. 
The Union should instead clarify its role and show how slim it is. It should actually refuse to 
take on new tasks that Member States want to give it unless it explicitly receives the powers 
to conduct these tasks.  
At 50, Europe also needs a new look. Any book or film about Europe starts with a sequence 
of black and white pictures of the founding fathers. Most Europeans – unfortunately – don’t 
even recognize the faces of Schuman, Monnet, De Gasperi or Adenauer. This shouldn’t be 
surprising. They’d probably also fail to recognise the national politicians of those days. 
History books are certainly useful, but pictures can be more effective than a thousand words. 
If I had to choose one picture to explain to current and future generations what Europe is 
about, I would take that of François Mitterrand and Helmut Kohl joining hands in Verdun, in 
September 1984. Some younger people might not recognise the two faces, but their act is 
unequivocal. Joining hands in front of a coffin explains everything about Europe, where we 
come from.  
But that’s clearly not enough. The people of Europe need a better understanding of what the 
European Union is about, what it has given them and where it is going. The Union should be 
seen not just as a grouping of states but as something helping the member states, and their 
citizens,  to  address  the  challenges  of  our  times.  The  Union  is  not  somewhere  else  –  in 
Brussels or Strasbourg – it’s in every European town or village, whose prosperity depends on 
being part of a united Europe.  
The future of Europe depends on each of its 500 million citizens. But, more importantly, the 
future  of  the  500  million  citizens  depends  on  the  future  of  the  Union.  The  best  way  to 
celebrate this 50th anniversary is to make sure that the best years are still to come.  
Looking back on what has been done should strengthen our will and our confidence about 
what we can achieve in the future, together.  
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 116/2008 
 7
