Christian Noyer: Challenges of financial innovation for the conduct of 
monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France, at the International Monetary 
Fund-Bank of France-Bank of England Conference, Paris, 29 January 2008. 
 The  current  financial  turmoil  is  here  to  remind  us  that  financial  innovation,  like  technical 
innovation, is not a smooth process. The flip side of the recent years of exuberant financial 
innovation, what might be seen in retrospect as the golden age of structured finance, comes 
now to the fore. However, after two or more decades in which major, multi-faceted financial 
innovation  has  brought  about  far-reaching  changes  in  the  global  economic  environment,  it 
would be unfair to forget the benefits economic agents have collectively reaped from tools 
that  are  fundamentally  aimed  at  allowing  an  easier  and  broader  access  to  funding  and  a 
more efficient risk allocation. 
I am delighted to co-introduce this conference which will tackle some major issues. Rather 
than  giving  an  exhaustive  overview  of  the  nature  and  magnitude  of  financial  innovation,  I 
think it more useful here, as a central banker, to focus on how financial innovation affects 
monetary  policy  decision-making.  I  know  this  seminar  will  dig  further  into  some  of  these 
issues but I selected two main issues, whose scope goes beyond the current events: 
- 
firstly,  how  the  last  wave  of  financial  innovation  has  affected  the  monetary 
transmission process of monetary policy. Implicitly, this also raises the question of 
whether and to what extent the current state of the innovation cycle challenges our 
understanding of what has changed over the last decade. 
and secondly, how financial innovation challenges the role of monetary analysis in 
monetary policymaking. 
 I shall then conclude by a few words on the difficult task of communicating about monetary 
policy  in  times  of  financial  stress.  This  is  a  concern  that  does  not  feature  formally  in  our 
programme today but lurks in the background and I am sure many of us will have it in mind 
throughout the day. 
Challenges for our understanding of the MP transmission process 
An  appropriate  knowledge  of  the  mechanisms  through  which  monetary  policy  affects  the 
economy  is  of  crucial  importance  for  central  banks.  Financial  innovation  affects  these 
mechanisms both by altering the channels through which monetary policy operates and by 
changing the overall impact of monetary policy decisions. But the magnitude of the changes 
and  the  exact  impact  of  financial  innovation  at  a  time  when  other  factors  such  as 
globalisation are at work are not well known. 
Financial innovation certainly contributes to enhancing wealth effects and thus probably also 
to  strengthening  the  interest  rate  channel.  First,  financial  innovation  fosters  faster 
dissemination  of  information  and  its  more  rapid  incorporation  into  financial  market  prices. 
This is of course particularly true for monetary policy decisions and can therefore increase 
the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  via  the  interest  rate  channel.  Second,  financial 
innovation  contributes  to  an  increased  holding  of  financial  assets  by  lowering  transaction 
costs and facilitating arbitrage, hedging, funding and investment strategies. Third, financial 
innovation often relies on greater leverage, increasing the effect of interest rate moves by the 
central bank. 
However, in times of combination of financial stress and adverse supply shocks, such as we 
are  now  facing,  the  risk  of  destabilising  highly-leveraged  financial  institutions  of  potential 
BIS Review 15/2008 
 1
systemic importance could complicate the task of the monetary policymaker wishing to raise 
the  policy  rate  in  a  timely  manner  so  as  to  prevent  inflationary  risks  from  materialising. 
Besides,  when  conditions  are  less  benign  than  usual,  the  transmission  process  along  the 
interest rate curve may become non-linear: a striking feature of this summer’s events was the 
surge in short-term money market spreads in the euro area as well as in the United States 
and the United Kingdom. Wider and variable spreads between term funding rates, of which 
many bank loans are priced off, and policy rates are worrying in as much as they may reduce 
the efficiency of interest rate moves when needed. That said, as this situation stems from a 
sharp  reduction  in  term  liquidity  due  to  a  general  fear  of  withdrawal  among  providers  of 
liquidity, e.g. money market funds, its unwinding requires an appropriate provision of central 
bank liquidity to the short-term interbank markets but not necessarily a change in the policy 
stance. 
In contrast to the enhancement of the interest rate channel, at least in normal times, financial 
innovation is traditionally expected to have weakened significantly the so-called bank lending 
channel. Financial innovation gives firms broader access to securities markets and, as such, 
makes them less dependent on bank funding. Similarly, banks may be more able to issue 
debt  securities  and  less  dependent  on  the  constraint  of  funding  themselves  with  secured 
deposits.  Moreover,  securitisation  by  banks  was  expected  to  alleviate  their  liquidity 
constraints  and  thus  to  further  weaken  the  credit  channel.  Indeed,  previous  research  has 
generally  found  that  banks  have  used  credit  market  innovations  such  as  loan  sales  and 
securitisation to diversify credit risk exposures and increase lending. 
However, recent research has highlighted the potential for bank capital regulation and market 
discipline to shape a bank capital channel of monetary transmission. Viewed as an extension 
of  the  standard  bank-firms  agency  problem  to  the  relationship  between  banks  and  their 
creditors, this capital channel could reinforce the standard financial accelerator mechanism. 
This last concern is closely related to the fears of a credit crunch that have been voiced in 
the last six months. 
Current events show that the tide of financial innovation may recede and the future of the 
originate-and-distribute  model  of  banking  is  a  topic  of  renewed  work.  What  we  see  now 
suggests that an unprecedented reintermediation process is underway, which might imply in 
the end a strengthening of the credit channel. 
To  sum  up,  financial  innovation  is  on  the  whole  expected  to  have  facilitated  the  job  of 
monetary  policymakers  by  accelerating  the  transmission  of  monetary  impulses  to  the 
economy. However, in times of stress, when financial sophistication may have gone further 
and  quicker  than  risk-management  practice,  the  confidence  crunch  that  may  ensue  paves 
the  way  to  non-linear  responses  of  the  economy  that  seriously  challenge  our  common 
understanding of how monetary policy impulses are transmitted to the economy. 
Challenges for our reliance on monetary indicators 
As you know, the Eurosystem’s monetary policy strategy assigns an important role to money, 
which is based on the premise that monetary developments provide valuable information on 
future inflation in the longer run. I would like to ground this with two reasons, a well-known 
stylised fact and a conjecture. The stylised fact first: there is ample statistical evidence, in the 
euro  area  and  elsewhere,  that  low  frequency  movements  in  money  growth  are  closely 
correlated  with  trend  inflation,  e.g.  for  frequencies  corresponding  to  cycles  of  eight  to  ten 
years. The conjecture, then, brings us to an issue that will be tackled this afternoon, namely 
the flattening of the Phillips curve: changing inflation dynamics, which can partly be viewed 
as a consequence of a successful anchoring by credible monetary policies, tend to reduce 
the  sensitivity  of  inflation  to  incipient  imbalances  in  the  economy.  To  prevent  the  risk  that 
central banks react too late to such imbalances, the monetary policy strategy has to enlarge 
its informational basis: monetary indicators, including money but also credit developments, 
may then be a good candidate to detect inflationary pressures early on. 
2 
 BIS Review 15/2008
However, the theoretically founded long-term relationship between money and inflation may 
be blurred in econometric estimates of long run money demand equations, and part of this 
could  be  due  to  financial  innovation.  Indeed,  as  far  as  the  euro  area  is  concerned,  recent 
Banque  de  France  research  has  pointed  to  a  structural  break  around  2001  in  the  income 
velocity of money. In the euro area, the velocity of money seems to have now established 
along  a  new,  faster  declining  trend.  This  is  consistent  with  the  hypothesis  of  a  financial 
deepening in the economy, in particular an increase in financial wealth held by households. 
Although the precise role of financial innovation in this process is still not fully understood, we 
should think of it in terms of both new players and new products: 
- 
In terms of new players, a plausible explanation is the rapid pace of expansion in the 
business  of  the  so-called  other  financial  institutions  (OFIs).  These  institutions 
include mutual funds as well as financial vehicles that buy and repackage loans that 
are securitised by banks. This activity reduces mechanically the growth of MFI loans 
to  the  private  sector,  while  it  is  mirrored  in  the  strong  increase  in  OFIs’  deposits 
holdings, hence contributing to M3 growth. How much of this business will resist the 
current  period  of  stress  remains  an  open  issue,  but  euro  area  monetary  statistics 
have shown no sign of a major decline in these money holdings so far. 
In  terms  of  new  products,  the  recent  emergence,  at  least  in  France,  of  high-yield 
liquid deposits that are accessible via direct banking on the internet is very likely to 
have reduced the interest elasticity of money. 
 Of  course,  monetary  policy,  in  the  euro  area  and  elsewhere,  is  not  committed  to  react 
mechanically  to  monetary  developments.  Nevertheless,  to  make  the  best  use  of  the 
informational  role  of  money,  central  banks  must  be  able  to  filter  out  the  noise  that  affects 
current monetary data, disentangling temporary factors from shifts in trends, supply shocks 
from demand shocks, with the latter possibly resulting from certain financial innovations in 
the context of globalisation. Fully assessing the effects of financial innovation is thus a real 
challenge for monetary  analysis. Considering the practical difficulties ahead, this seems to 
me to offer a fruitful field for applied research. 
Challenges for communication in times of stress: disentangling monetary and 
financial stability objectives 
Financial  market  disruptions  that  may  follow  times  of  exuberant  financial  innovation  may 
pose significant risks to macroeconomic stability. However, by their very nature and notably 
the highly non-linear dynamics they may trigger, such events, as well as the magnitude and 
speed of their macroeconomic consequences are uncertain. 
To  meet  its  stability  objectives  in  periods  of  financial  instability,  the  monetary  policymaker 
must probably put more emphasis on high-frequency financial markets information than he 
would otherwise do, because in normal times regular flows of macroeconomic statistics more 
or less suffice to form a correct assessment of the outlook. 
Special  communication  efforts  are  also  required.  One  big  challenge  for  communication  in 
times of stress is to make the public understand that short-term liquidity management can be 
completely  separate  from  the  definition  of  the  monetary  policy  stance  with  a  medium-term 
perspective. As I have already pointed out1, a standard result in economic theory (William 
Poole’s  paper  from  1970)  states  that,  when  demand  for  central  bank  money  is  uncertain, 
then  it  is  optimal  to  stabilise  the  short-term  interest  rate,  letting  money  supply  adjust 
endogenously. That is precisely what has happened in the euro area over the last half year. 
Indeed, the bulk of liquidity injections since last August was merely an attempt to align the 
                                                 
1   Cf. C. Noyer, “No moral hazard: the banks are doing their job”, Financial Times, 18 September 2007. 
BIS Review 15/2008 
 3
timing  and  maturity  of  the  liquidity  supply  with  a  changing  demand  within  the  reserve 
maintenance periods, in order to stabilize the very short-term interest rate on the interbank 
market.  Of  course,  this  is  always  a  difficult  task,  since  the  increase  in  the  precautionary 
demand  for  liquidity  altered  the  behaviour  of  banks  and  rendered  less  efficient,  at  least 
temporarily,  the  forecasting  models  we  use  to  calculate  the  benchmark  need  for  liquidity. 
However, since the Eurosystem acted as a price taker during these liquidity injections, it is 
obvious  that  the  interest  rates  at  which  these  fine-tuning  and  longer-term  operations  were 
settled had no information content for the monetary policy stance. In a period of increasing 
inflationary  risks  stemming  notably  from  excess  demand  for  commodities  and  energy 
worldwide,  it  is  crucial  that  our  liquidity  management  is  not  misinterpreted  and  does  not 
contribute to a deterioration of inflation expectations. 
Conclusion 
To conclude briefly, I shall invite you not to expect too much of monetary policy. Not only, to 
quote  the  Economist2,  are  we,  central  bankers,  “only  human”,  but  also,  to  put  in  more 
classical words, monetary policy alone cannot do everything with one single tool, the policy 
rate. 
A lesson that the subprime crisis has taught us is that a lot has still to be done in order to 
improve  the  regulatory  framework  in  which  the  financial  innovation  process  takes  place.  I 
have no time to develop this further, but I am confident that in particular the implementation 
of  Basel  II  will  bring  significant  improvements  in  the  measure  and  management  of  risks, 
providing a sounder basis for the next wave of financial innovation. 
                                                 
2   Cf. “Special report on central banks and the world economy: only human”, The Economist, October 20th-26th 
2007. 
4 
 BIS Review 15/2008
