Zamani Abdul Ghani: Growth and development of SME’s in Malaysia 
Opening  address  by  Mr  Zamani  Abdul  Ghani,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Malaysia,  at  the  Top  SMI  Supporter  Award  Presentation,  held  at  the  Credit  Guarantee 
Corporation Malaysia Berhad (CGC), Petaling Jaya, Selangor, 9 June 2008. 
 Bismillahirrahmanirrahim  
Distinguished fellow members of the Board of Directors of CGC, 
Yang Berbahagia Datuk Wan Azhar Wan Ahmad,Managing Director of CGC  
Distinguished Guests and Representatives of Financial Institutions  
Members of the Media  
Ladies and Gentlemen  
Assalamualaikum w.b.t. and a very good afternoon  
On behalf of the Board of Directors and Management of the Credit Guarantee Corporation, 
(CGC),  I  am  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  this  Top  SMI  Supporter  Awards  Presentation 
ceremony. This occasion is held in conjunction with the CGC's 35th Annual General Meeting 
that  was  successfully  concluded  just  a  while  ago.  I  am  pleased  to  note  the  encouraging 
representation made here today by fellow members of financial institutions. This signifies the 
importance  that  financial  institutions  attest  to  this  CGC's  annual  award  presentation 
ceremony.  That  said,  allow  me  to  record  our  appreciation  to  all  of  you  for  making  this 
ceremony an important event in your calendar.  
This  Top  SMI  Supporter  Awards  presentation  ceremony,  as  you  are  all  well  aware,  is  an 
annual occasion. It recognises the active participation by financial institutions in CGC's credit 
guarantee  schemes  in  particular,  and  contributions  by  financial  institutions  to  SME 
development in general. We firmly believe such efforts should not go unnoticed. Collectively, 
the  award  recipients  and  all  other  financial  institutions  have  helped  in  making  CGC  a 
stronger  SME-support  institution.  This  is  so  as  their  active  participation  opened  a  new 
window of opportunities not only for the SMEs but also for the CGC in reaching out to a wider 
cross section of the SME community throughout the country. 
In 2007, CGC provided credit guarantees totalling RM4.6 billion to more than 13,000 SMEs 
through our main schemes, the programmed lending schemes as well as the securitisation of 
SME  loans.  There  was  actually  remarkable  growth  with  the  number  of  loans  and  amount 
guaranteed growing by 73% and 53% respectively. This could be attributable to the strong 
support given by participating financial institutions that have been robust in serving the SME 
market  in  the  recent  years.  I  particularly  note  with  interest  that  the  seven  recipients  today 
collectively contributed more than 80% of the total loans guaranteed by CGC in 2007.  
In view of the changing facets of SME financing, CGC undertook several initiatives to further 
reach out to SMEs that are in need of financing. This includes the introduction of innovative 
products and services as well as widening the scope of guarantee beneficiaries by forging 
alliances  with  strategic  partners.  In  the  last  two  years,  CGC  has  entered  into  strategic 
partnership with many local and international institutions with the aim both of expanding its 
SME outreach as well as to better equip itself with the expertise and knowledge to take it to a 
higher  service  delivering  platform.  As  a  result,  CGC  is  now  able  to  undertake  some  new 
business  activities  such  as  securitisation,  portfolio  guarantees  and  collateralised  loan 
obligations  (CLOs).  These  are  aimed  at  raising  alternative  sources  of  funds  as  well  as 
attracting medium-term funding from the capital markets for SMEs. CGC firmly believes that 
these exercises are also key drivers in the Corporation's efforts towards achieving financial 
sustainability.  
The  Corporation  has  also  identified  a  number  of  strategies  to  help  it  to  achieve  financial 
independence.  Of  importance  is  the  expansion  in  the  product  range  that  include  capital 
BIS Review 75/2008 
 1
market activities. In view of our commitment towards making CGC a financially sustainable 
institution, we have even gone a step further by working closely with our financial partners to 
ensure  higher  business  quality.  To  encourage  active  participation,  CGC  introduced  for  the 
first  time  in  2008,  a  new  award  called  the  Best  Financial  Partner  Award.  The  award 
acknowledges and recognizes the financial partner that contributed the most towards quality 
assets for CGC. It also recognises the financial institutions' conscientious efforts in ensuring 
that  scarce  funds  are  channelled  to  SME  borrowers  identified  to  have  the  capability  and 
capacity to maintain good credit standing.  
The Best Financial Partner Award will be a regular feature in the years to come and we look 
forward  to  the  active  participation  of  all  the  financial  institutions.  In  addition  to  the  Best 
Financial  Partner  Award,  another  two  awards  were  also  introduced.  These  are  the  Top 
Islamic  Bank  and  Top  Development  Financial  Institution  awards  to  recognize  these  two 
categories of institutions for their contribution towards the overall business growth of CGC 
and  the  SME  sector.  These  new  categories  illustrate  our  sincere  acknowledgment  of  the 
financial institutions that have made significant contribution to SME development.  
We believe 2008 is an important year for CGC. Foremost is that it marks the 36th year of the 
Corporation's  involvement  in  SME  development.  It  is  also  the  year  which  will  see  the 
implementation  of  the  third  phase  of  our  three-year  business  transformation  plan  and  the 
successful completion of the three-year strategy. The necessary preparatory work under the 
transformation plan has largely being completed and we hope to take the first step towards 
achieving financial sustainability.  
Another  significant  milestone  in  2008  is  the  establishment  of  the  SME  Credit  Bureau,  a 
watershed event in CGC's evolution. The Bureau is a source of credible and reliable credit 
information that serves the needs of both the SMEs and the potential financiers. This reflects 
the natural progression for the CGC in its continuous efforts to enhance access to financing 
by SMEs. The establishment of a SME Credit Bureau, by CGC in strategic collaboration with 
Dun & Bradstreet, would no doubt complement the other initiatives of the Government and 
the financial sector in promoting growth and development of SMEs.  
We have seen how CCRIS, where real-time and comprehensive information on consumers' 
credit exposures and history is readily available. Such availability has served as a valuable 
source  of  information  in  credit  assessment  and  help  expedite  loan  processing  time.  In  the 
same vein, with greater availability of information on SMEs from the Bureau, the processing 
time for SME loans can be similarly shortened and decisions to grant financing can be made 
based on a more comprehensive set of information. We hope and encourage the financial 
institutions  to  avail  themselves  of  the  services  provided  by  the  Bureau  and  help  create  a 
healthier and more transparent credit culture amongst the SMEs and lenders.  
I would now like to take this opportunity to congratulate all the award recipients today. We 
hope the recognition accorded by CGC will help to create a better understanding of the spirit 
behind  this  initiative,  which  is  aimed  at  fostering  mutually  beneficial  working  relationship 
between  the  CGC  and  the  financial  institutions  for  the  over-arching  objective  of  promoting 
SME sector development. You have certainly given us your unwavering support through your 
active participation in our guarantee schemes. We look forward to your greater participation 
in the future.  
On another note, I would take this opportunity, in conjunction with our 35th AGM, to thank all 
employees  of  CGC  for  their  understanding  and  commitment  in  adopting  and  adapting  to 
changes. This include the internal organizational change that we have been through in the 
past two years to face the challenges of the dynamic business environment of today. 
Thank you for the kind attention and have a pleasant day. 
2 
 BIS Review 75/2008
