Ranee Jayamaha: SAARC Payments Initiative and policy responses 
Speech by Dr Ranee Jayamaha, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, at the 
inauguration of "SAARC Payments Initiative", Central Bank of Sri Lanka, Colombo, 28 March 
2008. 
  1. 
It is with great pleasure that I thank all of you for attending the inaugural session of 
the  SAARC  Payments  Initiative.  It  is  indeed  a  historic  event  and  a  landmark  in  the 
development  of  payment  systems  in  the  SAARC  region,  because  this  is  the  first  time  the 
member  central  banks,  as  a  group,  have  decided  to  pay  focused  attention  to  this  area  of 
activity. It is also an important achievement for the Central Bank of Sri Lanka to be able to 
pioneer the efforts in establishing the SAARC Payments Initiative. 
2. 
• 
The SAARC Payments Initiative, which is launched today, intends to 
assist  individual  SAARC  countries  to  prepare  a  domestic  payment  strategy  and  a 
forward looking development plan;  
design  a  coordinated  regional  approach  to  cross-border  payments,  taking  into 
consideration  the  implications  for  trade,  investment,  central  bank  policy,  foreign 
exchange positions and their management; and 
clear  any  impediments  experienced  by  the  members  in  the  areas  of  policy, 
operations  and  communications,  legal  and  regulatory  aspects,  technical  and 
institutional infrastructure, and engage in research and statistical analysis. 
3. 
During the course of the SAARC Payments Initiative, member countries will be able 
to learn from the efforts and experiences of developments of payments within the region, as 
well as outside. Some of our member countries may have to acquire modern communication 
infrastructure  and  advanced  payment  systems  to  support  the  delivery  of  the  payment  and 
settlement services required, not only by their own markets, but also by the regional market. 
In  effect,  the  SAARC  Payments  Initiative  will  be  able  to:  (a)  guide  the  efforts  of  member 
countries  in  modernizing  their  national  payment  systems;  (b)  assist  in  establishing 
appropriate technological links with others in the region; and (c) bring their payment systems 
to appropriate standards compatible with international standards.  
 The importance of payment systems 
4. 
4.1 
The broader term “payment systems” includes not only payments, but also clearing 
and  settlement  systems.  Payment  systems  represent  a  basic  infrastructure  for  the 
functioning  of  market  economies  and  in  developing  more  inclusive  financial  systems, 
including  enhancement  of  access  to  finance.  The  soundness  and  efficiency  of  payment 
systems are fundamental to the stability of the currency, as well as the financial system and, 
therefore, to sustaining economic development.  
4.2 
It  is  in  this  context  that  some  of  the  governing  laws  of  the  region’s  central  banks 
include references to the responsibility of central banks to promote the monetary, financial 
and payment systems in their respective countries. If I may quote from John Exter’s Report 
of 1949 on the establishment of the Central Bank of Ceylon, (the former name of the present 
Central Bank of Sri Lanka), it states “It is the monetary, financial and payment systems that 
facilitate  the  flow  of  money  in  the  economy  and  as  such,  the  Central  Bank  of  Ceylon 
undertakes  a  great  responsibility  in  promoting  the  economic  well-being  of  the  country”. 
Although modern central banks concentrate primarily on price stability and financial system 
stability, 
these  objectives  cannot  be  satisfactorily  achieved  without  simultaneous 
development in the payment systems. Therefore, at some stage, all central banks have to 
BIS Review 35/2008 
 1
pay attention to payment system development, although it was taken for granted by many 
until recent times.  
Advances and transformation in payment systems development 
5. 
5.1 
Payment  systems  have  undergone  profound  changes  in  recent  years,  primarily  in 
terms of the increased complexity of the production and differentiation of payment services 
offered to customers nationally, regionally and internationally. Payment systems are evolving 
towards an evermore universal and sophisticated level of operation. In both wholesale and 
retail areas, new technologies, new participants and new alliances are beginning to transform 
the  payments  system  landscape.  This  transformation  is  largely  due  to  developments  in 
information  and  communication  technology,  and  integration  and  globalization  of  financial 
markets at the regional and international level.  
5.2 
One  by-product  of  this  transformation  is  the  blurring  of  the  distinction  between 
wholesale  and  retail  activities.  Another  is  the  growing  integration  of  domestic  and 
international  payment  flows,  and  efforts  made  to  develop  efficient  cross-border  clearing 
mechanisms.  The  emergence  of  non-banks  in  the  payments  system,  playing  a  prominent 
role 
this 
transformation.  Banks  still  remain  at  the  forefront  of  change,  but  the  speed  at  which  non-
banks advance in these new areas of activity, is a significant threat to banks. This trend is 
now  emerging  in  Sri  Lanka  too  where  non-bank  card  issuing  agencies  have  begun  to 
compete  with  the  banks  in  providing  payment  services.  These  changes  have  prompted 
central  banks,  in  pursuit  of  their  mission  to  ensure  the  smooth  functioning  of  payment 
systems, to establish structured oversight functions to foster the stable, orderly and efficient 
development of this area in the financial system. 
introducing  significant  new  developments, 
further  by-product  of 
is  a 
in 
The public’s preferences and public policy 
6. 
6.1 
In assessing what might drive change and influence outcomes for payment systems, 
we  must  start  by  understanding  the  public  goals.  Regardless  of  the  mechanism  involved, 
people expect the payments system to possess at least three fundamental characteristics. 
First, it must have integrity, i.e. transactions must be safe, reliable, and secure. Second, it 
must be accessible and available to all. Finally, it must be competitive and efficient, i.e. the 
cost  of  making  payments  should  be  affordable.  To  make  an  effective  contribution  to  the 
development  of  payments  &  settlements  and  also  to  increase  trade  and  investment  flows 
nationally and regionally, it is necessary to identify the common themes in the form of public 
policy  goals.  In  this  context,  the  central  banks  are  called  upon  to  take  certain  minimum 
actions to further these goals.  
6.2 
However,  the  manner  and  intensity  of  the  current  involvement  of  central  banks  in 
payment systems development differ from one country to another. The roots of each central 
bank’s specific pattern of involvement lie in the different institutional structures and traditions 
of  each  country.  The  central  banks may  accordingly  decide  on  appropriate  action, beyond 
the minimum, which depends on the national and institutional background.  
7. 
Importance of regional efforts 
7.1 
By  and  large,  central  banks  in  the  SAARC  region  and  elsewhere  are  currently 
involved with payment systems in three main ways, namely, in an operational capacity, as 
payments system overseers, or as catalysts or facilitators of market and regulatory evolution. 
7.2 
As all central banks are aware, markets may encounter persistent impediments to 
payment  systems  development  and  may  become  unable  to  produce  efficient  and  safe 
services.  The  existence  of  such  impediments  would  give  rise  to  policy  issues  for  central 
2 
 BIS Review 35/2008
banks, especially due to their responsibility in achieving the core objectives, such as price 
stability  and  financial  system  stability.  These  impediments  can  take  the  form  of  legal  and 
regulatory  inefficiencies,  structural  and  performance  weaknesses  of  the  markets,  the 
outmoded standards and infrastructure used, or the lack of attention by the central banks and 
regulatory  authorities.  While  it  is  important  for  the  national  central  banks  to  address  these 
issues  and  find  remedial  action  early,  given  the  increase  in  trade,  investment  and  cross-
border  financial  flows,  it  is  essential  for  the  region  to  have  a  common  understanding  and 
apply, where possible, common standards.  
7.3 
The  design  of  every  payment  system  requires  a  series  of  trade-offs  between  the 
different  elements  of  its  objectives.  The  precise  outcome  of  these  trade-offs  will  vary, 
because they will be closely based both on national realities and international best practice. 
This emphasizes the need for close and continuous consultation in each country between the 
suppliers  of  payment  services  and  the  central  banks  as  the  overseer  and  regulator  of  the 
systems. The ultimate target of these consultations is to ensure the easy availability in each 
country of a payment system that meets the needs of its users, that enables the suppliers to 
cover  their  costs,  and  that  does  not  absorb  an  excessive  proportion  of  the  national 
resources. That is why many regional payment system development initiatives have sprung 
up over the last few decades. For example, South African Development Community (SADC 
Payments  Initiative  –  1996),  the  Western  Hemisphere  Payments  Initiative  (1999);  the 
Commonwealth  Independent  States  Payments  Initiative  (2004);  and  the  Arab  Payments 
Initiative (2005) are some of the well functioning regional payment Initiatives. The common 
objective  of  all  these  efforts  is  to  identify  possible  measures  for  improving  the  safety, 
efficiency and integrity of the regional payment systems.  
7.4 
The most demanding factor, common to all, is the rapidly changing global payment 
system  infrastructure  that  is  challenging  the  existence  of  domestic  and  regional  payment 
systems,  which  are  lagging  behind.  Given  the  increasing  sophistication  of  cross-border 
transactions, the need to mitigate risks involved in using outmoded infrastructure has to be 
given  priority.  The  SAARC  payment  system  development  strategy  should  therefore  be 
designed to cater not only to the region’s present needs, but also its future demands.  
How does the SAARC Payments Initiative work? 
Let me briefly set out the proposed institutional structure of the SAARC Payments 
8. 
8.1 
Initiative. 
8.2 
By consensus, Hon. Governors of the SAARC central banks requested the Central 
Bank  of  Sri  Lanka  to  take  the  lead  in  this  effort.  We  are  happy  to  be  the  catalyst  and 
promoter,  but  hope  that  at  an  appropriate  time,  this  Initiative  will  be  driven  by  the  other 
SAARC member central banks. In consultation with the SAARC Governors, we have already 
appointed a SAARC Payments Council (SPC), which is composed of the chairpersons of the 
National Payments Councils (NPCs) in each of the SAARC member countries or by senior 
officials appointed by the Governors of central banks in countries which do not have NPCs. 
The  NPCs  or  payments  committees  will  coordinate  and  liaise  with  all  stakeholders  in  the 
payments  area,  in  particular,  banks  and  financial  institutions,  stock  exchanges,  securities 
traders, stock brokers, service providers, regulators and legal professionals.  
8.3 
The  SPC  will  be  reporting  to  the  SAARCFINANCE  Governors  at  their  annual 
general meetings and will obtain general approval for implementation of the road map which 
will  be  discussed  during  the  rest  of  today.  The  SPC  will  be  assisted  by  a  Secretariat  for 
operational matters. For the time being, Mrs Siriwardena, Director/ Payments & Settlements 
of  the  Central  Bank  of  Sri  Lanka,  has  kindly  agreed  to  be  the  Secretary  to  the  SPC.  The 
Secretariat will take the lead to prepare a road map by establishing working/study groups in 
the key areas, in particular, policy and communication, infrastructure, research and statistical 
analysis and legal and regulatory framework.  
BIS Review 35/2008 
 3
The advisory role played by the international standard setters and other agencies on 
8.4 
regional payment initiatives has been important. In this regard, the Committee on Payment 
and Settlement Systems (CPSS) in the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), which is the 
standard  setter  for  payment  system  development  on  a  global  basis,  has  intimated  its 
willingness to provide technical assistance and guidance to the SAARC Payments Initiative. 
Similarly, we are informed that the World Bank is also willing to provide technical assistance 
and  advice  to  enable  the  SAARC  Payments  Initiative  to  start  off  on  a  sound  footing.  The 
presence  of  some  distinguished  officials  from  the  World  Bank  at  this  inauguration  is  an 
encouragement.  
8.5 
The SAARC member central banks should be happy to have been able to get the 
SAARC  Payments  Initiative  off  the  ground  within  such  a  short  period  of  time.  Given  the 
enthusiasm and commitment by all of us, I hope that we, as a regional group, will make a 
substantial contribution to trade, investment and economic activity of each of our countries 
and also the region, as a whole. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 35/2008
