Jean Claude-Trichet: Hearing before the Economic and Monetary Affairs 
Committee of the European Parliament 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  before  the 
Economic  and  Monetary  Affairs  Committee  of 
the  European  Parliament,  Brussels, 
10 September 2008. 
 les  membres  de 
la  Présidente,  Mesdames  et  Messieurs 
Madame 
la  Commission 
Economique  et  Monétaire,  je  me  réjouis  de  ce  troisième  échange  de  vues  avec  votre 
commission au cours de cette année. Je commencerai mon intervention par une évaluation 
de  la  situation  économique  et  monétaire,  en  expliquant  les  raisons  sous-jacentes  à  nos 
récentes  décisions  de  taux.  Je  me  pencherai  ensuite  sur  les  développements  sur  les 
marchés  financiers  en  vous  donnant  de  plus  amples  informations  sur  les  opérations  de 
politique  monétaire  que  la  BCE  a  menées  face  aux  tensions  demeurant  sur  le  marché 
monétaire.  Des  Weiteren  freue  ich  mich  das  von  Ihnen  aufgeworfene  Thema  der 
Interdependenz  zwischen  den  Vereinigten  Staaten  von  Amerika  und  der  Eurozone  zu 
erörtern. Zudem möchte ich näher auf die Entwicklung der Wettbewerbsfähigkeit innerhalb 
der Eurozone eingehen. Abschließend erfolgt ein Inflationsausblick auch im Hinblick auf Ihre 
Frage, ob eine Phase höherer Preissteigerungsraten vor uns liegen könnte. 
Economic and monetary developments 
Since my previous appearance before the European Parliament on 9 July when I presented 
the ECB’s Annual Report for 2007, annual inflation rates have remained at high levels well 
above  those  consistent  with  price  stability.  This  is  mainly  the  result  of  both  the  direct  and 
indirect  effects  of  past  surges  in  international  energy  and  food  prices.  In  addition,  upside 
risks to price stability over the medium term have continued to prevail in a context where the 
underlying pace of monetary expansion continues to be strong. Looking ahead, inflation in 
the euro area is likely to remain high for quite some time, moderating only gradually during 
the course of 2009. 
According  to  the  latest  ECB  staff  projections  the  average  annual  inflation  rate  is  foreseen 
between 3.4% and 3.6% in 2008 and between 2.3% and 2.9% in 2009.  
It is the Governing Council’s view that the risks to this outlook are on the upside. In particular, 
there is a very strong concern in the Governing Council that higher energy and food prices 
may lead to the emergence of broad-based second-round effects in price and wage setting, 
which in turn could add significantly to inflationary pressures. All parties concerned are called 
upon  to  contribute  to  avoiding  broad-based  second-round  effects,  as  this  is  essential  to 
ensure  that  longer-term  inflation  expectations  remain  firmly  anchored  in  line  with  price 
stability. In this context, the Governing Council is concerned about the existence of nominal 
wage  indexation  schemes,  as  they  involve  the  risk  of  triggering  an  inflationary  wage-price 
spiral. The Governing Council calls for these schemes to be abolished. 
Turning to economic activity, in the second quarter of 2008, real GDP contracted by 0.2% 
quarter on quarter. This reflects partly an expected technical reaction to the strong quarterly 
growth  of  0.7%  in  the  first  quarter.  It  also  reflects  dampening  effects  from  global  and 
domestic factors, including high commodity prices and weaker investment growth in the euro 
area. The current episode of weak economic growth is expected to be followed by a gradual 
recovery.  In  particular,  if  persistent,  the  fall  in  oil  prices  from  their  peak  in  July  will  help 
strengthen  real  disposable  income,  with  the  level  of  employment  remaining  high  and  the 
unemployment  rate  low  by  historical  standards.  Moreover,  euro  area  activity  should  be 
BIS Review 107/2008 
 1
supported  by  relatively  resilient  world  growth,  benefiting  mainly  from  sustained  growth  in 
emerging economies. 
According to the latest ECB staff projections the average annual real GDP growth is foreseen 
in a range between 1.1% and 1.7% in 2008 and between 0.6% and 1.8% in 2009. 
In the view of the Governing Council, uncertainty surrounding growth prospects is particularly 
high  at  the  current  juncture,  with  downside  risks  mainly  relating  to  renewed  increases  in 
energy  and  food  prices  and  a  potentially  more  negative  impact  of  financial  market 
developments than currently foreseen. 
The  monetary  analysis  confirms  the  prevailing  upside  risks  to  price  stability  at  medium  to 
longer horizons. While money and credit growth are now showing some signs of moderation, 
the  still  strong  underlying  pace  points  to  continued  upside  risks  to  price  stability  over  the 
medium term. In addition, available data suggest that the ongoing financial tensions have, as 
yet, not significantly affected the availability of bank credit. 
In  accordance  with  its  mandate,  the  Governing  Council  is  resolute  in  its  determination  to 
keep medium and long-term inflation expectations firmly anchored in line with price stability. 
This will preserve purchasing power in the medium term and support sustainable economic 
growth  and  employment.  It  is  against  this  background  that  the  Governing  Council  on  4 
September  decided  to  leave  the  key  ECB  interest  rates  unchanged.  On  the  basis  of  its 
assessment,  the  Governing  Council  believes  that  the  current  monetary  policy  stance  will 
contribute  to  achieving  the  objective  of  price  stability  over  the  medium  term.  Indeed,  the 
Governing Council will continue to monitor very closely all developments.  
Financial stability situation and overview of the ECB’s recent monetary policy 
operations 
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  developments  as  regards  financial  stability.  Recent  developments 
suggest  that  the  balance  of  risks  in  the  ECB  financial  stability  assessment  remains  tilted 
towards  the  downside.  This  is  because  the  persistent,  although  moderating,  decline  in  US 
house prices is leading to a rise in loan delinquencies and losses, and commensurate further 
declines in mortgage backed securities prices. Also in the euro area, economic growth has 
slowed  down  and  credit  risks  could  have  increased  in  some  housing  markets  and  related 
corporate sector loans. At the same time, however, there is little evidence to suggest that the 
availability  of  bank  credit  in  the  euro  area,  as  a  whole,  has  been  until  now  significantly 
affected by the financial market tensions. 
That said, as we already emphasised, the persistence of the financial market tensions may 
have  made  the financial system more vulnerable to the crystallisation of other pre-existing 
risks.  These  include  the  possibility  of  a  more  broad-based  turn  in  the  global  credit  cycle, 
disorderly developments owing to global imbalances, and the financial stability implications of 
volatile energy prices.  
More  generally,  the  outlook  for  euro  area  and  global  financial  stability  will  increasingly 
depend on the interaction between macroeconomic developments and the financial system, 
and  on  how  banks  respond  to  a  challenging  operating  environment.  The  financial  market 
correction  could  be  gradually  changing  its  nature  and  scope  and  evolve  into  a  more 
traditional credit-cycle downturn. In such circumstances, it is more likely that the adjustment 
process  will  not  abate  as  key  participants  in  the  financial  system  continue  their  efforts  to 
strengthen  their  liquidity  and  capital  positions.  In  an  environment  where  balance  sheet 
conditions change unexpectedly, there is no room for complacency.  
In the last three months, the ECB continued to apply three measures it had used so far since 
the start of the financial market turbulences, with a view to further steering very short term 
money market rates close to the minimum bid rate and also to alleviate tensions in the euro 
money market. 
2 
 BIS Review 107/2008
First,  the  ECB  continued  to  frontload  the  supply  of  liquidity  over  the  reserve  maintenance 
periods.  This  was  achieved  by  increasing  the  allotment  amounts  in  main  refinancing 
operations (MROs) at the beginning of the maintenance period while reducing them towards 
the  end  of  the  maintenance  period  so  that  the  average  supply  of  liquidity  remained 
unchanged over the entire maintenance period. 
Second, the ECB maintained the increased share of longer-term refinancing operations vis-
à-vis the share of main refinancing operations, which it had gradually built up since the start 
of the turbulences. Moreover, on 4 September, the ECB decided to renew the supplementary 
three and six month longer-term refinancing operations that will mature before the end of the 
year. This will allow the euro area banks to better plan their liquidity management over the 
turn of the year. 
Third, the ECB continued to conduct USD term auction facilities (TAF) in cooperation with the 
US  Fed  and  other  central  banks.  Accordingly,  it  provided  US  dollar  liquidity  to  euro  area 
banks, secured with Eurosystem eligible collateral. This measure was adjusted in the period 
under  review.  Indeed,  in  August  2008,  an  84-day  TAF  was  introduced  to  supplement  the 
already  existent  28-day  TAF,  however  without  thereby  increasing  the  total  outstanding 
amount of TAF operations. 
The Eurosystem’s collateral framework has proven robust and efficient over the years, and 
during the recent episode of financial market turbulence. In particular, the acceptance of a 
wide range of collateral contributes to the resilience of euro area financial markets. 
While fully preserving this feature, the ECB has – following its biennial review – incorporated 
some  technical  refinements  in  its  risk  control  framework  for  Eurosystem  credit  operations. 
These technical refinements, which were published on 4 September 2008, reflect, inter alia, 
improvements in the methodological framework, the assessment of market and liquidity risk 
characteristics of eligible assets, the actual use of eligible assets by counterparties and new 
developments  in  financial  instruments.  All  of  these  refinements  will  enter  into  force  on  1 
February 2009. 
In  concrete,  these  measures  include  the  application  of  new  valuation  haircuts  for  asset-
backed securities (ABS) and uncovered bank bonds and the application of a haircut add-on 
for  ABS  without  a  market  price.  Furthermore,  the  existing  “close  link  rules”  for  the  use  of 
eligible  assets  were  refined.  As  regards  the  credit  assessment  of  eligible  assets,  the 
Eurosystem introduced rating disclosure standards applicable to rating agencies. Finally, it 
was recalled that the Eurosystem has the right and obligation to react to practices that lead 
to an inadequate risk protection for the Eurosystem.  
The overall impact of the new haircuts for unsecured bank bonds and ABS on the availability 
of collateral is not expected to impair the ability of banks to participate in Eurosystem credit 
operations. 
US-euro area interdependence 
Let me now address the issue of interdependence between monetary policy conduct on both 
sides of the Atlantic. In considering such interdependence, it should be clear from the outset 
that  both  the  ECB  and  the  US  Federal  Reserve  conduct  monetary  policy  with  a  view  to 
achieving the domestic objectives that have been assigned to them. 
The single monetary policy was given the task of maintaining price stability in the euro area 
and  was  assigned  to  the  ECB  as  an  independent,  supranational  institution.  I  would  like  to 
stress that public pronouncements made by the US Federal Reserve are pointing out as we 
do ourselves that the delivery of price stability over the medium term is the best contribution 
that monetary policy can make to sustainable economic growth, job creation and prosperity. 
The Governing Council of the ECB – as the Open Market Committee does on the other side 
of the Atlantic – takes decisions independently, on the basis of its monetary policy strategy, 
BIS Review 107/2008 
 3
taking into account the structural features of its economy and the nature and amplitude of the 
economic  shocks  it  has  to  cope  with,  and  after  careful  assessment  of  the  risks  to  price 
stability in its economy. 
Of course, it is important for a stability-oriented monetary policy to analyse developments in 
external  prices,  in  international  trade  and  financial  flows as  well  as  the  spillovers  of  policy 
actions  around  the  globe.  Central  Banks  have  to  take  into  account  the  multiple  channels 
through which the major economies of the world are in close relationship, thus constituting a 
global  economy.  In  that  sense,  it  is  very  important  for  central  banks  to  ensure  that  they 
exchange pertinent information.  
As I already mentioned before, central bank staff and Governors of industrialised countries 
as well as of emerging countries meet every two months under the auspices of the Bank for 
International  Settlements  in  Basel.  Presently,  I  happen  to  be  the  Chairman  of  the  Global 
Economy Meeting and I can tell you that this meeting in particular is important for all central 
banks. In a very frank and direct fashion and with a high degree of mutual confidence we 
compare  notes,  exchange  all  necessary  information  so  as  to  be  duly  enlightened  on  the 
analysis and diagnosis that other central banks are making of their own domestic economies 
and on their perception of the global issues.  
Against  the  backdrop  of  the  serious  market  correction  recorded  since  summer  2007, 
monetary authorities on both sides of the Atlantic have been cooperating to help ensuring a 
smoother  functioning  of  inter-bank  markets  and  help  alleviating  liquidity  drying  up  in  some 
market segments.  
Intra-euro area competitiveness developments 
Persistent inflation and wage growth differentials may occur in a monetary union, determined 
by catching-up processes and/or by sustainable trend differentials in potential growth across 
countries.  However,  if  induced  by  structural  inefficiencies,  misaligned  national  policies 
including  wage-setting  policies  or  overly  optimistic  expectations,  such  differentials  may  be 
worrisome  and  may  have  important  adverse  implications  for  cost  competitiveness  of 
individual countries in the euro area. As national monetary and exchange rate policies are no 
longer  available  options  within  the  euro  area,  it  is  important  to  ensure  that  the  remaining 
mechanisms of adjustment to shocks function properly and that the build-up of imbalances is 
avoided. 
Rigidities  in  price  and  wage-setting  mechanisms  or  ongoing  excessive  price  and  wage 
developments may delay the necessary adjustments of relative prices to economic shocks 
and give rise to a prolonged period of relatively high inflation in some countries. This, in turn, 
could contribute to losses in price and cost competitiveness and an accumulation of internal 
imbalances within the euro area, which could also dampen output and employment. When 
looking at unit labour costs, it is also noticeable that a number of euro area countries which 
experienced significant increases in unit labour costs since their entry into the euro area, also 
show relatively high current account deficits. 
National authorities have an important responsibility to contribute to moderate price and unit 
labour  costs  developments.  It  should  in  particular  be  avoided  that  public  wage-setting 
contributes to strong overall unit labour costs growth. As high unit labour costs growth may 
also reflect an overheating of the economy, the avoidance of a pro-cyclical fiscal stance is 
particularly important. Furthermore, a key issue is the capacity of goods and labour markets 
to  adjust.  Therefore,  wage  agreements 
the 
competitiveness position, and need to take into account the still high level of unemployment 
in  many  economies  as  well  as  the  sector  specific  productivity  developments.  Finally,  the 
efficient and smooth functioning of economic adjustments within the euro area requires the 
completion of the Single Market and thus greater domestic and cross-border competition. 
in  particular  should  generally  reflect 
 4 
 BIS Review 107/2008
Let  me  conclude  by  briefly  addressing  the  Committee’s  concern  over  whether  we  are 
experiencing a new and lasting upward shift in inflation. The central bank is precisely there to 
prevent such a lasting shift and to deliver price stability over the medium term. On the basis 
of  the  assessment  of  the  Governing  Council  the  current  monetary  policy  stance  will 
contribute  to  achieving  this  objective.  The  Governing  Council  remains  resolute  in  its 
determination to keep inflation expectations solidly anchored in line with price stability. At the 
same time, upside risks to price stability over the medium term, in particular those stemming 
from second-round effects in price and wage setting, prevail. In this context, in order to avoid 
that the current high inflation rates become entrenched in expectations, it is of the essence 
that all relevant parties – price setters and social partners – meet their responsibilities. As 
emphasised,  it  is  also  important  that  indexation  schemes  are  abolished.  This  would 
strengthen the resilience of growth and employment creation of the euro area economy with 
regard to the current adverse developments we have to confront. 
BIS Review 107/2008 
 5
