Savenaca Narube: Microfinance, the economy and challenges in Fiji 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Savenaca  Narube,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji,  at  the 
National Micro, Small & Medium Enterprise (MSME) Forum, Lami, Suva, 22 May 2008. 
 Ms. Banuve Kaumaitotoya, Permanent Secretary for Industry, Tourism, Trade & 
Communications; 
Mr. Josefa Serulagilagi, Chairman, National Centre for Small & Micro Enterprise 
Development Board (and other Board members); 
Mr. Savenaca Nacanaitaba, CEO, National Centre 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Introductory comments 
It  is  indeed  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  participate  in  today’s  Forum.  At  the  outset,  let  me 
commend the National Centre for Small and Micro Enterprise Development for holding such 
an important National Forum and for looking at such a critical issue as a National Strategy for 
growing sustainable Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises, or MSMEs. There is no doubt of the 
need for such a strategy. Today’s forum is a very important means to again emphasise to the 
public  the  huge  contribution  MSMEs  make,  or  can  make,  towards  Fiji’s  economy  and 
prospects. Such a forum also allows us to put together ideas on how best we can promote 
the development of such an important sector of our country. 
I became closely involved in microfinance many years ago. We did a lot of preparatory and 
research  work  at  the  Reserve  Bank.  These  ideas  remained  with  me  when  I  moved  to  the 
Ministry of Finance where we convened the first National Conference on Microfinance. This 
led to the establishment of the Microfinance Unit at the Ministry of Finance which was the 
forerunner of the National Centre. 
The unit was guided by an Advisory Board made up of mostly practitioners in the field and 
the private sector. Our major objective was to develop a microfinance model that could be 
easily replicated across the country. One of the key issues that we had to answer was: What 
is the role of Government? Should it or its agency actually lend money directly to borrowers? 
Most of us felt that Government should resist this temptation and go through microfinance 
institutions or MFIs. I still prescribe to this view because MFIs are on the ground and know 
their customers. Governments seldom do. 
When news of the establishment of this Microfinance Unit spread, I began to notice long lines 
outside  their  office.  Rather  unpleasantly  we  had  to  correct  to  them  the  misconception  and 
that  “No  it’s  not  a  grant,  but  a  loan”.  And  not  only  that,  the  interest  rate  would  be  market 
based. 
With enthusiasm we allocated $3 million to this Unit. Unfortunately we only disbursed less 
than $300,000 in that year. Of course a lot of water has gone under the bridge since then. 
Today we are covering more than microfinance, incorporating the whole MSMEs. But more 
of that later. 
The current state of the economy and challenges 
Let me now turn first to the focus of today’s forum, in the context of the economy. I am sure 
no  one  can  disagree  that  fostering  the  development  of  MSMEs  is  critical  to  boost  growth, 
reduce  unemployment  and  raise  the  living  standards  of  our  people.  The  potential  here  is 
huge, and this is even more vital for our economy at this critical point in time. 
BIS Review 68/2008 
 1
Last year the economy is expected to have contracted by 4.4%, investment fell, companies 
have closed down (I’m sure they were more in the small and micro enterprise category, or 
SMEs),  jobs  have  been  lost  and  business  and  consumer  sentiment  and  confidence  has 
been, and remains, weak. 
Low growth rate 
One  of  our  major  problems  is  that  our  growth  rate  has  been  too  low.  Even  excluding  last 
year’s contraction, our growth rate has averaged only 2.8 percent over the previous years. 
Looking  ahead,  over  the  next  three  years,  although  the  economy  is  forecast  to  grow,  this 
growth is expected to be modest, averaging only 1.5 percent. I think it is obvious to all of us 
that we need to do more; for one thing it is insufficient to absorb many of our school leavers, 
which means a rise in unemployment. 
I have highlighted this in several past speeches but I feel it is important to do so again: with a 
growth rate this low, we will double the size of our economy in about 50 years – that is half a 
century!; for some, it is a lifetime! However, if we could lift our growth rate to, say, 5 percent 
per year, we would double our economy in less than 20 years. If growth was even higher, 
say 8 percent per year, we would double in only 12 years. I think this example speaks for 
itself. 
The question then, is, “What should we do to fix this? How can we grow better? How can we 
grow faster?” Obviously in order to grow faster we need to do many things, some of which 
are quite challenging to do, but we need to get started. I will highlight the two that I think are 
the most important. 
We must raise investment 
Firstly, we need to raise investment to over 25 percent of GDP. Unfortunately this ratio has 
fallen from around 18% of GDP in 2006 to around 15% last year, and there is little sign of a 
pickup so far. We need to turn this around. Attracting foreign investment is not easy for small 
nations like Fiji. Other countries, many of which are bigger and richer are competing fiercely 
to entice the same investment dollar that we are chasing. We are basically up against strong 
competition. We are the “small fish” in a very big sea. This makes our task even harder. 
Let me clarify here that the credit ceiling that the Reserve Bank has imposed on commercial 
bank credit is not constraining investment. Commercial banks can seek approval on lending 
in excess of their ceilings for priority sectors, particularly investment and SMEs. 
Exports must drive growth 
Secondly, exports must be the key driver of growth. I am sure that we are all aware that our 
exports are not doing well. Sugar, garments and gold have declined substantially from earlier 
peaks  by  a  collective  $400  million.  It  is  therefore  encouraging  that  gold  production  has 
recommenced.  This  will  support  growth  into  the  medium  term.  I  am  optimistic  that  the 
reforms in the sugar industry will lift sugarcane production and boost Fiji’s sugar exports in 
the  future.  I  am  also  hopeful  that  the  various  measures  that  Government  intends  to 
implement, identified out of the national export strategy, will further help in this regard and 
bring  about  the  desired  results  of  higher  exports  in  these  areas.  It  is  important  that  these 
measures are vigorously pursued. 
Wide trade deficit 
While there may be a few encouraging signs on the exports side, we cannot escape from the 
fact that our trade gap is too big. A large part of this is due to our huge imports bill, fuelled by 
the high oil prices, and more recently by high food prices. While we need our economy to be 
exports driven, at the same time we must reduce our huge imports bill, underpinned by the 
2 
 BIS Review 68/2008
strong credit growth of recent years. Added to this, Fiji’s preferential market access is slowly 
but surely being eroded, further imposing pressures on our balance of payments. 
At  the  Reserve  Bank  we  have  been  tightening  monetary  policy  since  2004  to  rein  in  this 
credit  growth  in  recent  years,  in  order  to  bring  down  the  huge  growth  in  imports.  Our 
assessment has been that this has been successful with imports (excluding aircraft) falling by 
over  7  percent  last  year,  although  of  course  some  of  this  is  likely  to  be  also  due  to  the 
weaker economy. 
As around one-third of our imports bill is oil imports, it is clear that our efforts in exploring 
alternative  sources  of  fuel  must  be  progressed.  We  must  invest  in  renewable  energy  and 
ethanol production in order to bring down Fiji’s heavy dependence on imported oil and fuels, 
in the future. 
The potential for micro, small & medium enterprises 
The picture I have painted is not too bright, but the good news is that our MSMEs can help 
us address the challenges that I have just mentioned. 
Raise growth 
MSMEs  can  raise  economic  growth.  While  the  contribution  that  medium  sized  enterprises 
play in our economy is easy to recognize, I think that our small and micro enterprises, our 
SMEs, don’t get the recognition they deserve. But they, along with medium sized businesses, 
are critical to achieving our growth potential. In developing countries in Asia, SMEs make up 
the bulk of their economies, some as high as 60 percent of GDP. In Fiji, however, this sector 
is still largely untapped; they probably make up only about 10 percent of our economy. The 
potential for us in these small businesses is therefore huge. 
Raise exports/investment 
Small businesses do not always stay small; they grow. Many of our now large companies like 
Tappoos,  Motibhais  and  many  others  were  once  SMEs.  I  am  confident  that  as  our  small 
businesses grow they can help raise exports and investment in Fiji. They can also help in 
import-substitution by providing some of the products that we currently import, such as fruits 
and  vegetables.  What  we  need  is  a  strategy  that  coordinates  domestic  supply  of  these 
goods. This will go a long way to reducing our imports bill and bringing down the trade gap. 
Create employment 
Small businesses are the answer to our unemployment problem. Our formal sector cannot 
absorb all our school leavers – this is the same in all developing countries. The employment 
growth  required  for  our  future  can  come  from  the  small  business  sector.  Rough  estimates 
suggest that close to 60 percent of Fiji’s labor force is involved in various forms of business 
that fall under the heading of SMEs. 
Combat poverty 
SMEs  are  also  a  way  to  combat  poverty  and  can  help  us  achieve  our  Millennium 
Development Goals. SMEs allow people to help themselves rise above poverty, by supplying 
the means to provide for basic needs such as education, food, shelter and clothing. SMEs 
give people the dignity of working for a living. 
BIS Review 68/2008 
 3
Theme: towards a national strategy for growing sustainable MSMEs 
Promoting the development of MSMEs is vital to raise our future prospects and our standard 
of living. That is why forums such as this one today are so critical. Not only must we come 
together to discuss, share ideas, brain-storm and strategize ways to foster this development 
but we must also make the public in general fully aware of the importance of this sector and 
of their potential and needs. I am pleased to note that the objectives of the forum seek to 
address this. 
I  am  also  pleased  to  note  that  the  National  Centre  intends  for  the  forum  to  cover  issues 
under  the  topics  of  financing,  entrepreneurship,  environment  and  exports  as  these  are  all 
very important issues as regards MSMEs. Let me now say a few words on environment. 
Right environment is critical 
I think it is clearly obvious to us all how critical it is to have in place the right environment, to 
allow the MSME sectors to grow. This environment must be created with sound policies and 
appropriate infrastructure and support services. It must be stable – politically, economically 
and socially. 
As  we  have  observed,  if  the  environment  is  not  conducive  it  scares  away  visitors,  scares 
away investors, and businesses are amongst the first to feel the negative repercussions. 
The phrase that we are a part of the “Global Village” remains highly applicable for us; if we 
don’t have the right environment in place, if we don’t nurture and feed such an environment, 
then we are swimming against the tide. If we don’t have the right environment in place, there 
are so many other countries that tourists and holiday-makers can go to instead of Fiji, and 
that  investors  can  put  their  money  into  just  as  readily,  if  not  easily,  than  in  Fiji.  We  are 
already offering all kinds of enticements to lure tourists and investors to our shores: reduced 
hotel rates and airfares, tax breaks of various kinds for investors and so on. But these types 
of “carrots” won’t be effective if the environment is unstable. 
Let me highlight other constraints that may be impeding the growth of MSMEs in Fiji. 
Areas that need addressing 
Statistics 
The  first  is  the  lack  of  data  or  statistics  on  MSMEs.  You  heard  me  earlier  say  “SMEs 
probably make up only about 10 percent of our economy” and that “Rough estimates suggest 
that close to 60 percent of Fiji’s labor force is involved in various forms of business that fall 
under the heading of SMEs”. These statements show that we critically need data. We need 
to  know  more  about  these  sectors  if  we  want  to  plan  for  them,  rather  than  using  rough 
estimates and best guesses. 
We need to know for example how much of our economy is made up of the SMEs sector, we 
should  know  how  much  is  made  up  of  medium  sized  businesses.  We  need  to  know  how 
many people are employed by the various business-size categories and statistics on loans to 
the  various  categories  of  business-size,  just  to  name  a  few,  if  we  want  to  have  proper, 
effective  and  informed  planning,  decision  and  policy  making  to  promote  growth  of  these 
sectors.  This  could  be  a  role  for  the  National  Centre  or  perhaps  the  Bureau  of  Statistics. 
Having  such  a  statistical  database  is  critical  in  order  to  do  any  type  of  planning  at  all  in 
regards to these sectors. This will therefore be a necessary input to any national strategy for 
MSMEs, and I hope that it will be an issue that will come up in your discussions. 
At the Reserve Bank we are doing our part to collect statistics on bank loans. Since 2006, we 
have required commercial banks, credit institutions and the Fiji Development Bank to provide 
4 
 BIS Review 68/2008
us with data on how much is being lent to micro enterprises, to small businesses, to medium 
sized businesses and so on. 
Access to finance 
Another  key  issue  on  MSMEs  is  access  to  finance.  Is  access  to  finance  a  problem  for 
MSMEs?  I  think  it  is,  probably  more  so  for  small  and  micro  businesses  than  perhaps  for 
medium sized ones. If so, then we must identify and implement ways to extend this access to 
financial  services  to  small  and  micro  enterprises.  We  welcome  the  announcements  by 
several commercial banks that they are putting greater attention in this area. 
I am informed that the lending budget for the National Centre is usually not depleted. Does 
this imply that access to finance may not be the real issue? Perhaps it is the business line or 
the business structure that is the binding constraint. We obviously need to identify this and 
find the appropriate solutions. 
I am pleased that the provision of rural banking services has been progressing well. This has 
been  an  initiative  that  the  RBF  has  been  actively  encouraging.  While  much  of  the  early 
business  in this  regard  focused  on savings,  this  has  now progressed to  small  loans  being 
given  out.  I  commend  the  efforts  of  the  bank  that  has  been  actively  going  out  to the  rural 
areas  and  outer  lying  islands  to  provide  this  service.  Rural  banking  will  be  an  excellent 
means  for  financial  literacy  outreach  and  education,  as  well  as  a  strong  medium  for  the 
delivery of credit for the development of SME activities and for promoting a savings culture. 
The  cost  of  this  access  to  finance  can  also  be  a  factor.  Creditworthiness  of  enterprises  is 
definitely an issue for financiers. So what can we do to help our SMEs be in a position to be 
eligible for loans? This is a tricky one to address and opens up the third issue, which may 
help in some way. 
Training and education 
This is the issue of training and education or of financial literacy in general; another key area. 
SME  entrepreneurs  need  a  lot  of  training,  for  example  in  basic  book-keeping,  marketing, 
business planning, feasibility assessments, even on how to fill in the many forms that may be 
necessary  or  provide  the  many,  sometimes  relatively  complex,  details  needed  in  loan 
applications. 
Again, here, the Reserve Bank has tried to do its part. We have discussed with commercial 
banks how we might work together to help small businesses, or to help the National Centre 
in its training programmes. We will continue to talk with the National Centre to see how the 
Reserve  Bank  can  be  of  help.  I  think  in  moving  towards  a  national  strategy  for  growing 
sustainable  MSMEs  –  which  is  the  theme  of  today’s  workshop  –  this  will  have  to  be  an 
integral part: How can this basic training be provided? What other training would be needed 
at the different stages of the “life” of SMEs? and so forth. 
I think also that in terms of training and education, the scope needs to be much broader to 
include financial literacy where we need to develop an enterprise culture, and this needs to 
begin at an early age; perhaps as part of curriculum in our schools. We need to incorporate 
entrepreneurship courses the earlier the better. 
Another key to the success of SMEs is the MFIs themselves – the third leg of this stool. 
While the commercial banks are fully established and regulated, other MFIs are not. It seems 
to me that we need to focus equally on these MFIs as we do the ultimate customers. Are 
these  MFIs  efficient?  Is  their  governance  transparent  and  effective?  Do  they  have  the 
capacity  and  the  training?  These  are  questions  that  I  trust  will  be  discussed  in  this  forum 
today. 
BIS Review 68/2008 
 5
Remittances 
And then, lastly, another issue is that of remittances. Personal remittances from abroad have 
risen  very  fast,  growing  from  around  $50  million  in  1999  to  around  $322  million  in  2006. 
Although  remittances  fell  last  year, to  around  $256  million,  it continues  to  be  an important 
source of income in Fiji. The question, though, is, “What are these remittances being used 
for?  What  are  they  spent  on?”  I  hope  that  they  are  not  just  being  used  only  for  everyday 
consumption. These remittances need to be spent in a more useful manner, for example they 
can be used to start up small businesses, which would provide an income stream in the long 
term,  thereby  lengthening  the  benefits.  We  are  examining  ways  in  which  we  can  set  up 
financial facilities to support a more productive use of these remittances. Charges are also 
important  in  encouraging  remittances  and  I  encourage  everyone,  particularly  financial 
institutions, to work with us to reduce these charges. 
The way forward 
Let me conclude on two practical notes. First, do we need to re-examine the model of our 
delivery of SMEs in all its phases? Is the structure appropriate? Is the level of Government 
involvement relevant? Can we identify how we can roll out SMEs quickly across the country? 
Second, this forum is not the first to discuss SMEs. Nor will it be the last. While developing a 
plan  is  essential,  it  is  not  sufficient.  We  must  put  the  plan  to  work.  Based  on  experience, 
unfortunately,  we  spend  too  much  time  planning  and  not  enough  time  executing  them.  I 
therefore hope that this forum will lead to some action with definite time frames. 
For such action to happen we need a few things. The first is a Vision and I have a sense that 
we  have  this  already.  Perhaps  it  needs  clarity  with  some  clear  targets.  The  second  is 
commitment or passion. I want to believe that we who are here today have this commitment 
– that is why we are here in the first place. The third is resources and capacity. I hope that 
the National Centre is fully resourced to carry out our plan. The final issue is our combined 
support.  We  can  make  a  difference.  We  play  different  roles  in  support  of  SMEs.  The 
commercial banks and the FDB have a lending role. The Government has an important role 
in  building  and  maintaining  an  enabling  environment  and  a  support  structure.  The  private 
sector can help in mentoring and advice. We in the RBF also play a part. I am confident that 
if we make a clear pledge today that we will pull together in support of SMEs, we will see 
significant differences in the next few years – for the betterment of everyone in Fiji. 
Finally, I note some very interesting topics in the sessions you will be having today, and a 
very impressive lineup of speakers – I wish you well in these deliberations. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS Review 68/2008
