Shamshad Akhtar: Corporate governance for banks 
Speech  by  Dr  Shamshad  Akhtar,  Governor  of  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan,  at  the  IBP 
Convocation, Lahore, 13 March 2008. 
 This  morning  I  propose  to  share  with  you  my  thoughts  on  the  topical  issue  of  “Corporate 
Governance  for  Banks”.  Corporate  governance  revolves  around  the  basic  principles  of 
fairness,  transparency  and  accountability.  Contrary  to  the  perception  of  many,  good 
governance is not a new phenomenon – the concept of well governed companies has been 
there  ever  since  formal  businesses  took  over  the  barter  trading  system.  “Corporate 
Governance”  received  fresh  impetus  and  widespread  recognition  during  the  1990s  with 
launching  of  the  Cadbury  Report  in  the  UK  and  prognosis  of  East  Asian  Crisis  of  the  late 
1990s and a series of corporate scandals in West including the Enron Scandals. Together 
the loss of investor confidence and economy generated by the corporate failures brought to 
forefront  the  significance  of  corporate  governance.  Global  and  regional  debates  and 
initiatives  have  helped  promote  greater  fairness,  transparency  and  accountability,  though 
there  remains  scope  for  still  better  understanding  of  its  dimensions  and  effective 
implementation.  
Corporate governance is critical to improving economic efficiency and growth. It serves as a 
deterrent to mismanagement and infuses discipline in the decision making process of boards 
of  directors.  Adherence  to  the  principles  of  good  corporate  governance  serves  to  foster 
investor confidence and attract domestic as well as foreign investors. Companies operating 
on  the  principles  of  good  corporate  governance  are  able  to  attract  investment.  A  study 
conducted by McKinsey quarterly indicated that investors would be willing to pay as much as 
30 percent more for shares in companies having effective corporate governance. A number 
of  surveys  of  investors  in  Europe  and  the  US  support  the  same  findings  and  show  that 
investors eventually reduce their investments in a company that practices poor governance.  
Why corporate governance matters for banks? 
The  need  for  corporate  governance  in  Pakistan  is  unmistakable.  The  country  has  steadily 
responded  to  the  corporate  governance  challenges  and  progress  in  the  banking  sector  is 
particularly impressive. Before we consider the corporate governance reforms for banks and 
the  outstanding  agenda,  let  us  first  explore  why  corporate  governance  matters  for  the 
banking system!  
Most  importantly,  the  financial  system  in  Pakistan  continues  to  be  predominantly  bank-
based, with bank assets to GDP ratio of 58.8 percent for 2007. Good corporate governance 
for  banks,  therefore,  becomes  critical  in  ensuring  solvency  and  stability  of  the  financial 
system  as  effectively  governed  banks  are  more  efficient  and  prudent  in  directing  their 
resources. 
Secondly, banks are highly-leveraged: they lend money borrowed from depositors and must 
therefore be accountable to these depositors. The corporate governance framework should, 
therefore, ensure aligning the interests of the management with equity and debt holders. The 
corporate governance of banks is intricately tied to the corporate governance of firms with 
former  enforcing  discipline  through  proper  due  diligence  of  conduct  of  corporate  and  their 
financial, while proper governance at corporate level help in safeguarding bank’s interests. 
Thirdly,  ownership  and  group  structure  of  banks  in  Pakistan  is  highly  varied.  The  banking 
sector  comprises  of  foreign-controlled,  family-owned  and  some  state-owned  banks,  with 
each type of ownership structure posing its peculiar governance challenges. Moreover, some 
banks  operate  as  part  of  industrial/commercial  groups  while  a  large  number  of  them  have 
BIS Review 33/2008 
 1
exposure to the non-bank financial sector through ownership and control. In such a scenario, 
transparency  and  fairness  in  banks’  lending  and  investment  decisions,  particularly  those 
concerning group companies, becomes a crucial requirement.  
Finally, banks need to adopt good governance practices and customer service standards in 
order to build public confidence in credibility of their operations. Banks operate in a highly 
vulnerable environment where bonafide or perceived impression of malpractices in a bank’s 
dealings could trigger a run on its deposits. 
Role of SBP  
SBP  has  been  on  the  forefront  in  promoting  good  corporate  governance  in  the  country. 
Primarily  as  the  regulator  and  supervisor  of  banks  and  DFIs,  SBP  has  a  crucial  role  in 
steering  corporate  governance  reforms  in  the  banking  sector.  In  this  regard,  SBP  has 
implemented a comprehensive corporate governance regime for banks, which is driven by a 
robust  legal  and  regulatory  framework,  risk-based  supervision  and  over-arching  banking 
sector reforms, notably, privatization, liberalization and consolidation of banks.  
The major thrust of legal and regulatory requirements is to strengthen the functioning of the 
Boards of directors of banks. In setting out the responsibilities of the Board, SBP requires 
directors to focus on policy making and general direction, oversight and supervision of the 
business  of  the  bank.  The  directors  are  expected  to  meet  frequently,  set  up  Board 
committees for audit, risk management, recruitment and compensation, and attend training 
programs to help them discharge their role as a director.  
In a recent move, SBP has separated the positions of chairman and CEO of banks and made 
it mandatory on banks to appoint on the Board at least 25% independent directors and not 
more than two executive directors. SBP has also strengthened the fit and proper criteria and 
approves  appointment  of  directors  and  CEO  of  banks  in  line  with  the  criteria.  Banks  must 
also  follow  the  fit  and  proper  criteria  in  appointing  key  executives  although  such 
appointments do not require SBP approval. 
Recognizing the centrality of proper risk management in corporate governance framework, 
SBP has issued guidelines on risk management, internal controls, IT security and business 
continuity planning. Detailed instructions are available in the policy framework for banks. Risk 
management  framework  is  laid  out  in  the  regulatory  requirements  that  check  banks’ 
exposure to group companies and other related parties, restrict exposure to single borrower, 
borrowing  group  or  sector,  as  well  as  limit  banks’  investments  in  equity  market.  Key 
requirements in this regard are:  
(i) 
Shareholding by a bank/DFI in other companies has been restricted to 30 percent of 
the  other  company’s  paid  up  capital  or  30  percent  of  the  paid  up  capital  and 
reserves of the acquiring bank/DFI, whichever is lower. (Section 23 (2) of BCO) 
Banks/DFIs  have  been  restricted  from  taking  unsecured  exposures  on  their 
directors, major shareholders, CEO, their families and firms or companies in which 
such  persons  have  interest.  In  case  a  secured  exposure  is  to  be  taken,  it  shall 
require  prior  approval  of  the  Board  of  directors,  excluding  the  director  concerned, 
and the facility shall be extended by the bank at prevailing terms and conditions, on 
an arm’s length basis.  
Standard limits at 30 percent and 50 percent (including 20 percent and 35 percent 
for  fund  based  exposure)  of  bank’s/DFIs’  equity  apply  on  single  and  group 
exposures, respectively. Furthermore, contingent liabilities of a bank/DFI should not 
exceed 10 times its equity. Likewise, clean lending to single persons is limited to Rs. 
0.5 million while aggregate exposure against all clean facilities should not exceed 
the equity of any bank/DFI. SBP has also specified that banks’/DFIs’ exposure to a 
(ii) 
(iii) 
2 
 BIS Review 33/2008
(iv) 
(v) 
company  cannot  exceed  10  times  of  borrowing  entity’s  equity  and  the  borrower’s 
current ratio cannot be lower than 1:1.  
Banks/DFIs should not invest in shares of any company/scrip in excess of 5 percent 
of their equity. Banks/DFIs will require prior approval from SBP in order to purchase 
shares of a company in excess of 5 percent of their paid-up capital or 10 percent of 
the  capital  of  the  investee  company,  whichever  is  lower.  Furthermore,  aggregate 
investments of banks in shares should not exceed 20 percent of their equity. Any 
shares acquired in excess of 5% limit due to underwriting commitments must be off 
loaded within a period of three months.  
Banks/DFIs may also take exposure in future contracts to the extent of 10 percent of 
their equity on aggregate basis. In this connection, the 10 percent exposure limit for 
future contracts will include both positions taken in futures buying and selling.  
To strengthen further risk management framework, SBP like other countries is steering the 
implementation  of  Basel-II  in  a  phased  manner.  Initially  banks  are  required  to  adopt  the 
Standardized  Approach  for  credit  risk  and  the  Basic  Indicator/  Standardized  Approach  for 
operational  risk  from  1st  January  2008.  Subsequently,  once  they  have  improved  their  in 
house  systems,  they  would  have  the  option  to  switch  over  to  more  advanced  approaches 
from  1st  January  2010  subject  to  the  adequacy  of  capacities  and  capabilities  and  its  due 
diligence by SBP.  
As  a  further  step  to  strengthen  governance  of  banks,  they  are  required  to  undergo  credit 
rating  annually.  The  rating  must  be  announced  publicly  and  disclosed  in  the  financial 
statements of the bank.  
SBP  also  requires  banks  to  appoint  auditors  from  a  panel  of  pre-approved  auditors 
maintained  by  it.  The  objective  is  to  ensure  credibility  of  audited  financial  statements  of 
banks. 
In  the  area  of  monitoring  and  supervision,  SBP  has  implemented  a  comprehensive 
framework, which is underpinned by regular on-site inspections of banks and DFIs under the 
regulatory  ambit  of  SBP.  Banks  are  inspected  in  accordance  with  a  pre-approved  annual 
the  CAMELS-S1  approach.  SBP  has  also  developed  a 
inspection  plan, 
comprehensive  surveillance  mechanism  –  the  Institutional  Risk  Assessment  Framework 
(IRAF)  –  to  capture  the  host  of  risks  facing  individual  banks  based  on  the  information 
gathered  from  on-site  inspections,  off-site  supervision,  market  intelligence  and  self-
assessment  by  banks.  The  objective  is  to  obtain  a  composite  rating  for  each  bank  for 
effective and proactive supervision by SBP. 
Finally,  SBP  is  endeavoring  to  further  strengthen  its  own  governance  processes  in 
consultation with its Board of directors. An adequate and appropriate governance framework 
is  crucial  for  the  optimal  functioning  of  any  enterprise,  but  more  so  for  a  central  bank 
because of its objectives of maintaining price stability and ensuring financial stability along 
with its crucial contribution to the overall economic policy framework. Furthermore, a vibrant 
and  effective  regulator  is  able  to  carry  forward  the  corporate  governance  reform  process 
more rigorously. 
SBP  is  fully  cognizant  of  the  need  to  implement  good  governance  practices  in  its  own 
functioning and has empowered its Board of directors to provide oversight and direction of 
affairs  and  business  of  SBP.  In  order  to  modernize  SBP’s  operational  strategies  and 
strengthen  its  governance,  the  organization  has  been  successfully  restructured  in  2006, 
followed  by  adoption  of  market-driven  compensation  packages  for  its  employees  in  2007. 
The  focus  of  the  SBP  management  has  been  on  improving  risk  management  and  internal 
following 
                                                 
1   CAMELS-S covers capital adequacy, asset quality, management, earnings, liquidity and sensitivity in addition 
to systems and controls of banks. 
BIS Review 33/2008 
 3
controls  systems  within  the  organization  as  well  as  enhancing  transparency  in  its 
communications  on  policy  and  financial  sector  issues.  SBP  is  also  working  towards 
developing adequate policy framework for consumer protection and has set up a Consumer 
Protection Department to safeguard consumer interests. 
Impact of corporate governance reforms 
Pursuant to multiple reforms initiated for the purpose, there has been a visible improvement 
in  the  corporate  governance  practices  of  banks.  The  fundamental  change  is  in  the 
effectiveness of the board. The implementation of Fit and Proper criteria has ensured that 
board  members  are  well  equipped  to  carry  out  their  responsibilities.  The  criteria  is  also  a 
measure to exclude unscrupulous individuals from the highly responsible position of a board 
member,  In  terms  of  performance,  the  Boards  of  directors  now  meet  more  frequently, 
focusing largely on strategic objectives and management oversight. The scope of the Board’s 
policy making function has enhanced to cover a broad range of areas, such as systems and 
control, risk management, human resources, credit, investments, etc.  
Professional  management  is  appointed  to  carry  on  the  banks’  operations.  Furthermore, 
internal  control  system  has  been  strengthened  in  banks  through  setting  up  of  audit 
committees and internal audit functions. Compliance officers are now appointed to manage 
banks’  compliance  to  the  policy  framework  and  laws  and  regulations,  including  the  AML 
requirements.  
The frequency of financial reporting has improved through circulation of quarterly accounts. 
Financial reporting standards are at par with international best practices while credibility of 
financial information has received a boost through rotation of auditors after every five years. 
Enhanced disclosure has positive implications which go beyond just accounting statements 
of the banking entity. It is a mechanism for the market to assess the quality of assets, and 
earnings,  and  expose  any  hidden  risk,  for  example  those  arising  from  associates, 
subsidiaries, related parties lending etc.  
These  improvements  have  been  reflected  in  international  assessments  of  corporate 
governance  framework  in  Pakistan.  The  ROSC-CG  assessment  of  Pakistan  in  June  2005 
acknowledges that “Reform to improve corporate governance has been significant, including 
the introduction of a Code of Corporate Governance and increased vigilance by regulators.” 
The  ROSC-CG  assessment  further  notes  that  “The  SBP  has  also  been  instrumental  in 
improving  corporate  governance  in  the  banking  system,  by  requiring  banks  and  DFIs  to 
adopt  the  Code,  and  by  assessing  compliance  with  other  relevant  aspects  of  prudential 
regulation specifically applicable to banks/DFIs.” Similarly the World Bank’s 2007 report on 
Doing Business in South Asia recognizes that “Pakistan provides relatively strong protections 
for minority shareholders against the misuse of corporate assets”. It ranks 19th worldwide on 
protecting investors.  
Outstanding corporate governance reform agenda  
While  considerable  progress  has  been  achieved  in  enhancing  corporate  governance 
practices of banks, SBP is geared towards filling in the remaining gaps.  
In this regard, foremost is the need to develop a suitable cadre of professional directors who 
are  knowledgeable  of  banks’  affairs  as  well  as  independent  of  their  management  and 
majority shareholders. Allied to this is the need to clarify and strengthen directors’ fiduciary 
duties to act in the interests of the bank and all of its stakeholders. It is also essential for 
banks to provide sufficient time and information to directors to prepare for Board meetings, 
structure Board meetings so as to allow ample time for discussion and establish appropriate 
criteria  for  assessing  and  improving  performance  of  directors,  including  independent 
4 
 BIS Review 33/2008
directors. To raise awareness on these and related aspects, SBP is working towards issuing 
comprehensive corporate governance guidelines for banks.  
As  earlier  discussed,  Pakistan’s  corporate  and 
financial  sectors  present  corporate 
governance  issues  peculiar  to  complex  ownership  and  group  structures.  By  conducting 
operations through a complex network of subsidiaries, controlling shareholders often acquire 
control  of  operations  and/or  cash  flows  disproportionate  to  their  equity  stake  in  individual 
companies.  The  key  issues  that  arise  as  a  result  include:  (i)  inequitable  treatment  of 
stakeholders; (ii) dominance of controlling shareholder-directors over Board proceedings; (iii) 
lack  of  independence  of  the  Board  from  the  management;  and  (iv)  channeling  of  bank 
resources to the benefit of group concerns.  
In order to address such corporate governance issues, there is a need for group supervision 
by the regulators. As regard the banking supervision, SBP is working towards introduction of 
consolidated supervision whereby it will not be monitoring banks as a stand-alone entity but 
rather as part of the entire banking group. This will help to evaluate the strength of the entire 
group  and  to  mitigate  risks  arising  from  group  companies.  A  significant  component  of 
consolidated  supervision  will  be  review  of  group  structures  and  detailed  examination  of 
related party transactions.  
I  would  also  like  to  share  with  you  that  SBP  has  recently  launched  a  survey  of  banks  to 
assess their corporate governance practices. The survey will help to identify areas for reform 
in the regulatory framework as well as its implementation by banks. The survey results will be 
a key input in further improving the corporate governance framework for banks.  
Conclusion 
Good  corporate  governance  is  essential  in  establishing  an  attractive  investment  climate 
characterized by competitive companies and efficient financial markets. It is imperative that 
Pakistan’s banking sector develops and implements good governance practices, in order to 
provide  impetus  to  economic  growth.  In  the  realm  of  a  rapidly  globalizing  world  – 
characterized by liberalization of markets, relatively free-er trade, sophistication of financial 
products and instruments, and growing awareness among consumers – Pakistan is ripe with 
lucrative opportunities for foreign and local investors alike. 
I would also like to mention that no amount of regulatory intervention can fully institutionalize 
corporate governance unless Boards and senior management of banks appreciate the value 
addition  of  corporate  governance  to  their  productivity  and  competitiveness.  In  this  context, 
banks should strive to build a reputation for honest and fair dealing while interacting with their 
internal  as  well  as  external  stakeholders.  Ethics,  transparency  and  the  competition  for 
reputation, which are the cornerstone of good corporate governance, would invariably be the 
distinguishing features of banks that emerge ahead in an increasingly competitive market. 
BIS Review 33/2008 
 5
