Jürgen Stark: Lessons for central bankers from the history of the Phillips 
Curve 
Speech by Mr Jürgen Stark, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Boston’s  Annual  Economic  Conference  “Understanding 
Inflation and the Implications for Monetary Policy: A Phillips Curve Retrospective”, Chatham, 
Massachusetts, 11 June 2008. 
 It is a great pleasure for me to be here today at this conference.  
I  will  try  to  look  at  the  historical  evolution  of  the  Phillips  curve  and  its  interaction  with 
macroeconomic  outcomes  from  a  slightly  eccentric  angle.  Forty  years  ago  it  suddenly 
became very difficult even for navigated policymakers who had been raised in the revered 
intellectual tradition of monetary orthodoxy to resist the revolutionary notion of a stable trade-
off between inflation and unemployment. Some rejected this notion – out of common sense 
and practical experience – and did it before scholars in universities could prove that it was 
theoretically fragile and empirically elusive.  
I  view  this  episode  –  in  which  honest  civil  servants  were  ahead  of  their  times  in  rejecting 
faulty  propositions  –  as  highly  symbolic.  The  episode  is  representative  of  the  key  but 
swinging  and  ambivalent  relationship  between  cutting-edge  economic  research  and  long 
established central banking principles. At the end, I will submit few reflections on how that 
relationship ought to be governed in modern policy-making institutions and how the ECB – 
for  its  part –  has  insured  against major  policy  failures  that  revolutionary  ideas  can  inflict if 
applied untested.  
1.  
The evolution of the Phillips curve: the interplay between ideas and 
macroeconomic outcomes 
The two top panels of Figure 1 show the kind of evidence A.W. Phillips had available when 
he  published  his  ground-breaking paper  fifty  years  ago.1  The  two  panels  show  the  rate  of 
unemployment  and  annual  wholesale  price  inflation  in  the  United  Kingdom,  during  the 
Classical Gold Standard, and during the period between the two World Wars, respectively. In 
line with Phillips (1958), the clear impression emerging from the figure is that of a relatively 
stable  relationship  between  the  two  variables,  which  is  especially  noteworthy  when  you 
consider that the second sample period comprises the Great Depression.  
Just two years after the publication of Phillips’ paper, the eponymous curve was made the 
centrepiece of cutting-edge macro-economic thinking by two future Nobel prize winners, Paul 
Samuelson and Robert Solow.2 Although Samuelson and Solow were careful in conjecturing 
that  changes  in  inflation  expectations  might  shift  the  unemployment-inflation  trade-off 
upwards or downwards, such care was ultimately lost in the fast-growing industry of macro-
analyses  that  was  spawned  by  their  article.  Samuelson-Solow’s  followers  took  the  Phillips 
curve as literally offering a “menu” of combinations of inflation and unemployment from which 
policymakers could choose at will – that is, an exploitable trade-off. 
In February 1963, three years after the publication of Samuelson and Solow’s paper, Federal 
Reserve  Chairman  William  McChesney  Martin  openly  rejected  the  notion  of  an  exploitable 
                                                 
1  
In fact, Phillips’ (1958) paper was based on annual data, whereas the two top panels of Figure 1 are based on 
monthly data downloaded from the NBER Macro History Database on the web (see at: www.nber.org). 
2   See Samuelson and Solow (1960). 
BIS Review 76/2008 
 1
trade-off  between  inflation  and  unemployment  in  his  statement  before  the  Joint  Economic 
Committee of the U.S. Congress.3 Disapprovingly, he pointed out that: 
“[…] there was even serious discussion of the number of percentage points of inflation we 
might trade off for a percentage point increase in our growth rate. The underlying fallacy in 
this  approach  is  that  it  assumes  that  we  can  concentrate  on  one  major  goal  without 
considering collateral, and perhaps deleterious, side effects on other objectives.” 
In December 1965, two years before Milton Friedman’s Presidential Address to the American 
Economic Association, which (re-)introduced the notion of the long-run vertical Phillips curve 
into  macroeconomics,4  Chairman  Martin  discussed  the  role  of  inflation  expectations  in 
shifting  the  unemployment-inflation  equilibrium  along  the  very  same  lines  Friedman  and 
Edmund Phelps5 would then expound in analytical terms:6  
“If labor had had reason to fear a persistent substantial rise in the cost of living, it would have 
felt  compelled  to  seek  compensatory  increases  in  wages;  and  if  management  had  had 
reason  to  expect  a  general  increase  in  the  price  level,  it  would  not  have  felt  compelled  to 
resist such demands. In that case, wages would certainly have risen faster than productivity; 
prices would have been raised in consequence; and the feared inflationary spiral would have 
become actuality.”7  
Subsequent developments are well known. 
On the theoretical front, 1967 and 1968 saw the independent enunciation of the “natural rate 
hypothesis”, both in Friedman’s Presidential Address to the American Economic Association 
– which I mentioned already – and in the work that ultimately won Edmund Phelps the Nobel 
Prize. Underlying the natural rate hypothesis are two key concepts. 
• 
First,  monetary  neutrality:  in  the  long  run,  the  Phillips  curve  is  perfectly  vertical, 
which is another way of expressing Robert Lucas’s famous dictum that “You can’t 
buy a permanent economic high just by printing money.” 
Second,  temporary  departures  from  the  natural  rate  of  unemployment  can  take 
place only to the extent that agents’ expectations are, for some reason, out of line 
with the economy’s authentic dynamics. When, in 1972, Robert Lucas applied to the 
Phillips  curve  the  hypothesis  of  rational  expectations,  the  notion  of  an  exploitable 
trade-off was banished from frontier research. 
 Lucas (1972a), in particular, showed that the traditional “Solow-Tobin” test of the natural rate 
hypothesis – based on the simple regression of inflation on lags of itself and on the rate of 
unemployment – was flawed in principle, as its results crucially depended on the nature of 
the  monetary  policy  regime,  and  could  therefore  not  be  used  to  validate  or  invalidate  the 
natural rate hypothesis. 
Rerunning history is obviously impossible. It is my conviction, however, that these theoretical 
developments, by themselves, would most likely not have  succeeded at displacing the old 
consensus of an exploitable trade-off with the swiftness we have seen in reality, if it had not 
been for a dramatic, concomitant real-world development: the Great Inflation. 
                                                 
3   See Martin (1963). 
4   See  Friedman  (1968).  Although  published  in  1968,  Friedman’s  Presidential  Address  was  delivered  to  the 
American Economic Association on December 29, 1967. 
5   See Phelps (1968). 
6   See Martin (1965). 
7   He later summarised his position on the issue in the following terms: ‘ My view of inflation is clear. To those 
who  believe  that  full  employment  requires  inflation,  my  answer  is  that  unless  inflation  is  restrained  full 
employment is impossible.’ See Martin (1971). 
2 
 BIS Review 76/2008
Indeed, the Great Inflation episode was associated with the breakdown of empirical Phillips 
curves, as equations estimated over the previous, more stable period lost predictive power 
and had to be adjusted judgementally by forecasters in policy institutions.  
The shifting nature of the unemployment-inflation relationship around the time of the Great 
Inflation is clearly apparent even to the naked eye from the bottom-right panel of Figure 1. 
Whereas  from  the  second  half  of  the  19th  century  up  until  mid-1960s  inflation  and 
unemployment had systematically negatively co-moved in both the United Kingdom and the 
United States, around the time of the Great Inflation they started to move upward in lockstep. 
As  pointed  out  by  Lucas  and  Sargent  in  a  paper  presented  in  1978  at  a  conference 
organised by the Boston FED,8 the inflation of the 1970s represented, under this respect, a 
sort of large-scale experiment for the old consensus. For Lucas and Sargent the verdict of 
this experiment was clear: the “halcyon days”9 of post-Keynesian macroeconomics, with its 
belief in the exploitability of the Phillips trade-off, were gone for ever. 
Over subsequent years, and until mid-1990s, the Phillips curve essentially disappeared from 
frontier  research.  Alienated  by  the  disappointing  performance  of  the  Phillips  curve,  and 
following  the  lead  of  Kydland  and  Prescott,10  frontier  researchers  were  preoccupied  with 
building  flexible-price  general  equilibrium  models  driven  by  technological  impulses.  Within 
the new framework, there was indeed no place for a Phillips curve to speak of.  
The  revival  of  interest  in  the  Phillips  curve  started  in  the  1990s,  and  was  driven  by  two 
separate developments. From an empirical standpoint, work concentrated on the forecasting 
performance  of  “generalised  Phillips  curve  models’  comprising,  in  lieu  of  unemployment, 
activity 
traditional 
benchmarks, this line of research has shown that generalised Phillips curve models exhibit a 
remarkable improvement in forecasting ability.11  
On the theoretical front, there was a growing realisation that the research program launched 
by Kydland and Prescott was facing fundamental problems. Notably, the absence of nominal 
rigidities  in  a  real  business  cycle  setting  implied  –  among  other  things  –  that  the  new 
paradigm  was  fundamentally  incapable  to  reproduce  the  key  macroeconomic  facts 
uncovered  by  the  structural  VAR  literature:  first  and  foremost  the  sluggish  and  drawn-out 
response of key variables such as inflation and output growth to monetary policy innovations. 
The DSGE research program, which started around mid-1990s,12 was motivated by the need 
to reproduce key macroeconomic stylised facts within otherwise standard general equilibrium 
business cycle models. The introduction of various nominal and real frictions in such models 
has  spawned  a  modelling  effort  and  a  flourishing  of  an  econometric  work  which  is,  to  this 
day, continuing unabated. The best testimony to the importance of this line of research is that 
DSGE models have breached the walls of academia, and are today being increasingly used 
at central banks as key input in the policy process.  
A key building block of this class of models is the “New Keynesian Phillips curve”, which in its 
original incarnation relates current inflation to its expectation next period and to current real 
marginal cost. For several years this purely forward-looking Phillips curve specification has 
been regarded as producing implications for inflation dynamics that are at odds with the high 
factor  analysis.  Compared 
indicators  extracted 
from  dynamic 
to 
                                                 
8   See Lucas and Sargent (1978). 
9   See Lucas and Sargent, cit. 
10   Kydland and Prescott (1982). 
11   See  e.g.  Stock  and  Watson  (1999).  Further,  although,  as  the  bottom-right  panel  of  Figure  1  shows,  the 
inflation-unemployment correlation clearly appears to have broken down around the time of the Great Inflation, 
as shown by King and Watson the relationship does not appear to have experienced major instabilities once 
one focuses upon the business-cycle frequencies, i.e. those relevant for monetary policy. 
12   See Hairault and Portier (1993) and Yun (1996). 
BIS Review 76/2008 
 3
inflation persistence that is typical of most of the post-WWII era. Several solutions have been 
proposed  to  introduce  persistence  in  the  model-implied  time  process  for  inflation,  the  best 
known  being  the  idea  that  prices  that  are  not  reset  optimally  each  period  are  somehow 
“indexed”  to  past  inflation.13  Formulations  along  these  lines  suffer  however  from  several 
problems.  
• 
First,  except  in  labour  markets,  there  is  little  evidence  in  our  economies 
documenting price-indexing practices of the type described by theory.  
Second,  and  fundamentally,  even  conceding  that  such  practices  might  be  wide-
spread in high-inflation regimes, it is hard to believe that they would survive under 
more stable monetary conditions.14  
 And  recent  research,  indeed,  shows  that  the  backward-looking  Phillips  curve  component 
disappears under stable monetary regimes, i.e. under regimes in which inflation is strongly 
mean-reverting around the quantitative definition of price stability entertained by the central 
bank.15 Further, once controlling for fluctuations in trend inflation, the Phillips curve appears 
indeed to be purely forward-looking.16 Although this line of research is very recent, and its 
results ought therefore necessarily to be regarded as tentative, these findings reinforce the 
notion of the fundamental power of monetary institutions in permeating economic behaviours 
profoundly,  direct  expectations  and  –  ultimately  –  determine  the  intimate  fabric  of  market 
economies.  
The  history  of  the  Phillips  curve  that  I  just  briefly  summarised  suggests  to  me  several 
reflections. The fact that prominent central bankers wedded to classical principle of monetary 
neutrality  were  ultimately  vindicated  bears  a  degree  of  significance  that  transcends  the 
confines of central banking chronicles. I view this episode as a highly symbolic manifestation 
of a fundamental problem that central bankers continually face: namely, how to govern the 
relationship between policy-making and cutting-edge economic research. Let me turn to this 
point next. 
The relationship between economic research and economic policymaking 
2.  
Before a new medicine is launched on the market, it has to be extensively tested. Introducing 
new drugs on the market without extensive testing, and without further government vetting, 
would be considered a kind of social hazard that would undermine the very foundations of 
modern collective life. Beyond and after precautionary testing, the application of the medicine 
on  large  numbers  of  patients  provides  a  source  of  ongoing  information-gathering  that 
expands knowledge of its healing properties. So, from time to time we learn that the Food 
and Drug Administration interrupts the sale of drugs that have been on the market for years, 
on the grounds provided by new evidence concerning previously unknown deleterious side 
effects.17  
Compared with medical research, economics – and notably the economics and econometrics 
of  Phillips  curve  relationships  –  present  the  additional,  insurmountable  problem  that  new 
                                                 
13   See Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (2005), and Smets and Wouters (2003). 
14   See Woodford (2007). 
15   See Benati (2008a). 
16   See Cogley and Sbordone (2008). Trend inflation is, according to this line of research, what ultimately imparts 
inflation its persistence. 
17   There  is  a  clear  parallel  between  the  risk  of  side  effects  of  pharmaceutical  means  and  Chairman  Martin’s 
words on the ‘ collateral, and perhaps deleterious, side effects on other objectives’ in his testimony in front of 
the U.S. Congress in February 1963, when he flatly rejected the idea that it could be possible to permanently 
trade-off a few percentage points of unemployment for a few percentage points of inflation. 
4 
 BIS Review 76/2008
theories  cannot  even  be  tested  before  application.  To  be  sure,  history  has  offered  a  few 
“natural  experiments”:  for  example,  the  hyperinflations  that  swept  Europe  after  the  First 
World  War  were  a  prominent  collective  test,  whose  lessons  have  been  absorbed,  and  are 
today  deeply  entrenched  into  the  collective  psyche  of  many  European  peoples.  But  the 
fundamental  irreproducibility  of  controlled  experiments  in  social  sciences  remains.  True,  in 
recent  years,  a  very  limited  number  of  theories  in  the  field  of  social  science  have  been 
subjected  to  experiments.  And,  a  recent  strand  of  macroeconomic  literature18  has  even 
argued  that  in  the  presence  of  uncertainty  about  the  structure  of  the  economy  monetary 
authorities  should  “experiment”,  by  running  monetary  policy  in  such  a  way  as  to  create 
sufficient  variation  in  the  data.  By  standard  econometric  arguments,  this  will  indeed  allow 
better identification of the relevant, unknown deep parameters for future policy conduct.  
When presented with this line of arguments, however, a policymaker’s instinctive reaction is 
that they cannot possibly be right.  
• 
First and foremost, any experimenting with the economy would inevitably and fatally 
run  the  risk  of  destabilising  expectations.  Indeed,  the  result  that  it  is  optimal  to 
experiment  with  the  economy  was  originally  obtained  within  models  in  which  the 
public played a purely passive role and the behaviour of the policymaker could not 
alter the public’s beliefs and expectations. 
Second,  when  this  assumption  has  recently  been  relaxed  in  models  in  which  the 
public  is  allowed  to  learn  from  the  behaviour  of  the  policymaker,19  the  result  was 
overturned.  Optimal  policy  becomes  distinctly  conservative,  in  the  sense  that 
policymakers  should  be  wary  and  respectful  of  the  fundamental  fragility  of  the 
macroeconomic  equilibrium  to  any  perturbation  that  policy  experiments  could 
introduce.  
 In a nutshell, the initial, radical result in favour of monetary policy experimentation has been 
reversed. The fragility of the earlier result – and the transience of many such results, in the 
history of the theory of economic policy, which had appeared rock-solid at first sight – is a 
memento to policy practitioners.  
This,  of  course,  poses  an  issue  concerning  the  right  balance  between  creativity  and 
pragmatism in our policy-making institutions. Isn’t it the case that an  excessive intellectual 
conservatism might end up leaving our policy-making institutions “behind the curve”, clinging 
to dead theories, and unable to cope with the new challenges of an ever-changing world? 
To be sure, highly innovative ideas will not systematically be proven wrong: heliocentrism – a 
revolutionary  paradigm  when  it  was  first  expounded  –  finally  and  definitely  displaced 
previously dominant geocentrism. We should be careful not to censor research just for the 
sake  of  intellectual  conservatism.  However,  the  intrinsically  entrepreneurial  nature  of 
research,  whatever  the  specific  field  of  endeavour,  means  that  the  incidence  of  failure  is 
bound to be high. Failure in economic policy means potential for economic damage.  
A safe principle that has always worked in the past is that the introduction of new ideas and 
concepts  into  a  central  bank’s  monetary  policy  framework  should  be  evolutionary,  as 
opposed  to  revolutionary.  Historically,  a  typical  example  of  this  has  been  the  introduction, 
towards  the  end  of  1999,  of  an  explicit  numerical  objective  for  inflation  on  the  part  of  the 
Swiss  National  Bank  (SNB).  Since  its  foundation,  in  1907,  the  SNB  has  been  a  bulwark 
against inflation, delivering an annual inflation rate that, over the entire century – excluding 
war years – was just 2.1 per cent on average. Further, back in the 1970s, around the time 
the  Great  Inflation  plagued  many  countries,  the  SNB  –  together  with  the  Bundesbank  – 
                                                 
18   See e.g. Bertocchi and Spagat (1993). 
19   See Ellison and Valla (2001) and Rosal and Spagat (2006). 
BIS Review 76/2008 
 5
“showed  the  way”  inflation  could  be  resisted  –  amidst  international  turbulences  –  by 
appropriately restrictive policies. In no way the introduction of an explicit numerical objective 
for inflation did therefore radically alter its monetary policy framework: rather, by providing a 
“focal point” for inflation expectations, the only goal of such innovation was to improve the 
framework’s performance, and to facilitate the central bank’s task within the framework.  
This naturally leads me to the final part of my speech. In recent years, an amended Phillips 
curve  –  which  shifts  with  the  state  of  expectations  –  has  been  made  the  modelling 
centrepiece of innovative proposals to conduct monetary policy without explicit reference to 
monetary  aggregates.  Part  of  the  academic  community,  in  particular,  has  advised  the 
European  Central  Bank  to  abandon  the  prominent  role  it  assigns  to  a  careful  analysis  of 
monetary aggregates. Based on my previous discussion, the key question then becomes: “Is 
such a radical extent of innovation justified”? I will offer my thoughts on this question in the 
remainder of my remarks.  
Money and the Phillips curve based model of inflation 
3.  
There is no role for monetary analysis in the model of inflation determination that is centred 
around the New-Keynesian Phillips curve. The announcement of an inflation target together 
with a promise to move the real interest rate sufficiently forcefully in response to deviations of 
observed inflation from target is a necessary and sufficient strategy for price stability in the 
model.  The  real  shocks  that  buffet  the  economy  will  cause  time  variation  in  monetary 
aggregates, but such movements will be uninformative: real shocks will manifest themselves 
in other variables in the system as well, and those other variables will be sufficient statistics 
for the underlying state of the model economy. 
Conversely,  shocks  originating  in  the  money  market  are  often  un-modelled  within  the 
framework, because they are inconsequential. In the model, a monetary authority setting an 
interest  rate  as  a  function  of  inflation  deviations  from  target  will  automatically  offset  those 
shocks and insulate the economy from their potentially malign influences on real variables 
and  inflation.  A  Taylor  rule  can  do  the  job  and  thus  make  monetary  shocks  completely 
uninteresting from a monetary policy stabilisation standpoint. 
The question is whether a central bank can content itself with such a stylised representation 
of the economy. There are two issues.  
• 
• 
The first issue concerns the long-run behaviour of the model. In the long run, the model can 
replicate  the  statistical  association  between  money  growth  and  inflation.  But  it  does  not 
reproduce  the  lead-lag  structure  that  links  the  two  variables.  The  model  assumes  a  given 
inflation  target  defined  in  numerical  terms.  By  simulating  the  model,  one  can  prove  that  – 
provided  some  mild  conditions  on  the  Taylor  rule  are  satisfied  –  inflation  will  consistently 
fluctuate around the objective over the business cycle and money in the long term will grow 
at a rate consistent with the objective as well. Only exogenous innovations to the numerical 
objective will – after some time – result in lasting changes in inflation and, as a consequence, 
in persistent changes to money growth.  
However, this lag structure implied by the model – where changes to the inflation objective 
precede changes in inflation, which in turn precede changes in money growth – is at odds 
with the empirical evidence. One extremely robust feature that is possible to detect on the 
statistical association between money growth and inflation across diverse monetary regimes 
and historical periods is that persistent changes in (trend) money growth precede – rather 
than follow – changes in trend inflation. This can be interpreted as money having a leading 
First, can this model be trusted to get the facts right in the long run?  
Second, can monetary shocks be ignored even at business cycle frequencies?  
6 
 BIS Review 76/2008
role  in  signalling  future  changes  in  inflation,  and  even  an  active  role  in  determining  such 
changes in the medium term.20  
I extract one lesson from this observation. Money growth might indeed have something to do 
with making the price stability objective credible. In the model, credibility of announcements 
is not at stake. In reality, that credibility needs to be buttressed – in the eyes of the economic 
agents  –  by  mutually  reinforcing  “strategic  instruments”.  I  interpret  the  evidence  as 
suggesting that money can indeed act as the second “strategic instrument,” on a par with a 
clear announcement of a quantitative definition of price stability, supporting that definition in 
the long run.  
For what concerns the behaviour of the model at business cycle frequencies, as I mentioned 
already the model does not feature a money market or a financial sector. Consequently, it 
simply assumes away the shocks that, even in the short run, can originate in those sectors. 
This has two main implications: one on the demand for money side, the other on the side of 
liquidity and credit provision.  
On the demand side, the model does not substantiate money’s role as the principal vehicle 
for settling transactions and providing a “store of value”, for example, in face of heightened 
uncertainty. However, it is precisely in such conditions that we see money play an active role 
as a primary attractor for investors and financial intermediaries alike in search for portfolio 
security and liquidity. In the mainstream model, all eventualities can be hedged in advance, 
so there is no need to maintain a liquid portfolio even in the face of major shocks. In reality, 
money  can  act  as  a  primary  determinant  of  portfolio  allocation  and  spending  decisions  in 
conditions of major and sudden shifts in risk perceptions. By monitoring money and liquidity 
preferences a central bank acquires a first-rate indicator of the state of confidence. 
The  second  implication  works  through  the  provision  of  liquidity.  In  the  main-stream  model 
there is no borrowing or lending activity. However, these “missing” activities are important, as 
we  all  realise  when  credit  markets  become  dysfunctional.  Shocks  hitting,  for  example, 
financial intermediaries’ changing perceptions of credit and aggregate risk can drive variable 
wedges between the interest rate that the monetary authority can control and at which banks 
can borrow – in fact, the only interest rate that is defined in the model – and the interest rate 
at  which  banks  lend,  which  is  relevant  for  aggregate  demand.  Observation  and  empirical 
tests  tell  us  that  the  latter  spectrum  of  market  rates,  applying  to  borrowers  with  different 
degrees of creditworthiness, is linked in various ways to liquidity. But the absence of liquidity 
makes  the  mainstream  model  unable  to  provide  relevant  insights  into  the  determination  of 
credit spreads, of term premia and, in one word, of asset prices, which are the principal link 
in the chain of propagation of monetary policy through the economy.  
The strategic assignment to expand our view beyond the real sector has been instrumental in 
developing two avenues of analysis that would have remained atrophic otherwise. 
• 
First, we can count today on a first-rated system of real-time monitoring of monetary 
facts which we can resort to instantly especially in times of emergency. The financial 
shocks  which  became  apparent  in  August  2007  posed  –  and  continue  to  pose  – 
delicate  interpretation  issues:  Is  the  soaring  growth  of  credit  that  we  observe  yet 
another manifestation of market participants’ anxiety about future credit access? Is it 
due  to  forced  re-intermediation?  Or,  rather,  is  it  to  be  taken  as  a  sign  that  the 
                                                 
20   Benati (2008b) shows that, over the last two centuries, the low-frequency components of money growth and 
inflation have exhibited an extraordinarily close co-movement, with a consistent lead of trend money growth 
over trend inflation by 2-3 years, in the United States, the United Kingdom, Norway, Sweden, Australia, and 
Canada. He argues that the resilience of both features to dramatic changes in the monetary regime naturally 
suggests  that  they  are  both  structural  in  the  sense  of  Lucas  (1976).  Finally,  he  shows  that  traditional  New 
Keynesian models in  which money plays a purely residual role are incapable of replicating such a lead-lag 
structure, as they typically imply that money growth lags inflation, or is, in the best of cases, contemporaneous 
with it. 
BIS Review 76/2008 
 7
 financial turbulence is not severe enough to dent firms’ and lenders’ confidence in 
the  future  prospects  of  our  economy?  If  the  first  two  cases  were  true,  some 
monetary  policy  action  would  be  warranted.  If  the  last  interpretation  were  true, 
however,  the  monetary  policy  implications  would  be  different,  possibly  opposite. 
Monetary  analysis  has  assisted  us  to  interpret  events  that  were  crucial  for  the 
design of policy. 
The  second  avenue  of  analysis  that  the  monetary  side  of  our  strategy  has 
encouraged  is  the  macroeconomic  modelling  of  the  monetary  sector.  As  a  result, 
currently we can use large-scale estimated DSGE models with a developed credit 
market  that  permit  informative  simulation  experiments  around  baseline  forecasts. 
We  exploit  the  active  channels  of  transmissions  from  credit  and  money  to  activity 
and inflation which are built into these models to quantify more precisely the risks to 
the projections which one could associate with the financial turmoil. This would have 
been  impossible  if  we  had  contented  ourselves  with  economic  models  in  which 
inflation and output move only because of innovations to consumption, investment, 
or cost-push forces.  
In summary: I assign money two functions. 
The  first  is  that  of  a  reinforcing  strategic  instrument  that  in  the  long  term  buttresses  our 
determination to preserve price stability. It complements and reinforces our announcement of 
a quantitative definition of price stability. The “inflation objective” term that appears in many 
version  of  the  new  Phillips  curve  is  a  proxy  for  central  bank  credibility.  However,  its 
connection with the deep strategic foundations of a central bank is what is missing from the 
model and it is what the ECB has tried to make firm and clear with its monetary pillar when 
our strategy was first announced in 1998.  
The second function of money is that of a privileged monitoring device that can help explain 
facts and shocks even at a shorter horizon. These are shocks that originate in the market for 
funds  and  liquidity  and  can  disturb  from  time  to  time  the  workings  of  the  transmission  of 
monetary  policy.  The  mainstream  model  of  inflation  determination,  organised  around  the 
new-Keynesian Phillips curve, is inhospitable to liquidity and risk considerations. But this is 
no  reason  for  abandoning  monetary  analysis.  It  is  a  reason  for  refining  the  model  and 
bringing it to a stage where it can provide help to central bankers in all the tasks – be it the 
anchoring of inflation expectations or the identification and deflection of monetary shocks – in 
which they daily engage.  
Concluding remarks 
5.  
After  years  of  Keynesians/Monetarists  controversies  over  the  sources  of  inflation,  a 
consensus  has  emerged  and  is  now  dominant  in  macroeconomic  theory  and  practice: 
inflation  is  a  monetary  phenomenon.  In  the  long  term,  monetary  policy  can  only  influence 
nominal  variables.  The  consensus  model  centred  around  a  reconstructed  Phillips  curve  – 
unlike its infamous  predecessor –  grants  no  free  lunch  to  policymakers.  So,  there  is  more 
than a sense in which we all can say that the new Phillips curve encapsulates fundamental 
tenets  of  prudent  monetary  policy-making:  the  inflation  process  is  forward-looking  and  will 
inexorably and quickly incorporate and perpetuate any deviations from price stability, if and 
when central banks were to start experimenting with the economy. 
But inflation formation is a complex phenomenon in which expectations interact with current 
and past shocks – to the cost structure of firms as well as to the monetary and financial fabric 
of the economy – in ways that a Phillips curve cannot fully account or describe. Failure to 
adopt  an  all-encompassing  view  of  the  inflation  process  will  lay  down  the  potential  for 
economic damage.  
8 
 BIS Review 76/2008
The  ultimate  lesson  that  I  draw  from  the  vicissitudes  of  the  Phillips  curve  in  the  half  of  a 
century behind us is that we should all beware of models that short-circuit the workings of a 
complex market economy in a single equation. 
Thank you. 
References 
Benati,  Luca  (2008a),  “Investigating  Inflation  Persistence  Across  Monetary  Regimes”, 
Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 2008, forthcoming. 
Benati,  L.  (2008b),  “Money,  Inflation,  and  New  Keynesian  Models”,  ECB  Working  Paper, 
forthcoming,  Bernanke,  Benjamin  S.  (2006),  “The  Benefits  of  Price  Stability”,  speech 
delivered at the Center for Economic Policy Studies and on the occasion of the Seventy-Fifth 
Anniversary  of  the  Woodrow  Wilson  School  of  Public  and  International  Affairs,  Princeton 
University, Princeton, New Jersey, February 24, 2006. 
Bertocchi, Graziella, and Michael Spagat (1993), “Learning, Experimentation, and Monetary 
Policy”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 32, pp. 169-183. 
Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles Evans (2005), “Nominal Rigidities 
and  the  Dynamic  Effects  of  a  Shock  to  Monetary  Policy”,  Journal  of  Political  Economy, 
113(1), pp. 1-45. 
Cogley,  Timothy  W.  and  Argia  Sbordone  (2008),  “Trend  Inflation,  Indexation,  and  inflation 
Persistence in the New Keynesian Phillips Curve”, American Economic Review, forthcoming 
Ellison, Martin and Natacha Valla (2001), “Learning, Uncertainty and Central Bank Activism 
in an Economy with Strategic Interactions”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 48(1), 153-171. 
Friedman, Milton (1968), “The Role of Monetary Policy”, American Economic Review, 58(1), 
1-17. 
Hairault, Jean-Olivier, and Frank Portier (1993), “Money, New Keynesian Macroeconomics, 
and the Business Cycle”, European Economic Review, 37, 1533-1568 
Kydland,  F.,  and  E.  C.  Prescott  (1982).  "Time  to  Build  and  Aggregate  Fluctuations". 
Econometrica 50: 1345–1370. 
Lucas, Robert E., Jr. and Thomas J. Sargent (1978), “After Keynesian Macroeconomics”, in 
After the Phillips Curve, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Conference Series No. 19: 49-72; 
reprinted in the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 3 (1979): 1-6. 
Martin, W. McChesney, Jr. (1963), “Statement” by Wm. McC. Martin, Jr., Chairman, Board of 
Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System,  to  the  Joint  Economic  Committee,  February  1, 
1963 (available at the St. Louis FED website). 
Martin, W. McChesney, Jr. (1965), “Statement” by Wm. McC. Martin, Jr., Chairman, Board of 
Governors of the Federal Reserve System, to the Joint Economic Committee, December 13, 
1965 (available at the St. Louis FED website). 
Martin,  W.  McChesney,  Jr.  (1971),  “Inflation:  Enemy  of  Growth”,  Summary  of  Remarks  by 
William McChesney Martin, Jr. before the 24th Annual Meeting of the Institute of Newspaper 
Controllers  &  Finance  Officers,  New  York,  Hilton  Hotel,  New  York  City,  October  25,  1971 
(available at the St. Louis FED website). 
Phelps, Edmund S. (1968), “Money-Wage Dynamics and Labor-Market Equilibrium”, Journal 
of Political Economy, Vol. 76, No. 4, Part 2: Issues in Monetary Research, 1967, (Jul. - Aug., 
1968), pp. 678-711. 
Phillips, A W (1958). "The Relationship between Unemployment and the Rate of Change of 
Money Wages in the United Kingdom 1861-1957". Economica 25 (100): 283-299. 
BIS Review 76/2008 
 9
Rosal, Joao Mauricio, and Michael Spagat (2006), “Structural Uncertainty and Central Bank 
Conservatism:  The  Ignorant  Should  Shut  Their  Eyes”,  mimeo,  Royal  Holloway  College, 
University of London. 
Samuelson, Paul A. and Robert M. Solow, “Analytical Aspects of Anti-Inflation Policy”, The 
American Economic Review, Vol. 50, No. 2, Papers and Proceedings of the Seventy-second 
Annual Meeting of the American Economic Association (May, 1960). 
Smets,  Frank,  and  Rafael  Wouters  (2003),  “An  Estimated  Stochastic  Dynamic  General 
Equilibrium Model of the Euro Area”, Journal of the European Economic Association, 1(5), 
1123- 1175. 
Stock, James H., and Mark W. Watson (1999), “Forecasting Inflation”, Journal of Monetary 
Economics, 44, 293-335. 
Yun,  Tack  (1996),  “Nominal  Price  Rigidity,  Money  Supply  Endogeneity,  and  Business 
Cycles”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 37(2), 345-370. 
Woodford, Michael (2007), “Interpreting Inflation Persistence: Comments on the Conference 
on  Quantitative  Evidence  on  Price Determination”,  Journal  of  Money,  Credit,  and Banking, 
39(2), 203-211. 
Figure 1. Inflation and unemployment in the United Kingdom and the United States since the 
Gold Standard era 
10 
 BIS Review 76/2008
