Miranda S Goeltom: Macroeconomic impact of climate change – 
opportunities and challenges (Closing remarks) 
Closing remarks by Prof Dr Miranda S Goeltom, Senior Deputy Governor of Bank Indonesia, 
at  Bank  Indonesia’s  Annual  International  Seminar  on  “Macroeconomic  impact  of  climate 
change – opportunities and challenges”, Nusa Dua, Bali, 1-2 August 2008. 
 Fellow Governors, 
Distinguished speakers and chairpersons, 
Honorable guests, 
Ladies & Gentlemen, 
On behalf of Bank Indonesia, I would like to express our most sincere thanks to all of you for 
the  honor  that  you  have  just  bestowed  upon  my  invitation  to  participate  in  the  annual 
international seminar of Bank Indonesia in our island of gods, Bali. Also, I would like to thank 
all honorable guest speakers, chairpersons, and participants for your valuable presentations 
and  fruitful  discussions  during  this  one  and  a  half  day  seminar  held  in  such  salubrious 
settings.  In  my  belief,  the  sharing  of  views  and  experiences  among  central  bankers, 
commercial bankers, academicians, bureaucrats, and the business community will enhance 
more  productive  policies  with  regards  to  global  climate  change  phenomenon,  to  support 
sustainable  growth  in  the  long-run,  as  well  as  maintaining  financial  stability  and  alleviating 
poverty. 
My Dear Colleagues, 
Distinguished participants , 
We have just completed an invigorating and very productive discussion. For the past one-
and-a  half  day  we  have  deliberated  on  a  wide  range  of  global  issues  related  to  climate 
change impact, in which all of them are import ant, some of them are crucial to the life of 
human being and the planet. We have been through the rigorous deliberations, and energetic 
but always friendly discussion. We also have summoned the spirit of this seminar and drawn 
inspiration  to  contribute  within  our  own  justification  a  better  macroeconomic  and  financial 
stability in conjunction of global climate change. 
The  evidence  of  global  warming  has  become  apparent  as  the  consequence  of  human 
activities.  We  have  learnt  that  it is not  fiction  or  propaganda,  but  it is a  fact  and  real.  The 
costs  of  policies  to  address  climate  change  can  be  contained  by  ensuring  that  mitigation 
policies  are  well  designed.  It  will  be  crucial  to  aim  at  a  framework  that  is  sustainable  and 
provides incentives for country participation. 
We have made just another step in the long journey of our inspirations to mitigate the global 
climate  change  impact.  Indeed,  as  has  always  happened,  after  every  seminar  that  we 
convene such as this, we grow more unified in our thoughts, more coordinated in our actions, 
and  more  effective  in  participation  in  international  decision-making.  As  a  result  of  these 
efforts, we keep in step with rapid march of history. 
We  have  also  thoroughly  examined  our  options  and  arrived  at  a  broad  common 
understanding  (platform)  over  critical  issues  on  the  global  climate  change  impact  to 
macroeconomic,  financial  stability, and  poverty  eradication.  Climate  change  is  predicted  to 
have some impacts in spreading disease, earlier spring arrival, plant and animal range shifts 
and  population  changes,  coral  reef  bleaching,  downpours,  heavy  snowfalls  and  flooding, 
drought  and  fires,  and  other  natural  catastrophes.  The  revolution  and  transformation  of 
natural changes has brought significant far-reaching effects on human well-being, particularly 
to  the  sustainable  economic  development  and  poverty  alleviation.  This  condition  would, 
BIS Review 102/2008 
 1
unfortunately,  generate  greater  risks  on  business  and  economic  activities  that  should  be 
addressed. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Now, as we are approaching to the end of our seminar, please allow me to close with several 
salient  points  and  comments  made  by  distinguished  guest  speakers  at  this  forum.  Let  me 
start with strong message brought to us by his Excellency the Governor of Bank Indonesia, 
Mr. Boediono, during his opening remarks. He stated that the threat of climate change may 
go  beyond  the  usual  welfare  statistics  and  if  left  unresolved,  climate  change  and  the 
accompanying  twin  crises  may,  in  due  time,  put  our  shared  vision  of  a  free,  open  and 
democratic g lobe at risk. He argued that to effectively respond to such a global challenge, 
we need a global and coordinated agenda of actions. 
I,  indeed,  share  his  view  as  expressed  in  my  paper  on  the  Macroeconomic  Policy  and 
Climate Change in the session of economic consequences of climate change and policies 
option. In this regard, I believe that there are a number of key messages we need to take 
away today; emphasizing that the policies should be integrated in different sectors and not 
be instituted to sacrifice the achievement of long-term social welfare. All countries need to 
agree  that  climate  change  and  development  goals  can  and  should  be  pursued  jointly. 
International  frameworks  should  recognize  the  right  of  nations  to  increase  their  living 
standards, and the common but differentiated responsibilities of developed and developing 
countries  in  mitigating  the  effects  of  climate  change.  For  this,  countries  need  to  pursue 
effective mitigation at the lowest cost. In this regard, not only unequivocal political leadership 
of developed countries, but also strong commitment from all countries to engage on climate 
change, is amongst the fundamental pillars to promote global welfare. 
Meanwhile, Dr. Hans Timmer emphasized that developing countries are taking center stage 
in the climate change issues. This conviction relies on the fact that (i) growth in developing 
world is much faster than expected during the 1990s and the cheapest mitigation options are 
in developing countries, (ii) developing countries are most vulnerable to climate impact and it 
has  come  earlier  than  expected,  and  (iii)  current  analysis  includes  distributional  impacts 
within countries and poor are hit hardest. For that reason, climate change policies must be 
integrated into development strategy , and developing countries have to become key players 
in those policies. 
Prof.  Iwan  Jaya  Azis  on  his  presentation,  “exploring  economy-wide  impacts  of  climate 
change  in  a  resource-rich  country”  shared  with  us  his  finding  from  his  analysis  on  these 
issues using recursive dynamic computable financial general equilibrium (CFGE) model. His 
research  was  empirically  based  on  resource-rich  country,  such  as  Indonesia,  with  a 
concentration on the area that the country faces substantial challenges in terms of declining 
productivities due to climate change, such as food, mining, forestry and fisheries. One of his 
finding  is  that  optimizing  the  innovative  approaches  on  developing  Indonesia’s  enormous 
biological potential seems to be able to avoid a trade-off between mitigating climate change 
and maintaining macroeconomic stability. It was also pointed out that the appropriate policies 
of mitigation that lead to productivity improvements do not always involve a trade-off between 
income  growth  and  poverty  reduction.  Furthermore,  he  showed  us  his  support  on  carbon 
credit scheme, but raised issues as to whom the financial revenue should go to. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The  second  session  discussed  whether  there  is  a  role  for  central  bank  in  climate  change 
adaptation. We started with two issues from the viewpoints of central bankers as brought up 
by the first speaker, Hernán Lacunza, namely how will climate change impact on the macro 
economy and what is the best way for monetary policy to deal with it. Lacunza argued that 
monetary policy by itself can not do a particularly efficient job of controlling or mitigating the 
factors that lead to climate change. Instead, monetary policy can devote efforts to adapt to 
climate change so that its contribution to macroeconomic stability is not jeopardized. The key 
here is to be flexible, in particular, the standard inflation targeting approach could be modified 
2 
 BIS Review 102/2008
as  necessary,  in  order  to  deal  with  persistent  supply  shocks  –  through  the  use  of 
countercyclical policies as reserve accumulation, exchange rate management, and a more 
extensive use of informed judgment than before. 
Meanwhile,  Prof.  Peter  J.  Sinclair  argued  that  consumption  of  nature’s  capital  calls  for 
taxation so that there would be rewards for depleting natural capital more slowly. Regarding t 
he terminology of “Green GDP”, Prof. Sinclair argued that it is a misnomer in that it focuses 
on gross income, and not on income net of depreciation in any sense. So it is fiscal policy 
that is centre stage in this regard, not monetary policy. He has showed that the trend of ad 
valorem fossil fuel taxation can have important consequences, even if inter-temporal issues 
imply that its level may be irrelevant. Nevertheless, global warming has important implication 
for monetary policy, through its long run impact on rates of real interest and growth, and its 
short run repercussions on the level of prices of fossil fuels, which may react quite strongly to 
changing perceptions of the character and extent of the global warming phenomenon. 
At the last of this session, Dr. Junggun Oh identified impacts of climate change which might 
be a decrease in the potential capacity of growth, a rise in the inflation rate, a decrease in 
capital flows, and deterioration of exports, and thus a slowdown of global economic growth 
followed by changes in market interest rate. Thus the tough challenges faced by the central 
bank is how to keep the commitment to price stability on the one hand and how much to take 
the possible worsening economic growth and employment into account. As wit h Lacunza, 
Dr. Oh argued that climate change are largely supply shock, yet the central bank should set 
the  optimal  target  rate  of  inflation  based  on  studies  on  the  impact  of  climate  change  and 
inflation rate. 
Distinguished guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Session three of this seminar was designed to discuss the role of fiscal policy in promoting 
environmental  friendly  growth  and  development.  Fiscal  stimulus  among  other  policy 
measures,  could  encourage  a  market  in  developing  green  investment  and  production 
towards sustainable economic growth. As the first speaker of this session, Prof. Emil Salim 
highlighted  the  fact  that  market  failure  has  locked  conventional  market  economy  in  an 
unsustainable  pattern  of  development  with  no  environmental  values.  This  has  caused  a 
subsidized  growth  of  economy,  followed  by  bursting  energy  and  food  crisis  comparable  to 
what we are seeing now. At the global level market failure is perpetuated by the absence of 
independent  global  institutions  to  develop  market  corrections,  while  a  t  the  national  level, 
market  failure  prevails  with  subsidized  energy  in  conventional  growth  without  any 
considerations on pollution costs. In this regard, green fiscal policy come at the forefront to 
correct market failure. Several existing policies were mentioned such as palm-oil pollution tax 
in  Malaysia,  wind-energy  subsidy  in  Japan,  palm-oil  export  tax  in  Indonesia,  and  clean 
development mechanism, which are already adopted by several countries. He also reiterated 
the  basic  notion  of  green  fiscal  policy  is  to  get  the  market  price  of  environmental  services 
right. To do so, the Government need to focus on long term development goal rather than the 
short one. 
Further,  Ms.  Teresa  Ter-Minassian,  suggested  that  impact  of  climate  change  to  public 
finance should be responded by fiscal measures to mitigate and to adapt its consequences. 
Aimed  at  raising  the  price  of  pollution,  mitigation  measures  can  be  implemented  through 
carbon  tax,  cap-and  trade  schemes,  and  reduction  of  fossil  fuel  subsidies.  Despite  of  its 
obstacles,  countries  in  the  world  should  encourage  international  cooperation  in  mitigation 
measures  by  adopting  minimum  rates  of  carbon  taxes,  border  tax  adjustments,  possible 
sectoral  agreement,  and  establishing  positive  incentives  for  avoiding  deforestation.  At 
minimum,  it  is  important  to  know  new  public  investments  can  be  climate-proofed,  and  the 
associated country level cost. More work is also needed on how financial mechanisms can 
be used for market-based insurance against climate change risks. 
BIS Review 102/2008 
 3
The  third  speaker  in  this  session,  Mr.  Chalongphob  Sussangkarn,  argued  that  policy 
officials at Ministry of Finance (MOF) should have an understanding on environmental and 
climate change issues because many key policy instruments are under the jurisdiction of the 
Ministry of Finance, and most of them are market based instruments such as taxes. Without 
the understanding and support of Ministry of Finance, whether at ministerial or bureaucratic 
level,  it  would  be  very  difficult  to  introduce  environmental  friendly  market  based  fiscal 
measures. 
The  fourth  speaker  in  this  session,  Dr.  Stephen  Specks  used  the  concept  of  an 
environmental  fiscal  reform  (EFR)  to  address  multiple  policy  objectives  (those  are 
environment, fiscal, and poverty reduction). He argued that environ mental reforms are a key 
instrument  of  raising  fiscal  revenues  and  fighting  poverty  through  generating  or  freeing  up 
budgetary  resources  to  be  used  for  pro-poor  investments,  while  furthering  environmental 
goals. Options of instruments of an EFR package should encompass a broad range of taxes, 
pricing instruments and reforming subsidies. In EFR concept, he allocates revenue in some 
ways such as: revenue allocated to priority spending areas; revenues are used for reduction 
in other taxes – tax shifting exercise; or revenues are earmarked for environmental/pro poor 
investment  programs. He also finds evidences  that EFR can increase the efficiency of the 
economy.  EFR  can  be  a  powerful  tool  for  mobilizing  revenues,  while  simultaneously 
promoting environmental objectives and supporting poverty eradication measures – but EFR 
is  not  a  “panacea”.  With  the  concept  proposed,  Dr.  Specks  offers  an  important  part  of  a 
development  policy  tool  kit  complementing  and  strengthening  regulatory  and  other 
approaches  to  fiscal  and  environmental  management  –  not  only  in  developed  but  also  in 
developing countries. 
My dear colleagues, 
The  fourth  session  in  this  morning  covered  issues  in  financial  system  adaptation  and 
innovation  arising  from  climate  change.  Vast  impact  of  climate  change  on  production  and 
consumption  has  led  to  the  need  for  financing  and  market  structure  adjustment.  There  is 
room  for  banking  and  other  financial  institution  to  transform  into  green  banking/financial 
institution and for them to be innovative and to create new financial instruments as part of 
adaptation effort. 
Ms  Kathleen  Robbins  in  this  session  outlined  the  problem  of  imbalances  in  trade  and 
production  subsidy  between  developed  and  non-developed  countries.  This  is  one  of  the 
reasons that can keep the poor t rapped living in poverty. In this regard, “Pyramid Protocol” 
can be a way to help the poor and alleviate poverty and raise the real income of the poor. It 
is  suggested  that  the  only  way  to  help  the  poor  and  alleviate  property  is  to  raise  the  real 
income o f the poor. On the other hand, giving chance for the poor to get financial support to 
start  small  business  is  one  way  to  help  the  poor  graduate  from  poverty.  Hence,  financial 
returns,  social  benefits,  and  environmental  benefits,  are  the  need  to  be  considered  when 
designing responses to climate change. 
The question of whether climate change is a big deal for financial system was addressed by 
our fellow from bank of Thailand, Dr. Bandid Nijathaworn. He strongly agrees that climate 
change is indeed a big deal for the financial system through increasing risk exposure from 
macroeconomic impact, risk and new business opportunities with economic transformation, 
and financial system role as an agent for change. However, progress in Asia is in fact much 
less. Nevertheless, he finds that there are several key policy principles for moving the issue 
forward,  such  as  clear  global  rule  of  the  market  beyond  2012,  market  infrastructure  and 
incentive structure provided by the government, market-mechanism should be the key driver 
to deal with this new paradigm, and financial regulation should be neutral. He argued that 
there  is  substantial  opportunity  for  the  financial  system,  especially  in  supporting  green 
technology and carbon trading market. 
4 
 BIS Review 102/2008
He  proposed  the  following  action  s  to  start-up  emerging  markets  includes  establishing  the 
country’s  overall  strategy  on  carbon  trading,  reducing  searching  cost, educating  all  market 
players, and providing tax incentive to build up the market. 
Moreover, Barry Eichengreen shared his views that climate change is a clear case where 
financial market and instruments can be part of the solution. They offer coping strategies for 
firms, farmers, and governments struggling with the consequences, although both of markets 
and instruments find obstacle to progress. There are financial-market-like variants of cap-and 
trade offering cheaper ways than mandates of limiting emissions. On the other hand, there is 
a spirited debate between the advocates of carbon taxation and cap-and trade. Of course, 
both approaches require political will. 
On  the  other  hand,  Preety  Bhandari  on  her  remarkable  presentation,  described  that  the 
estimated investment and financial flows needed in 2030 is large compared with the funding 
currently  available  under  the  Convention  and  its  Kyoto  Protocol,  but  small  in  relation  to 
estimated  GDP  and  global  investment  in  2030.  Hence,  she  urged  the  need  for  a  clever 
financial architecture by exploring potential new international sources. In order to solve these 
matters, she proposed an optimal combination of mechanisms, such as the carbon markets, 
the  financial  mechanism  of  the  Convention,  ODA,  national  polices  and  new  sources  of 
finance  are  needed.  The  entities  that  make  the  investment  decisions  are  different  in  each 
sector and the policy and/or financial incentives needed, will vary. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
The  final  session,  included  four  enlightening  presentations,  elaborated  issues  on  adapting 
poverty  eradication  strategies  to  climate  change.  As  the  first  speaker  in  this  session,  Mr. 
Danny Leipziger of World Bank argued that poorer households will be the most affected by 
climate change. He also raised the issue that systemic impacts will also threaten inclusive 
growth.  This  is  so  because  changes  in  relative  prices  will  affect  poverty  and  distribution, 
rising  fiscal  pressures  will  strain  poverty  and  investment  budgets,  and  stress  over  natural 
resources can  elevate  conflict  risk.  He  proposed  several  actions  to  be  done  in  addressing 
climate  change  and  poverty  reduction.  They  are  mitigation  policies  to  adopt  less  Green-
House  Gas  intensive  technologies,  adaptation  strategy  integrated  with  national  poverty 
reduction strategies, economic adjustment impacts of global climate policies and impacts that 
lead to rising commodity prices and changes in trade flow. However, he also stressed that 
mitigation must proceed on a win-win basis with sensitivity to the needs of the poor. Finally 
he  quoted  important  message  from  Schelling  (1992)  that  the  best  defense  for  developing 
countries against climate change may be their own continued development!. 
Meanwhile,  Hakan  Bjorkman  shared  the  other  half  story  of  the  climate  change,  that  is 
beyond the issue of deforestation and rising contribution to the green houses gas. Bjorkman 
conveyed  key  messages  from  a  UNDP  report,  whereby  climate  change  threatens  to 
undermine  Indonesia's  effort  in  poverty  alleviation.  The  impact  is  intensifying  the  risk  and 
vulnerabilities  facing  by  the  poor  people,  placing  further  stress  on  already  over-stretched 
over  coping  mechanism.  So  far  global  attention  has  been  focused  on  mitigation  and 
principally effort to reduce emission and carbon dioxide. These measures are important but 
for the poorest community the most pressing issue how to adapt. 
On  the  other  hand,  HS  Dillon  reiterated  that  developing  countries  dependent  upon 
agriculture will be particularly harmed by global warming. HS Dillon also point out that the 
food  security  does  not only  come  from  impact  of  climate  change  and  the  lack  of  speed  in 
food production to catch the rising demand, but also point the development and trade policies 
practiced  that  caused  depressed  agricultural  prices  leading  to  stagnant  agricultural 
productivity  in  many  places  as  well  as  the  rapacious  institutional  investors  playing  in  the 
commodity  futures  markets.  Any  solution,  therefore,  should  not  only  be  directed  at  cutting 
emissions but also enhancing the capacity of those who stand to suffer most. As part of the 
global  solution,  Dillon  suggested  that  we  focus  on  improving  the  quality  of  our  institutions, 
providing  more  quality  extension  and  easier  access  to  credit  and  other  resources  so  that 
BIS Review 102/2008 
 5
even  the  small  farmers  can  adapt,  and  adopting  sound  agricultural  practices  which  allow 
preserving  wildlife  and  developing  rural  communities  at  the  same  time  in  a  sustainable 
manner. 
Finally  Dr.  Erna  Witoelar  shared  her  important  messages  that  climate  change  is  often 
recognized as a global equity issue. It’s the world’s poorest of the poor who contributed least 
to the atmospheric buildup of greenhouse gases, which are being hardest hit. It is also about 
countries and sections of populations who are the least equipped to deal with the harm they 
face, both for lack of economic resources and as a result of being geographically located in 
higher  vulnerability  areas.  Meanwhile  wealthier  nations  and  populations,  which  have 
contributed the most to the atmospheric changes linked to global warming, are experiencing 
fewer  effects  and  are  also  better  able  to  withstand  them.  She  highlighted  three  important 
approaches that need to be taken into account namely: a holistic approach at all levels of 
governance,  from  local  to  national  to  global;  build  synergies  to  upscale  pilot  projects  and 
good  practices  to  reach  more  regions,  especially  remote  areas  and  multi-stakeholder 
approach where governments, private sector and civil society need to jointly engage, scale 
up  and  harmonized  efforts  to  enable  all  least  developed  regions  to  achieve  their  MDGs. 
Lastly  she  believes  that  climate  change  mitigation  and  adaptation  are  far  more  than 
technology  and  infrastructure.  It  is  about  people’s  resilience  and  building  partnerships  for 
everybody’s informed participation in climate change mitigation and adaptation together with 
efforts to achieve other MDGs. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
We have taken another step forward in shaping a common position for mitigating the global 
climate change impact toward a better life of human beings. Following the Bali Roadmap on 
December  2007,  and  again  through  this  seminar,  the  issues  concerning  the  action  of 
adaptation  and  mitigation  of  climate  change  will  be  discussed  more  comprehensively  in 
searching for an effective and efficient global resolution. 
Having done all these and more, I do believe that we have not only completed some part of 
our preparations for the world actions in mitigating negative global climate change impact, 
but  also  advanced  our  broad  inspirations  for  the  building  of  macroeconomic  and  financial 
stability, for the long lasting prosperity of human being. Considering the multitude of points of 
view and the speakers and participants arguments, some of them conflicting with each other, 
on the various global climate changes impact that we have addressed, it is remarkable that 
we have accomplished as much as we discussed. I can only attribute this productiveness to 
your diligence and dedication and, above all, your will to accommodate and compromise in 
order to arrive at a common ground. For we all know that the stakes are exceedingly high, 
that the quality of life of future generations depends on the efficacy of our present efforts. We 
know  that  human  welfare  is  indivisible  and  that  has  given  us  a  strong  sense  of  common 
purpose which is the unmistakable evidence that in all of us the spirit of Bali is vibrantly alive. 
Indeed,  we  have  not  merely  paid  lip  service  to  history.  Through  our  exertions  during 
yesterday, through what we have accomplished in this seminar, we have endeavored to pay 
proper homage to the first generation of world leaders who met in this island last year. 
My dear Colleagues, 
Distinguished Participants, 
In this meeting you have all generously contributed your valuable thoughts and your power of 
articulation  you  have  also  given  much  of  yourselves,  many  of  you  working  until  the  small 
hours of the morning in order to fulfill this demanding seminar’s agenda. For that I cannot 
thank you enough. 
Also,  I  would  like  to  thank  IMF,  ADB,  GTZ,  UNDP,  and  USAID  for  their  valuable,  partial 
financing of  this  one-and-a  half  day  seminar.  Last  but  not  least,  I  would  like  to  extend  my 
heartfelt appreciation to the organizing committee and all support staffs, who have ensured 
the success of this year’s seminar. 
6 
 BIS Review 102/2008
Before I close this remark, let me bring up an interesting note about Bali. The water found 
here on this paradise island is extremely addictive; once you tried it you will succumb to the 
island’s exotic wonders and return time and time again. So, once is never enough. I urge you 
to make the most of your visit and explore the magnificent sights, tastes and sounds of the 
island, with the hope that the memories that you make will be great, unforgettable ones. And 
finally,  may  God  Almighty  bless  your  journey  home,  and  those  taking  the  green  tour  this 
afternoon, I know you will have a great time! 
BIS Review 102/2008 
 7
