Sada Reddy: Improving access to money in Fiji 
Address  by  Mr  Sada  Reddy,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji,  at  the  official 
opening of ANZ ATM No. 70, Nasese, 5 August 2008. 
 Mr. Robert, Bell, General Manager ANZ Bank 
Management and staff of ANZ Bank 
Distinguished guests 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Introductory remarks 
Good morning to you all 
I would like to thank the ANZ Bank for the kind invitation to open this new ATM, their 70th to 
date. It is certainly an honour for me to be part of another milestone in ANZ’s history and 
growth in Fiji. 
It is always encouraging to see banks in Fiji expanding their services through opening new 
branches and ATMs. Such developments bring banking services closer to the people and the 
community. 
In this regard, I congratulate ANZ for their long term commitment to Fiji and to the economy 
of Fiji. 
ANZ Bank in Fiji 
Let me say a few words on ANZ’s history in Fiji. ANZ’s association with Fiji goes back to the 
1800’s when the Union Bank of Australia, an ancestor of ANZ, began operations in Levuka in 
1880. As you know, Levuka then was the capital of Fiji. 
When Suva was established as the capital, ANZ opened a branch here in 1883. For various 
reasons,  ANZ  withdrew  from  Fiji  by  1895.  However  it  re-established  operations  in  Fiji  in 
1951. Since then, of course, ANZ has grown from strength to strength. 
Today ANZ Bank in Fiji has many points of representation - 16 branches, 2 Prime Banking 
Sites. 2 Business Centres, 831 Electronic Merchants countrywide, 734 EFTPOS terminals, 
24/7 phonebanking and internet services, banking facilities within the concourse and transit 
lounge of Nadi International Airport and an agency at Nausori Airport and is deeply involved 
with mobile rural banking services. 
ANZ is the largest bank in Fiji with total assets of $1.6 billion and forms 40 percent of the 
total banking system. 
ANZ’s rural banking 
Let me say a few words about ANZ’s Rural Banking Services. ANZ started its Rural Banking 
Services  in  October  2004.  To  date,  this  business  has  grown  substantially  from  almost 
nothing to $7 million in deposits. Total lending is approaching $1 million. The customer base 
was more than 50,000 as at end March 2008. 
Through  mobile  banking 
the  rural  areas  of  Tailevu/Naitasiri, 
Namosi/Serua,  Nadroga/Nadi,  Bua/Macuata,  Cakaudrove  and  fly-in  fly-out  operations  to 
Taveuni and Kadavu. Apart from various deposits products, the rural program also includes 
small and micro loans to communities in rural and outlying areas. The Government and the 
trucks,  ANZ  services 
BIS Review 96/2008 
 1
Reserve Bank have supported this initiative of ANZ from the beginning and are pleased to 
see  that  more  and  more  rural  areas  are  being  serviced  through  ANZ  Rural  Banking.  We 
encourage  various  businesses  and  Government  agencies,  including  NLTB,  to  use  these 
services when they wish to make payments such as royalties, land rent etc. 
Financial Literacy programs organised by the United Nations Development Program (UNDP) 
have been conducted in conjunction with ANZ rural banking in these rural areas as well since 
October 2004. 
ATMs 
ATMs  provide  a  very  convenient  way  of  doing  banking.  Customers  can  access  their  bank 
accounts to make cash withdrawals or credit card cash advances and check their account 
balances  as  well  as  topping  up  their  mobile  balances.  With  more  and  more  ATMs  being 
installed around the country, the need to go to a bank for cash has reduced dramatically. I 
am told that people in Fiji use ATMs more than in many other countries. This is seen from the 
frequency of use of each ATM in the country. 
As of today, there are 151 ATMs in Fiji. Of that total, ANZ has 70 ATMs or 46 percent of the 
total. This is an excellent achievement for ANZ in Fiji! 
The location of this ATM in Nasese is going to service a rapidly growing part of Suva. We 
hope that this will lessen the queues at the ATMs in Suva. 
 FIJICLEAR 
While we are on the topic of access to money, I would like to take this opportunity to say a 
few  words  about  FIJICLEAR.  Fiji’s  electronic  payment  system  is  called  FIJICLEAR.  This 
system went live on 30 August 2007 and was launched on 16 October 2007. 
FIJICLEAR  allows  people  to  make  and  receive  payments  electronically  on  the  same  day 
through a commercial bank anywhere in Fiji. FIJICLEAR has been in operation for almost a 
year  but  for  some  reason  many  of  our  people  are  not  using  this  very  easy  and  efficient 
payment system. 
There are a number of benefits of using FIJICLEAR. 
To the Payee i.e. the person receiving money, the benefits include: - 
• 
Funds are credited into the account straight away. So there is no waiting of 3 to 7 
days for funds to be cleared when using a cheque; 
There  is  time  savings  as  one  does  not  have  to  physically  visit  a  bank  to  deposit 
cheque; 
There is no uncertainty of any dishonoured cheques with the associated charges and 
loss of income; 
Immediate crediting of account means that any overdraft limit is reduced and hence 
lower interest charges; 
• 
Immediate crediting of funds will help in cash flow; and 
• 
Reduced overhead or staff costs as there is less paperwork. 
There are also benefits to the Payer i.e. those making the payment: - 
• 
• 
• 
There is less risk of transporting cheques; 
There is savings in time and charges; and 
There is better business relationship with creditors. 
  2 
 BIS Review 96/2008
I  therefore  strongly  encourage  businesses  as  well  as  individuals  to  use  this  modern 
payments  system  to  make  transactions.  The  Payee  should  insist  on  the  Payer  to  use 
FIJICLEAR for payments. 
In the coming months, the Reserve Bank will be working closely with the commercial banks 
to enhance awareness of the system. We hope to reduce overall transaction costs of using 
FIJICLEAR and improve the efficiency of financial transactions in the economy. At present, 
the  banks  charge  the  local  TT  rate  of  around  $10  to  $15  per  transaction.  But  this  charge 
should  go  down  as  the  number  of  transactions  increase.  We  will  be  asking  the  banks  to 
review the current charges to encourage the use of FIJICLEAR. 
Official opening 
Once again, I would like to thank Robert for his kind invitation. I wish him and his team every 
success in their Fiji operations. 
I now have much pleasure in declaring ANZ’s 70th ATM open. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 96/2008 
 3
