Zeti Akhtar Aziz: The development of the Malaysian bond market 
Remarks by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the Launch of 
the Electronic Trading Platform by Bursa Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur, 29 April 2008. 
 Let me first of all thank Bursa Malaysia for inviting me to say a few words on this occasion of 
the  launch  of  the  Electronic  Trading  Platform.  This  initiative  marks  another  important 
advancement  in  the  development  of  the  Malaysian  bond  market.  The  Electronic  Trading 
Platform will take over the function that was previously performed by the Bond Information 
and Dissemination System (BIDS). Bank Negara established BIDS ten years ago, in 1997 to 
provide  market  information  on  domestic  debt  securities.  BIDS  was  developed  as  a 
centralized  database  that  provided  information  on  the  terms  of  the  issue,  details  of  trade 
done  and  the  relevant  information  on  the  various  debt  securities,  to  facilitate  increased 
transparency  and  efficiency  in  the  bond  market.  BIDS  therefore  aided  the  price  discovery 
process thereby promoting secondary and primary activities in the bond market. BIDS was 
revolutionary  in  its  time  as  authorities  in  other  jurisdictions  subsequently  launched  similar 
initiatives in their respective markets. 
This  Electronic  Trading  Platform  is  a  significant  enhancement  to  the  mechanism  in  the 
development of a more vibrant bond market. Indeed, this development is timely because the 
Malaysian  bond  market  is  now  at  the  threshold  of  its  next  stage  of  development.  Several 
factors  have  brought  the  development  of  the  bond  market  to  this  threshold.  Firstly,  large 
investment  projects  of  long-term  gestation  by  the  private  sector  can  now  source  financing 
mainly  from  the  bond  market  as  opposed  to  only  relying  on  the  banking  system.  As  a 
consequence,  the  expansion  of  the  private  debt  securities  market  has  now  exceeded  the 
public  debt  securities  market.  With  the  recovery  of  private  investment  since  2003  and  its 
increased momentum there has been growing expansion of the bond market. 
Secondly, the liberalisation of the bond market to allow non-residents to raise funds from our 
domestic bond market has also contributed further to the growth of the market. Thirdly, an 
important  development  of  Islamic  finance  in  Malaysia  is  the  development  of  the  sukuk 
market. In 2007, the sukuk issuance has exceeded the issuance of conventional bonds. This 
has increased the diversity of asset classes and instruments in the Malaysian bond market. 
Fourthly, there has been a major structural enhancement in the capital market intermediaries 
with  the  introduction  of  investment  banking  in  2006.  With  the  permitted  foreign  interest  in 
investment  banking  raised  to  forty-nine  percent,  foreign  participation  is  encouraged.  In 
addition, Islamic banking institutions, including Islamic subsidiaries may conduct investment 
banking  activities.  These  capital  market 
the 
strengthening of the institutional investors and the fund management industry. The growing 
sophistication of investors has resulted in increasing diversification of portfolios with growing 
interest  in  the  bond  market.  Foreign  holdings  of  debt  securities  outstanding  have  also 
increased from less than 1% in 2000 to 15% in 2007. And finally, these developments have 
been  continuously  reinforced  by  the  strengthening  of  the  financial  infrastructure,  the 
settlement  system,  the  legal  and  regulatory  framework  to  ensure  the  robustness  and 
vibrancy of the bond market. 
Malaysia  has  benefited  immensely  from  the  development  of  the  bond  markets.  As  an 
important source of financing, it contributes to the economic growth process. It also allows for 
more efficient mobilization and allocation of financial resources. With greater efficiency in the 
intermediation  process,  it  reduces  the  cost  of  financing.  It  also  allows  for  the  increased 
diversification  of  risks  both  for  issuers  and  investors.  In  addition,  it  enhances  financial 
stability  through  potential  diversification,  increased  transparency  and  greater  market 
discipline. The development of the bond market also enhances the transmission mechanism 
intermediaries  are  also  reinforced  by 
BIS Review 53/2008 
 1
of  monetary  policy.  Finally,  and  most  importantly,  the  more  developed  bond  market  has 
enhanced our resilience to the implications of increased volatility in the international financial 
markets. 
The Malaysian bond market has several distinguishing features. Firstly, it comprises both the 
conventional  and  Islamic  bond  market.  Secondly,  the  secondary  and  repo  market  is  now 
growing  in  significance.  Turnover  volume  in  the  secondary  market  has  been  steadily 
increasing over the years marking the active participation in the bond market by investors. In 
2007, total annual turnover volume increased by 46% to RM777 million. 
There is also an increased diversity of instruments being issued ranging from asset-backed 
bonds, bonds bearing features such as stepped-up coupons and "floaters" and pass-through 
ABS. Malaysia is also a leader in the development of sukuks and its pioneering efforts have 
seen the introduction of innovative structures such as the exchangeable sukuk musharakah, 
exchangeable sukuk as well as sukuk based on istisna' and ijarah. This is reinforced by the 
diversified tenures of the issues. Malaysia's strong financial links to the traditional and non-
traditional markets such as in the Middle East also allows issuers to diversify their investor 
base.  Malaysia  therefore  continues  to  remain  an  important  destination  for  international 
financial flows that are traded on the New Silk Road. 
In  concluding  my  remarks,  I  wish  to  congratulate  all  those  involved  in  crystallizing  the 
Electronic Trading Platform that is being launched today. This is a further step to create a 
more vibrant bond market. The growing role of the bond market in mobilizing and allocating 
funds not only in the domestic financial system but also across borders, to and from other 
parts of the world, has demonstrated the maturity of the Malaysian bond market. This has not 
only  strengthened  international  financial  inter-linkages  but  has  increased  the  potential  for 
greater economic integration and shared prosperity. 
2 
 BIS Review 53/2008
