Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: From Tuscany’s 19th century currency, the fiorino, 
to the euro – dialogue on international finance 
Speech by Mr Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, in the Sala Luca Giordano at the Palazzo Medici Riccardi, Florence, 15 May 2008. 
 I’m very pleased to come back to Florence to consider a highly topical subject linked to the 
effects of the financial turmoil on the world economy. 
To  understand  the  current  economic  situation  and  the  current  short  to  medium-term 
prospects we need to take a step back and consider the imbalances that were building up on 
our continent until mid-2007, imbalances that were evidently unsustainable and that underlie 
the corrections we are going through. 
We have to distinguish three main imbalances. 
In  chronological  order,  the  first  one  concerns  international  payments.  Over  the  years,  the 
United States has accumulated huge deficits on its current account which have grown out of 
a lack of domestic savings. The US economy was essentially growing by borrowing from the 
rest of the world. In 2007 the US current account deficit amounted to over 6% of its GDP. 
For  years  the  problem  of  the  sustainability  of  America’s  external  imbalance  has  been 
emphasised,  especially  in  Europe,  which  feared  the  risk  of  a  disorderly  unwinding  with 
destabilising effects on the financial markets. The typical response from the other side of the 
Atlantic to such fears was that in a globalised world these imbalances are physiological and 
do not cause problems so long as they are financed with capital inflows. Moreover, the status 
of the dollar as sole international reserve currency used to guarantee such financing. In the 
end,  the  theory  (which  in  fact  is  no  more  than  an  accounting  identity)  was  put  forward 
according to which America’s deficit was in reality the other side of the coin of an excess of 
savings in the developing countries, resulting inter alia from the fixed exchange rate policy 
vis-à-vis the dollar. The adjustment had therefore to start first of all from a modification of the 
policy  of  the  other  countries,  rather  than  from  the  recovery  of  the  savings  capacity  of 
American  households.  In  synthesis,  the  prevailing  theory  up  to  recently  was  that  the  US 
imbalance  was  physiological  and  its  correction,  if  any,  would  have  implied  no  painful 
adjustment on the US economy. 
The  second  imbalance  that  has  built  up  in  recent  years  relates  to  the  development  of 
financial products that have loosened the ties between lenders and borrowers. Securitisation, 
which has enabled lenders to spread risk better, restructuring it and selling it to others, has 
however  reduced  the  incentive  to  value  it  correctly,  either  by  those  who  originated  the 
product  or  those  who  acquired  it.  The  sub-prime  mortgages  in  the  United  States  are  an 
example of how certain risks can be underestimated if they are sold on to others, perhaps 
with opaque contracts. The loss of trust in certain kinds of financial contract, in particular in 
relation to their liquidity, has reduced the incentive to finance such operations, giving rise to 
chain reactions in all the markets. 
In this case too, the alarm was raised some time ago. I recall, for instance, a Financial Times 
article  at  the  end  of  January  2007,  six  months  before  the  start  of  the  turbulence,  which 
quoted  a comment  made  by  the  President  of  the  ECB  at Davos,  namely  that  international 
markets were underestimating risks and had to prepare for a substantial adjustment in the 
prices of financial assets.  
The response of the market operators to these warnings, in particular from the other side of 
the Atlantic, was: “We’ll keep dancing until the music stops”. One should not interfere with 
the market mechanism or lean against asset prices. Financial innovation, also in mortgage 
BIS Review 61/2008 
 1
markets,  was  a  positive  development  as  it  allowed  households,  also  the  less  well-off,  to 
finance consumption and investment. 
Not  everybody  shared  this  position.  As  early  as  February  2005,  Paul  Volcker,  former 
Chairman of the Federal Reserve had drawn attention to the imbalances in the US economy, 
ranging from the balance of payments deficit and the possible bubble in house prices to the 
excessive  household  indebtedness.  In  his  view,  a  correction  of  these  imbalances  was 
inevitable.  
The  third  imbalance  is  the  one  that  results  from  globalisation  and  from  the  escape  from 
poverty of hundreds of millions of people, notably in China, India and elsewhere in Asia as 
well as in Africa, a change which is putting pressure on energy and agricultural commodity 
prices.  The  imbalance  between  growth  in  global  demand  and  rigidity  of  supply  points  to 
scarcities that are reflected in prices. The uncertainties of the financial markets have in the 
end contributed to price tensions. 
Also in this instance, the alarm was raised some time ago, although little notice was taken. 
The price of oil, for example, was around USD 20 a barrel in 1999 and in the eight years 
thereafter it rose fivefold (tripled when priced in euro). Fortunately, European countries have 
resisted  the  temptation  to  reduce  energy  taxes,  which  would  have  led  to  an  increase  in 
demand  and  therefore  ultimately  raise  the  rich  countries’  oil  bill.  On  the  other  hand,  other 
industrial  countries  have  continued  to  keep  energy  taxation  at  very  low  levels,  in  order  to 
support consumption. In some cases production of “bio-fuels” has been encouraged, which 
has led to further distortions in energy and food prices. The main oil and energy companies 
until two years ago have continued to price oil at USD 40 a barrel in their industrial plans, 
thus  underestimating  the  need  –  and  the  opportunity  –  for  investment  in  order  to  increase 
supply. 
The combination of these three imbalances is the source of the economic slowdown under 
way,  above  all  in  the  United  States,  accompanied  by  strong  inflationary  pressures  and  by 
financial turbulence unfolding since the last summer.  
Overcoming the current economic phase implies some correction of the imbalances I have 
just mentioned. 
Two questions come to mind: 
1. 
2. 
The reply to the first question is that probably more time will be needed than is thought to 
overcome the current adjustment because the imbalances that underlie this critical period go 
back a long way and will take time to unwind.  
Time  will  be  needed,  in  particular,  before  American  households  start  saving  again  in  a 
significant  way,  to  run  down  part  of  their  debt.  In  the  short  term,  this  may  involve  slower 
growth for some years. 
Time  will  be  needed  before  the  financial  operators  regain  trust  in  the  capacity  to  resort  to 
sound sources of finance so as to be able to reduce their current high appetite for liquidity. 
Some financial instruments will remain relatively illiquid, until the prospect of a capital gain 
will not become realistic gain. It will not however be possible to return to the very low levels 
of  risk  remuneration  seen  in  recent  years.  Credit  institutions  will  have  to  rethink  their 
business  models  in  order  to  better  assess  the  opportunities  for  growth  based  on  the 
availability of capital. 
Time will also be needed before the supply of commodities can react to demand in such a 
way as to keep prices down. As for agricultural commodities, the use of new productive land 
implies long-term investments and implementation times. Climate change could increase the 
variability of supply. The same applies to energy commodities. Without a stronger policy of 
How long will the current critical economic and financial phase last?  
What can economic policy do to speed up the correction and alleviate its costs?  
2 
 BIS Review 61/2008
energy saving, in particular in the US, the equilibrium between demand and supply cannot be 
ensured at moderate price levels. 
In brief, there are, above all, structural factors at the heart of the current crisis which will take 
time  to  recover.  This  suggests  that  to  accelerate  the  adjustment  economic  policies  of  a 
structural rather than cyclical nature are necessary.  
Let's  turn  to  those  economic  policies.  What  are  the  do’s  and  don’ts  in  the  light  of  both 
economic analysis and of past experience?  
Let’s start with the don’ts. What do the errors of the past teach us and, in particular, what 
was done in earlier crises, in 1929, 1974-75, 1992-93 and in 2001-2002?  
There are at least four errors that should not be repeated.  
The first error that should be avoided is to allow that some exogenous price increases lead to 
a  generalised  higher  inflation  on  a  permanent  basis.  The  rise  in  headline  inflation  must 
remain temporary and limited to food and energy prices, and not spill over other sectors of 
the economy. From this standpoint, the gravest danger is to index wages to inflation and, in 
particular, to inflation of external origin. This is a well-known finding in the economic literature 
and broadly confirmed by experience. The countries with wage indexation mechanisms are 
those that have least capacity to cope with external shocks like the oil price increase. They 
tend  to  feed  into  a  wage-price  spiral,  with  negative  effects  on  purchasing  power  and 
employment.  This  experience  is  not  unique  to  the  1970s.  Even  today  in  the  euro  area, 
countries  like  Spain  that  still  have  indexing  mechanisms  have  above-average  inflation. 
Unemployment  has  started  to  rise  again  –  the  first  sign  of  an  economic  slowdown;  the 
unemployment rate in Spain is at around 9%, compared with 8% in the middle of last year. In 
Italy, where there is no automatic indexing, the unemployment rate is below 6%, the lowest 
level since the early 1980s. 
It would be especially damaging for employment and inflation if the reform of the Italian wage 
bargaining  system  currently  under  debate,  aimed  at  tying  wage  levels  more  strongly  to 
productivity, were to contain inflation indexation clauses. Even worse would be the situation if 
a possible indexation were to be tied, as some are advocating, to a price index of frequently 
purchased  goods,  such  as  that  developed  by  ISTAT  for  analytical  purposes  and  reflecting 
only the frequency of purchases, not their economic value.  
The  second  error  to  avoid  is  to  tackle  the  effects  deriving  from  a  supply  shock,  like  that 
connected to the increase in the oil price, with policies to stimulate demand. If the increase in 
oil  price  and  other  commodities  is  protracted,  anticyclical  policies  simply  postpone  the 
adjustment by several months, making it more expensive. From the first oil shock – in the 
mid-1970s  –  it  is  possible  to  gain  very  clear  insights  that  ought  not  to  be  forgotten.  The 
comparison between the experience of Germany, which avoided using monetary and fiscal 
policy to compensate for the loss in purchasing power caused by the increase in oil price, 
and  that  of  Italy,  which  instead  sought  to  stimulate  domestic  demand  is  illuminating.  The 
German  economy  and  that  of  other  countries  which  followed  the  same  path  emerged 
stronger  from  that  difficult  phase  of  adjustment  than  countries  like  Italy  which  followed  the 
illusions of Keynesianism and only engineered a higher inflation rate.1 The depreciation of 
the exchange rate did not allow to increase market share on a sustainable basis. Italy is still 
paying for that error, with a public debt above 100% of GDP and a debt burden that weighs 
heavily on taxpayers.  
The third error that history invites us not to repeat is to put up protectionist barriers to stop or 
impede the economic and financial integration under way at global level. Experience shows 
that  such  measures  damage  economic  growth  and  tend  to  worsen  crises.  The  1929  crisis 
                                                 
1   See Figures 1-4 in the Annex. 
BIS Review 61/2008 
 3
was characterised not only by its deepness but also by the policy mistakes committed at the 
time,  which  introduced  protectionist  barriers  with  the  aim  of  protecting  national  economies 
from international competition in the hope that this would succeed in better coping with the 
crisis.  Many  countries  adopted  measures  to  restrict  trade  with  the  aim  of  favouring  local 
production at the cost of imports and trying to protect jobs. In June 1930 the United States 
introduced  the  Smoot-Hawley  Tariff  Act,  which  imposed  disproportionately  high  duties  on 
imported  goods.  Other  countries  took  retaliatory  measures.  International  trade  declined 
(some say it contracted sharply), deepening the depression and delaying the recovery.2  
At the current juncture one the few factors supporting growth is international trade, driven in 
particular  by  emerging  economies.  Without  this  contribution,  growth  would  be  stalling 
completely in advanced economies. Under these conditions, thinking of curbing international 
trade would be a mistake in the same way as in 1929. 
To  isolate  a  country  from  globalisation  means  weakening  it  economically.  The  empirical 
evidence shows that there is a clear relationship between a country’s degree of integration in 
the global economy and its economic performance over a relatively long period of time. It is 
the  more  integrated  countries  that  compete  better  and  develop,  not  those  which  shut 
themselves off from competition. 
The  microeconomic  evidence  confirms  the  macroeconomic  trends.  Firms,  including  Italian 
ones,  which  have  restructured  and  are  exposed  to  international  competition  have  become 
more productive, have started to regain market share, have improved their productivity and 
started  to  pay  their  employees  higher  wages.  By  contrast,  firms  which  are  protected  from 
competition  and  benefit  from  having  a  monopoly  or  from  national  or  local  restrictions  on 
trade,  and  perhaps  even  benefit  from  state  aid  tend  to  pass  their  higher  costs  onto 
consumers.  I  don’t  need  to  tell  you  that  there  are  some  Italian  firms  which  are  flourishing 
without  state  aid,  while  others  don’t  have  real  growth  opportunities  and  continue  to  be  a 
burden on taxpayers because they receive support from the public sector.  
Finally, protection from international competition means higher prices, as quotas and tariffs 
are a form of taxation. This weakens consumers’ purchasing power, and particular affects the 
poor. There is really no need to favour price increases in these times of higher inflationary 
pressures. 
The  fourth  mistake  that  needs  to  be  avoided  is  to  intervene  in  financial  markets  without 
considering the perverse incentives that may result from these actions. Whatever measure 
aimed  at  supporting  financial  institutions  in  distress  due  to  market  turbulence  should  not 
allow those who have made mistakes to avoid paying the price for them. Should this happen, 
they would be tempted to do the same thing again. 
The  measures  taken  in  recent  months  by  central  banks,  including  the  ECB,  aimed  at 
supporting market liquidity but, at the same time, not to relieve investors from solvency risks, 
go  in  this  direction.  Even  the  rescue  operations  undertaken  in  the  US  in  order  to  protect 
systemic stability have been accompanied by some form of penalty for the managers as well 
as the shareholders who had not paid enough attention to their behaviour. 
It is also important to minimise regulatory changes that could induce investors to cover up 
their  losses,  especially  during  an  adjustment  of  market  prices,  as  this  could  weigh  on 
transparency and market confidence. It is surely desirable to support long-term as opposed 
to  speculative  investment,  and  protect  long-term  investment  from  the  perverse  effects  of 
market volatility, but this should be accompanied by supervisory measures that would certify 
that the investment in question is really a long-term one and is not subject to liquidity risks. 
                                                 
2   See,  for  example,  D.  Irwin  (1998):  “The  Smoot-Hawley  Tariff:  A  Quantitative  Assessment”,  Review  of 
Economics and Statistics, 80, 2, pp. 326-334. 
4 
 BIS Review 61/2008
Let me now turn to the things that should be done. Also in this case I would like to highlight 
four of them. Three of them involve actions at European level, as either the competence has 
been transferred to that level or the international partners are of such large size that it would 
be futile for individual European countries to address them separately. 
A first important step has already been taken: it is the euro. I will not dwell on the benefits 
that citizens and firms gain from having a stable currency like the euro in such a financial 
crisis, even though they do not often realise them. It is important not to forget it. 
Let  me  just  recall  how  the  US  recession  in  the  early  1990s  affected  Europe  in  1992-93, 
leading  –  in  the  presence  of  uncoordinated  economic  policies  within  Europe  –  to  serious 
economic  and  financial  turbulence.  The  ERM  crisis  and  the  exit  of  the  Italian  lira  and  the 
British pound in the autumn of 1992 as well as the widening of the fluctuation bands of the 
ERM led to large changes in competitiveness, with an overall contractional impact even on 
the stronger economies such as Germany. 
It is difficult to imagine what would have happened in recent months without the euro. If the 
past  is  a  good  guide  to  understand  the  future,  we  can  be  sure  that  Italian  inflation  and 
interest rates would be higher, with negative repercussions on consumption and investment. 
We can only guess what our oil bill would now be if we had a weak currency instead of the 
euro. Likewise, just imagine the situation for households having mortgage debt who would 
have to pay substantially higher interest rates. 
Monetary  stability  requires  a  monetary  policy  focused  on  medium-term  price  stability. 
Especially in a phase of higher uncertainty such as the one we are currently experiencing 
there  must  be  no  doubt  about  the  priorities  of  the  central  bank,  or  about  its  strategy  and 
independence. There can certainly be no doubt about the attitude of the European Central 
Bank. Those who had doubts in the past must have now changed their minds. 
The second line of action concerns financial markets. On this matter there is now a precise 
action  plan,  agreed  at  international  level  within  the  framework  of  the  Financial  Stability 
Forum. Within 100 days a number of regulatory, and self-regulatory, measures need to be 
approved, aimed at improving transparency and risk management. Among these measures 
some  are  particularly  relevant:  the  introduction  of  standards  for  disclosing  the  exposure  to 
off-balance sheet items; asset valuation methods where the underlying asset is illiquid; more 
generally,  a  higher  degree  of  transparency  for  banks’  exposure  to  structured  financial 
products. Rating agencies are called upon to improve their evaluation and to reduce possible 
conflicts  of  interest.  As  far  as  regulators  are  concerned,  more  international  cooperation  is 
required, for example through the creation of a “college of supervisors” for large and global 
financial groups. 
The third priority is to tackle the problems related to global imbalances, together with other 
main  players  of  globalisation  in  the  relevant  bilateral  and  multilateral  fora.  Globalisation 
cannot  be  stopped.  Governments  must  act,  within  the  framework  of  existing  rules.  In  this 
regard, Europe has a major responsibility.  
Concerning international trade, Europe can only gain from the completion of the Doha round, 
so  that  WTO  rules  are  respected,  particularly  regarding  intellectual  property  rights.  The 
recent  price  increases  of  agricultural  products  should  make  it  easier  for  the  EU  to  make 
some  concessions  on  the  Common  Agricultural  Policy,  in  order  to  eliminate  the  subsidies 
which  tend  to  distort  international  prices.  This  would  be  an  advantage  for  European 
producers and consumers alike. 
Regarding currencies, it is important to continue talking with those countries which still peg 
their currencies to the US dollar, although their economies show a higher growth rate and a 
strongly positive balance of payments. Pegging to the US dollar slows down the adjustment 
of global imbalances. A speeding-up of the appreciation of the exchange rate of the yuan vis-
à-vis the US dollar as well as the euro would be in the interest not only of the international 
community,  but  of  China  itself.  In  the  past  12  months,  the  exchange  rate  of  the  Chinese 
BIS Review 61/2008 
 5
currency has gained approximately 9% vis-à-vis the US dollar, while losing about 3% vis-à-
vis the euro. Only in the past months have markets experienced the inverse process, with the 
yuan gaining also against the euro. 
The appreciation of the yuan would allow China to effectively counteract internal inflationary 
pressures and to reduce the balance of payments surplus, which fuels the accumulation of 
global imbalances. The increase in food prices should ease fears that an appreciation of the 
yuan could penalise the income of rural areas, which are still quite sizeable. 
The  euro  area  has  to  act  together,  exerting  some  pressure  on  the  IMF,  which  last  year 
adopted a resolution to effectively strengthen its surveillance of currency markets. 
Lastly, regarding energy issues, it is necessary that developed countries, including Europe, 
put  a  stronger  emphasis  on  energy  savings  and  climate  change.  The  experience 
accumulated in recent years has confirmed that although energy saving measures can slow 
down growth in the short term, costs connected to energy waste can be much greater in the 
long run. 
I  will  now  close  with  the  fourth  line  of  action,  which  is  linked  to  the  previous  one,  though 
being  on  a  more  national  scale.  The  ability  of  a  European  country  to  become  part  of  the 
globalisation process depends not only on EU-wide initiatives but also on internal measures 
aimed at supporting economic growth. In essence, there are only two ways of absorbing the 
shock  deriving  from  price  increases  in  raw  materials  and  to  prevent  it  from  becoming  a 
reduction  in  purchasing  power.  The  first  way  is  to  increase  productivity  in  order  to  allow 
wages to grow in a non-inflationary manner. The second is the reduction in the price of items 
other than energy and food. Of course, these are not easy ways, but they are the only ones 
which can allow European economies to grow while preserving the purchasing power of its 
citizens, even in the presence of a worsening in the terms of trade. 
The measures which should be taken are well known: they are in the field of competition, the 
liberalisation  of  markets,  services  and  labour  and  above  all  the  development  of  human 
capital, which constitutes the first basis of productivity and hence income. This is the path 
taken by those European countries which have experienced higher growth than others in the 
past months and years, while at the same time sharing the same currency, the euro.  
The  data  released  today  on  real  GDP  growth  in  the  first  quarter  of  this  year  confirm  that 
those  countries  which  have  followed  the  path  of  improvement,  structural  reform  and  cost 
discipline have shown a greater resilience and have managed to achieve growth even when 
faced with a negative external shock.  
This is the way to go if we want to move away from the current stalemate.  
6 
 BIS Review 61/2008
Figure 1. Nominal short-term interest rate, Italy and West Germany, 1970-1986 
Source: OECD. 
Figure 2. Real short-term interest rate, Italy and West Germany, 1970-1986 
Source: OECD. 
BIS Review 61/2008 
   7
Figure 3. Inflation rates in Italy and West Germany, 1970-1986 
Source: OECD. 
Figure  4.  Competitiveness  as  measured  by  the  relative  unit  labour  cost,  Italy  vs. 
Germany (1970=1) 
Source: European Commission. 
  8 
  BIS Review 61/2008
