José Manuel González-Páramo: Globalisation, macroeconomic stability 
and monetary policy at a time of financial turmoil 
Speech  by  Mr  José  Manuel  González-Páramo,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
European  Central  Bank,  at  the  FCAVN  Seminar  on  “Globalisation  in  the  XXI  Century: 
Challenges and Dilemmas”, San Sebastián, 5 September 2008. 
 1.  
Introduction 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  be  here  in  San  Sebastián  and  I  would  like  to  thank  the 
organisers – Federación de Cajas de Ahorros Vasco-Navarras and, in particular Mr Pedro 
Martínez  de  Alegría  Pinedo  –  for  giving  me  the  opportunity  to  participate  in  this  Seminar, 
which continues what is by now a long tradition started in 1991. 
Like in the past, the organisers have challenged us by choosing a very important but rather 
“difficult” subject: the challenges and dilemmas that the financial globalisation process poses 
for policy-makers, economic agents and the society at large.  
Financial  globalisation  has  potentially  very  significant  implications  for  the  welfare  of  our 
economies, as the experience of the turmoil in international financial markets over the last 
year shows. It is therefore very important that we improve our understanding of how financial 
globalisation is changing the structure of our economies and the way they work. Therefore, 
we  should  congratulate  the  organisers  for  promoting  a  public  debate  on  this  issue.  In  my 
intervention  today,  I  will  focus  on  the  relationship  between  financial  globalisation  and  the 
market turmoil that we have experienced since last year, and some of the lessons that we 
have learned.  
I would also like to use this opportunity to share with you some considerations about the euro 
area economy. Therefore, in my intervention I will briefly discuss the state and the outlook for 
economic growth and inflation in the euro area and their implications for monetary policy.  
Different dimensions of globalisation  
2.  
Globalisation  is  a  catch-all  term  used  to  describe  the  growing  interdependence  of  the 
international  economy  via  trade,  production  and  financial  market  linkages  over  recent 
decades. A number of key indicators of globalisation compiled by academic researchers and 
international organisations (e.g. the size of international capital markets, portfolio investment 
and  FDI,  trade  openness,  international  competition,  etc.)  show  that  the  current  wave  of 
globalisation  gained  momentum  at  around  the  beginning  of  the  1980s  and  significantly 
accelerated in the course of the 1990s.1  
Understanding globalisation is very important for central banks since globalisation may – via 
a number of channels – affect key elements of the monetary policy framework, such as the 
inflation  formation  process  and  the  monetary  transmission  mechanism.2  In  particular, 
changes in the structure and workings of the economy prompted by globalisation may alter 
                                                 
1   For a review of issues related to financial globalisation see BIS (2006), “Financial globalisation”, BIS Paper 
N. 32, December. 
2   See Ciccarelli, M. and Mojon, B. (2005), "Global inflation", European Central Bank Working Paper No. 537. 
BIS Review 105/2008 
 1
the relative importance of the various transmission channels of monetary policy impulses.3 
This is indeed one of the major challenges posed by globalisation, to recall the theme of this 
seminar.  
The theme of the seminar is also the dilemmas arising from globalisation. The President of 
the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, Richard Fisher, once remarked that "One cannot make 
monetary  policy  without  being  aware  of  the  forces  of  globalization  acting  upon  our 
economy".4  Yet,  we  still  know  relatively  little  about  how  globalisation  has  affected  our 
economies. This is partly because the current wave of globalisation is still fairly new. Thus, 
its impact on the structure of the economy may yet to emerge in the data or may be hard to 
discern using analytical tools, such as econometric models, based on regularities drawn from 
the study of a less globalised world. Besides, over the last few decades, our economies have 
also  undergone  other  structural  changes  (for  instance,  in  the  monetary  policy  regime)  that 
may render it difficult to disentangle the specific effect of globalisation from those of changes 
elsewhere in the economy.  
At the same time, even in a globalised world, inflation remains a monetary phenomenon in 
the  long  run  and  central  banks  retain  their  key  role  and  responsibility  in  preserving  price 
stability. If anything, the commitment of central banks to price stability becomes even more 
necessary  since  a  solid  anchoring  of  inflation  expectations  at  levels  consistent  with  price 
stability is essential in a rapidly changing global economy, where inflation dynamics can be 
affected in various ways and adverse shocks are more easily and rapidly transmitted across 
countries. 
One  of  the  main  sources  of  changes  to  the  global  economy  during  the  current  wave  of 
globalisation has been the acceleration in financial integration across countries, particularly 
since the second half of the 1990s. While some researchers often point out that the current 
level  of  openness  of  international  capital  markets  is  still  lower  than  that  prevailing  before 
World  War  I,  there  is  no  doubt  that  we  live  in  a  world  in  which  advances  in  financial  and 
communications technology combined with regulatory and institutional changes have led to 
international  capital  markets  and  financial  institutions  becoming  more  closely  interrelated 
than ever in the past.5  
Growing  financial  integration  among  countries  and  regional  areas  is  a  potential  source  of 
benefits,  notably  due  to  enhanced  opportunities  for  international  risk  sharing.  Indeed, 
financial globalisation may provide countries with instruments to hedge against idiosyncratic 
shocks in order to better smooth consumption smoothing, thereby yielding significant welfare 
gains. In addition, larger integration into the international financial system may contribute to 
the  efficient  functioning  of  the  entire  economy  by  providing  additional  financing  at  a 
reasonable  cost  to  domestic  agents,  by  facilitating  the  transfer  of  technology  from  abroad 
and by stimulating the performance of the domestic financial sector.  
However, financial globalisation may also entail some risks. Increased international financial 
integration is likely to lead to a larger sensitivity to external spillovers. Under more extreme 
circumstances,  the  experience  of  some  developing  countries  suggests  that  increased 
integration  into  international  financial  system,  if  not  accompanied  by  the  establishment  of 
high-quality  institutional  and  regulatory  frameworks  as  well  as  sound  macroeconomic 
policies, may make countries more vulnerable to episodes of financial and macroeconomic 
instability.  
                                                 
3   See González-Páramo, J.M. (2007) “Globalisation and monetary policy”, Lecture at Suomen Pankki, Helsinski, 
15 March (http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2007/html/sp070316.en.html). 
4   Fisher,  R.W.  (2005).  "Globalization  and  monetary  policy",  Warren  and  Anita  Manshel  lecture  in  American 
foreign policy, Harvard University, 3 November. 
5   See for instance Stanley Fischer’s analysis in BIS (2006), cit. 
2 
 BIS Review 105/2008
The financial turmoil 
3.  
The  episode  of  financial  market  turmoil  that  we  have  experienced  since  August  2007 
provides a good illustration of how, in a globalised economy, an idiosyncratic shock can be 
propagated  more  rapidly  and  through  a  variety  of  new  channels  to  seemingly  distant 
countries and markets. Indeed, the turmoil originated in a relatively small segment of the US 
economy – the sub-prime segment of the mortgage market – that has no obvious relationship 
with the Eurosystem’s sphere of interest. Yet, its quick propagation caused an increase in 
volatility and a decline in liquidity in a variety of markets all around the world, including the 
euro  area  market  for  inter-bank  unsecured  loans  that  represents  a  key  component  of  the 
money market and the starting point of the area-wide monetary transmission mechanism. 
The decrease in liquidity was most obvious for the markets directly related to the core of the 
current  turmoil,  namely  the  market  for  sub-prime  mortgage-backed  securities  (MBSs). 
However, since the start of the turmoil problems of illiquidity have spread further, affecting 
other asset-backed securities (ABSs), asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP), and basically 
all  structured  credit  instruments,  such  as  collateralised  debt  obligations  (CDOs).  Also  the 
liquidity in the secured non-government repurchase agreement (repo) markets was heavily 
impacted,  as  many  banks  no  longer  wanted  to  accept  the  types  of  securities  mentioned 
above  (MBSs,  ABSs  at  large,  and  CDOs)  as  underlying  collateral  in  repo  transactions. 
Another  market  segment  that  saw  a  partial  (temporarily,  even  severe)  deterioration  of 
liquidity conditions is the foreign exchange swap market, which is very important for banks 
managing liquidity in different currencies. Occasionally, poor liquidity conditions have been 
reported even in markets for securities historically regarded as very liquid and safe, such as 
the  market  for  bank  covered  bonds  or,  even,  the  government  bonds  of  some  developed 
economies.  
To understand, at least partly, how the disturbances in a fairly domestic-oriented part of the 
US economy – a small segment of its housing market – could have spread across borders, 
financial markets and institutions all around the world, we must bear in mind the increasing 
importance of credit securitisation and the emergence of credit derivatives in global financial 
markets. Credit securitisation essentially means to convert highly illiquid loans into liquid and 
tradable securities that can be sold to investors. While the origination of bank loans remains 
to  a  large  extent  level,  financial  globalisation  has  made  the  related  securities  available  to 
investors worldwide.  
Some scholars have nevertheless challenged the recurrent claim that the current turmoil is 
unprecedented.6  Indeed,  past  financial  disturbances  and  crises  have  often  had  an 
international dimension and cross-border financial contagion is certainly “no new thing under 
the sun”. However, a number of factors, including its speed of transmission and scope, set 
the current episode of turmoil apart from previous experiences.  
Policy responses 
4.  
Let  me  briefly  elaborate  on  the  actions  taken  by  the  ECB  to  address  the  financial  market 
turbulences. In both “normal” and “turbulent” times, the primary objective of the Eurosystem’s 
open market operations is to keep the overnight rate as close as possible to the policy rate. 
However, during the recent period of turbulence, open market operations have aimed also at 
ensuring  the  continued  access  of  solvent  banks  to  liquidity,  notably  by  contributing  to 
smoothening  the  impaired  functioning  of  the  money  market.  By  doing  so,  the  ECB  has 
intended  to  contribute  to  re-establishing  confidence  among  market  participants  and  to 
                                                 
6   See  Bordo,  M.  (2007),  “The  crisis  of  2007:  The  same  old  story,  only  the  players  have  changed”,  Remarks 
prepared for the Fed Chicago and IMF Conference on Globalisation and Systemic Risk. 
BIS Review 105/2008 
 3
safeguarding  financial  stability  and  the  appropriate  functioning  of  the  monetary  policy 
transmission mechanism.  
From the very first day of the financial market turmoil, in an environment of increased liquidity 
risk  and  in  response  to  banks’  changed  liquidity  demand  pattern,  the  ECB  has  achieved 
these objectives in two different ways.  
First, the Eurosystem has adjusted the distribution of liquidity supplied over the course of the 
maintenance period, by frontloading the supply of liquidity at the beginning of the period and 
reducing it later, so that the total amount of liquidity over an entire maintenance period has 
remained unchanged.  
Second, during the turmoil the Eurosystem has applied different open market procedures to 
supply liquidity to the banking system. More specifically, the use of fine-tuning operations has 
been  more  frequent  than  in  “normal  times”  because  of  the  unpredictability  of  liquidity 
demand.  In  addition,  the  amount  of  refinancing  provided  via  longer-term  refinancing 
operations  with  3-month  duration  and,  since  April  2008,  also  with  6-month  maturity  has 
increased  significantly  with  a  view  to  maintaining  smooth  conditions  in  the  term  money 
market.  At  the  same  time,  the  amount  of  refinancing  provided  via  the  one-week  main 
refinancing  operations  has  been  reduced  correspondingly,  so  that  the  total  amount  of 
outstanding refinancing has remained unchanged.  
Given  the  global  nature  of  the  financial  turmoil,  central  banks  have  strengthened  their 
cooperation,  first  through  enhanced  information  exchange  and  collective  monitoring  of 
market developments and later on by coordinated steps to provide liquidity. Since December 
2007, the ECB has, in cooperation with the US Federal Reserve and together with the Swiss 
National Bank, been conducting several term auction facilities – the so-called TAF-operations 
– to provide USD liquidity to euro area banks. In practice, through these operations the ECB 
grants loans in USD to euro area banks, on behalf of the US Fed, with a maturity of 28 days 
and, since August 2008, also of 84 days. These liquidity-providing operations do not have a 
direct effect on euro liquidity conditions, but are conducted to address the availability of US 
dollar funding for euro area banks and aim at improving global funding conditions. 
As regards other central banks, in general their primary response to the market turmoil has 
been  to  intervene  to  keep  short-term  money  market  rates  near  target  rates,  through  more 
active  liquidity  management.  Moreover,  central  banks  have  aimed  to  ease  the  increasing 
pressure in term money markets by: (1) increasing the viability of standing loan facilities as 
backstop funding options; (2) boosting the share of longer-term operations in total refinancing 
provided 
the  range  of  acceptable  collateral  and  eligible 
counterparties, in those countries where it was needed; and (4) establishing security lending 
facilities.7
to  banks;  (3)  expanding 
Lessons from the turmoil  
4.  
Whilst  it  is  too  early  to  make  a  definitive  assessment,  certain  supervisory,  regulatory  and 
operational  issues  can  already  be  identified  as  warranting  further  attention  or  action. 
Initiatives are already underway at the international and EU level to address these various 
issues. Let me highlight some of them. 
Lessons for supervisors and regulators 
4.1  
The recent episode of financial turmoil has reminded us that financial globalisation makes the 
safeguarding of financial stability a more interdependent task, requiring effective coordinated 
international action aimed at addressing financial system vulnerabilities.  
                                                 
7   See CGFS Study Group, “Central bank operations in response to the financial turmoil”, CGFS Paper 31. 
4 
 BIS Review 105/2008
Against  this  background,  both  the  public  and  the  private  sector  have  undertaken  a  major 
collective effort to identify measures needed to strengthen the resilience of the domestic and 
international financial systems in the longer term in order to avoid the recurrence of similar 
events in the future.  
Particularly important in this respect is the report of the Financial Stability Forum (FSF) on 
“Enhancing  Market  and  Institutional  Resilience”  that  has  been  fully  endorsed  by  the 
international community and acts as the main reference for the necessary improvements. In 
this  context,  let  me  briefly  recall  some  of  the  key  areas  in  which  the  report  has  identified 
room for improvement: (i) some aspects of the prudential framework, relating to capital and 
liquidity  risk  as  well  as  to  banks’  liquidity  risk  management  practices;  (ii)  transparency, 
including  full  disclosure  of  banks’  exposures  on  structured  products  and  off-balance  sheet 
vehicles; (iii) valuation standards, especially as regards marking-to-market illiquid assets; (iv) 
market functioning, including possible conflicts of interest of credit rating agencies and their 
role in rating structured finance instruments; and (v) authorities’ responsiveness to risks and 
arrangements for crisis management. 
Having identified the main areas for intervention, the key issue is now to ensure the rapid 
and  effective  implementation  of  the  respective  recommendations  in  the  FSF  report.  In 
particular, the short-term measures put forward by the FSF and endorsed by the G7 in April 
this  year  represent  immediate  priorities  and  thus  a  time  horizon  of  100  days  for  their 
implementation  has  been  set.  While  a  more  thorough  review  of  the  progress  in  the 
implementation of these recommendations is due for the G7 meeting in October, the results 
of  a  preliminary  assessment  is  encouraging.  Indeed,  progress  has  been  observed  in  a 
number of areas identified as requiring immediate action.  
In  addition,  the  recent  market  correction  has  exposed  a  number  of  more  structural 
weaknesses  of  the  financial  system  that  represent  medium-term  priorities  for  policy  work. 
Some of the topics of critical importance from a central banking perspective include: (1) to 
ensure  adequate  transparency  regarding  financial  markets,  institutions  and  financial 
instruments; (2) the effective and timely implementation of the new Basel II framework, after 
revising  detected  shortcomings  (for  instance  related  to  any  pro-cyclical  features  of  the 
regulatory  framework);  (3)  the  growing  importance  and  complexity  of  liquidity  risk  in  more 
market-based financial systems; (4) the enhancement of institutional arrangements for cross-
border cooperation among authorities, both at times of financial stress and in normal times.  
Finally, I would like to highlight the importance of improving cooperation and the exchange of 
information  between  supervisory  authorities  and  central  banks  on  financial  stability  issues. 
The recent financial market turmoil has confirmed the importance of a smooth and efficient 
relationship  between  the  central  banking  and  supervisory  functions.  In  financial  stress 
situations,  supervisory  information  remains  essential  for  the  effectiveness  of  the  central 
bank’s  financial  stability  assessments.  Conversely,  supervisors  should  benefit  from  the 
systemic  perspective  of  central  banks  when  considering  their  actions  vis-à-vis  individual 
institutions.  This  is  the  rationale  behind  the  specific  FSF  recommendation  to  enhance  the 
interplay between central banks and supervisory authorities.  
to  respond 
the  challenges 
the  Eurosystem 
Lessons for the operational frameworks 
to 
4.2  
The  ability  of 
for  monetary  policy 
implementation posed by the recent period of financial market volatility has to a large extent 
depended  on  its  collateral  framework.  Thanks  to  the  broad  range  of  assets  eligible  as 
collateral  –  together  with  the  large  number  of  counterparties  and  the  large  size  of  its 
refinancing  operations  –  the  Eurosystem  has  been  able  to  step  in  effectively  when 
intermediation in inter-bank markets deteriorated, without the need to make changes to its 
framework.  
As a side effect of the broad range of assets accepted as collateral, the framework helped us 
also  during  the  turmoil  to  address  liquidity  squeezes  in  some  markets,  including  the  ABS 
BIS Review 105/2008 
 5
market, as it mitigated refinancing risks for asset classes that had become illiquid. This has 
contributed to financial stability in the euro area. Other central banks may have had those 
effects in mind when they initiated changes to their operational framework in the wake of the 
turmoil, leading to a significant degree of convergence among the various frameworks.  
Of course, the ability of the Eurosystem’s operational framework to respond to the challenges 
for monetary policy implementation posed by the recent period of financial market volatility 
does not mean that there is no scope for further improvements and refinements to make it 
even  more  effective.  Regarding  this  point,  the  ECB  yesterday  announced  some  technical 
refinements  to  its  risk  control  framework  for  Eurosystem  credit  operations.  These  are  the 
result of a regular review of the framework, conducted on a biennial basis with the objective 
of identifying possible improvements and ensuring that the Eurosystem remains adequately 
protected against financial risks in the face of changes in financial markets and collateral use 
practices. 
The announced refinements are as follows: 
First,  some  revisions  are  being  introduced  to  the  haircuts  for  credit  institution  debt 
instruments and asset-backed securities. The first are increased by 5%, across all maturities, 
while the haircut schedule for ABS is replaced by a unique haircut of 12% for all maturities 
and coupon types. In addition, a valuation markdown of 5% is imposed on those ABS that 
are priced theoretically. 
Second,  the  ECB  has  extended  the  definition  of  “close  links”  between  counterparty  and 
collateral. As you may know, the existence of such links, which are currently defined only in 
terms of cross ownership of capital, would prevent a counterparty from using that collateral. 
With the announced change, “close links”, are extended to situations in which a counterparty 
submits an ABS as collateral when it provides support to that ABS. Such support should not 
be in the form of extensive liquidity support or in the form of a currency hedge. 
Finally,  we  have  placed  more  weight  on  the  transparency  of  the  credit  assessments  by 
ratings  agencies.  Such  assessments  should  be  based  on  a  public  rating  and,  for  ABSs, 
publicly available credit-rating reports and quarterly rating reviews would be required. 
These changes were deemed necessary as they reflect improvements in the methodological 
framework, the assessment of market and liquidity risk characteristics of eligible assets, the 
actual  use  of  eligible  assets  by  counterparties,  and  new  developments  in  financial 
instruments. 
Monetary policy  
5.  
The  continuation  of  the  financial  market  turbulences  has  increased  the  uncertainty 
surrounding not only the implementation of monetary policy but also its formulation. Let me 
now turn to our current assessment of the monetary policy stance. I should start by stressing 
that,  also  in  an  increasingly  globalised  world,  inflation  is  fundamentally  and  over  the  long 
term a monetary phenomenon. Despite the many challenges which we face daily, euro area 
monetary policy must remain focused on delivering price stability in the medium term, which 
is essential for the efficient working of markets and the optimal allocation of resources.  
Looking at the current inflation performance, there is no reason to be satisfied. Annual HICP 
inflation has remained well above levels consistent with price stability since last autumn. This 
is largely due to both the direct and the indirect effects of the sharp increases in commodity 
prices, particularly oil and food prices, observed in recent quarters.  
The inflation outlook is also a source of major concern. HICP inflation is expected to remain 
above  levels  consistent  with  the  ECB’s  quantitative  definition  of  price  stability  for  a  rather 
protracted period of time, and to moderate only in the course of next year. Consistent with 
this  outlook,  the  latest  ECB  Staff  projections,  released  yesterday,  show  that  annual  HICP 
inflation  is  expected  to  average  between  3.4%  and  3.6%  in  2008,  and  between  2.3%  and 
6 
 BIS Review 105/2008
2.9%  next  year.  Projections  from  international  organisations  and  private  sector  forecasters 
depict a similar picture. 
At  our  meeting  yesterday,  the  members  of  the  Governing  Council  concurred  that  risks  to 
price stability at the policy-relevant horizon remain on the upside. These risks mainly relate to 
possible  further  increases  in  commodity  prices  or  to  the  delayed  effects  of  past  price 
increases.  Besides,  the  possible  emergence  of  broad-based  second-round  effects  in  price 
and wage setting behaviour represents a source of acute concern. In addition, unanticipated 
increases in indirect taxes and administered prices may aggravate the outlook for inflation. 
In the current context of strong inflationary pressures, it is essential to maintain longer-term 
inflation  expectations  solidly  anchored  at  levels  consistent  with  price  stability  and  to  avoid 
that  the  current  inflation  rates  become  entrenched  in  private  sector  inflation  expectations. 
This is not only the task of the central bank. All parties, in both the private and the public 
sector,  can  give  a  key  contribution  to  maintaining  price  stability  by  abstaining  from  any 
practices  that  may  fuel  broad-based  second-round  effects.  In  this  sense,  it  is  particularly 
important that all parties concerned agree to abolish indexation schemes for nominal wages 
in  those  countries  where  they  still  exist.  Under  the  illusory  pretence  of  preserving  the 
purchasing  power  of  workers,  these  schemes  risk  turning  temporary  price  shocks  into 
devastating  inflationary  wage-price  spirals  that  ultimately  undermine  employment  and 
competitiveness to the detriment of those whom the schemes are supposed to protect.  
Let me also briefly recall the Governing Council’s current assessment of economic activity in 
the  euro  area.  The  latest  data  indicate  that,  after  recording  a  0.2%  decline  on  a  quarterly 
basis  in  the  second  quarter  of  2008,  the  euro  area  economy  is  currently  experiencing  a 
period  of  weak  activity,  reflecting  the  dampening  impact  of  both  domestic  and  external 
factors. Nevertheless, we expect the current episode of weakness to be followed by a period 
of gradual recovery. Consistent with this scenario, the ECB Staff projects average real GDP 
growth to between 1.1% and 1.7% in 2008, and between 0.6% and 1.8% next year.  
However, the uncertainty surrounding the outlook for growth in 2008 and 2009 is particularly 
high,  with  risks  predominantly  on  the  downside.  These  downside  risks  mainly  stem  from 
further unanticipated increases in energy and food prices, the continuing possibility that the 
financial  turmoil  may  have  a  more  severe  impact  on  the  real  economy  than  currently 
anticipated,  the  potential  for  disorderly  developments  stemming  from  persisting  global 
imbalances and increasing protectionist pressures. 
The monetary analysis has continued to confirm our view of prevailing upside risks to price 
stability at medium to longer horizons. Although the growth of euro area broad monetary and 
credit  aggregates  has  recently  moderated,  the  continued  underlying  strength  of  monetary 
expansion signals the existence of upside risks to price stability over the medium term.  
On  the  basis  of  its  economic  and  monetary  analyses,  the  Governing  Council  decided 
yesterday to leave the ECB’s key policy rate (the minimum bid rate of its main refinancing 
operations) unchanged at 4.25%. It is our view that the current monetary policy stance will 
contribute  to  achieving  our  primary  objective  of  maintaining  price  stability  in  the  medium 
term.  
The  public  at  large  should  be  confident  that  the  members  of  the  Governing  Council  are 
resolutely  determined  to  do  whatever  it  will  be  necessary  to  fulfil  the  ECB’s  mandate  of 
delivering price stability in the medium term and to maintain expectations firmly anchored at 
levels consistent with price stability. This is the best contribution that the ECB can provide in 
order  to  preserve  the  purchasing  power  of  citizens  over  the  medium  term  and  to  support 
sustainable growth and employment in the euro area.  
Many thanks for your attention. 
BIS Review 105/2008 
 7
