Donald L Kohn: Expertise and macroeconomic policy 
Comments  by  Mr  Donald  L  Kohn,  Vice  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US 
Federal  Reserve  System,  on  "Insiders  versus  Outsiders  in  Monetary  Policy-Making,"  by 
Timothy  Besley,  Neil  Meads,  and  Paolo  Surico,  at  the  American  Economic  Association 
Session,  Allied  Social  Science  Associations  Annual  Meeting,  New  Orleans,  Louisiana, 
4 January 2008. 
 This  panel  is  dealing  with  an  important  topic  –  in  effect,  the  design  and  functioning  of 
monetary  policy  committees.  Monetary  policy  decisions  are  judgment  calls,  informed  by 
forecasts and discussions about how the economy is likely to evolve, alternative possibilities, 
and  potential  responses  to  policy  actions.  The  question  is  how  to  bring  the  best  possible 
judgments to bear on these questions.  
Besley,  Meads  and  Surico's  contribution  is  to  ask  whether  certain  characteristics  of  the 
policymakers  matter  for  the  how  they  vote  on  the  monetary  policy  committee.  For  the 
Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) at the Bank of England, they find heterogeneous views 
among  voters,  but  no  systematic  differences  based  on  whether  the  MPC  member  is  an 
insider – that is part of the hierarchy at the Bank – or an outsider appointed for a short term 
just to the MPC; whether the person comes from an academic background; or whether that 
person has worked at the Treasury. I found the piece well done and interesting, and I have 
only  a  few  comments  before  moving  on  to  some  questions  and  observations  about  the 
Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) sparked by reading this research.1
My  first  comment  is  that  I'm  not  surprised  by  the  results.  The  MPC  has  a  well-defined 
objective given by the government. To be sure, members may differ about the precise time 
frame in which to meet that objective, but these distinctions should be small relative to the 
importance of the overall objective. In addition, at every policy meeting, each member of the 
MPC is operating with the same information from the staff, and before the quarterly meetings 
that  precede  an  Inflation  Report,  the  members  have  sat  through  a  number  of  discussions 
covering all aspects of the forecast. Everyone should be equally familiar with the key issues 
and analysis. Finally, dissent is accepted, indeed encouraged in some respects, by insiders 
as well as outsiders, reducing any differences in incentives facing the two groups. 
Nonetheless, some aspects of the paper raised questions in my mind about the robustness 
of the results. For one, the authors, in testing for differences in policy preferences, assume 
everyone  has  the  same  forecast,  thus  eliminating  one  channel  through  which  different 
backgrounds  may  manifest  themselves.  The  MPC  does  go  through  an  extensive  internal 
process  when  producing  its  forecast,  which  as  I  just  noted,  may  mitigate  the  differences 
among members. Still, some of the differences in policy choices probably reflect underlying 
differences in forecasts, not just differences in Taylor-rule parameters. Certainly, the minutes 
of the MPC meetings suggest divergence in how members view the outlook, and the Inflation 
Report  routinely  notes  differences  in  views  about  the  central  tendency  forecasts.  Small 
differences, especially if sustained over time, could well have a substantial effect on voting 
patterns.  
In practice, policy decisions are likely to depend on more than the modal forecast used by 
the authors, such as the degree of uncertainty, the risks around the central tendency, and a 
weighting of the costs to public welfare from missing the forecast on one side or another. In 
this regard, the Inflation Reports also note that members may have different views about the 
                                                 
1   The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily shared by other members of the Federal Open 
Market Committee. 
BIS Review 1/2008 
 1
balance  of  risks.  I  don't  know  how  the  authors  could  go  about  testing  whether  the 
backgrounds of MPC members are systematically related to differences in forecasts or in risk 
assessments, but surely these are important possibilities.  
I was also struck by the finding that the output gap did not play a significant role in policy 
decisions. As the paper notes, the MPC takes account of the gap in its inflation forecast, but 
the  results  suggest  members  give  no  independent  weight  to  deviations  of  output  from 
potential.  On  the  surface,  this  may  suggest  that  either  the  MPC  has  faced  only  demand 
shocks – unlikely given the rise in energy prices – or it is not really a flexible inflation targeter. 
Indeed, figure 1, column 3, indicates that many  MPC  members have significantly negative 
coefficients on the output gap. I suspect the reality is that members rely on much more than 
the projected output gap to judge the future balance of demand and potential supply, but the 
econometric results on the output gap suggest the need for further explanation.  
Finally, the authors find that the change in the policy rate at the last meeting matters for each 
person's vote at the current meeting. It is not clear why the decision to change rates at the 
last  meeting  should  affect  judgments  on  the  appropriate  policy  at  the  current  meeting, 
independent  of  the  outlook.  Perhaps  the  dissenters  believe  they've  made  their  point  and 
unless they feel especially strongly they don't need to dissent again, but the rationale for this 
variable should probably be explored further. 
The  purpose  of  bringing  outsiders  onto  the  policy  committee  of  the  Bank  of  England  is  to 
assure that a variety of views will be considered in the policy debate. I'll spend the rest of my 
time addressing how this works at the Federal Reserve. I'll do this in the form of questions 
about the personnel and functioning of the FOMC, with my tentative answers.  
Does it matter who is on the FOMC other than the Chairman?  
1.  
My answer is yes, and I think I have reasons other than simple self-esteem. To be sure, the 
Committee looks to the Chairman to provide strong leadership. The Chairman's special role 
is  partly  legal  and  structural  –  as  the  chair  of  the  Board  and  the  Committee  and  as  the 
Committee's representative in front of Congress where the FOMC is held accountable for its 
actions.  In  addition,  the  Committee  is  so  large  –  in  effect  nineteen  people  –  that  strong 
leadership is required to construct a policy position that can command a substantial majority 
and to present a coherent rationale for that policy to the public. But in my experience, the 
other  members  of  the  Committee  are  also  important  for  good  policy.  Effective  Chairmen 
cannot operate independently of the sentiment on the Committee; ultimately, the authority of 
the Chairman rests on his ability to persuade the other members of the Committee that the 
choices they are making under his leadership will accomplish their objectives. The better the 
collection of individuals he needs to persuade, the better the policy is likely to be. Individual 
members can exert considerable influence over time through the cogency of their arguments, 
and  having  a  variety  of  perspectives  on  the  Committee  will  strengthen  this  process.  In 
addition, all FOMC members play important roles in explaining policy decisions to the public, 
and  how  they  present  their  views  can  influence  public  attitudes,  perceptions,  and 
expectations.  
Are there insider/outsider types of distinctions on the FOMC?  
2.  
Although  the  process  by  which  people  come  onto  the  Committee  leads  naturally  to 
considerable diversity, the insider/outsider distinction does not apply cleanly to the FOMC. 
Board members of course are appointed by the President with the approval of the Senate. 
The members of the Board are almost always outsiders – the appointment of a staff member, 
like myself, is very rare. And Board members typically come from a variety of backgrounds, 
including top-notch academic economists, but also bankers and others with experience in the 
financial  arena,  and  occasionally  business  people.  We  are  appointed  for  fixed  terms, 
encouraging independent views.  
2 
 BIS Review 1/2008
Reserve  Bank  presidents  owe  their  appointments  to  both  the  board  of  directors  of  their 
regional Reserve Bank and the Board of Governors in Washington. Presidents can be either 
insiders  –  long-time  staff  members  –  or  outsiders  with  relevant  experience  in  academia, 
public policy, or the financial sector. Once appointed, a president can serve until retirement 
at  age  65  or  for  a  minimum  of  ten  years,  affording  scope  for  maintaining  their  individual 
views.  
Nonetheless, FOMC members try to find consensus under the leadership of the Chairman, 
and neither Governors nor presidents dissent very often. Presidents have tended to dissent a 
little  more  than  Governors.  The  greater  number  of  dissents  by  presidents  might  reflect  a 
number  of  factors.  For  one,  presidents  have  their  own  staffs,  which  can  help  support 
alternative views in preparing for a meeting. Board members share a common staff with the 
Chairman, and, being in the same building, perhaps have a greater opportunity to influence 
and be influenced by the Chairman. In this regard, Bank presidents may act like "outsiders" 
more  readily  than  Board  members.  At  the  same  time,  Bank  presidents  tend  to  be  longer 
tenured than Board members, and can contribute the institutional memory one might expect 
from "insiders" when Board membership turns over rapidly.  
Why so few dissents? 
3.  
FOMC  members  recognize  the  degree  of  uncertainty  around  their  judgments.  Unless  they 
perceive that a serious misjudgment is being made, they expect, given common objectives, 
that when they prefer another policy and their analysis later proves correct, the Committee is 
likely to move in their direction in time to forestall problems developing. And they may see 
their  influence  on  policy  as  greater  over  time  if  they  are  usually  part  of  the  consensus. 
Finally, they could perceive that a series of close votes could create uncertainty about policy 
and the direction of the institution. 
The  absence  of  dissents  should  not  be  taken  as  indicating  that  alternative  views  are  not 
expressed at FOMC meetings. Often these are manifest in participants' forecasts. Because 
we are such a large and geographically separated Committee, the FOMC, unlike the MPC, 
does not attempt to arrive at a common forecast, and the dispersion of individual forecasts 
illustrates  the  range  of  views.  For  example,  participants'  projections  in  October  of  gross 
domestic  product  (GDP)  growth  for  2008  differed  by  one  full  percentage  point  and 
differences were still a half a percentage point for 2010. Participants had alternative views 
about current developments affecting the economy and about its long-run growth properties, 
and they argued their points in the meeting. Nonetheless, all but one of the voting members 
was able to agree that the action taken that day was consistent with moving the economy 
toward meeting the Committee's objectives.  
Do you need to be a monetary policy expert to contribute? 
4.  
The  Committee  is  strengthened  by  having  people  with  a  wide  variety  of  backgrounds, 
including those whose principal area of expertise of lies outside of monetary economics. To 
some extent, the range of backgrounds on the FOMC reflects the need for expertise to carry 
out  the  non-monetary  policy  responsibilities  of  the  Federal  Reserve.  Any  monetary  policy 
committee needs to have a number of people on it that fully understand and can deal readily 
with  the  model  behind policy  deliberations,  and  who  have  an  awareness  of  the lessons  of 
monetary policy history. But other types of expertise also are valuable. Policy works through 
financial  markets,  and  those  with  that  background  contribute  to  understanding  how  policy 
impulses  are  being  transmitted  to  savers  and  spenders.  Experience  in  private  industry  is 
valuable for gathering and interpreting information from many business sources that we bring 
to FOMC deliberations. 
Any member needs to understand the basic framework to have influence on the debate. But 
you  don't  need  to  be  a  monetary  policy  expert.  Those  who  come  on  the  Committee  with 
BIS Review 1/2008 
 3
policy  credentials  can  be  very  effective  immediately.  But  judgment  and  experience  count. 
Noneconomists can become very effective as they learn the lingo and the framework. The 
large  size  of  the  Committee  and  long  tenure  of  members  allows  time  and  space  for  this 
expertise to develop. One of the most difficult aspects of policymaking is recognizing what 
you don't know, perhaps because the world is no longer conforming to your models. A high 
level of monetary policy expertise is not necessarily a good guide to who will possess that 
skill.  
Conclusion 
The proof of the pudding is in the eating. Since the late 1970s in the United States and since 
the  establishment  of  the  MPC  in  the  United  Kingdom,  economic  performance  in  both 
countries has, on balance, been good. A number of factors have contributed to this result, 
but the respective monetary policy committees must have played some role.  
To  be  sure,  in  the  United  States,  the  leadership  of  Chairmen  Volcker,  Greenspan,  and 
Bernanke  has  been critical  to  the  results,  but  I  believe  a  diverse  and  independent  minded 
group of policymakers has contributed as well, and it is important to maintain this mix and 
quality. Could the functioning of the FOMC be improved? Certainly, and Chairman Bernanke 
has moved to further utilize the diverse views of the FOMC members, while maintaining the 
leadership necessary to keep this diverse group headed in the appropriate direction.  
4 
 BIS Review 1/2008
