Jean-Claude Trichet: Overview of recent euro area developments and the 
effects of globalisation on prices and real estate 
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the meeting 
of the Management Board of the CDU, Wiesbaden, 5 January 2008. 
 It is a great pleasure for me to be invited as a guest speaker here today.  
Let me briefly sketch out the main topics I want to address. First, I will present to you our 
views  on  the  current  economic  situation  in  the  euro  area.  Then,  I  will  explain  the  ECB’s 
liquidity  operations  following  the  tensions  in  the  money  markets  since  August  last  year  as 
well as our views on the stability of the euro area financial system. To conclude, I will say a 
word  upon  the  effects  of  globalisation  on  price  developments  and  on  developments  in  the 
real estate sector. 
Economic and monetary developments 
Let me first say that we are presently in the purdah period, namely within a week before the 
next  decision  meeting  of  the  Governing  Council.  Nothing  in  what  I  will  say  should  be 
interpreted in terms of our future decision next Thursday. I will stick to explaining what has 
been our diagnosis and judgment on the occasion of our last meeting.  
All  recent  incoming  information  had  fully  confirmed  our  view  that,  in  a  context  of  vigorous 
money and  credit growth and sound economic fundamentals in the euro area, the risks to 
price  stability  over  the  medium  term  are  clearly  on  the  upside,  as  I  said,  on  behalf  of  the 
Governing Council, after our meeting on Thursday, 6 December 2007. The recent substantial 
increase in oil and food prices, together with unfavourable base effects from energy prices, 
owing to the marked decline in oil prices a year ago, are having a strong upward impact on 
inflation  in  the  current  context.  Looking  ahead,  the  inflation  rate  is  expected  to  remain 
significantly  above  2%  in  the  near  future,  and  it  is  likely  to  moderate  only  gradually  in  the 
course of 2008. Hence the period of temporarily high inflation rates would be somewhat more 
protracted than previously expected.  
Looking  further  ahead,  the  December  2007  Eurosystem  staff  macroeconomic  projections 
foresee annual HICP inflation to be between 2.0% and 2.2% in 2007, to then rise to between 
2.0% and 3.0% in 2008, before moderating to a range of 1.2% and 2.4% in 2009. Compared 
with  the  September  2007  staff  projections,  the  ranges  for  2007  and  2008  have  shifted 
upwards. These staff projections are based on two key assumptions. The first is that recent 
oil and food price dynamics and their impact on HICP inflation will not have broadly-based 
second-round effects on wage-setting behaviour. The second key assumption is that growth 
in profit margins will moderate over the projection horizon. These two assumptions imply, in 
the  context  of  the  staff  projections,  a  continuation  of  overall  contained  domestic  cost 
pressures, which contributes to the moderation in inflation projected in 2009. 
It has been the view of the Governing Council that the risks to this medium-term outlook for 
price developments are fully confirmed to lie on the upside, mainly relating to possible further 
rises  in  oil  and  agricultural  prices,  and  increases  in  administered  prices  and  indirect  taxes 
beyond  those  foreseen  thus  far.  In  addition,  against  the  background  of  sound  economic 
fundamentals,  stronger  than  currently  expected  wage  dynamics  may  emerge,  while  an 
increase in pricing power in market segments with low competition could materialise. 
As  regards  economic  activity,  incoming  information  had  confirmed  the  sustained  nature  of 
economic expansion in the euro area, with real GDP growing by 0.7% quarter-on-quarter in 
the  third  quarter,  while  indicating  some  moderation  in  the  fourth  quarter.  Overall,  the 
BIS Review 3/2008 
 1
economic  fundamentals  in  the  euro  area  remain  sound.  Looking  ahead,  Eurosystem  staff 
projects annual real GDP growth to lie between 2.4% to 2.8% in 2007, between 1.5% and 
2.5% in 2008, and between 1.6% and 2.6% in 2009. In comparison with the September 2007 
ECB  staff  projections,  the  range  projected  for  real  GDP  growth  in  2008  has  been  revised 
slightly  downwards,  whereas  for  2007  the  new  range  lies  within  the  upper  part  of  the 
previous one.  
This scenario is based on the expectation that the global economy will remain resilient, with 
the slowdown of economic growth in the United States partly offset by the continued strength 
of emerging market economies. However, in view of the potential impact of ongoing financial 
market  volatility  and  re-pricing  of  risk  on  the  real  economy,  this  assessment  remains 
surrounded  by  a  high  level  of  uncertainty.  And  in  the  Governing  Council’s  view,  the  risks 
surrounding this outlook for economic growth lie on the downside. 
The monetary analysis had confirmed the prevailing upside risks to price stability at medium 
to longer-term horizons. On the basis of latest available data, covering the period to the end 
of  November  2007,  the  underlying  money  and  credit  expansion  remains  vigourous,  even 
taking temporary factors into account, such as the flattening of the yield curve, the financial 
market turmoil and specific transactions associated with the restructuring of certain banking 
groups.  Therefore,  monetary  and  credit  developments  continue  to  require  very  careful 
monitoring, not least with a view to better understand the response of the private sector to 
increased financial market volatility. 
Thus  far,  there  has  been  little  evidence  that  the  financial  market  turbulence  since  early 
August 2007 had strongly influenced the dynamics of broad money and credit aggregates. 
Indeed, the expansion of loans to households and non-financial corporations has remained 
robust,  which  may  suggest  that  the  supply  of  credit  has  not  been  impaired.  To  develop  a 
more complete view of the impact of financial market developments on bank balance sheets, 
financing conditions and money and credit growth, further analysis will be required. 
The ECB’s Governing Council stands ready to counter upside risks to price stability, in line 
with its mandate. Against this background, on 6 December 2007 we decided to leave the key 
ECB  interest  rates  unchanged.  The  Governing  Council  will  monitor  very  closely  all 
developments.  In  particular,  as  I  said  on  behalf  of  the  Governing  Council  after  our  last 
meeting, for the recent increase in inflation to remain temporary, it is essential that the price 
and wage-setting behaviour remains unaffected by current inflation rates, so as to avoid the 
emergence of second-round effects. By acting in a firm and timely manner on the basis of its 
assessment, the Governing Council will ensure that such second-round effects and risks to 
price  stability  over  the  medium  term  do  not  materialise.  To  firmly  anchor  inflation 
expectations  in  line  with  price  stability  is  even  more  important  at  times  of  financial  market 
volatility  and  increased  uncertainty.  In  this  respect,  the  Governing  Council  has  decided  to 
continue to pay great attention to financial market developments. 
Liquidity operations 
Ladies and gentlemen, once the Governing Council has defined the monetary policy stance 
necessary  for  maintaining  price  stability  in  the  medium  term,  in  line  with  its  mandate  as 
defined by the Treaty, the ECB has the responsibility to also ensure the smooth functioning 
of the segment of the money market that we influence. I should like to underline – once again 
– that these two responsibilities are clearly distinct and should not be mixed.  
Since early August last year, tensions have been observed in money markets and during the 
last months banks expressed particular concerns about their liquidity needs over the year-
end.  The  year-end  period  is  traditionally  a  period  of  scarce  liquidity,  as  market  activity  is 
subdued and banks are preparing their year-end balance sheets.  
In its open market operations, the ECB therefore pursued its endeavour to contribute to the 
smooth functioning of the euro money market. In early August, we responded to the sudden 
2 
 BIS Review 3/2008
upward  pressures  on  the  overnight  interest  rate  by  lending  significant  amounts  of  liquidity 
through  overnight  fine-tuning  operations.  We  also  carried  out,  and  later  renewed,  two 
supplementary longer-term refinancing operations in order to reduce banks’ concerns over 
their  longer-term  funding  during  a  period  when  the  longer-term  repo  and  deposit  markets 
turned  illiquid.  In  the  main  refinancing  operations  the  ECB  has  allotted  larger  amounts  of 
liquidity than under normal circumstances with an aim to limit the volatility of very short term 
rates  around  the  ECB’s  minimum  bid  rate.  These  large  amounts  of  liquidity  have  always 
been absorbed later on during the maintenance period, so that the ECB has only provided 
banks  with  the  liquidity  needed  for  the  fulfilment  of  their  reserve  requirements  on  average 
over the maintenance periods. Let me also underline that we only provide such operations 
against solid collateral, as always. 
Just  before  Christmas  we  lengthened  the  maturity  of  the  second  last  main  refinancing 
operation  from  one  to  two  weeks,  thus  facilitating  the  coverage  of  the  year-end  liquidity 
needs  of  banks.  For  this  specific  operation,  we  announced  that  we  would  satisfy  all  bids 
received at 4.21 percent or above, the 4.21 percent level being the weighted average rate of 
the  previous  main  refinancing  operation  one  week  before.  This  action,  combined  with  our 
liquidity-absorbing operations until 4 January, contributed to a smooth end of the year in the 
euro area by keeping short-term interest rates close to the ECB’s minimum bid rate.  
Overall,  the  ECB’s  actions  permitted  to  maintain  very  short-term  rates  close  to  the  ECB’s 
policy rate. The tensions, which have been observed in the longer term money market rates 
in  euro,  are  due  in  particular  to  the  persistence  of  uncertainties  surrounding  the  financial 
health and liquidity needs of financial institutions as well as the impact of the ongoing global 
financial  market  correction,  with  a  general  re-appreciation  of  risks.  These  tensions  have 
receded  whilst  remaining  significant.  By  reducing  the  volatility  of  the  very  short-term  rates 
around  the  key  policy  rate  of  the  ECB  and  by  containing  pressures  in  the  interbank  term 
money market, the ECB’s liquidity operations have contributed to a better resilience of the 
European  financial  system  without  –  of  course  –  eliminating  the  causes  of  the  tensions, 
originating outside the money market. 
During  this  tumultuous  period,  the  Eurosystem  remained,  as  usual,  in  close  contact  with 
other major central banks. In this context, on 12 December the ECB, the Federal Reserve, 
the  Bank  of  England,  the  Bank  of  Canada  and  the  Swiss  National  Bank  announced 
measures  designed  to  address  elevated  pressures  in  short-term  funding  markets.  In 
particular,  the  ECB  participated  in  joint  action  with  the  Federal  Reserve  and  the  Swiss 
national Bank. The ECB provided a total of 20 billion US dollar in two auctions to Eurosystem 
counterparties against ECB-eligible collateral.  
Through its own actions as well as the joint efforts with other central banks, the Eurosystem 
as well as the community of central banks have shown their capacity to cope with a number 
of challenges that euro and global money markets are currently facing. More than ever, in 
these periods of tensions, lucidity in the diagnosis, rapidity in the decision, and absence of 
complacency are of the essence. This total absence of complacency is particularly necessary 
as regards financial stability. 
Financial stability  
I  would  now  like  to  share  with  you  our  assessment  of  the  financial  stability  situation,  as 
described in the recent Financial Stability Review. I will discuss briefly the role of financial 
institutions and supervisory authorities in coping with the present financial market correction.  
With  financial  systems  undergoing  a  process  of  de-leveraging  and  re-intermediation, 
uncertainty surrounding the financial stability outlook for the euro area has heightened and 
may persist until it becomes clear how the potential balance sheet effects of the turbulence 
will  be  spread  across  individual  financial  institutions.  Clarity  is  also  needed  concerning 
liquidity commitments to off-balance sheet vehicles, and the magnitude of assets that may be 
BIS Review 3/2008 
 3
re-intermediated  back  onto  the  balance  sheets  of  euro  area  financial  institutions.  The 
process  of  improving  clarity,  which  started  when  Q3  2007  financial  statements  became 
available, will be advanced further when institutions publish their annual audited accounts for 
2007 as a whole.  
Given the uncertainties, the adjustment process in the financial system in the coming period 
may be challenging, and we have to be prepared to the materialisation of risks at any time. 
That  being  said,  there  are  mitigating  factors,  including  a  broadly  favourable  economic 
outlook, the largely sound balance sheets of households and firms, and the generally sound 
capital positions of core financial firms. This should not, however, provide any grounds for 
complacency  given  the  heightened  uncertainties.  In  a  fluid  environment  where  financial 
system  conditions  may  unexpectedly  change,  prudence  is  of  the  essence  both  for 
policymakers and financial institutions.  
Concerning  the  role  of  financial  institutions  and  supervisory  authorities  in  coping  with  the 
financial turmoil, I would submit three observations. First, given the underlying factors of the 
financial  stress,  and  in  order  to  re-establish  confidence  within  the  financial  system,  it  is 
crucial to promote a widespread consistent valuation of complex structured products as well 
as an adequate disclosure by banks of all their exposures, in particular related to the US sub-
prime mortgage sector. Second, I would welcome the efforts of the supervisory community, 
namely  through  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  and  the  Committee  of 
European  Banking  Supervisors,  in  keeping  each  other  abreast  of  developments  and  in 
considering jointly possible measures to contain the potential effects of the turmoil. Third, I 
would  underline  the  importance  in  stress  situations,  like  the  current  one,  of  effective  and 
smooth  cooperation  and  exchange  of  information  between  the  supervisory  authorities  and 
central banks.  
As to the policy lessons to be learned in order to avoid the recurrence of similar disruptions in 
the future, I would say that, while it is still too early to draw definitive conclusions, there is a 
common understanding on the key issues requiring further analysis. In this respect, let me 
recall  a  few  topics.  First,  the  need  for  the  financial  industry  to  provide  significantly  more 
public information about securitisation, credit risk transfer and complex structured products. 
Transparency appears to be of the essence in order to restore trust and confidence. Second, 
the need for rating agencies to review their methodologies for complex structured products 
and to address very seriously potential conflicts of interest. Third, the need for investors to 
review  their  investment  behaviour  excessively  reliant  on  ratings.  Fourth,  the  need  for 
supervisors to implement the new capital framework under Basel II as rapidly and effectively 
as  possible  and  to  reflect  on  possible  improvements  of  the  framework,  including  the 
enhancements of the supervisory regime for liquidity risk. In this context, I should mention 
that the ECB with the assistance of the Banking Supervision Committee is carrying out work 
on banks’ stress-testing and contingency funding plans.  
On all the issues mentioned above, work is already under way at both the international and 
European level. The ECB is strongly supportive of the work of the Financial Stability Forum, 
as  well  as  of  the  European  initiatives  discussed  in  the  ECOFIN  Council.  In  this  context,  I 
would like to once again stress the importance of effective cooperation in any policy actions 
to be taken at the international level. 
The impact of globalisation on price developments 
Ladies and gentlemen, let me turn to the impact of globalisation on price developments. As a 
preface, let me say that while globalisation could influence aggregate prices in several ways, 
such  impacts  are  limited  to  the  short  term  given  that  inflation  is  ultimately  a  monetary 
phenomenon. 
The direct, and perhaps most visible effect of globalisation for consumers, is its implication 
for  relative  prices.  On  the  one  hand,  globalisation  has  dampened  increases  in  euro  area 
4 
 BIS Review 3/2008
import  prices  of  manufactured  goods  given  a  rising  share  of  imports  from  lower-cost 
countries such as China and the new EU Member States. On the other hand, rising demand 
associated with globalisation has contributed to the significant increases observed in world 
energy and other commodity prices. Although such relative price shocks do not necessarily 
affect inflation, prolonged short term impacts of sizeable relative price shocks could result, for 
instance, from adjustment frictions in the economy. Empirical studies for the euro area have 
tended to suggest a small dampening influence of trade openness on prices in the early part 
of this decade, though globalisation’s contribution to recent movements in commodity prices 
–  particularly  energy  and  food  –  has  had  a  significant  offsetting  upward  impact  on  prices. 
This warrants close monitoring, in particular given the risks of second round effects. In case 
of  food  related  commodities,  it  also  underlines  the  importance  of  efficient  supply  side 
adjustment in agricultural commodity markets.  
A separate but nonetheless potentially equally important channel through which globalisation 
can affect inflation involves the indirect price impact of increased competitive pressures, with 
two main aspects. First, in principle it could contribute to compressing firms’ price-cost mark-
ups  as  competitive  forces  resulting  from  trade  openness  would  depress  profit  mark-ups  of 
domestic  firms  competing  with  international  firms.  In  practice,  however,  such  effects  have 
been  hard  to  identify  and,  indeed,  aggregate  profitability  has  remained  high.  Second,  in 
principle competition associated with globalisation could alter the responsiveness of prices to 
costs  or  measures  of  economic  slack,  or  imply  a  greater  role  for  foreign  conditions  in  the 
inflation  process.  In  practice,  it  would  appear  that  such  responsiveness  has  not  increased 
over the last decade, while empirical evidence supporting a growing role of global measures 
of economic slack in the inflation process of the euro area and other advanced economies 
has been limited.  
On  balance,  not  only  is  the  net  effect  of  globalisation  on  euro  area  prices  difficult  to 
accurately  gauge,  but  it  may  also  be  changing  through  time.  For  this  reason,  the  ECB 
continues to actively monitor possible ongoing changes in the inflation process. At the same 
time, efficient adjustment can be best facilitated by focusing on price stability and continuing 
to solidly anchor inflation expectations in the face of considerable relative price shocks. 
Developments in the real estate sector 
Let  me  conclude  with  some  remarks  on  residential  property  prices.  As  with  other  asset 
prices, residential property prices are closely monitored by the ECB in terms of our economic 
analysis. Within this context, while we take the euro area real estate sector into account in 
assessing risks to price stability, we certainly do not target house prices, or for that matter, 
any other asset prices. We do monitor asset prices closely because of the potentially high 
costs  for  price  stability  and  for  the  economy  as  a  whole  that  are  associated  with  strong 
appreciations  and  rapid  reversals  in  asset  prices.  Also,  our  monetary  analysis  covers  the 
monitoring  of  money  and  credit  which  often  reflect  the  evolution  of  prices  and  house 
purchases.  In  this  sense,  a  strategy  which  on  top  of  our  economic  analysis  regularly 
assesses money and credit developments has an important benefit on the monitoring side in 
that 
the  emergence  of  unsustainable 
developments in asset prices.  
In terms of recent developments in the euro area real estate sector, the latest available data 
on  house  prices  appears  to  support  the  notion  of  a  cooling  in  euro  area  housing  market 
developments  after  a  prolonged  period  of  unusually  high  growth  rates  in  many  euro  area 
countries. That said house price growth generally remains relatively elevated in the euro area 
on average when seen in historical perspective – notwithstanding considerable heterogeneity 
in underlying country developments. The outlook for the euro area as a whole – I insist, for 
the euro area as a whole – remains that of a relatively soft landing. Within this context, a 
continued moderation of residential investment would also be likely.  
I thank you for your attention. 
it  can  contribute 
identifying  and 
limiting 
to 
BIS Review 3/2008 
 5
