Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Microentrepreneurial success in the Philippines 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas),  at  the  Microentrepreneur  of  the  Year  (MOTY)  Awards  2008 
Launch, Manila, 15 May 2008. 
 Fellow workers and advocates in microfinance, special guests, good morning. On behalf of 
the Members of the Monetary Board, I welcome all of you to the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas 
for the launching of the 2008 Microentrepreneur of the Year Awards.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen.  This  is  the  sixth  year  we  are  mounting  this  search  for  the  best 
microentrepreneurs in our country.  Through all these years, I have felt  that the role of the 
judges in selecting the winners have become increasingly difficult.  
Don’t get me wrong; I am not complaining!  
The  difficulty  lies  in  the  fact  that  there  are  now  so  many  inspiring  success  stories  in  the 
microfinance  sector  to  choose  from.  This  tells  me  that  we  are  successful  in  providing  a 
nurturing environment for microenterpreneurs.  
Today  is  therefore  a  happy  occasion  as  friends  and  colleagues  involved  in  microfinance 
come together once again.  
Let us therefore take this opportunity to thank our partners for making the MOTY a much-
anticipated event. Friends, let us give a big hand to Citi Philippines and Citi Foundation under 
Mr. Sanjiv Vohra, the Microfinance Council under Mr. Rollie Victoria and Mr. Ed Garcia, as 
well as the members of the National Selection Committee.  
During the first five years of the MOTY, we met exceptional microentrepreneurs who proved 
access to responsive microfinance services can empower them to break out of poverty and 
build a better life for themselves, their families, and even their communities.  
We are happy that our past winners continue to shine and to be a source of inspiration. For 
instance, 2004 winner Leticia Rosas, a handloom weaver from Marinduque, had the unique 
experience  to  address  a  big  crowd  of  microfinance  practitioners  in  the  historic  halls  of  the 
Malacanan Palace.  
2006  winner  Jennilyn  Antonio,  a  former  factory  worker  turned  peanut  butter  manufacturer, 
now supplies SM Supermarkets, the country’s largest retail chain. We of course thank one of 
our committed judges, Mrs. Tessie Sy-Coson, for this. 
And just recently, we learned that one of our winners was able to access a 2 million peso 
loan from the Development Bank of the Philippines without collateral.  
Other winners have become newsworthy celebrities, invited to guest in television and radio 
programs or featured in newspapers and magazines.  
Clearly, MOTY’s value goes beyond the incentives it provides deserving microentrepreneurs; 
it  has  also  evolved  as  a  vehicle  for  showcasing  microfinance  as  a  potent  tool  for  poverty 
alleviation  and  microentrepreneurs  as  responsible,  accountable  and  creditworthy  bank 
clients.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen.  These  milestones  are  the  results  of  the  collective  and  coordinated 
efforts  of  many  institutions  and  individuals,  the  key  movers  of  which  are  represented  here 
today.  Indeed,  MOTY  is  one  tangible  example  of  successful  and  meaningful  cooperation 
among different institutions working toward a shared goal.  
Today,  as  our  country’s  poor  grapple  with  the  challenges  of  rising  prices  of  basic 
commodities, the call for coordinated efforts to fight poverty has never been stronger.  
BIS Review 61/2008 
 1
Let us therefore resolve to work more closely together to build stronger financial institutions 
that  provide  responsive  service  to  microenterprises,  sow  the  seeds  of  entrepreneurship, 
nurture  local  enterprises,  and  build  prosperity  in  our  country  through  microfinance 
development.  
I am confident this can be done. I say this on the basis of our track record. Before the year 
2000, for instance, there were only a handful of banks into microfinance. Since then, this has 
grown  significantly.  Today,  229  banks  are  into  microfinance  with  a  total  client  base  of 
780,000 and loans outstanding of 6 billion pesos.  
Significantly, our micro-borrowers have also become net savers; their deposits with banks as 
of December 2007 have reached close to 2 billion pesos! Not only have they been liberated 
from  the  cycle  of  poverty,  they  are  attaining  financial  security  for  themselves  and  their 
families.  
Let  us  therefore  resolve  to  continue  to  work  together  to  nurture  and  expand  our  base  of 
microenterpreneurs all over the country.  
Thank you all. Mabuhay ang microfinance! 
2 
 BIS Review 61/2008
