Jean-Claude Trichet: Hearing at the Economic and Monetary Affairs 
Committee of the European Parliament 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, 
at the Hearing at the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee of the European Parliament, 
Brussels, 25 June 2008. 
 les  membres  de 
la  Présidente,  Mesdames  et  Messieurs 
Madame 
la  Commission 
Economique et Monétaire, je me réjouis d'apparaître devant votre commission aujourd'hui. 
Je  commencerai  mon  intervention  par  une  évaluation  de  la  situation  économique  et 
monétaire,  en  expliquant  les  raisons  sous-jacentes  à  nos  récentes  décisions  de  taux. 
Ensuite,  je  vous  fournirai  de  plus  amples  informations  sur  les  opérations  de  politique 
monétaire  de  la  BCE  en  réaction  aux  tensions  enregistrées  sur  le  marché  monétaire. 
Anschließend möchte ich näher auf die ersten zehn Jahre der Europäischen Wirtschafts- und 
Währungsunion  eingehen.  Außerdem  werde  ich  die  wichtigsten  Elemente  des  neuen 
Strukturberichts des Eurosystems über Arbeitsangebot und Beschäftigung präsentieren. 
Economic and monetary developments 
Since my previous appearance before the European Parliament at the end of March, annual 
HICP  inflation  has  remained  high,  at  levels  significantly  above  3%.  This  mainly  owes  to 
strong increases in energy and food prices. Moreover, upside risks to price stability over the 
medium term have intensified further over the past few months, in a context of very vigorous 
money and credit growth. Looking ahead, the Governing Council expects inflation in the euro 
area to remain high for some time to come, before moderating only gradually in 2009.  
In line with this view, the latest Eurosystem staff projections foresee average annual inflation 
between  3.2%  and  3.6%  in  2008  and  between  1.8%  and  3.0%  in  2009.  Compared  with 
previous staff projections, this represents a significant upward revision, reflecting higher oil 
and food prices as well as increasing inflationary pressures in the services sector.  
The Governing Council remains particularly concerned that current elevated inflation rates, 
which  have  proved  higher  and  more  persistent  than  previously  foreseen,  may  become 
entrenched  in  private  inflation  expectations  and  lead  to  second-round  effects  in  price  and 
wage setting. The increased relevance of such considerations reflects the strengthening of 
upside  risks  to  price  stability  over  the  medium  term.  In  particular,  wage  growth  may  be 
stronger than anticipated, given high rates of capacity utilisation and a tight labour market. In 
this  context,  the  risk  of  triggering  an  inflationary  wage-price  spiral  is  particularly  acute, 
especially  where  nominal  wage  indexation  schemes  exist.  Moreover,  price  increases  in 
particular in parts of the services sector that lack competition may be higher than currently 
expected. 
Against this background, it is imperative that all parties concerned contribute to avoiding the 
emergence  of  broadly-based  second-round  effects.  This  is essential  to  secure  that  longer-
term inflation expectations remain firmly anchored in line with price stability.  
Turning to economic activity, in the first quarter of 2008, real GDP grew strongly, by 0.8% 
quarter-on-quarter.  In  part,  this  unexpected  positive  outcome  reflects  temporary  factors, 
notably a boost in construction activity, given the very mild winter in many parts of Europe. 
That  being  said,  the  strong  growth  in  the  first  quarter  has  to  be  seen  against  the  usual 
volatility of quarterly data: in coming to an assessment, it will be more appropriate to view the 
first  two  quarters  of  2008  together.  Looking  forward,  domestic  and  foreign  demand  are 
expected to support ongoing economic expansion, albeit to a lesser extent than during 2007. 
BIS Review 84/2008 
 1
The  euro  area  economy  has  sound  fundamentals  and  does  not  suffer  from  major 
imbalances. 
This outlook is also reflected in the latest Eurosystem staff projections, which foresee annual 
real GDP growth in the range of between 1.5% to 2.1% in 2008 and of between 1.0% and 
2.0% in 2009. However, it is important to put these figures into perspective: the annual rates 
mask the fact that on a quarterly basis real growth is projected to reach its trough already in 
mid 2008, before gradually recovering thereafter.  
In  the  view  of  the  Governing  Council,  uncertainty  surrounding  growth  prospects  remains 
high,  with  downside  risks  mainly  relating  to  a  potentially  more  negative  impact  of  financial 
market  developments  than  anticipated  and  further  unanticipated  increases  in  energy  and 
food prices. 
The  monetary  analysis  confirms  the  prevailing  upside  risks  to  price  stability  at  medium  to 
longer-term  horizons.  Available  data  suggest  that  the  underlying  rate  of  money  and  credit 
expansion remains strong and that the ongoing financial turmoil has, as yet, not significantly 
affected bank loan supply to the non-financial corporate sector. 
In  line  with  its  mandate,  the  Governing  Council  is  strongly  determined  to  secure  the  firm 
anchoring of longer-term inflation expectations in line with price stability. Such an anchoring 
is  a  prerequisite  for  monetary  policy  to  make  an  ongoing  contribution  towards  supporting 
sustainable economic growth and job creation in the euro area. In particular, the Governing 
Council  remains  committed  to  preventing  second-round  effects  and  the  materialisation  of 
upside risks to price stability over the medium term. Against this background, on 5 June, we 
decided to leave the key ECB interest rates unchanged. At the same time, we signalled that 
we  are  in  a  state  of  heightened  alertness.  Indeed,  the  Governing  Council  will  continue  to 
monitor very closely all developments. 
Recent monetary policy operations of the ECB 
Turning to our liquidity management, since March, the ECB has continued to apply basically 
four liquidity measures to alleviate ongoing tensions in the euro money market. 
First,  the  ECB  has  continued  to  “frontload”  the  supply  of  liquidity  over  the  reserve 
maintenance period. This means that we have provided more liquidity at the beginning of the 
maintenance period, while compensating for this by providing less liquidity towards the end 
of the period. The average supply of liquidity has thus remained unchanged over the entire 
maintenance period. 
Second,  around  the  end  of  the  first  quarter  of  2008,  when  money  market  tensions  were 
intensifying,  the  ECB  conducted  two  liquidity-providing  fine-tuning  operations  to  address 
these  tensions.  The  ECB  has  recently  announced  that  it  stands  ready,  if  needed,  to 
contribute to smoothing the market conditions around the end-of-semester.  
Third, the ECB has continued its policy of providing a higher share of liquidity on a longer-
term basis by renewing our supplementary three-month longer-term refinancing operations. 
Moreover, in April 2008 the Eurosystem conducted a supplementary longer-term refinancing 
operation  with  a  six-month  maturity  and  announced  another  one  for  July  2008.  It  is  to  be 
noted that the total amount of outstanding refinancing remained unchanged, as we reduced 
the share provided via the one-week main refinancing operations. 
Fourth,  to  ensure  the  availability  of  funding  denominated  in  US  dollars,  the  ECB  has 
continued the conduct of term auction facilities in cooperation with the US Federal Reserve. 
Accordingly, it provided liquidity in US dollars to euro area banks, secured with Eurosystem 
eligible collateral. 
2 
 BIS Review 84/2008
Ten years of EMU 
Let me take the opportunity to say a few words on the tenth anniversary of the ECB and the 
European System of Central Banks, which we celebrated on 1 June. The creation of the euro 
has been an historic policy decision for Europe. The ECB has been successful in delivering 
what it is expected to deliver under its mandate, namely price stability. Importantly, longer-
term inflation expectations have been at levels consistent with price stability. This is a great 
achievement against the backdrop of a series of substantial oil and food price shocks as well 
as increases in indirect taxes and administered prices over the past decade. 
Price stability is essential not only because it protects the income of all our fellow citizens – 
and particularly the most vulnerable and poorest groups in society – but also because it is a 
necessary condition for sustainable economic growth and job creation. 
As regards fiscal consolidation and structural reforms, a number of euro area countries have 
made  good  progress  over  the  past  decade,  while  others  are  still  lagging  behind.  Notably, 
some  countries  have  still  to  achieve  and  maintain  sound  fiscal  positions  and  reduce 
government debt ratios to more sustainable levels. The ECB is concerned about recent signs 
of a slowdown or even back-tracking in terms of structural reforms and fiscal consolidation. 
Ill-designed  structural  policies,  economic  rigidities  and  undisciplined  fiscal  policies  may 
contribute to increased inflationary pressures or higher inflation persistence, which monetary 
policy  would  need  to  take  into  account.  In  this  respect,  the  steady  pursuit  of  prudent  and 
efficient fiscal policies along with reforms that enhance competition and market flexibility is 
crucial to ensure the smooth functioning of Monetary Union. 
Labour supply and employment in the euro area 
Within this context, let me draw your attention to the latest Eurosystem's Structural Issues 
Report, which will be posted this morning on our website. The report this year focuses on the 
main developments in labour supply and employment in the euro area countries since the 
early 1980s.  
Let me briefly mention some key developments.  
Since the start of Monetary Union, the euro area has witnessed an increase of 15.7 million in 
the number of people employed. This compares to around 5 million in the preceding period 
1990-98. The total labour market participation rate rose to nearly 71%, and the employment 
rate rose to over 65%.  
The  period  since  1999  is  also  characterised  by  a  change  in  labour  supply  composition. 
Women  have  entered  the  labour  market  in  increasing  numbers.  In  addition,  older  workers 
have  tended  to  remain  in  the  labour  market  for  longer,  which  is  welcome  in  view  of 
population  ageing.  Immigrants  have  contributed  positively  to  labour  supply,  helping  to  fill 
skills shortages. The share of workers with tertiary level education has increased. 
These  are  encouraging  developments,  resulting  from  the  implementation  of  structural 
reforms  in  product  and  labour  markets,  increased  immigration  and  wage  moderation. 
Nevertheless, progress has been quite uneven across countries and significant challenges 
remain. 
From a monetary policy perspective, four conclusions can be drawn. 
First, there is a need to further increase the labour market participation and employment rate 
of all groups of society. We have not yet reached the Lisbon employment rate target of 70%. 
Lower  labour  taxes,  stricter  work  availability  requirements  and  reduced  incentives  to  retire 
early would contribute to stimulating labour supply. Reduced restrictions on labour contracts 
and  well-designed  “work/family  reconciliation”  policies  would  among  others  support 
participation  further.  Increasing  product  market  competition  would  also  help  support 
employment creation. 
BIS Review 84/2008 
 3
Second,  there  is  a  need  for  making  labour  market  institutions  more  flexible  to  facilitate  a 
better  matching  of  the  skills  of  those  who  seek  a  job  with  the  characteristics  of  labour 
demand. To help match demand and supply, wage developments should reflect local labour 
market conditions.  
Third,  there  is  a  need  to  increase  knowledge  and  the  transferability  of  skills.  Bringing 
unemployed  or  inactive  people  into  jobs  will,  over  time,  enhance  individuals’  labour 
productivity and thus real wages. Good quality education is of the utmost importance and the 
recognition  and  incentives  for  young  people,  workers  and  firms  to  invest  in  education  and 
training  must  be  enhanced.  The  efficiency  and  service  orientation  of  education  institutions 
should be improved. In addition, the labour market should play a stronger role in signalling to 
education systems and workers which skills are in short supply. 
Finally,  the  euro  area  should  make  better  use  of  skills  from  outside  the  euro  area. 
Immigration policy should be closely aligned with the skills needed by the labour market, and 
ensure  the successful  integration  of  immigrants  into  the  active  workforce  and  society  as  a 
whole. 
4 
 BIS Review 84/2008
