V Leeladhar: The payment and settlement system in India 
Special address by Mr V Leeladhar, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
Conclave  on  Indian  Banking  –  Vision  2010,  organised  by  the  Indian  Banks’  Association, 
Mumbai, 1 August 2008. 
  Dear Friends, 
It is my pleasure to be here with you this afternoon at this important conclave, which seeks to 
articulate the vision of Indian banking in 2010. I am thankful to the organisers for affording 
me  this  opportunity  to  be  here  today  and  share  some  of  my  thoughts  with  this  august 
audience.  The  Indian  banking  system  has  come  a  long  way,  particularly  during  the  last 
couple of decades and continues to evolve in a myriad of ways. While, no doubt, the future 
contours  of  the  Indian  banking  would  be  shaped  and  driven  by  a  variety  of  factors,  the 
developments  in  the  payment  and  settlement  systems,  to  my  mind,  would  be  of  particular 
significance.  This  is  so  since  the  payment  and  settlement  systems  are  part  of  the  basic 
infrastructure  needed  for  the  proper  functioning  of  market-oriented  economies.  They  are 
indispensable for the efficient flow of payments for goods, services and financial assets and 
their  smooth  functioning  is  crucial  for  the  effective  implementation  of  the  central  bank’s 
monetary policy and for maintaining the financial and monetary stability in the economy. The 
RBI  has  recognised  the  payment  and  settlement  systems  to  be  critically  important  for  the 
broadening and deepening of the financial markets, as also for maintaining confidence in the 
financial  system  by  enhancing  the  safety,  soundness  and  efficiency  of  the  market 
infrastructure. 
I have, therefore, chosen to talk about the payment system in India, which is an important 
element  of  the  financial  sector  infrastructure.  Today,  I  would  like  to  briefly  touch  upon  the 
evolution  and  objectives  of  the  Indian  payment  system  –  as  a  public  good,  various 
milestones  crossed  by  us  in  the  past  few  decades,  the  major  initiatives  that  the  RBI  has 
taken to upgrade and modernise the payment system in India to benchmark it with the best in 
the  world,  and  the  various  technological  developments  that  can  be  leveraged  to  further 
deepen  the  penetration  of  the  payment  system  services  in  the  country  to  promote  greater 
financial inclusion. 
Evolution of the payment system in India 
The history of the payment system can be said to be virtually co-terminus with the evolution 
of  money.  The  earliest  form  of  payment  system  could  perhaps  be  traced  back  to  the  pre-
historic  days  of  barter  trade  when  the  settlement  of  consideration  took  place  through 
exchange  of  conch  shells,  goods,  cattle  and  later  commodities.  Such  a  system,  in  the 
absence of money as a medium of exchange, was obviously very cumbersome due to highly 
improbable ‘coincidence of wants’ of the two parties to a barter transaction. Subsequently, 
more  formalised  payment  instruments,  such  as  coins,  developed.  The  earliest  payment 
instruments known to have been used in India were coins, which were either punch-marked 
or  cast  in  silver  and  copper;  even  leather  is  known  to  have  been  used  for  making  coins. 
Thus,  with  the  advent  of  institutionalised  forms  of  money,  initially  in  the  form  of  coins  and 
later as paper money, the barter trade withered away and the usage of currency became the 
order of the day.  
Paper money, in the modern sense, has its origin in India in the late 18th century with the 
note issues of private banks as well as semi-government banks. Amongst the earliest issues 
were  those  by  the  Bank  of  Hindoostan,  which was  the  first  joint  stock  bank  established  in 
1770,  the  General  Bank  in  Bengal  and  Behar,  and  the  Bengal  Bank.  Later,  with  the 
BIS Review 96/2008 
 1
establishment of three Presidency Banks since 1809, the work of issuing notes was taken 
over by them and each Presidency Bank had the right to issue notes within certain limits. The 
private banks and the Presidency Banks introduced other payment instruments in the Indian 
money market and cheques were introduced by the Bank of Hindoostan. Buying and selling 
bills  of  exchange  became  one  of  the  items  of  business  to  be  conducted  by  the  Bank  of 
Bengal from 1839. The Paper Currency Act of 1861 conferred upon the Government of India 
the  monopoly  of  Note  Issue,  thus,  bringing  to  an  end  the  note  issues  of  private  and 
Presidency Banks. In 1881, the Negotiable Instruments Act (NI Act) was enacted, formalising 
the  usage  and  characteristics  of  instruments  like  the  cheque,  the  bill  of  exchange  and 
promissory  note.  The  NI  Act  provided  a  legal  framework  for  non-cash,  paper  payment 
instruments in India and continues to be an operative legislation even today. 
While the modern cheques came into being in India only in the 19th century, it is noteworthy 
that  India  had  pioneered  the  use  of  non-cash  based  payment  systems  long  ago,  which 
established  themselves  as  strong  mechanism  for  the  conduct  of  trade  and  business.  The 
most important form of credit instrument that evolved in India was termed as ‘Hundis’ and 
their use was reportedly known since the twelfth century. Hundis were used as instruments 
of  remittance,  credit  and  trade  transactions,  and  were  of  various  types,  each  type  with  its 
own unique features. However, with the steady rise in volumes of trade and commerce and 
the  growing  confidence  of  the  public  in  the  usage  of  cheques,  etc.,  there  was  also  rapid 
growth  in  the  payment  transactions  using  these  instruments.  With  the  development  of  the 
banking  system  and  higher  volume  of  cheques  used,  the  need  for  an  organised  cheque 
clearing  process  emerged  amongst  the  banks.  Clearing  associations  were  formed  by  the 
banks in the Presidency towns and the final settlement between member banks was effected 
by means of cheques drawn upon the Presidency Banks. With the setting up of the Imperial 
Bank  in  1921,  settlement  was  done  through  cheques  drawn  on  that  bank.  After  the 
establishment of the RBI in 1935, the Clearing Houses in the Presidency towns were taken 
over by the RBI, and continued with it for more than five decades. 
It is noteworthy that the volume of paper-based clearing we handle is the sixth largest in the 
world and during the year April 2007 to March 2008 about 1.46 billion cheques were cleared 
in the country. The total number of cheques cleared and the value during the last three years 
in India are as follows: 
 
Type 
Volume (in billion) 
Value (Rupees in lakh crore) 
(April – March) 
 2005-06  2006-07 2007-08 2005-06  2006-07 2007- 08 
1.29 
1.03 
1.37
1.14
1.46
113.29
120.42
133.96 
1.22
94.74
104.35
115.29 
 
Total 
Cheques 
Of these: 
a) MICR 
b) Non 
MICR 
0.026 
0.023
0.024
18.55
16.07
18.67 
 
In the wake of financial sector reforms, the  maturing of the banking system and the rising 
volume of paper-based clearing, the RBI has now adopted a policy stance of moving away 
from the actual management of retail payment and settlement systems. Thus, for a few years 
now,  the  task  of  setting  up  new  MICR-based  cheques-processing  centers  has  been 
delegated  to  the  commercial  banks.  The  management  of  clearing  houses  also  stands 
decentralised  to  a  large  extent  and  in  many  cities  and  towns,  the  commercial  banks  have 
been entrusted with the management of the bankers’ clearing houses. 
2 
 BIS Review 96/2008
Just  to  provide  an  overview,  let  me  mention  for  record  that  at  present,  there  are  1089 
Bankers’ Clearing Houses operating in India, of which 1036 are managed by State Bank of 
India and its Associates, 17 by the Reserve Bank, and the remaining 36 by 12 nationalised 
banks.  The  mechanised  cheques  processing  using  MICR  technology  (Magnetic  Ink 
Character  Recognition)  is  now  available  at  60  locations  and  six  more  locations  are  being 
upgraded  with  this  technology.  Thus,  the  computerised  clearing  houses  numbering  915 
(including  the  60  MICR  centres),  account  for  84  per  cent  of  the  total  number  of  clearing 
houses  in  the  country.  This  demonstrates  that  our  payment  system  has  indeed  made 
remarkable progress during the last two decades, with ongoing adoption and up-gradation of 
technology.  
Objectives of the payment system 
As some of you might recollect, a monograph on Payment Systems in India was prepared by 
the  RBI  in  1998  to  increase  the  awareness,  both  within  the  country  and  abroad,  of  the 
payment systems existing in India. The monograph also detailed the objectives that needed 
to be achieved. To that end, a Payment System Vision Document for 2001-04 was prepared 
to draw up the roadmap for consolidation, development and integration of payment systems 
in the country. Once these objectives were achieved, a Vision Document for 2005–08 was 
published in May 2005, articulating the Reserve Bank’s vision for the coming four years for 
the  payment  and  settlement  area.  The  mission  enshrined  in  the  Vision  Document  is  the 
establishment of safe, secure, sound and efficient payment and settlement systems for 
the  country,  towards  which  all  the  upgradation  efforts  are  focused.  Whereas  safety  in 
payment  and  settlement  systems  relates  to  risk  reduction  measures,  security  pertains  to 
confidence in the integrity of the payment systems. All payment systems are envisaged to be 
on sound footing with adequate legal backing for operational procedures and transparency 
norms. Efficiency enhancements are envisaged by leveraging the benefits of technology for 
cost-effective solutions. Thus, as part of its public policy objectives, the Reserve Bank has 
played a major role in the design, development and functioning of payment and settlement 
systems, and the multi-dimensional efforts of the RBI over the years have been geared to 
realise this vision.  
The role of the RBI 
The development of a payment system is one developmental role that is common to most of 
the  central banks.  It  is well  recognised  that  an  efficient  payment  and  settlement  system  is 
essential  for  efficient  functioning  of  the  modern  financial  system.  The  Reserve  Bank  has, 
therefore,  played  a  catalytic  role,  over  the  years,  in  creating  an  institutional  framework  for 
development of a safe, secure, sound and efficient payment system for the country. It has 
also initiated a variety of institutional, procedural and operational measures to strengthen and 
refine the payment system. In order to place the efforts of the RBI in a proper perspective, 
allow me to briefly trace some of the salient developments, chronologically. 
Remittance Facilities Scheme 
Many  of  you  might  remember  that  one  of  the  earliest  mechanisms  for  movement  of 
settlement funds of banks between the clearing centres was provided by the Reserve Bank 
as  far  back  as  in  1940.  Since  October  1,  1940,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  been  operating  an 
integrated Remittance Facilities Scheme, which facilitates transfer of funds between banks 
located  at  different  centres  in  the  country,  expeditiously  and  with  a  minimum  cost.  The 
Scheme  is  operated  by  the  Reserve  Bank  and  the  public  sector  banks  as  its  agents, 
including treasuries and sub-treasuries of the government. In other centres, the SBI operates 
a  remittance  scheme  to  enable  banks  to  fund  and  draw  upon  their  various  settlement 
accounts. In the absence of the SBI, its associate banks or the public sector banks managing 
BIS Review 96/2008 
 3
the  clearing  house,  provide  the  remittance  facility.  The  Scheme  has  served  us  well  and 
enables smooth movement of settlement funds between all the clearing centres. 
Clearing house regulations 
As  you  are  aware,  the  bankers’  clearing  houses  constitute  the  critical  nodes  in  the  entire 
payment  system  of  the  country  and  their  efficient  and  orderly  functioning  is  crucial  for  a 
robust payment system. However, prior to 1986, there were no formal regulations and rules 
governing the transaction of business in the clearing houses and each clearing house had its 
own rules and regulations, based on local conventions and convenience. Hence, in case of 
disputes,  resolution  of  the  problem  proved  to  be  difficult.  In  1986,  therefore,  the  Reserve 
Bank formulated a set of guidelines known as the Uniform Regulations and Rules (URR) for 
the  Bankers'  Clearing  Houses,  so  as  to  harmonise,  across  the  country,  the  framework 
governing the conduct of the clearing houses. These guidelines had also become necessary 
in the backdrop of increasing computerisation in the banking industry and the consequential 
changes in the functioning of the clearing houses. The Regulations have since been adopted 
individually  by  the  general  body  of  each  clearing  house  in  the  country.  Individual  clearing 
houses are free to frame their own rules consistent with the broad framework provided by the 
Regulations.  The  Uniform  Rules  and  Regulations  represent  a  significant  step  forward  in 
providing a formal institutional framework for the payment system in the country. 
The Board for Payment and Settlement Systems 
In order to strengthen the institutional framework for the payment and settlement systems in 
the country, the Reserve Bank constituted, in 2005, a Board for Regulation and Supervision 
of Payment and Settlement Systems (BPSS) as a Committee of its Central Board. The Board 
is  chaired  by  the  Governor,  RBI  while  all  the  four  Deputy  Governors  and  two  external 
Directors of the Central Board are its members. The role of the BPSS is to lay down policies 
relating to the regulation and supervision of all types of payment and settlement systems, set 
standards for existing and future systems, approve criteria for authorisation of payment and 
settlement  systems,  and  determine  criteria  for  membership  to  these  systems,  including 
continuation, termination and rejection of membership. Thus, the BPSS is the highest policy 
making  body  in  regard  to  the  payment  and  settlement  systems  in  the  country  and 
encompasses electronic, non-electronic, domestic and cross-border payment and settlement 
systems which affect the domestic transactions. In its relatively short span since its inception, 
the BPSS has provided valuable guidance in shaping the emerging contours of the payment 
and  settlement  system  in  the  country  and  has  helped  widen  the  reach  of  the  payment 
services of the banks to the hinterland areas. 
Payment and Settlement Systems Act 2007 
It is internationally acknowledged that payment and settlement systems should function on a 
well-founded legal basis. This entails among other things, proper authorisation requirement 
for  setting  up  and  payment  systems,  legal  recognition  for  netting,  settlement  finality, 
providing  for  regulation  and  oversight  of  the  payment  and  settlement  systems.  Many 
countries have either provided for these requirements in their central bank statutes or have 
drafted separate and comprehensive laws for this purpose. In India where the economy is 
growing at a fast pace increasingly large volumes and values are being handled by payment 
systems.  Non-bank  entities  who  are  outside  the  explicit  regulatory  purview  of  the  central 
bank  are  running/  are  likely  to  run  important  payment  systems.  A  number  of  innovative 
payment  instruments/systems  have  been  introduced  by  unregulated  entities.  While  large 
payment systems which are unregulated present risks to the stability of the financial systems, 
unauthorised retail payment systems without proper management and operational structures 
can  undermine  public  confidence  in  the  efficacy  of  the  payment  systems  as  a  whole.  The 
Reserve Bank and the Government felt that there should be an explicit law to regulate the 
4 
 BIS Review 96/2008
payment and settlement systems. The Parliament has enacted the Payment and Settlement 
Systems  Act    in  December  2007.  This  Act  empowers  the  Reserve  Bank  to  regulate  and 
supervise  the  payment  and  settlement  systems  and  provides  a  legal  basis  for  multilateral 
netting and settlement finality. The Act empowers the Reserve Bank to lay down the policies 
for regulation and supervision of the payment and settlement systems, authorise their setting 
up/continuance,  for  issuing  directions,  laying  down  standards,  calling  for  information/data, 
initiating prosecution/levying penalties for violation of the provisions of the Act, its regulations 
and directions etc. The Act will come into operation very shortly. 
Umbrella organisation for retail payments 
In India the retail paper-based and electronic clearing is carried out by about 1089 clearing 
houses all over the country run by RBI, State Bank of India, its associate banks and other 
public  sector  banks.  The  multiplicity  of  local  operators  and  diverse  local  practices  which 
determine  the  conduct  of  clearing  quite  often  compromises  safety  and  efficiency  of  the 
clearing  operations  besides  not  giving  due  importance  to  customer  service.  This  situation 
limits the scope for product innovation and expanding the reach of the payment systems. The 
Reserve Bank in its Vision Document (2005-08) for the Payment Systems in India, expressed 
its intention to move away from the operation of the retail payment systems and concentrate 
on  operating  the  RTGS  system,  regulating  and  overseeing  the  payment  systems  and 
providing  the  settlement  accounts  for  important  payment  systems.  It  also  envisaged  the 
setting up of an institution at the national level to own and operate all retail payment systems 
in the country. The setting up of this umbrella organisation would bring greater efficiency by 
way  of  uniformity  and  standardisation  in  retail  payments,  expand  its  reach  and  bring 
innovative  payment  products  to  augment  customer  convenience.  The  Indian  Banks 
Association set up a Working Group which examined this issue and suggested the modalities 
for  setting  up  this  organisation.  This  organisation  to  be  known  as  the  National  Payments 
Corporation of India (NPCI) will be an entity registered under the Companies Act and will be 
owned by banks and financial institutions. NPCI will be a Section 25 company, which will not 
distribute its profits as dividend, but will plough it back for the improvement and expanding 
the  reach  of  the  retail  payment  systems.  The  ownership  of  the  company  will  be  suitably 
diverse  with  no  bank  or  group  of  banks  having  shareholding  exceeding  10%  of  the  total 
shareholding. The Payment and Settlement Systems Act 2007 has laid down that such not 
less than 51% of the equity of this company will be held by public sector banks. The work 
relating to the setting up of NPCI is in progress. 
Let  me  now  say  a  few  words  about  the  RBI’s  initiatives  in  the  area  of  electronic  payment 
system. 
Reserve Bank’s initiatives for electronic payments and banking 
As part of its public policy objective of promoting a safe, secure, sound and efficient payment 
system,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  taken  several  initiatives  to  develop  and  promote  electronic 
payments  infrastructure.  Towards  this  end,  the  RBI  introduced  the  Electronic  Clearing 
Service (ECS) and the Electronic Funds Transfer (EFT) system in 1995, the Real Time Gross 
Settlement  (RTGS)  system  in  March  2004,  the  National  Electronic  Funds  Transfer  (NEFT) 
system in November 2005 and Cheque Truncation System (CTS) in February 2008. Let me 
present a brief overview of these payment-system products launched by the RBI. 
Electronic Clearing Service 
With  a  view  to  upgrading  our  payment  system  to  the  international  standards,  the  Reserve 
Bank  took  the  initiative  and  set  up  Electronic  Clearing  Service  in  India,  in  the  mid  1990s, 
which  is  the  counterpart  of  the  automated  clearing  house  (ACH)  system  in  certain  other 
countries. It has two variants – ECS - Credit Clearing and ECS - Debit Clearing. While the 
BIS Review 96/2008 
 5
Credit  Clearing  operates  on  the  principle  of  ‘single  debit-multiple  credits’  and  is  used  for 
making payment of salary, pension, dividend and interest, etc., the Debit Clearing functions 
on the principle of ‘single credit-multiple debits’ and is used for collecting payments by utility 
service  providers  like  electricity,  telephone  bills  as  well  by  banks  for  receiving  principal  / 
interest repayments for housing and personal loans from the borrowers. At present, about 18 
million  transactions  flow  through  the  ECS  system  every  month.  This  facility  is  currently 
available  at  70  centers  in  the  country.  Settlement  takes  place  on  T+1  basis  and  the  cycle 
gets completed on T+1. RBI is also in the process of developing a National ECS system – 
about which I will talk a little later. 
Internet banking 
It may be recalled that pursuant to advent of internet-based banking in India, the RBI had 
appointed  a  Working  Group  on  Internet  Banking  in  2001  to  address  the  issues  relating  to 
technology  and  security,  legal  aspects,  and  the  regulation  and  supervision  of  the  internet 
banking  activities  of  the  banks.  The  recommendations  of  the  Group  were  accepted  for 
phased implementation and detailed guidelines on internet banking were issued by the RBI 
to the banks in June 2001, for adoption by the banks offering internet banking facilities. Even 
though  the  Group  had  made  the  recommendations  in  the  context  of  the  internet  banking, 
these  were  to  be  applicable,  in  general,  to  all  forms  of  electronic  banking,  to  the  extent 
relevant. The banks are now permitted to offer internet banking facilities based on the Board-
approved  internet  banking  policy  and  no  longer  require  prior  RBI  approval.  The  product 
portfolio to be offered through internet banking is also no longer confined to only the local 
currency  products  but  even  foreign  exchange  services,  for  the  permitted  underlying 
transactions, can be offered through internet banking. Operations on the Vostro accounts of 
the  overseas  banks  and  exchange  houses,  maintained  with  the  banks  in  India,  are  also 
permitted through the internet-based operations. Needless to say, the overarching concern in 
providing internet banking would be the effective management of the incremental operational 
risks acquired by the banks in using this new delivery channel for the banking services.  
Real Time Gross Settlement System 
The payment system in the country largely follows the deferred net settlement regime, under 
which the net amount is settled between the banks, on a deferred basis. Such a dispensation 
entails an element of settlement risk. Hence, as a step towards risk mitigation in the large 
value  payment  systems,  the  RTGS  was  operationalised  by  the  RBI  in  March  2004,  which 
enables settlement of transactions in real time, on a gross basis. Almost all the inter-bank 
transactions  in  the  country  and  many  time-critical  customer  transactions  are  now  settled 
through this system. RTGS is fully secured electronic funds transfer system where banks and 
customers can receive payments on real time basis. The outreach of RTGS transactions has 
also  grown  geographically.  Out  of  about  75,000  bank  branches  in  the  country,  more  than 
48,300  bank  branches  now  accept  requests  for  remittance  through  RTGS  system  for 
customer transactions as well as inter-bank transactions. A minimum threshold of rupees one 
lakh has been prescribed for customer transactions to ensure that RTGS system is used only 
for  large  value  transactions  and  retail  transactions  take  an  alternate  channel  of  electronic 
funds  transfer.  The  daily  average  of  transactions  is  over  34,000  by  volume  and  over  Rs.2 
lakh crore by value. The RBI also provides collateralised Intra-Day-Liquidity (IDL) support to 
the member banks for the RTGS operations. With the progressive expansion of the RTGS 
volume, a  view needs to be taken on the continued need and relevance of the high-value 
clearing system – since the two systems have a functional overlap on account of the same 
value threshold and the target clientele. 
6 
 BIS Review 96/2008
National Electronic Funds Transfer System 
Yet  another  product  innovation  by  the  RBI  was  the  National  Electronic  Funds  Transfer 
System,  which  was  introduced  in  November  2005  as  a  more  secure,  nation-wide  retail 
electronic payment system to facilitate funds transfer by the bank customers, between the 
networked  bank  branches  in  the  country.  It  is  a  deferred  net  settlement  system  and  is  an 
improvement over other modes in terms of security and processing efficiency. It provides six 
settlement  cycles  a  day  and  enables  funds  transfer  to  the  beneficiaries  account  on  T+0 
basis.  This  facility  is  currently  available  at  over  46,300  bank  branches  throughout  the 
country.  The  daily  average  of  the  transactions  is  over  80,000  by  volume  and  over  Rs.500 
crore  by  value.  It  is  envisaged  that  all  the  RTGS-enabled  bank  branches  would  also  be 
NEFT-enabled  and  the  customer  would  have  a  choice  between  the  RTGS  or  the  NEFT 
systems, based on time criticality, value of the transaction and willingness of the customer to 
pay  different  charges  for  the  two  systems.  With  the  introduction  of  NEFT,  the  Electronic 
Funds Transfer system, introduced in 1994 for retail funds transfer, is now available only for 
Government payments. Let me also mention that using the NEFT infrastructure, the system 
of one-way remittance from India to Nepal has been implemented by the RBI since 15th May 
2008. 
Cheque Truncation System (CTS) 
The  latest  electronic  payment  product  introduced  by  the  RBI  is  the  Cheque  Truncation 
System, which was launched, on a pilot basis, in the National Capital Region of New Delhi on 
February 1, 2008, with the participation of 10 banks. At present all the banks are participating 
in the system through 53 direct member banks. The main objective of the CTS is to improve 
the  efficiency  and  substantially  reduce  the  cheque  processing  time  in  the  system.  The 
traditional  clearing  system  requiring  the  physical  presentation  of  cheques  in  the  clearing 
house for payment and settlement, inevitably entails consequential inefficiencies in terms of 
clearing time and infrastructure required. The enormity of  the logistics needed for physical 
cheque clearance can be gauged from the fact that we cleared about 1.46 billion cheques in 
the  country  during  the  year  April  2007  to  March  2008.  In  contrast,  the  main  advantage  of 
cheque truncation is that it obviates the physical presentation of the cheque to the clearing 
house; instead, the electronic image of the cheque would be sent to the clearing house. The 
CTS  would  enable  the  realisation  of  cheques  on  the  same  day,  and  provide  a  more  cost-
effective mode of settlement than manual and MICR clearing. Smaller banks, which may find 
it unviable to set up the infrastructure, could utilise the services of service bureaus set up for 
this purpose by a few larger banks.  
Once the CTS become fully operational, the system would be the largest in the world and 
would  leapfrog  the  country  from  the  paper-based  instruments  to  a  fully  electronic mode  of 
payment  and  settlement.  Necessary  amendments  have  been  made  to  the  Negotiable 
Instruments  Act,  1881,  which  provides  legal  recognition  to  the  electronic  image  of  the 
truncated  cheque.  These  amendments  provide  a  legal  basis  for  the  cheque  truncation 
system. 
National Electronic Clearing Service (NECS) 
The National ECS is a product being developed by the RBI to enable centralised processing 
of  the  ECS  transactions,  in  contrast  to  the  existing  ECS  system  that  has  decentralised 
operations  at  70  locations,  spread  all  over  the  country.  Under  the  National  ECS,  the 
processing of all the ECS transactions would be centralised at the National Clearing Cell at 
Nariman Point, Mumbai and sponsor banks would need to only upload the relative files to a 
web server, with online data validation facility. Destination banks would receive their inward 
clearing  data/file  at  a  central  location,  through  the  web  server.  The  National  ECS  would 
leverage the Core Banking platform of the commercial banks, to enable around 50,000 core-
banking-enabled branches of the various banks, to avail of this service. The system would 
BIS Review 96/2008 
 7
facilitate  end-to-end  seamless  posting  of  the  NECS  transactions  in  a  straight-through-
processing  (STP)  environment.  This  would  help  the  users  and  member  banks  to  send, 
receive and process the data files at one centralised place, thereby improving the efficiency 
of the payment system.  
Mobile banking 
As you are no doubt aware, with the rapid growth in the number of mobile phone subscribers 
in  India,  the  banks  have  been  exploring  the  feasibility  of  using  mobile  phones  as  an 
alternative channel of delivery of banking services. A few banks have also started offering, 
through  the  mobile  phone,  information-based  services  like  balance  enquiry,  stop-payment 
instruction of cheques, record of last five transactions, etc. Considering that the use of this 
technology for the banking services is relatively new and calls for appropriate safeguards to 
ensure  security  of  financial  transactions,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  formulated  the  ‘Draft 
Operating  Guidelines  for  Mobile  Payments  in  India',  through  a  consultative  process  and 
placed them on the RBI’s website in June 2008 for public comments. It is expected that the 
guidelines when operationalised, would help strengthen the operating environment for mobile 
banking in the country. 
Satellite banking 
The availability of reliable communication network is an important prerequisite for facilitating 
electronic modes of payment. However, the non-availability of the terrestrial communication 
link in many parts of the country, particularly the hinterland and hilly areas, poses a major 
constraint in securing greater penetration of electronic payment services in such areas. For 
such  difficult  terrain,  which  is  not  connected  by  terrestrial  links,  the  satellite  connectivity  is 
considered to be the appropriate mode of connecting the branches in these areas, as also as 
a fallback system. In this background, a paper was prepared by a member of the Board for 
Payment and Settlement Systems of the Reserve Bank on the use of satellite communication 
technology to facilitate penetration of payment services to the rural areas which are denied 
these  facilities  due  to  non-  availability  of  reliable  communication  links.  A  Technical  Group 
constituted by  the  Reserve  Bank  has  since  examined  the  proposal  and  recommended  the 
use of satellite connectivity as it would facilitate integration of the rural branches with the core 
banking solution platform of the banks and help them providing efficient funds-transfer facility 
to their customers.  
However,  reckoning  the  cost  implications  involved  in  creating  satellite  connectivity  for  the 
bank branches, the Reserve Bank is considering provision of financial incentive to the banks 
for  adopting  this  technology.  Under  the  proposal,  the  RBI  would  be  bearing  a  part  of  the 
leased  rentals  for  the  satellite  connectivity,  provided  the  banks  use  it  for  connecting  their 
branches  in  the  North  Eastern  States  and  in  the  under-banked  districts  in  the  rest  of  the 
country.  A  discussion  paper  on  this  scheme  was  placed  on  RBI  website  in  June  2008  for 
public comments.  
I may add that the satellite communication link is the most disaster-proof, since the satellite, 
up in the sky, continues to function even in the face of major natural disasters on earth, such 
as floods or earthquakes. It is, therefore, ideally suited for use as a back-up communication 
link for the major centers in the country, where a disaster can otherwise disrupt the terrestrial 
connection.  
The challenges ahead 
We have no doubt covered considerable ground in modernising our payment and settlement 
system.  The  banking  system  too  has  made  considerable  investment  in  the  related 
infrastructure  to  upgrade  the  payment  system.  However,  there  are  several  challenges  that 
8 
 BIS Review 96/2008
need  to  be  effectively  addressed  if  the  full  benefits  of  the  achievements  so  far  are  to  be 
reaped.  
One of the main challenges in the payment system area is to promote large-scale use of the 
electronic modes of payment across the country and requires addressing the constraints that 
impede the adoption of this mechanism. To my mind, the primary reason for slow pace of 
adoption of the electronic modes of funds transfer, particularly in the retail segment, is the 
lack of education – particularly on the part of the bank staff at the branch level that have 
interface with the public. A survey conducted by one of the Regional Offices of the RBI in the 
recent past revealed that in the limited sample covered, there were several bank branches in 
the State which were not even aware of the National Electronic Fund Transfer system. The 
banks, therefore, need to make concerted efforts to increase the degree of awareness at the 
level of the branch staff so that the electronic fund transfer services percolate down to the 
level of the public in a significant manner. 
The  other  side  of  the  coin  is  the  lack  of  customer  education  and  awareness  about  the 
features and benefits of the EFT, which precludes wider adoption of this product and leads to 
carrying on with the traditional modes of payment. I would, therefore, like to urge upon the 
banks to launch a systematic educational campaign for their clients to educate them of the 
suite of electronic products offered by them. This would not only reduce the avoidable paper 
work in the operation of the banks but would also improve the quality of customer service 
and eventually, business volume.  
In so far as the RBI is concerned, with a view to promoting the electronic payment culture 
and  to  make  it  more  user-friendly,  the  RBI  has  intervened  and  mandated  reasonability  in 
pricing  of  transactions  effected  through  ATMs  and  compulsory  use  of  electronic  mode  for 
transactions above a specified threshold. The service charge levied on banks by the RBI for 
ECS, EFT / NEFT and RTGS transactions has been waived until March 2009, so that this 
benefit  of  reduced  costs  is  passed  on  to  customers,  and  the  right  incentive  framework  is 
created for the use of electronic retail payment products. Similarly, the limits set for ECS and 
EFT  /  NEFT  transactions  were  also  dispensed  with  in  November  2004  with  a  view  to 
expanding the user base. This, of course, is apart from various measures taken by the RBI 
for strengthening the payment systems infrastructure in a variety of ways. 
Although the share of electronic payment products is improving in the overall retail segment, 
the share of public sector banks in this area is very low even as the number of branches 
offering the electronic payment facility is increasing. It is, therefore, necessary to make these 
products available across all bank branches. There is also a need to focus on expanding 
the geographical reach of the electronic payment services so as to include the segments of 
the  population  not  yet  touched  by  it.  It  is  difficult  to  achieve  financial  inclusion  without 
encompassing rural-India in the payment system out-reach and the banks that do so first, will 
reap  the  rewards  of  the  ‘first-mover  advantage’  in  terms  of  higher  market  share,  with  the 
concomitant increase in business and revenues. And as we all know, the electronic payment 
medium is not only speedier and more efficient, but is also more environment friendly as it 
reduces the reliance on paper required for effecting payments. It is our vision that electronic 
products  reach  a  level  of  50%  by  volume  and  95%  by  value  of  the  aggregate  payment 
system transactions in the country, by the end of March 2009. 
Then,  there  are  also  some  nagging  efficiency  issues  in  the  payment  system.  Whilst  the 
current clearing cycle of T+1 basis for the cheques payable locally, compares favourably with 
the best in the world, it is necessary to look into the entire cheque collection cycle – from the 
time  a  customer  deposits  a  cheque  at  a  branch  till  the  point  of  realisation  of  credit  in  his 
account.  There  is  perhaps  scope  for  continuous  improvement  in  overall  collection  cycle. 
Going by the number of complaints received, it appears that customer-service in this area is 
not very customer-centric. 
BIS Review 96/2008 
 9
Conclusion 
The  payment  and  settlement  system  constitutes  the  backbone  of  the  financial  sector  and 
enables conclusion and settlement of financial contracts. The country has made phenomenal 
progress in enhancing the reach and improving the efficiency of the national payment system 
– in which the RBI and the banking system have been equal partners. Creating a world-class 
payment system in the country is a long, arduous but an exciting journey in which we have to 
constantly keep striving to better our past achievements. I am sure the banking community 
present  here  would  make  dedicated  and  systematic  efforts  in  this  direction  to  meet  the 
challenges ahead and actively contribute to realising our vision for the payment system that 
we have set for ourselves. 
Thank you. 
10 
 BIS Review 96/2008
