Donald L Kohn: The US economy and monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Donald L Kohn, Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve  System,  at  the  University  of  North  Carolina  at  Wilmington,  Cameron  School  of 
Business' Business Week Program, Wilmington, North Carolina, 26 February 2008. 
 When, at the end of July, I accepted Tom Simpson's invitation to speak to you today on the 
economy and monetary policy, little did I realize the challenges I would face. For one, the 
economy  and  financial  markets  have  taken  some  unexpected  twists  and  turns  over  the 
intervening  seven  months,  and  we  are  still  in  the  midst  of  a  rapidly  evolving  and  highly 
uncertain  situation.  For  another,  when  we  set  the  date,  I  had  expected  that  Chairman 
Bernanke would have already given our Monetary Policy Report to the Congress, and I could 
simply  develop  some  of  the  themes  he  had  laid  out.  However,  that  testimony  will  be 
tomorrow, and I must emphasize that the views you are about to hear are my own and not 
necessarily  shared  by  any  of  my  colleagues  on  the  Board  or  the  Federal  Open  Market 
Committee (FOMC).1  
Several  major  developments  are  shaping  current  economic  performance,  the  outlook,  and 
the conduct of monetary policy. The most prominent of these developments is the contraction 
in the housing market that began in early 2006. Both the prices and pace of construction of 
new homes rose to unsustainable levels in the preceding few years. For a time, the resulting 
correction  was  largely  confined  to  the  housing  market,  but  the  consequences  of  that 
correction have spread to other sectors of the economy.  
The financial markets are playing a key role in the transmission of the housing downturn to 
the rest of the economy. In the first half of 2007, investors became concerned about the likely 
performance  of  many  subprime  adjustable-rate  mortgages  made  from  late  2005  through 
early 2007. Lenders turned away from subprime mortgages and some other investments as 
the magnitude of the losses on those mortgages began to emerge, as uncertainty about the 
ultimate  size  of  the  losses  and  who  would  bear  them  mounted,  and  as  these  experiences 
undermined confidence in a variety of other credit instruments, especially those with complex 
structures. Those tendencies have intensified as risks of a spillover to the broader economy 
have risen. The increase in expected losses along with the unwillingness of investors to fund 
some types of credits has led to pressures on banks and other financial intermediaries as 
well  as  on  prices  and  liquidity  in  securities  markets.  The  result  has  been  a  substantial 
tightening in credit availability for many firms and households. 
At  the  same  time,  continued  sizable  increases  in  the  prices  of  food,  energy,  and  other 
commodities  have  raised  inflation.  To  some  extent,  those  increases  have  resulted  from 
strong demand in rapidly growing emerging-market economies, like China and India. But the 
increases likely also reflect conditions such as adverse weather in some parts of the world, 
the  use  of agricultural commodities  to  produce  energy,  and  geopolitical  developments  that 
threaten supplies in some petroleum-producing centers. The higher prices have eroded the 
purchasing power of household income, adding to restraint on spending. 
In my remarks today I will trace the effects of these developments in more detail, discuss the 
response  of  monetary  policy,  and  talk  about  the  implications  for  the  future  path  of  the 
economy. 
                                                 
1   Stephanie Aaronson and Joyce Zickler, of the Board’s staff, contributed to the preparation of these remarks. 
BIS Review 23/2008 
 1
Recent economic and financial developments 
The pace of real economic activity stepped down sharply toward the end of last year and has 
remained  sluggish  in  recent  months.  Real  gross  domestic  product  (GDP)  is  estimated  to 
have risen only slightly in the fourth quarter. The contraction in the housing market continues 
to drag down economic growth. Declines in real residential investment subtracted nearly 1 
percentage point from the overall increase in real GDP in  2007. Even so, the inventory of 
unsold  new  homes  remains  unusually  high,  because  the  demand  for  housing  has  fallen 
about  as  rapidly  as  the  supply.  Problems  in  the  subprime  market  have  virtually  cut  off 
financing in this sector. Prime jumbo mortgages are being made, but the lack of a secondary 
market has caused the spread between rates on these mortgages and on those that have 
been eligible for purchase by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac to widen substantially. Even the 
standards for conforming mortgages have been tightened of late. Weak demand, in turn, is 
leading  to  widespread  declines  in  the  actual  and  expected  prices  of  houses,  further 
discouraging buyers. Starts of new single-family homes continued to fall in January, dropping 
to fewer than 750,000 units – a level of activity more than 1 million units below the peak in 
early  2006.  Judging  from  the  further  decline  in  permits  last  month,  additional  cutbacks  in 
construction are likely. It appears that the correction in the housing market has further to go. 
For the better part of the past two years, the trouble in the housing market was contained; 
however,  over  the  past  several  months,  the  weakness  appears  to  have  spread  to  other 
sectors  of  the  economy.  Tighter  credit,  reductions  in  housing  and  equity  wealth,  higher 
energy prices, and uncertainty about economic prospects seem to be weighing on business 
and  household  spending.  Labor  demand  has  softened  in  recent  months.  Private  nonfarm 
payrolls were little changed in January, and the unemployment rate moved up to 4.9 percent, 
on average, during December and January, after remaining around 4-1/2 percent from late 
2006 through most of 2007. The higher level of weekly claims for unemployment insurance 
suggests continued softness in employment this month. 
Apart from the labor market, the hard data on economic activity in the first quarter are limited, 
but,  on  the  whole,  the  data  suggest  economic  activity  has  remained  very  sluggish.  Retail 
sales  were  up  moderately  in  nominal  terms  in  January,  but  after  adjusting  for  the  rise  in 
prices  of  consumer  goods,  real  spending  on  non-auto  goods  appears  to  have  been  little 
changed last month. In addition, unit sales of new motor vehicles weakened. Total industrial 
production  rose  just  0.1  percent  in  January  for  a  second  consecutive  month,  and 
manufacturing  output  was  unchanged.  Much  of  the  other  information  about  the  current 
quarter has come in the form of surveys of business and consumers – and most all of it has 
been downbeat. That said, I can still see a few bright spots. One is that the level of business 
inventories  does  not  appear  worrisome  at  present.  Another  is  that  international  trade 
continued to be a solid source of support for the economy through the end of last year. The 
worsening financial conditions and slower growth in the United States have had some effect 
on the rest of the world, but the prospects for foreign growth remain favorable. 
The most recent news on inflation – the January report on the consumer price index (CPI) – 
was disappointing. Once again, total or headline CPI was boosted by a jump in energy prices 
and relatively large increases in food prices; last month's rise left the twelve-month change in 
the overall CPI at 4.3 percent – twice the pace a year ago. In addition, the January increase 
of  0.3  percent  in  the  CPI  excluding  food  and  energy  was  slightly  higher  than  the  average 
monthly  rate  in  2007.  Nonetheless,  the  twelve-month  change  in  this  measure  of  core 
inflation,  at  2-1/2  percent,  was  still  slightly  below  the  rate  one  year  earlier.  The  recent 
readings  on  core  inflation  suggest  that  the  higher  costs  of  energy,  a  pickup  in  prices  of 
imported goods, and, perhaps, the persistent upward price pressures in commodity markets 
may be passing through a bit to core consumer prices. 
2 
 BIS Review 23/2008
The implications of financial stress for the economic outlook 
The recent evolution of U.S. financial markets is a complicated story, and a full consideration 
of  how  and  why  this  episode  of  financial  turmoil  developed  is  a  topic  for  another  speech. 
Today, I am going to focus on some key aspects of the situation in which we find ourselves 
and discuss their implications for the economy and for monetary policy. 
The  pressures  from  the  financial  turmoil  have  been  most  intense  for  those  financial 
intermediaries  that  have  been  exposed  to  losses  on  mortgages  and  other  credits  that  are 
repricing,  as  well  as  for  those  institutions  now  required  to  bring  onto  their  balance  sheets 
loans that previously would have been sold into securities markets. As those intermediaries 
take steps to protect themselves from further losses and conserve capital, and as investors 
more broadly have responded to the evolving risks, spreads on household and business debt 
in securities markets have widened, the availability of bank credit has decreased, and equity 
prices have weakened. 
In addition to the drying up of large portions of mortgage finance that I referred to previously, 
conditions  have  firmed  on  loans  for  a  variety  of  other  purposes.  Responses  to  our  Senior 
Loan  Officer  Opinion  Survey  in  January  showed  that  banks  have  tightened  terms  and 
standards  for  household  and  commercial  mortgages,  commercial  and  industrial  loans,  and 
consumer  loans.  In  corporate  bond  markets,  spreads  have  been  widening  on  both 
investment-  and  speculative-grade  issues.  Lenders  are  demanding  much  higher  risk 
premiums for commercial real estate loans. And equity prices have fallen substantially over 
the past seven months, reducing household wealth and increasing the cost of raising equity 
capital for businesses. 
To  be  sure,  the  easing  of  monetary  policy  that  I  will  be  discussing  in  a  minute  has,  quite 
deliberately, been intended to offset the effect of this tightening, resulting in some borrowers 
seeing lower interest rates. But financing costs have risen, on balance, for riskier credits, and 
almost  all  borrowers  are  dealing  with  more  cautious  lenders  who  have  adopted  more 
stringent standards. Those financial market developments are, in many respects, a healthy 
correction to previous excesses. But, in some cases, they may represent an overreaction, or 
at  least  positioning  for  the  small  probability  of  very  adverse  economic  conditions.  In  any 
case, they have the potential to adversely affect household and business spending.  
The  recovery  in  financial  markets  is  likely  to  be  a  prolonged  process.  The  length  of  the 
recuperation  will  depend  importantly  on  the  course  of  the  economy,  particularly  on 
developments in the housing market. If the deterioration in the housing market were greater 
than  expected  in  coming  months,  the  losses  borne  by  financial  institutions  would  be  even 
greater,  and 
reduce  credit  availability.  More  widespread 
macroeconomic weakness could make lenders more cautious and could cause the financial 
problems  to  spread  further.  The  recent  problems  of  financial  guarantors,  with  possible 
implications for municipal bond markets as well as for bank balance sheets, are an indication 
that the financial sector remains vulnerable. 
Even in a more favorable economic environment, some time is likely to be required to restore 
the functioning and liquidity of a number of markets. The collapse of the subprime mortgage 
market and subsequent problems in other areas of the financial markets have brought to light 
a number of deficiencies in the practice of financial intermediation that will take some time to 
correct. Clearly, lending standards in the subprime mortgage market were too lax, particularly 
for riskier households. Compounding the problem, those involved in moving the loans from 
originator to investor, including the credit rating agencies, failed to ensure that the quality of 
the  underlying  credit  was  accurately  assessed  and  represented.  Moreover,  some  of  the 
financial instruments developed in recent years were opaque, making it difficult for investors 
to  price  them  correctly.  And  many  did  not  fully  appreciate  and  properly  manage  the  risks 
involved in the maturity, credit, and liquidity transformations that were taking place in several 
sectors of the financial market. A number of markets will need to make institutional changes 
before  they  are  likely  to  function  smoothly  again,  and  regulators  will  need  to  adapt  their 
lenders  might 
further 
BIS Review 23/2008 
 3
oversight to take account of the lessons learned. In the end, we will have a safer system, but 
one  with  more  bank  intermediation,  less  leverage,  and  higher  financing  costs  for  many 
borrowers. 
The monetary policy response 
The  Federal  Reserve  has  responded  to  the  unfolding  situation  by  acting  to  improve  the 
access  of  depository  institutions  to  liquidity  and  by  easing  the  stance  of  monetary  policy 
substantially. 
Problems  in  the  subprime  mortgage  market  had  been  evident  by  early  2007,  but  the 
disruptions took a far more serious turn last August when pressures spread to commercial 
banks  both  here  and  abroad.  Among  other  things,  the  disruption  of  markets  for  structured 
credits  had  the  effect  of  bringing  a  good  deal  of  financial  intermediation  back  onto  the 
balance  sheets  of  banks.  Uncertain  about  the  ultimate  call  on  their  lending  capacity,  the 
financial strength of some of their counterparties, and their own needs for liquidity, banks and 
other lenders became much more reluctant to extend credit in term funding markets. 
The Federal Reserve was created in large part to supply liquidity and calm markets in such 
situations, importantly by assuring banks of a backup source of funding through the discount 
window. To enhance the utility of the discount window and encourage its use, the Federal 
Reserve  reduced  the  spread  between  the  discount  rate  and  the  federal  funds  rate  last 
August, and we made lending available explicitly on a term basis, rather than only overnight. 
However, banks were reluctant to use even this more attractive discount facility because they 
feared that their counterparties would see it as a sign of weakness, and pressures in term 
funding markets increased. 
In  December  we  introduced  a  new  method  for  banks  to  borrow  from  the  Federal  Reserve 
against a broad range of collateral – the term auction facility (TAF). The TAF is an auction 
through which a fixed amount of lending is offered to the banking system, and it seems to 
have been successful in avoiding the "stigma" problem and in helping funding markets return 
to more normal functioning. Markets were also aided by coordinated efforts to supply liquidity 
by several other central banks at the same time. 
As the deterioration in financial markets increasingly has threatened to hold down spending 
and  employment,  the  FOMC  has  eased  monetary  policy,  reducing  the  federal  funds  rate 
target by 2-1/4 percentage points since the turmoil erupted in August. Those actions have 
been  intended  to  counteract  the  effects  on  the  overall  economy  of  tighter  terms  and 
conditions in credit markets, the drop in equity and housing wealth, and the steep decline in 
housing  activity.  Our  objective  has  been  to  promote  sustainable  growth  and  maximum 
employment over time. 
But easier monetary policy will not forestall a period of economic weakness in the near term. 
Experience teaches us that some time is likely to pass between a decline in interest rates 
and  its  positive  effect  on  demand.  Once  financial  conditions  change,  time  is  required  for 
individuals  to  recalibrate,  and  then  execute,  their  spending  decisions.  Lower  interest  rates 
will not stop, only cushion, the correction in housing markets. 
Easier monetary policy will not – and should not – "bail out" lenders and other investors who 
made poor choices or failed to protect themselves against the remote, but potentially severe, 
contingency that house prices would decline or against the much more predictable repricing 
of  credit  and  liquidity  risk.  The  adjustment  in  financial  markets  is  part  of  the  process  that 
ultimately will restore credit allocation and market functioning to a sounder, more sustainable 
basis. 
What policy can do is attempt to limit the fallout on the economy from this adjustment. Lower 
interest rates should support aggregate demand over time, even in the face of widespread 
contraction in the supply of credit. Certainly, interest rates on loans will be lower than if policy 
4 
 BIS Review 23/2008
had not been eased, and, if policy is eased sufficiently, they can be absolutely lower than 
before  for  many  borrowers,  which  could  well  be  necessary  in  an  environment  where 
standards  and  nonprice  terms  on  access  to  credit  are  tighter.  Among  other  things,  lower 
rates should facilitate the refinancing of mortgage loans, and they will hold down the cost of 
capital to business. To be sure, reductions in interest rates will not help borrowers facing a 
cutoff  of  credit  from  lenders,  but,  in  general,  credit  is  still  flowing  from  banks  and  other 
lenders.  Easier  policy  should  also  support  asset  prices  –  or  at  least  cushion  declines  that 
otherwise would have occurred. And expected policy easing likely contributed to the drop in 
the foreign exchange value of the dollar, which is bolstering our exports. 
The extent of the financial adjustment, as I mentioned previously, is itself highly dependent 
on how housing and the economy evolve. Part of the rise in risk spreads, reduction in credit 
availability, and the declines in stock prices in the past few months reflect investor efforts to 
protect themselves against the potential for very adverse economic outcomes – that is, the 
exposures and losses that would accompany a persistent steep decline in house prices and 
a  significant  recession.  Of  course,  these  actions  –  reducing  exposures,  tightening  credit 
standards, demanding extra compensation for taking risk – themselves make these "tail risk" 
scenarios even more likely. In circumstances like these, the decisions of policymakers must 
take account of not only the most likely course of the economy, but also the possibility of very 
unfavorable  developments.  Doing  so  should  reduce  the  odds  on  an  especially  adverse 
outcome  not  only  by  having  policy  a  little  easier  than  otherwise,  but  also  by  reassuring 
lenders  and  spenders  that  the  central  bank  recognizes  such  a  possibility  in  its  policy 
deliberations. Whether the Federal Reserve has done enough in this regard is a question this 
policymaker will be weighing carefully over coming months. 
Even as we respond to forces currently weighing on real activity, we must also set policy to 
resist any tendency for inflation to increase on a sustained basis. Allowing elevated rates of 
inflation to become entrenched in inflation expectations would be costly to reverse, constrain 
our ability to cushion further downward shocks to spending, and result over time in lower and 
less stable economic expansion. Inflation expectations generally have appeared reasonably 
well anchored, giving the FOMC room to focus on supporting economic growth. Moreover, as 
I will explain below, for a variety of reasons, I do not expect the recent elevated inflation rates 
to persist. In my view, the adverse dynamics of the financial markets and the economy have 
presented  the  greater  threat  to  economic  welfare  in  the  United  States.  But  the  recent 
information on prices underlines the need to continue to monitor the inflation situation very 
carefully. 
The outlook for economic activity and inflation 
How  long  the  adjustment  in  financial  markets  will  take  and  the  consequences  of  that 
adjustment  for  economic  activity  are  subject  to  considerable  uncertainty.  In  my  view,  the 
most likely scenario is one in which the economy experiences a period of sluggish growth in 
demand  and  production  in  the  near  term  that  is  accompanied  by  some  further  increase  in 
joblessness. 
New  building  activity  will  continue  to  decline  until  the  overhang  of  inventories  of  unsold 
homes has been substantially reduced, and the demand side of the market is not likely to 
revive appreciably until buyers sense that price declines are abating and financing conditions 
for  mortgages  are  improving.  Consumer  spending  will  be  damped  by  the  effects  on  real 
incomes of a weak labor market and rising energy prices and by the effects of declines in the 
stock  market  and  home  prices  on  household  wealth.  Business  spending  on  capital 
equipment  should  be  held  down  by  slower  sales  and  production  and  by  caution  in  a  very 
uncertain  economic  environment.  Nonresidential  construction  is  likely  to  lose  some 
momentum in the wake of both weak growth in overall economic activity and tighter credit. 
Some modest offset to these areas of weakness should come from export demand, which 
BIS Review 23/2008 
 5
should be boosted by the lagged effects of recent declines in the dollar and supported by 
still-solid growth abroad. 
By midyear, economic activity should begin to benefit from several factors. One is the fiscal 
stimulus  package  that  the  Congress  recently  enacted.  The  rebates  that  households  are 
scheduled  to  begin  to  receive  in  May  should  provide  a  temporary  boost  to  consumption. 
Although  the  timing  and  the  magnitude  of  the  spending  response  is  uncertain,  economic 
studies  of  the  previous  experience  suggest  that  a  noticeable  proportion  of  households  are 
quite sensitive to temporary cash flow. The potential effects of the business incentives are 
perhaps more uncertain. Although economic theory suggests that they should bring forward 
some capital spending, past experience has been mixed. 
Second,  the  decline  in  residential  investment  should  begin  to  abate  later  this  year  as  the 
overhang  of  unsold  homes  is  worked  off,  reducing  what  has  been  a  significant  drag  on 
economic growth over the past two years. Finally, the declines in interest rates that began 
last  summer  should  be  supporting  activity  over  coming  quarters,  and  their  effects  should 
show  through  more  clearly  to  improvements  in  economic  activity  as  the  stress  in  financial 
markets dissipates. 
Although  a  firming  in  the  growth  of  economic  activity  after  midyear  now  appears  the  most 
likely  scenario,  the  outlook  is  subject  to  a  number  of  important  risks.  Further  substantial 
declines  in  house  prices  could  cut  more  deeply  into  household  wealth  and  intensify  the 
problems  in  mortgage  markets  and  for  those  intermediaries  holding  mortgage  loans. 
Financial markets could remain quite fragile, delaying the restoration of more normal credit 
flows. As observed in the minutes of its most recent meeting, the FOMC has expressed a 
broad concern about the possibility of adverse interactions among weaker economic activity, 
stress in financial markets, and credit constraints. 
I expect the run-up in headline inflation to be reversed and core inflation to edge lower over 
the  next  few  years.  This  projection  assumes  that  energy  and  other  commodity  prices  will 
level  out,  as  suggested  by  the  futures  markets.  Moreover,  greater  slack  in  the  economy 
should reduce pressure on prices and wages. Despite high resource utilization over the past 
couple  of  years  and  periods  of  elevated  headline  inflation,  labor  cost  increases  have 
remained quite moderate, and inflation expectations remain reasonably well anchored. 
Nonetheless,  policymakers  must  remain  very  attentive  to  the  outlook  for  inflation.  As  I 
mentioned earlier, the recent uptick in core inflation may reflect some spillover of the higher 
costs  of  food,  energy,  and  imports  into  core  prices.  And  the  prices  of  crude  oil  and  other 
commodities  have  moved  up  further  in  recent  weeks.  A  related  concern  is  that  inflation 
expectations might drift higher if the current rapid rates of headline inflation persist for longer 
than anticipated or if the recent easing in monetary policy is misinterpreted as reflecting less 
resolve  among  Committee  members  to  maintain  low  and  stable  inflation  over  the  medium 
run.  Persistent  elevated  inflation  would  undermine  the  performance  of  the  economy  over 
time. 
Conclusion 
These have been difficult times for the U.S. economy. The correction of excesses in sectors 
of the economy and financial markets has spilled over more broadly. Growth has slowed, and 
unemployment  has  increased;  both  borrowers  and  lenders  are  facing  problems,  and  the 
functioning of the financial markets has been disrupted. At the same time, inflation has risen. 
I  believe  we  will  see  a  return  to  stronger  growth,  lower  unemployment,  lower  inflation  and 
improved flows in financial markets, but it probably will take a little while. And adverse risks 
to  this  most  likely  scenario  abound:  Uncertainty  could  trigger  an  even  greater  withdrawal 
from risk-taking by households, businesses, and investors, resulting in more pronounced and 
prolonged  economic  weakness;  events  beyond  our  borders  could  continue  to  put  upward 
pressure on inflation rates. 
6 
 BIS Review 23/2008
But we should not lose sight of some fundamental strengths of our economy. Our markets 
have  proven  to  be  flexible  and  resilient,  able  to  absorb  shocks,  and  quick  to  adapt  to 
changing circumstances. Those markets reward entrepreneurship and risk-taking, and many 
people are looking for opportunities to buy distressed assets and restructure and strengthen 
businesses to take advantage of the economic rebound that will occur. Monetary policy has 
proven  itself,  under  a  wide  variety  of  circumstances,  very  effective  in  recent  decades  in 
damping inflation when needed and in stimulating demand and activity when that has been 
appropriate. Our job at the Federal Reserve is to put in place those policies that will promote 
both price stability and growth over time. We have the tools. As Chairman Bernanke often 
emphasizes: We will do what is needed. 
BIS Review 23/2008 
 7
