Amando M Tetangco, Jr: The Credit Surety Fund – sustaining economic 
growth through increased credit flows 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas), at the Launching of the Credit Surety Fund Program, Trece 
Martirez City, Cavite, 27 August 2008. 
 Governor Ayong Maliksi, distinguished Board Members of the Sangunihang Panlalawigan ng 
Cavite and other officials from Cavite’s local government units – mga Mayors at Vice Mayors, 
officers  and  members  of  Cavite’s  cooperatives,  our  partners  from  the  Micro,  Small,  and 
Medium  Enterprises  Sector  or  what  we  call  MSMEs,  representatives  from  the  Industrial 
Guarantee  Loan  Fund,  representatives  from  the  banking  sector,  fellow  workers  in 
government, special guests.  
Magandang umaga po sa inyong lahat! Kami po sa Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas ay natutuwa 
dahil  ngayon  ang  panimula  ng  isang  mahalagang  programa  na  tinatawag  nating  Credit 
Surety  Fund.  At  dahil  mahalaga  ito,  karamihan  sa  mga  opisyal  ng  Bangko  Sentral  ay 
nandirito ngayon.  
Ipakikilala ko po sila, umpisa sa mga miyembro ng ating Monetary Board: Kasama po natin si 
Monetary  Board  Member  Alfredo  Antonio,  dating  Chairman  ng  Development  Bank  of  the 
Philippines;  at  si  Monetary  Board  Member  Ignacio  Bunye,  dating  Press  Secretary  at 
Presidential Spokesman.  
Kasama ko rin po ang management team ng Bangko Sentral, kabilang si Deputy Governor 
Diwa  Guinigundo,  si  Assistant  Governor  &  General  Counsel  Juan  de  Zuñiga,  Jr.,  at  si 
Assistant Governor Rene Carreon, at iba pang mga opisyal ng BSP. 
The level of our participation in this event speaks volumes about the way we at the Bangko 
Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  value  our  MSMEs.  The  MSME  sector  represents  the  backbone  of  our 
economy  as  99  per  cent  of  registered  firms  belong  to  this  sector.  A  recent  report  of  the 
International Finance Corporation of the World Bank Group indicated that loans to MSMEs 
comprise twenty-five percent (25%) of the total loans of the banking system. Malaking bahagi 
po ito ng pautang ng ating mga bangko. Kaya masasabi natin na mahalaga rin ang MSMEs 
sa banking sector.  
Kaya  lamang,  kulang  pa  rin  ito  sa  tutuong  panga-ngailangan  ng  ating  MSMEs.  Estimates 
indicate that roughly 60% of the credit needs of MSMEs remain unserved.  
Simple  ang  dahilan  nito:  Marami  sa  ating  MSME’s  ay  walang  collateral  na  maiharap  para 
maka-utang  sa  mga  bangko,  maliban  sa  kanilang  proven  track  record  as  successful  and 
responsible  small  entrepreneurs.  Dito  po  pumapasok  ang  Bangko  Sentral  at  ang  Credit 
Surety Fund. Sa ilalim po ng Credit Surety Fund Program ay mapapabilis ang pagbibigay ng 
pautang  sa  ating  mga  MSMEs  dahilan  sa  pag-tutulungan  ng  LGUs  led  here  in  Cavite  by 
Governor Ayong Maliksi, ng ating mga kooperatiba, at ng IGLF na itatag ang Credit Surety 
Fund. With this as underlying surety, MSME entrepreneurs without collateral can now borrow 
from the banks.  
This program therefore directly addresses the MSME’s lack of collaterals. In other words, the 
program  will  democratize  access  to  bank  credit  and  help  level  the  playing  field  for  our 
MSMEs. Ito pong Credit Surety Fund ang magiging susi ng ating MSMEs para maka-utang 
sa mga bangko.  
At the heart of this program is the spirit of “BAYANIHAN”. To our mind, the foundation and 
success of the program will depend ultimately on the cooperation and collaboration of all the 
participants in this multi-sectoral program: the national government through IGLF, the local 
BIS Review 107/2008 
 1
government led by its Governor, MSMEs under the cooperatives, the banks that will provide 
the  loans,  and  the  Bangko  Sentral  which  will  provide  rediscounting  for  up  to  80%  for  the 
MSME loans.  
Later, we shall have an audio-visual presentation that will explain the rationale, the process, 
and the objectives of this important public-private sector collaboration.  
Sa ngalan po ng Bangko Sentral, binabati po namin ang lalawigan ng Cavite sa pamumuno 
ni Gobernor Ayong Maliksi (talaga pong magaling at maliksi ang inyong gobernador!) dahil 
kayo po ang first province na nag-launch ng groundbreaking program na ito.  
Kaya  po  mahalaga  ang  inyong  malakas  na  suporta  sa  credit  surety  fund  program  at  sa 
pagtatayo  ng  Cavite  Coopreneurs  Surety  Fund.  Your  pioneering  efforts  to  implement  the 
program will be the challenge to other provinces in the Philippines for them to establish their 
very own surety fund.  
On  the  part  of  the  BSP,  you  can  be  assured  that  we  will  continue  to  advocate  and  make 
room for future innovations that will further benefit our entrepreneurs and help uplift the lives 
of our people.  
Sana po ay magka-isa tayo sa pag-sulong ng ating bansa sa pamamagitan ng ating credit 
surety fund program.  
Mabuhay ang Cavite! Mabuhay ang ating bansang Pilipinas!  
Maraming salamat po sa inyong lahat. 
2 
 BIS Review 107/2008
