Zeti Akhtar Aziz: The transformation of Labuan as an International 
Business and Financial Centre   
Speech by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the launch of 
Labuan International Business and Financial Centre, Kuala Lumpur, 28 January 2008. 
 Distinguished Guests,  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
It is with great pleasure that I welcome you to the launch of Labuan International Business 
and  Financial  Centre.  This  decade  has  seen  the  Labuan  Offshore  Financial  Centre 
demonstrate  its  ability  to  adjust  and  reinvent  itself  in  a  rapidly  changing  international  and 
regional environment. This decade has also witnessed the robustness and resilience of the 
Labuan  Offshore  Financial  Centre  as  evidenced  by  its  ability  to  continue  to  expand  and 
mature even during the most challenging of periods. 
The global and regional market place however, continues to transform, bringing with it new 
opportunities and challenges. To have the flexibility to benefit from the new opportunities and 
to  have  the  capacity  to  rise  to  the  new  emerging  demands  and  challenges,  continued 
reassessments  need  to  take  place  to  rediscover  new  directions,  build  new  strengths,  new 
comparative  advantages  and  to  define  our  new  role  in  this  ever  changing  and  more 
competitive market place. Today we are defining a new beginning for the Labuan Offshore 
Financial  Centre  as  it  positions  itself  for  a  much  larger  role.  Your  presence  here  today  to 
share in this auspicious occasion is indeed appreciated. 
In providing the full range of financial services, Labuan offers a total financial solution both in 
both conventional and Islamic finance. Labuan also has the top-ranked financial institutions 
that  originate  from  more  than  80  countries,  including  Islamic  financial  institutions  that  also 
originate from different parts of the world. The Labuan Offshore Financial Centre has seen 
steady  expansion  both  in  terms  of  the  number  of  players,  the  diverse  financial  product 
offering and the volume of activity.  
Labuan today has also become a thriving regional business centre. It is making its mark as a 
regional  base  for  the  oil  and  gas  industry  and  as  an  entreport  for  the  regional  triangle  of 
Brunei-Sabah-Philippines.  Its  convenient  location  and  excellent  deep  harbour  are  natural 
advantages.  Its  modern  airport  which  has  been  enhanced  has  also  promoted  increased 
tourism. Being a duty free zone and a free port status has supported these activities. Growth 
in these peripheral commercial and economic activity in Labuan has provided the potential 
for Labuan to succeed as an international business and financial centre. 
Labuan  benefits  from  being  centrally  located  in  the  Asia  Pacific  region,  a  region  that  has 
been one of the fastest growing regions in the world. The Asian region is also among the 
most  open  in  the  world  in  terms  of  international  trade  and  investment.  A  more  recent 
phenomenon  is  the  increased  intra-regional  trade  and  investment  resulting  in  greater 
regional  economic  integration.  This  has  been  reinforced  further  by  increased  investment 
flows  from  the  Middle  East  to  Asia.  In  2006,  the  Asia  Pacific  surpassed  Europe  as  the 
second largest region for investment from the Gulf Cooperative Council (GCC) with USD460 
billion investment. 
Despite  the  current  financial  upheavals  that  are  occurring  in  the  international  financial 
system,  the  underlying  trends  in  the  region  including  the  cumulative  regional  demand, 
greater  regional  integration  and  the  increased  appeal  of  the  region  as  an  investment 
destination have continued to present immense opportunities for Labuan as a business and 
financial centre. 
BIS Review 10/2008 
 1
Labuan  is  well  positioned  to  tap  these  business  opportunities.  Key  to  the  success  of  a 
business and financial centre is its competitiveness, the convenience and cost effectiveness 
of doing its business, its connectivity and the confidence in the centre. The Government of 
Malaysia  has  been  highly  committed  to  ensuring  that  Labuan  has  all  these  elements. 
Massive investment has been made to provide for the physical infrastructure and amenities 
in Labuan. This includes the modern communication links, and the business and education 
amenities  to  support  Labuan's  designated  role  as  an  international  business  and  financial 
centre. Recently, the Labuan International airport was enhanced further and open sky policy 
has been adopted to facilitate enhanced access to the island. Also, improvements have been 
made to the deep harbour facilities.  
Increased  access  is  however,  not  only  limited  to  the  physical  access  but  also  the  easy 
access to other financial markets. This requires the infrastructure that allows for the efficient 
conduct of international financial transactions. Intermediaries need to be able to have easy 
access  to  participate  in  other  jurisdictions.  To  facilitate  this  and  to  promote  the  cost 
competitiveness in Labuan, it is supported by a balanced regulatory regime that effectively 
regulates  the  market  while  facilitating  market  development.  LOFSA,  the  Labuan  Offshore 
Financial  Services  Authority  was  established  ten  years  ago  not  only  to  put  in  place  an 
effective  regulatory  regime  and  to  provide  the  supervisory  oversight,  but  also  to  focus  on 
market development and facilitation. To further ensure a conducive business environment, it 
is also supported by a robust legal framework including trust laws. While Labuan has in place 
a  business  friendly  tax  regime  it  also  has  never  been  positioned  as  a  low  tax  finance 
repository. On the contrary it has leveraged on its strengths and unique advantages to meet 
the market's need.  
In going forward, a number of programs will be initiated. The Labuan International Business 
and  Financial  Centre  (IBFC)  aspires  to  achieve  the  status  of  being  the  "gold  standard  for 
holding company jurisdiction". This market has been identified as a further business driver for 
Labuan IBFC. Malaysia's extensive tax treaty network with over 63 countries in addition to 
the introduction of a more flexible tax framework supports this initiative. It was announced in 
the  2008  Budget  that  Registered  Labuan  offshore  companies  now  have  the  option  to  be 
taxed under the Malaysian Income Tax Act 1967 or the Labuan Offshore Business Activity 
Tax  Act  (LOBATA)  1990,  thus  enabling  businesses  to  structure  their  transactions  more 
efficiently. The Labuan IBFC's competitiveness will be further enhanced through a revision of 
the pricing structure pertaining to incorporation and maintenance fee charges. There will be 
an  annual  reviews  and  prices  will  be  revised  in  response  to  competitive  market 
developments.  
The  Labuan  IBFC  will  also  leverage  on  the  national  strategy  of  the  Malaysian  Islamic 
Financial Centre by promoting Syariah-compliant trusts and foundation. These products will 
complement  Islamic  financial  products  and  services  already  available  in  Kuala  Lumpur. 
Efforts will also be taken to further develop Labuan's captive insurance business which has 
enjoyed commendable growth over the years.  
Conclusion 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The establishment of Labuan as an international offshore financial centre in 1990 was indeed 
a  bold  step  in  its  time.  We  are  now  seeing  the  payoffs  from  this  initiative.  With  the 
transformation of Labuan as an International Business and Financial Centre, our ambition will 
be taken further. The new name signals that Labuan is ready to take on the much broader 
and larger role. The new name also represents a commitment. A commitment for the future. 
To demonstrate this commitment, the Government and the regulators have put in place the 
supportive and enabling environment to promote a more connected and more cost effective 
environment.  Continued  initiatives  will  also  be  taken  to  remove  any  impediments  and 
obstacles to a more efficient delivery system and to advance forward the Labuan IBFC.  
2 
 BIS Review 10/2008
The responsibility for ensuring the ambitions of the Labuan IBFC to be realised, is however, 
a shared responsibility. The future will be for the competitive. The future will be for the cost 
efficient. The future will be for the creative and innovative. The future will be for those that 
are  able  to  give  good  value  propositions  to  their  customers.  Achieving  this  will  therefore 
involve the industry, the market professionals and participants. With these cumulative efforts, 
we are confident Labuan IBFC will be another chapter of success, Insya Allah. 
On  that  note,  I  thank  you  again  for  being  here  to  witness  the  launching  of  the  Labuan 
International Business And Financial Centre. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 10/2008 
 3
