Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Islamic finance – constant evolution and emerging 
opportunities 
Speech  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia,  at  the  Nikkei 
Islamic  Finance  Symposium  2008:  "Islamic  Finance:  Constant  Evolution  and  Emerging 
Opportunities", Tokyo, 23 February 2008. 
 It  is  my  great  honour  and  pleasure  to  be  here  in  Tokyo  to  speak  at  this  Islamic  Finance 
Symposium  organised  by  the  NIKKEI.  This  is  an  important  forum  that  provides  the 
opportunity  to  foster  a  greater  understanding  and  appreciation  of  Islamic  finance  and  its 
increasing  role  in  the  international  financial  system.  We  are  also  very  honoured  by  the 
presence and participation of Governor Fukui from the Bank of Japan at this Symposium.  
My  remarks  today  will  focus  on  the  evolution  and  new  emerging  opportunities  in  Islamic 
finance  as  its  growth  and  development  in  the  global  financial  system  gains  further 
momentum.  My  presentation  will  also  touch  on  our  experience  in  the  development  of  an 
Islamic  financial  system  in  Malaysia  which  operates  side  by  side  with  the  conventional 
financial  system  and  in  which  the  international  dimension  has  now  become  increasingly 
significant.  
Evolution of Islamic finance 
Modern Islamic finance was initially developed as an intermediation channel for Muslims to 
conduct their savings and investment activities in accordance with the Islamic principles. As 
recent as five years ago, however, Islamic finance has experienced major transformations. 
Its rapid evolution is particularly evident in five dimensions of its development.  
Firstly, from being concentrated in Muslim populated regions, Islamic finance is now viewed 
as a competitive form of financial intermediation that has drawn significant participation 
by non-Muslims. For borrowers, it is seen as an alternative means of financing. For investors, 
it is seen as a new asset class. Islamic finance has thus witnessed exceptional growth, not 
only  in  the  Muslim  world,  where  its  growth  is  premised  on  religious  and  business 
considerations, but also across the Western world where the growth is driven by commercial 
and  business  considerations.  Today,  the  total  assets  of  the  Islamic  financial  system  has 
surpassed  one  trillion  US  dollars,  about  fivefold  of  its  magnitude  five  years  ago.  Islamic 
finance is now among the fastest growing financial segments in the world with an estimated 
annual growth of 20 percent.  
Secondly, the nature of the business of Islamic finance has also evolved, from being mainly 
focused on retail and trade financing to the financing of other commercial business activities. 
With the emergence of more diverse Islamic financial institutions and the development of the 
Islamic financial markets, the scope of Islamic finance business has been expanded to 
include private equity, project finance, the origination and issuance of sukuk, and fund, asset 
and wealth management activities. The pace of product innovation has also intensified with 
more  sophisticated  Islamic  banking  and  takaful  products  as  evidenced  by  the  surge  of 
structured  products  and 
investment-linked  products.  These  products  have  become 
competitive both in terms of product structure and pricing. The enhanced depth of the Islamic 
financial  markets  has  also  increased  its  attractiveness  as  an  asset  class  for  investment. 
These developments have resulted in an extensive range of Islamic financial products and 
services that is being offered to consumers and businesses.  
The third dimension in which there has been significant evolution is in the regulatory and 
legal  framework  for  Islamic  finance  which  has  taken  into  account  the  distinct  features  of 
Islamic financial transactions. This has ensured that the growth and developments of Islamic 
BIS Review 23/2008 
 1
finance is accompanied by the corresponding development of the supporting legal, regulatory 
and supervisory framework to ensure its soundness and stability. The establishment of the 
Islamic  Financial  Services  Board  in  2002  also  marked  an  important  milestone  in  the 
development  of  the  prudential  regulatory  standards  and  best  practices  for  Islamic financial 
institutions. Its establishment has also contributed to the harmonisation in the development of 
Islamic finance across different jurisdictions.  
Fourthly, the international dimension of Islamic finance has rapidly gained significance as it 
evolves to become an increasingly important part of the international financial system, 
and as is becomes poised to contribute towards greater global financial integration. Islamic 
financial institutions have now ventured beyond their domestic borders and funds raised in 
Islamic financial markets in different jurisdictions have drawn investors from financial centres 
across the globe. As market players across continents participate in the expansion of inter-
regional investment flows, it has enhanced financial linkages among the major regions. To 
date, the number of Islamic financial institutions worldwide has increased to more than 300, 
spanning  more  than  75  countries  both  in  the  Muslim  and  non-Muslim  countries.1  The 
expansion  of  the  inter-linkages  among  intermediaries  and  markets  across  regions  would 
contribute towards a more efficient allocation of financial resources across borders and thus 
contribute to enhancing global growth prospects.  
The  fifth  dimension  that  has  seen  significant  change  is  in  the  development  of  human 
capital in Islamic finance. It has been a vital development that has been key in ensuring an 
adequate supply of talent and expertise for further expansion and development of the Islamic 
financial services industry. High caliber professionals that have the combined knowledge and 
understanding of the Shariah with the necessary skills in finance2 are now in great demand. 
Recognising this, several major institutions of higher learning are offering more focussed and 
structured programmes in Islamic finance. The establishment of the International Centre for 
Education  in  Islamic  Finance  (INCEIF)  in  Malaysia  in  2006  represents  a  structured 
investment  in  human  capital  development  to  support  the  global  development  of  Islamic 
financial services industry. It is envisioned that INCEIF will act as a professional certification 
body  as  well  as  an  education  centre  for  specialised  post-graduate  programmes  in  Islamic 
finance. 
Distinctive features of Islamic finance  
While  Islamic  finance  has  continued  to  evolve,  the  distinct  features  remain  fundamental. 
Islamic finance is required to operate in accordance with the rules of Shariah from which it 
derives its unique characteristics. The Shariah injunctions require that the Islamic financial 
transaction be supported by an underlying economic activity. This requires that the financial 
transaction must be accompanied by a genuine trade and business related activity.  
Based  on  this  arrangement,  interest-based  transactions  are  prohibited.  Islam  encourages 
business  and  trade  activities  that  generate  a  fair  and  legitimate  profit.  In  Islamic  finance, 
there  is  therefore  always  a  close  link  between  the  financial  and  productive  flows.  This 
intrinsic  principle  contributes  towards  insulating  the  Islamic  financial  system  from  potential 
risks of financial stress resulting from excess leverage and speculative financial activities.  
A  further  fundamental  principle  of  Islamic  finance  is  the  risk  and  profit  sharing  feature  of 
Islamic  financial  transactions.  This  could  involve  an  arrangement  whereby  the  Islamic 
financial  institution  shares  profit  with  the  investor  in  a  Mudarabah  contract  or  in  a 
Musyarakah contract, both parties share in the profit or loss. These arrangements involve an 
explicit sharing of the risks by the Islamic financial institution and the investor, thus requiring 
                                                 
1   Sources: Islamic Finance News, Islamic Financial Services Board & National Authorities. 
2   The trend is now to have both "Shariah savvy financial practitioner" and "financial savvy Shariah Scholars". 
2 
 BIS Review 23/2008
the  Islamic  financial  institution  to  appropriately  manage  the  risks  associated  with  the 
transaction. It entails the appropriate due diligence and the integrating of the risks associated 
with the investment activity into the financial transaction. The real activity is thus expected to 
generate sufficient wealth to compensate for the risks.  
It is from this profit and risk sharing feature of Islamic financial transactions that a high level 
of  disclosure  and  transparency  is  required.  This  represents  a  basic  tenet  underlying  all 
Islamic  financial  transactions.  There  is  an  inherent  obligation  to  meet  the  appropriate 
standards  of  transparency.  The  accountabilities  of  the  respective  parties  involved  in  the 
transaction are also clearly defined in the contract. These disclosures also allow the market 
to assign the appropriate risk premiums to the respective companies thereby enhancing the 
potential  for  market  discipline  to  take  effect.  These  intrinsic  features  as  required  by  the 
Shariah injunctions provide an in-built checks and balances which serve to ensure financial 
stability in the Islamic financial system.  
Malaysian experience 
Allow me to take this opportunity to share with you Malaysia's experience in developing the 
Islamic  financial  system,  and  in  particular,  the  Islamic  capital  market.  Malaysia  has 
developed  over  more  than  two  decades,  a  comprehensive  Islamic  financial  system  that 
operates  in  parallel  with  the  conventional  financial  system.  The  Islamic  financial  system  in 
Malaysia has evolved as a competitive component of the domestic financial system with a 
significant  number  of  diverse  players  in  the  Islamic  banking,  the  takaful  industry  and  the 
Islamic  money  and  capital  markets.  Our  approach  has  been  to  focus  on  institutional 
development, reinforced by a robust Shariah, legal and regulatory framework as well as the 
investment  in  human  capital  development.  In  this  more  recent  decade,  attention  has  been 
focussed  on  developing  the  financial  markets,  in  particular  the  sukuk  market,  and  on  the 
liberalisation of the Islamic financial system.  
We are now entering a new phase in the development of Islamic financial system in Malaysia 
with  initiatives  to  position  Malaysia  as  International  Islamic  financial  hub.  The  initiative  is 
aimed  at  strengthening  our  international  economic  and  financial  inter-linkages  and  thus 
promoting greater regional and international trade and investment activities. As part of the 
wide  ranging  liberalisation  measures,  we  have  seen  the  entrance  of  new  foreign  Islamic 
financial  groups  into  our  financial  system.  New  licences  have  been  issued  and  greater 
foreign  interest  in  the  domestic  Islamic  financial  institutions  have  also  been  permitted.  In 
addition, the listing rules were liberalised to facilitate foreign and cross-border listings. New 
licences  are  also  being  issued  for  International  Islamic  Bank  and  International  Takaful 
Operator  to  conduct  Islamic  banking  and  takaful  and  retakaful  business  in  international 
currencies.  
The most significant progress that has been achieved is in the development of the Malaysian 
sukuk or Islamic bond market. The Malaysian sukuk market is now the largest Islamic bond 
market in the world with more than 62% (or USD60 billion) of the global outstanding sukuk 
having  been  originated  from  Malaysia.  Supported  by  a  comprehensive  infrastructure 
including the settlement and bond information system, Malaysia has an active primary sukuk 
market with an average annual growth of 17% over the period 2001-2006. It also has one of 
the most active secondary markets with a turnover of sukuk trading registering of more than 
USD40 billion annually.  
The  Malaysian  bond  market  has  also  been  liberalised  to  enable  foreign  entities  to  raise 
ringgit and foreign currency denominated funds from our market. International issuers may 
thus  issue  multi-currency  Sukuks  or  alternatively  have  the  flexibility  to  swap  domestic 
currency funding into other currencies. At this juncture, I'm also pleased to inform you that a 
Malaysian corporation recently issued the largest-ever sukuk issue in the world amounting to 
equivalent USD4.7 billion which was two times oversubscribed. This hybrid sukuk which has 
BIS Review 23/2008 
 3
both  equity  and  debt  natures  is  one  of  the  several  innovative  instruments  that  has  been 
issued in the sukuk market.  
Malaysia's development of Islamic finance has contributed positively to our overall financial 
system in several respects. This has resulted to a more diversified financial system that has 
increased its overall resilience. Secondly, it has increased our international linkages. Thirdly, 
it  has  also contributed to  greater  financial inclusion  particularly  in  the  area  of  financing  for 
small and  medium scale enterprises and micro financing. Then, enhanced with the in-built 
checks  and  balances,  it  contributes  towards  financial  stability.  Finally,  Islamic  finance  has 
become  a  new  area  of  growth  that  has  become  very  vibrant  in  generating  income,  wealth 
and employment.  
Opportunities in Sukuk 
In the current liberalised and globalised environment, Islamic finance is now at the threshold 
of a new dimension in strengthening financial inter-linkages between nations in the global 
economy. With the expanded scope of activities in Islamic finance, the Islamic bond market 
or  Sukuk  market  has  fast  become  an  important  avenue  for  fund  raising  and  investment 
activities. The Sukuk market has registered a remarkable growth, increasing at an average 
annual rate of 40 percent with a current size of more than USD82 billion. The vast potential 
in Sukuk market in the international financial system indeed represents the crest of a new 
wave of innovation in Islamic finance. This is evidenced by the active participation of a great 
number of global players such as investment banks, Islamic banks and securities firms in the 
issuance of Sukuk.  
The Sukuk market brings with it great benefits to both issuer and investors. For issuers that 
include  government  agencies,  multinational  corporations  and  multinational  development 
institutions,  Sukuk  plays  a  multi-faceted  role  in  meeting  different  funding  requirements 
ranging  from  large  infrastructure  and  developmental  projects  to  capital  and  business 
expansion.  This  is  particularly  important  for  emerging  market  economies.  The  Middle  East 
and Asia currently represent the two fastest growing regions in the global economy. These 
regions are aggressive in their privatisation efforts and in the implementation of infrastructure 
and  developmental  projects.  Asia  alone  will  be  spending  an  estimated  USD1  trillion  on 
infrastructure over the next five years, while infrastructure requirements in the Middle East 
are estimated to be USD700 billion over the same period.3 While in Malaysia, the National 
Economic  Regional  Corridor  plan  requires  an  estimated  USD192  billion  (RM620  billion)  of 
investment.4  
On the demand side, the issuer also benefits from the competitively attractive pricing of 
Sukuk ranging from 10 to 20 basis points lower than mainstream bonds. This has resulted 
from  the  continuous  over  subscription  of  the  sukuk  which  has  ranged  from  two  to  thirteen 
times.  The  phenomenal  demand  for  sukuk  is  further  reinforced  by  excess  liquidity  in  the 
global  financial  system.  This  demand  comes  from  a  relatively  wider  investor  base  that 
comprises  both  the  conventional  and  Islamic  investors.  The  strong  demand  for  sukuk  has 
also been spurred by the higher level of surplus savings and reserves in Asia. In the case of 
Japan , apart from the high savings rate, Japan has the largest percentage of high net worth 
individuals wealth distribution in the Asia Pacific.  
From the investors' perspective, besides the intrinsic value of sukuk which is largely asset-
backed,  convertible  to  shares  and  exchangeable  with  shares,  there  are  benefits  of 
                                                 
3   Source: GCC Research , Kuwait Finance House. 
4   An estimate amount of investments for Eastern Corridor Economic Region (RM112 billion), Northern Corridor 
Economic Region (RM100 billion), Iskandar Regional Development (RM382 billion) and Sabah Development 
Corridor (RM25.8 billion). 
4 
 BIS Review 23/2008
diversification. Sukuk is fast becoming a new asset class. Sukuk has also generated good 
investment returns for investors arising from its higher pricing in the secondary market due 
to the "buy and hold" preference and its scarcity.  
Opportunities in takaful 
The  other  opportunities  in  Islamic  finance  are  in  the  takaful  or  Islamic  insurance  and  re-
takaful. The global takaful market, in particular, has also undergone positive developments at 
the  international  level.  From  only  a  single  takaful  company  being  in  existence  more  than 
twenty years ago in Sudan, the takaful industry has now expanded with the establishment of 
more than 50 takaful companies worldwide with a total contribution estimated at about USD3 
billion for the year 2005. The takaful industry is expected to grow at about 20% per annum to 
reach  USD7.4  billion  in  global  annual  contributions  over  the  next  ten  years.5  It  is  also 
encouraging to note that the number of retakaful companies have also grown in tandem with 
the increased number of takaful companies.6 The need for strong and credible retakaful 
operators  globally  is  important  to  complement  the  growth  and  expansion  of  the  takaful 
industry.  
Let me turn to Japan's potential participation in Islamic finance. We welcome the participation 
of Japanese financial institutions, authorities and corporations in Islamic finance, particularly, 
in  the  Islamic  capital  markets.  Japan  thus  far  has  for  several  decades  had  a  significant 
economic role in the Asian region in terms of trade and investment. Japan's investment in the 
region is estimated to be USD45 billion over the period of 2004-2006.7 Japan has also been 
consistently ranked among the top five investing nations in Malaysia, with investment flows 
amounting to 25.7% of the total flows for the period of 2000 to 2006. In 2006 alone, Japan 
foreign  direct  investment  inflow  into  Malaysia  was  at  USD6.1  billion.8  Japan  has  also 
remained a significant partner in trade with Malaysia.  
While Japan's economic relationship in investment and trade in the region is well established, 
there is a significant potential for strengthening further the financial linkages in future. There 
is  potential  to  evolve  the  direct  investment  and  trade  in  goods  to  grow  the  financial  ties. 
Islamic finance represents a vehicle that could further deepen our financial relationship and 
the regional financial integration process. By enhancing new linkages in this relationship and 
the  prospect  for  greater  integration,  it  would  contribute  towards  unlocking  potential 
opportunities for mutual prosperity of the region.  
To  advance  relations  in  the  area  of  Islamic  finance,  a  memorandum  of  understanding 
between the Central Bank of Malaysia and Japan Bank for International Corporation (JBIC) 
was  signed  in  2007.  There  is  also  a  strategic  alliance  between  one  of  the  world  largest 
Japanese insurance groups with a domestic insurance company in Malaysia which resulted 
in the establishment of a takaful company. Efforts can also be focussed on facilitating cross 
listing  of  sukuk  in  multiple  jurisdictions.  Japan  may  also  use  Malaysia  as  a  platform  for 
innovation  and  research  in  Islamic  finance.  There  are  various  institutions,  including  the 
industry-owned  research  and  training  institute  in  Islamic  finance,  the  Islamic  Banking  and 
Finance Institute Malaysia (IBFIM), INCEIF and universities which have undertaken research 
on Islamic finance. Thus, it is hoped that the Japanese participation in the Islamic financial 
                                                 
5   Based on projection by Institute of Islamic Finance and Insurance & Investor Offshore Review, February 2006. 
6   To-date there is more than 10 retakaful companies  providing retakaful capacity for both family  and general 
takaful business. 
7   United Nations Conference on Trade & Development's (UNCTAD) World Investment Report 2007. 
8   Sources:  JETRO  from  Ministry  of  Finance  Balance  of  Payments  Statistics  and  Bank  of  Japan  foreign 
exchange rates. 
BIS Review 23/2008 
 5
markets would contribute towards further international financial integration and thus achieve 
a more efficient allocation of resources across borders.  
Conclusion 
Let  me  conclude  my  remarks.  The  increasing  awareness  and  appreciation  of  the  inherent 
strengths  of  Islamic  finance  and  its  tremendous  potential  for  advancement  have  ignited 
interests amongst the global financial community to venture into this new sphere of finance. 
Taking advantage of the increasing role of Islamic finance in bringing together different parts 
of the world with surplus funds in search of investment opportunities, with those that have 
financing  needs,  will  increase  these  mutually  reinforcing  prospects.  We  look  forward  to 
Japan's participation in this new financial evolution.  
Thank you.  
6 
 BIS Review 23/2008
