Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Turning challenges into opportunities – the key 
to sustainable growth 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas),  at  the  BAIPHIL’s  Induction  of  Officers,  Directors  and 
Committee Chairpersons and the General Membership Meeting, Makati, 15 July 2008. 
 Distinguished officers and members of BAIPHIL (led by outgoing President Dolly Yuvienco 
and incoming President Lydia King), fellow bankers, co-workers in the BSP, special guests, 
good afternoon!  
I am pleased to join BAIPHIL today on the induction of its new set of officers. I do welcome 
the opportunity to meet BAIPHIL’s officers and members, as you count among the partners 
of  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  in  our  continuing  pursuit  of  reforms  for  a  strong  and 
vibrant banking system.  
In  addition,  BAIPHIL  has  emerged  as  one  of  the  Bangko  Sentral’s  consistent  partners  in 
corporate social responsibility projects that directly benefit our marginalized sector.  
Among  others,  I  remember  that  BAIPHIL  organized  other  financial  industry  associations  in 
providing  financial  support,  as  well  as  sweat  equity,  for  the  BSP-St.  Paul  GK  Village  in 
Paranaque City. You will be happy to know therefore that over the weekend, we turned over 
16 GK units to new homeowners in our Paranaque GK village. For this, ladies and gentlemen 
of the BAIPHIL, you all deserve a long round of applause! Salamat sa inyong tulong. 
To  the  newly  inducted  officers,  directors  and  committee  chairpersons,  I  offer  my 
congratulations! We at the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas look forward to working with you as 
our banking sector deals with domestic and global challenges.  
In  my  previous  meetings  with  members  of  the  financial  community  early  this  year,  I 
discussed the outlook for the economy and the banking sector in 2008. I remember having 
said that the Philippine economy is headed for a more challenging environment – one that is 
fraught  with  headwinds.  Indeed,  our  economy  has  to  contend  with  “rough  patches” 
emanating primarily from the turbulence in global financial markets, the slowdown in the US 
and other economies, and the unprecedented rise in global food and energy prices.  
While we continue to see challenges and risks arising from adverse global developments, we 
remain optimistic and confident that we can ride out this turbulence and sustain the economic 
gains  achieved  in  recent  years.  Why  do  I  say  this?  Well,  because  we  do  our  homework; 
together,  we  have  built  up  domestic  buffers  that  should  continue  to  help  us  withstand 
headwinds which are mainly external in origin.  
Let me cite some of these buffers and how exactly these have insulated the economy from 
external risks.  
First, we have fortified our domestic financial system. In terms of resources, for instance, the 
Philippine banking system’s asset base has grown steadily from P3.4 trillion in 2001 to P5.1 
trillion  as  of  the  first  quarter  of  2008  on  the  back  of  sustained  increases  in  deposits  and 
capitalization. This is equivalent to a 50% increase.  
In addition, overall asset quality of Philippine banks has made a dramatic turnaround, with 
the NPL ratio dropping from 16.9 percent in 2001 to 5 per cent as of March 2008.  
Meanwhile, banks’ capital adequacy ratio on both solo and consolidated bases remained well 
above the regulatory minimum of 10 percent and the international benchmark of 8 percent. 
We also have in recent years put in place structural reforms in the banking system, such as 
the adoption of international accounting standards and the enforcement of stricter corporate 
BIS Review 93/2008 
 1
governance standards, which have made it more resilient and able to withstand volatilities in 
financial markets. 
Ladies and gentlemen, all these indicators point to a fundamentally sound banking system.  
Yet another strong buffer we have going for us is the country’s favorable external position. 
Among others, our first quarter 2008 balance of payments yielded a surplus of US$1.7 billion. 
This is 20.8 percent higher than our surplus in the same period last year, as both the current 
and the capital and financial accounts continued to post surpluses. While the merchandise 
trade deficit widened due to higher oil and food costs, the current account was in surplus of 
about 3 percent of GDP mainly as remittances sustained their expansion. Based on the latest 
figures,  in  May  this  year,  remittances  amounted  to  $1.4  billion  or  a  15.6  percent  increase 
year-on-year. Total remittances for the first five months of 2008 reached $6.8 billion or 14.7 
percent up from the same period last year. 
As a result of the BoP surplus, the country’s gross international reserves (GIR) continued to 
reach peak levels, hitting a new record high of US$36.7 billion in June this year. At this level, 
our GIR can cover 6 months of imports of goods and payments of services, way above the 
global standard.  
Similarly, the country’s major external debt ratios have been improving, an indication of the 
country’s enhanced capacity to service its maturing foreign obligations. 
These positive indicators make us confident about the prospects for our economy in general 
and our banking sector in particular. Moreso, if we are to continue our efforts to strengthen 
the banking sector and our economy.  
It is in this context that I find BAIPHIL’s theme for this occasion as a most appropriate rallying 
point: “Turning challenges into opportunities.”  
I believe we are in a position to continue to fortify our buffers by remaining proactive in our 
response and deeply committed to pursue our reform agenda. 
In this connection, our key policy thrusts at the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas are as follows:  
First, our monetary policy will continue to focus on our core mandate of maintaining stable 
prices. We will keep our eye on the inflation ball, being mindful that as we do this, we are 
able to foster an environment conducive to sustained economic growth. 
In recent months, we have seen inflation moving up steadily on account of record high oil 
and  food  prices,  hitting  11.4%  in  June  this  year,  the  highest  in  more  than  14  years.  This 
brought the year-to-date average inflation to 7.6 percent. Although this is still consistent with 
the BSP’s view of a hump-shaped path for inflation in 2008 and 2009, we cannot afford to 
underestimate this old adversary of  central banks. Inflation is at the very top of the BSP’s 
policy priorities. We will continue to intensify environmental scanning and surveillance of key 
macroeconomic  developments  to  ensure  that  our  assessments  of  the inflation  outlook  and 
the risks to inflation remain fresh. The Monetary Board will take the necessary and decisive 
action to address the threat of high inflation.  
Second, on the external sector, our policies will be geared toward ensuring the sustainability 
of  the  country’s  external  debt  and  maintaining  a  comfortable  level  of  reserves.  In  recent 
months,  we  have  witnessed  a  depreciation  in  the  peso’s  value.  This  has  not  been 
unexpected,  given  the  significant  upmove  last  year  and  the  changing  environment  we 
operate  in  this  year.  We  believe  that  the  current  exchange  rate  levels  reflect  a  healthy 
correction in the market, and market players should take advantage of this. As we expect to 
still have a surplus in the balance of payments for the year, the peso should be supported, 
particularly in the last quarter of this year when remittances are traditionally strong.  
Third, reforms in the financial sector will continue to be directed toward maintaining a strong 
banking system and a robust domestic capital market. Specifically, we will focus on: further 
enhancing the regulatory framework through the implementation of the BASEL II roadmap; 
2 
 BIS Review 93/2008
improving corporate governance by promoting compliance with international accounting and 
financial  reporting  standards;  accelerating  the  implementation  of  risk-based  supervision 
technology;  and  continuing  support  for  the  development  of  a  deep  and  efficient  capital 
market, including support for necessary legislative reforms.  
Moving on, another priority for the BSP is our continuing efforts to broaden access to credit 
of  micro,  small  and  medium  enterprises  or  what  we  call  MSMEs.  BSP’s  recent  reform 
initiatives  toward  this  end  include  liberalized  branching;  expansion  of  foreign  currency 
deposit  unit  (FCDU)  and  trust  licenses  to  include  qualified  rural  banks;  the  re-opening  of 
quasi-banking  license;  and  the  introduction  of  the  breakthrough  housing  microfinance 
product.  
We will also continue to work on a sound market infrastructure that will promote secure and 
timely  completion  of  transactions,  thereby  minimizing  systemic  risk  and  enhancing  the 
integrity  of  financial  transactions.  This  is  being  implemented  through  the  promotion  of 
progressive policies on e-commerce and payments system innovation.  
Summing  up,  the  critical  task  ahead  of  us  is  to  preserve  the  momentum  for  economic 
reforms. This way, we can be assured of the economy’s sustained growth in the long run. 
As in the past, we will continue to rely on BAIPHIL’s steadfast support in terms of providing 
training assistance to bank professionals to ensure that they are better skilled and equipped 
to handle the demands of a sophisticated and competitive financial arena.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  equal  measures  of  challenges  and  opportunities  abound  in  the 
banking sector. I am confident that with your newly-elected officers and directors, BAIPHIL is 
in a strong position to take on the challenges upfront and turn these into opportunities that 
will benefit your respective banks and the economy as a whole.  
Together,  we  can  pursue  a  higher  growth  path  for  the  economy,  even  in  the  face  of 
formidable challenges.  
Again, my congratulations to BAIPHIL and its new set of officers led by its President Lydia 
King 
Mabuhay ang BAIPHIL! Mabuhay ang ating mahal na bansang Pilipinas! Maraming salamat 
sa inyong lahat. 
BIS Review 93/2008 
 3
