Njuguna Ndung’u: The role of banking and finance in regional integration 
Address by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the Banking 
and Finance Conference, Nairobi, 18 August 2008. 
 Chief Executives of Commercial Banks here present; 
John Wanyela, Executive Director, Kenya Bankers Association; 
Representatives of the East African Business Council and East African Development Bank; 
Conference Facilitators; 
Distinguished Guests; 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
I  am  delighted  to  be  here  this  morning  and  let  me  hasten  to  thank  the  organisers  of  the 
conference  for  the  invite.  I  am  informed  that  the  overarching  theme  of  the  conference  is 
mainstreaming  banking  and  finance  issues  in  the  integration  process  of  the  East  African 
Community. This is indeed a subject that is near and dear, not just to the Central Bank of 
Kenya, but also to our counterparts in the region. I was therefore pleased to be advised that 
similar  forums  have  already  been  held  in  Uganda,  Rwanda  and  Tanzania.  I  am  further 
informed that a regional forum that will bring together all the East African key banking and 
finance players is scheduled for Arusha in the course of next month. 
The  role  of  banking  and  finance  in  regional  integration  cannot  be  overemphasised.  At  the 
most basic level, banks facilitate trade and flow of funds and investments across the region. 
However, with the global trends towards regional integration, banks will increasingly play a 
pivotal role in providing capital that will make this vision come true. I have in mind the move 
towards  private-public  partnerships  in  the  financing  and  implementation  of  key  regional 
infrastructure  projects.  We  would  like  to  see  our  banks  playing  an  increased  role  in  such 
initiatives. Commercial banks must therefore facilitate long term financing projects. 
It  would  be  apt  at  this  juncture  to  commend  the  Kenyan  banking  sector  that  is  well 
represented here today for expanding its footprint across the East African region. Regional 
banking  is  a  relatively  “virgin”  service  that  should  be  encouraged.  Your  institutions  will, 
however, require to be well capitalised to take advantage of emerging regional opportunities. 
In  this  regard,  raising  capitalization  in  the  commercial  banks  will  facilitate  flexibility  and 
innovations in their market niche. 
I  would  also  like  to  commend  Kenyan  banks  and  the  Kenya  Bankers  Association  for  their 
efforts  in  the  recent  Safaricom  IPO.  All  the  banks  came  out  of  it  unscathed  and  this  self 
discipline and focus is commendable. Of course, the Central Bank had to walk the path with 
them. 
Allow  me  to  now  turn  to  the  experiences  of  the  regional  central  banks  in  the  East  African 
Community  (EAC)  integration  agenda.  As  you  may  be  aware,  the  EAC  has  mandated  the 
Monetary Affairs Committee (MAC) with the key objective of implementing a monetary union 
which is a precursor to the full integration of the East African Community. MAC is comprised 
of the Governors of the five East African central banks. Technical sub-committees of MAC 
focus  on  the  thematic  areas  of  macroeconomic  issues  of  convergence,  bank  supervision, 
payments  systems,  financial  markets,  information  technology  and  capacity  building.  These 
areas are indeed the building blocks of the envisaged monetary union. 
Of particular interest to the banking sector is the harmonisation of regulation and supervision. 
This is of key importance to the increasingly regional Kenyan banking sector in view of the 
costs  associated  with  compliance 
the 
harmonization of banking supervision and regulation continues to be at the top of the MAC 
radar screen. 
regimes.  Therefore, 
to  varying 
regulatory 
BIS Review 107/2008 
 1
What has been our score card in this area? Overall, MAC has served as a useful forum to 
share experiences on topical bank supervision and regulation issues and forge a common 
way  forward.  Indeed  harmony  has  been  achieved  in  key  regulatory  issues  such  as 
operational independence of central banks, publication/disclosure of financial statements by 
commercial banks and business continuity management. 
We continue to share supervisory policies and procedures through joint arrangements. The 
East  African  central  banks  are  at  the  moment  in  active  discussions  on  a  draft  regional 
Memorandum of Understanding (MOU). The MOU, which we target to finalise by the end of 
the  year,  will  enhance  information  sharing  amongst  the  partner  central  banks.  As  you  will 
appreciate,  this  initiative  will  facilitate  the  consolidated  supervision  of  our  regional  banks. 
There  are  however  challenges,  some  of  which  are  legislative  in  nature  as  well  as  the 
microstructure of our financial system. 
Going forward, MAC will continue, relentlessly, to work towards harmonizing the East African 
banking  supervision  and  regulation  regimes.  We  are  acutely  aware  that  a  harmonized 
regulatory regime will reduce compliance cost and spur regional expansion of banks. It is not 
an easy road, but one that we must tread. Our vision will be ultimately achieved when the 
partner  central  banks  can  issue  “East  African  Banking  Licences”  valid  in  all  the  partner 
states. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: It is my expectation that over the course of this morning, you shall as 
market players: 
• 
• 
Clearly identify ways in which the banking sector can facilitate regional integration. 
Brainstorm  on regulatory and other barriers to regional integration from a banking 
and finance perspective. 
Make  clear,  time  bound  and  practical  recommendations  on  how  the  barriers 
identified can be overcome. 
 We look forward to receiving the report of your proceedings this morning and remain open to 
further consultations on this topical agenda. 
It  is  now  my  pleasant  duty  and  honour  to  declare  the  Banking  and  Finance  Conference 
officially open. I wish you fruitful deliberations in this Conference. 
2 
 BIS Review 107/2008
