European Central Bank: Press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank 
and Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 
10 April 2008. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Vice-President  and  I  are  very  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  our 
press conference. Let me report on the outcome of our meeting, which was also attended by 
Commissioner Almunia.  
On the basis of our regular economic and monetary analyses, we decided at today’s meeting 
to leave the key ECB interest rates unchanged. The latest information has confirmed the 
existence of strong short-term upward pressure on inflation. In fact, we are experiencing a 
rather  protracted  period  of  temporarily  high  annual  rates  of  inflation,  resulting  mainly  from 
increases  in  energy  and  food  prices.  The  latest  information  also  clearly  confirms  our 
assessment of prevailing upside risks to price stability over the medium term, in a context of 
continuing very vigorous money and credit growth. The economic fundamentals of the euro 
area are sound. Incoming macroeconomic data continue to point to moderate but ongoing 
real  GDP  growth.  However,  the  level  of  uncertainty  resulting  from  the  turmoil  in  financial 
markets remains unusually high and tensions may last longer than initially expected. Against 
this  background,  we  emphasise  that  maintaining  price  stability  in  the  medium  term  is  our 
primary objective in accordance with our mandate. The firm anchoring of medium to longer-
term  inflation  expectations  is  of  the  highest  priority  to  the  Governing  Council  and  there  is 
certainly no room for complacency in this regard. We believe that the current monetary policy 
stance  will  contribute  to  achieving  our  objective.  The  Governing  Council  remains  strongly 
committed to preventing second-round effects and the materialisation of upside risks to price 
stability  over  the  medium  term.  We  will  continue  to  monitor  very  closely  all  developments 
over the coming weeks. 
Allow me to explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis.  
According  to  Eurostat’s  second  estimate,  quarter-on-quarter  real  GDP  growth  in  the  fourth 
quarter of 2007 was 0.4%, following 0.7% in the previous quarter. The latest information on 
economic activity also underpins previous expectations of moderate but ongoing growth in 
the first quarter of 2008. Overall, the euro area economy has sound fundamentals and does 
not suffer from major imbalances. 
Looking  ahead,  both  domestic  and  foreign  demand  are  expected  to  support  ongoing  real 
GDP  growth  in  the  euro  area  in  2008,  albeit  to  a  lesser  extent  than  during  2007.  While 
moderating,  growth  in  the  world  economy  is  expected  to  remain  resilient,  benefiting  in 
particular from strong growth in emerging economies. This should continue to support euro 
area  external  demand.  Meanwhile,  investment  growth  in  the  euro  area  should  provide 
ongoing  support  to  economic  activity,  as  capacity  utilisation  is  high,  profitability  has  been 
sustained and there are no significant signs of supply constraints on bank loans. At the same 
time,  as  a  result  of  the  improved  economic  conditions  and  wage  moderation,  employment 
and  labour  force  participation  have  increased  significantly  and  unemployment  rates  have 
fallen to levels not seen for 25 years. While being dampened by the impact of higher energy 
and food prices on purchasing power, consumption growth should continue to contribute to 
economic expansion, in line with real disposable income growth.  
The uncertainty surrounding this outlook for economic growth remains high, and downside 
risks  prevail.  The  risks  relate  mainly  to  the  financial  market  turbulence,  which  could  last 
longer than initially thought and could have a broader than currently expected impact on the 
BIS Review 42/2008 
 1
real  economy.  Moreover,  downside  risks  also  stem  from  the  dampening  impact  on 
consumption and investment of further unanticipated increases in energy and food prices, as 
well as from protectionist pressures and the possibility of disorderly developments owing to 
global imbalances. 
With regard to price developments, according to Eurostat’s flash estimate, the annual HICP 
inflation  rate  was  3.5%  in  March  2008,  after  3.3%  in  February.  This  outturn  confirms  the 
ongoing strong and lately further increasing short-term upward pressure on inflation, resulting 
largely from sharp increases in energy and food prices in recent months. Looking ahead, the 
annual HICP inflation rate is likely to remain significantly above 2% in the coming months, 
moderating  only  gradually  over  the  course  of  2008.  Accordingly,  we  are  currently 
experiencing a rather protracted period of temporarily high annual rates of inflation. 
The  risks  to  the  outlook  for  inflation  over  the  medium  term  remain  clearly  on  the  upside. 
These  risks  include  the  possibility of  further  rises  in  energy  and  food  prices,  as well  as  of 
increases  in  administered  prices  and  indirect  taxes  beyond  those  foreseen  thus  far.  Most 
importantly,  there  is  a  risk  that  price  and  wage-setting  behaviour  could  add  to  inflationary 
pressures.  In  particular,  the  pricing  power  of  firms,  notably  in  market  segments  with  low 
competition, may prove stronger than currently expected, and stronger than expected wage 
growth  may  emerge,  taking  into  account  high  capacity  utilisation  and  tight  labour  market 
conditions.  
Against  this  background,  it  is  imperative  that  all  the  parties  concerned  meet  their 
responsibilities. Second-round effects stemming from the impact of higher energy and food 
prices on wage and price-setting behaviour must be avoided. In the view of the Governing 
Council, this is of key importance in order to preserve price stability in the medium term and 
thereby the purchasing power of all euro area citizens. The Governing Council is monitoring 
wage  negotiations  in  the  euro  area  with  particular  attention.  In  this context,  the  Governing 
Council is concerned about the existence of schemes in which nominal wages are indexed to 
consumer prices. Such schemes involve the risk of upward shocks in inflation leading to a 
wage-price  spiral,  which  would  be  detrimental  to  employment  and  competitiveness  in  the 
countries concerned. The Governing Council therefore calls for such schemes to be avoided.  
The monetary analysis confirms the prevailing upside risks to price stability at medium to 
longer-term  horizons.  Annual  M3  growth  remained  very  vigorous  at  11.3%  in  February, 
supported by the continued strong growth of MFI loans to the private sector. While annual 
M1 growth has moderated further in recent months, as higher short-term interest rates have 
increased the opportunity cost of holding the most liquid components of M3, the growth of 
time deposits remains extremely strong. This reflects the relatively flat yield curve, which has 
made it more attractive to hold monetary assets remunerated at close to market rates than to 
hold  riskier,  longer-maturity  instruments.  Overall,  the  impact  of  the  flat  yield  curve  and  a 
number of other temporary factors suggest that annual M3 growth currently overstates the 
pace  of  the  underlying  monetary  expansion.  However,  even  after  taking  such  effects  into 
account,  a broad-based  assessment  of  the  latest  data  confirms  that  the  underlying  rate  of 
money and credit growth remains strong. 
The growth of household borrowing has moderated over recent months, reflecting the impact 
of  higher  key  ECB  interest  rates  since  December  2005  and  cooling  housing  markets  in 
several  parts  of  the  euro  area.  However,  the  growth  of  loans  to  non-financial  corporations 
has remained very robust. Bank borrowing by euro area non-financial corporations grew at 
an annual rate of 14.8% in the year to February 2008. Overall, bank loans to the domestic 
private sector have grown at around 11% on an annual basis for the past two years. 
For  the  time  being,  there  is  little  evidence  that  the  financial  market  turbulence  seen  since 
early August 2007 has strongly influenced the overall dynamics of broad money and credit 
aggregates. Notwithstanding the tightening of credit standards reported in the bank lending 
2 
 BIS Review 42/2008
survey for the euro area, continued strong loan growth to non-financial corporations suggests 
that the supply of bank credit to firms in the euro area has not been significantly impaired by 
the financial turmoil thus far. Further data and analysis will be required in order to obtain a 
more complete picture of the impact of the financial market developments on banks’ balance 
sheets, financing conditions and money and credit growth. 
fundamentals  of 
To  sum  up,  a  cross-check  of  the  outcome  of  the  economic  analysis  with  that  of  the 
monetary analysis clearly confirms the assessment that upside risks to price stability prevail 
over the medium term, in a context of very vigorous money and credit growth and with no 
significant  signs  of  supply  constraints  on  bank  loans  to  households  and  non-financial 
corporations.  The  economic 
Incoming 
macroeconomic data continue to point to moderate but ongoing real GDP growth. However, 
the level of uncertainty resulting from the turmoil in financial markets remains unusually high 
and tensions may last longer than initially expected. Against this background, we emphasise 
that  the  firm  anchoring  of  medium  to  longer-term  inflation  expectations  is  of  the  highest 
priority  to  the  Governing  Council.  We  believe  that  the  current  monetary  policy  stance  will 
contribute to achieving this objective. The Governing Council remains strongly committed to 
preventing second-round effects and the materialisation of upside risks to price stability over 
the medium term. We will continue to monitor very closely all developments over the coming 
weeks. 
the  euro  area  are  sound. 
Regarding fiscal policies, the intentions reflected in the latest round of stability programmes 
imply a rise in the euro area general government deficit ratio in 2008. Further fiscal pressures 
are likely to arise as overly optimistic macroeconomic assumptions are already being revised 
downwards  and  political  demands  for  fiscal  loosening  are  increasing.  In  this  situation, 
countries  with  fiscal  imbalances  are  urged  to  make  further  progress  with  structural 
consolidation, in line with the requirements of the Stability and Growth Pact. At the current 
juncture,  particularly  prudent  and  stability-oriented  fiscal  policies  would  also  contribute  to 
containing inflationary pressures. 
Turning to structural reforms, we welcome the launch of the 2008-10 cycle of the renewed 
Lisbon strategy for growth and jobs by the European Council. The favourable labour market 
trends  in  the  euro  area  suggest  that  economic  reforms  are  paying  off.  However,  many 
challenges  remain  as  overall  employment  is  still  below  the  Lisbon  target  of  70%  and 
unemployment  is  still  unacceptably  high.  Moreover,  productivity  growth  remains  weak, 
constraining general income growth. Therefore, we strongly encourage euro area countries 
to increase reform efforts, in particular to foster market integration and to reduce rigidities in 
product  and  labour  markets  that  restrict  competition,  employment  flexibility  and  wage 
differentiation,  and  we  support  them  in  these  efforts.  They  would  not  only  promote 
employment  and  support  potential  growth,  but  would  also  contribute  to  moderating  price 
pressures. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
BIS Review 42/2008 
 3
