Jean-Claude Trichet: The European Regulatory and Supervisory 
Framework – the views of the ECB 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  2008 
Eurofi Conference, Nice, 11 September 2008. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
 Introduction 
It is a great pleasure to address this extremely distinguished group of European executives 
and policy makers. Eurofi plays a key role in the ongoing reflections regarding the integration 
and efficiency in the European financial industry and its yearly conference is always a unique 
opportunity for lively debates on current financial services issues in Europe. 
With  the  event  of  today,  the  organizers  aim  to  provide  input  from  the  financial  services 
industry to the priorities and proposals of the European policy makers. On my part, I intend to 
share with you a few reflections on some implications of the financial market correction for 
both the private and the public sector.  
General issues  
Let  me  start  by  recalling  that  the  financial  market  correction  –  taking  the  form  of  a 
generalized  re-pricing  of  risks  and  de-leveraging  –  which  was  triggered  by  surging 
delinquencies  on  US  sub-prime  mortgages  now  more  than  one  year  ago,  is  an-going 
process.  The  overall  impact  so  far  on  the  financial  system  has  been  considerable. 
Confronted  with  such  an  extent  of  turbulences,  high  level  of  volatility  and  overshooting, 
unprecedented  in  the  industrialized  financial  systems  since  World  War  II,  both  public 
authorities  and  the  industry  have  responded  swiftly  to  cope  with  the  new  situation  and  to 
draw all lessons from the present episode in order to avoid recurrence of such an abrupt and 
disturbing correction in the future.  
Let me recall briefly these responses. At the international level, we agreed on the appropriate 
methodologies  to  draw  the  lessons  from  the  turbulent  market  correction.  The  Financial 
Stability  Forum  (FSF)  –  which  had  been  created  after  the  Asian  crisis  and  has  proved  its 
efficiency  on  this  occasion  –  investigated  how  financial  market  and  institutional  financial 
resilience  could  be  improved  and  its  report  of  April  this  year  lists  67  recommendations  in 
areas  consistent  with  the  ones  identified  by  the  ECOFIN  Council.  The  G7  and  the 
international  community  fully  supported  the  FSF  recommendations  at  its  meeting  in 
Washington  last  April  and  the  FSF  is  now  well  engaged  in  monitoring  closely  the  actual 
implementation  of  the  recommendations.  At  the  level  of  the  European  public  sector,  the 
ECOFIN  Council  endorsed  in  October  2007  a  roadmap  defining  a  list  of  actions  to  be 
completed  in  the  course  of  2008.  The  Council  identified  four  priority  areas  for  action:  (i) 
enhancing  transparency;  (ii)  improving  valuation  standards;  (iii)  reinforcing  prudential  rules 
and  risk  management  in  the  financial  sector;  and  (iv)  improving  market  functioning.  Very 
active work is well under way for the actual implementation of the Council’s action points. 
The private sector for its part has engaged in important initiatives, including in particular the 
report of the Institute of International Finance (IIF) on market best practices and the report by 
the Counterparty Risk Management Policy Group (CRMPG) on containing systemic risk.  
The  outcome  of  the  analyses  has  highlighted  major  issues  for  the  banking  sector  in  the 
present  global  finance.  In  this  respect,  I  would  like  to  focus  more  particularly  on  three 
questions.  First,  the  transfer  of  credit  risk,  as  epitomized  by  the  «originate  to  distribute 
BIS Review 108/2008 
 1
model ».  The  second  is  the  unprecedented  liquidity  problems  faced  by  banks.  The  third 
relates to the cooperation between central banks and supervisory authorities.  
The «originate to distribute» model 
Let  me  first  refer  to  the  «originate  to  distribute»  model  which  has  spread  diffusely  in  the 
financial  industry  in  recent  years.  As  is  well  known,  this  business  model  relies  heavily  on 
securitization,  notably  the  origination  of  loans  by  banks  that  are  repackaged  into  tradable 
securities  distributed  to  investors.  Securitization  is  indeed  at  the  center  of  the  financial 
disturbances  we  have  witnessed  and  some  would  even  see  the  recent  events  as  the 
beginning of the end of the OTD model; looking at some of the figures one may well believe 
this.  The  European  Securitization  Forum  forecasts  that  securitization  issuance  volumes  in 
the EU for 2008 will be EUR 272 billion or more than 40% lower than in 2007; for residential 
mortgage backed-securities the drop is predicted to be 50%. Since August last year some 
banks are in effect forced to hold a substantial portion of new securitization issuance on their 
own books.  
But just as the strong growth of securitization before the correction led many observers to 
overemphasize the pros of the OTD model and neglect the cons, the present situation may 
well create a reverse tendency. Indeed one risks forgetting that over recent years the OTD 
model delivered numerous benefits to financial markets participants, including an increased 
ability to hold or transfer credit risk, improved funding possibilities and capital efficiency and 
more flexibility in reducing credit risk concentration. These are pertinent motives to continue 
resorting  to  securitisation  so  that  in  my  view  the  OTD  concept  will  remain  valid,  though 
certainly  not  in  the  same  form  and  to  the  same  extent  as  in  the  recent  past.  It  remains 
important that policy makers are aware of these benefits when considering possible public 
action.  
But  it  has  to  be  stressed  that  along  with  the  development  of  the  securitisation  market,  its 
complexity, leverage and opacity have significantly increased, which raises serious concerns. 
The fact that various participants – originators, intermediaries, rating agencies, investors – in 
the securitisation process have diverse, and often conflicting, incentives plays an important 
role here.  
The fights against the adverse consequences of conflicts of interest should be engaged in 
the  first  instance  by  the  market  participants  themselves.  In  this  respect,  transparency  is  a 
powerful  tool.  For  instance,  transaction  documentation  relating  to  securitisation  operations 
should explicitly specify possible conflicts of interest and how they are dealt with. In addition, 
a  more  standardised  and  detailed  disclosure  related  to  the  underlying  portfolios  of 
securitisations would be beneficial for the efficient functioning of the market. I appreciate that 
in  this  domain  of  transparency  the  industry  is  making  substantial  efforts.  They  have  to  be 
actively pursued. 
When self-regulation and/or industry initiatives turn out to be insufficient, regulators have to 
step in, following a thorough assessment of the costs and benefits of introducing new rules. If 
there  is  scope  for  imposing  new  rules,  it  is  important,  given  the  global  nature  of  the 
securitisation process, that they are agreed by regulators at the international level.  
Another aspect I would underline in this context relates to the issuance of covered bonds. 
Indeed, the performance of covered bonds proved up to now to be relatively resilient to the 
financial market correction compared to asset-backed securities. Covered bonds are already 
the most important privately issued bond segment in Europe’s capital markets with over EUR 
2 trillion outstanding at the end of 2007. From a financial stability perspective, they have a 
number of attractive features, not least the fact that the credit risk stays with the originator, 
which strengthens the incentives for prudent risk management; generally they are also more 
transparently accounted for in banks’ published accounts than securitisation transactions.  
2 
 BIS Review 108/2008
Banks’ liquidity management 
This  brings  me  to  a  second  important  area  highlighted  by  the  financial  market  correction, 
namely  liquidity  management.  Indeed,  the  shaken  confidence  in  the  OTD  model  reflected 
itself  foremost  in  evaporating  market  and  funding  liquidity.  As  banks  were  forced  to  take 
securitized assets on their balance sheet again and provide funding under committed liquidity 
lines, they were at the same time confronted with serious and unexpected liquidity drains.  
In the light of the experience, it is fair to say that liquidity risk has been neglected in banks’ 
overall risk management compared to all the attention that over the past years has gone to 
capital management. The events of the past year have been a strong reminder that liquidity 
risk  is  a  key  risk  for  banks  to  manage  and  which  even  profitable  and  solvent  institutions 
cannot afford to downplay.  
This is also an area where in the first instance it is for the financial institutions themselves to 
pursue  improvements  in  their  liquidity  risk  management  systems.  However,  there  is  also 
room for more coordinated action by the regulatory and supervisory authorities. In fact, over 
the past months, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision at the global level and the 
CEBS  at  the  European  level  have  been  working  on  possible  recommendations  for 
improvements in this area which were recently subject to public consultation.  
Central  banks,  as  ultimate  liquidity  providers,  have  a  strong  interest  in  the  ways  banks 
manage their liquidity. Therefore, with the assistance of the Banking Supervision Committee, 
the  Eurosystem  has  investigated  in  detail  how  banks  manage  their  liquidity,  in  particular 
through the use of liquidity stress tests and contingency funding plans. It is worth recalling a 
few key findings of this analysis.  
A  first  general  finding  is  that  industry  practices  show  a  wide  diversity  as  regards  the 
components and details of liquidity stress tests and contingency plans. Clearly, a generally 
accepted industry standard has not yet emerged and thus all relevant parties are invited to 
undertake efforts in this direction.  
Second,  it  emerges,  not  surprisingly,  that  central  bank  facilities  are  an  essential  part  of 
banks’  contingency  funding  plans.  A  number  of  banks  indicated  that  in  response  to  the 
financial market correction they intend to place more emphasis on such facilities. As a central 
banker, I wish to be sure that banks can manage their liquidity risk on their own and not rely 
mechanically on central bank refinancing beyond common lending facilities and open market 
operations. Emergency  liquidity  assistance  by  central  banks  should  therefore  not be  relied 
upon by banks in their liquidity planning. 
Finally,  public  authorities  should  improve  their  monitoring  of  the  liquidity  situation  of  the 
financial  system  and  its  components  by  drawing  on  the  liquidity  stress  tests  results  of 
individual  banks.  This  should  be  achieved  by  organizing  concerted  rounds  of  common 
liquidity  stress  tests  whereby  participating  banks  would  use  their  own  approaches  to  carry 
out liquidity stress tests based on a common scenario. In this way supervisors and central 
banks  could  approximate  the  potential  systemic  impact  of  the  scenario  selected.  Banks 
would benefit as well from such an exercise through benchmarking and learning effects.  
Cooperation between central banks and supervisors 
Let me then turn to the last topic I would like to touch upon, namely the cooperation between 
central  banks  and  supervisors.  I  will  consider  three  areas  where  I  see  major  scope  for 
improvement, namely financial stability assessments, liquidity and crisis management.  
The  periodic  monitoring  and  assessment  of  financial  stability  conducted  by  central  banks 
would benefit from an enhanced cooperation between central banks and supervisors. In that 
context, I recall that the FSF stressed in its April report the need to improve the interaction 
between central banks and supervisors in the early detection of risks to the financial system. 
This  entails  that  the  supervision  of  individual  institutions  should  be  enhanced  with  central 
BIS Review 108/2008 
 3
banks’  financial  stability  assessments,  which  in  turn  should  benefit  more  from  supervisory 
insights.  
I am fully supportive of this recommendation. In their financial stability assessments, central 
banks  take  a  “top  down”  approach  by  focussing  on  the  main  macro-prudential  risks. 
Supervisors,  by  contrast,  take  typically  a  «bottom  up»  approach  by  looking  at  the  risks  of 
individual institutions. Somewhere these two approaches have to meet and influence each 
other for the better. For central banks this may mean that they have to communicate their 
financial  stability  assessment  in  a  way  that  is  directly  relevant  for  supervisors,  while 
supervisors  have  to  bring  to  the  attention  of  central  banks  developments  in  individual 
institutions that are important for the financial system as a whole. 
This  recommendation  is  clearly  relevant  not  only  at  the  national  level  but  also  at  a  cross-
border  level.  Concerning  the  EU  in  particular,  this  presupposes  an  effective  interaction 
between the assessment of risks faced by the EU banking sector made by central banks and 
supervisors, as reflected in the analyses of the BSC and CEBS respectively.  
An important aspect of the cooperation between central banks and supervisors in periodically 
assessing  the  financial  stability  conditions  is  central  banks’  access  to  supervisory 
information.  In  normal  times,  the  assessment  of  risks  for  the  financial  system  as  a  whole 
needs to rely on a large set of information sources, including those from banking supervisors. 
An  immediate  example  is  represented  by  the  data  on  the  solvency  and  profitability  of  the 
banking sector, as well as ad hoc information on specific exposures of the banking sector. 
While  it  is  fair  to  say  that  there  exists  already  extensive  access  by  central  banks  to 
supervisory  information  there  is  certainly  room  for  improvement  in  terms  of  timeliness, 
frequency and detail. Take the example again of the «originate to distribute» model. Once 
could argue that in case central banks had access to more detailed supervisory information 
on banks’ involvement in securitisation operations they would have found it easier to assess 
the implications of this development for the financial system as a whole.  
When  a  situation  of  financial  stress  actually  emerges  and  risks  developing  into  a  financial 
crisis,  supervisory  information  remains  again  crucial  for  central  banks’  financial  stability 
assessment. But in this case, the need for information will be very much driven by the nature 
of  the  stress.  In  the  present  market  conditions,  central  banks  are  of  course  very  much 
interested  in  banks’  exposures  to  the  US  sub-prime  sector  and  to  structured  financial 
products, as well as the effect of the price corrections on banks’ solvency position.  
A second area of cooperation I want to mention is liquidity, which is again at the cross-roads 
of  central  banking  and  banking  supervision.  Much  of  the  work  that  central  banks  and 
supervisors  are  undertaking  to  render  financial  institutions  and  markets  more  resilient  to 
liquidity shocks is interrelated and offers therefore scope for mutual cooperation. I will give 
just one example referring to a topic I mentioned already earlier, namely banks’ contingency 
funding plans. While normally supervisors require banks to set up these plans, central banks 
should also have access to them as an element to be considered in the context of deciding 
on liquidity provision.  
The final area I would mention is crisis management. In this field, the FSF report makes also 
a  number  of  recommendations  that  pertain  to  the  cooperation  between  central  banks  and 
supervisors.  More  specifically,  the  report  recommends  that  for  the  largest  cross-border 
financial firms, the most directly involved supervisors and central banks should establish a 
small group to address specific cross-border crisis management planning issues.  
I believe that in Europe, the right principles have been agreed to meet this recommendation. 
The Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) on cooperation on cross-border financial stability 
includes  appropriate  provisions  on  the  cooperation  between  central  banks  and  banking 
supervisors,  for  example  when  assessing  the  potential  systemic  implications  of  a  financial 
crisis  or  when  emergency  liquidity  assistance  will  be  provided  to  a  cross-border  financial 
group.  A  second  important  reinforcement  will  come  from  the  scheduled  changes  to  the 
Capital  Requirements  Directive,  which  include  several  aspects  relating  to  the  cooperation 
4 
 BIS Review 108/2008
and exchange of information between central banks and banking supervisory authorities also 
in crisis situations.  
Concluding remarks 
Ladies and gentlemen, let me conclude. The financial market correction has revealed areas 
in the regulatory and supervisory framework which need to be promptly addressed by public 
authorities and the financial industry. In the EU, the ECOFIN roadmap of October 2007 is in 
that  respect  the  benchmark  and  it  is  important  that  the  actions  identified  are  indeed  fully 
implemented without delay.  
I think it is equally important that continued efforts are put into the realization of two other 
ECOFIN  roadmaps,  namely  the  one  regarding  strengthening  the  EU  arrangements  for 
financial  stability  and  the  other  one  on  enhancing  the  Lamfalussy  framework.  Both  are 
indeed highly relevant in the context of the financial market correction.  
A  major  step  in  strengthening  the  financial  stability  arrangements  was  taken  with  the 
signature  of  the  MoU  on  cross-border  financial  stability.  The  next  step  consists  of 
implementing and testing the memorandum’s procedures and principles, in which the ECB is 
actively involved. A second important strand of work under the heading of enhanced financial 
stability arrangement consists of reviewing the policy tools for crisis prevention, management 
and resolution at the EU level, where the European Commission takes the leading role.  
The  market  correction  has  underscored  the  urgency  and  importance  of  enhancing  cross-
border  convergence  and  cooperation  in  the  supervision  of  cross-border  banks  in  the  EU, 
which is the objective of the roadmap on enhancing the Lamfalussy framework. Only in this 
way  the  necessary  preconditions  are  in  place  to  ensure  an  effective  monitoring  of,  and 
response to, cross-border financial risks by banking supervisors. To that end, it is important 
to  ensure  that  the  Level  3  committees  as  well as  the  colleges  of  supervisors  can work  as 
effectively as possible. 
Ladies and gentlemen, John F. Kennedy once famously said in a speech that the Chinese 
word  for  crisis  is  composed  of  two  characters,  one  representing  danger  and  the  other 
opportunity. Although I still prefer to speak of financial market correction, I believe I showed 
you that both elements are indeed present today.  
I thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 108/2008 
 5
