Ben S Bernanke: Developments in the financial markets 
Testimony of Mr Ben S Bernanke, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve System, before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, US Senate, 
Washington DC, 3 April 2008. 
 Chairman  Dodd,  Senator  Shelby,  and  other  members  of  the  Committee,  I  appreciate  this 
opportunity to discuss current economic and financial conditions and the actions the Federal 
Reserve has taken to stabilize financial markets and the economy.  
Although  the  situation  has  recently  improved  somewhat,  financial  markets  remain  under 
considerable  stress.  Pressures  in  short-term  bank  funding  markets,  which  had  abated 
somewhat  beginning  late  last  year,  have  increased  once  again.  Many  lenders  have  been 
reluctant  to  provide  credit  to  counterparties,  especially  leveraged  investors,  and  increased 
the amount of collateral they required to back short-term security financing agreements. To 
meet  those  demands,  investors  have  reduced  their  leverage  and  liquidated  holdings  of 
securities, putting further downward pressure on security prices. Credit availability has also 
been  restricted  because  some  large  financial  institutions,  including  some  commercial  and 
investment  banks  and  the  government-sponsored  enterprises  (GSEs),  have  reported 
substantial  losses  and  writedowns,  reducing  their  capital  available  to  support  increased 
lending.  Some  key  securitization  markets,  including  those  for  nonconforming  mortgages, 
continue to function poorly if at all.  
These  developments  in  financial  markets  –  which  themselves  reflect,  in  part,  greater 
concerns about housing and the economic outlook more generally – have weighed on real 
economic  activity.  Notably,  in  the  housing  market,  sales  of  both  new  and  existing  homes 
have  generally  continued  weak,  partly  as  a  result  of  the  reduced  availability  of  mortgage 
credit, and home prices have continued to fall. Private payroll employment fell substantially in 
February,  after  two  months  of smaller  job  losses,  with  job cuts  in  construction  and  closely 
related industries accounting for a significant share of the decline. But the demand for labor 
has also moderated recently in other industries. Overall, the near-term economic outlook has 
weakened  relative  to  the  projections  released  by  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee 
(FOMC)  at  the  end  of  January.  Inflation  has  also  been  a  source  of  concern.  We  expect 
inflation  to  moderate  in  coming  quarters,  but  it  will  be  necessary  to  continue  to  monitor 
inflation developments carefully.  
Well-functioning  financial  markets  are  essential  for  the  efficacy  of  monetary  policy  and, 
indeed,  for  economic  growth  and  stability.  Consistent  with  its  role  as  the  nation's  central 
bank, the Federal Reserve has taken a number of steps in recent weeks to improve market 
liquidity and market functioning. These actions include reducing the cost and increasing the 
allowable  term  of  discount  window  credit  to  commercial  banks;  increasing  the  size  of  our 
Term Auction Facility, through which credit is auctioned to depository institutions; initiating a 
Term Securities Lending Facility, which allows primary dealers to swap less-liquid mortgage 
backed securities for more-liquid Treasury securities; and creating the Primary Dealer Credit 
Facility, which is similar to the discount window but accessible to primary dealers. Although 
these facilities operate through depository institutions and primary dealers, they are designed 
to  support  the  broader  financial  markets  and  the  economy  by  facilitating  the  provision  of 
liquidity by those institutions to their customers and counterparties. With respect to monetary 
policy,  at  its  March  meeting  the  FOMC  reduced  its  target  for  the  federal  funds  rate  by  75 
basis points to 2-1/4 percent.  
It was in this context of intensifying financial strains that, on March 13, Bear Stearns advised 
the  Federal  Reserve  and  other  government  agencies  that  its  liquidity  position  had 
BIS Review 39/2008 
 1
significantly  deteriorated  and  that  it  would  have  to  file  for  bankruptcy  the  next  day  unless 
alternative sources of funds became available.  
This  news  raised  difficult  questions  of  public  policy.  Normally,  the  market  sorts  out  which 
companies  survive  and  which  fail,  and  that  is  as  it  should  be.  However,  the  issues  raised 
here  extended  well  beyond  the  fate  of  one  company.  Our  financial  system  is  extremely 
complex and interconnected, and Bear Stearns participated extensively in a range of critical 
markets. The sudden failure of Bear Stearns likely would have led to a chaotic unwinding of 
positions  in  those  markets  and  could  have  severely  shaken  confidence.  The  company's 
failure  could  also  have  cast  doubt  on  the  financial  positions  of  some  of  Bear  Stearns' 
thousands of  counterparties  and  perhaps  of  companies  with  similar  businesses. Given  the 
exceptional pressures on the global economy and financial system, the damage caused by a 
default by Bear Stearns could have been severe and extremely difficult to contain. Moreover, 
the  adverse  impact  of  a  default  would  not  have  been  confined  to  the  financial  system  but 
would  have  been  felt  broadly  in  the  real  economy  through  its  effects  on  asset  values  and 
credit availability. 
To  prevent  a  disorderly  failure  of  Bear  Stearns  and  the  unpredictable  but  likely  severe 
consequences  for  market  functioning  and  the  broader  economy,  the  Federal  Reserve,  in 
close consultation with the Treasury Department, agreed to provide funding to Bear Stearns 
through  JPMorgan  Chase.  Over  the  following  weekend,  JPMorgan  Chase  agreed  to 
purchase Bear Stearns and assumed Bear's financial obligations. 
The  purpose  of  our  action,  as  with  our  other  recent  actions  –  including  our  provision  of 
liquidity to financial firms and our reductions in the federal funds rate target – was, as best as 
possible, to improve the functioning of financial markets and to limit any adverse effects of 
financial turmoil on the broader economy. We will remain focused on those objectives. 
Clearly,  the  U.S.  economy  is  going  through  a  very  difficult  period.  But  among  the  great 
strengths of our economy is its ability to adapt and to respond to diverse challenges. Much 
necessary  economic  and  financial  adjustment  has  already  taken  place,  and  monetary  and 
fiscal policies are in train that should support a return to growth in the second half of this year 
and next year. I remain confident in our economy's long-term prospects. 
Thank you. I would be pleased to take your questions.  
2 
 BIS Review 39/20086
