Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj: Challenges for Islamic finance 
Keynote address by His Excellency Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj, Governor of the Central 
Bank of Bahrain, at the World Islamic  Banking European Summit, London, 8 July 2008. 
 Your Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen:  Good Morning.  
It  is  a  pleasure  to  be  here  at  the  inaugural  World  Islamic   Banking  European  Summit  in 
London. As His  Excellency, Shaikh Mohammed, has already mentioned,  Bahrain has been 
home to the World Islamic Banking  Conference for the past fifteen years.  
Throughout that  time Central Bank of Bahrain has been – and remains – a  strong supporter 
of the WIBC. We very much welcome  this inaugural European summit, which we regard as 
yet  a further indication that Islamic finance is rapidly  moving into the financial mainstream.  
There is no need for me to repeat the facts and figures  about the stunning growth of Islamic 
finance that Shaikh  Mohammed has already referred to. Let me say,  however, that I strongly 
endorse his view that the Islamic  financial industry continues to offer enormous  opportunities 
for both Muslims and non-Muslims alike.  We at the CBB have a continuing commitment to 
 facilitating  the  development  of  the  Islamic  financial   services  industry.  We  issued  the  first 
sovereign sukuk in   2001. We were the first regulator in the world to issue a  comprehensive 
set  of  prudential  regulations  tailored  to   the  needs  of  Islamic  financial  institutions.  More 
 recently, we have introduced an innovative approach to  the application of Basel II, Pillar 1 
requirements to our  Islamic banks.  We will continue to ensure that all financial institutions  in 
Bahrain adhere to the very highest international  standards. Where necessary we will play our 
part  in   adapting  those  standards  to  the  needs  of  the  Islamic   financial  services  industry.  In 
developing this  framework we are assisted by the presence in Bahrain of  a number of the 
leading standard setting bodies for the  industry.   These include AAOIFI, the Accounting and 
Auditing  Organisation for Islamic Financial Institutions and the  IIFM, the International Islamic 
Financial  Market,  which   is  doing  sterling  work  in  developing  standard  contracts   and 
associated  documentation.   Building  sound  underpinnings,  in  the  form  of  an   appropriate 
framework  of  regulation,  accounting  and   contract  standardization,  is  a  very  important 
challenge.  But it is by no means the only one that the industry must  confront as the result of 
its success.  
I would like to take  this opportunity to look at some of the other challenges  that the industry 
currently faces as it moves into the  financial mainstream.  A long-standing issue relates to the 
multiplicity of  Shari’a boards and judgements. This has led to both a  lack of homogeneity for 
some  products,  and  a  lack  of   certainty  by  clients  about  the  cross-border  acceptability   of 
Shari’a  rulings.  Additionally,  there  is  a  continuing  need  for  high  quality   human  resources 
within the industry. It has been  growing so fast that it has been difficult for institutions  to find 
enough  skilled  or  qualified  staff.  In  recognition  of  this  need  the  CBB  established  a  special 
Waqf fund in   2006 to finance and publish research and to support  training workshops and 
other educational initiatives. We  have also been working with the Bahrain Institute of  Banking 
and Finance to develop new courses on Islamic  finance.  Despite the importance we attach to 
each of these  challenges, there are three in particular that I would like  to highlight today.    
The first concerns corporate governance. All financial  institutions – whether conventional or 
Islamic  –  need   high  standards  of  corporate  governance  as  they  are   entrusted  with  other 
people’s money. However, this  need is particularly great in Islamic financial institutions  due 
to several issues that are specific to their business  model.   Decisions on profit distribution, for 
example, require the  careful balancing of the interests of multiple stakeholder  groups – not 
just  shareholders,  as  in  conventional  banks,   but  the  interests  of  holders  of  investment 
accounts  as   well.     Investment  account  holders are  exposed  to  many  of  the   same  risks  as 
shareholders,  but  lack  the  same  control   rights  –  such  as  the  ability  to  vote  for  board 
BIS Review 91/2008 
 1
members  –   that  are  attached  to  equity  ownership.  Balancing  these   different  stakeholder 
interests requires the adoption of  strong corporate governance practices, and the standards 
 developed both by AAOIFI and by the Islamic Financial  Services Board are vital components 
of the solution.   
The second issue concerns Islamic banks’ ability to  manage their liquidity. At the CBB we are 
in the process  of developing an Islamic Sukuk Liquidity Instrument.  This will be a repurchase 
agreement which will enable  financial institutions, both conventional and Islamic, to  access 
short term liquidity against Government of  Bahrain Ijara sukuk issued by the CBB.   We have 
also  encouraged  the  IIFM  to  develop  contracts   and  documents  that  can  be  used  for 
conducting  transactions through commodity murabahas. Even so,  there is a continuing need 
for  more  depth  and  liquidity  in   Sharia-compliant  money  markets  and  the  CBB  intends  to 
 remain at the forefront of such initiatives. The final challenge is to ensure that the industry’s 
 undoubted success does not turn into complacency. The  sensational growth of the industry 
in recent years  combined with high levels of liquidity has meant that  Islamic banks have not 
needed to fight for funding or  ideas. Newer entrants to the industry have merely tended  to 
copy the strategies they see being successfully  pursued by their more established rivals. If I 
may say so,  there is a high degree of “cloning” of business models.  
 As a result, a very high percentage of Islamic banks have  a strategy that is heavily weighted 
towards  real  estate   and  asset  finance.  They  tend  to  be  project-driven  and  do   not  have  a 
steady source of “bread and butter” revenue to  tide them over any downturns in economic 
activity. This  contrasts with conventional banks with their extensive  loan books, overdraft and 
credit card facilities which  provide steady revenue to cover their overheads even in  today’s 
challenging  markets.   The  “cloning”  of  business  models  leads  to  financial   institutions 
becoming exposed to the same economic and  industrial sectors. The Islamic banking sector 
as a whole  is highly exposed to the property sector – real estate,  commercial property and 
construction – and as events in  the advanced markets have recently reminded us, this  sector 
can and does experience significant cycles of  activity.    
The asset-based business models favoured by many  Islamic banks have not been tested in 
a downturn. We  need to remember that a business model which looks  robust in conditions of 
rising  asset  values  and  abundant  liquidity  may  not  be  so when  the  economic  environment 
 changes.   The  industry  needs  to  respond  to  these  challenges  by   developing  a  greater 
diversity of business models, more  diverse and stable income sources, and more rigorous 
 risk management and stress testing techniques to assess  its preparedness to deal with any 
downturn  in  economic   activity.   As  a  central  banker  I  am  inevitably  preoccupied  by  risk, 
 especially  when  it  could  potentially  impact  on  a   significant  sector  of  the  financial  industry. 
However,  the   challenges  that  I  have  highlighted  are  very  much  the   result  of  the  industry’s 
recent success. We all share of  the aim of ensuring that the industry remains successful,  and 
this is why it is so important that we recognize and  address these challenges.   
2 
 BIS Review 91/2008
