T T Mboweni: Overview of the South African economy 
Address  by  Mr  T  T  Mboweni,  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  at  the  88th 
ordinary general meeting of shareholders, Pretoria, 18 September 2008. 
 Introduction 
The past year has been a difficult one for both the global and domestic economies. At the 
time of the previous annual general meeting of the South African Reserve Bank (the Bank), 
the sub-prime mortgage crisis in the United States (US) was in an early phase, and at that 
stage  the  full  implications  were  yet  to  be  seen.  A  year  later  we  are  witnessing  the 
repercussions  in  terms  of  pressure  on  the  international  financial  markets  and  a  slowing 
global economy. Compounding these developments were sustained increases in the prices 
of a number of commodities, particularly food and oil, which have fuelled domestic and global 
inflation. The South African banking sector has been relatively insulated from these financial 
market uncertainties. Nevertheless, greater vigilance has been required in supervising and 
regulating the domestic banking sector and payment system, which contributed to an orderly 
financial market environment. 
At  the  same  time,  monetary  policy  has  faced  particular  challenges  as  relative  price 
movements  and  strong  domestic  demand  caused  inflation  to  exceed  the  inflation  target 
range. In carrying out its mandate of achieving and maintaining price stability, the Bank has 
tightened the stance of monetary policy over the past year. However, the Bank has retained 
its focus on maintaining the efficient internal workings of the Bank. It is in this context that I 
report to you today. 
This  year  a  comprehensive  economic  report  is  included  as  part  of  the  Annual  Report.  In 
previous years this economic report was published as a separate Annual Economic Report. 
The economic report provides an analysis of developments in the domestic and international 
economy during the year under review, with particular emphasis on developments that have 
had implications for the operations and policy implementation of the Bank. The focus of this 
address is on the main operational areas of the Bank. 
Monetary policy 
The  challenges  facing  monetary  policy  intensified  during  the  year.  Inflation  was  impacted 
initially by strong domestic demand pressures, and sustained and significantinternational oil 
and food price increases. Since April 2007, CPIX inflation has exceeded the upper end of the 
target range of 3 to 6 per cent and it has risen persistently since then. In July 2008 CPIX 
inflation had reached a level of 13,0 per cent. 
The  Monetary  Policy  Committee  (MPC)  has  consistently  recognised  that  there  is  little  that 
monetary policy can do to avoid the impact or first-round effects of exogenous relative price 
changes  on  domestic  inflation.  Monetary  policy  needs  to  focus  on  preventing  these  first-
round  effects  from  feeding  through  to  a  generalised  or  broad-based  increase  in  inflation. 
Central  to  this  is  the  management  of  inflation  expectations.  If  monetary  policy  fails  to  act 
appropriately,  inflation  expectations  will  become  less  anchored,  with  implications  for  price 
and wage setting. Whereas initially much of the pressure on inflation came from exogenous 
sources, more recently it has become evident that second-round effects have become more 
prominent. During the year under review underlying inflation has increased consistently: in 
July 2007 CPIX inflation excluding food and petrol measured 5,0 per cent, whereas by July 
2008 it had increased to 7,4 per cent. 
There was also some deterioration in inflation expectations. During the second half of 2007 
expectations,  as  reflected  in  the  inflation  expectations  survey  conducted  on  behalf  of  the 
BIS Review 111/2008 
 1
from 
Bank by the Bureau for Economic Research at Stellenbosch University, remained within the 
target range, although there was a moderate upward drift. This was despite the unfavourable 
inflation  outcomes.  However,  the  picture  changed  in  2008  when  expectations  increased 
significantly  above  the  upper  end  of  the  inflation  target  range  for  all  years  in  the  forecast 
period.  This  deterioration  is  consistent  with  other  market-based  measures  of  inflation 
expectations. 
During the past year there have been a number of factors that impacted on inflation and that 
influenced monetary policy decisions. These included endogenous and exogenous factors. 
The  international  oil  price  continued  to  put  pressure  on  domestic  inflation.  Oil  prices  were 
affected  by  strong  global  demand,  particularly 
fast-growing  emerging-market 
economies,  most  notably  in  Asia.  Numerous  oil-supply  disruptions,  mainly  a  result  of 
geopolitical developments and adverse weather conditions, also affected the oil market. As a 
result, the price of North Sea Brent crude oil increased from just over US$50 per barrel in 
January 2007 to reach a high of over US$145 per barrel in July 2008, before moderating in 
recent  weeks.  The  combined  effects  of  the  international  oil  price  and  rand  exchange  rate 
developments  have  resulted  in  a  cumulative  increase  in  domestic  petrol  prices  of  about 
R2,75 per litre since September 2007. 
Despite an improved domestic maize harvest and relatively benign weather conditions, food 
prices also continued to place upward pressure on inflation. Factors sustaining pressure on 
international food prices include drought conditions in some regions, export restrictions in a 
number of countries, the diversion of food crops to biofuels production, and increased global 
demand  fuelled  by  strong  growth  and  higher  incomes  in  emerging  markets  in  particular. 
Domestically, between August 2007 and July 2008, food prices contributed on average 4,1 
percentage points to average CPIX inflation of 9,3 per cent. 
Pressures from food and oil prices have also impacted on global inflation. Despite a general 
downturn in most of the advanced economies, monetary policy in numerous countries has 
been tightened in recent months in response to heightened inflation pressures. 
Since early 2008, the exchange rate has also begun to pose a threat to the inflation outlook. 
The exchange rate reacted to a number of developments including the widening deficit on 
the current account of the balance of payments, electricity supply constraints, bouts of global 
risk aversion and movements in the US dollar against other currencies. More recently, the 
rand  exchange  rate  has  appreciated  somewhat  from  its  earlier  lows.  The  trend  of  wage 
settlements  has  also  become  an  increasing  risk  to  the  inflation  outlook.  Nominal  wage 
settlements  have  been  increasing  over  the  past  year,  although  they  are  still  on  average 
below the inflation rate, particularly once productivity changes are adjusted for. 
Most other domestic determinants of inflation remained well contained and have either been 
neutral  or  helpful  to  inflation  developments.  After  a  long  lag,  household  consumption 
expenditure  showed  a  definite  response  to  the  tightened  monetary  policy  stance,  despite 
only a moderate slowdown in bank credit extension to households. 
Demand for durable goods has been particularly responsive to higher nominal interest rates. 
Asset price developments, in the form of lower equity prices and a subdued housing market, 
reduced the pressure on inflation emanating from wealth effects. Output growth, which has 
measured  around  5  per  cent  per  annum  during  the  past  four  years,  showed  signs  of 
moderating  and  the  economy  appears  to  be  growing  somewhat  below  potential  output 
growth. Fiscal policy also remained supportive of monetary policy. 
In response to the impact of these developments on the inflation outlook, the monetary policy 
stance  has  been  tightened  progressively  over  the  past  year.  The  repurchase  rate  was 
increased  by  50  basis  points  after  each  of  four  of  the  six  MPC  meetings  held  since  the 
previous  annual  general  meeting.  Since  the  tightening  cycle  began  in  June  2006,  the 
repurchase  rate  has  been  increased  by  a  cumulative  500  basis  points.  In  January  2008 
interest rates were kept on hold despite a mildly deteriorated inflation forecast. At that time, 
2 
 BIS Review 111/2008
the risks to the outlook were more or less the same, but the MPC assessed that the extent of 
these risks had moderated somewhat. However, by the next meeting this assessment had 
changed in the light of new developments, including the risk posed to the outlook by Eskom’s 
application for a significant further increase in the price of electricity. 
At  its  most  recent  meeting  in  August  2008  the  MPC  decided  to  keep  the  monetary  policy 
stance unchanged. The committee decided that although upside risks to the inflation outlook 
remained, the degree of risk had subsided somewhat, particularly in the light of the continued 
slowdown  in  household  consumption  expenditure,  the  widening  output  gap  and  the  lower 
international oil prices. The inflation forecast of the Bank showed that inflation was expected 
to  peak  in  the  third  quarter  of  2008  and  then  begin  to  decline,  and  to  return  to  within  the 
target range by the second quarter of 2010. 
The fact that inflation has been outside the target range for some time has been regarded by 
some  as  an  indication  of  the  failure  of  the  inflation-targeting  framework.  It  is  generally 
accepted that a flexible inflation-targeting regime should allow for a deviation from the target 
in the event of exogenous shocks, which are beyond the control of the monetary authorities. 
Our  framework  also  allows  for  deviations  from  the  target  in  such  instances,  to  avoid  an 
excessive  impact  on  output  variability.  However,  to  prevent  second-round  effects,  it  is 
important  that  expectations  remain  well  anchored.  Failure  to  respond  will  inevitably  cause 
expectations to become dislodged and result in a further acceleration of inflation. The Bank 
remains committed to bringing inflation back to within the target in a reasonable time frame. 
Money-market operations 
The Bank manages the daily liquidity requirement in the money market so as to ensure that 
the implementation of monetary policy is consistent with the stance determined by the MPC. 
During the past year the daily liquidity requirement has been kept within a range of between 
R6,6  billion  and  R14,7  billion.  The  purchases  of  foreign  exchange  from  the  local  foreign-
exchange market create rand liquidity that has to be drained in order to maintain a liquidity 
shortage  in  the  money  market.  Liquidity  was  drained  in  a  number  of  ways,  including  the 
issuing  of  SARB  debentures,  conducting  longer-term  reverse  repurchase  transactions  and 
increasing  deposits  in  the  sterilisation  account  that  the  National  Treasury  holds  with  the 
Bank.  In  addition,  increases  in  notes  and  coin  in  circulation,  and  in  the  statutory  cash 
reserves of commercial banks also drained liquidity. 
Accumulation and management of reserves 
The  Bank  continued  to  increase  the  level  of  official  gross  gold  and  foreign-exchange 
reserves,  from  US$29,8  billion  at the  end  of  August  2007 to  US$34,3  billion  at  the  end  of 
August  2008.  Over  the  same  period,  the  international  liquidity  position  increased  from 
US$27,4  billion  to  US$33,5  billion.  In  addition  to  accumulating  foreign-exchange  reserves, 
the Bank reduced the level of its borrowed reserves from around US$3,2 billion at the end of 
August 2007 to US$896 million at the end of August 2008. Borrowed reserves were reduced 
with the repayment of the outstanding portion of the syndicated loan entered into in 2005. 
South  Africa  is  one  of  a  number  of  emerging-market  countries  that  have  a  relatively  high 
current-account deficit, which underlines the need for a healthy level of reserves. The current 
level  of  reserves  puts  South  Africa  more  or  less  in  line  with  many  of  its  peers  in  the 
emerging-market  community  and  it  meets  the  generally  accepted  reserve-adequacy 
measures. However, the Bank does not regard the current level as excessive and is likely to 
continue accumulating reserves at a moderate pace when market conditions permit. 
Enhancing the reserves management processes of the Bank has been a strategic focus area 
for a number of years, commensurate with the growing responsibility associated with higher 
levels  of  reserves.  This  improvement  continued  during  the  past  year.  The  primary  focus 
BIS Review 111/2008 
 3
during the period under review was the formulation and partial implementation of a strategic 
asset  allocation,  which  involved  the  quantification  of  risk  tolerance  in  the  form  of  a  target 
duration per currency and a risk budget to facilitate the active management of reserves. In 
line with these developments, the roll-out of the internally managed portfolios was initiated to 
move closer to the approved strategic asset allocation. 
Currency distribution 
In celebration of former President Nelson Mandela’s 90th birthday on 18 July 2008, the Bank 
issued  five  million  pieces  of  the  bi-metal  commemorative  R5  coin  depicting  the  former 
president.  Arrangements  were  made  to  distribute  this  special  commemorative  coin  to  all 
provinces prior to 18 July 2008, thereby ensuring that they were available nationally on Mr 
Mandela’s birthday. 
The national payment system 
In March 2008 the Bank celebrated the 10th anniversary of the implementation of the South 
African Multiple Option Settlement (SAMOS) system. During 2008 an upgrade of the SAMOS 
system  was  initiated  to  facilitate  the  implementation  of  delivery-versuspayment  in  the 
settlement  of  money-market  securities.  Another  project  was  initiated  to  review  the  South 
African  settlement  system  infrastructure  and  applications,  and  to  benchmark  them  against 
those  of  other  central  banks.  Business  continuity  management  also  received  special 
attention during 2008. Interbank clearing and settlement are of systemic importance and the 
Bank co-operated with stakeholders to minimise potential disruptions in this domain. 
The  Bank  continued  to  develop  the  oversight  of  the  national  payment  system  (NPS).  This 
included the issuing of directives relating to the conduct of system operators and third-party 
service  providers  in  the  payment  system,  which  became  effective  in  December  2007.  The 
measures contained in these directives are aimed at ensuring the safety and efficiency of the 
NPS. The Bank also participated in the Continuous Linked Settlement system oversight and 
served  on  the  foreign-exchange  settlement  subgroup  of  the  Bank  for  International 
Settlements. 
The  Bank,  in  its  role  as  overseer  of  the  NPS,  established  the  National  Payment  System 
Advisory Body (NPSAB), which is representative of all the regulated stakeholders within the 
NPS.  This  body  allows  for  regulated  bank  and  non-bank  participants  to  establish 
associations that can represent the interests of their members at the NPSAB. 
Financial stability 
The  resilience  of  financial  markets  globally  has  been  severely  tested  during  the  past  year 
following the widespread impact of negative developments in the US housing and subprime 
mortgage markets. As a result of the securitisation of sub-prime loans, the effect turned out 
to be more widespread than anticipated originally. Emerging-market economies, in general, 
and  South  Africa,  in  particular,  have  proven  to  be  remarkably  resilient  in  the  midst  of  this 
financial  market  turmoil.  The  impact  on  South  Africa  has  been  indirect,  mainly  through 
financial  market  volatility  and  the  resultant  economic  slowdown  in  the  US  and  other  major 
industrialised countries. 
The Bank, in recognising the importance of a stable financial system to support its primary 
objective,  seeks  to  identify  inherent  weaknesses  in  the  financial  system  and  monitor  risks 
that  may  result  in  financial  system  disturbances.  The  domestic  financial  system  was 
assessed  as  sound,  based  on  a  quantitative  analysis  of  a  standard  set  of  financial 
soundness indicators. The Bank’s qualitative assessment of the inherent robustness of the 
financial  system  environment  against  the  12  key  financial  soundness  standards  of  the 
4 
 BIS Review 111/2008
Financial  Stability  Forum  shows  a  high  level  of  general  compliance  with  international 
standards and best practice. 
Bank regulation and supervision 
As  part  of  its  bank  supervision  function,  the  Bank  focused  on  the  impact  of  international 
financial  market  developments  on  the  banking  sector.  In  mid-2007  the  Bank  requested  a 
selection  of  South  African  banks  to  provide  detailed  reports  on  their  exposure  to  the 
prevailing  risks.  It  was  found  that  local  banks  had  no  direct  exposure  to  the  sub-prime 
mortgage  market,  while  certain  of  the  banks’  international  franchises  had  only  limited 
exposure.  However,  indirect  effects,  such  as  increased  funding  costs,  were  observable.  In 
view  of  the  developments  in  financial  markets  and  specific  events  in  some  international 
banking institutions, the Bank deemed it important to embark on a process to evaluate the 
appropriateness of South African banks’ incentive schemes during 2008. 
A major change to the South African banking regulatory and supervisory framework occurred 
as  a  result  of  the  implementation  of  Basel  II  on  1  January  2008.  The  process  followed  in 
implementing  Basel  II  was  characterised  by  its  broad  consultative  approach;  several 
quantitative  impact  studies  and  field  tests;  amendments  to  the  regulatory  and  supervisory 
frameworks; and regular interaction with all South African banking institutions. The amended 
Banks  Act,  1990  and  Regulations  relating  to  Banks,  as  well  as  the  revised  supervisory 
process were implemented at the same time. 
The Bank, in close co-operation with the Financial Intelligence Centre, continued to monitor 
the compliance of banking institutions with legislation relating to anti-money laundering and 
combating the financing of terrorism. Furthermore, in August 2008 the Bank participated in 
the Financial Action Task Force’s mutual evaluation of South Africa’s anti-money laundering 
and counter-terrorism financing system. 
information 
International co-operation 
The  African  continent  and  the  Southern  African  Development  Community  (SADC)  region 
remain the focal points of the Bank’s international relations efforts as programmes to achieve 
regional  integration  gain  momentum.  The  Bank  currently  hosts  the  Secretariat  of  the 
Committee  of  Central  Bank  Governors  (CCBG)  in  SADC  and  continues  to  support  the 
implementation  of  CCBG  projects.  Significant  progress  has  been  made  in  the  committees 
dealing  with  payment  systems, 
technology,  macroeconomics,  banking 
supervision and legal issues. This progress has been shared with the finance committees in 
Parliament where the ratification of the Finance and Investment Protocol, a key instrument to 
advance regional economic integration in SADC, has been sought. 
In our relations with multilateral institutions our efforts have been concentrated on increased 
participation in key forums such as the G-20. The chair of the G-20 passed on to Brazil from 
South Africa at the beginning of this year. South Africa remains an active participant in this 
forum of systemically important advanced and emerging-market economies. The focus of the 
forum this year includes competition in the financial sector, fiscal space for social inclusion 
and clean energy. In addition, with the active involvement of the forum, progress was made 
this  year  with  the  reform  of  the  Bretton  Woods  institutions,  particularly  in  relation  to  quota 
reform and the finances of the International Monetary Fund (IMF). 
The  Bank,  through  the  SARB  College  (the  College)  continued  to  contribute  to  training  in 
Africa by co-operating with international training institutions and central banks. The College 
hosted the residential segment of the IMF Financial Programming and Policies course, and a 
course for African countries on external vulnerabilities. The College also co-hosted a high-
level seminar on capital flight in sub-Saharan Africa with the World Bank Institute. 
BIS Review 111/2008 
 5
Internal administration 
The Annual Report of the Bank was distributed to shareholders before this meeting. The total 
assets of the Bank show an increase from R220 billion at the end of March 2007 to R300 
billion at the end of March 2008. The increase was mainly the result of the accumulation of 
official gold and foreign-exchange reserves; and was financed, in the main, by an increase in 
government deposits, the issuing of SARB debentures, an increase in currency in circulation, 
and the effect of valuation adjustments to the net reserves as a result of exchange rate and 
gold  price  movements.  These  adjustments  are  reflected  in  the  increase  in  the  Gold  and 
Foreign Exchange Contingency Reserve Account. 
The  Bank’s  profit  before  taxation  increased  from  R2  907  million  for  the  previous  financial 
year to R3 475 million for the financial year ended 31 March 2008. Budgeted expenditure of 
the Bank for the current financial year amounts to R1,9 billion. 
The  four  subsidiary  companies  of  the  Bank,  namely  the  South  African  Mint  Company,  the 
South  African  Bank  Note  Company,  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank  Captive  Insurance 
Company  and  the  Corporation  for  Public  Deposits  achieved  their  objectives  during  the 
financial year. After a review of reports by their Boards of Directors and internal and external 
auditors,  the  Bank  is  satisfied  that  the  subsidiaries  are  managed  in  accordance  with  their 
objectives  and  best  corporate  governance  practice.  The  results  of  the  subsidiaries  are 
reported  on  a  consolidated  basis  with  those  of  the  Bank  in  the  financial  statements  in  the 
Annual Report. 
The  shares  of  the  Bank  continued  to  trade  through  the  over-the-counter  trading  facility, 
implemented  on  1  October  2005.  During  the  period  1  April  2007  to  31  March  2008,  42 
transactions were successfully concluded, representing 69 516 shares. 
Human resources remain an important focus of the Bank. As at the end of March 2008 the 
Bank employed 1 896 permanent and 48 contract staff members. The staff turnover rate was 
about 7 per cent, which is significantly lower than the banking-sector average of about 11 per 
cent.  In  terms  of  overall  racial  employment  equity,  the  Bank  progressed  from  43  per  cent 
black employees in 2000 to 58 per cent in 2008. Accordingly, the Bank’s overall target of 50 
per cent black employees has been realised and surpassed. At managerial level, 44 per cent 
of  the  positions  are  filled  by  black employees  compared  with  18  per  cent  in  2000.  Overall 
gender equity improved from 42 per cent female employees in 2000 to 47 per cent in 2008. 
The Bank aims to have 50 per cent female employees at all levels of employment by 2011. 
Performance  management  received  special  attention  during  the  past  year.  This  issue  was 
identified  in  the  Bank’s  Seventh  Annual  Report  on  the  Employment  Equity  Plan  to  the 
Department  of  Labour  as  the  only  remaining  barrier  to  employment  equity.  A  special  task 
team  was  commissioned  to  research,  investigate  and  benchmark  best  practice  relating  to 
performance  management.  The  report  was  finalised  and  approved  by  the  Remuneration 
Committee of the Bank. 
At  the  Bank  we  consider  the  wellness  of  employees  as  one  of  our  primary  human  capital 
objectives. In this regard, we have updated and modernised clinic facilities that will cater for 
the  well-being  of  employees.  In  the  area  of  HIV/AIDS  management  we  have  completed 
prevalence  testing,  conducted  industrial  theatres  to  sensitise  staff,  and  are  implementing 
Bank-wide peer counsellor and educator training. 
The Bank has always considered training and development to be of paramount importance. 
In  the  past  financial  year  the  Bank  spent  an  amount  of  about  R33  million  on  training, 
development,  study  aid,  bursaries,  skills  development  levies  and  educational  grants.  The 
Cadet Graduate Programme of the Bank increased its intake from 10 in the previous year to 
17 in 2008. The College formed a strategic alliance with the University of South Africa and 
the Institute of Bankers in South Africa to offer a nationally recognised qualification, namely 
the Advanced Diploma in Central Banking, which is also prescribed for the Cadet Graduate 
Programme. 
6 
 BIS Review 111/2008
A number of high-level workshops and seminars were organised by the College for specific 
niche markets. The second biennial conference on Challenges for Monetary Policy-makers in 
Emerging Markets is being organised and is scheduled to take place in October 2008. 
Business  continuity  plans  have  been  developed  and  successfully  tested  for  all  critical 
business processes. The Bank further continues to contribute towards the establishment and 
maintenance of a resilient business continuity capability within the broader financial sector, 
including the cash management industry. 
The upgrading of the back-up uninterrupted power supply for Head Office is in progress. This 
is  being  done  to  prevent  interruptions  in  Bank  operations  as  a  result  of  unplanned  power 
disruptions. The Bank has also embarked on a project to investigate the energy efficiency 
and environmental friendliness of its buildings. This project should result in a reduction in the 
consumption of electricity and fuel. 
Planning  is  in  progress  for  several  projects  at  the  various  branches  around  the  country  to 
ensure the efficient distribution of currency. The design for the proposed new Bloemfontein 
Branch has commenced, and tenders are awaited for extensive additions and alterations to 
the  East  London  Branch.  The  new  cafeteria  at  the  Pretoria  North  Branch  has  been 
completed.  Furthermore, 
the 
Johannesburg  Branch  will  undergo  major  repairs.  At  Head  Office  large  projects  aimed  at 
enhancing the existing infrastructure have been completed. These include the replacement 
of  carpets,  modernisation  of  lifts  and  maintenance  of  the  air-conditioning  system.  The 
upgrading  of  the  fire  protection  and  evacuation  systems,  and  the  project  to  improve 
accessibility for people with disabilities are under way. 
the  Cape  Town  Tower  Block  will  be  upgraded  and 
Conclusion 
Global  and  domestic  developments  are  expected  to  continue  to  pose  a  challenge  to 
monetary  policy  in  the  coming  year.  In  the  international  markets  heightened  volatility  is 
expected  to  persist  and  growth  in  industrialised  countries  is  expected  to  moderate  further. 
The  outlook  for  commodity  prices  is  therefore  uncertain  and  this  makes  for  a  difficult 
monetary policy environment. The Bank will continue to focus on bringing inflation down to 
within the inflation target range. The objective of the Bank remains to achieve and maintain 
low inflation in the interest of sustainable economic growth. 
During  times  of  global  financial  market  instability  it  is  even  more  important  to  maintain 
vigilance  over  the  payment  system,  domestic  financial  markets  and  the  banking  system  in 
particular. After the successful implementation of Basel II, the Bank will continue to monitor 
closely  the  domestic  banks  not  only  with  respect  to  the  possible  impact  of  global 
developments, but also to the impact of tighter credit conditions on indebted households and 
firms. 
Staff development will remain one of our strategic objectives. There will be a continued focus 
on training and development within the context of our Employment Equity Plan. Appropriate 
training is a benefit not only to the individual, but more generally to the Bank and the wider 
economy. 
Acknowledgements 
I wish to thank the Presidency, the Government and Parliament for their continued support. 
The  Bank  maintained  a  good  working  relationship  with  the  National  Treasury  through  the 
system of bilateral committees. Furthermore, I wish to thank the Minister and Deputy Minister 
of Finance, and the Director-General of the National Treasury and his staff for their ongoing 
support and co-operation. 
BIS Review 111/2008 
 7
Sincere thanks are also due to the members of the Board of the Bank for their tireless efforts 
in ensuring appropriate corporate governance in the Bank. I welcome Mr Elias Masilela who 
has been appointed to the Board as a government representative. He takes the place of Prof. 
Vishnu Padayachee whose term of office expired last year. I wish to take this opportunity to 
thank Prof. Padayachee for his valuable contributions to the Bank over the past years. The 
successes achieved in dealing with the challenges of the past year are due to the continued 
dedication and commitment of the deputy governors, management and staff of the Bank. I 
wish to thank them all for their contributions and I am confident that these efforts will ensure 
that the coming year is even more successful. 
8 
 BIS Review 111/2008
