Njuguna Ndung’u: IFRS, Basel II and the challenges ahead in Kenya 
Keynote address by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, during 
the  Official  Opening  of  Financial  Reporting  Workshop  for  the  Banking  Sector,  Nairobi, 
27 March 2008. 
 Distinguished Participants, 
Distinguished Resource Persons, 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Let me first thank Ernst and Young for the invitation to give today’s keynote address, on the 
Financial Reporting Workshop for the Banking Sector. Looking at the agenda, this meeting in 
the  next  two  days  will  dwell  on  a  number  of  important  accounting  and  regulatory  issues. 
Therefore,  to  help  set  the  stage  for  the  discussion  to  follow,  I  would  like  to  take  this 
opportunity  to  expound  on  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya’s  perspective  on  compliance  with 
International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS), and specifically at the benefits from such 
compliance,  the  progress  we  have  made,  the  link  between  IFRS  and  Basel  II  and  the 
challenges ahead. 
Acceptance  and  use  of  IFRS  has  become  virtually  universal,  with  many  countries  that 
hitherto operated their own national standards having phased them out for IFRS despite the 
associated  challenges.  International  flows  of  investment  capital  and  capital  instruments 
across geographical boundaries have added a new impetus to the adoption of international 
standards globally.  
It is no wonder that in 1998, the Institute of Certified Public Accountants of Kenya (ICPAK), 
moved  from  Kenya  Accounting  Standards  in  favour  of  International  Accounting  Standards. 
The  Central  Bank  as  the  principal  regulator  of  banks  and  non-bank  financial  institutions, 
formulates prudential guidelines that are in harmony with IFRS in order to minimize conflict 
and enhance compliance with international standards. 
The Central Bank of Kenya recognises that financial reporting standards play a crucial role in 
enhancing financial stability. On one hand, Reporting Standards provide the foundation for 
the production of credible financial statements and other disclosures that communicate the 
performance of the industry and at the firm level. 
On the other hand, disclosure of reliable information facilitates market discipline, cultivates 
confidence  and  reduces  the  possibility  of  adverse  instability.  The  credibility  of  information 
allows market participants to process the right information and make appropriate decisions, 
thus  a  good  signalling  mechanism.  Disclosure  of  information,  however,  should  not 
compromise  proprietary  data,  but  must  be  flexible  enough  to  accommodate  future 
advancement in risk management. Such outcomes therefore, have obvious implications for 
the supervisor’s ability to oversee the safety and soundness of financial institutions. 
It  is  necessary  for  banks  and  non-bank  financial  institutions  to  prepare  quality  financial 
statements  so  that  shareholders  and  other  stakeholders  are  well-informed  and  a  sound 
judgement  on  their  financial  status  can  be  made  by  the  market.  Quality  and  reliable 
information depends in turn, on the reporting standards being applied. In this respect, IFRS 
ensures that financial reporting is prepared under accepted principles that convey a true and 
fair view of the financial position of an institution. 
The  foregoing  notwithstanding,  the  Central  Bank  has  made  significant  progress  in 
strengthening  the  supervisory  approaches  and  risk  management  guidance  for  banks  and 
non-bank  financial  institutions.  This  is  aimed  at  encouraging  the  banks  and  non-bank 
financial  institutions  to  implement  sound  risk  management  practices  at  all  levels  and  in  all 
market segments. 
BIS Review 34/2008 
 1
It  is  for  this  reason  that  the  Central  Bank  will  continue  to  attach  great  importance  to  risk 
management  and  reporting  standards  so  that  financial statements  produced  by  banks  and 
non-bank  financial  institutions  convey  adequate  information  about  their  risk  management 
activities  to  key  stakeholders,  such  as  shareholders,  creditors,  depositors  and  any  other 
interested parties. It is hoped that with adequate and timely information potential investors 
can make correct judgement/assessment of this market. 
The choice of Basel II as a topic for discussion during the workshop is indeed timely. Basel II 
represents a crossroad, a watershed and a turning point for the future of global supervisory 
practices. Basel II presents us with an opportunity to enhance risk management systems in 
our  banks,  upgrade  our  supervisory  approaches  and  inculcate  market  discipline.  This  can 
only  serve  to  enhance  financial  stability.  Central  Bank  recently  issued  an  information 
memorandum to banks and non-bank financial institutions thereby setting the stage for the 
implementation of Basel II. 
Unlike Basel I which focused on a single risk measure, Basel II puts more emphasis on the 
banks’ own internal methodologies, supervisory review, and market discipline. The Accord is 
based  on  three  mutually  reinforcing  pillars  that  allow  banks  and  supervisors  to  evaluate 
properly the various risks that banks face. All of the reinforcing pillars will contribute to safety 
and soundness in the financial system.  
Market  discipline  reinforces  the  incentives  for  the  management  of  banking  enterprises  to 
manage  them  along  sound  lines.  It  operates  on  the  basis  of  disclosures  and  other 
information  available  in  the  market  and  defines  the  reward  system  for  the  management. 
Periodic and meaningful disclosures by banks relating to their capital, risk exposures and risk 
management techniques enable market participants to make an assessment of a bank's risk 
profile. The information is also appropriate for supervision in that it generates advice and /or 
strengthens partnership. 
Enhanced,  high-quality  disclosures  are  mandated  in  IFRS  from  an  accounting  perspective 
and in Basel II from a prudential perspective. While IFRS disclosures focus on assessing the 
current  financial  position  of  an  enterprise,  Basel  II  disclosures  are  more  forward-looking. 
Given the different focus of accounting and prudential standard setters, it is to be expected 
that  the  disclosure  requirements  under  the  two  standards  differ  in  some  respects.  IFRS 
disclosures are made in the financial statements by all enterprises that prepare and submit 
financial statements. On the other hand, disclosures under Pillar 3 are required to be made 
only  by  banks  that  are  implementing  Basel  II.  Moreover,  Pillar  3  disclosures  need  not 
necessarily be made in the financial statements.  
IFRS and Basel II disclosures do, however, complement as well as supplement each other in 
several  ways.  Both  require  corporates  to  provide  information  on  their  capital,  the  risks 
exposed to, and how these risks are managed. Disclosures are required to be made "through 
the eyes of the management". This enables the user of information to view and assess a firm 
in the same way its management would. Disclosures under both IFRS and Basel II include a 
good mix of quantitative and qualitative aspects.  
Consistent,  comprehensive  and  comparable  disclosures  contribute  to  effective  market 
discipline. IFRS and Basel II disclosures try to ensure that this goal is met. There is potential 
for achieving synergies in disclosures under IFRS and Basel II by defining risk parameters in 
a common way, and developing common processes and data collection methodologies. This 
could lead to a consistent basis for internal reporting to the management of the enterprise 
and external reporting to the supervisors or regulators and other stakeholders.  
Challenges with IFRS and Basel II 
Compliance with IFRS will assist banks to comply with certain aspects of Basel II. Both IFRS 
and  Basel  II  intend  to  leverage  on  market  discipline  by  requiring  the  disclosure  of  certain 
information.  Basel 
the 
II  encourages  development  of  more  refined  approaches 
to 
2 
 BIS Review 34/2008
measurement of risks and greater transparency while IFRS strives to support broader and 
more sensitive recognition and disclosure of risks. 
Through  financial  reporting,  the  management  of  banks  and  non-bank  financial  institutions 
provide their shareholders, potential investors and other stakeholders with the past results of 
the business being managed and supervised. These reports give more in-depth insight into 
the  income  statement,  balance  sheet  and  cashflow  and  therefore,  help  the  users  of  these 
reports better understand and assess the financial performance of the business. The market 
participants base their investment decisions mainly on the financial reports, thus reinforcing 
the  importance  of  providing  adequate  and  accurate  information.  Although  financial  reports 
are  a  crucial  management  tool,  they  at  the  same  time  provide  the  management  with  an 
opportunity to explain to stakeholders the institution’s performance, achievements and future 
plans. 
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision recognises the importance of IFRS in Basel Core 
Principle (BCP) 22 by requiring regulators to ensure that banks maintain adequate records 
which are prepared in accordance with consistent accounting policies and practices. 
Compliance with IFRS and Basel II will however, pose certain challenges to banks and non 
bank  financial  institutions.  For  accounting  standards,  the  most  recent  challenge  is  the 
accounting methods for sophisticated financial products, such as bonds, in which differences 
in financial assets’ classifications can result in different financial impacts. For example, held-
to-maturity  classification  conceals  profit  or  loss  until  maturity,  while  trading  classification 
charges profit or loss to financial statements in every accounting period. The interpretation 
for a suitable classification relies significantly on the intention of bank management as well 
as on the judgment of external auditors.  
Another practical challenge is the use of complex financial models to measure risks in banks’ 
portfolio. These models are important as they provide adequate predictive power. But there 
must be sufficient data, appropriate risk measurement techniques, and a rigorous validation 
process for the benefits of the predictive power of the models to be analysed. At present, the 
most important concern is the lack of consistent data points over time. For example, for credit 
risk measurement, a certain amount of data on default is required. Such data is typically not 
readily available. 
Banks  may  need  to  rethink  their  operations  and  strategies  on  account  of  the  expected 
greater involvement of third parties. The point here is that new regulations allow banks to use 
financial  models  to  estimate  required  capital  and  fair  values  of  assets  and  liabilities.  This 
means that banks can take advantage of the lower capital requirements by offering cheaper 
or more cost efficient products to their customers. But these aspects in the market place are 
driven by the market niche the bank is serving. The combination of market niche, requisite 
information and efficiency will be the core of operating strategies in the banks. 
Banks  must  increase  their  knowledge  base  regarding  risk  management  techniques, 
especially on risk modelling. Going forward, a good internal rating system is key to business 
expansion and growth. To do so, banks can initially seek support from external consultants to 
transfer the know-how on risk management. But, in the longer term, it will be necessary for 
banks  to  train  their  own  staff  and  build  expertise  to  work  as  specialists  on  internal  rating 
system and risk modelling. But we all do know that at the end of it all, these requirements 
and their derivative innovations are driven more not by the regulator like CBK, but the market 
niche the bank or any other firm in business is operating in. The more we understand our 
market niches, the more we perform better and above all adhere to the rules of the game. 
Market niches provide a drive to innovativeness. 
I  should  now  end  my  talk.  It  has  been  a  pleasure  to  share  with  you  a  regulator’s  view  on 
compliance  with  IFRS.  I  hope  my  remarks  and  observations  have  been  useful.  We  are 
travelling  on  an  important  and  challenging  path  towards  achieving  a  robust  and  resilient 
financial  system,  and  steady  progress  is  being  made.  Indeed,  this  progress  is  usually 
BIS Review 34/2008 
 3
noticeable in times of economic vibrancy. You, as a key stakeholder, are also an important 
part of this journey.  
It is a great honour and privilege for me to declare the Financial Reporting Workshop for the 
Banking  Sector  officially  opened  and  to  thank  Ernst  and  Young  for  organizing  such  a 
workshop. 
Thank you very much. 
4 
 BIS Review 34/2008
