Y V Reddy: India – the global partner 
Introductory remarks by Dr Y V Reddy, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the World 
Leaders’ Forum, Columbia University, New York, 15 April 2008. 
 Dean  Coatsworth,  Professor  Bhagwati,  Professor  Radon,  students,  faculty  and  alumni  of 
Columbia University, and members of the wider New York City Community. 
I  am  grateful  to  President  Bollinger  for  extending  me  an  invitation  to  participate  in  the 
prestigious World Leaders Forum at the Low Memorial Library. Distinguished past speakers 
at the Forum include, I am informed, President Clinton, President Putin, The Dalai Lama and 
Noble laureate Joseph Stiglitz. I am greatly honoured by the invitation and look forward to the 
informal dialogue with the highly respected Dr. Jagdish Bhagwati. 
By way of an introduction, I will present select aspects of the engagement of independent 
India with the global polity and economy. 
While  India  became  independent  on  15th  August  1947,  it  became  a  Republic  on  26th 
January 1950, with the adoption of a written Constitution which is governing the nation. Dr. 
B.R. Ambedkar, the architect of the Indian Constitution, had the benefit of education at the 
Columbia  University  where  he  obtained  a  Ph.D.  Prof.  John  Dewey  inspired  many  of  Dr. 
Ambedkar’s ideas about equality and social justice. Prof. Edwin Seligman, himself a friend of 
Lala Lajpat Rai, the legendary fiery freedom fighter of India, became a mentor to the young 
Ambedkar. Dr. Ambedkar also benefitted from his research and education in London. These 
are  examples  of  how  India’s  freedom  movement  and  the  Constitution,  that  binds  our 
governance  today,  have  benefitted  from  partnering  with  the  global  scholarship,  in  general, 
and  with  the  special  relationship  with  Columbia  University  and  the  United  States,  in 
particular.  Incidentally,  the  Columbia  University  conferred  an  honorary  degree  on  the  first 
Prime Minister of India, Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, on his first visit to the US soon after our 
independence. 
An  important  characteristic  of  the  global  society  is  the  sheer  diversity  of  races,  religions, 
cultures, ideologies and languages. India has the distinction of reflecting, in itself, the great 
diversity of the global society. For example, India is a home to the largest number of people 
practising  Zoroastrianism  –  who  are  also  known  as  Parsees.  Two  of  India’s  provinces  are 
governed by communist parties. In fact, we are a unique federation where the boundaries of 
existing provinces are redrawn and new provinces are created, to accommodate aspirations, 
while  remaining  strictly  within  the  provisions  of  the  Constitution.  We  have  several  national 
languages in which governments’ businesses are conducted. Every currency note that you 
see in India has the denomination written in seventeen languages with different scripts. In 
brief,  independent  India  believes  firmly,  in  dialogue,  accommodation  and  assimilation  of 
multiple identities of people. 
These characteristics enable the Indian people and the Indian corporates to live and work 
harmoniously alongside other nationalities.  
India’s  record  as  a  responsible  nation  in  honouring  its  commitments  is  well  known. 
Specifically, independent India has never reneged on its monetary obligations to the rest of 
the  world  and  has  not  sought  any  noticeable  rescheduling  of  its  payment  obligations.  In 
1991, we had a liquidity crisis in currency, mainly due to the war in Iraq and the breakdown of 
trade with USSR, but we preferred to pledge gold, initiate a massive import compression and 
start a reform process with assistance from the IMF and the World Bank. The entire burden 
of crisis and adjustment was successfully borne by the domestic economy. 
In the current environment of financial turbulence, and also a possible unwinding of macro 
imbalances, India plays a stabilising role with a modest current account deficit in most of the 
BIS Review 45/2008 
 1
recent years, at around one per cent1 of GDP, and a market determined exchange rate. India 
has not been contributing to the global macro economic imbalances, though it has a stake in 
how the issues get resolved in the near future.  
Currently,  there  is  a  debate  on  the  role  of  Sovereign  Wealth  Funds.  India  is  in  receipt  of 
investments from several of them either directly or indirectly, and hence, is interested in the 
current debate. For its part, the country’s foreign exchange reserves amounting to about US$ 
300 billion continue to be managed by the Reserve Bank of India, typically as per mandate 
similar  to  those  of  other  central  banks  around  the  world  and  consistent  with  the  IMF 
guidelines.  However,  the  Indian  corporates,  based  on  account  of  their  own  commercial 
judgements,  take  investment  positions  and  merge  or  acquire  other  undertakings  in  other 
countries. Public policy neither provides incentives nor disincentives for such market based 
initiatives by the Indian corporates.  
India’s external sector has displayed considerable strength and resilience since the reforms 
in 1991 – despite several domestic as well as global political events and supply shocks in 
food and fuel. Interestingly, India’s external trade in goods and services as a percentage of 
GDP is more than that of the United States (at 48 per cent and 29 per cent respectively), and 
is, in a way, indicative of the extent of India’s trade integration with the global economy. India 
is fully convertible on the current account, but we do have requirements of repatriation and 
surrender  of  export  earnings  to  ensure  that  capital  account  transactions  do  not  take  place 
under the guise of current account. Capital account is almost fully open to non-residents, well 
regulated  financial  institutions,  and  corporates.  In  regard  to  residents,  capital  account  is 
almost  fully  open  to  resident  corporates  and  partially  open  to  individuals  and  financial 
intermediaries. In brief, we partner with the global economy fully on the trade and the current 
account  while  there  is  progressive  liberalisation  of  the  capital  account,  consistent  with  the 
progress in reforms in the real, fiscal, and financial sectors. 
The  current  turbulence  in  financial  markets  and  institutions  –  particularly  in  the  USA,  has 
raised  enquiries  about  the  possible  contagion.  The  money,  government  securities  and 
foreign  exchange  markets  have  been  stable  in  India  and,  in  our  view,  they  may  not  be 
vulnerable  in  terms  of  direct  and  first-round  effects.  However,  the  Indian  equity  markets, 
which often reflect global trends, have been volatile in the recent months and that has some 
impact on changing sentiments. We have a bank-dominated financial sector, and banks have 
a strong capital base.  
In response to the global developments and the rapid growth in money supply, credit, and 
asset prices in India, we have since 2004 increased, in regard to banks, the risk weights and 
the  provisioning  requirements,  and  decreased  or  rationalised  the  exposure  limits  to  select 
sectors.  These  were  combined  with  prudential  stipulations  on  off-balance  sheet  items  and 
relationships  between  banks  and  non-bank  finance  companies.  Several  safeguards  have 
been  built  in  terms  of  prudential  guidelines  and  access  to  repo  markets  to  guard  against 
liquidity-related  problems  to  banks.  Above  all,  withdrawal  of  monetary  accommodation 
commenced in 2004 and has been gradually fine-tuned, remaining sensitive to early signs of 
overheating, while related prudential measures were addressing exposure of banks to risks 
in assets. Hence, in our assessment, the Indian financial sector is likely to be less affected by 
the contagion than most other EMEs, in respect of first-round or direct effects. 
A few words about the state of the Indian real economy may be in order. The annual growth 
in  real  GDP  since  2003-042  has  averaged  8.7  per  cent.  Investments  and  savings  as 
percentage  of  GDP  have  been  in  excess  of  30  per  cent  since  2004-053  thus  indicating  a 
                                                 
1   0.4% in 2004-05; 1.2% in 2005-06; and 1.1% in 2006-07. 
2   2003-04 to 2007-08. 
3   2004-05 to 2006-07. 
2 
 BIS Review 45/2008
potential for continued growth in output and productivity over the medium term. Similarly, like 
most  of  the  rest  of  the  world,  India  has,  by  and  large,  experienced  benign  inflationary 
conditions  averaging  around  5.2  per  cent  since  2004-054.  However,  at  this  juncture,  both 
domestic output and prices are under some pressure due to recent global developments with 
regard to the prices of food, fuel and metals, and the turbulence in the financial markets.  
Our  main  challenges  are  eradication  of  poverty,  efficient  use  of  water,  reviving  growth  in 
agriculture, improving physical and social infrastructure, upgrading human skills and, above 
all,  fiscal  empowerment  coupled  with  the  increasing  real  sector  flexibility.  Our  strengths 
mainly are the demographic dividend, the stability of the political system, and the emergence 
of  a  very  broad  based  and  growing  entrepreneurial  class,  which  has  a  penchant  for 
innovation.  In  overcoming  the  challenges  and  taking  advantage  of  the  strengths,  our 
engagement with global economies, in particular with the United States, is bound to play a 
very critical role. 
We  are  optimistic  about  a  continued  mutually  beneficial  engagement  with  the  global 
economy. Indians are providing services in various parts of the world – U.S.A., Middle East, 
U.K. and East Asia. Their services range from the less skilled, at one end of the spectrum, to 
the  very  highly  skilled  professionals  at  the  other  end.  Their  annual  contribution  by  way  of 
remittances is about three per cent of GDP now. These are in addition to export of services, 
especially  software  which  are  of  the  same  order.  Indians  are  among  the  most  significant 
foreign  students  to  attend  the  universities  for  higher  education  in  USA,  UK,  Australia, 
Canada, Singapore, China, etc. 
Following  sustained  higher  growth  in  India,  a  reverse  process  of  brain  flow  has  also 
commenced by way of foreign nationals and expatriate Indians expressing their interest for 
pursuing more fruitful ventures in India. As a result, corresponding trade and private business 
linkages have also started growing. To illustrate, recently a globally active bank has launched 
a  product  in  India  –  “Account  for  Expatriates”  –  for  providing  value-added  services  for  the 
rapidly growing expatriate community in India.  
This  engagement  with  the  global  economy  has  matured  into  a  self  reinforcing  process  as 
benefits are perceived by many and they are percolating to a large number of people in India.  
Given the diversity of India in respect of social, political and financial systems, public policy 
considerations demand that India’s integration with the global economy be managed through 
a participative and consultative manner, and in a gradual fashion. 
I look forward to an engaging, educative and enlightening interactive session. Thank you. 
                                                 
4   2004-05 to 2007-08 (till week ended March 22, 2008). 
BIS Review 45/2008 
 3
