Denny H Kalyalya: Financial access and sustainability of financial 
services in Zambia  
Paper presented by Dr Denny H Kalyalya, Deputy Governor Operations, Bank of Zambia, at 
The  Zambia  Institute  of  Chartered  Accountants  Annual  Business  Conference,  Livingstone, 
7-8 August 2008. 
 Salutation 
1.0 
• The Guest of Honour 
• Chairperson 
• Distinguished participants 
• Ladies and Gentlemen 
It is an honour and privilege for the opportunity to make a presentation to this important ZICA 
Annual  Conference.  Before  going  any  further  allow  me  to  convey  the  Governor’s  sincere 
apologies for not being able to come due to prior commitments. He did also send his good 
wishes for a successful conference. 
Introduction 
2.0  
In  my  brief  intervention,  I  will  endeavour  to  address  the  question  of  financial  access  and 
sustainability in Zambia. It is generally recognized that the financial sector plays a critical role 
in  the  mobilization  of  development  finance  and  stimulation  of  economic  growth  and 
development  in  general.  An  efficient,  broad-based  and  dynamic  financial  sector  is  an 
essential element in the attainment and maintenance of high rates of economic growth and 
sustainable development. Through their services, banks and non-bank financial institutions 
(NBFIs),  they  provide  an  efficient  mechanism  for  the  allocation  of  savings  and  investment 
and they enable financial transactions to take place at minimum cost. 
To discuss the issues of financial access and sustainability in Zambia in a little more detail, 
our presentation is organized as follows. In Section Three, we provide a brief summary of the 
financial sector in Zambia. This will be followed by a discussion of financial access in section 
Four.  In  sections  Five  and  Six  highlights  on  the  issue  of  sustainability  and  concluding 
remarks are provided, respectively. 
The financial sector in Zambia 
3.0  
The financial sector in Zambia comprises banks and non-bank financial institutions (NBFIs) 
and are regulated and supervised by three agencies, namely, the Bank of Zambia (BoZ), the 
Pensions  and  Insurance  Authority  (PIA),  and  the  Security  and  exchange  Commission 
(SEC).1 However, the presentation will focus on the component of the financial sector under 
the regulatory and supervisory ambit of the BoZ. It is expected that the rationale for such a 
focus will become clear as the presentation progresses. 
As participants may be aware, the mission statement of the Bank of Zambia is to “formulate 
and  implement  monetary  and  supervisory  policies  that  achieve  and  maintain  price  stability 
and promote financial system stability in Zambia.” 
                                                 
1   The  Pensions  and 
pensionfunds, while the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) regulates securities firms. 
Insurance  Authority  (PIA)  regulates  and  supervises 
insurance  companies  and 
BIS Review 99/2008 
 1
In  line  with  this  mission  statement,  the  BoZ  is  responsible  for  regulating  and  supervising 
banks and the following types of NBFIs: 
Leasing and finance companies; 
• 
• 
Housing financial institutions (building societies); 
Savings and credit institutions; 
• 
• 
Development finance institutions; 
Microfinance institutions; and 
• 
• 
Bureaux de change. 
As  at  June  30,  2008  there  were  14  commercial  banks  and  71  NBFIs  (see  Appendix  I). 
Currently,  commercial  banks  dominate  Zambia’s  financial  system  with  total  assets  and 
liabilities amounting to K14,465,045 million as at June 30, 2008 (about 31.8% of GDP). The 
reference  NBFIs,  notably,  the  leasing  and  finance  companies  (11,  two  of  which  are  under 
statutory  management  of  the  Bank  of  Zambia2),  building  societies  (3),  microfinance 
institutions licensed under the BFSA (15), development finance institutions (1) and savings 
and credit institutions (2). The combined balance sheet of these institutions, as at June 30, 
2008  amounted  to  about  7.9%  of  the  aggregated  balance  sheet  of  the  commercial  banks 
(see Table 1). 
 Access to financial services 
4.0  
In May 2007, here in Livingstone, the World Bank organized a Southern Africa roundtable 
discussion  on  the  launch  of  their  new  report  entitled,  “Making  Finance  Work  for  Africa”.  A 
common  understanding  arising  from  this  debate  was  that  financial  exclusion  has  negative 
economic and social effects on society. These include the following: 
i. 
The  lack  of  efficient  financial  service  provision  means  that  poor  people  are  either 
forced  to  use  inefficient  provisions,  often  at  high  cost  (for  instance,  with  high 
transactions  costs,  excessively  high  interest  rates  on  loans,  or  poor  returns  on 
savings)  thereby  entrenching  poverty  –  or  they  do  not  have  access  to  certain 
financial  products,  either  because  of  an  absolute  absence  of  suitable  products  or 
because available products are too expensive; 
This in turn tends to restrict the economic opportunities open to the poor and makes 
the  poor  vulnerable  to  adverse  events  and  financial  loss  (e.g.  due  to  the  lack  of 
insurance and secure savings products); 
ii. 
                                                 
2   Access Financial Services Limited and Access Leasing Limited were placed under statutory management of 
the Bank of Zambia on 13 January 2003. 
2 
 BIS Review 99/2008
iii. 
iv. 
The absence of savings products makes it difficult to build up capital; and 
As the poor are faced with the high costs of accessing financial services, and are 
denied entrepreneurship opportunities that might provide them with a chance to earn 
an income, poverty becomes entrenched. 
In  the  recent  past,  it  is  gratifying  to  note  that  financial  sector  in  Zambia  has  begum  to 
demonstrate  that  it  is  reasonably  efficient,  sound  and  profitable.  Since  the  many  bank 
closures of the mid- to late-1990s following stiff competition and the tightening of regulation 
and oversight through the promulgation of the Banking and Financial Services Act (BFSA) in 
1994 we have not experienced any serious banking crisis. That be as it may, like in many 
other developing countries the financial sector in Zambia still faces a number of challenges. 
The Financial Sector Assessment Programme (FSAP) Report of 2002 highlighted a number 
of these including limited access to financial services by the rural and peri-urban population 
and doubtful sustainability of financial services in Zambia. 
In light of these findings, and in recognition of the strategic importance of the development of 
the financial sector in contributing to sustainable economic growth and poverty reduction, the 
Government  of  the  republic  of  Zambia  developed  and  launched  the  Financial  Sector 
Development Plan (FSDP) in 2004. 
The FSDP is a comprehensive five year strategy to build and strengthen the financial sector 
infrastructure  to  enable  it  to  support  economic  diversification  and  sustainable  growth.  In 
addition, and in furtherance of the objectives of the FSDP, the BoZ Strategic Plan for 2008 – 
2011 has made financial inclusion as one of its key strategic objectives. 
Under the FSDP two important studies, the FinScope™ Surveys of 2005 and 2007, on the 
demand for and supply of financial services in Zambia have been completed. These studies 
have  augmented  the  earlier  findings  of  the  FSAP  with  respect  to  the  key  developmental 
challenges for the financial sector in Zambia.3
The key findings of the Finscope Survey on the demand for financial services included the 
following: 
• 
Only  34%  of  the  population  were  “financially  served”,  i.e.,  used  formal  and/or 
informal financial products, whilst 66% had no access to financial services; 
77.5% of Zambians report to have never had a bank product or service; 
40%  of  salaried  staff  reported  not  having  bank  accounts,  signifying  that  they 
received money in cash rather than through the financial system; 
The  barriers  to  accessing  financial  services  include  cost,  distance,  time  and 
transport to reach the bank or financial service provider; 
Rather  than  purchase  treasury  bills,  buy  life  insurance  or  stocks  on  the  stock 
exchange, most of the respondents preferred to invest in agriculture or a business; 
Microfinance institutions although used by only 5% of the adult population plays an 
important role in increasing levels of access to financial services; and the  
The informal sector in Zambia played a significant role in the provision of financial 
services  catering  for  11%  of  the  population,  compared  with  other  countries  in  the 
Southern  African  Development  Community  (SADC)  where  similar  surveys  have 
                                                      
3   The FinScope™ 2005 survey was a representative, nationwide survey of 4,000 households, with questions on 
the use of a wide range of financial services focusing on four main product types: savings, credit, insurance 
and transactions, both formal and informal. The survey focused on the use of personal financial products and 
services. It was conducted by FinMark Trust of South Africa. 
BIS Review 99/2008 
 3
been undertaken, namely, Botswana, Namibia and South Africa at 5%, 1% and 8%, 
respectively. 
An important point to note for policymakers is the fact that the majority of those who had no 
access to financial services are the rural poor, with women more disadvantaged than men. 
Importantly, these are the very areas and categories of people for whom support has been 
prioritized  in  the  Fifth  National  Development  Plan  (FNDP)  and  under  the  Citizens 
Empowerment Act (2006). The Government, working with the private sector and other key 
stakeholders, thus already has platform from which to address these challenges. 
During  the  first  half  of  2007,  the  Supply  Side  Study  was  undertaken  as  a  follow  up  to  the 
FinScope™2005  demand  side  survey.  The  Study  revealed  opportunities  as  well  as 
challenges  in  addressing  access  to  financial  services  and  financial  sector  development  in 
general. 
First,  macroeconomic  policy  and  financial  sector  regulation  were  no  longer  viewed  as  a 
problem, following the downward trend in inflation to single digits in 2006, the consolidation 
of  the  Government’s  fiscal  position,  strong  economic  growth.  Second,  the  enabling 
environment to facilitate the expansion in access to credit, i.e. developments in the payment 
system and the greater sharing of information in the financial markets through credit bureaux 
is also not yet a binding constraint. 
The Study does, however, recognize the need to continue to develop the payment system 
and improve the flow of information between financial services providers as well as with their 
potential clients to avoid this becoming a binding constraint as the financial system develops. 
Third, the key constraint to expanding access related to the focus and strategies of individual 
banks  and  NBFIs.  The  Study  points  out  that  commercial  banks  have  tended  to  provide 
financial services to a narrow group of clients (typically corporate entities and formal sector 
employees), at a high cost, within a narrow geographical location (typically the major towns 
and  peri-urban  areas,  and  they  have  made  high  returns  in  doing  so  (see  Table  2). 
Disappointingly,  NBFIs  have  typically  served  the  same  client  base  and  have  not  offered 
effective competition to commercial banks. 
 Initiatives to expand access to financial services 
4.1 
There are a number of strategies being implemented by both the private and public sectors 
to  make  the  financial  sector  more  inclusive,  thereby  increasing  the  benefits  to  the  poor  of 
participating in the formal economy. 
4.1.1   Financial service providers 
Currently, there are signs that a number of financial institutions are re-positioning themselves 
in  terms  of  location  and  product  offerings.  This  is  evidenced  by  an  expanding  branch  net-
work and the range of lower-cost products that are now available in the market. For instance, 
some commercial banks have begun to offer new financial products and services, particularly 
in  retail  and  community  banking.  This  expansion  has  also  been  noted  in  the  microfinance 
sector which is growing to fill the supply gap for finance that arose from the closure of banks 
4 
 BIS Review 99/2008
and  branches  in  rural  and  peri-urban  areas  earlier  on.  With  the  microfinance  regulations 
issued  in  2006,  the  number  of  microfinance  institutions  licensed  by  BoZ,  for  instance,  has 
grown  from  3  in  2006  to  15  as  at  June  30,  2008,  with  several  other  applications  currently 
under consideration. 
This change in strategy is partly due to the strengthened fiscal position of the Government 
and the significant fall in annual inflation to single digit levels in 2006 for the first time in three 
decades. These developments have resulted in reduced returns on investment in Treasury 
bills  and  Government  bonds  thus  compelling  banks  and  NBFIs  to  actively  seek  other 
investment  avenues.  To  this  end,  domestic  credit  to  the  private  sector  as  a  percentage  of 
GDP has increased from 18.7 percent at the end of 2005 to 43.0 percent at end of 2007. In 
the  same  period,  the  proportion  of  national  savings  increased  from  18.1  percent  to  21.6 
percent.4 These statistics are good indicators of improving access to financial services. 
4.1.2   Government 
The  Government  is  encouraging  the  state-owned  NBFIs,  that  already  deal  with  the  low-
income  market  to  deepen  and  broaden  their  services.  Some  of  these  already  have  an 
increasing presence country wide and have developed strategic development plans, aimed 
at extending financial services to the low income population. 
The role of Government as shareholder of public NBFIs has been to implement a coherent 
shareholder  strategy  to  bring  these  public  financial  institutions  back to  commercial  viability 
through provision of financial support. The Government has indicated its intention to further 
capitalize these institutions for this purpose. 
4.1.3   Citizen economic empowerment 
The  Government  has  also  pushed  the  issue  of  “access”  to  the  top  of  its  financial  policy 
agenda and is emphasizing on the need for financial inclusion for all citizens as evidenced by 
share  floatation  in  favour  of  Zambian  citizens  in  privatized  state  enterprises  through  the 
Citizens Economic Empowerment Act. 
5.0  
Sustainability of financial services 
Regulatory framework 
5.1  
The BoZ is responsible for regulating and supervising banks and the specified NBFIs. This 
entails,  among  other  aspects,  ensuring  that  financial  service  providers  (FSPs),  as  these 
institutions  may  generally  be  referred  to,  are  adequately  capitalized  and  have  risk 
management systems appropriate for their size, nature of operations and level of complexity. 
Safe, strong and sound FSPs are vehicles for the provision of sustainable financial services 
as they better cope with external shocks. 
A significant part of the BoZ analysis involves reviewing key ratios from financial statements. 
The objectives of this ratio analysis are, among other things, to discern trends, identify key 
risk  areas  to  focus  on  and  to  compare  performance  with  competitors,  industry  average  or 
standard.  For  instance  the  key  ratios  relating  to  banks’  performance  in  the  recent  past  is 
shown in Table 3. 
                                                 
4   Zambia: Selected Economic Indicators, IMF 2008. 
BIS Review 99/2008 
 5
  The  BoZ  also  recognizes  that  financial  stability  is  essential  for  strong  macroeconomic 
performance and execution of monetary policy. This is clearly reflected in the Bank’s mission 
statement, referred to earlier. To ensure stability, our supervisory processes are based on a 
robust  regulatory  framework,  underpinned  by  on-site  inspections  and  off-site  surveillance, 
which places emphasis on banks proactively managing the risks inherent in their products 
and services. 
Financial  stability  can  only  exist  when  all  financial  system  risks  are  adequately  identified, 
allocated, priced and managed. FSPs face a significant number of risks, which include credit 
risk, operational risk, market risk and liquidity risk. As a result, a minimum regulatory capital 
charge  is  defined  to  cover  these.  In  responding  to  the  challenge,  in  2006,  the  Capital 
Adequacy  Regulations  of  1995  were  amended  to  provide  for  a  tiered  capital  structure  to 
encourage entrants into the financial sector (see Table 4) The review was aimed at ensuring 
that banks are adequately capitalised at commencement, and as they operate. 
In  2005  amendments  were  made  to  the  Buildings  Societies  Act,  Development  Bank  of 
Zambia Act, National Savings and Credit Bank Act and the Banking and Financial Services 
Act,  to  ensure  harmonisation  of  these  pieces  of  legislation  under  this  sector.  The 
amendments  have  enhanced  the  supervisory  oversight  of  the  BoZ  on  the  financial  sector. 
The  Bank  of  Zambia  Act  is  also  being  reviewed  with  a  view  to  enhancing  operational 
independence of BoZ. 
6 
 BIS Review 99/2008
In 2006, Microfinance Regulations were introduced to provide a framework to set standards 
for the industry thereby affording the microfinance sector a chance to operate and grow in a 
manner that is safe, sound and sustainable. For instance, no Trust is allowed to own shares. 
Regulation  20  provides  that  an  MFI  shall  have  a  board  of  directors  of  not  less  than  5 
members,  the  majority  of  whom  shall  be  permanent  residents  in  Zambia.  Regulation  35 
provides that no person shall, without prior BoZ approval, own more than 25% shares in a 
deposit taking MFI, while Regulation 35(4) provides that no person shall, without prior BoZ 
approval, own more than 50% shares in a non-deposit taking MFI. 
Prevention of money laundering 
5.2  
The  increasing  threat  posed  by  money  laundering  can  undermine  confidence  in  any 
economy. Some of the threats of Money Laundering that distort countries’ economies include 
the following: 
i. 
Undermining of the legitimate private sector – Money launderers use money obtain 
through  criminal  activities  to  set  up  front  companies  in  order  to  hide  the  ill-gotten 
wealth.  This  gives  the  front  companies  an  unfair  competitive  advantage  over 
genuine companies as they can afford to undercut prices with subsidised laundered 
resources. 
Loss of control of economic policy – Depending on the magnitude of the laundered 
money in an economy, these funds may dwarf government’s budgets, resulting in 
loss of control over economic policy by governments. 
Economic distortion and instability – Criminal money responds not to economic or 
financial signals but to opportunities for further crime and the threat of being caught. 
Therefore  money  launderers  will  not  generally  invest  funds  in  activities  that  are 
economically beneficial to the country. 
Loss  of  revenue  –  Money  laundering  makes  governments’  tax  collection  efforts 
difficult and diminishes tax revenues. 
Reputation  risk  –  In  today’s  global  economy,  nations  can  not  afford  to  have  their 
reputations eroded by association with money laundering. Legitimate businesses will 
not  want  to  deal  with  a  bank  or  financial  institution  suspected  to  handle  criminal 
funds. 
Undermines  the  financial  sector  –  The  unchecked  use  of  the  financial  system  by 
criminal organisations risks undermining individual institutions and ultimately entire 
financial  systems.  When  banks  or  financial  institutions  become  part  of  a  criminal 
network,  they  lay  themselves  open  to  loss  from  fraud  if  they  do  not  screen  out 
undesirable customers or if their own officers are compromised. In the face of the 
above economic, financial and political threats, the international financial community 
has recognised that public confidence in such institutions, and hence their stability, 
could be undermined if they became associated, even inadvertently, with criminals. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
In order to prevent the escalation of money laundering, the following measures have been 
undertaken: 
i. 
The Government has enacted the Prohibition and Prevention of Money Laundering 
(PPML)  Act  2001  which  has  criminalized  money  laundering  and  provides  for  the 
forfeiture of property by offenders; 
BoZ has issued Directives to all regulated financial institutions on combating money 
laundering  to  ensure  that  the  potential  threats  posed  by  money  launderers  are 
limited; and 
ii. 
BIS Review 99/2008 
 7
iii. 
BoZ  has  also  developed  a  supervisory  framework  aimed  at  conducting  targeted 
inspections  to  ensure  banks  and  NBFIs  are  complying  with  the  anti-money 
laundering legislation and directives. 
to 
facilitate 
Improvement of credit culture 
the  Credit  Reference  Services  (Licensing)  Guidelines 
5.3  
In order to improve the credit culture in the country, the BoZ issued the Credit Data (Privacy) 
Code  and 
the 
establishment  of  credit  reference  bureaux  (CRBs).  The  guidelines  were  gazetted  on  30 
January 2006. Subsequently, the first credit bureau, namely, Credit Reference Bureau Africa 
Limited (CRBAL) was licensed on June 5, 2006 and was launched on January 11, 2007. 
The main task of a CRB is to provide lenders with factual information upon which they can 
base their lending decision. While CRBs facilitate sharing of information without approving or 
disapproving  credit,  or  collecting  debts  they  also  assist  consumers  understand  the 
responsible use of credit and help lenders in identifying good payers from defaulters. Once 
fully operational the credit bureau will: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
Allow for increase in credit extension because of better risk profiles; 
Reduce credit processing costs and times as well as loan write-offs; 
Lower borrowing costs; and 
Enhance  the  credit  culture,  which  in  turn  will  allow  for  the  provision  of  the  much 
needed finance for the development of various sectors. 
5.4 
• 
Cost of banking services 
It  has  been  observed  that  the  Zambian  banking  industry  has  one  of  the  highest 
operating costs when compared to other countries in Sub-Saharan Africa. In turn, 
the  cost  structure  makes  it  difficult  to  develop  efficient,  low  cost  services  that  the 
general  populace  can  afford.  The  challenge  for  the  industry  is  to  come  up  with 
innovative  ways  and  means  of  providing  banking  services  at  affordable  costs  in 
order  to  capture  the  larger  un-banked  population  and  also  improve  economic 
activities in productive sectors. This challenge is slowly being addressed in various 
ways including the following: 
i. 
Consumer awareness through quarterly publication of bank charges in the 
daily  papers  of  circulation  in  order  to  allow  the  public  an  opportunity  to 
make informed decisions by comparing charges offered by banks; and  
Banks  are  required  to  comply  with  the  Cost  of  Borrowing  Regulations  of 
1995 and to disclose to the borrower the cost of borrowing whenever a loan 
is made. 
ii. 
Corporate governance 
5.5 
In recent years, corporate governance has emerged on the global agenda as a key part of 
the pursuit of proper and effective business practice. The objective being the need for probity 
in business activity, compliance with the law and regulations, and to secure good reputation 
and confidence and thus attract investment. 
At the heart of the debate on good corporate governance lie the conflicts or potential conflicts 
of  interest,  between  shareholders  and  either  the  board  of  directors  as  whole  or  individual 
board members. Areas where a conflict of interest might be apparent include the following: 
i. 
Financial reporting and auditing. The directors may try to disguise the true financial 
performance of their company by “dressing up” the published accounts and giving 
less than honest statements; 
8 
 BIS Review 99/2008
ii. 
iii. 
 Director’s  remuneration.  Directors  may  reward  themselves  with  huge  salaries  and 
other  rewards,  such  as  bonuses,  a  generous  pension  scheme,  share  options  and 
other benefits with little regard to the needs of the shareholders and the company; 
and 
Risk taking. Directors of companies might take decisions intended to increase profits 
without regard to the changing risk profile of their existing businesses. 
Under the Companies Act, directors are liable for breaches of fiduciary duties and 
obligations. For instance, directors are liable for any loss suffered as a result of their 
acting outside their authority or for failure to exercise the degree of care, skill and 
diligence  expected  of  them  in  the  circumstances.  The  BFSA  complements  the 
provisions of the Companies Act by placing more duties and obligations on directors 
of  banks  and  financial  institutions.  Chapter  III,  Parts  III  and  IV  of  the  BFSA  deals 
with the boards of directors of banks and financial institutions. Under these parts: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
Every bank or financial institution is expected to have a board of directors in 
which shall vest all the powers of management and control and which shall 
be  responsible  for  the  formulation  of  policies  of  the  bank  or  financial 
institution (Section 30(1); 
The Board  of directors shall consist of not less than 5  members (Section 
30(2); 
Every  financial  service  provider  must  have  a  Chief  Executive  Officer  and 
Chief Financial Officer who shall not qualify to hold office unless it is shown 
that  they  are  fit  and  proper  persons,  above  21  years  old,  have  not  been 
convicted  of  a  felony  or  offence  involving  dishonesty,  are  not  mentally 
incompetent, have never been removed from office under the BFSA, have 
not  managed  a  company  that  has  gone  into  liquidation  or  entered  into  a 
composition with creditors (Section 31); 
The majority of directors must be from outside the bank (Section 32(1); 
Directors,  Chief  Executive  Officers  and  Chief  Financial  Officers  are 
expected to act honestly, in good faith and in the interest of the company 
whilst exercising due care, diligence and skill (Section 33); 
A director is required to declare in writing to the board annually, the names 
and  addresses  of  the  director’s  associates  and  full  particulars  of  every 
material interest (Section 35); 
A director who (a) negligently or with intent to deceive, makes any false or 
misleading statement or entry or omits any statement or entry that should 
be made in any book, account, report or statement of the financial service 
provider,  or  (b)  obstructs  or  endeavours  to  obstruct  (i)  the  proper 
performance  by  an  auditor  of  the  auditor's  duties  in  accordance  with  this 
provisions of this Act; or (ii) a lawful inspection of the service provider by a 
duly  authorised  inspector  appointed  by  the  Bank  of  Zambia,  commits  an 
offence and is liable on conviction to a fine or to imprisonment (Section 36). 
In addition to the provisions of the BFSA, the BoZ has put in place a number of regulations 
aimed at enhancing good corporate governance for the FSPs regulated by the BoZ, some of 
which are listed below: 
vii. 
vi. 
i. 
The Prohibition and Prevention of Money Laundering Act of 2001 (PPMLA) 
and the Anti-Money Laundering Directives obligate the board of directors to 
formulate  anti-money  laundering  policies  and  ensure  senior  management 
implement these policies; and 
BIS Review 99/2008 
 9
ii. 
The  Corporate  Governance  Guidelines  for  Financial  Institutions  issued  in 
November  2006  set  forth  a  broad  framework  of  fundamental  corporate 
governance principles to guide the actions of the directors and managers of 
the institutions operating in Zambia. 
Sovereign credit rating for Zambia 
5.6 
The process of obtaining a credit rating for Zambia has reached an advanced stage. With 
increased  funding,  particularly  through  foreign  direct  investment,  institutions  which  are 
involved in medium- to long-term financing, are expected to access relatively cheaper credit 
and increased access to finance. With an increase in access particularly to rural areas, the 
number of excluded people is likely to decline from the levels of 66% recorded in 2005. 
Conclusion 
6.0  
Recent  developments  in  the  financial  sector  offer  some  encouragement  that  working 
together, the Government, the BoZ, and the financial service providers can extend the range 
and reach of financial services that are available to both corporate and individual clients. Still 
a lot remains to be done to extend financial services to the majority of our people and foster 
ongoing  sustainability  of  our  financial  institutions.  In  this  regard,  there  are  a  number  of 
challenges that lie ahead including the following: 
i. 
Developments  in  the  external  sector  are  a  constant  threat  to  macroeconomic 
stability in general and implementation of effective monetary policy, in particular. In 
this regard, maintaining single digit inflation, given the rising fuel and food prices will 
be quite challenging and therefore requires concerted efforts of all key stakeholders. 
Strengthening  and  staying  the  course  with  regard  to  the  recently  achieved  fiscal 
prudence  as  well  as  forging  relatively  stronger  coordination  between  fiscal  and 
monetary policies is an equally challenging task in the period ahead. 
The  provision  of  infrastructure,  particularly  in  rural  areas  is  an  equally  important 
challenge  as  without  good  infrastructure  very  little  will  happen  in  the  way  of 
expanding  financial  and  other  services  to  these  areas  and  not  to  mention  the 
resident population. 
Innovation  –  the  Financial  Service  Providers  themselves  need  to  invest  in  new 
technology  and  human  resources  that  will  enable  them  to  provide  lower  cost 
financial services and expand their client base. While conventional dedicated, full-
service  banks,  with  “brick  and  mortar”  branches,  have  high  costs  and  staffing 
requirements, the use of technology can aid the delivery of low-cost (and hence low-
charge)  banking  services.  Many  financial  transactions  do  not  require  staffed  bank 
branches;  for  instance  cash  can  be  assessed  through  ATMs  (which  could,  for 
instance,  be  installed  in  all  post  offices).  Another  opportunity  arises  from  mobile 
phone banking, which has much potential for low-cost banking and financial services 
and therefore able to transform financial access through extending banking to the 
unbanked  using  existing  mobile  communications  infrastructure  which  already 
reaches many unbanked people. 
Consumer awareness, there is need to enhance financial literacy so that the public 
can  fully  appreciate  the  cost  of  financial  services.  Such  knowledge  would  enable 
them to make informed decisions about their levels of financial commitments. Tied 
to this is the need to promote responsible lending. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
Developments in the financial system are critical for the achievement of sustainable growth in 
the long term. Given the undeveloped nature of Zambia’s financial system, it is evident that 
the diversification and strengthening of financial institutions, instruments and markets must 
be  regarded  as  a  prerequisite  to  further  economic  development.  In  this  regard,  the 
10 
 BIS Review 99/2008
Government  approved  the  Financial  Sector  Development  Plan  provides  a  framework  for 
focused development of the financial system. 
Bearing  the  foregoing,  the  BoZ  continue  to  closely  monitor  the  financial  condition  and 
performance of the financial sector. 
References 
1.  FinMark  Trust  (2005).  Measuring  Financial  Access  in  Zambia:  Summary  of  Topline 
Findings, FinScope™(2005) Survey. 
2. GRZ (2004). Financial Sector Development Plan for Zambia. 
3.  Honohan  P.,  and  T.  Beck  (20070.  Making  Finance  Work  for  Africa.  World  Bank, 
Washington DC. 
4. Jefferies. K. Enhancing Access to Banking and Financial Services in Botswana. 
 
 
Appendix  I  containing  contact  details  of  banking  and  other  institutions  in  Zambia  can  be 
found on Bank of Zambia’s website www.boz.zm. 
BIS Review 99/2008 
 11
