Mario Draghi: Deep interdependence – the transatlantic economy and its 
prospects 
Speech  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Italy,  at  the  Aspen  Institute  Italia 
International  Conference  “Italy,  Europe  and  the  US  –  the  transatlantic  link  and  its  future”, 
Rome, 1 July 2008. 
 Is there still a “transatlantic economy”? 
1. 
How  deep  is  the  interdependence  between  the  European  and  the  American  economies, 
actually? Since the preferential transatlantic link was forged with the Marshall Plan sixty and 
more years ago, the global landscape has been transformed. The economic distress of the 
European economies, especially in the countries defeated in war, implied the risk of global 
political instability in the face of the nascent Soviet bloc. The idea for financial aid to Europe 
was  conceived.  In  December  1947  President  Truman  had  proclaimed  that  “Our  deepest 
concern with European recovery … is that it is essential to the maintenance of the civilization 
in which the American way of life is rooted.” 
For  the  United  States,  the  Marshall  Plan  was  also  an  investment  in  its  own  security  and 
prosperity. And quite an economical investment at that. The first fifteen months of the Plan’s 
application cost no more than one month of war.1 While America offered aid, it called on the 
Europeans themselves, together, to organize a plan for the reconstruction of an open Europe 
capable  of  sustaining  its  own  growth.  The  American  stimulus  for  Europe’s  gradual  and 
multilateral liberalization of foreign trade was crucial. 
Italy played a special role in transatlantic relations. Through the mid-1960s its trade with the 
United States was relatively more intense than that of the other large continental countries. 
America  provided  14  per  cent  of  Italy’s  imports  and  took  10  per  cent  of  its  exports.  For 
France  and  Germany  these  shares  were  at  least  five  points  lower;  Germany  reached  the 
Italian level only at the end of the period. US leadership in direct industrial investment in Italy 
was strengthened during the 1950s. 
In  the  decades  since,  more  than  anything  else  the  transatlantic  link  has  meant  cultural 
fertilization. The United States, for centuries the beneficiary of European culture, found the 
way to repay this debt, fecundating a war-wracked Old World not only with material aid but 
above  all  with  the  culture  of  the  market,  the  programme  of  spreading  prosperity  to  the 
masses, and innovative entrepreneurial approaches. 
The Marshall Plan’s Overseas Technical Assistance and Productivity Program was designed 
to boost productivity by training and the transfer of American industrial practices to western 
Europe. Even after the end of the Plan, US experts continued their missions to Europe as 
industrial  consultants,  and  European  engineers  continued  to  visit  the  United  States  for 
training. 
A good number of Italian public administrators took advantage, including the Bank of Italy’s 
Salvatore  Guidotti,  who  learned  “modern”  national  accounts  methods  in  Washington.  A 
number  of  management  schools  on  the  Harvard  pattern  were  founded  in  Italy.  Two  of  the 
leading figures in the Italian industrial renaissance, Vittorio Valletta and Adriano Olivetti, were 
influenced by this climate. 
                                                 
1   US Department of State, Office of Public Affairs, Current Development Report on European Recovery, no. 3, 
1948. 
BIS Review 101/2008 
 1
Today the European economic community is an established fact, the Soviet adversary has 
dissolved,  Asia  has  stridden  purposefully  onto  the  world  stage  and  other  regions  too  are 
clamouring for a larger role. The economic supremacy of the United States remains, but now 
it  must  come  to  grips  with  a  series  of  other  economic  power  centres.  How,  and  how 
profoundly, have these developments affected the interdependence between the economies 
on the two sides of the Atlantic? 
Let us examine the facts. Economic interdependence must be assessed in three respects: 
the real economy (trade and direct investment); the financial economy; and economic policy 
(reciprocal influence and cooperation).  
Trade and foreign direct investment 
2.  
2.1 
On  trade.  First,  a  premise:  both  the  US  and  Europe  were  and  are  still  relatively 
“closed”  economies.  For  the  United  States,  foreign  trade  in  goods  represents  scarcely  a 
fourth of GDP today. The openness of today’s 27-member European Union is of about the 
same order of magnitude. 
However, this similarity conceals significant differences in trend. The United States built its 
internal market much earlier than Europe, in the nineteenth century; and even in the 1950s 
and 1960s American foreign trade was much more modest than now, accounting for just one 
tenth of GDP. 
The  dynamics  was  very  different.  The  US  were  a  closed  economy  with  a  predominant 
internal market until recently. The single countries of Europe were much more open versus 
the US than vice versa before European integration. As this took off the ground, the internal 
market replaced external trade. 
America’s  “discovery”  of  the  importance  of  the  world  around  it  is  historically  recent.  It  has 
been fostered by globalization and spurred by the deficit of domestic saving. But the secular 
dominance  of  the  US  domestic  market  makes  American  firms  and  policymakers  alike 
primarily inward-looking. 
Europe  does  still  consist  of  sovereign  states,  but  every  one  has  a  strong  propensity  for 
foreign  trade,  historically  rooted  both  in  corporate  strategies  and  in  economic  policy 
philosophy.  A  good  part  of  that  propensity  has  been  channelled  into  the  relatively  recent 
phenomenon  of  an  opening  up  of  national  markets  to  bring  them  together  in  one  single 
market. 
Transatlantic  trade  nevertheless  remains  the  largest  component  of  both  areas’  external 
economic  dealings.  In  2007  each  side  took  about  a  fifth  of  the  other’s  exports;  the  United 
States  supplied  12  per  cent  of  Europe’s  imports,  Europe  18  per  cent  of  America’s.  These 
shares are still large, but smaller than just a decade ago. They have been lowered by the 
emergence of major new trading powers outside the Atlantic area. 
2.2 
In the flow of productive capital too, the once very close interdependence between 
Europe and the United States has been affected by the emergence of major new countries 
that both receive and make foreign direct investments. However, the figures on the stock of 
investment – which reflect the past and not, like flows, only the present – paint a picture of 
still intense interdependence. 
Today  as  thirty  years  ago,  the  United  States  and  the  European  Union  are  the  greatest 
sources of foreign direct investment in the world, the origin of 70 per cent of the world stock. 
They have been and still are highly attractive for foreign investment. Despite the competition 
of the emerging economies, they are host to 60 per cent of the world’s outstanding foreign 
direct  investment.  The  interdependence  between  them  is  evident.  The  value  of  American 
capital in Europe and European capital in America now amounts to nearly one trillion euros. 
2 
 BIS Review 101/2008
Italy’s overall foreign direct investment has been marginal, with annual flows amounting to 
just 2 per cent of our GDP on average in the past 10 years, far below the levels recorded in 
Germany,  France  or  Spain.  FDI  in  Italy  have  averaged  1  per  cent  of  GDP,  as  little  as  in 
Germany, against over 3 per cent in France and Spain. 
Finance 
3. 
In the financial sphere, the interdependence between the two sides of the Atlantic is harder 
to  isolate.  Certainly,  the  American  model  deeply  influenced  developments  in  the  financial 
services industry and its legal infrastructure in Europe. 
But finance is now global, not only transatlantic. In the past 20 years the financial markets of 
the main advanced and emerging countries have become more and more closely integrated, 
in response to technological progress and liberalization. Physical production too has played a 
role. Today, the components of many industrial products are ordinarily made in one country, 
assembled  in  another,  and  then  sold  throughout  the  world.  This  unbundling  of  production 
requires high international capital mobility; but the global financial opening has far exceeded 
that of foreign trade. 
The co-movement, on a world scale, of national stock exchange indexes and bond yields is 
empirically  significant.  Since  the  1990s  until  now,  the  price  variability  of  a  stock  has  been 
better explained by the company’s industry than its country. 
Transatlantic  ties  are less  visible  in  today’s  global  financial  system  than  in  the  past.  Good 
examples are foreign exchange dealing and portfolio investment. The dollar and the euro are 
still the most heavily traded currencies, being involved in 86 and 37 per cent of the exchange 
rate transactions, respectively; but the share of the emerging currencies is rapidly rising, and 
it  is  now  equal  to  nearly  20  per  cent.  Europeans  still  own  more  than  a  third  of  all  the  US 
stocks  and  bonds  held  by  non-residents,  but  emerging-country  investors  are  moving  up 
rapidly. The portion in Chinese hands has quadrupled since the turn of the decade to almost 
10  per  cent,  owing  above  all  to  China’s  build-up  of  foreign  currency  reserves.  That  of 
investors from Latin America has doubled to over 6 per cent. 
Economic policies 
4. 
Taken  all  together,  the  stylized  facts  I  have  set  out  so  far  make  a  composite  picture. 
Transatlantic links are still important, but less than in the past, in a globalized and polycentric 
world. In the field of economic policy, however, they remain today more than ever the centre 
of international relations. 
The  economic  and  financial  governance  of  the  world  rests  on  a  delicate  balance  between 
competition  and  cooperation.  The  global  economy  sprang  from  the  success  of  a  model  of 
“democracy  and  market”  that  now  –  admittedly,  differing  in  extent  and  varying  in  mix  – 
inspires  a  growing  number  of  national  systems  around  the  world.  The  first  and  leading 
purveyors of this model since World War II have been the United States and Europe. And it 
is still up to them to set the example of good, fruitful cooperation. 
Two major questions are on the order of the day: free trade and international monetary and 
financial stability. 
4.1  
Free trade is under fire today as it has never been since the 1980s. The 2001 Doha 
Round of talks for further liberalization has stalled. There is widespread disillusion and alarm 
over globalization. The task facing governments is not an easy one. The prices of essential 
goods are rising, the purchasing power of wages and salaries is decreasing, the tranquility of 
savings is being threatened. And it is true that the fruits of the globalized economy have been 
distributed  unequally  among  the  different  social  groups.  Public  opinion  is  bewildered  by  a 
confused  world;  in  the  crisis  citizens  seek  reassurance.  I  understand  that  governments 
BIS Review 101/2008 
 3
rediscover  the  value  of  protectionist  formulas.  Freedom  of  trade  may  appear  a  risk, 
protectionism a form of relief. But problems of income distribution cannot be solved by drying 
up one of the main sources of income. 
Both sides of the Atlantic have an interest in preserving a climate propitious to the orderly 
growth  of  international  trade  and  investment,  based  on  a  set  of  rules  that  are  above  all 
equitable. 
The main emerging countries, which have benefited so greatly from global integration, should 
undertake  more  substantial  commitments  to  open  their  markets  and  accept  stricter 
international rules. Also it is hard to imagine that the transatlantic partners would not be able 
to  find  a  compromise  solution  involving  a  balanced  reduction  of  European  import  tariff 
barriers and US farm subsidies. 
4.2  
In recent months, we have been engaged in assessing the risks and malfunctions of 
financial  innovation  and  integration.  Financial  instability  has  revealed,  among  other  major 
flaws,  serious  regulatory  inadequacies.  Since  the  onset  of  the  crisis,  the  G-7  Finance 
Ministers have asked the Financial Stability Forum to review existing regulation with a view to 
making  the  global  financial  system  more  resilient  to  future  shocks.  The  FSF  Report  was 
endorsed  by  the  G-7.  It  addresses  the  perverse  incentives  that  have  produced  a  level  of 
leverage  both  excessive  and  misperceived,  and  introduces  new  capital  and  liquidity 
requirements. 
On  the  foreign  exchange  front,  the  dollar,  in  spite  of  its  present  weakness,  remains  the 
currency of the world’s largest economy, with deep, open and liquid financial markets and a 
central bank with a firmly established reputation for independence. 
Today,  however,  these  same  qualities  can  be  claimed  by  the  euro  and  the  area  that  has 
adopted it as single currency. Already the euro is widely used internationally for commercial 
invoices and as currency of denomination of debt instruments. Since 1999, for instance, the 
share of instruments denominated in euros has risen by more than 10 percentage points to 
over 30 per cent of the world total; that of the dollar stands at 44 per cent. For the time being 
the  currency  is  still  mainly  regional,  its  use  outside  the  area  being  largely  confined  to 
bordering  countries.  But  the  premises  would  appear  to  be  in  place  for  an  extension  of  its 
international role in both trade and finance.  
The transatlantic link is extremely precious and must be cultivated at the policy level. New 
prospects  will  open  up  shortly.  To  overcome  today’s  challenges,  it  will  be  necessary  for 
objectives  to  be  shared  and  decision-making  to  be  based  on  solidarity.  The  United  States 
and Europe, more closely united, are a guarantee for the world’s stability. 
4 
 BIS Review 101/2008
