Miguel Fernández Ordóñez: Turbulence in the world markets – a Spanish 
view (five lessons and some homework) 
Address by Mr Miguel Fernández Ordóñez, Governor of the Bank of Spain, at the “Círculo 
Financiero”, Barcelona, 14 May 2008. 
 Let me begin by thanking you for the invitation to deliver this speech. 
I shall not be going into details today on either the sequence of events that have triggered 
the turbulence in international financial markets, or on the various suggestions for reform that 
may prevent a similar situation from arising in the future. We currently have several reports 
by  various  institutions  addressing  these  matters  in  depth,  including,  for  example,  the  most 
thoroughgoing report by the Financial Stability Forum. 
The scope of my speech this evening will be more modest: to examine the Spanish banking 
system  in  the  context  of  this  turbulence.  The  central  idea  I  wish  to  convey  is  as  follows. 
Spanish banks and savings banks have not contributed to any extent either to the generation 
or to the subsequent propagation of the turbulence, which in principle puts them in a sound 
position to withstand it. However, and as recent events have clearly reminded us, we live in 
an  increasingly  global  world.  Accordingly,  the  Spanish  financial  system  cannot  remain 
immune  to  the  consequences  of  the  current  problems,  which  affect  not  only  those  who 
originated them but all of us. 
To some extent, the turbulence may be viewed as the necessary response to the financial 
exuberance  experienced  by  the  world  economy  in  recent  years,  a  situation  that  was 
unsustainable. This period was marked by very low volatility and risk premiums amid very 
accommodative financing conditions. That contributed to a failure to assess risks correctly, 
leading to exaggerated asset price rises and excessive levels of leverage. True, we are no 
doubt  currently  witnessing  an  overreaction  in  certain  markets,  in  which  the  premiums 
demanded are not in line with asset quality; but as the turbulence progressively abates, risk 
premiums  will  normalise,  albeit  at  higher  levels  than  the  excessively  low  ones  recorded 
before the summer of 2007, and that will bear favourably on financial stability in the medium 
and long run. 
This normalisation will contribute to alleviating the sharp growth in credit that has led to high 
household and corporate debt in many countries. Admittedly, in Spain this debt was largely 
used to finance housing investment and the expansion of companies' productive capacity, as 
well as their internationalisation. But this makes it no less necessary now to undertake an 
adjustment to return these variables to more reasonable levels. 
This adjustment has begun in Spain with households and corporations generally in a sound 
financial position. At the same time, the quality of bank balance sheets is high compared with 
other  countries'  banking  systems.  Notwithstanding  this,  and  as  a  natural  consequence  of 
credit growth in the past, and of a macroeconomic setting characterised by a cyclical turning 
point, we should expect continuing rises in bad debts in the coming months. This rise in bad 
debts should concern us, and indeed it would be alarming if bank regulators and supervisors 
were  unconcerned;  but  it  does  so  only  moderately,  bearing  in  mind  the  resilience  of  the 
banking  sector  according  to  the  stress  tests  performed  by  the  Banco  de  España  under 
assumptions in which extremely adverse scenarios materialise. 
Nor will I be referring today to the problems that are common to all adjustment processes, 
the  adjustment  in  the  Spanish  economy  having  moreover  begun  before  the  turbulence 
emerged last summer. Rather, I shall be focusing on what for me is the worst effect of this 
turbulence:  the  global  financial  market  dysfunctions.  So  you  may  better  understand  my 
subsequent  remarks,  I  would  like  to  very  briefly  outline  how,  starting  from  a  very  limited 
BIS Review 62/2008 
 1
segment of the US mortgage market (the subprime mortgage segment), we have reached a 
generalised situation of international financial market turbulence.  
The factors behind the current situation are complex.  But in my opinion there are  two key 
elements that explain such an intense process of propagation. First, and as already stated, 
low risk premiums and very low volatility led to a strong increase in leverage on international 
financial markets and a big appetite for risk in the search for high yields, a tendency in which 
certain  financial  institutions  in  some  countries  participated.  Also,  and  in  relation  to  the 
foregoing, the development of a banking model focusing on the origination of loans for their 
subsequent distribution on the financial markets, underpinned by the securitisation of assets 
through certain complex structured products and by the use of off-balance sheet investment 
vehicles,  introduced  inappropriate  incentives  as  regards  the  granting  of  financing  and  the 
subsequent management of the associated risks. In my view, it is these latter elements which 
explain the intensity and speed with which the turbulence has spread. 
Starting  from  this  idea,  I  shall  draw  five  lessons  which  I  consider  highly  relevant  for  the 
future. I will then evaluate the Spanish banking system in relation to each of them in order, 
finally, to identify certain tasks which we should, each from our own area of responsibility, 
address  so  as  to  limit  the  adverse  consequences  for  the  Spanish  economy  of  the 
international financial market turbulence. 
the 
turbulence  emerged, 
First lesson: on the originate-to-distribute model 
In  recent  years  some  banking  systems  have  developed  a  banking  model  based  on  the 
origination of loans for subsequent distribution on the financial markets. This type of model 
has been largely underpinned by asset securitisation, a process that enables bank loans to 
be batched and converted into marketable products. This mechanism has allowed banks to 
transfer the risk of the financing they originate to the market.  
Until 
the  originate-to-distribute  model  had  generally  been 
understood to be a very effective instrument of risk management: the banks using the model 
had  an  additional  mechanism  to  decide  on  the  degree  of  risk  exposure  on  their  balance 
sheets, while these risks were transferred within the financial system to those agents most 
prepared to assume them. However, the present situation seems to show that the risks have 
not ended up with those investors most prepared to assume them, but with those who least 
understood them. 
What problems have led this business model to the current difficulties? Firstly, and insofar as 
the  banks  that  granted  the  financing  rapidly  packaged  the  loans  and  placed  them  on  the 
market, very powerful incentives arose to lower credit standards in the extension of loans, so 
that  the  selection  of  borrowers  was  not  made  following  sound  banking  risk  management 
practices.  What  is  more,  perverse  incentives  also  came  into  play  in  the  monitoring  of 
borrowers, since the originators disassociated themselves from the financing. 
Furthermore,  once  the  problems  surfaced  in  the  form  of  an  increase  in  defaults,  the 
possibilities of resolving these problems were also seen to be very limited. The number of 
agents intervening in the process is high and their interests do not always fully coincide. In 
other words, compounding the incentive-related problems that emerge when the economic 
situation is favourable are conflicts of interests once the situation has turned adverse. 
In  fact,  the  originate-to-distribute  model  has  stymied  one  of  the  essential  functions  of 
banking:  the  extraction  of  valuable  information  to  allow  proper  discrimination  between 
borrowers.  
This  business  model  has  been  highly  fashionable  in  certain  countries,  but  not  in  all.  The 
Spanish  banking  system  has  not  adopted  it,  and  the  model  here  has  continued  to  be  a 
traditional banking one with closeness to bank customers, detailed knowledge of them and 
the forging of links over time being some of its defining characteristics.  
2 
 BIS Review 62/2008
True,  Spanish  banks  have  made  considerable  use  of  asset  securitisation,  but  to  a  totally 
different  end  than  those  banks  which  developed  the  originate-to-distribute  model.  As 
conceived  by  Spanish  banks,  asset  securitisation  was  not  a  business  in  itself  but  a 
mechanism to obtain additional funding. In this way, risks were not transferred to the financial 
markets but were retained on the balance sheets of the banks granting financing, and the 
perverse incentives under the originate-to-distribute model were thus avoided.  
Second lesson: on the use of complex products that are difficult to assess and lacking 
in transparency 
The process of asset securitisation has also differed across banking systems as concerns 
the complexity of the products developed. The second key aspect of the turbulence is that 
some international banks, particularly when securitising US subprime mortgage loans, used 
highly complex structured products that are difficult to assess and lacking in transparency. 
Products such as CDOs, CDOs of ABS and CDO squared have been prominent in recent 
months in the business news, especially because of their adverse impact on the results of 
the  biggest  international  financial  institutions.  Some  of  these  products  used  the  bonds 
resulting  from  a  specific  securitisation,  packaging  them  and  combining  them  with  other 
financial instruments in order to re-securitise them. Other products, to offer another example, 
were  made  up  of  securitisations  of  relatively  heterogeneous  asset  portfolios,  in  which  the 
degree of concentration was high. 
Evaluating  these  products  required  the  use  of  sophisticated  models  based  on  numerous 
assumptions and on information not directly observable in the markets. Also, owing to their 
recent  development,  the  models  had  not  been  tested  in  a  highly  adverse  scenario.  In 
addition,  the  sophistication  of  these  products  meant  that  the  calculation  of  the  parameters 
needed for the valuation models was more complex, making it increasingly difficult to value 
the level of risk incurred.  
Events have highlighted the fact that the valuation models have not worked well, meaning 
that many banks have miscalculated the level of risk assumed and that stress tests have not 
worked  properly.  Beyond  these  quantitative  considerations,  the  use  of  these  complex 
products  also  indicates  significant  shortcomings  in  the  more  qualitative  facet  of  risk 
management.  Quite  simply,  numerous  banks  and  investors  took  positions  in  products  that 
they did not properly understand. And today it is quite clear to see that they have perhaps 
committed the most basic error contrary to sound risk management, i.e. investing in products 
whose risks have not been fully understood. 
The third ingredient the turbulence has revealed in relation to this type of product has been 
the  lack  of  transparency,  both  regarding  the  valuation  models  used  and  the  degree  of 
exposure assumed. The lack of confidence in the financial markets is largely related to a lack 
of information, to such an extent that financial institutions themselves have not trusted one 
another, prompting serious problems in interbank markets. 
Yet  not  all  products  related  to  securitisations  are  so  complex  or  pose  such  valuation 
problems as those I have mentioned. The most straightforward securitisations, such as those 
used  by  Spanish  financial  institutions,  are  characterised  by  their  use  of  well-diversified, 
granular portfolios made up of homogenous assets. In these conditions, the models available 
do not have product-valuation problems, and it is straightforward to calculate the expected 
losses  associated  with  the  bonds  classified  in  the  different  tranches  of  the  securitisation. 
What is more, in Spain's case, where no market segment comparable with the US subprime 
one has been developed, the quality of the securitised assets is very high. 
Not  only  have  Spanish  credit  institutions  not  designed  complex  structured  products,  they 
have not invested in them either. In this respect, risk management has functioned correctly, 
since excessively risky products of which full understanding was lacking have been avoided: 
BIS Review 62/2008 
 3
the absolute absence of direct and indirect exposures to US subprime mortgage loans is a 
clear example of this.  
Third lesson: on off-balance sheet investment vehicles 
The  originate-to-distribute  model  also  drew  on  the  development  of  off-balance  sheet 
investment vehicles, namely conduits and SIVs. The way in which these vehicles operate is 
to  make  long-term  investments  and  to  finance  themselves  short  term,  by  issuing 
collateralised commercial paper.  
As concerns the term structure of their assets and liabilities, these special-purpose entities 
engage in a very similar activity to banking. However, unlike banks, they are not required to 
have their own capital and are not subject to appropriate supervision. They could be said to 
be  parallel  banks  without  capital  or  regulation  and,  therefore,  they  do  not  have  access  to 
central bank liquidity.  
These conduits and SIVs have played a considerable role in amplifying the turbulence, and 
in the speed with which it has spread. This was because some banks had to lend to these 
vehicles  under  the  liquidity  facilities  they  had  open  with  them,  or  because  an  attempt  was 
made to prevent a massive sell-off of securities, or else because large institutions considered 
that  the  cost  of  letting  conduits  and  SIVs  go  to  the  wall,  in  terms  of  the  reputational  risk 
involved, was greater than the cost of coming to their assistance. The fact is that many of the 
risks that were believed to have been transferred to the market have unexpectedly returned 
to bank balance sheets.  
The proliferation of these investment vehicles is due to, at least, two reasons. First, because 
some  banks  saw  them  as  a  means  of  achieving  greater  profitability,  while  alleviating  their 
capital requirements. And second, because prudential supervision was not sufficiently active 
in detecting and preventing this type of instrument. 
None  of  these  elements  has  been present  in  the  Spanish banking  system,  which  explains 
why  Spanish  banks  have  no  exposure  to  these  vehicles.  Spanish  banks  have  obtained 
sufficient profits pursuing their traditional and typically retail activity, meaning they have had 
no  great  interest  in  developing  either  the  structures  or  products  that  are  at  the  root  of  the 
current problems. 
The Banco de España has been categorical regarding its requirement that these vehicles be 
consolidated  for  accounting  and  capital  purposes.  Today,  following  the  application  of 
International Financial Reporting Standards in 2005, this requirement to consolidate conduits 
and SIVs is now very clear. But even before the IFRSs came into force, Spanish banks had 
no  incentive  to  develop  these  off-balance  sheet  vehicles,  because  the  Banco  de  España 
always analysed the risks assumed by banks from a consolidated perspective. 
Fourth lesson: on the procyclicality of banking regulation 
The  fourth  lesson  to  be  drawn  from  the  turbulence  is  related  to  the  debate  that  has  re-
opened on international markets about the way in which financial regulation should address 
so-called  procyclicality.  In  particular,  concern  has  been  raised  about  Basel  II  and 
international accounting standards. 
We  should  perhaps  begin  by  acknowledging  that  financial  market  participants  themselves 
behave in a procyclical way, as they tend at favourable times in the cycle to forget about the 
consequences of an excessive build-up in risks. The pertinent question to ask, therefore, is 
whether  or  not  prudential  regulation  amplifies  this  natural  behaviour  by  financial  market 
participants. 
Before  analysing  the  elements  of  procyclicality  that  Basel  II  and  international  accounting 
standards may contain, it should be stressed that this set of rules includes numerous positive 
4 
 BIS Review 62/2008
elements. Basel II will entail, and is in fact entailing, notable progress in the management of 
the risks credit institutions face. Had Basel II been in force some years back, many of the 
dysfunctions  currently  lying  behind  the  turbulence  would  not  have  taken  place.  Moreover, 
international  accounting  standards,  and  in  particular  the  financial  reporting  standards 
adopted in 2005 by the European Union, contribute to the common goal of a single financial 
market,  since  it  appears  reasonable  that  companies  operating  in  a  single  area  should  be 
subject to the same accounting rules. 
Returning to procyclicality, I must remind you that this was a very significant debate during 
the period Basel II was being prepared. Insofar as capital requirements are more sensitive to 
risk, it is reasonable to believe that procyclicality is greater, requiring less capital when things 
go well and more capital when they go badly. The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision 
was  mindful  of  this  and  that  is  why  the  new  regulatory  framework  for  capital  includes 
elements that mitigate it, both under Pillar 1 and under Pillar 2. However, procyclicality can 
be  most  mitigated  by  improving  risk  management:  the  most  procyclical  banks  are  those 
incapable  of  properly  managing  their  risks  over  the  course  of  the  cycle,  so  that  when  the 
cycle turns adverse, they have to react abruptly. 
The  debate  on  the  procyclicality  of  international  accounting  standards  has,  to  date,  been 
more limited. This is surprising since, as current events are showing, the impact of fair value 
valuation on banks' income statements, and therefore on their retained earnings and on their 
capital,  is  notable,  especially  when  markets  are  illiquid  and  internal  valuation  models  are 
suffering the consequences. 
I  believe  that  a  reform  now  would  only  increase  investor  uncertainty.  Therefore,  once  this 
period of turbulence is behind us, the debate on the procyclicality of accounting standards 
should  be  deepened,  to  consider  what  the  weaknesses  of  using  fair  value  in  specific 
circumstances  are.  Further,  it  would  be  advisable  to  focus  the  discussion  on  the  role  of 
provisions,  i.e.  on  measuring  the  losses  incurred  by  banks  due  to  credit  risk.  Greater 
flexibility in their calculation would enable procyclicality to be reduced, making the accounting 
standards more consistent with prudent risk management. 
This has been the traditional position of the Banco de España on accounting regulation, to 
consider  it  always  as  a  key  element  of  prudential  regulation.  In  this  respect,  accounting 
Circular  4/2004,  on  the  adaptation  to  international  accounting  standards,  made  a  notable 
effort to retain prudential criteria in those areas in which the standards permitted more than 
one option. 
One  clear  example  of  this  is  the  rules  on  provisions.  Criteria  are  laid  down  specifying  the 
provisions  that  should  be  made  in  relation  to  losses  incurred  and  identifiable  in  specific 
operations. The level of provisions at any given moment depends on the time elapsed since 
the default arose. In this respect, the new accounting Circular of the Banco de España has 
increased  the  percentages  that  must  be  applied  in  the  calculation  of  these  specific 
provisions. 
The requirement is also laid down to make provisions to cover the losses, likewise incurred, 
but  not  identifiable  in  specific  operations.  This  is  possible  on  the  basis  of  statistical 
procedures  and  the  past  experience  of  the  banks.  From  a  conceptual  standpoint,  these 
provisions  reflect  the  fact  that,  in  banking  systems,  risks  tend  to  build  up  during  cyclical 
upturns,  which  has  to  do  with  the  procyclicality  characterising  the  participants  in  financial 
systems. From a practical point of view, what the current provisioning system has achieved is 
to give Spanish banks greater strength greater room for manoeuvre to withstand a potential 
worsening of the conditions in which they are pursuing their activity. Indeed, the system is 
designed in such a way that it has obliged banks to set aside funds that will enable them to 
absorb the impact of a potential increase in specific provisions. 
The  system  approved  in  Spain  was  the  most  demanding  possible  within  the  framework  of 
international  accounting  standards.  Consequently,  thanks  to  the  design  of  a  general 
provision such as the present one, along with a tightening of the parameters that determine 
BIS Review 62/2008 
 5
the  specific  provision,  the  Spanish  banking  system  had  the  highest  volume  of  provisions 
among the developed countries when the market turbulence emerged. 
Last lesson: on how the turbulence affects us all 
I have attempted to convey to you that, in Spain, banking regulation has proven to be strict, 
having  included  concern  over  procyclicality  among  its  criteria  for  action,  and  that  Spanish 
banks  have  properly  managed  the  risks  associated  with  financial  developments  in  recent 
years. The absence of a subprime segment, of an originate-to-distribute model, of complex 
structured products and of off-balance sheet investment vehicles attest to the fact we have 
all done the right things. Can we afford to be complacent? I would say no, for three reasons. 
First, because if we have not made certain mistakes, this is largely due to the fact that our 
financial  system  has  been  very  traditional,  without  sophisticated  institutions  such  as  those 
that have most suffered from the turbulence. Second, because, as I have already said, the 
Spanish economy needs to undergo adjustment in several areas, but essentially in that of 
residential  investment.  And  third,  because  the  strong  interconnections  within  the  financial 
system, which is today more global than ever, mean that if markets cease to function, that 
has negative consequences not only for those that generate the problems but for all those 
participating  in  them.  This  is  the  last  lesson  I  will  refer  to:  globalisation  has  brought  many 
benefits  but,  even  if  the  right  things  have  been  done  in  one  quarter,  if  others  generate 
problems, such problems ultimately also affect those who did not create them and that is why 
we must respond to them. 
The turbulence on international financial markets has led some markets on which Spanish 
banks  usually  obtained  additional  financing,  for  instance  the  private  fixed-income  and 
securitisation markets, to dry up abruptly. The malfunctioning of these markets has affected 
everybody since investors, disillusioned with the complex products I mentioned earlier, have 
not wished to take the time to discriminate properly between different products.  
Whatever  the  case  may  be,  the  difficulties  in  gaining  access  to  wholesale  financing  have 
posed a considerable management challenge. To date, the response of Spanish banks has 
been appropriate, partly because the structure of their liabilities is such that the wholesale 
financing  raised  in  recent  years,  at  a  higher  cost,  has  been  predominantly  with  longer 
maturities, which now affords them greater freedom; and partly because they have been able 
to resort to alternatives, such as shorter-dated financing to cover their funding needs. 
These  alternative  ways  of  obtaining  financing are  somewhat  temporary  in  nature,  which  is 
consistent  with  the  high  degree  of  uncertainty  prevailing  at  present  and  which  will 
conceivably not persist over time. Naturally, the potential impact of this situation on banks' 
financial position, and therefore on the Spanish economy, will largely hinge on the duration of 
the bout of turbulence. 
Indeed, the events of recent weeks offer grounds for some optimism: after a virtual drought 
for seven months, in only three weeks a notable group of banks have obtained over 13,550 
million euro on the international market. 
"Homework" 
The starting position of Spanish banks at the outset of the turbulence was, as I have already 
said, very sound, and this has allowed them to avoid its more immediate and direct effects. 
The reporting of results both for the fourth quarter of 2007, and those being released for the 
first  quarter  of  2008,  show  the  notable  differences  in  comparison  with  other  international 
banks. However, the dysfunctions continue affecting international financial markets, and that 
does  not  leave  the  Spanish  financial  system  immune  to  what  we  might  call  second-round 
effects. Accordingly, financial market participants - each in their own area of responsibility – 
must act in such a way as to ensure these effects are minimised. 
6 
 BIS Review 62/2008
Indeed, the tasks to be performed pose an even more demanding challenge, considering that 
the turbulence is coinciding with a period of internal adjustment and deceleration in the world 
economy. The deterioration in macroeconomic conditions is most patent in the United States, 
with  most  analysts  forecasting  a  sharp  slowdown  in  the  opening  quarters  of  2008.  But 
slacker  growth  is  also  expected  in  Europe  in  the  coming  months.  The  Spanish  economy, 
after  an  upturn  lasting  more  than  ten  years,  has  also  begun  its  adjustment.  For  all  these 
reasons, as economic agents we all have a significant "to do" list ahead of us. 
I  shall  begin  by  referring  to  credit  institutions,  since  it  is up  to  them  to  continue  managing 
properly  the  risks  they  assume,  developing  adequate  risk  measurement,  control  and 
management systems and, in short, determining what level of solvency is appropriate to their 
risk  profile.  In  the  present  circumstances  of  the  international  financial  markets,  there  are 
certain considerations that I believe to be particularly significant. 
First,  Spanish  banks  must  respond  appropriately  to  the  change  in  cycle  under  way  in  our 
economy. This entails not only properly managing defaults as they occur, but also tempering 
the slowdown in the rate of credit expansion. It would be counter-productive for the Spanish 
economy if an excessive reduction in credit growth were to limit its capacity to grow. 
Second, as I have pointed out already, Spanish banks’ income statements have escaped the 
effects  of  the  US  sub-prime  mortgage  crisis.  However,  unquestionably  the  environment  in 
which Spanish banks will have to operate, and indeed in which they already do operate, has 
become very difficult. Insofar as higher financing costs may affect their operating margins, 
alternative  mechanisms  for  keeping  their  income  statements  sound  must  be  strengthened. 
An initial consideration in this respect is that a high percentage of the financing granted in 
Spain  is  variable  rate,  so  banks  have  a  greater,  almost  automatic,  ability  to  pass  cost 
increases  through  to  borrowers.  Further,  in  the  last  few  years  Spanish  institutions  have 
shown  notable  skill  in  managing  operating  costs,  becoming  some  of  the  most  efficient 
players in the world. In the current circumstances, progress along these lines is even more 
necessary. 
Third, and very importantly, some of the international markets on which Spanish institutions 
have raised financing in recent years have narrowed substantially. In this respect, the lack of 
discrimination  seen  in  the  last  few  months  is  surprising,  as  the  markets  have  similarly 
penalised products whose features, in terms of level of complexity and risk, are substantially 
different. This is the case, for example, of Spanish securitisations which, on account of their 
simplicity,  the  high  quality  of  the  securitised  collateral  and  the  low  level  of  bad  debts 
recorded, bear no relation to the more complex structured products used by banks in other 
countries. A particularly striking case is mortgage covered bonds, whose credit quality is very 
high and easily measurable. This quality resides in their legal characteristics, since they are 
backed  by  the  whole  of  the  issuer's  mortgage  portfolio  and  their  minimum  level  of  over-
collateralisation is 25%. 
However, financial market participants have not taken these arguments into consideration. In 
fact, banks have to keep explaining to the market the differences in their issues. An effective 
way of doing so is to start issuing medium-term securities again. And, as mentioned above, 
congratulations are in order because this is the path successfully taken by some banks in 
recent months. 
The  effort  credit  institutions  have  to  make  to  explain  their  business  model,  which  differs 
sharply from that of other international institutions currently in difficulty, can and should be 
supplemented by analysis and explanations provided by the Banco de España. When there 
is a lack of confidence, transmitting key information to the markets so that participants can 
make informed investment decisions is essential. For this reason, the institution I represent 
has  taken  various  initiatives,  such  as  publishing  the  Financial  Stability  Report  nearly  one-
and-a-half months earlier than usual, and public appearances by Bank senior officials. This 
conference is, or so I hope, a good example of such initiatives: my aim is for you to leave this 
conference with a clearer idea of the situation of the Spanish banking system. 
BIS Review 62/2008 
 7
Naturally, the Banco de España’s “homework” is not limited to this. Rather, as the authority 
responsible  for  regulation  and  prudential  supervision,  it  is  bound  to  continue  providing  the 
necessary incentives and to see to it that Spanish banks exercise prudent risk management 
and have sufficient provisions should those risks materialise. 
In the area of financial regulation, debate is currently under way in international fora on the 
lessons to be drawn from this experience and on the measures to be taken in the future so 
that the weaknesses are not repeated. And we should acknowledge the notable efforts being 
made  by  different  organisations  in  different  areas.  For  its  part,  the  Banco  de  España,  in 
keeping  with  its  remit,  considers  that  this  review  must  not  succumb  to  the  temptation  of 
indiscriminately stepping up the level of regulation of the sector. The initiatives along these 
lines have to be thought out in depth and have to be justified by the existence of a market 
failure the resolution of which, through public intervention, gives rise to greater benefits than 
costs. 
Lastly,  in  regard  to  the  direct  powers  of  the  Banco  de  España,  I  would  remind  you  of 
something  that  often  seems  to  be  overlooked:  the  institution  I  represent  is  part  of  the 
Eurosystem.  In  view  of  that  fact  it  will  continue  working  to  ensure  that  monetary  policy 
implementation is compatible with holding inflation within the bounds set by the central bank 
and, at the same time, will help guarantee that adequate liquidity is provided so that money 
markets function properly. 
The social partners also have an important task: to co-operate so that, while the inevitable 
adjustment is taking place in the residential construction sector and in related activities, the 
rest  of  the  economy,  i.e.  industry  and  services,  becomes  more  dynamic.  And  for  this  to 
happen  a  moderation  in  private  sector  margins  and  in  unit  labour  costs  through  wage 
moderation and/or productivity increases is fundamental. It should be quite clear for all that if 
the inevitable rise in unemployment in construction is not offset by greater dynamism in the 
rest  of  the  private  sector  of  the  economy,  employment  may  perform  more  negatively  than 
expected. 
Finally, I would like to mention the necessary action by government, in at least two areas of 
its competence. 
The first is fiscal policy. One of the major advantages of the fiscal consolidation drive during 
the  long  period  of  expansion  of  the  Spanish  economy  is  that  the  government  budget 
mechanisms, known as automatic stabilisers, can now operate fully. These mechanisms act 
rapidly, promoting confidence and facilitating agents’ formation of expectations. However, the 
activation  of  fiscal  policy  measures  of  a  discretionary  nature  must  be  prevented  from 
jeopardising budget stability in the medium and long-term, since this would entail costs far 
exceeding any potential benefits that might be had in the short-term. 
The second area of action is that of measures of a structural nature aimed at improving the 
functioning  of  certain  markets,  increasing  the  flexibility  of  wage  and  price  formation 
mechanisms and expediting the reallocation of factors across sectors of the economy. For 
this task to be successful, the responsible co-operation of the social partners is also crucial. 
To go into these matters in depth would need a whole conference in itself, so I shall conclude 
on  this  point,  but  not  before  reiterating  once  again  the  main  idea  I  wish  to  leave  with  you 
today. The Spanish financial system has not participated in the causal factors of the current 
international financial turbulence and this, together with its financial soundness, puts it in a 
favourable starting position. However, we live in a global world, and the good work done so 
far  is  no  antidote  to  the  risk  of  turbulence.  Indeed,  the  most  effective  way  of  limiting  the 
materialisation of these risks in the Spanish banking system, and in the Spanish economy, is 
to  acknowledge  that  we  are  not  immune  to  them  and,  based  on  this  premise,  to  work 
together to take the decisions that will enable us to meet the current challenges. I have no 
doubt that this is the spirit shared by all those of us who in one way or another have some 
responsibility in this field. Thank you. 
8 
 BIS Review 62/2008
