John Hurley: International economic and financial developments and 
prospects for the Irish economy 
Address by Mr John Hurley, Governor of the Central Bank & Financial Services Authority of 
Ireland, to the Irish Association of Pension Funds Annual Dinner, Dublin, 28 February 2008. 
 Introduction 
I  would  like  to  thank  your  chairman  for  the  invitation  to  address  you  this  evening  on  the 
occasion  of  your  annual  dinner.  In  my  speech  tonight,  I  will  comment  on  international 
economic  and  financial  market  developments  as  well  as  prospects  for  the  domestic 
economy. I will also briefly address the issues of population ageing and pensions.  
International economic developments 
Prior to the recent slowdown in economic growth, the global economy had, over the previous 
four years, experienced its strongest period of expansion since the early 1970s. While this 
might not have been apparent in the euro area, where growth only started to pick up in the 
second-half of 2005, the evidence from the rest of the global economy is clear. Not only was 
there robust global growth during this period, a number of other features were also striking. 
In particular, increasingly global growth was spread more widely, with emerging market and 
developing economies accounting for a higher share of growth. An important factor behind 
these  developments  has  been  globalisation,  which  has  had  both  a  significant  real  and 
financial dimension.  
The  economic  impact  of  these  developments  has  meant  that  the  emerging  market 
economies now account for a greater share of world economic activity. Integration, however, 
works both ways. As a result, I would not expect that these economies can remain immune 
from the current slowdown in global economic activity. The main sources of this slowdown 
are rooted in the US economy and, in particular, its housing sector. The adjustment in that 
sector is having a significant effect on the US economy and also on other major economies. 
This  reflects  the  fact  that  a  range  of  complex  financial  products  linked  to  housing,  in 
particular in the area of sub-prime lending, has amplified the impact on the real economy of 
what  were  not  large  changes  in  themselves.  This,  in  turn,  reflects  the  way  in  which  these 
products were distributed and valued within the financial system. 
The  actual  scale  of  the  slowdown  in  the  US  remains  rather  uncertain.  There  has  been  a 
significant monetary and fiscal policy response, but it is still unclear how deep or how long 
the slowdown may be. It is apparent, however, that growth will slow substantially.  
The second area of uncertainty is the impact on other economies. Given the weight of the US 
in the global economy and its extensive linkages with other economies, there will certainly be 
some impact. As regards the euro area, possible spillover effects on growth are one of the 
downside risks to activity that have been identified by the Governing Council, although the 
upside risks to inflation at present are also very clear. 
Financial markets 
Turning to financial markets, it is clear that these too have become much more integrated 
over time. From a position where sectors like your own have tended to have a “home bias” in 
asset  allocation,  portfolios  have  become  much  more 
in  nature.  One 
consequence of this is that it has made possible the financing of ever growing global current 
account imbalances. This may have facilitated the rise of these imbalances, and the national 
international 
BIS Review 25/2008 
 1
in 
led 
they  surfaced, 
today's  markets.  Once 
to  a  substantial  degree  of 
spending and savings behaviour that lies behind them by, for example, a tendency to keep 
the cost of borrowing lower than it might otherwise be in countries with savings deficits. 
It  has  been  argued  that  financial  globalisation and,  in  particular,  the  scale  and  speed  with 
which it has developed, has played a part in generating some of the excesses in financial 
markets which have crystallised over the past six months. However, there have also been 
other factors at work. I would like to turn now to comment on some of these. 
At this stage, the events of the past six months are well known. After a long period during 
which financial market conditions were extremely buoyant, global markets have witnessed a 
substantial and warranted repricing of risk. This follows a prolonged period when asset prices 
were driven to exceptionally high and unsustainable levels in many parts of the world, and 
inadequate  attention  was  paid  to  risk.  The  unwinding  of  these  excesses  has  generated 
significant  turbulence  in  financial  markets  and  strains  in  money  markets.  These  problems 
reflect  vulnerabilities  which  have  been  uncovered  about  the  way  risks  have  come  to  be 
assessed,  valued  and  distributed 
these 
vulnerabilities  have 
financial  reintermediation  and 
deleveraging.  
Central banks have responded in a determined manner to counteract disorderly conditions in 
money markets. The actions undertaken since August have alleviated problems at the short-
end of the interbank market. They have also helped to encourage a narrowing of the wide 
spreads that had opened up between longer-term rates and policy rates. While having eased 
back, however, concerns about credit quality and asset valuations persist. International stock 
markets have also been affected by the turbulence, particularly financial sector stocks. Irish 
bank shares, which are a significant part of the Irish equity market, did not remain unaffected 
by  these  events,  although  another  factor  was  the  rebalancing  of  growth  away  from  the 
construction sector in the domestic economy. These recent developments, however, have to 
be placed in the context of previous substantial increases in Irish bank shares. 
During this period of exceptional turbulence, Irish banks, like their international peers, faced 
an  environment  where  medium  to  long  term  funding  was  not  as  readily  available  on 
wholesale  money  markets  as  heretofore.  However,  adequate  overnight  liquidity  was 
available at all times and, since the end of the year, conditions in the interbank markets have 
eased,  and  term  funding  is  now  more  freely  available  and  at  lower,  if  not  normal,  interest 
rates. 
The current situation and outlook for the stability of Irish banks, based on an assessment of 
developments  so  far,  is  positive.  The  sector's  shock  absorption  capacity  has  been  largely 
unaffected by the turbulence in international financial markets. The domestic banking system 
reports  no  significant  direct  exposures  to  US  sub  prime  mortgages  and  only  negligible 
exposures through investments and links with other financial companies or special purpose 
vehicles. In addition, our stress-testing of the banking system indicates that Irish banks are 
solidly profitable and well-capitalised.  
As far as drawing conclusions at the global level in relation to the turbulence is concerned, 
there  needs  to  be  a  careful  and  balanced  assessment  made  of  the  lessons  to  be  learned 
from recent events. Indeed, we must also be conscious that this turbulence may persist for 
some  time  yet.  The  elements  which  came  together  to  generate  the  recent  turbulence 
involved a weakening of credit discipline, a build-up of leverage, with risks transferred in an 
opaque  way  through  the  global  financial  system.  Added  to  this  was  a  degree  of  investor 
complacency, encouraged by benign economic conditions and a long period of low market 
volatility. All of these together led investors to focus heavily on return while under-weighting 
risk. It will be important, as the lessons of recent experience are absorbed, to improve risk 
management, in particular in relation to liquidity issues, market transparency, and valuation 
standards of complex financial instruments and vehicles. The management, assessment and 
monitoring  of  credit  risk,  the  assessment  of  counterparty  risk  and  the  role  of  credit  rating 
agencies are also issues which require consideration. These are all areas identified in the 
2 
 BIS Review 25/2008
roadmap of actions endorsed by EU Finance Ministers last October. Work on this roadmap is 
on track and a detailed report on these issues is due to be considered by ECOFIN in April. 
The domestic economy 
I should say that, at times like this, the protection afforded to a small country by membership 
of the euro area comes sharply into focus. It is undoubtedly the case that our ability to cope 
with  recent  challenges  has  been  greatly  enhanced  by  our  membership  of  economic  and 
monetary union.  
Before commenting further on the domestic economy, I would like to make a few remarks 
about monetary policy. As you may be aware, the most recent assessment of the Governing 
Council was that, as the reappraisal of risk in financial markets continues, there remains an 
unusually high degree of uncertainty over its impact on the real economy. It is clear that the 
risks to the outlook for economic activity in the euro area lie on the downside; however, risks 
to  price  stability  over  the  medium-term  are  on  the  upside.  The  latest  data  have  tended  to 
confirm this assessment of risks. At our next meeting in March, we will, of course, have the 
benefit of new macroeconomic projections. 
The prospects for the Irish economy this year are for some moderation in economic growth 
following the strength of recent years. Nevertheless, growth is expected to remain relatively 
favourable by international standards. The Bank projects GDP growth of around 3 per cent 
this  year,  with  GNP  growth  expected  to  be  somewhat  lower  at  about  2.6  per  cent.  This 
represents  a  significant  deceleration,  as  the  economy  enters  a  phase  where  domestic 
demand will lose much of its recent buoyancy, with exports playing a more significant role. 
Export growth is expected to grow broadly in line with export market growth, although this will 
mean a somewhat slower pace than last year, given current external headwinds. A further 
rebalancing of economic growth, with less dependence on domestic demand and a stronger 
external performance, is therefore envisaged. Indeed, such a rebalancing is required in order 
to maintain a satisfactory overall performance and to put the economy on a sustainable path.  
This underlines the importance of preserving and improving the economy's competitiveness 
position. The linkages between our economy and the US and, indeed, the UK, suggest that 
there will inevitably be some effect from developments in these economies through various 
channels  such  as  trade,  financial  flows  and  even  perhaps  foreign  direct  investment.  The 
scale of the impact is difficult to assess. Although it is likely to be significant, it may not be 
perhaps quite as great as some commentators have recently suggested. 
In  relation  to  fiscal  policy,  the  somewhat  expansionary  stance  this  year  will  provide  some 
support to domestic activity. It will partly offset the slowing of domestic demand, albeit within 
the  limits  of  prudence  and  without  an  excessive  deterioration  in  the  underlying  budgetary 
position. It will be particularly important to reduce the rate of increase in current spending to 
what  can  be  financed  by  more  moderate  revenue  growth,  while  continuing  to  focus  public 
capital  resources  on  improving  the  country's  infrastructure,  in  line  with  the  National 
Development Plan.  
As  regards  domestic  demand  this  year,  the  most  notable  adjustment  relates  to  the 
construction sector. Its weight in overall output growth is set to decline to a more sustainable 
level due to a sizable reduction in residential construction output. This had reached levels in 
recent  years  that  were  well  beyond  the  economy's  medium-term  requirements.  The 
moderation  in  output  growth  and,  in  particular,  the  adjustment  in  the  labour-intensive 
construction  sector  suggest  that  employment  growth  is  set  to  decelerate  significantly  this 
year. While employment gains in other sectors of the economy are likely to more than offset 
the decline in construction sector employment, the overall increase in employment is likely to 
be quite modest. Employment growth seems set to fall short of the increase in labour supply 
and, as a consequence, some limited rise in the unemployment rate, perhaps to an average 
of about 5½ per cent, is in prospect this year. Less robust output and employment growth 
BIS Review 25/2008 
 3
will, however, contribute to an easing in inflationary pressures in the domestic economy. The 
average HICP inflation rate is expected to fall to around 2½ per cent this year, and perhaps 
further to about 2 per cent next year, bringing inflation in Ireland broadly into line with the 
euro area average. 
Following  substantial  price  increases  over  an  extended  time-period,  house  prices  have 
declined  reflecting  an  easing  of  demand.  As  prices  have  eased,  housing  output  has  also 
fallen  back  from  recent  record  highs,  adjusting  to  meet  the  new  demand  conditions.  As  a 
result, the supply of new houses is projected to decline to a level in line with the medium-
term requirements of the economy, or possibly even somewhat below it. This combination of 
housing  output  and  price  developments  has  resulted  in  a  significant  and  welcome 
deceleration in credit growth since mid-2006. 
Turning to the medium-term, the economy has the potential to grow by around 4 per cent, a 
healthy  rate  of  expansion  by  the  standards  of  other  developed  economies.  Assuming  no 
adverse  external  developments  and  a  broad  levelling  off  in  housing  output,  growth  should 
recover in 2009, approaching its medium-term potential. As I have already stated, however, 
this  outcome  is  contingent  on  the  maintenance  of  a  strong  competitive  position.  This  will 
require  a  sensible  approach  to  pay  determination  and  continuous  improvements  in 
productivity in both the private and public sectors of the economy.  
I  would  like  to  particularly  stress  the  important  role  of  productivity  for  the  future  of  the 
economy. In the long run, only productivity improvements can bring sustainable increases in 
the  standard  of  living  for  individuals.  If  we  try  to  compensate  ourselves  for  terms  of  trade 
losses, such as those caused by oil price increases, then the results will be damaging. We 
know  that  this  is  the  case  from  past  experience.  It  took  us  many  years  to  recover  from 
inappropriate  responses  to  similar  developments  in  the  past.  Policies  that  promote 
productivity and competitiveness can, on the other hand, help the economy to ride out the 
effects of adverse developments and of lower growth in the global economy. They will also 
serve  to  increase  the  medium-term  performance  of  the  economy,  protect  employment  and 
allow for sustainable increases in living standards.  
Population ageing and pensions 
I will now turn to the issue of pensions and ageing. While it is obviously good news on an 
individual  level  that  life  expectancy  is  increasing,  population  ageing  more  generally  poses 
significant  macroeconomic  and  fiscal  challenges  for  most  developed  countries,  including 
Ireland, during the decades ahead. The projected increase in the old-age dependency ratio 
will  have  negative  implications  for  economic  growth,  while  simultaneously  placing  a 
significant  burden  on  public  finances  and  on  the  sustainability  of  privately  funded 
occupational and private pensions.  
Population ageing will place considerable pressure on the public finances by driving up age-
related expenditure. In the European context, the most acute fiscal pressures are faced by 
those  countries  where –  unlike  in  Ireland  –  occupational  pensions  are  mainly  funded  on  a 
pay-as-you-go basis within public social insurance systems. A number of European countries 
have already adopted pension reforms aimed at controlling the projected increase in public 
pension  expenditure.  These  include  a  considerable  restructuring  of  contribution  or  benefit 
rules, increasing the effective retirement age and linking pension benefits in an actuarially fair 
way  to  life  expectancy.  In  some  cases,  where  these  types  of  reforms  have  proved  to  be 
insufficient, more systemic reforms have been adopted, changing the financing structure of 
pension provision with increased reliance upon funded pension arrangements. 
In the Irish case, the flat rate structure of the basic state pension, together with our current 
relatively  favorable  demographic  structure,  has  so  far  resulted  in  a  much  smaller  fiscal 
burden  from  age-related  expenditure.  Nevertheless,  on  the  basis  of  current  policies,  age-
related  public  expenditure  in  Ireland  is  set  to  increase  significantly  in  the  decades  ahead. 
4 
 BIS Review 25/2008
Total pension expenditure by the state is set to increase from 4.6 per cent of GDP in 2005 to 
7.9  per  cent  in  2030  and  further  to  11.1  per  cent  of  GDP  in  2050,  according  to  the  latest 
Department of Finance estimates.  
As you will be aware, some pension reforms have already been adopted in Ireland. The most 
notable  has  been  the  establishment  of  the  National  Pensions  Reserve  Fund  (NPRF).  In 
addition, the parameters of the public service occupational scheme have been adjusted, with 
an increase in the minimum retirement age for new entrants. While the projected pension-
related burden represents a significant challenge, careful planning will help to counteract the 
long-term  pressures  emanating  from  population  ageing.  In  this  regard,  the  Government's 
recently  published  Green  Paper  on  Pensions presents  a  range  of  measures  that might  be 
undertaken  to  address  future  pension  expenditure  pressures.  The  four  options  considered 
were  –  a  gradual  increase  in  the  current  social  welfare  pension  combined  with  a  longer 
working life, enhancements to the current voluntary pension system, the adoption of a soft 
mandatory pension savings scheme and a fully mandatory pension savings scheme. Another 
issue worth considering is whether tax incentives or direct contributions by the Exchequer, as 
in  the  SSIA  scheme,  are  the  better  approach.  As  you  will  also  be  aware,  the  National 
Pensions  Review,  published  by  the  Pensions  Board  in  2006,  provides  a  further  set  of 
recommendations.  
Ireland has the advantage of starting from a healthy fiscal position, with one of the lowest 
debt-to-GDP  ratios  in  the  EU.  Furthermore,  Ireland's  demographic  profile  is  expected  to 
remain favourable for some time. The country has a window of opportunity to move towards 
a more sustainable position. It is important, however, that considerable practical progress is 
made  in  good  time  in  dealing  with  a  problem,  which,  while  not  imminent,  is  nevertheless 
unavoidable and needs to be addressed sooner rather than later. 
There are two key issues that need to be addressed.  
First,  measures  are  urgently  required  to  bring  funding  into  line  with  the  cost  of  state 
pensions. Without this, the long term funding gap for the state pension system that already 
exists will be exacerbated.  
Second, private occupational and personal pension coverage is particularly low among low-
income  workers  and  this  must  be  addressed.  While  800,000  people  are  covered  by 
occupational  pension  schemes  and  about  EUR90  billion  worth  of  assets  are  under 
management,  at  present  nearly  half  of  Irish  workers  are  not  covered  by  occupational  or 
private pension schemes. As a result, these workers face a substantial fall in living standards 
when they reach retirement.  
The  challenge  for  the  pensions  industry  itself  is  to  mobilise  private  savings  and  to  deliver 
investment  returns  that  can  provide  adequate  pensions  when  they  fall  due.  An  important 
factor in this is to ensure that pension products are sold in as transparent a way as possible. 
In  recent  times,  a  much  wider  range  of  investment  outlets  for  pension  funds  has  become 
available, but recent experience indicates that the risks associated with new and innovative 
products need to be prudently assessed. 
Conclusions 
In  conclusion,  therefore,  while  both  the  international  and  domestic  economies  are  in 
somewhat of a down phase at the moment, this has followed a protracted period of strong 
economic growth. A very welcome feature of this has been the rapid economic progress of 
regions  of  the  world  that  did  not  enjoy  the  substantial  improvements  in  living  standards 
experienced by OECD countries since the second world war. Improved living standards and 
levels  of  health  care  have  led  to  very  significant  increases  in  life  expectancy  in  both 
developing  and  developed  countries.  The  pensions  industry  and  national  exchequers 
worldwide  are  faced  with  the  challenge  of  coping  with  these  profound  changes.  With  our 
BIS Review 25/2008 
 5
relatively young population, Ireland is facing these pressures somewhat later than most other 
advanced countries. 
An  important  response,  both  to  these  longer-term  challenges  as  well  as  the  shorter-term 
difficulties  caused  by  a  weaker  external  climate  and  adjustments  domestically,  will  be  to 
continue to improve our productivity performance. There can be no doubt that we will be in a 
better  position  to  cope  with  challenges  such  as  population  ageing  and  with  changes  in 
economic  circumstances  generally  in  a  situation  in  which  our  economic  performance 
continues to remain robust. 
As  I  have  already  mentioned,  it  is  important  that  we  face  the  longer-term  challenges  of 
ageing without undue delay. Estimates suggest, for example, that, from a position at present 
where there are six people at work to every retired person, by mid-century this ratio will fall to 
two people at work to every pensioner. The various discussion papers, including the recent 
Green Paper, set out the various options for us to choose as a nation. It is important that we 
move  ahead  soon  to  deal  with  these  issues,  so  that  it  will  not  be  necessary  to  take  more 
drastic action at some stage in the future. 
6 
 BIS Review 25/2008
