Yi Gang: The development of Shibor as a market benchmark 
Speech by Mr Yi Gang, Deputy Governor of the People’s Bank of China, at the 2008 Shibor 
Work Conference, Beijing, 11 January 2008. 
 Thank you for your presence. Since its launch one year ago, Shibor has made remarkable 
progress. I’d like to share with you some of my observations. 
First,  Shibor  is  for  market  participants.  At  the  initial  stage,  central  bank  promotion  is 
necessary.  But  Shibor,  as  a  market  benchmark,  belongs  to  the  market  and  all  the  market 
participants. All parties concerned including financial institutions, National Inter-bank Funding 
Center,  National  Association  of  Financial  Market  Institutional  Investors  shall  have  a  full 
understanding of this, and actively play a role in the operations of Shibor as stakeholders. 
The success of Shibor relies on the joint efforts of all the stakeholders. 
Under  the  command  economy,  the  central  bank  is  the  leader  while  commercial  banks  are 
followers.  But  from  the  current  perspective  of  the  central  bank’s  functions,  the  bipartite 
relationship varies on different occasions. In terms of monetary policies, the central bank, as 
the monetary authority, is the policy maker and regulator, while commercial banks are market 
participants and players. But in terms of market building, the relationship is not simply that of 
leader  and  followers,  but  of  central  bank  and  commercial  banks  in  a  market  environment. 
This broad positioning and premise will have a direct bearing on how we behave. On the one 
hand,  it  requires  the  central  bank  to  work  as  a  service  provider,  a  general  designer  and 
supervisor  of  the  market.  On  the  other  hand,  it  requires  market  participants  and  various 
associations to cultivate Shibor as stakeholders and players on a leveling playground.  
Second, I’d like to elaborate on the relationship between Shibor and market-based interest 
rate. At present, lending and deposit interest rates are regulated with a floor lending rate and 
a  ceiling  deposit  rate.  The  regulation  is  necessary  so  far  because  it  dramatically  cuts 
transaction  cost  and  reduces  the  probability  of  vicious  competition.  But  the  side  effect  is 
limited research coverage by financial institutions on how to price deposits and loans. With 
time passing by, the preconditions for the adoption of market-based interest rate will become 
more mature. In the past, what worried us the most was possible vicious competition after 
market-based  interest  rate  was  introduced.  But  now  a  few  large  commercial  banks  have 
gone  public,  and  have  established  Boards  of  Directors,  brought  in  independent  directors, 
strategic investors (including foreign strategic investors). All of these changes will restrict the 
behaviors  of  commercial  banks  to  some  extent.  Now  commercial  banks  can  afford  not  to 
spend  too  many  resources  in  research  on  pricing.  But  with  the  progress  of  market-based 
interest rate reform, pricing will take a large share of commercial banks’ resources, and will 
reflect  their  core  technologies  and  core  competitiveness,  consuming  a  lot  of  energy  and 
resources. In fact, Shibor can play a benchmark. 
Shibor must become a recognized and authoritative interest rate benchmark to replace the 
benchmark  lending  and  deposit  rates  set  by  the  central  bank.  This  being  achieved,  the 
central bank could gradually retreat from its intervention. Simply put, interest rate pricing in 
fact  releases  pressure.  When  clients  complain  about  high  interest  rate,  commercial  banks 
can pass the buck to the central bank because the central bank sets the interest floor. When 
Shibor  matures,  Shibor will  become  the  culprit. Such  a  change  though looks  simple  bears 
important  legitimacy,  authoritativeness,  and  persuasiveness,  and  can  make  Shibor  a 
recognized and completely authoritative benchmark. 
What is market-based interest rate? In my understanding, it means deregulation. But if the 
central bank deregulates deposit rate ceiling and lending rate floor when there is no other 
reliable benchmark to substitute them, the result could be worse. When is the right timing for 
deregulation?  My  answer  is  when  a  new  benchmark  matures.  Shibor  is  an  important 
BIS Review 12/2008 
 1
benchmark, on which I have high hopes in the process of making interest rate more market-
based. 
Interest rate floor and ceiling is likely to exist for some period. Can the market-based interest 
rate  transformation  process  start  with  discount  rate  linking  with  Shibor?  In  fact,  discount 
facilities  are  loans.  A  breakthrough  with  discount  rate  will  have  far-reaching  impact  on  the 
market-based  interest  rate  transformation,  and  provide  experiences  for  future  interest  rate 
reform. 
Third, I’d like to move onto the relationship between Shibor and product innovation. There 
are a lot of innovative products based on Shibor. Hopefully more will emerge. There are also 
products  based  on  other  benchmarks,  such  as  floating  rate  products  based  on  1-year 
required reserve rate. It is up to product providers as for on which benchmarks they’d like to 
base their products. But when designing products with a long maturity such as 10 years or 15 
years,  product  issuers  shall  take  into  account  the  uncertainty  of  the  market-based  interest 
rate transformation in the future. Of course, Shibor also has uncertainties, so various aspects 
shall  be  taken  into  consideration  when  issuing  new  products.  From  a  global  perspective, 
Shibor represents a direction of reform. Shibor’s failure would suggest the failure of China’s 
money market and bond market. Without a proper pricing benchmark, the Chinese currency 
renminbi  would  be  regarded  as  a  failure,  so  would  the  Chinese  economy.  So  the 
development of Shibor can only succeed without any leeway. 
According to experiences elsewhere in the world, Shibor shall be used as a benchmark for 
product innovation. Shibor unavoidably has loopholes, so it’s natural that some new products 
are based on benchmarks other than Shibor, such as the 7-day repurchase rate. We shall be 
open to such products from a commercial perspective because everything that exists must 
have a reason. These benchmarks may compete with Shibor in a meritorious manner. Only 
when there is competition, can we stakeholders make comparisons before Shibor becomes 
an established benchmark. No administrative measures shall be applied to suppress other 
benchmarks. 
In terms of market development, the future trend of Shibor shall be taken into full account, 
and international experiences shall be drawn from, such as B2B, C2C, B2C and other types 
of  online  trading  in  developed  countries.  As  far  as  innovation  is  concerned,  we  can  also 
initiate innovation on our own, but new innovations are subject to the test of time and market. 
So  when  designing  innovative  products,  it  is  advisable  to  learn  from  international 
experiences. In a long-term perspective, Shibor is very important for financial innovation and 
the  development  of  derivatives. 
from 
international experiences. 
Fourth,  the  relationship  between  Shibor  and  internal  transfer  pricing.  One  advantage  of 
Shibor is that it links the market on the one hand and internal transfer pricing of commercial 
banks on the other hand. Many commercial banks, as nationwide large banks, have internal 
transfer prices across regions, products, deposits and loans, and assets and liabilities. As a 
result,  commercial  banks’  head  offices  are  under  constant  pressure  from  branches  with  a 
deposit  surplus  and  branches  with  a  loan  surplus.  For  example,  deposit  surplus  banks 
demand  a  hike  in  the  interest  rate  when  they  deposit  fund  with  the  head  office.  How  can 
head  offices  convince  their  branches  of  the  legitimacy  of  internal  transfer  pricing?  It  is  not 
until  Shibor  is  introduced  to  internal  transfer  pricing  that  can  the  rights  and  interests  of 
various  departments  and  branches  of  large  commercial  banks  be  balanced  in  a  scientific, 
reasonable  and  persuasive  manner  because  Shibor  is  an  objective  price  that  links  the 
internal parties with external parties. 
Internal  transfer  pricing  is  a  basis  for  internal  management,  systematic  management,  risk 
management,  economic  capital  and  arithmetic  of  various  indicators.  If  commercial  banks 
have a relatively unified understanding of Shibor and core techniques in pricing, Shibor can 
be used in internal transfer pricing. This will be very important for internal management of 
commercial banks. 
is  required  when  drawing 
Insightful 
thinking 
2 
 BIS Review 12/2008
Fifth, the relationship between Shibor and the renminbi internationalization. The renminbi is 
China’s  main  currency,  a  point  that  we  shall  bear  in  mind  when  contemplating  the 
development of the money market. In the past, we only looked at the domestic market, but 
now  we  should  adopt  a  global  perspective.  Many  currencies  in  the  world  have  their 
benchmark  interest  rates,  including  Libor,  Euribor,  Tibor  and  etc.  The  launch  of  Shibor 
shored  up  transaction  volume  in  the  money  market.  Comparatively  speaking,  Shanghai’s 
money market capacity is incomparable to that of London and New York. But the renminbi 
will soon become an important currency in the world, so we shall steadily push ahead with 
the  renminbi  convertibility  under  the  capital  account.  At  present,  great  pressure  of 
appreciation on the renminbi driven by large amount of capital influx is to a large extent due 
to a positive outlook of China’s economy and purchase of renminbi-denominated assets by 
foreign  companies  and  individuals.  In  fact,  the  money  market  is  part  of  the  financial 
infrastructure that will establish the renminbi’s role in the world. 
As  such,  we  must  have  full  confidence  in  Shibor.  Whether  Shibor  will  become  a  widely 
accepted  benchmark  will  signify  whether  a  renminbi  market  will  be  established,  whether 
capital  market  convertibility  will  be  achieved,  whether  the  Chinese  economy  will  be 
successful, and whether foreign investors would have confidence in holding renminbi assets. 
From this sense, Shibor shall gradually establish its status as a benchmark. 
Sixth, Shibor is also a benchmark for other products and institutional arrangements. A lot of 
existing products are linked to some interest rates set by the People’s Bank of China (PBC). 
So when the PBC adjusts interest rate, multiple factors shall be taken into account so as to 
balance  the  interests  of  various  parties.  PBC  staff  shall  improve  their  professionalism  and 
expertise.  However,  any  move  to  balance  interests  involves  different  interest  groups  and 
produces a complex picture. So a widely accepted and objective benchmark is needed, and 
Shibor can take this responsibility. 
I  suggest  that  more  products,  from  company-wide  provident  fund,  public  welfare  fund, 
company-wide trust fund to wealth management products, housing provident fund and broker 
depository fund shall be linked to Shibor. 
Seventh, the authenticity and quality of Shibor. In the previous year, Shibor made big strides. 
Delighted  though,  I  also  closely  watch  the  quality  and  authenticity  of  Shibor.  The  spread 
between Shibor within 3 months and the actual trading rate is small, so market transactions 
are brisk. But the spread between long and medium-term Shibor rates and the actual trading 
rates is relatively large. Because Shibor is a benchmark for the inter-bank market that has 
become  a  main  force  for  the  money  market  and  bond  market,  some  of  the  protracted 
problems are also reflected in Shibor. For example, some trading rates include some factors 
beyond  the  market,  including  special  arrangements  and  adjustments  tailored  to  a  specific 
counter-party. One rate that concludes a deal with one particular counter-party cannot apply 
to other counter-parties. Similar situations still exist. 
We hope Shibor is less distorted, but whether a deal can be sealed concerns credit approval. 
The  most  standard  practice  is  to  base  risk  premium  on  the  credit  standing  of  different 
counter-parties  and  add  the  risk  premium  to  Shibor.  We  don’t  want  to  see  complicated 
factors (such as interest transfer) intervening trading rates to make trading rate and quoted 
Shibor rate further apart. The solution of this problem involves many aspects such as internal 
management, credit approval and delegation of power to branches. As far as transparency of 
trading  price  is  concerned,  there  is  such  a  belief  that  lack  of  transparency  and  extreme 
transparency  shall  both  be  avoided.  In  case  of  over  transparency,  after  a  transaction  is 
made, all other counter parties know about the trading rate. But in fact, it is normal to add risk 
premium  when  trading  with  smaller  banks.  How  to  determine  an  appropriate  level  of 
transparency?  We  wish  to  provide  a  system  as  convenient  as  Reuters  where  one  can 
publicize transaction information to the whole market and deal with individual counter-parties 
through  a  small  window.  But  as  far  as  price-quoting  banks  are  concerned,  price  quotation 
and  internal  management  shall  become  more  clearly  defined  to  eliminate  interest  transfer 
BIS Review 12/2008 
 3
and other “noises” other than risk premiums outside the system, while such “noises” shall be 
dealt with by legitimate means. 
The  spread  between  quoted  Shibor  rate  and  actual  trading  rate,  especially  the  spread  for 
products with a maturity of over 3 months, is a major factor influencing the quality, credibility 
and authoritativeness of Shibor. There is room for improvement. I hope more studies can be 
done  to  find  out  the  reasons  why  the  correlation  between  quoted  rates  of  products  with  a 
maturity of over 3 months and inter-bank borrowing transaction rate is low? How to increase 
the correlation? How about the correlation between long and medium-term Libor and inter-
bank borrowing rate? How big is the gap between Shibor and Libor? 
In conclusion, all of you have provided important advice including training programs. Shibor 
has been developing very fast. I believe the existing problems can be addressed in a fast 
manner so as to make Shibor a benchmark for the money market and for the short end of 
China’s bond yield curve. 
4 
 BIS Review 12/2008
