Masaaki Shirakawa: Recent economic and financial developments and 
the conduct of monetary policy 
Summary  of  a  speech  by  Mr  Masaaki  Shirakawa,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  to  the 
Japan National Press Club, Tokyo, 12 May 2008. 
 Introduction 
I am honored to be invited to speak here today to the Japan National Press Club. The club 
has been called "traditional" in the sense that it is valued for its long history, but it is also 
known  for  its  tradition  of  asking  speakers  tough  questions.  I  once  heard  from  a  senior 
colleague at the Bank of Japan that the governor of a central bank can deliver a speech here 
only when the economy is performing satisfactorily and he or she is fully confident about the 
conduct of monetary policy. I am here today to deliver my first speech since being appointed 
as the Governor of the Bank, not because this is the case, but because I hope your forthright 
questions will provide me with food for thought and also because this is a good opportunity to 
explain the Bank's thinking behind the conduct of monetary policy. 
In the first half of my speech, I will talk about the current situation of and outlook for Japan's 
economy and the conduct of monetary policy in the near term. In the second half, I would like 
to explain some basic points that I believe are important for the conduct of monetary policy. 
I.  
The outlook for economic activity and prices and the conduct of monetary 
policy in the near term 
The current situation of and Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices 
A.  
I  will  first  explain  the  current  situation  of  and  outlook  for  Japan's  economy.  At  the  Bank's 
Monetary Policy Meetings, or MPMs for short, the Policy Board members discuss the outlook 
for economic activity and prices. At the MPMs held at the end of each April and October, they 
center  their  discussion  on  the  outlook  for  the  coming  two  years.  Based  on  that,  the  Bank 
makes public its thinking behind its conduct of monetary policy in the Outlook for Economic 
Activity and Prices, or the Outlook Report. In the Outlook Report released at the end of April 
this year, the Bank revised its economic assessment downward from the previous Outlook 
Report released six months ago, stating that Japan's economic growth was slowing and that 
deceleration in the economy seemed likely to continue for the time being. 
The first cause of the slowdown in the economy is the rises in energy and materials prices. 
The deterioration in the terms of trade that results from such rises leads to a decline in real 
income, as Japan depends heavily on imported resources. This exerts downward pressure 
on  corporate  profits  and  reduces  households'  purchasing  power,  eventually  resulting  in  a 
decrease  in  investment  and  consumption.  The  second  cause  is  the  disruptions  in  global 
financial markets and the growing uncertainty regarding overseas economies stemming from 
the  U.S.  subprime  mortgage  problem,  which  arose  last  summer.  In  a  situation  where 
concerns  exist  about  the  uncertainty  of  the  economic  outlook,  business  sentiment  has 
become cautious – as is evident, for example, in the Tankan (Short-Term Economic Survey 
of Enterprises in Japan) – and consumer sentiment has also deteriorated. Since the effects 
of  these  two  causes  are  likely  to  persist,  deceleration  in  the  economy  seems  likely  to 
continue for the time being. 
Thereafter, however, the economy is likely to return to a moderate growth path, as overseas 
economies are expected to move out of their deceleration phase and the effects of the rises 
in energy and materials prices are likely to abate. Expressing the outlook numerically, from 
BIS Review 66/2008 
 1
fiscal 2008 through fiscal 2009, the economy is likely to grow at a pace around the potential 
growth rate, which is estimated to be 1.5 percent or somewhat higher. 
This view is supported by the following facts. First, overseas economies, especially emerging 
economies,  are  likely  to  continue  to  grow  at  a  relatively  high  rate,  although  the  pace  of 
growth is likely to decelerate slightly. Japan's exports have remained firm as a whole – even 
though  those  to  the  United  States  have  been  falling  for  some  time  –  as  they  have  been 
increasing at a considerable pace to a broader range of destinations, particularly emerging 
economies  and  countries  that  export  natural  resources.  Japan's  exports  are  expected  to 
continue  rising  against  the  background  of  the  rapid  growth  of  these  economies.  Second, 
although  economic  activity  might  weaken  further,  it  seems  that  Japan's  economy  has 
become  more  resilient  to  negative  shocks  than  in  the  past.  In  the  corporate  sector,  firms 
currently  face  no  excess  in  production  capacity,  inventory,  or  employment,  and  corporate 
profits have been close to historical highs. As a result of this, Japanese financial institutions 
are very sound. And third, the accommodative financial conditions are likely to continue to 
support  private  demand.  Given  that  currently  the  uncollateralized  overnight  call  rate  is  0.5 
percent and the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI is slightly above 1 percent, the short-
term  real  interest  rate  is  in  rough  terms  0  percent.  The  level  is  very  low  relative  to  the 
potential growth rate, and is also low compared with that in other major economies. Credit 
spreads,  which  are  added  to  benchmark  interest  rates  when  firms  borrow  funds,  have  not 
been  increasing  either,  unlike  in  Europe  and  the  United  States.  Moreover,  financial 
institutions' lending attitudes and firms' liquidity positions have continued to be favorable on 
the whole, although the situation for small firms has been relatively severe. 
Turning to prices, the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI excluding fresh food has been 
rising since around  the end  of  2007  due  mainly  to  increased  prices  of petroleum  products 
and food products, and was 1.2 percent in March 2008. The rate was the highest increase in 
the 15 years since August 1993, if we disregard fiscal 1997, when retail prices rose due to 
the rise in the consumption tax. A major factor that affects inflation is the balance between 
aggregate supply and demand in the economy, or the level of resource utilization in terms of 
the labor and production capacity. On this point, the level of resource utilization is currently 
close to its historical average judging from firms' perception of employment conditions and 
production capacity as seen in the Tankan, as well as from the unemployment rate and the 
capacity  utilization  rate.  Assuming  that  the  economy  grows  at  around  the  potential  growth 
rate as I have described, aggregate supply and demand in the economy are likely to remain 
more or less balanced. Therefore, the supply-demand balance in the domestic economy is 
unlikely to significantly affect CPI inflation either upward or downward. However, a process is 
likely to take place in which the rise in energy and materials prices will gradually be passed 
on to downstream prices, and thus CPI inflation is projected to be around 1 percent for both 
fiscal 2008 and fiscal 2009. 
CPI inflation of around 1 percent is consistent with the Bank's "understanding of medium to 
long-term  price  stability"  and  it  is  where  most  Policy  Board  members'  median  figures  of 
ranges that they understand as being consistent with price stability over the medium to long 
term are located. Therefore, future developments in the CPI may also be assessed as being 
within the range of "price stability." In this regard, the price situation in Japan is favorable as 
compared with major overseas economies, where the inflation rate has been very close to or 
above  the  upper  limit  of  the  range  regarded  as  consistent  with  price  stability.  However, 
inflation perceived by households in Japan may in fact be higher than the rate of change in 
the CPI, as suggested by many survey results – for example, the Bank's Opinion Survey on 
the  General  Public's  Views  and  Behavior  –  given  that  prices  of  goods  that  are  purchased 
frequently, such as food products, have been rising noticeably. I think that the Bank should 
pay close attention to changes in people's perception of inflation, since they may affect the 
actual rate of change in prices through, for example, consumers' expected inflation rate and 
firms' price-setting behavior. 
2 
 BIS Review 66/2008
Uncertainty regarding the Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices 
B. 
In the Bank's most likely projection, or the baseline scenario, it is projected that the growth 
rate of Japan's economy will decelerate for the time being but thereafter the economy is likely 
to continue its moderate growth with price stability. However, as I will discuss in a moment, 
an  economic  outlook  is  always  subject  to  uncertainties,  and  currently  the  situation  is  one 
where  the  degree  of  uncertainty  is  especially  high.  In  such  a  situation,  it  is  necessary  to 
thoroughly and closely assess not only the baseline scenario but also the possibility of the 
economy deviating either upward or downward from it, that is, the risk scenarios. 
The  first  risk  to  the  outlook  concerns  developments  in  overseas  economies  and  global 
financial markets. Disruptions in global financial markets have continued for over six months. 
In a speech made in early April, Federal Reserve Chairman Ben S. Bernanke said, "I think it 
is true that the financial distress we are seeing now is among the most severe episodes of 
the  postwar  era,"  and  my  view  is  exactly  the  same.  Issuance  in  markets  for  securitized 
products, where the U.S. subprime mortgage problem originated, has been brought to a halt. 
Looking  at  corporate  finance  in  the  United  States  and  Europe  as  a  whole,  credit  spreads 
such as those on corporate bonds have been large. U.S. and European financial institutions 
have increasingly tightened their lending standards. 
Amid  the  tightening  of  the  financial  environment,  in  addition  to  the  drop  in  housing 
investment,  deceleration  in  the  U.S.  economy  is  becoming  more  pronounced.  It  is  highly 
likely that, for the time being, the U.S. economy will experience sluggish growth, or even a 
moderate  recession.  The  timing  and  pace  of  recovery  of  the  U.S.  economy  will  largely 
depend  on  when  the  housing  market  correction  is  completed  and  when  the  financial 
environment  stops  deteriorating.  An  improvement  in  the  housing  and  financial  markets,  in 
combination with the reductions in the policy interest rate by the Fed and a fiscal stimulus 
package, will make it more likely that the U.S. economy recovers gradually. However, home 
prices have yet to stop declining, and there are no signs that the financial market disruptions 
will abate. In addition, there are risks of a further tightening of financial institutions' lending 
attitudes. The key is when and how the combined effects of disruptions in financial markets, 
asset  prices,  and  economic  activity  will  diminish,  which  is  unforeseeable,  and  this  is  the 
biggest source of uncertainty. 
The second risk concerns developments in energy and materials prices. In the outlook that I 
described  earlier,  it  is  projected  that  the  prices  of  crude  oil  and  other  international 
commodities  will  remain  elevated,  supported  by  growing  demand  especially  in  emerging 
economies.  Considerable  uncertainty  always  surrounds  developments  in  these  prices, 
leaving the potential for movement in either direction. If the rise in international commodity 
prices is significantly faster than expected, this could further increase inflationary pressures 
around the world. In that case, there would be a risk of a subsequent economic slowdown 
through the monetary tightening aimed at preventing inflation. As for the effects on Japan's 
economy, higher prices of international commodities would not only accelerate inflation but 
also increase the outflow of income, and this might put downward pressure on the economy. 
As  I  have  described,  there  is  considerable  uncertainty,  especially  about  developments  in 
overseas  economies  and  global  financial  markets  and  also  high  prices  of  energy  and 
materials,  and  attention  should  be  paid  particularly  to  the  downside  risks  to  Japan's 
economy. 
However,  it  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  everyone,  including  policymakers,  tends  to  be 
strongly affected by the current situation when forecasting the future. We should, considering 
the matter calmly, be aware that the significance of the upside risks will increase if the dense 
fog  surrounding  the  outlook  for  the  global  and  Japanese  economies  gradually  clears.  It 
seems  that,  for  the  time  being,  downside  risks,  rather  than  upside  ones,  are  likely  to  be 
incorporated into the decision-making of households and firms. Nevertheless, it seems that 
their expectations of future growth in the somewhat longer term are being maintained. In that 
BIS Review 66/2008 
 3
case, if the downside risks do not materialize and uncertainties become smaller, households 
and firms may come to expect higher economic growth. 
If  this  happens,  the  current  low  interest  rates  will  have  a  stronger  impact  on  Japan's 
economy. Generally speaking, the prolongation of an accommodative financial environment 
in  a  situation  where  aggregate  supply  and  demand  in  the  economy  remain  more  or  less 
balanced  tends  to  have  an  unfortunate  effect  on  people's  decision-making;  they  become 
unconsciously too optimistic in assessing risks, and firms and households as well as financial 
institutions  may  overextend  themselves,  resulting  in  a  long-run  misallocation  of  resources 
and significant swings in the economy. It seems that the recent economic slowdown as well 
as  increased  future  uncertainty  has  reduced  the  risk  that  firms  and  households  will 
overextend  themselves.  However,  if  the  dense  fog  surrounding  the  outlook  for  the  global 
economy  gradually  clears  and  as  a  result  firms  and  households  come  to  expect  higher 
economic growth than previously, the current degree of monetary policy accommodation is 
likely to become overly strong relative to the level of economic activity. 
Conduct of monetary policy in the near term 
C.  
Next, I would like to talk about the Bank's conduct of monetary policy in the near term based 
on the outlook I have just described for economic activity and prices. Six months ago, the 
Bank indicated in its October 2007 Outlook Report that it would "adjust the level of interest 
rates gradually in accordance with improvements in the economic and price situation." In the 
April 2008 Outlook Report, however, the Bank stated, "Given the current situation where the 
outlook  for  economic  activity  and  prices  is  highly  uncertain,  it  is  not  appropriate  to 
predetermine the direction of future monetary policy." 
Needless  to  say,  the  Bank  should,  as  a  central  bank,  keep  in  mind  that  real  short-term 
interest rates are currently at around 0 percent, an extremely low level. Once the Bank thinks 
that Japan's economy is highly likely to follow a path of sustainable growth with price stability, 
it will be appropriate to adjust the level of interest rates. 
At  present,  however,  the  situation  of  Japan's  economy  demands  that  most  attention  be 
focused on the downside risks. Since the outlook for an economy always entails uncertainty, 
monetary policy decisions should be made not only based on the most likely projection but 
also fully taking into account factors that are risks to it. The Bank considers that currently the 
risks are unbalanced, and in conducting monetary policy more attention needs to be paid to 
downside risks to the economy stemming from uncertainties regarding future developments 
in overseas economies and global financial markets as well as the effects of high energy and 
materials  prices.  The  Bank  will  pay  close  attention  to  future  developments  in  economic 
activity  and  prices  and,  in  particular,  to  whether  downside  risks  will  decrease,  thereby 
increasing the likelihood of the economy realizing sustainable growth with price stability, or 
whether the probability of such risks materializing will rise. 
So  far,  I  have  described  the  Bank's  thinking  regarding  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  in 
terms of interest rate policy. Now, let me remind you of an important fact: proper functioning 
of financial markets is a prerequisite for monetary policy to be effective. It is therefore vital to 
ensure  the  stability  of  Japanese  financial  markets  when  global  financial  markets  remain 
volatile. 
Fortunately,  Japanese  financial  markets  have  so  far  been  stable  unlike  their  U.S.  and 
European counterparts. Mainly this is because Japanese financial institutions have had only 
limited exposure to subprime-related products, but I believe that a considerable role was also 
played by the fact that the Bank, based on its past experience of financial crises, had already 
established  a  framework  for  flexibly  providing  liquidity.  As  you  know,  since  last  summer 
central  banks  in  North  America  and  Europe  have  introduced  various  tools  for  liquidity 
provision to address elevated pressures in short-term funding markets. For example, the Fed 
has  extended  the  maximum  maturity  of  its  funds-supplying  operations  to  one  month,  from 
two weeks. The Bank employs funds-supplying tools with a variety of maturities – some of 
4 
 BIS Review 66/2008
which have a maximum maturity of one year – and this enables the Bank to provide funds 
with  the  appropriate  maturity.  In  March  this  year,  the  Fed  introduced  a  credit  facility  that 
allows securities companies to borrow funds. The Bank has included securities companies 
as  counterparties  since  2001,  when  it  introduced  a  complementary  lending  facility.  As  for 
collateral, central banks in North America and Europe have recently expanded the range of 
eligible collateral they accept, while the Bank has long accepted a broad range of assets as 
eligible  collateral.  Moreover,  the  Bank  has  a  "pooled  collateral"  system,  which  allows 
counterparties to change their collateral in a flexible manner when necessary. 
Needless  to  say,  excessive  use  of  such  supportive  measures  may  hamper  the  proper 
functioning  of  financial  markets,  which  should  operate  autonomously,  and  therefore  it  is 
important  to  maintain  a  good  balance  between  offering  supportive  measures  and  leaving 
things  to  the  autonomous  functioning  of  the  market.  What  we  have  learned  from  Japan's 
experience in 1997 and subsequent years, however, is that once strains occur in borrowing 
from  the  market,  smooth  borrowing  and  lending  become  difficult,  and  problems  cannot  be 
easily  resolved.  In  order  to  maintain  a  financial  environment  in  which  monetary  policy 
accommodation  effects  derived  from  the  present  low  interest  rates  are  fully  realized,  the 
Bank will continue to carefully monitor market developments and to ensure the stability of the 
money market. It will also carefully assess the future outlook for economic activity and prices, 
closely  considering  the  likelihood  of  its  projections  as  well  as  factors  posing  upside  or 
downside risks, and will implement its policies in a flexible manner. 
Basic thinking concerning the conduct of monetary policy 
II.  
Having  dealt  with  the  economic  and  price  situation  and  the  Bank's  conduct  of  monetary 
policy  in  the  near  term,  I  would  now  like  to  spend  the  rest of  the  time talking  about  some 
fundamental points that I think significant for the conduct of monetary policy. 
The importance of maintaining price stability in the medium to long term 
A.  
First  of  all,  I  would  like  to  emphasize  the  importance  of  correctly  understanding  "price 
stability," one of the objectives of monetary policy. The Bank of Japan Act stipulates that the 
Bank's  currency  and  monetary  control  shall  be  aimed  at  achieving  price  stability,  thereby 
contributing to the sound development of the national economy. I strongly support the spirit 
of  this  provision,  and  would  like  to  clarify  the  important  point  that  "price  stability"  in  the 
provision means stability that can be sustained in the medium to long term. The public seems 
to  understand,  as  common  sense,  that  price  stability  is  essential  and it  is  important  that  it 
continue in the medium to long term. However, in reality, policy actions aimed at realizing this 
objective are not necessarily supported by many people all the time. For instance, many of 
you may remember the situation during the economic bubble in Japan – in fiscal 1987 and 
fiscal 1988, the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI stayed in the 0-1 percent range and 
this, coupled with other factors, caused the public to strongly oppose a possible raising of 
interest rates, despite the overheating of the economy. I do not think that low interest rates 
were  the  only  factor  behind  the  economic  bubble,  nor  do  I  think  that  it  is  appropriate  to 
conduct  monetary  policy  with  the  aim  of  controlling  asset  prices.  Nevertheless,  I  consider 
that, in conducting monetary policy, it is important to monitor various factors influencing the 
economy,  including  developments  in  asset  prices,  to  realize  sustainable  economic  growth 
with  price  stability.  Assessment  of  the  economic  situation  with  such  a  wide-ranging 
perspective  may  lead  to  raising  of  interest  rates  under  certain  circumstances,  even  when 
price  indicators  suggest  that  prices  are  stable.  On  the  other  hand,  even  when  inflation  is 
suggested by data, central banks may need to reduce interest rates in particular situations. A 
good example would be an increase in consumer prices resulting merely from a temporary 
rise in crude oil prices due to supply-side factors. Reducing policy interest rates to respond to 
an  economic  downturn  caused  by  deterioration  in  the  terms  of  trade  may  contribute  to 
ensuring  economic  growth  with  continued  price  stability  –  although  such  a  policy  action 
BIS Review 66/2008 
 5
should be taken only when energy-related price rises are not leading to broad-based inflation 
accompanied  by  higher  inflation  expectations,  in  other  words,  there  are  no  second-round 
inflation effects. 
The Bank reviews and releases, annually in principle, the "understanding of medium- to long-
term  price  stability"  –  that  is,  the  level  of  inflation  that  each  member  of  the  Policy  Board 
understands as being consistent with price stability over the medium to long term. The latest 
review  conducted  at  the  end  of  April  indicated  that  there  was  no  major  change  from  the 
previous review – that is, the "understanding" expressed in terms of the year-on-year rate of 
change  in  the  CPI  currently  falls  in  a  range  approximately  between  0  and  2  percent,  with 
most  Policy  Board  members'  median  figures  at  around  1  percent.  The  Bank  conducts 
monetary policy taking account of the "understanding." 
Forecasts for the economy and prices bearing uncertainty in mind 
B. 
The second point I would like to emphasize is that we should be fully aware of the fact that 
forecasts of economic activity and prices involve considerable uncertainty. 
Economic  forecasters,  including  central  banks,  do  their  utmost  to  provide  accurate 
projections  of  economic  activity  and  prices,  but  projection  errors  are  often  sizable.  In  the 
case of projections of the economic growth rate one year ahead presented by central banks 
as well as private and  government organizations, for example, the average historical error 
ranges exceed 1 percent. This shows the current limit of human ability to predict the future. 
Considerable uncertainty attends the economic outlook, and it is therefore necessary to keep 
in mind the possibility that the economy will not evolve as projected, making it a prerequisite 
in the conduct of monetary policy to perceive factors posing both upside and downside risks. 
Some experts warned of the risk of a bubble in the U.S. housing market and, furthermore, 
the possibility of excessive position-taking in credit markets, as these might result in severe 
economic  shocks.  It  is  indeed  important  to  have  such  a  vision  regarding  the  economy.  I 
would, however, hesitate to endorse the opinion that the Fed should have had, a few years 
ago,  a  baseline  scenario  that  incorporated  a  possible  bursting  of  the  housing  bubble  and 
disruptions in financial markets, and that it should have conducted monetary policy based on 
the  scenario.  From  the  perspective  of  policymakers,  a  convincing  approach  would  be  one 
where the possibility of the bursting of a bubble is regarded as a risk factor for the conduct of 
monetary policy – rather than one where it is incorporated in the baseline scenario. This is 
the basic concept behind the Bank's approach, where it assesses the baseline scenario, or 
the  most  likely  outlook  –  the  assessment  from  the  "first  perspective"  –  while  assessing 
various  risk  factors  and  the  cost  that  would  be  incurred  should  risks  materialize  –  the 
assessment from the "second perspective." 
The  latest  Outlook  Report  provides,  in  the  form  of  charts,  the  aggregated  probability 
distributions compiled from the distributions attributed by individual Policy Board members to 
the  likelihood  of  divergence  upward  or  downward  from  their  forecast,  with  the  aim  of 
providing  more  detailed  and  visual  descriptions  of  the  level  of  risks  to  the  forecast.  Each 
chart shows a bell-shaped distribution with the most likely projection forming the top of the 
curve.  The  charts  are  called  Risk  Balance  Charts,  since  they  indicate  how  the  risks  are 
distributed around the central view and how the distributions are skewed. The Bank released 
these Risk Balance Charts because it considered that risks that were not deemed most likely 
by the Bank should also be described in a way that the public could understand easily. 
Complex interdependency between financial and economic developments 
C.  
The third point I would like to mention is that there is a complex interdependency between 
financial  and  economic  developments,  and  this  should  be  fully  taken  into  account  in 
assessment  of  the  economic  and  price  situation.  This  relationship  can  be  seen  in  Japan's 
post-bubble experience in the late 1980s, the U.S. IT bubble in the late 1990s, and the recent 
subprime  mortgage  problem.  It  is  difficult  to  explain  these  cases  by  using  models  derived 
6 
 BIS Review 66/2008
from  standard  economic  theory.  What  happened  in  U.S.  financial  markets  recently  was  a 
decline  in  market  liquidity.  When  this  occurs,  although  sellers  of  financial  products  in  the 
market offer prices, no one is willing to buy at those prices, resulting in a drastic shrinkage of 
market transactions. As a result, market participants are unable to take or hedge risks, and 
this in turn negatively affects economic activity. 
Unfortunately, there is no perfect explanation of why this complex phenomenon occurs. This 
makes it all the more important for central banks to continue their efforts to steadily gather 
and analyze a wide range of data, including information relating to both economic activity and 
financial conditions as well as information at both the macro- and micro-economic levels, and 
to update the analysis as new information comes in. I think, while the variety of knowledge 
and experience accumulated within central banks should be fully mobilized, it is important for 
them to remain humble, fully recognizing the limits of human knowledge. 
Examining the financial environment 
D. 
The fourth point I would like to make is that assessment of monetary policy effects requires 
examination of the overall financial environment, including not only the level of nominal short-
term interest rates but also developments in various other interest rates, the state of financial 
markets' functioning, and the lending stance of financial institutions. 
Central banks use a short-term interest rate, usually an overnight rate, as their policy interest 
rate.  In  Japan,  the  policy  interest  rate  is  the  uncollateralized  overnight  call  rate,  and  the 
target level is currently set at around 0.5 percent. However, it is not only short-term interest 
rates that influence the spending behavior of firms and households, but also ones with longer 
maturities – in other words, all the interest rates that form the yield curve. It is also important 
to assess the level of interest rates in real terms, taking into account expected inflation rates. 
Furthermore, it should be borne in mind that firms, when borrowing from banks or from the 
market by issuing bonds, have to pay higher interest rates than risk-free borrowers such as 
the  government,  with  spreads  added  onto  the  benchmark  rates  in  accordance  with  their 
creditworthiness. In some cases, financial institutions may refuse to lend even if a borrower 
is willing to pay a higher interest rate. 
Given the facts I have described, when assessing the effects of monetary policy and making 
policy decisions, it is vital to examine thoroughly not only the appropriate level of the policy 
interest rate but also the overall financial environment, which is suggested by the shape of 
the yield curve, the relationship between the level of the policy interest rate and the potential 
economic growth rate as well as the expected inflation rate, various credit spreads that are 
added onto benchmark interest rates, and the lending stance of financial institutions. 
Conclusion 
I have explained the basic points that are important for the conduct of monetary policy. In 
closing, I would like to touch upon a few issues related to the organization and behavior of 
central banks. 
The first issue relates to the basis for central banks' independence – in other words, why they 
alone are entitled to conduct monetary policy. I explained earlier that a central bank takes 
policy action to ensure sustainable price stability in the medium to long term. Such action, 
however, may not be popular in the short term. What then justifies such action by a central 
bank? My answer is that accurate research and analysis by a central bank form the basis for 
the policy decision. The economy is constantly undergoing change, even at this moment, in a 
situation where economic globalization and development in information and communications 
technology  are  in  progress.  This  is  why  I  respect  central  bank  culture,  which  attaches 
importance to being humble and always learning. In addition, it is indispensable for a central 
bank to explain clearly the reasons for its policy decisions – that is to say, it should ensure 
transparency.  After  all,  a  central  bank's  independence  is  based  on  years  of  experience  in 
BIS Review 66/2008 
 7
making policy decisions based on its accurate analysis, and on transparency with regard to 
its policy decisions. 
The  second  issue  relates  to  the  importance  of  banking  operations  carried  out  by  central 
banks.  I  have  spoken  today  mainly  about  monetary  policy,  but  a  central  bank's  various 
banking operations also make an essential contribution to the development of the economy. 
To  cope  with  the  disruptions  in  global  financial  markets  since  last  summer,  central  banks 
have taken various measures to provide financial markets with ample liquidity, or even acted 
as an intermediary. Their banking functions have played a crucial role in ensuring that those 
monetary policy actions take effect smoothly. Despite the unstable functioning of the markets 
since the summer, payment and settlement systems have not undergone major disruption. 
When  financial  markets  experience  turmoil,  foreign  exchange  transactions  are  generally 
prone to settlement risk because of the time difference, and this can jeopardize the markets 
further.  However,  such  problems  have  not  occurred,  and  this  is  partly  due  to  efforts  by 
central banks over many years to enhance the payment and settlement system for foreign 
exchange transactions. These efforts of major economies' central banks and private banks 
brought  a  new  system  into  effect  in  2002  that  realized  settlement  on  a  payment-versus-
payment basis of transactions involving a pair of different currencies – for example, the yen 
and the U.S. dollar or the euro and the dollar. If this system had not been introduced until 
some  years  later,  turmoil  in  the  markets  would  have  been  more  extensive.  Moreover, 
preparations  for  unexpected  events  are  just  as  important  as  the  banking  operations,  and 
central banks have been enhancing business continuity planning for emergencies including 
earthquakes, terrorist attacks, and system failures. 
In  recent  years,  monetary  policy  has  been  attracting  greater  attention,  and  this  is  indeed 
welcome. However, it is only one aspect of central banks, and I hope that banking operations 
performed  by  central  banks  as  "the  bank  for  banks,"  their  other  aspect,  will  gain  more 
recognition. Through the conduct of the two policies – monetary policy and banking policy – I 
will dedicate my efforts to ensuring stability in both prices and the financial system. 
8 
 BIS Review 66/2008
