Shamshad Akhtar: Inclusiveness, growth and gender equity 
Speech  by  Dr  Shamshad  Akhtar,  Governor  of  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan,  at  the  World 
Economic Forum, Davos, 24 January 2008. 
 1.  Growing  theoretical  and  empirical  evidence  across  the  world  has  now  confirmed  that 
“policy-inclusiveness” is a prerequisite for benefits of economic growth and development to 
trickle  down  smoothly  and  speedily  to  the  marginalized  and  vulnerable  segment  of 
population. Global  and  regional  efforts  launched  over  the  last  decade  or  so  have  paid  off. 
World has made decent inroads in reducing level of poverty and financial exclusion, tracking 
and  monitoring  global  and  regional  poverty  and  its  dimensions  and  developing  better 
understanding  of  the  nexus  and  transmission  mechanism  of  inclusiveness,  growth  and 
gender equity. 
2. In my remarks I propose to lay out the size and dimension of the exclusion with focus on 
women and make the point that gender inequalities exacerbate exclusion of large segment 
and level of exclusion aggravates gender inequity itself. 
3.  To  address  “exclusion”  there  is  need  to  nurture  policy  inclusiveness,  ensuring  robust 
campaign  of  financial  inclusion  to  broaden  access  to  finance,  while  launching  supportive 
development  strategies  and  programs  that  enhance  the  viability  and  sustainability  of  the 
financial services provided to the vulnerable groups. 
Size and dimension of exclusion 
4.  With  better  global  monitoring  mechanisms  it  is  now  well  established  that  “women  are 
poorer and disadvantaged relative to men”, as: 
• 
Nearly  70%1
  of  the  one  billion  of  world’s  poor  living  on  less  than  $1  a  day  are 
women  and  half  a  billion  live  in  Asia.  This  number  goes  up  to  1.4  billion  if  one 
applies $2 a day definition for poverty; 
Women make up 65% of the world’s illiterate2; and 
Women get paid less and hold less than 6% of senior management positions3
• 
• 
5.  Feminization  of  poverty  is  overwhelming  and  perennial  gender  inequality  results  in 
“inequality trap” which ends up reproducing other types of inequalities. This statement of the 
World  Bank’s  Global  Monitoring  Report,  2007  captures  well  the  qualitative  dimension, 
complexity  and  enormity  of  problem  and  the  associated  challenges  of  tackling  gender 
inequalities which have trapped women in poverty. 
6.  Notwithstanding,  significant  reduction  in  poverty  incidence  in  recent  years,  albeit  at 
different  pace  across  the  world,  is  impressive.  Population  growth  and  economic  cyclical 
factors however add annually to the ranks of poor. In Asia, poverty incidence fell from 27% in 
1990  to  20%  by  2006  accompanied  by  improvements  in  attainment  of  MDGs.  Pace  of 
poverty  reduction  has  been  steeper  in  East  Asia  relative  to  South  Asia4  with  former  lifting 
 etc. 
                                                 
1   The estimate of poor women is based on UNDP Human Development Report 1995 which stated, "poverty has 
a woman's face – of 1.3 billion people in poverty 70%are women." This ratio of poor women is most widely 
quoted even presently. 
2   Global Call for Action “Stand up & speak out: 70% poor are women” 2007. 
3
Ibid. 
  
4   The World Bank, Global Monitoring Report, 2007. 
BIS Review 25/2008 
 1
around  630  million  people  from  extreme  poverty  in  under  a  quarter  of  a  century.  This  has 
lowered the region’s share in the total poverty from 58% in 1981 to just 9% in 2004. In South 
Asia  poverty  fell  from  52%  in  1981  to  32%  in  2004,  but  absolute  numbers  of  poor  remain 
large.  Several  factors  have  contributed  to  improvements  in  these  indicators  ranging  from 
higher economic growth and liberalization to concrete affirmative and  targeted anti-poverty 
programs. 
Nexus between inclusiveness, growth and gender equity 
7. There is now a broad consensus emerging in development literature that women being a 
large proportion of population and labor force, if appropriately nurtured, through development 
and  finance  inclusive  policies  would  have  more  distinct  impact  on  economic  growth  and 
reduce poverty. 
8. Recent evidence of few key reports including the World Bank’s Global Monitoring Report, 
2007 and Access for All, 2007 and the World Economic Forum, Gender Report, 2007 brings 
out with greater clarity and distinctly the nexus between inclusiveness, growth and poverty 
reduction. 
• 
in 
influences 
turn,  among  others, 
First,  evidence  confirms  that  there  is  a  positive  correlation  between  country’s 
gender gap ranking and their per capita income as well as competitiveness ranking. 
Consequently,  it  is  found  that  countries  with  low  per  capita  incomes  and  ranking 
inadvertently have high gender gaps. 
Second,  impact  of  growth  on  poverty  on  women’s  uplift  varies  depending  on  the 
level  of  incomes  of  countries  as  well  as  the  quality  of  economic  growth  and  its 
transmission  mechanism  which 
income 
distribution.  The  Global  Monitoring  Report,  2007  found  that  in  19  low  income 
countries, 1 percent of GDP growth was associated with a 1.3 percent fall in the rate 
of extreme poverty and a 0.9 percent fall in the $2-a-day poverty rate. However, for 
middle-income countries the impact of GDP per capita growth on poverty is less and 
in  some  countries  average  poverty  did  not  decline  despite  increase  in  economic 
growth. 
Third, although faster economic development and poverty reduction spurs gender 
equality  the  relationship  is  marred  by  issues  of  simultaneity  and  difficulties  in 
comprehending  the  causality  of  relationship.  On  one  hand  economic  growth  and 
poverty  reduction  initiatives  help  to  improve  sex-specific  Human  Development 
Indices and augment gender empowerment. On the other hand, efforts to promote 
gender equality by way of education and enhanced women’s participation in labor 
force,  credit  etc.  results  in  higher  contribution  of  this  segment  of  population  to 
economic  growth  and  poverty  reduction.  Recent  studies  using  cross-country 
regressions found that female education has a larger impact on growth than male 
education.  Furthermore,  evidence  indicates  that  the  direct  and  indirect  effects  of 
gender  inequality  in  educational  attainment  accounted  for  38  percent  of  the  2.5 
percentage point gap in growth rates between South Asia and East Asia. 
  9.  It  is  now  well  established  that  proper  delivery  of  microfinance  to  women  helps  reduce 
poverty  and  social  indicators,  while  promoting  economic  growth.  Women’s  empowerment 
through proper access to credit further facilitates attainment of a set of MDGs and gender 
equality through: (i) poverty reduction, (ii) universal primary education, (iii) reduction in under 
5 mortality, (iv) improved maternal health, and (v) lowering of HIV/AIDS incidence. 
10.  While  these  relationship  and  linkages  have  been  found  to  exist,  the  twist  and  turns  in 
causality  and  simultaneity,  the  social  beliefs  and  practices  and  complexities  of  delivery  of 
service  have  deterred  achieving  effective  results  for  gender  balance.  A  prerequisite  for 
attainment  of  gender  equality  and  its  sustainability  it  is  important  to  provide  women  equal 
2 
 BIS Review 25/2008
access to “opportunities” backed by proper rights, voice and access to human and productive 
resources with the objective of augmenting their economic empowerment. 
Financial and development inclusive policies 
11.  Global  microfinance  campaign  and  initiatives  have  helped  in  extending  the  finance  to 
poor.  This  has  played  a  significant  role  in  changing  lives  of  poor  through  economic 
empowerment.  In  Asia,  the  number  of  microfinance  beneficiaries  has  now  reached  113 
million  74%  of  which  are  poorest  and  65%  women.  Including  families  of  the  beneficiary 
clients, the overall impact of microfinance is close to 465 million5. Number of microfinance 
beneficiary in Asia is the largest constituting 85% of the total recorded microfinance clients 
world-wide. 
12.  Microfinance  link  with  gender  equity  is  now  evolving  in  a  number  of  countries.  For 
instance:  In  Bangladesh  Grameen  Bank  and  ASA  report  that  97%  and  78%  of  its  total  12 
million  clients,  respectively  are  women.  In  Mexico,  98%  of  the  765,362  clients  of  Banco 
Compartamos’s are women. In Indonesia, Bank Rakyat Indonesia reports 50% of its client 
are  women.  This  ratio  is  70%  in  Afghanistan  and  50%  in  Pakistan.  Most  microfinance 
institutions (MFIs)/Microfinance banks (MFBs) report a high return on equity and assets and 
recovery rate is by and large over 90%. 
13.  Global  and  regional  challenges  of  reducing  poverty  and  MDGs  are  daunting  but 
attainable provided there is more accelerated, aggressive, brutal and frontal attack through 
well  coordinated  and  cohesive  economic  and  social  policies  as  dealing  with  “poverty”  is 
complex given its dimensions and multiple causative factors. 
14. Recognizing this dilemma, the evolution of financial inclusion that aims to broaden and 
deepen access to development finance for all, of which microfinance is a subset, is timely. 
Ultimately  it  is  a  well  functioning  and  efficient  financial  market  which  can  deal  more 
holistically  with  provision  of  financial  services  to  the  economy  and  population.  However, 
emphasis  on  building  financial  inclusive  system  is  an  integral  and  core  pillar  of  financial 
sector  reforms.  This  has  emerged  in  direct  recognition  that  growth  and  development  of 
finance does not alone address question of “access.” 
15. Direct intervention to build financially inclusive system is critical as one recognizes fully (i) 
financial  markets  failures  and  imperfections  such  as  information  asymmetries,  lack  of 
sensitivity  to  gender  and  redistributive  dimensions  of  resources  and  wealth  and  high 
transaction costs etc.; (ii) high price and non-price barriers such as lack of credit history and 
collateral  and  connection;  and  (iii)  other  constraints  such  as  lack  of  literacy  and 
entrepreneurial skills, etc. 
16. Over the years, there has been substantive development in the architecture and thinking 
on  financial  inclusion.  While  there  is  no  “one-size  fits  all”  strategy  or  approach  but  it  is 
important to recognize few core or necessary conditions aside from host of other sufficient 
conditions that are needed to maximize the benefits derived from a well designed financial 
inclusion strategy. At the outset, it is critical to understand the size and dimension of financial 
exclusion. 
17.  Drawing  from  this  broad  framework,  State  Bank  of  Pakistan  (SBP)  has  launched  a 
Financial  Inclusion  Program  with  the  assistance  of  DFID.  As  a  precursor  to  this  Program, 
SBP has already formulated a microfinance strategy which aims to enhance the outreach of 
microfinance industry to 3 million by 2001 though efforts are underway to fast track this and 
to  reach  10  million  in  next  few  years.  In  conjunction  with  this,  SBP  is  working  with  the 
industry to enhance outreach by proper exploitation of the avenues available for promoting 
                                                 
5   State of the Microcredit Summit Campaign Report 2007. 
BIS Review 25/2008 
 3
credit  for  Small  and  Medium  Enterprises  and  agriculture  and  rural  finance.  While  financial 
penetration ratio is quite low in Pakistan, the growth in outreach has improved: for instance: 
(i) number of microfinance beneficiaries have tripled to 1.5 million over the last two years, (ii) 
number  of  agriculture  borrowers  increased  to  2  million  by  the  end  of  this  fiscal  year,  with 
agriculture credit rising from just over Rs50 billion in FY03 to almost Rs200 billion in FY07; 
and (iii) number of small and medium enterprise borrowers rose from 91,663 in Dec 2003 to 
nearly 190,000 in Dec 2007. 
18. Through this forum, I would like to invite other stakeholders including Standard Chartered 
Bank  (SCB)  to  join  us  and  DFID  –  together  to  further  augment  the  financial  inclusion 
program.  Pakistan  has  laid  sound  financial  sector  legal,  policy,  regulatory  and  supervisory 
framework and has now an elaborate banking and microfinance industry infrastructure which, 
if effectively, nurtured and exploited can pave way for better results in extending outreach. 
4 
 BIS Review 25/2008
