Donald L Kohn: The economic outlook 
Speech by Mr Donald L Kohn, Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve  System,  at  the  National  Conference  on  Public  Employee  Retirement  Systems 
Annual Conference, New Orleans, Louisiana, 20 May 2008. 
The  original  speech,  which  contains  various  links  to  the  documents  mentioned,  can  be  found  on  the  US  Federal  Reserve 
System’s website.  
 These have been challenging times for the U.S. economy. Homebuilding and house prices 
have  gone  through  prolonged  and  deep  declines;  the  resulting  broad  pullback  in  financial 
markets from risk-taking and credit extension has transmitted some of the weakness in the 
housing  sector  to  other  types  of  spending.  At  the  same  time,  a  substantial  run-up  in  the 
prices  of  petroleum  and  other  commodities  has  simultaneously  increased  inflation  and 
damped spending on other goods and services. I don't need to tell you that challenging times 
for the economy are also challenging times for those entrusted with managing pension funds. 
So I thought you might find it useful this morning for me to review where I think the economy 
is and where it might be going. That, in turn, depends critically on developments in financial 
markets, and I'll have something to say about those developments as well. Finally, I'll end 
with a few thoughts about what the recent turbulence in financial markets may imply for the 
administration of public pension funds.1  
Recent economic developments 
Economic activity this year has been quite sluggish. The weakness in activity continues to be 
shaped by the fallout from the contraction in housing markets that began two years ago. The 
demand for housing continued to decline early this year, and sales could fall even further in 
coming months, given the tightness in mortgage lending. Nonprime mortgages have all but 
disappeared from the mortgage market. Moreover, with only limited securitizations of prime 
jumbo loans, rates on those loans are relatively high, and their share of total originations has 
shrunk  significantly  since  last  July.  Rates  for  fixed-rate  conforming  loans  have  dropped  to 
close  to  6  percent.  But  even  there,  the  good  news  is  tempered  somewhat  because,  with 
delinquencies  on  prime  mortgages  rising,  the  government-sponsored  enterprises  have 
tightened their standards for conforming loans and added fees for borrowers with lower credit 
scores  and  less  collateral.  All  prominent  measures  of  house  prices  are  now  showing 
declines.  Although  lower  prices  would  eventually  help  bolster  housing  demand,  the 
expectations  of  further  declines  in  prices  may  currently  be  exacerbating  the  difficulties  in 
housing markets.  
In this environment, homebuilders have made only limited progress in reducing the very large 
overhang of unsold new homes despite having cut starts to a level not seen since early 1991. 
Single-family starts fell to an annual rate of 690,000 in April; the pace of new activity has now 
dropped by a 1/2 million units in each of the past two years. The supply of existing homes on 
the market also remains quite high and is likely to be augmented in coming months by rising 
foreclosures. As a result, further cuts in construction appear to be in train. 
The sharp contraction in housing was at the center of the slowdown in economic activity that 
began  late  last  year.  By  early  this  year,  however,  the  spillovers  from  the  housing  market 
correction onto other sectors of the economy began to show through more clearly; consumer 
                                                 
1   Paul  Smith,  David  Wilcox,  and  Joyce  Zickler,  of  the  Board's  staff  contributed  to  the  preparation  of  these 
remarks. The views expressed are my own and do not necessarily represent the views of other members of 
the Board or the Federal Open Market Committee. 
BIS Review 64/2008 
 1
and business spending, which had slowed at the end of 2007, has remained on a shallow 
trajectory since then.  
In  particular,  spending  on  consumer  goods,  including  new  motor  vehicles,  has  been  soft. 
Since  last  fall,  rising  prices  for  energy  and  food  have  made  a  significant  dent  in  the 
purchasing power of consumers' incomes. Moreover, despite some improvement in the stock 
market recently, households' net worth has deteriorated since the beginning of the year as 
the prices of homes have declined; and credit conditions have tightened. In reaction to these 
adversities, households seem to have become extremely downbeat about prospects for jobs 
and income. 
Business  spending  for  equipment  and  software  edged  down  in  the  first  quarter,  and  the 
environment  for  capital  spending  remains  difficult;  businesses  are  uncertain  about  the 
economic  outlook,  and  lenders  have  adopted  more  stringent  lending  standards.  However, 
while  conditions  are  quite  tight  for  riskier  firms,  credit  does  appear  to  be  more  readily 
available to investment-grade businesses. 
More  difficult  financing  conditions  also  seem  to  be  leaving  an  imprint  on  nonresidential 
construction,  which  now  appears  to  be  softening  after  a  couple  of  years  of  sharp  gains. 
According  to  our  April  Senior  Loan  Officer  Opinion  Survey  on  Bank  Lending  Practices,  a 
large  majority  of  banks,  which  are  the  largest  provider  of  commercial  mortgages,  reported 
tightening  standards  on  commercial  real  estate  over  the  preceding  three  months.2  The 
issuance  of  securitized  commercial  real  estate  loans,  which  funds  a  little  more  than  one-
fourth of all outstanding commercial mortgages, has slowed to a trickle. Sales of commercial 
properties fell sharply in the first quarter, and late last year prices appeared to have begun to 
decline.  
A bright spot has been the external sector. Although the pace of real activity in some foreign 
economies also appears to be slowing, the overall rate of expansion in our trading partners – 
especially emerging Asian economies such as China – remains solid. Some of the pullback 
in U.S. demand has been absorbed by declines in imports, and the decline in the dollar has 
made U.S. firms more competitive in export markets, though it has also accentuated inflation 
concerns. 
The deceleration in economic activity has been reflected in the labor market, where layoffs 
have risen and hiring has slowed. Payroll employment has now fallen for four consecutive 
months. The combination of job losses and the greater difficulty in finding jobs has pushed 
the unemployment rate up to 5 percent in recent months.  
Financial market developments 
As  I've  just  noted,  the  tightening  of  financial  conditions  as  a  result  of  stresses  in  financial 
markets has been an important factor in the recent slowdown of the U.S. economy. In recent 
weeks, however, U.S. financial markets have improved somewhat. Equity prices have risen 
noticeably  since  mid-March.  Spreads  on  both  investment-grade  and  speculative-grade 
corporate  bonds  have  generally  narrowed  over  the  same  period,  and  investment-grade 
companies, including financial institutions, have been able to raise funds in credit markets. 
Financial intermediaries have also tapped equity markets to bolster capital depleted by the 
recognition of losses on loans and securities. 
Clearly, some of the extraordinary increase in risk aversion that we saw earlier this year has 
been  reversed.  Apparently,  a  combination  of  factors  has  contributed  to  a  perception  that 
financial markets and the economy are less likely than some had feared to experience very 
                                                 
2   Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  (2008),  "The  April  2008  Senior  Loan  Officer  Opinion 
Survey on Bank Lending Practices" (April). 
2 
 BIS Review 64/2008
adverse  outcomes:  Among  those  factors  were  Federal  Reserve  actions  to  bolster  liquidity 
and ease monetary policy, the success of a number of financial institutions in raising capital, 
and  incoming  economic  data  and  earnings  reports  that  were  not  as  weak  as  market 
participants had expected. 
Still,  the  persistence  of  relatively  wide  spreads  in  many  markets  suggests  that  investors 
continue  to  be  worried  about  credit  quality;  the  issuance  of  speculative-grade  bonds  has 
been scant this year; and securitization markets for many types of mortgages continue to be 
impaired. In addition, term bank funding markets remain under pressure as banks and other 
lenders  in  these  markets  conserve  capital  and  liquidity  and  limit  risk-taking.  Banks  have 
further tightened lending standards across a wide range of business and consumer loans. 
These  findings  generally  suggest  that  market  participants  remain  wary,  and  in  that 
environment,  improvements  in  financial  markets  are  vulnerable  to  negative  news  on  the 
economy or the extent of credit losses. I expect further, but gradual, improvement in financial 
markets. Credit flows need to be re-channeled and re-intermediated with less leverage, less 
rollover risk, and greater compensation for taking risk than before the turmoil began last year. 
Securitized assets need to be simpler, more transparent, and less reliant on the imprimatur 
of a credit rating agency. Lenders and other investors need to gain greater confidence that 
they understand the extent and incidence of the losses arising from the lax lending practices 
of recent years and the current economic slowdown. Those processes are likely to be slow 
and they may be set back from time to time, but they will ultimately succeed in giving us a 
more robust financial system than we had a year ago. 
The economic outlook 
Although the current financial and economic situation remains quite difficult, I believe that the 
most likely scenario over the next year or so is one in which economic activity firms during 
the  second  half  of  this  year  and  then  gathers  some  strength  in  2009.  In  the  near  term, 
consumer  spending  is  likely  to  receive  a  boost  from  the  rebates  that  are  now  flowing  to 
taxpayers. Although the timing and the magnitude of the spending response are uncertain, 
economic  studies  of  the  previous  experience  suggest  that  a  noticeable  proportion  of 
households respond reasonably quickly to temporary cash flows. Of course, the stimulus to 
domestic production will depend on the extent to which the additional demand is met by a 
temporary drawdown of inventories or an increase in imports rather than by an expansion in 
domestic output. But to date, businesses appear to be keeping tight control on inventories, 
and a reasonable assumption is that we will see a temporary lift to the economy in coming 
months. 
The pace of activity should continue to improve next year, with an important part of the gains 
coming from the abatement of the forces currently restraining activity. That said, a number of 
factors  suggest  that  the  recovery  could  be  relatively  moderate.  I've  already  mentioned  my 
expectation that financial market functioning and risk appetites will continue to improve, but 
that recuperation will require some time. As all that happens, the policy easing the Federal 
Reserve has put in place over recent months will begin to show through more in reductions in 
the cost of capital and the greater availability of credit. The demand for housing is not likely 
to rebound substantially for a while after this episode, but the drag on growth from declining 
activity and prices in the housing market will ebb as excess inventories are worked off and 
affordability improves. Consumption should pick up along with the improvement in jobs and 
income,  though  a  gradual  increase  in  the  saving  rate  would  be  expected  now  that 
households will no longer be counting on increases in the value of their homes to finance 
retirement  or  other  future  spending.  With  a  lag,  business  investment  should  turn  up  as 
prospects  for  a  sustained  expansion  of  economic  activity  become  clearer.  And  both 
households  and  businesses  should  benefit  from  a  leveling-off  in  the  prices  of  energy  and 
other commodities along the path implied by futures markets. 
BIS Review 64/2008 
 3
As with any forecast, mine is subject to a number of uncertainties. One is the extent of the 
housing correction ahead of us. If the retrenchment in house prices becomes deeper than 
anticipated, its effect on lenders and financial markets could further damp overall economic 
activity.  We  are  in  uncharted  waters  when  the  financial  system  becomes  so  disrupted, 
though  we  should  consider  ourselves  fortunate  that  we  have  very  few  similar  historical 
episodes  on  which  to  base  our  judgments.  In  such  circumstances,  uncertainty  about  how 
credit conditions will evolve and how businesses and households will react to changing terms 
and conditions means that we can have even less confidence than usual in our economic 
forecasts. 
Inflation 
Another area of concern is the implications for inflation as a result of the recent run-up in the 
prices of energy, food, and other commodities. The recent news on inflation has been mixed. 
Core inflation has moderated a little so far this year. However, we have seen no relief from 
the  pressures  of  rising  prices  for  energy  and  food;  thus  headline  inflation  has  been  quite 
elevated. These prices have continued to rise despite slowing demand in the United States 
and,  to  a  lesser  extent,  in  other  countries.  Over  the  past  few  years,  emerging  market 
economies have increased demand for many  of these commodities,  and world supply has 
not  kept  pace  with  this  growing  demand.  For  oil,  non-OPEC  production,  particularly  in  the 
North  Sea  and  in  Mexico,  has  proved  disappointing,  and  OPEC  production  has  remained 
restrained.  As  for  food  prices,  bad  weather  has  combined  with  higher  production  costs  to 
restrain supplies. Consequently, agricultural inventories have been drawn down to low levels 
and have not been available to absorb the rising demand. Furthermore, higher energy prices 
have  affected  agricultural  prices  not  only  through  higher  costs  of  production  but  also  by 
boosting the demand for biofuels.  
Some observers have questioned whether the news on fundamentals affecting supply and 
demand  in  commodities  markets  has  been  sufficient  to justify  the  sharp  price  increases  in 
recent months. Some of these commentators have cited the actions of the Federal Reserve 
in  reducing  interest  rates  as  an  important  consideration  boosting  commodity  prices.  To  be 
sure,  commodity  prices  did  rise  as  interest  rates  fell.  However,  for  many  commodities, 
inventories have fallen to all-time lows, a development that casts doubt on the premise that 
speculative demand boosted by low interest rates has pushed prices above levels that would 
be consistent with the fundamentals of supply and demand. As interest rates in the United 
States fell relative to those abroad, the dollar declined, which could have boosted the prices 
of  commodities  commonly  priced  in  dollars  by  reducing  their  cost  in  terms  of  other 
currencies, hence raising the amount demanded by people using those currencies. But the 
prices of commodities have risen substantially in terms of all currencies, not just the dollar. In 
sum,  lower  interest  rates  and  the  reduced  foreign  exchange  value  of  the  dollar  may  have 
played a role in the rise in the prices of oil and other commodities, but it probably has been a 
small one. 
The  rise  in  commodity  prices  presents  particular  challenges  for  monetary  policy  because 
such increases both add to near-term inflationary pressures and damp demand. A tendency 
for  increases  in  commodity  prices  to  become  a  factor  in  ongoing  pricing  and  wage-setting 
more generally would be a worrisome development that would over time tend to undermine 
economic welfare.  
In the near term, headline inflation is likely to continue to be boosted by the direct effects of 
the recent increases in the prices of energy and food. If, as futures markets suggest, those 
prices level off later this year, prospects seem reasonably good for headline inflation to move 
back  in  line  over  time  with  core  inflation.  And  I  expect  core  inflation  to  ease  off  slowly  as 
commodity prices level out and as economic slack creates competitive conditions that inhibit 
increases in labor costs and prices. Despite the elevated headline inflation of the past four 
4 
 BIS Review 64/2008
years, we have seen little evidence of faster wage inflation. And healthy gains in productivity 
have helped to hold down labor cost pressures on prices. 
My expectations for moderating inflation and limited spillover effects from commodity price 
increases depend critically on the continued stability of inflation expectations. In that regard, 
year-ahead inflation expectations of households have increased this year in response to the 
jump  in  headline  inflation.  Of  greater  concern,  some  measures  of  longer-term  inflation 
expectations appear to have edged up. If longer-term inflation expectations were to become 
unmoored – whether because of a protracted period of elevated headline inflation or because 
the  public  misinterpreted  the  recent  substantial  policy  easing  as  suggesting  that  monetary 
policy makers had a greater tolerance for inflation than previously thought – then I believe 
that we would be facing a more serious situation. 
Monetary policy 
The  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  will  be  monitoring  inflation  developments  closely  for 
any sign that our longer-run objective of promoting price stability is threatened. At the same 
time,  we  also  need  to  continue  to  carefully  assess  whether,  after  a  period  of  near-term 
softness  in economic  activity,  the  economy  is  likely  to  be  on  track  for sustained  economic 
expansion  over  time.  With  the  information  now  in  hand,  it  is  my  judgment  that  monetary 
policy appears to be appropriately calibrated for now to promote both rising employment and 
moderating  inflation  over  the  medium  term.  But  a  large  measure  of  uncertainty  surrounds 
that judgment and as the economy evolves, so will the appropriate stance of policy.  
Lessons for public pension systems 
Now let me shift my focus to what pension fund managers might glean as lessons learned 
from  the  recent  turmoil  in  financial  markets  and  some  of  the  structural  challenges  that  lie 
ahead. From what we have seen so far, public pension systems generally appear to have 
avoided  the  worst  of  the  damage  resulting  from  the  recent  tumult.  For  example,  while  a 
number of public funds evidently held structured credit products such as collateralized debt 
obligations, the overall level of exposure to those products appears to have been relatively 
small.  
Nonetheless, the recent experience does point up some serious considerations as pension 
funds address the challenges in meeting their obligations in coming years. One is that public 
pension systems – like all investors – need to be diligent about understanding and managing 
the risks on their balance sheets. Too many investors seem to have placed too much faith in 
credit  rating  agencies,  and  too  few  seem  to  have  developed  their  own  views  of  the  risks 
embedded in their holdings. Of course, developing such views is no small undertaking. But if 
ever  a  demonstration  of  the  value  of  doing  so  were  needed,  the  recent  episode  certainly 
provides it.  
Perhaps the biggest challenge facing public pension systems is inadequate funding. Even by 
current  measures  of  liability,  which  themselves  may  not  be  fully  revealing,  last  year  about 
three-fourths of public pension systems were underfunded, and about one-third were funded 
at less than 80 percent. Lengthening life expectancies and tight public budgets are making 
existing  pension  promises  ever  more  difficult  to  keep  –  and  the  problem  is  significantly 
magnified if promised health benefits are included.  
The funding situation puts systems under a great deal of pressure to reach for higher returns 
by investing in riskier assets. But as has been so clearly and forcefully demonstrated over 
the past year, there is no free lunch with risk-taking: The price is volatility, the extent of which 
should be well disclosed and the implications of which should be well understood.  
The generally high weight on equity and real estate investments in the typical public pension 
fund portfolio has increased in recent years. Part of that exposure has come from increased 
BIS Review 64/2008 
 5
investment in private equity, real estate investment trusts, and hedge funds. Indeed, some 
funds have allocated 25 percent or more of their portfolios to these "alternative" categories. 
With exposures like those, public pension systems should maintain formal risk-management 
procedures that are independent of the selection and evaluation of managers and that are 
carefully  designed  to  minimize  conflicts  of  interest  that  can  weaken  the  risk-management 
function.  
I  mentioned  earlier  that  current  measures  of  pension  liabilities  might  be  less  than  fully 
revealing.  Why  might  that  be  so?  The  chief  reason  is  that  public  pension  benefits  are 
essentially bullet-proof promises to pay. We all have read about instances in which benefits 
were  lost  when  a  private-sector  pension  sponsor  declared  bankruptcy  and  terminated  the 
plan. In the public sector, that just hasn't happened, even when the plan sponsor has run into 
serious financial difficulty. For all intents and purposes, accrued benefits have turned out to 
be  riskless  obligations.  While  economists  are  famous  for  disagreeing  with  each  other  on 
virtually  every  other  conceivable  issue,  when  it  comes  to  this  one  there  is  no  professional 
disagreement:  The  only  appropriate  way  to  calculate  the  present  value  of  a  very-low-risk 
liability is to use a very-low-risk discount rate. 
However, most public pension funds calculate the present value of their liabilities using the 
projected rate of return on the portfolio of assets as the discount rate. This practice makes 
little sense from an economic perspective. If they shift their portfolio into even riskier assets, 
does  the  value  of  the  liabilities  backed  by  their  taxpayers  go  down?  Financial  economists 
would say no, but the conventional approach to pension accounting says yes. Unfortunately, 
the measure of liabilities that results from this process has a real consequence: It pushes the 
burden of financing today's pension benefits onto future taxpayers, who will be called upon to 
fund the true cost of existing pension promises. 
Another  challenge  that  everyone  involved  in  public  pensions  faces  is  the  issue  of 
transparency.  Unlike  private  pension  funds,  public  pension  systems  do  not  account  for 
liabilities  in  a  standardized  way.  As  a  result,  public  employees,  taxpayers,  municipal  bond 
investors, credit rating agencies, and other market participants have a hard time comparing 
funding levels across systems and over time. 
What steps can pension funds take to improve transparency and help clarify their long-run 
challenges?  Ideally,  they  would  disclose  a  standardized  measurement  of  funding  status, 
using  consistent  and  appropriate  measures  of  liability.  They  might  also  disclose  how  their 
asset allocation affects the volatility of the returns on their assets and how their funding ratios 
and cash flow might be affected by various outcomes in the financial markets. Such practices 
almost  surely  would  be  welcomed  externally.  But  they  might  also  pay  dividends  internally, 
because the funds might find that the information about the volatility built into their systems 
changes their views about the amount of risk they want to shoulder.  
Public pension funds hold more than $3 trillion in assets and cover nearly 20 million workers 
and  retirees.  Those  funds  are  clearly  vital  to  the  business  of  state  and  local  governments 
across  the  country  as  well  as  to  the  public  employees  they  cover.  The  potential 
improvements  I  have  touched  on  today  –  adhering  to  best  practices  with  regard  to  risk 
management  and  grappling  with  some  of  the  difficult  structural  issues  that  currently  face 
public  pension  systems  –  would  help  strengthen  public  pension  systems  and  should 
minimize  the  risks  to  public  employees,  the  governments  that  employ  them,  and  the 
taxpayers that finance them both now and in the future. 
6 
 BIS Review 64/2008
