Ben S Bernanke: The importance of financial education and the National 
Jump$tart coalition survey 
Speech  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve  System,  at  the  Jump$tart  Coalition  for  Personal  Financial  Literacy  and  Federal 
Reserve  Board  Joint  News  Conference,  Federal  Reserve  Board,  Washington  DC, 
9 April 2008. 
 Good  morning.  It  is  my  pleasure  to  welcome  you  to  today's  briefing  on  the  results  of  the 
Jump$tart Coalition's biennial financial literacy survey of America's high school seniors.  
The financial preparedness of our nation's youth is essential to their well-being and of vital 
importance to our economic future. In light of the problems that have arisen in the subprime 
mortgage market, we are reminded of how critically important it is for individuals to become 
financially  literate  at  an  early  age  so  that  they  are  better  prepared  to  make  decisions  and 
navigate an increasingly complex financial marketplace. Choosing a credit card, saving for 
retirement  or  for  a  child's  education,  or  buying  a  home  now  requires  more  financial  savvy 
than ever before. Financial literacy and consumer education – coupled with robust consumer 
protection  –  makes  the  financial  marketplace  effective  and  efficient,  and  better  equips 
consumers to make tough yet smart financial decisions. Today, only eight states across the 
U.S. require personal finance before middle or high school graduation. I believe more states 
should  consider  making  personal  finance  a  requirement  for  all  students  who  seek  a  high 
school diploma. I am personally convinced that improving education is vital to the future of 
our  economy  and  all  its  citizens,  and  I  strongly  believe  that  promoting  financial  literacy,  in 
particular,  must  be  a  high  priority.  I  know  that  those  of  you  here  today  join  me  in  this 
conviction.  
The  Jump$tart  Coalition  is  a  leader  among  organizations  seeking  to  improve  the  personal 
financial literacy of students from kindergarten to the university level. In particular, through its 
biennial  survey  of  high  school  seniors  –  the  results  of  which  you  will  hear  about  shortly  – 
Jump$tart has brought increased attention to the need for  greater financial literacy among 
the  youth  of  our  nation.  During  the  Jump$tart  survey's  12-year  history,  the  data  gathered 
have served as the basis for useful measures of what young adults do and don't understand 
about finances. Undoubtedly, we will soon learn that there is plenty of work to be done and 
that our students have much to learn. 
The  Federal  Reserve  is  strongly  committed  to  Jump$tart's  mission  to  better  educate 
America's youth about personal finance. On the regional level, many Federal Reserve Banks 
work closely with the state coalitions to help achieve this worthy mission. In fact, there is at 
least one economic education specialist at each of the Reserve Banks and their branches. 
Many of these specialists offer training seminars to help educators teach vital economic and 
personal finance topics in their classrooms. The Federal Reserve also continues to support a 
variety of programs and initiatives to increase financial literacy. These include:  
• 
Money  Smart  Week,  an  annual  week-long  program  coordinated  by  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  Chicago,  which  educates  consumers  about  money  management 
and promotes financial education awareness in 20 cities across the 7th District;  
Building  Wealth,  a  resource  developed  by  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Dallas  to 
help consumers develop a personal plan for building wealth;  
"Life Smarts", a national quiz-based competition for high school students sponsored 
by the National Consumer League and promoted by many Reserve Banks;  
  BIS Review 42/2008 
 1
  Educational  web  sites,  such  as  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  San  Francisco's 
"FedVille,"  where  students  actively  learn  more  about  financial  concepts  such  as 
spending, saving, and earning interest; and  
FederalReserveEducation.Org, our system-wide education web portal offering easy 
access  to  a  host  of  beneficial  resources  geared  toward  students,  parents,  and 
teachers.  
In addition to these and many other Federal Reserve resources, we will continue to work to 
expand  the  resources  and  programs  devoted  to  the  important  public  policy  challenge  of 
improving financial literacy. 
I  want  to  take  this  opportunity  to  thank  the  Jump$tart  Coalition  and  their  partners  for  their 
continued support and commitment to furthering the financial education of our youth. Now, it 
is  with  great  pleasure  that  I  introduce  Laura  Levine,  executive  director  of  Jump$tart  and 
appointed member of President Bush's recently formed Council on Financial Literacy, who 
will give a report on the status of financial education of youth in this country. 
2 
 BIS Review 42/2008
