Donald L Kohn: Dedication remarks 
Speech by Mr Donald L Kohn, Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve  System,  at  the  Dedication  of  the  New  Seattle  Branch  Building  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of San Francisco, Renton, Washington, 7 April 2008.  
 Good  afternoon.  It  is  my  honor  and  pleasure  to  be  here  today  to  help  dedicate  the  new 
Seattle  Branch  building,  and  to  speak  about  how  this  terrific  new  facility  will  assist  the 
Federal Reserve System's efforts to help guide the national economy and serve the payment 
needs of the Northwest.  
I  would  like  to  express  my  personal  appreciation  to  the  City  of  Renton  for  its  support  and 
assistance  in  locating  the  Seattle  Branch  at  its  new  home  along  Naches  Avenue.  As 
Chairman of the Committee on Federal Reserve Bank Affairs at the Board of Governors, I 
have followed this building project closely, and value the city's cooperation in helping ensure 
its future success. I especially appreciate the city's close cooperation with us in upgrading 
the utilities and streets serving the site and, essentially, making it a welcome new home for 
Branch employees. 
The Seattle Branch, created in 1917, was housed in leased space until a downtown site was 
built in 1950. Although that building served the Seattle area's needs well for more than fifty 
years, service demands on the Branch have evolved and outstripped the capabilities of the 
old  building  and  site.  The  vault  and  cash  processing  areas  were  no  longer  adequate  for 
efficient operations, and cash delivery facilities could not accommodate the type and number 
of  delivery  vehicles,  which  had  resulted  in  armored  trucks  queued  along  Spring  Street. 
Furthermore,  the  building's  general  layout  and  construction  did  not  meet  the  post-9/11 
security  requirements  necessary  for  protecting  Federal  Reserve  System  employees  and 
operations.  
We  considered  several  sites  in  the  Seattle  metropolitan  area  for  the  new  building,  initially 
searching for a suitable site within the city limits. But our site and transportation requirements 
prompted us to consider options within the broader metropolitan area, and we found that this 
location's  proximity  to  major  roads  and  highways  will  improve  vehicular  access  for 
employees, visitors, and delivery personnel.  
As  you  may  have  noticed,  the  new  site  is  large  –  almost  10  acres  –  and  its  security  is 
evident.  Clearly,  the  safety  of  our  employees  and  operations  is  a  high  priority  that  has 
become a greater focus in the post-9/11 era, but the building is more than just secure: Its 
design supports our mission, which is to promote a stable and efficient financial system and 
to conduct a monetary policy that fosters maximum employment and stable prices.  
In recognition of our responsibilities as a community partner, the architecture of the building 
reflects both the character of the area as well as environmental concerns. For example, the 
building site borders a wetlands area that the Bank was careful to consider in situating the 
structure and tailoring the landscaping. A construction objective was to minimize the project's 
cost by using materials and methods commonly employed locally. The new building's exterior 
is  a  combination  of  low-maintenance  glass,  metal,  and  concrete  elements.  In  all,  the 
designers  have  produced  a  handsome  design  that  reflects  the  Branch's  desired  utilitarian 
theme and functional requirements. The natural landscaping around the building reflects the 
character of the region as well, and it serves as an important feature in the overall design, 
and helps minimize ongoing maintenance costs.  
And besides serving as an attractive asset in the City of Renton and in the greater Seattle 
metropolitan area, the new building should act as a catalyst for further development of the 
Longacres  area  by  attracting  other  financial  services  facilities.  It  will  serve  as  an  ideal 
location for meetings with the Branch board of directors and as a facility for interacting with a 
BIS Review 41/2008 
 1
wider public audience to exchange information on economic developments in the Northwest. 
And  these  meetings  will  support  our  broader  monetary  policy  mission.  Monetary  policy  is 
directed by the Federal Open Market Committee, or FOMC, which consists of the Board of 
Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  and  the  Reserve  Bank  presidents.  The  FOMC 
relies  on  information  provided  by  business  people  and  others  and  economic  intelligence 
gathered  from  around  the  nation.  The  Seattle  Branch  assists  FOMC  policymakers  by 
monitoring  indicators  of  economic  conditions  at  the  grassroots  level  here  in  the  Northwest 
through liaison with local community groups and businesses. In addition, through community 
outreach,  the  Seattle  Branch  supports  the  Federal  Reserve's  aim  to  provide  economic 
information to the community and offer economic and financial education programs to local 
groups and schools.  
Maintaining the effectiveness of the nation's payment system is another important aspect of 
our work here in the Northwest. The distribution of currency is critical to the local economy, 
and  the  Federal  Reserve  has  the  responsibility  to  ensure  the  reliability  and  availability  of 
cash. Fortunately, the new Branch building is designed to meet the cash service of Seattle 
area residents for many years to come. It comes equipped with state-of-the-art cash handling 
systems, including an automated storage vault to further improve operational efficiency, and 
its currency operations are designed to be scalable to address changing demands for cash in 
the Seattle region. 
Let  me  conclude  by  reiterating  my  great  pleasure  in  participating  in  this  ceremony,  which 
underscores  our  commitment  to  serve  the  growing  needs  of  the  Seattle  and  greater 
Northwest communities. I appreciate the opportunity you've provided me to speak about our 
central bank roles and functions and our strong links with the local economic community. 
I am confident that this building will enable us to continue to meet our own mission objectives 
and serve as an integral member of the community for many years to come. I congratulate 
Branch staff and the community for their roles in ushering in this outstanding facility. 
2 
 BIS Review 41/2008
