Christian Noyer: Inflation, financial innovation and monetary policies – 
some contemporary challenges 
Speech  by  Mr  Christian  Noyer,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France,  at  the  GIC  and  CEPII 
Conference, Paris, 13 May 2008. 
 Inflation pressures are now at work in most parts of the world. Today, I would like to start with 
offering some comments on this worrying development and then elaborate on the challenges 
raised by financial innovation for monetary policies. 
The current rise in global inflation appears in stark contrast with the price stability recorded 
over the past decades. 
During  the  last  twenty  years,  globalisation  has  made  a  significant  contribution  to  price 
stability.  With  new  large  players  (such  as  China  and  India)  entering  the  world  economy, 
cheap imports of manufactured goods have become available to developed countries. The 
fall  in  import  prices  has  allowed  real  consumption  wages  to  grow  without  impacting  real 
production  wages.  This,  in  turn,  has  lowered  the  inflation  rate  for  any  given  level  of 
employment.  In  parallel,  the  effects  of  globalisation  have  been  felt  more  indirectly  through 
increased competition, both on products and labour markets. 
Inflation dynamics have also changed. Maybe the most documented and commented-on of 
these  changes  has  been  the  so-called  flattening  of  the  Phillips  curve.  This,  in  economic 
jargon, means that domestic inflation has become less sensitive to the domestic output gap, 
or, alternatively, that it has become more stable during the business cycle. 
There are several possible – and not mutually exclusive – explanations for this phenomenon. 
Expectations may be more solidly anchored, which would lessen the impact of the output gap 
on current inflation. It is also possible that, as a result of structural reforms, the NAIRU has 
decreased  in  many  countries  in  recent  years,  thus  giving  the  "optical"  impression  of  a 
horizontal Phillips curve during this period. In a broader sense, globalisation itself may also 
be responsible for the flattening of the Phillips curve. In an open economy, domestic demand 
changes  can  easily  be  satisfied  through  increased  imports.  As  a  consequence,  domestic 
inflation may become less sensitive to the domestic output gap and more sensitive to global 
tensions on production capacities. 
Overall,  these  developments  have  made  it  easier  for  central  banks  to  bring  down  inflation 
without real costs to the economy. 
But it is clear, today, that these effects are being reversed. 
The prices of oil, food and other commodities are now increasing fast. There might be three 
reasons  for  this  rise  (the  importance  of  which  is  currently  hotly  debated):  first  a  supply-
demand  imbalance;  second,  the  emergence  of  commodities  as  an  asset  class,  attracting 
substantial  flows  into  commodity  funds;  and,  finally,  the  use  of  commodities  as  a  hedge 
against inflation or dollar depreciation. 
In addition, while labour supply in emerging countries will remain abundant, it is not all that 
clear that it will remain cheap. Indeed, we are currently seeing an increase in export prices in 
emerging countries, which translates into higher import prices for developed economies. 
In short, the world environment has become very inflationary. 
And  yet,  in  many  parts  of  the  world,  monetary  policies  remain  somehow  permissive.  The 
reason  for  this  paradox  can  be  found  in  the  dilemma  faced  by  many  countries,  which 
maintain  some  link  between  their  currencies  and  the  US  dollar,  in  order  to  prevent  an 
unwanted  appreciation  of 
to  Mundell’s 
rate.  However,  according 
their  exchange 
BIS Review 63/2008 
 1
times, 
financial 
innovation  significantly  weakens 
incompatibility  triangle,  a  country  cannot  tie  its  currency  to  another  currency  and 
simultaneously conduct an independent monetary policy, when capital flows freely between 
countries.  As  a  consequence,  many  emerging  economies  are  currently  led  to  partially 
"import" the US monetary policy although their situation and position in the economic cycle 
are fundamentally different. 
This situation could be very unstable and dangerous. First, real exchange rate appreciation – 
which is bound to occur anyway – takes place through increased inflation rather than nominal 
exchange  rate  appreciation.  Indeed,  inflation  in  many  emerging  countries  is  currently 
accelerating. Second, at the world level, we might be piling up inflationary pressures, which 
could develop further in 2009-10. There is an explosive mix of rising commodity prices and 
permissive monetary policies, which could create an ongoing spiral, and, if it were allowed to 
develop, would specially hurt the poor countries, most of which are net food importers. It is 
our common and joint responsibility to do everything in our power to avoid such an outcome. 
Let me now turn to another major challenge: the impact of financial innovation on the conduct 
of monetary policy. The current financial turmoil is here to remind us that financial innovation 
is  not  a  smooth  process.  An  appropriate  knowledge  of  the  mechanisms  through  which 
monetary  policy  affects  the  economy  is  of  crucial  importance  for  central  banks.  Financial 
innovation affects these mechanisms by altering the channels through which monetary policy 
operates. Drawing on some lessons from the current turmoil, I would like to make four points. 
First, securitisation has created new uncertainties in the transmission channels of monetary 
policy.  It  may  have  weakened  some  channels  and  strengthened  some  others.  At  least  in 
normal 
the  bank-lending  channel. 
Securitisation gives firms broader access to capital markets and, as such, makes them less 
dependent on bank funding. Similarly, banks may be more able to issue debt securities and 
less dependent on the constraint of funding themselves with secured deposits. At the same 
time,  however,  securitisation  strengthens  the  “direct”  transmission  channel  through  which 
interest rates operate, since a great number of financial intermediaries are more dependent 
on liquidity and on its price. 
Second,  financial  innovation  –  to  the  extent  that  it  makes  it  easier  to  take  risks  and 
encourages  the  “search  for  yield”  –  may  have  increased  the  impact  of  monetary  policy 
because, in such an environment, risk premia are highly procyclical and move in tandem with 
interest rates. 
Third, this same procyclicality of “risk taking” can lead to booms and busts, when investors’ 
appetite for risk changes. Another effect of financial innovation is thus to create asymmetries 
in the reaction of the economy to monetary policy: for example, the slow build-up of bubbles 
during periods of monetary easing followed by an abrupt retrenchment when monetary policy 
tightens.  Note  that  there  is  currently  a  debate  as  to  whether  this  inherent  procyclicality  of 
financial systems is amplified by our accounting and prudential regimes. 
Fourth, it may be that modern financial innovation creates new discontinuities in the financial 
system and dynamics. When conditions are less benign than usual, the transmission process 
along the interest rate curve becomes non-linear: a striking feature of this summer’s events 
was  the  surge  in  the  short-term  money  market.  Wider  and variable  spreads  between  term 
funding  rates  (of  which  many  bank  loans  are  priced  off)  and  policy  rates  may  reduce  the 
efficiency  of  interest  rate  adjustments  when  needed.  Innovation  also  reinforces  the 
mechanism of the "financial accelerator", through which the level of asset prices influences 
credit distribution (through collateral values and, now, its impact on banks tier one ratio), then 
the  real  economy;  and,  in  return,  the  real  economy  impacts  asset  prices  and  values.  This 
spiral can go upwards, or, as we see now, downwards. 
Overall, I believe that central banks have coped well with these challenges over the past ten 
months.  The  monetary  policy  response  has  differed  across  industrialised  countries,  as 
warranted  by  the  differences  in  economic  situations  and  outlooks.  A  striking  development, 
however,  has  been  the  progressive  convergence  of  liquidity  provision  frameworks,  even  if 
2 
 BIS Review 63/2008
technical  modalities  remain,  and  will  remain,  country-specific.  There  has  been  a  general 
move towards a lengthening of maturities, a broader range of collateral and a wider list of 
counterparties.  A  clear  and  strong  distinction  has  been  preserved  everywhere  between 
liquidity provision, on the one hand, and monetary policy, on the other. In the euro area, the 
policy  rate  has  been  maintained  unchanged,  even  if,  at  the  same  time,  liquidity  has  been 
provided to the interbank market. Indeed, the bulk of liquidity injections since last August has 
been aimed at aligning the timing and maturity of the liquidity supply with a changing demand 
within the reserve maintenance periods, in order to stabilise the very short-term interest rate. 
As I have already pointed out, a standard result in economic theory (William Poole’s paper 
from 1970) states that, when demand for central bank money is uncertain, then it is optimal 
to stabilise the short-term interest rate, letting money supply adjust endogenously. 
We are, by no means, in totally safe territory. The conjunction of inflationary pressures and 
residual financial instability will prove, in times to come, very challenging for policy-makers. 
But we can rely on our experience and the lessons learned during the last few months to try 
and steer the world economy through its current troubles. 
BIS Review 63/2008 
 3
