Ajith Nivard Cabraal: Harnessing sustainable growth in emerging 
markets 
Keynote address by Mr Ajith Nivard Cabraal, Governor of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, at 
the 2nd World Management Summit 2008, Karachi, Pakistan, 11 March 2008.  
 As salaam Aleikum, Ayubowan, Good Morning. 
Mr. Chairman, Distinguished Delegates, Ladies and Gentlemen,  
At the outset, I wish to thank the organizers of this World Management Summit for inviting 
me  to  deliver  the  keynote  address.  I  am  also  greatly  touched  by  the  wonderful  hospitality 
accorded to me in this very interesting and historic city of Karachi. 
Mr. Chairman, I consider it a privilege and honour to share my thoughts and views on a very 
timely  topic,  “Harnessing  Sustainable  Growth  in  Emerging  Markets”  at  this  important 
forum. I hope I would be able to plant a few seeds in your distinguished minds so that such 
seeds may be nurtured by you in your deliberations to follow. 
As  a  first  step,  let  us  examine  the  current  global  and  regional  trends  in  relation  to 
World Economic Growth, so that we could deal with this topic in a wider perspective. 
As we know, over the past few years, the global economy has been experiencing one of its’ 
strongest sustained periods of growth, since the early 1970s. This expansion is projected to 
be very strong even after accounting for the impact of the recent financial market turbulence. 
Significantly,  this  growth  has,  as  its  foundation,  the  strong  results  of  the  emerging 
markets which have been leading the way. In fact, during 2007, China’s economy grew by 
over 11 per cent and it made the largest contribution to global growth. India grew at more 
than 9 per cent and Russia at almost 8 per cent. These three countries accounted for one-
half  of  global  growth  over  the  past  year,  while  several  other  developing  countries  also 
maintained their own robust expansions. In fact, the rapid growth in these countries counter-
balanced the moderate growth in the United States and other advanced economies.  
The  current  global  expansion  is  remarkable  in  several  ways.  First,  emerging  markets 
and developing countries are now accounting for a high share of growth – more than two-
thirds, compared with about one-half in the 1990s; Second, the successes arising from rapid 
growth are not being enjoyed by a few countries only – most countries and regions are doing 
better  in  comparison  to  their  own  past  standards;  and,  third,  the  volatility  of  growth  has 
declined  substantially.  For  example,  the  Sri  Lankan  economy  has  grown  at  well  over  6% 
during each of the past 3 years and in 2008 too, a growth of 7% or close to 7% is projected. 
Pakistan too has recorded an average growth rate above 7% during the last 4 years. 
Mr. Chairman, until the last decade, there was a clear relationship between global economic 
growth and the growth in advanced economies. As a matter of fact, when major economies, 
particularly, the USA, recorded a slow down, it retarded world output significantly. So much 
so, it was said that when the USA got a cold, the others got pneumonia! However, recent 
trends  show  that  the  world  economy  is  no  longer  overwhelmingly  reliant  on  the 
advanced  economies  only.  In  fact,  the  weights  seems  to  be  gradually  shifting  with  the 
emerging global economy recording strong growth performances during recent years, while 
the advanced economies are basically recording moderate growth. It may therefore be useful 
to  “flag”  this  important  aspect  when  we  are  discussing  the  issues  relating  to  harnessing 
sustainable growth in emerging markets. 
Let  us  consider  as  to  what  extent  the  current  expansion  in  emerging  markets  and 
developing countries is due to the implementation of good policies, or as to whether it 
BIS Review 29/2008 
 1
was  just  good  luck  that  made  this  happen.  What  is  the  secret  behind  this  remarkable 
performance of emerging economies?  
A simple assessment may probably tell us that the main driver of the recent expansion has 
been the fast integration of these developing nations with the global economy, and the rapid 
opening out of their economic activity. All three major emerging economies, China, India and 
Russia,  were  basically  “closed”  economies  a  couple  of  decades  ago.  Emergence  of  these 
three giants, who collectively account for 20% of land area on the earth and serve as home 
for 40% of world population, has dramatically changed the shape of world trade, direction of 
capital flows and the growth sources of the global economy. In fact, during the last decade, 
the  share  of  advanced  economies  in  global  trade  reduced  gradually  from  around  75%  to 
around  60%,  while  the  direction  of  investment  also  reversed,  as  evidenced  by  the  fast 
accumulation of foreign reserves by the emerging nations.  
In  the  meantime,  we  would  also  observe  that  these  and  other  developing  countries  have 
benefited  immensely  by  the  prudent  policies  that  they  have  implemented  for  the  rapid 
economic development of their emerging economies. These improvements include more 
disciplined  monetary  and  fiscal  policies,  more  focused  institutions,  and  more 
responsible financial sector developments. In essence, the recent success of emerging 
economies  could  be  explained,  to  a  significant  extent,  by  conventional  growth  theory. 
Improvements  in  physical  capital  stock;  improvements  in  human  capital;  and 
improvements in productivity. 
We  all  know  that  according  to  growth  theory,  increased  GDP  growth  leads  to  an 
increase in per capita incomes, which in turn leads to a significant improvement in the 
quality of life of people in a country. We also know that, right now, significant growth 
is taking place. But, will it continue to happen? Can we ensure sustainability of this 
outcome?  Upto  what  point  is  it  going  to  be  tough  for  the  countries  to  keep  on 
achieving? 
Many economic experts believe that the immediate challenge that is before the developing 
nations is to reach a per capita income target of around US $ 2,500 as quickly as possible. It 
is no secret that, when a country surpasses a threshold per capita income of around US$ 
2,500,  it  provides  a  new  impetus  to  policymakers,  key  stakeholders  and  the  people  as  a 
whole, to launch into a new phase of development. Thereafter, the process of development 
takes place more smoothly and naturally. This is due to several reasons. First, at the new 
levels  of  income,  a  society  naturally  attains  certain  standards,  including  stronger  business 
ethics, better behavioral patterns and wider national integration. Second, at the new levels of 
income, people are able to plan their investments better, as they can look beyond matching 
their income with the cost for basics. This includes not only financial investments, but also 
includes  investments  in  skill  and  knowledge,  upgrading  and  investing  on  physical  health, 
both  of  which  boost  factor  accumulation  with  less  effort.  Third,  as  income  levels  increase, 
even a lower growth rate means a higher increase in income in absolute terms.  
But, moving towards that magical number is not going to be easy. In today’s trying 
conditions,  it  would  be  even  more  difficult  than  in  the  past  when  many  of  the  old 
established advanced nations crossed the magical mark. 
As we know, many of today’s advanced nations passed that threshold under very different 
conditions than what the emerging economies are facing today. In fact, during those early 
days,  some  of  those  countries  were  able  to  freely  utilize  the  labour  and  resources  of  the 
countries  that  were  colonized  by  them,  and  benefit  immensely  by  the  fruits  of  the  foreign 
lands and natural resources. They had to adhere to very few laws and regulations relating to 
education,  training,  health  or  labour  practices,  or  standards  on  working  conditions.  There 
were no environmental laws or treaties, and the environment was often the first casualty in 
their quest of accumulating wealth. Capital accumulated by illegal means or criminal activity 
was used freely without any restriction.  
2 
 BIS Review 29/2008
But,  today  the  situation  is  completely  different.  Today,  emerging  countries  are  acting  in  a 
much more responsible manner in driving their economies forward. In fact, the present day 
emerging economies are achieving their attractive levels of growth, while adhering to, and 
respecting  international  conventions  on  copyright,  anti-money  laundering  and  terrorist 
financing,  environmental,  labour,  human  rights,  safety,  health,  etc.,  etc.  This  situation  is 
sometimes  forgotten  by  some  of  the  economic  and  political  analysts,  particularly  from 
advanced nations and therefore it may not be too inappropriate to remind the world of this 
state of affairs, on and off.  
All in all, from the point of view of individual developing countries, the most important 
economic need  at  present  is  to  maintain  the  high  economic  growth  momentum  that 
they are currently achieving, in a sustainable manner. Although it had been tough, it is 
heartening to note that many developing countries have, since of late, been able to do so. 
But the challenge is becoming more and more intense by the day, and policymakers have to 
be  constantly  alert  to  developments  on  several  fronts  simultaneously,  in  order  to  continue 
with  the  same  momentum.  Investments  have  to  be  boosted;  institutions  need  to  be 
strengthened;  infrastructure  has  to  be  improved;  regulation  has  to  be  strengthened.  In 
addition, all this has to happen at the same time. 
In the meantime, global challenges and risks loom large. Some of the downside risks are 
so  intense  and  serious  that  those  could  even  threaten  the  very  foundation  of  the 
present  growth  momentum,  and  drag  the  developing  nations  as  well  as  the  entire 
world  economy  towards  recession!  There  are  many  such  dangers  lurking.  The  current 
financial market turmoil could trigger a more pronounced global slowdown. The unbelievably 
high and volatile oil prices and the resulting inflationary pressures could lead to severe BOP 
problems, disrupt capital inflows and cause large global imbalances. The aging population, 
the  intensification  of  resistance  to  globalization,  the  havoc  that  may  be  caused  by  global 
warming  and  the  danger  of  terrorism  could  all  lead  to  serious  repercussions  to  the 
sustainable growth models that the economic planners are attempting to implement. 
But  the  good  news  is  that  there  is  sufficient  evidence  to  indicate  to  us,  that  many 
developing countries are implementing a number of structural changes order to face 
upto these growing threats. Improved monetary and fiscal policies, improved institutions, 
and better financial systems, etc., are clearly helping to stretch the current positive business 
cycle, notwithstanding the numerous threats.  
However, we must not be complacent. We must not underestimate the recent increased 
financial market volatility. We must not take the oil shock or the inflation pressures lightly. We 
must not ignore the imbalances that are being generated by the aging population. We must 
not think that the resistance to globalization will just fade away. We must not conclude that 
terrorism is someone else’s problem and therefore it will not affect us. We must not imagine 
that global warming will impact only a few coastal nations and therefore we will be safe from 
its effects. In contrast, we must anticipate the threats and prepare ourselves to face it with 
confidence.  Needless  to  say,  if  these  challenges  are  not  adequately  addressed,  or  faced 
directly,  the  fall  out  could  result  in  serious  repercussions  that  will  greatly  hamper  the 
continued success of the current expansion. 
Mr. Chairman, another interesting phenomenon is that, while most countries seem to 
be  growing  well  at  the  aggregate  level,  there  are  also  growing  concerns  about  the 
equitable  distribution  of  these  gains.  It  is  clear  that  rapid  technological  progress  and 
continuing  globalization  of  trade  and  finance  have  helped  to  enhance  growth  and  reduce 
poverty.  But  the  same  conditions  are  also  contributing  to  increasing  the  concentration  of 
income and wealth, within certain selected groups. In general, owners of capital and scarce 
skills have been well rewarded, while, less-skilled workers and those with limited access to 
jobs or finance have enjoyed limited gains. While it is obvious that such an outcome poses 
serious political risks, even from an economic point of view, inequality raises an economic 
issue  since  it  implies  that  human  resources  are  not  being  productively  used.  Therefore  it 
BIS Review 29/2008 
 3
follows  that,  unless  this  imbalance  is  addressed,  it  would  probably  manifest  itself  in 
dangerous political upheavals, which could easily negate the economic gains that may have 
been so painstakingly built up. 
In recent years, the global expansion has been supported by the ready availability of external 
financing at relatively reasonable interest rates. Credit has been readily available, particularly 
as  a  result  of  innovations  in  financial  market  instruments  which  were  supposed  to  have 
improved liquidity and distributed risk better. But those innovative models are today facing 
increasing  pressure,  and  economic  planners  are  in  the  process  of  re-thinking  these 
processes. Therefore, in the near future another serious issue that we may have to face 
in  our  effort  to  achieve  sustainability  in  our  growth  momentum  would  be  that,  over 
time, global savings may well become more scarce, putting upward pressure on real 
interest rates. 
Mr. Chairman, twice during the first half of the last century, the prosperity of the world 
was  severely  threatened  by  devastating  world  wars.  Fortunately  for  us,  the  concerted 
efforts  of  many  statesman-like  leaders  and  other  far  thinking  persons  who  served  in 
respected international organizations, that danger was averted. Nevertheless the world paid 
a  huge  price  for  that  terrible  experience.  But,  today  in  a  different  way,  the  world  faces 
another destructive force of terrorism, which is almost as debilitating as the horrible 
world wars of the past century. As a result, from the world’s advanced economies to the 
lesser developed economies, many countries have to face some aspect of terrorism; directly 
or  indirectly.  These  evil  forces,  if  not  eliminated,  will  soon  hamper  the  global  economic 
growth in many ways. It will destroy physical and human capital. It will weaken infrastructure 
development  and  institution  building.  It  will  force  governments  to  divert  more  and  more 
resources to national security and terrorism prevention. It will result in reduced resources that 
can  be  channeled  to  developmental  efforts.  In  that  context  when  we  are  focusing  on 
sustainable growth, the ill-effects of terrorism must also be clearly identified and we must all 
take,  as  well  as  support,  the  necessary  steps  to  deal  with  this  threat,  both  politically  and 
militarily;  both  locally  and  internationally;  both  directly  and  indirectly;  both  individually  and 
collectively. 
The ever increasing oil and energy prices is another serious concern for all economic 
planners. International prices of oil, as we all know, has increased five-fold during the last 6 
years. As the world bravely adjusts daily to these unconscionable and wild increases, the oil 
producers enjoy the unprecedented gains. In this background, we cannot realistically expect 
oil  prices  to  reduce  in  the  near  future  and  therefore  we  would  have  to  consciously  brace 
ourselves to deal with the harmful effects of this highly destructive attack on future growth, if 
we are to maintain our growth momentum.  
As if the of oil shock was not enough, the international commodity prices too, have 
been rising sharply during the past year or so. This outcome possibly displays how tightly 
linked  the  prices  of  commodities  are,  to  each  other.  As  a  result  of  these  increases,  which 
resulted in the global food price index recording a 54% increase over the past year, many 
countries  are  now  facing  their  highest  recorded  inflation  figures  in  the  new  millennium. 
China’s inflation in January 2008 was at its highest in 11 years. In Singapore, it was their 
highest in 25 years. Australia recorded their highest figure in 16 years. We, in Sri Lanka also 
recorded  our  highest  rate  in  18  years  while  we  know  Pakistan  too  is  struggling  with  its 
inflation, amidst high food prices. 
In  this  volatile  scenario,  the  challenge  before  the  emerging  countries  is  how  to 
maintain price stability, without hampering the growth momentum. Unfortunately, in the 
backdrop of high international oil and commodity prices, there does not appear to be an easy 
escape route or a quick fix. Worse still, many experts are now proffering the view that the 
current increases in oil and commodity prices may be a “structural adjustment” rather than 
just another “supply shock”. If that is the case, the present sky-high prices may not return to 
their previous low levels. If so, policymakers will have to factor that situation into their future 
4 
 BIS Review 29/2008
projections.  Then  the  billion  dollar  question  will  crop  up:  What  do  we  do?  If  we  allow 
domestic prices to adjust in line with the high international prices, we will immediately face 
high  inflation.  On  the  other  hand,  if  we  subsidize  these  commodities  using  inflationary 
financing,  the  result  is  again,  even  more  high  inflation  in  the  future.  Not  very  attractive 
options! But, countries have to make choices now, particularly because it is highly unlikely 
that this problem will go away. 
Mr. Chairman, we have so far discussed at length, the current trends in economic growth, 
and the challenges that we have to face in our attempts to harness sustainable growth. Now, 
let  us  get  to  an  even  more  critical  part  of  this  discussion.  How  do  we  continue  to 
harness  sustainable  growth  in  our  own  economies?  How  do  we  protect  our  growth 
momentum? 
Before we really get down to discussing the factors surrounding this issue, let us see as to 
what  usually  happens  in  the  world  when  nations  are  faced  with  serious  threats  to  their 
economic well being. In the early 1970s, when oil prices increased sharply, many countries 
quickly  started  their  own  oil  exploration  and  development.  When  doing  so,  several  oil 
reserves, which were, up to that time, believed to be uneconomical for development, were 
suddenly  qualifying  as  being  “economical”.  In  other  words,  many  countries  re-positioned 
themselves to become “net commodity exporters” from being “net commodity importers”, in 
the face of rising prices. They were quick to understand that such a shift was vital for their 
future economic development and  well being. As in the 1970’s, today too, there is a clear 
trend  where  countries  are  quickly  attempting  to  boost  their  capacity  to  produce  oil  and 
agricultural commodities. If, as expected, this re-positioning and/or restructuring occurs, and 
occurs quickly, the current imbalances will be addressed sooner than later. In fact, if we look 
at the recent increases in bio-fuel production, it has clearly been a case of steady increases 
in the production of all varieties of oil substitutes, all over the world. In that sense, the current 
vibrant  and  challenging  economic  environment  provides  new  and  exciting  opportunities  to 
both  developing  and  advanced  countries,  and  many  countries  seem  eager  to  seize 
opportunities and implement decisions quickly.  
Mr. Chairman, at the same time, we should also probably realize that in our constant 
search  for  sustainable  growth,  the  more  regular  issues  that  confront  emerging 
economies also need to be addressed appropriately through a series of fundamental 
policy actions. Let us therefore, for completeness sake, take a quick look at some of 
those policy actions as well. 
One, the sound management of risk. As the pace of globalization intensifies and massive 
flows of capital take place, on-going reforms in regulation and supervision, the development 
of  domestic  capital  markets,  improvement  in  corporate  governance  and  an  adequate  and 
credible legal framework have to take place effectively. 
Two,  the  maintenance  of  sound  macroeconomic  policies.  Sound  fiscal  and  monetary 
policies leading to low and stable inflation and an environment of exchange rate stability and 
sustained private sector investment is vital for sustainable development. 
Three, the implementation of policies that promote domestic savings and investment. 
It is important to note that while a steady flow of foreign savings is important for emerging 
markets, efforts to mobilize domestic resources are equally critical for long-term growth. 
Four, the maintenance of reasonable debt levels so that the repayment capacity of the 
economy is not compromised, even if some of the major risks were to materialize. 
Five, the improvement of the quality of information and statistics relating to all sectors 
of  the  economy.  This  policy  action  ensures  the  widespread  and  timely  dissemination  of 
information, thereby encouraging robust economic activity. 
Six,  the  continuous  expansion  of  trade  by  lobbying  for  major  changes  within  the 
industrialized  nations,  while  promoting  greater  trade  among  the  emerging  economies  and 
within regions. 
BIS Review 29/2008 
 5
infrastructure;  speedy 
technical  capabilities;  clean  environments;  safe 
Seven,  the  rapid  implementation  of  consistent  and  significant  poverty  reduction 
programmes and infrastructure development projects so that it provides opportunity and 
hope to the poor and addresses regional imbalances. 
Eight,  the  active  use  of  technology  in  economic  transformation,  so  that  backward 
societies or groups could “leap-frog” rather than drift along at “snail’s pace”. 
At the same time, we also have to keep in mind that the sustainability for growth in 
developing  countries  will  be  greatly  enhanced  by  political  stability.  Therefore,  care 
must  be  taken  to  ensure  that  any  political  crisis  which  threatens  to  undermine  economic 
progress needs to be resolved quickly and satisfactorily, so that the growth momentum will 
not be hampered in the short to medium terms. 
Mr. Chairman, we should all be glad that we are today here in Karachi, deliberating on 
the topic of “Harnessing Sustainable Growth”, because it is a topic that will touch our 
lives very closely, today as well as tomorrow. In doing so, we will naturally have to closely 
study  the  worldwide  conditions,  trends,  needs,  challenges,  future  strategies  and  the  many 
issues connected to the realization of this outcome. It is certainly a complex topic, and it will 
not have cut and dried answers; nor will it have an easy path, free of obstacles. At the same 
time there is one fact that we must all be very clear about. i.e., harnessing growth will only be 
the  beginning.  If  so,  we  must  all  realize  that while  the  beginning  would  be  vital,  we  would 
need to methodically build capacity to sustain the growth and to keep going, amidst whatever 
challenges we may encounter. Implementation of policies would therefore be the key to 
sustainable growth. 
People could, of course, eloquently talk of sound monetary policies; effective fiscal policies; 
well  structured  private/public  partnerships;  super  regulatory  institutions;  vibrant  markets; 
skilled  managers; 
living  conditions; 
developed 
transparent  systems;  stable  governments; 
corruption  –  free  societies;  free  media;  lower  crime;  balanced  development;  trickle  down 
effects;  equal  opportunities;  equitable  distribution  of  wealth;  good  living  standards  and  a 
whole  host  of  similar  outcomes.  But,  mere  talk  of  such  conditions  would  not  lead  us  to 
achieve  those  goals  or  achieve  high  sustainable  growth.  If  we  are  to  realize  all  those 
outcomes,  the  continuous  implementation  and  close  monitoring  and  evaluation  of  all  our 
programmes and policy actions is essential. That then, is the key.  
Let us remember that it is better to implement one action than write 100 reports that no one 
takes  notice  of.  It  is  better  to  deliver  one  outcome  than  deliver  100  speeches  that  no  one 
listens  to.  It  is  better  to  improve  one  life  than  organize  100  workshops  that  no  one  finds 
useful. It is better to light one candle than curse the darkness! This then, my dear friends, is 
the challenge that is before us.  
Very  often,  we  encounter  prophets  of  gloom  and  doom  who  attempt  to  demoralize  us  by 
showing off the magnitude of the problem or by continuously criticizing, or by telling us that 
we can’t. We should not fall prey to such distractions or falter in the implementation of our 
policy  actions.  We  must,  with  conviction  and  courage,  move  towards  realizing  our 
growth targets, while improving our macroeconomic fundamentals. If we can achieve 
8% growth on a continuous basis for 8 or 9 years, we would be in a position to double our 
per capita income. For a country like Sri Lanka that would mean we would reach a per capita 
income of around US$ 3,000 by the year 2015, from our current per capita of around US$ 
1,600. That is not an impossible dream. Sri Lanka has shown that, with determination and a 
clear  focus,  it  can  be  done.  In  fact,  from  2005  to  2007,  our  per  capita  income  shot  up  by 
nearly 30%! These successes can be maintained, but that could only be done with hard work 
and more hard work.  
Mr. Chairman, South Asia, the huge giant, is finally waking up from its’ deep slumber. 
This giant had been taking a long rest, after enjoying a glorious past. A huge giant cannot 
stir, without the world around noticing the rumble. All recent indications are that the world is 
certainly taking note of this re-awakening. It is time for all of us in this region to capitalize on 
justice; 
6 
 BIS Review 29/2008
this new visibility. All of us who are in this region know that our destinies are linked. We rise 
and  fall  together.  Today,  we  see  a  clear  light  at  the  end  of  the  tunnel  and  the  tunnel  is 
becoming wider and wider, making our journey more exciting and pleasant, but yet tough and 
adventurous. It is not only in cricket that we are excelling today. We are making our mark on 
many other areas as well.  
Let us then, as a region, take our rightful place in the League of Nations by showing that we 
can  develop  economically  to  reasonable  levels  quickly  and  in  a  sustainable  manner.  Our 
people  are  responding.  Our  people  are  becoming  more  conscious  that  better  living 
standards  are  possible.  They  are  increasingly  showing  that  they  are  prepared  to  work 
towards that goal. Our collective work ethic and productivity standards are improving. Let us 
support  and  intensify  these  efforts  and  amplify  the  trends.  Let  us  keep  the  momentum 
going. Let us implement, implement, and implement! 
Mr.  Chairman,  the  Global  Management  Summit  organized  by  you  provides  an  excellent 
forum  for  all  of  us  to  learn  from  each  other  and  shape  our  strategies.  Let  us  use  this 
opportunity  to  fine-tune  our  own  knowledge  and  skills  and  move  with  confidence  towards 
delivering sustainable growth to our economies and usher better lives for our people. That is 
my wish for all of us and I am certain that we would have the energy and the resilience to 
succeed. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 29/2008 
 7
