Jameel Khadaroo: Future developments in the banking and financial 
sector in Mauritius 
Address by Dr Jameel Khadaroo, Second Deputy Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at the 
University of Technology Mauritius, Port Louis, 25 August 2008. 
 Good  morning.  It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  be  here,  at  the  invitation  of  the  Accounting, 
Banking and Finance Society of the University of Technology  Mauritius (UTM), to address 
you  on  the  future  developments  in  the  banking  and  financial  sector  in  Mauritius.  The 
Society’s initiative to invite practitioners to share their experience with the academic world is 
certainly useful in helping to bridge the gap between academia and industry and in promoting 
exchange of ideas on latest issues. Well done and keep it up! 
Today’s  theme  is  surely  topical.  The  Mauritian  authorities  are  committed  to  transform  our 
island into a service-oriented economy. In a very recent speech, the Prime Minister stated 
that “financial services are well positioned to be the engine of growth in the development of 
the services sector as a whole”. 
Introduction 
By  virtue  of  my  position,  I  shall  reflect  on  the  topic  of  the  day  from  the  central  bank’s 
perspective  whilst  also  tracing  out  progress  achieved  to  date.  Basically  financial  sector 
developments  refer  to  developments  in  three  pillars,  namely  financial  institutions,  markets 
and supporting infrastructure. I shall focus on how I see the evolution of each pillar over the 
next few years, starting with financial institutions. 
Financial institutions 
The  financial  system  in  Mauritius,  as  in  most  developing  economies,  is  still  dominated  by 
banks. For the year 2007 for Mauritius, banks held 73 per cent of total financial sector assets 
– the insurance sector accounted for 13 per cent, non-bank deposit taking institutions for 8 
per cent. Leasing, credit finance, investment funds and other financial institutions accounted 
for  the  remaining  6  per  cent.  In  terms  of  value  addition  to  domestic  output,  the  financial 
sector  contributed  to  10.4  per  cent  of  2007  GDP  –  banks  accounted  for  6.4  percentage 
points  while  the  insurance  sector  for  2.8  percentage  points.  Employment  in  the  financial 
sector has increased by about 25% since the beginning of the present decade. Moreover, 
financial sector growth has on average outpaced overall economic growth – this pattern is 
likely to persist in future, given the emphasis placed on development of banking and financial 
services in Mauritius. 
The continuous development of the banking and financial sector has been the outcome of 
carefully designed strategies implemented over time. The Bank of Mauritius has been taking 
a  series  of  policy  measures,  consistent  with  a  gradual  shift  from  a  directive-based  to  a 
market-based environment, with a view to foster integration of the Mauritian banking sector 
with the Mauritian economy as well as with the international financial system. This process of 
continuous improvement is set to strengthen further, with policy geared towards enhanced 
transparency. 
Non-performing  advances  as  a  proportion  of  total  advances  have  declined  steadily  over 
recent  years,  helped  to  a  significant  extent  by  the  coming  into  operation  in  2005  of  the 
Mauritius  Credit  Information  Bureau  (MCIB)  which  is  housed  at  the  central  bank.  The 
resilience of the banking sector to shocks has increased, in part due to diversification of the 
sources of banks’ income. Indeed an increasing share of banks’ income is generated by what 
BIS Review 102/2008 
 1
we call in our jargon “Segment B” activities – basically foreign-source income, i.e. all lending 
and  related  activities  undertaken  with  non-residents.  Banks,  which  used  to  be  very 
dependent  on  domestic  economic  developments,  now  generate  as  much  as  half  of  their 
income  from  foreign  sources.  In  2007  banks’  foreign-source  income  grew  by  43  per  cent, 
much higher than growth of 11 per cent in domestically sourced income. With the Mauritian 
economy and financial sector set to become more open, the banking sector should be able to 
further improve resistance to shocks provided, of course, exposures continue to be managed 
judiciously. 
In  line  with  the  spirit  of  consolidation,  legislation  was  amended  in  2004  to  cater  for  single 
bank licensing, implying the phasing out of separation of banking activities into offshore and 
onshore.  The  tax  regime  for  income  from  domestic  and  foreign  sources  of  business  was 
made uniform. Banks licensed in Mauritius may undertake both “Segment A” and “Segment 
B”  activities,  that  is,  domestic  as  well  as  international  banking.  Legislation  was  also  been 
amended  in  2004  to  encourage  non-bank  deposit  taking  institutions  to  merge  into  banks. 
Since 2007, three non-bank deposit taking institutions have been granted banking licences – 
one of them opened a new bank while the two others took over existing banking business. 
This trend is likely to become more prominent in future. 
The two largest domestically-owned banks have already looked beyond Mauritian shores by 
incorporating branches and subsidiaries in the region. They have joined the syndicated loan 
business  and  lent  substantial  amounts  to  non-resident  companies.  The  reputation  of 
Mauritius as a credible financial centre, the expertise built up over time, and the favourable 
legislative  and  regulatory  framework  should  continue  to  contribute  to  the  success  of  the 
banking sector. 
I shall now turn to the second pillar for financial sector development, namely markets. 
Markets  
The  development  of  the  financial  sector  cannot  be  envisaged  without  the  promotion  of 
strong, well-functioning and deep financial markets.  
Significant  progress  has  been  achieved  in  positioning  the  domestic  stock  market  on  the 
international  financial  arena.  The  stock  exchange  of  Mauritius  (SEM)  is  endowed  with  a 
state-of-the-art  trading  infrastructure  and,  as  a  result  of  its  good  performance,  was  the 
second  African  exchange  after  the  Johannesburg  Securities  Exchange  (JSE)  to  attain 
membership  status  of  the  World  Federation  of  Exchanges  (WFE)  in  November  2005. 
Moreover, in about a month, on 1 October 2008, the Mauritius stock exchange is scheduled 
to join the Dow Jones Wilshire Global Index.  
In 2007, market capitalisation in US dollars on the SEM increased by 70 per cent year-on-
year, with non-residents’ gross inward investment in the equity market registering a record 
high. The remarkable track record of the SEM should induce the private sector to take better 
advantage in securing long-term funding. The amendments brought in 2007 to the Securities 
Act 2005 could give a boost to securities trading on the stock exchange. 
There  is  significant  room  for  improvement  with  regard  to  development  of  fixed  income 
markets, which have remained rather shallow and illiquid despite recent interest from foreign 
investors.  Traditionally,  fixed  income  markets  are  important  channels  through  which  public 
and private institutions avail of financial resources for medium- and long-term projects. Bond 
markets  also  constitute  good  investment  opportunities  for  long-term  investors  such  as 
pension  funds  and  insurance  companies.  There  have  been  a  few  bond  issues  lately  – 
including one launched by the European Investment Bank – and this should be encouraged 
for the benefit of all stakeholders.  
In the light of limited success experienced with the secondary trading of treasury bills on the 
stock exchange of Mauritius, the Bank of Mauritius is currently undertaking a review of the 
2 
 BIS Review 102/2008
primary dealer system. The central bank is also working on the issue of benchmark bonds in 
collaboration with bankers. 
A commodity exchange, named Global Board of Trade (GBOT), is scheduled for launch in 
Mauritius  in  January  2009  with  the  collaboration  of  Financial  Technologies  India  (FTI)  Ltd. 
This  commodity  exchange,  which  intends  to  trade  commodities  and  derivative  products  in 
metals, oil and agriculture, shall take the Mauritian financial system a step further by enabling 
better enterprise risk management and financial planning. Mauritius will also seriously need 
to  contemplate  the  development  of  full-fledged  currency  futures  in  the  near  future  –  that 
would assist in formation and management of exchange rate expectations. 
I  shall  now  turn  to  the  third  pillar  for  financial  sector  development,  namely  supporting 
infrastructure. 
Supporting infrastructure 
Under  supporting  infrastructure  I  would  distinguish  three  important  themes,  namely  legal 
infrastructure, technological infrastructure, and human resource infrastructure. 
Legal infrastructure 
Recent  legislations  passed  in  the  Finance  Acts  of  2007  and  2008  are  expected  to 
significantly impact the banking and financial sector in Mauritius.  
With regard to the banking sector, the Bank of Mauritius is reviewing its guidelines to give 
greater  operational  autonomy  to  banks  without  losing  sight  of  prudence.  Further  to  recent 
amendments brought to the Banking Act 2004, banks may subject to approval by the Bank of 
Mauritius  and  authorisation  by  the  Financial  Services  Commission  engage  in  new  lines  of 
business  –  such  as  financial  leasing  and  agency  services  –  without  having  to  set  up  a 
subsidiary. 
With a view to broaden the array of services, new legislation allows non-bank deposit taking 
institutions  to  engage  in  lending  and  such  other  investment  as  may  be  approved  by  the 
central bank, while foreign exchange dealers may offer money and value transfer services. 
Banks may provide selective products such as private and investment banking services to 
high  net  worth  customers,  which  complements  government  policy  of  attracting  these 
individuals to invest and work in Mauritius. 
A key legislation that could propel the Mauritian banking and financial sector to new heights 
relates to Islamic banking, more broadly called Islamic finance. Islamic banking adheres to 
Islamic law by offering banking services and products where banks earn profits and fees on 
financing facilities extended to customers, instead of interest. Islamic banking is one of the 
world's fastest growing financial segments. Financial centres worldwide are competing for oil 
revenues of the Middle East. The Asian Development Bank estimates total assets held under 
Islamic  finance  rules  at  around  $1  trillion  USD,  with  annual  growth  of  10  to  15  percent. 
London,  Singapore  and  Hong  Kong  have  emerged  as  key  centres  of  expertise  in  Islamic 
finance, while Malaysia hosts nearly two thirds of the worldwide Islamic sukuk bond market – 
an estimated $100 billion. Many smaller financial centres have passed legislation to enable 
Islamic finance. With the drying-up of liquidity in the wake of the global financial turmoil, non-
Islamic countries have been increasingly looking to issue their own sovereign sukuk debt.  
Mauritius has recently revised its legislation to accommodate Islamic banking and finance. 
Regulatory hurdles have been removed as we move into Islamic finance. The central bank 
has  issued  guidelines  for  Islamic  Financial  Institutions  (IFIs)  and  the  Government  has 
changed  the  Tax  laws  in  order  to  facilitate  conduct  of  Shariah  compliant  financial 
transactions. Banks may opt to exclusively conduct Islamic banking or offer Islamic financial 
products  through  a  window.  Through  the  Finance  Act  2008,  non-bank  deposit  taking 
BIS Review 102/2008 
 3
institutions have also been authorized to offer Shariah compliant financial products. Islamic 
banking in Mauritius should become a reality in the near future. 
A proposed Insolvency Bill seeks to amend and consolidate the law relating to insolvency of 
individuals and companies and the distribution of assets on insolvency and related matters. 
Moreover,  a  Netting  and  Intermediated  Securities  Bill  provides  for  the  validity  and 
enforcement  of  close-out  netting  arrangements  and  giving  effect  to  The  Hague  Securities 
Convention  on  the  law  applicable  to  certain  rights  in  respect  of  securities  held  with 
intermediaries. With a view to promoting Mauritius as a reputable and clean financial centre, 
the  Bank  of  Mauritius  reviewed  its  Guidance  Notes  on  Anti-Money  Laundering  and 
Combating 
light  of 
recommendations made in the report on the evaluation of the AML/CFT regime of Mauritius 
by the Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) mission of the IMF/World Bank.  
the  Financing  of  Terrorism  (AML/CFT) 
in  July  2008 
the 
in 
Technological infrastructure  
The technological infrastructure – exchanges and systems used to clear and settle market 
trades or cash obligations – plays a critical role in the development of the financial sector. 
With the advent of modern technology, payments, clearing and settlements are effected in 
real-time.  The  Bank  of  Mauritius  launched  in  December  2000  a  real-time  gross  settlement 
system with guaranteed finality of payment known as the Mauritius Automated Clearing and 
Settlement  System  (MACSS).  Ongoing  efforts  have  since  been  made  to  modernise  the 
payments  system.  Recent  initiatives  include  the  Port-Louis  Automated  Clearing  House 
(PLACH) set up in 2002, which performs netting on cheque data that are sent to the clearing 
house by electronic means and the settlement at each clearing cycle on the MACSS. The 
Bank of Mauritius is currently working on a Cheque Truncation project, whereby clearing and 
settlement of a cheque will be done through images of cheques instead of physical cheques.  
The Stock Exchange of Mauritius also operates a Central Depository System (CDS), which 
allows for delivery versus payment of stock exchange transactions on a T+3 rotating basis 
via the MACSS. 
At a cross-border initiative level, the Bank of Mauritius is also participating in the COMESA 
Regional Payment and Settlement System (REPSS) which will allow cross border payments 
between COMESA countries. The objective is two-fold: to reduce costs of transactions and 
time taken for settlement by not having to route the transaction through third parties outside 
the COMESA region and to enhance security of payments. This system is characterised by a 
T+0 settlement, with possibility of real-time payment at higher fees. Banks will access this 
payment system through their respective central banks. The Bank of Mauritius is earmarked 
to act as the settlement Bank in the system. 
Let  me  now  touch  on  human  resource  infrastructure,  which  is  of  direct  relevance  to 
institutions like the University of Technology Mauritius (UTM). 
Human resource infrastructure 
The scarcity of skilled manpower could inhibit the development of the financial sector. In this 
regard  the  Mauritian  authorities  have,  rightly  so,  opened  up  the  island  to  foreign  talent.  In 
addition, tertiary institutions have been designing a range of courses to meet the exigencies 
of the financial sector in terms of labour requirements. I am aware, for instance, that the UTM 
has  in  the  recent  past  set  up  courses  in  Banking  and  Finance  at  both  undergraduate  and 
graduate levels. The point I am making here is simple –academia has a key responsibility in 
safeguarding the sustainability of financial sector growth in Mauritius. 
4 
 BIS Review 102/2008
Concluding remarks 
To  conclude,  I  shall  merely  state  that  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  is  committed  to  continue  its 
leading role in the development of the Mauritian banking and financial sector. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 102/2008 
 5
