John Hurley: Managing financial stability in Ireland 
Comments  by  Mr  John  Hurley,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  and  Financial  Services 
Authority of Ireland, at the Central Bank of Luxembourg on the occasion of the publication of 
its Financial Stability Review, Luxembourg, 28 April 2008. 
 It is a great pleasure to be here today at the launch of the Financial Stability Review and on 
the  occasion  of  the  10th  Anniversary  this  year  of  the  creation  of  the  Banque  Centrale  du 
Luxembourg.  I  would  like  to  thank  Governor  Mersch  for  the  invitation  to  speak  about 
arrangements for managing financial stability in Ireland. 
As you may be aware, for the last five years, the Central Bank and an autonomous Financial 
Regulator have operated together in Ireland within the one organisation – the Central Bank 
and Financial Services Authority of Ireland. There were various reasons behind this choice of 
structure. A key consideration was the sharing of responsibility for financial stability, realising 
the  synergies  that  existed  between  the  central  banking  and  financial  regulation  functions. 
Other advantages included optimising the use of technical skills, benefiting from economies 
of  scale  in  the  provision  of  shared  services  and  promoting  communication  between  both 
areas. 
A  key  consideration  was  the  sharing  of  responsibility  between  the  Central  Bank  and  the 
Financial Regulator for financial stability.  
The  new  organisation  was  notable  for  two  reasons.  First,  it  established  a  single  financial 
services regulator. The second notable aspect of the new organisation was the location of 
the Financial Regulator within the broader Central Bank and Financial Services Authority of 
Ireland. This reflected the fact that, prior to the re-organisation, the Central Bank had been 
the main locus of expertise in these supervision activities in Ireland. 
The end result is an organisation that consists of two constituent parts, each with their own 
responsibilities.  Both  sides  are  bound  together, however,  by  integrated membership  of  the 
Central  Banks’  board  of  directors  and  the  Financial  Regulator’s  corresponding  Regulatory 
Authority. 
Although both parties have their own responsibilities, there is a shared high-level objective of 
contributing  to  financial  stability.  The  Central  Bank  has  an  explicit  legal  mandate,  in  both 
domestic legislation and under the Maastricht Treaty, to contribute to financial stability both in 
Ireland  and  across  the  euro  area.  The  Financial  Regulator  contributes  to  the  work  of  the 
Central  Bank  in  discharging  its  responsibility  in  relation  to  the  maintenance  of  overall 
financial stability.  
It makes this contribution in two broad ways. First, it maintains confidence in the solvency 
and safety of individual institutions. Second, it protects and informs consumers. Although the 
Central  Bank’s  and  Financial  Regulator’s  roles  in  contributing  to  financial  stability  are 
different,  they  are  complementary  and  combine  to  deliver  a  comprehensive  approach  to 
stability issues. 
There are various joint initiatives between the Central Bank and Financial Regulator, where 
our technical expertise is pooled. Examples of this co-operation include our regular macro-
economic stress-testing exercises and publication of the Financial Stability Report; a regular 
programme of joint meetings of Central Bank and Financial Regulator management with the 
senior  executives  of  our  major  banks;  and,  finally,  the  parties  cooperate  fully  in  their 
participation in international fora on financial stability issues. There is also a memorandum of 
understanding  between  the  Central  Bank  and  Financial  Regulator  on  financial  stability 
issues.  Under  this  agreement,  the  Central  Bank  contributes  to  stability  through  the 
formulation of monetary policy, oversight of the financial system infrastructure, surveillance of 
BIS Review 51/2008 
 1
the financial system, and undertaking any official financial operations that might be required 
in  exceptional  circumstances.  For  its  part,  the  Financial  Regulator  makes  its  contribution 
through its prudential and consumer roles. 
In addition, a separate joint management committee was established to deal solely with the 
stability  issues.  The  Financial  Stability  Committee  is  the  main  forum  where  senior 
management from both the Central Bank and Financial Regulator meet formally to consider 
financial  stability  issues.  However,  in  practice,  staff  at  all  levels  of  the  organisation  come 
together regularly in an informal way to discuss these matters and to undertake joint work.  
Publication  of  the  Financial  Stability  Report  is  one  of  the  ways  in  which  our  organisation 
contributes to financial stability on an on-going basis. A key element of the Report is that it 
represents the joint views of both the Regulator and the Bank. It is our hope that the wide-
ranging analyses in these Reports encourages dialogue among the wider public on financial 
stability  issues  and  conveys  the  importance  of  a  stable  financial  system.  In  addition,  the 
Central  Bank  and  the  Financial  Regulator  jointly  hold  round-table  meetings  with  senior 
executives of the main domestic credit institutions as early as possible after publication. The 
aim of these meetings is to focus attention on the key risks outlined in the Report. 
A  key  area  where  co-operation  between  the  Central  Bank  and  Financial  Regulator  has 
proved  most  useful  is  in  respect  to  financial  crisis  management.  The  organisation  is 
constantly developing its procedures to deal with potentially disruptive events and this is very 
much  a  joint  effort  between  both  parties.  The  Central  Bank  and  Financial  Regulator  have 
held joint crisis simulation exercises and, more recently, these have involved the participation 
of officials from the Irish treasury. This is in addition to the normal Domestic Standing Group 
arrangements. 
This  co-operation  between  both  the  Central  Bank,  Financial  Regulator  and  Treasury 
Department  leaves  us  well  placed  to  meet  the  objectives  set  out  in  the  international 
memoranda on crisis management issues – where the sharing of information and expertise 
at national level would be important to the handling of any cross-border financial crisis. 
In summary, financial stability considerations were key in the design of the organisation. This 
choice of organisational structure reflected the shared high-level objective of contributing to 
financial  stability  for  both  the  Central  Bank  and  Financial  Regulator.  The  end  result  is  an 
organisation with a cohesive and comprehensive approach to financial stability issues.  
Many thanks for your attention today. 
2 
 BIS Review 51/2008
