Martín Redrado: Financial turbulence – impact on developed and 
emerging economies (closing address) 
Closing address by Mr Martín Redrado, Governor of the Central Bank of Argentina, at the 
Central  Bank  of  Argentina  2008  Money  and  Banking  Conference  “Financial  turbulence  – 
impact on developed and emerging economies”, Buenos Aires, 1 September 2008. 
 When we started planning this event, by mid last year our goal was to exchange diagnoses 
and innovative ideas that, at the end of the day, would contribute to redesign global policies. 
And when I say “us”, I mean policymakers and academic economists merging the views of 
both the emerging and developed countries.  
This  is  exactly  what,  in  my  opening  address,  I  suggested  we  should  aim  for:  taking 
advantage of this unique opportunity that the international financial crisis provides us in order 
to reflect on the efficacy of our policies and thus, based on experience, improve the quality of 
our instruments.  
We  also  undertook  to  consolidate,  in  Argentina,  an  international  scenario  for  debating 
international finance in these unique circumstances for the global economy. This contributes 
to our engagement with the world; very often we face many everyday challenges that prevent 
us from reflecting on more global matters which also affect us.  
That is why I would especially like to thank my central banker colleagues and friends from 
the  academic  world,  with  whom  I  usually  meet  in  various  international  fora,  for  promptly 
accepting my invitation to come to Argentina. 
Uncertainty persists about the duration and depth of the current global financial crisis. With 
recession increasing in the advanced economies, it remains unclear how it will continue to 
spread; what is clear is that the U.S. economy is not disconnected from the rest of the world, 
as Randy Kroszner stated yesterday in his very convincing remarks.  
In  this  framework,  developing  countries  are  relatively  stronger  vis-à-vis  other  past  events. 
This is reflected in financial assets that fluctuate less than, for example, comparable U.S. and 
European assets.  
Countries with large fiscal and current account deficits mainly financed with short-term capital 
flows (e.g. Eastern European, unlike Latin American and Asian countries) are the hardest hit.  
In fact, if we aggregate emerging countries with current account deficits above 5 points of 
GDP and compare them to the rest, we see a difference of almost 500 bp in CD spreads 
whereas, at the end of 2007, values were similar. 
Another  recurrent  theme  during  these  days  was  the  pervasive  global  inflationary  scenario, 
which  poses  a  challenge  both  for  the  developed  and  the  emerging  world.  In  his  very 
interesting  analysis  of  inflation  levels  in  emerging  vis-à-vis  developed  countries,  Stephen 
Cecchetti wonders what these levels would look like if developed countries switched weights 
with emerging countries and used the consumption basket of the latter. Clearly, the impact of 
shocks  and  consumption  patterns  vary  according  to  each  economy  and  so  do  economic 
policy responses.  
In  the  field  of  policies,  another  recurrent  theme  throughout  the  debate  was  that  each 
economy has its unique characteristics. It is obvious that, in emerging economies, markets 
are less deep and instruments, more fragile.  
A  few  minutes  ago,  Roberto  Frenkel  pointed  out  that  in  economies  with  a  low  degree  of 
financial intermediation, the aggregate demand is not so elastic relative to the interest rate, 
making the fiscal policy more responsible for aggregate demand control.  
BIS Review 109/2008 
 1
For example, trade-offs between ensuring monetary stability and rebuilding at the same time 
the same transmission mechanisms are unknown to the developed world. In turn, innovative 
products arrive at our economies with some delay, at least in a massive way. That is why we 
insist on the need to have, at least, a good understanding of this problem when designing 
global policies and regulatory mechanisms. 
However, what was typical among emerging countries (that is, that bank runs turn into more 
widespread crises, which include attacks on currency, capital and credit flight, and decline in 
activity), now threatens developed countries.  
This  is  nothing  new,  but  it  is  especially  relevant  in  the  light  of  recent  events  in  the  global 
economy. As witnesses of the responses, we see that policy design and implementation also 
adapt  to  the  different  characteristics  of  each  country  in  the  developed  world.  Financial 
instability appears as a greater demand for risk rewards. On this matter, Professor Edmund 
Phelps remarks set us in the right direction.  
The debate is complex in itself: there are those who favor ex ante preventive interventions 
and those who underscore the importance of a decisive ex post action to mitigate the effects 
of financial collapse.  
In  turn,  some  advocate  for  financial  stability  issues  to  be  exclusively  dealt  with  through 
prudential  regulation  (so  that  monetary  policy  may  focus  mainly  on  achieving  nominal 
stability objectives) whereas others claim that monetary policy design must take into account 
the possible ex ante accumulation of trends towards financial imbalance.  
Finally, some support a greater involvement of fiscal authorities when dealing with solvency 
issues, and emphasize the need to preserve monetary policy to address liquidity problems.  
Yesterday,  Tom  Hoenig  said  that  the  current  crisis  is  a  great  opportunity  for  debating  the 
Federal Reserve’s mandate. Financial stability is a new objective that should be added to the 
traditional price stability and long term growth objectives. This brings about the question of 
the effectiveness of monetary policy instruments, such as interest rate or liquidity provision 
mechanisms, in achieving simultaneous objectives.  
If  there  had  been  more  comprehensive  mechanisms  to  deal  with  cases  like  this,  maybe  it 
would not have been necessary to make such an intensive use of these instruments.  
As Jacob Frenkel remarked in the opening session, “it is not about preventing the crisis but 
making financial systems more resilient”.  
In  emerging  countries,  it  was  clear  that  systemic  stability  had  to  be  maintained,  given  our 
history  of  macroeconomic  volatility  and  recurrent  crises.  But  in  the  most  industrialized 
countries,  where  capital  markets  are  deep  and  highly  integrated  into  the  banking  system, 
financial  stability  was  traditionally  regarded  more  as  an  instrument  than  as  an  objective  in 
itself. However, we can now see the fiscal, monetary and financial instruments working “side 
by side” towards a common goal.  
As  Mario  Blejer  stated  moments  ago,  “in  times  of  crisis  we  need  to  adapt  their  action  to 
prevent the crisis from spreading over the rest of the economy”. 
Current regulatory policies have a procyclical component that must be dealt with in upcoming 
reforms.  José  Antonio  Ocampo’s  proposals  on  countercyclical  capital  requirements  have 
been  subject  to  discussion  for  some  time,  and  so  have  moving  provisions  in  the  Spanish 
case.  
In  my  view,  in  order  to  achieve  financial  stability,  we  will  probably  need  to  reform  existing 
regulations.  In  fact,  several  panellists,  such  as  Viñals  and  Ocampo,  paved  the  way  for  a 
debate on increased policy coordination given the increased interaction of financial markets 
and  the  difficulty  this  implies  for  independent  action.  As  I  see  it,  this  will  not  stop  the 
increasing financial innovation process but will strengthen the related risk management. In 
2 
 BIS Review 109/2008
this sense, the degree of interdependence of the global economy in general, and of financial 
markets in particular, increasingly requires joint international actions.  
A  greater  harmonization  of  domestic  and  international  regulation  will  prevent  regulatory 
arbitrage from being used to obtain extraordinary revenues, which was one of the causes of 
the current crisis. 
Cecchetti also dealt with this issue and gave us something to think about — something we 
also  emphasized  in  the  opening  address.  The  central  bank  interest  rate  is  not  a  complete 
indicator of financial conditions. We need to improve financial stability measures.  
In  the  case  of  developing  economies,  Madame  Hu  was  in  favor  of  using  reserve 
requirements  instead  of  interest  rates  to  deal  with  the  evolution  of  liquidity  conditions.  For 
many economists, she argued, this was “old-fashioned”, but for China it proved efficient. In 
fact, the use of the interest rate in segmented, shallow and unconnected financial systems 
has  obvious  limitations.  This  shows  that  the  control  of  monetary  aggregates  can  be 
appropriate under certain circumstances in many emerging economies. 
This  underscores  a  point  I  usually  make  about  monetary  policy,  which  was  developed  by 
Marty Feldstein. The profession focused so much on rules that the reference to interest rate 
and to monetary policy appear to be synonymous. Marty just claimed that monetary policy 
will continue to lack the ability to strengthen the economy because of the unusual conditions 
in the housing sector and credit markets, and because the rates were very low and failed to 
keep the economy going. Central banks have other tools that are perhaps more traditional, 
but  have  fallen  into  abeyance  in  some  countries,  such  as  discount  windows  and  reserve 
requirements. 
As you can see, the discussion agenda is long and complex and there is no single optimal 
approach  that  could  be  defined  in  a  vacuum.  The  coexistence  of  different  policy 
recommendations was confirmed this morning when two prominent scholars such as Bennett 
McCallum and Jan Kregel analyzed monetary policy from a theoretical perspective.  
In  our  country,  we  saw  an  example  of  commitment  to  systemic  stability  in  the  past  few 
months with the full implementation of the robust and consistent approach launched in recent 
years.  All  instruments  were  available.  We  focused  all  our  efforts  on  restoring  the  money 
market equilibrium.  
Our  system  was  able  to  cushion  the  impact  of  external  disruptions  on  macroeconomic 
performance, confirming that the central bank's prudential and countercyclical policies were 
right, both in the monetary and the financial fields.  
Something  similar  occurs  with  the  exchange  rate  channel.  In  my  opinion,  the  current 
managed floating exchange rate regime is the most appropriate to weather financial turmoil 
at this time of our economic history.  
Analyzing the Asian experience, Zeti has just stressed the importance of foreign exchange 
predictability for companies to focus their efforts on micro issues.  
This  reinforces  my  belief  that  a  managed  floating  exchange  rate  regime  is  the  only  one 
possible for the current moment of Argentina signed by a history of volatility.  
One of the most distinctive features of the aggregate operating dynamics in Argentina has 
been the recurrent macroeconomic instability episodes. It is no accident that, in the past 25 
years, our economy spent over a third of the time off the dynamic stability path (defined as 
the  range  between  two  standard  deviations  of  the  long-term  trend),  against  Australia’s  18 
percent or Brazil’s 25 percent. Argentina has similar resources and position in the world to 
these  countries,  and  should  have  some  symmetry  with  them  as  regards  the  impact  of 
external shocks. These phenomena have severely harmed long-term performance, and were 
not free of charge in terms of welfare: excessive volatility is probably the main reason for our 
country’s economic stagnation in the last three decades. 
BIS Review 109/2008 
 3
Furthermore,  our  economy  is  still  on  its  way  to  its  long-term  path  after  exiting  an 
unprecedented  crisis,  which  simultaneously  included  an  institutional  breakdown,  a  huge 
devaluation, the destruction of the financial system and the default on the public debt.  
In Argentina, the monetary policy transmission channels are just being rebuilt, since credit to 
the private sector accounts for 12 percent of GDP, still far below the Latin American average. 
Moreover, consumer credit reacts weakly to interest rate fluctuations.  
Therefore,  the  hasty  adoption  of  certain  instruments  would  not  only  be  useless  but  also 
hamper  their  future  use.  We  cannot  “take  shortcuts”;  rather,  we  must  patiently  rebuild  the 
power  of  monetary  policy  tools.  For  this  reason,  comparing  the  situation  of  the  various 
emerging countries may lead to wrong diagnoses and policy recommendations.  
But  it  was  the  reinsurance  policies  (reserve  accumulation  and  the  construction  of  a  solid 
financial system) that afforded us high liquidity cushions to be prepared for times like these. 
What  would  have  happened  under  the  same  circumstances  with  a  pure  floating  exchange 
rate regime in place? Are we prepared for the exchange rate to fluctuate in a short time, as it 
does in neighboring countries? I do not think so, not yet, given our long history of instability 
and dollarization. This is something we will learn over time.  
It is against this background that Argentina made the decision to settle its debt with the Paris 
Club,  which  reflects  the  country’s  willingness  to  pay  and  creditworthiness.  This  decision  is 
part of a comprehensive strategy to access the debt markets voluntarily — not only for the 
government  but  also  for  the  private  sector.  Furthermore,  this  is  a  clear  proof  of  what  this 
seminar aims at: an opportunity to turn over a new leaf which is, undoubtedly, a step forward 
in our country's international financial integration.  
After paying the debt, Argentina will continue to maintain robust international reserve levels 
as a percentage of GDP, both in comparison with other countries and with its own previous 
historical  levels.  We  are  building  up  reserves  thanks  to  a  trade  balance  surplus  which  is 
expected  to  continue  in  the  next  few  years.  Even  after  debt  repayment  and  without 
considering future trade surplus, the international reserve stock is well above its optimal level 
in  terms  of  imports  for  the  next  months,  short-term  external  liabilities  and  monetary 
aggregates.  
In turn, the national public sector holds AR$30 billion worth of deposits, identical funding is 
guaranteed  in  the  domestic  market  and  there  is  a  similarly  sized  fiscal  scenario.  This 
exceeds next year’s public debt maturities (capital and interest).  
This decision is fully consistent with the monthly trade surplus of USD 1 billion expected for 
next year — which ensures one of the three basic pillars of the current monetary regime: the 
prudential  international  reserve  accumulation  strategy  that  also  supports  the  monetary 
absorption instruments used to regulate the means of payment adjustment. 
Therefore, this decision is in keeping with our commitment to repeat in the next five years the 
fiscal performance of the previous period — a primary fiscal surplus of 3.2% of GDP —, and 
with an economic program fully engaged in the efficient and prudent coordination of various 
anti-inflationary policies. On the one hand, both the fiscal and the revenues policies should 
be  consonant  with  the  behaviour  of  primary  spending  and  revenues,  respectively.  On  the 
other,  monetary  policy  should  not  only  keep  fostering  the  recovery  of  domestic  money 
demand, but also attempt to consolidate the remonetization of the Argentine economy. The 
sound  coordination  of  all  these  policies  will  most  likely  extend  twin  surpluses  (fiscal  and 
external). For our country, these surpluses have become the pillars of sustained growth with 
social inclusion. 
For the first time in decades, the Central Bank of Argentina has effective tools to protect our 
economy against any sudden changes. This is the best contribution we can make to ensure 
two  essential  public  goods:  monetary  and  financial  stability,  which  were  missing  in  the 
economic history of the past 50 years. Thank you all and see you next year. 
4 
 BIS Review 109/2008
