John Hurley: Financial stability and recent market developments in 
Ireland 
Opening statement by Mr John Hurley, Governor of the Central Bank & Financial Services 
Authority of Ireland, to the Joint Oireachtas Committee on Finance and the Public Service, 
Dublin, 30 January 2008. 
 Good afternoon Chairman and members of the committee. Thank you for inviting us to meet 
with you today. I am accompanied by Tony Grimes, the Director General of the Central Bank. 
Mr  Patrick  Neary,  the  Chief  Executive  of  the  Financial  Regulator  is  accompanied  by  Con 
Horan, the Prudential Director of the Financial Regulator. 
With  your  agreement,  in  my  opening  remarks  I  would  like  to  recall  the  background  to  the 
current market turbulence and outline our approach to Financial Stability in the Central Bank 
and Financial Services Authority of Ireland, to summarise some of the main points from our 
recent Financial Stability Report, and to talk a little about the recent market developments 
and  their  effects  here  in  Ireland.  Mr.  Neary  will  outline  how  the  Financial  Regulator 
discharges its responsibilities in this context. 
After  several  years  during  which  financial  market  conditions  were  extremely  buoyant, 
international  financial  markets  have  experienced  a  substantial  correction  and  considerable 
volatility over the last 6 months. This episode began with a significant heightening of concern 
globally, from mid-2007 onwards, about investors’ exposures to mounting losses in the US 
subprime mortgage market. These concerns proved serious enough to disrupt a variety of 
financial markets, including those markets which banks access for their funding. The result 
internationally  has  been  a  severe  disruption  of  banks’  liquidity  flows  and  heightened 
concerns about financial stability. 
It  is  against  this  background  that  we  present  today  our  current  assessment  of  financial 
stability  in  Ireland  and  outline  our  role  in  contributing  to  stability  in  the  domestic  financial 
system. 
What is financial stability? 
Let me begin by briefly defining financial stability. Financial stability exists where the various 
components  of  the  financial  system,  such  as  financial  markets,  payments  and  settlements 
systems  and  financial  intermediaries  (such  as  banks),  function  smoothly  and  without 
interruption and with each component resilient to shock. In simple terms, a stable financial 
system is one that is able to absorb shocks. Instability emanating from a financial crisis can 
be very serious - there have been many examples of financial crises in the past in various 
countries  that  proved  to  be  costly  in  terms  of  economic  disruption  and  loss  of  output  and 
employment. 
Co-operation between the Central Bank and Financial Regulator on financial stability 
issues 
I  will  now  briefly  describe  the  institutional  arrangements  governing  financial  stability  in 
Ireland.  The  Central  Bank  and  Financial  Services  Authority  of  Ireland  is  the  institution 
charged  with  contributing  to  financial  stability  in  Ireland  under  both  domestic  and  EU 
legislation. The organisation consists of two component entities – the Central Bank and the 
Financial  Regulator  –  each  with 
its  own  particular  responsibilities.  The  roles  are 
complementary and we enjoy the closest cooperation. The Central Bank’s responsibilities for 
financial stability relate to the surveillance of the strengths and vulnerabilities of the overall 
BIS Review 13/2008 
 1
economy and financial system. The Financial Regulator’s remit includes surveillance of the 
financial  soundness  of  individual  institutions.  Both  approaches  are  necessary  for  a 
comprehensive  assessment  of  financial  stability  and  our  organisational  structure  facilitates 
the seamless sharing of expertise. Accordingly, colleagues from both the Central Bank and 
the  Financial  Regulator  come  together  regularly  at  all  levels  (i.e.,  directors,  senior 
management  and  staff)  to  consider  financial  stability  issues  and  this  joint  assessment  is 
published in our annual Financial Stability Reports. 
Financial stability in Ireland 
Publication  of  the  Financial  Stability  Report  is  only  one  of  a  number  of  ways  in  which  we 
contribute to financial stability on an ongoing basis. 
It  is  generally  accepted  that  price  stability  contributes  greatly  to  financial  stability.  As  a 
member  of  the  Governing  Council  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  I  participate  in  the 
formulation  of  Eurosystem  monetary  policy.  The  Irish  Central  Bank  conducts  market 
operations  on  behalf  of  the  Eurosystem  relating  to  the  provision  of  liquidity  to  banks  in 
Ireland; we are responsible for the oversight of payments and settlements systems and we 
contribute to the formulation of the Eurosystem’s policies on financial stability. We maintain 
an open dialogue with the domestic credit institutions in order to review issues affecting the 
domestic  financial  system  and  to  facilitate  the  flow  of  information  between  our  domestic 
banks and the ECB. This dialogue has been intensified in recent times through regular and 
ongoing joint meetings of Central Bank and Financial Regulator management with the senior 
executives of our major banks. Furthermore, we continue to develop procedures to assess 
and deal with any concern of a financial stability nature that might arise. Finally, as I have 
said, we work closely with our colleagues in the Financial Regulator, who in the course of 
their regulatory activities have important insights into the operation of the financial system. 
Mr Neary will share these insights with you shortly. 
Financial Stability Report 2007 
Your  invitation  mentioned  the  Financial  Stability  Report  for  2007  specifically.  I  will  outline 
briefly now the approach and key messages in this report and we are happy to explore any of 
these issues in greater detail afterwards. 
Since  2000,  we  have  published  annually  an  assessment  of  financial  stability.  In  similar 
fashion to other central banks, we publish our report to provide the information and analysis 
so  that  financial  market  participants  and  the  wider  public  are  well  informed  about  the 
economic and financial environment, with particular attention to the associated risks. Armed 
with this information, they should be better able to make informed decisions about financial 
planning and decision-making. Our intention is that the report conveys the importance of a 
stable financial system and that it should stimulate discussion of the current financial stability 
climate. 
Our  overall  assessment  in  our  most  recent  Financial  Stability  Report,  published  last 
November, is that financial stability risks have, on balance, increased since the publication of 
the previous report in 2006, as a result of the more challenging international environment and 
its implications for domestic financial institutions. 
Our central expectation, based on an assessment of the risks facing both the household and 
non-financial corporate sectors, the health of the banking sector, the results of stress testing 
of  the  financial  system  and  the  outlook  for  the  economy  is  that,  notwithstanding  the 
international  financial  market  turbulence,  the  Irish  banking  system  continues  to  be  well 
placed  to  withstand  adverse  economic  and  sectoral  developments  in  the  short  to  medium 
term. 
There are, however, some key risks to this central outlook for financial stability: 
2 
 BIS Review 13/2008
First,  by  any  standard,  Ireland  is  one  of  the  most  open  economies  in  the  world  and  the 
downside  of  this  is  that  the  economy  and  its  financial  system  is  highly  exposed  to  events 
arising in the world economy and financial markets. 
Second, on the domestic front, the outlook is for a deceleration in economic growth in 2008 
along with some rebalancing in the composition of growth. It is important that this moderation 
of activity takes place at a pace that is conducive to the health of the economy and supports 
the stability of the financial system. The labour market continued to perform strongly during 
2007, albeit with clear evidence of more moderate employment and labour force growth than 
in the recent past. The outlook is for weaker, although still positive, employment growth in 
2008,  mainly  due  to  an  expected  decline  in  construction  sector  employment.  While  this  is 
likely  to  lead  to  some  increase  in  unemployment,  the  unemployment  rate  is  expected  to 
remain low by international standards. 
Third, in the housing market, increases in interest rates, which up to the middle of last year 
had risen from low levels, have clearly reduced the affordability of housing over the past two 
years. There has also been a levelling off of house price increases followed by some decline. 
The latest published data show that prices were down about 6 per cent in year-on-year terms 
in November 2007. This would, of course, mask variations that may exist and other industry 
sources suggest that the figure may be currently somewhat greater. These developments in 
the market can be seen as part of a necessary adjustment phase following many years of 
high house price inflation. Affordability has begun to improve again due to lower house prices 
and changes to stamp duty and mortgage interest relief. Moreover, there are signs that the 
fundamental demand for housing in the economy remains strong – for example, private rents 
are continuing to rise, at about 11 per cent year-on-year – and employment and earnings are 
still growing. 
Finally, an additional factor is the impact of the turbulence in financial markets internationally 
on  credit  conditions  in  the  domestic  economy.  The  ultimate  impact  will  depend  on  the 
possible  evolution  and  duration  of  the  current  disruption  in  market  activity.  The  potential 
evolution  of  these  developments  is  difficult  to  predict  and  we  must  remain  alert  to  the 
possible risks for the domestic economy. 
The ongoing tensions in financial markets 
The  international  banking  system  has  been  negatively  affected  by  the  volatility  in  financial 
markets, both directly through losses on their holdings of US sub prime assets, and indirectly 
through  holdings  of  investments  exposed  to  US  sub  prime  losses  as  well  as  credit 
commitments to related conduits or special purpose vehicles. There has been a necessary 
reappraisal  and  re-pricing  of  risk  across  many  financial  market  instruments  and  sectors. 
Uncertainty  regarding  the  size  and  location  of  losses  has  affected  confidence  between 
counterparties and has severely inhibited lending in the unsecured interbank money markets. 
Central banks responded in an unprecedented manner to counteract disorderly conditions in 
money markets. In particular, the Eurosystem, of which the Central Bank is a member, along 
with other major central banks, moved quickly to meet the increased liquidity needs of the 
banking system. Liquidity management policies since August have been very much focused 
on,  first,  restoring,  and,  then,  maintaining  calm  in  money  markets.  Most  recently,  the 
Eurosystem  conducted  significant  operations 
reduce  concerns  about  year-end 
developments.  I  would  emphasise  that  there  is  a  clear  distinction  between  these  types  of 
money market management operations to ease volatility in financial markets and monetary 
policy decisions that are made with the aim of achieving the price stability objective that is 
the core function of the Eurosystem. 
These money-market actions were successful in alleviating the problems at the very short-
end of the interbank market. Longer-term rates have not yet fully adjusted, although spreads 
between  these  rates  and  policy  rates  have  narrowed  considerably  towards  more  normal 
to 
BIS Review 13/2008 
 3
levels in recent weeks. Activity in the interbank market, however, remains well below normal 
and  will  revert  to  previous  levels  only  when  a  greater  degree  of  confidence  returns  to  the 
markets. 
In summary, timely action by the authorities has mitigated the liquidity impact of the financial 
market turbulence on the global banking system, most of which had little or no exposure to 
US sub prime mortgages. Irish banks are a case in point. 
The situation in Ireland 
During this period of exceptional turbulence, like their international peers, Irish banks faced 
an  environment  where  medium  to  long  term  funding  was  not  as  readily  available  on  the 
interbank money markets as heretofore. However, adequate overnight liquidity was available 
at all times and, since the year-end, conditions in the interbank markets have eased and term 
funding is now more freely available and at lower interest rates. 
The current situation and outlook for the stability of Irish banks, based on an assessment of 
developments  so  far,  is  positive.  The  sector’s  shock  absorption  capacity  has  been  largely 
unaffected by the turbulence in international financial markets. The domestic banking system 
reports  no  significant  direct  exposures  to  US  sub  prime  mortgages  and  only  negligible 
exposures through investments and through links with other financial companies or special 
purpose  vehicles,  which  were  negatively  affected  by  the  current  market  turmoil.  The 
Financial Stability Report contains an article summarising the results of a survey conducted 
with the banks on this issue. 
Given  the  extent  of  the  disruption  to  normal  market  functioning  internationally  in  recent 
months,  it  was  inevitable  that  Irish  banks  –  like  all  banks  –  would  experience  some 
impairment  in  their  access  to  term  liquidity  in  the  interbank  market.  However,  the 
comprehensive  liquidity  framework  within  the  Eurosystem  and  the  significant  volumes  of 
collateral  held  by  them  means  that  Irish  banks  are  well  positioned  to  access  Eurosystem 
liquidity. Also, a fuller assessment of the funding patterns of Irish banks indicates that there is 
a significant medium-term element to much of their funding, as well as a relatively wide range 
of funding options available to them. 
Finally, our stress-testing of the banking system and our extensive financial stability analysis, 
all of which is outlined in our Financial Stability Report, indicate that Irish banks are solidly 
profitable and well-capitalised and with no major exposures. 
Conclusion 
In conclusion, the Irish banking system continues to demonstrate its strength in the face of 
the international market problems that have been occurring over the past number of months. 
As the evolution and duration of the current episode is still uncertain, it is difficult to draw firm 
conclusions  at  this  early  stage.  Nevertheless,  it  is  of  course  prudent  at  this  time  for  all 
jurisdictions to examine whether there are lessons that can be learned. In that context we will 
be informed by what will emerge from the examination, currently taking place at the level of 
EU Finance Ministers and internationally, that may help avoid a repeat of recent events. 
It is not the intention to rush to judgement on these matters; this would not make sense. They 
need  careful  consideration  and  this  is  what  is  taking  place.  Many  measures  already  have 
been  put  in  place  both  here  and  at  the  level  of  the  Eurosystem,  long  before  these 
international  credit  problems  arose.  These  measures  have  helped  our  own  banks  remain 
robust  in  the  face  of  the  international  credit  problems  and  they  retain  a  strong  shock 
absorption capacity to deal with risks that have emerged. 
I would now like to hand-over to Patrick Neary, who will deal more specifically with the role 
played by the Financial Regulator. 
4 
 BIS Review 13/2008
