Nicholas C Garganas: The euro and Greece 
Dinner  speech  by  Mr  Nicholas  C  Garganas,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Greece,  on  the 
occasion  of  the  ECB  Governing  Council  meeting  hosted  by  the  Bank  of  Greece,  Athens, 
8 May 2008. 
 Your Excellency Mr Prime Minister,  
President of the European Central Bank,  
Speaker of the Parliament,  
Minister of Economy & Finance,  
Commissioner,  
Dear Colleagues and friends,  
It is a great pleasure to welcome you to Greece on the occasion of today’s meeting of the 
ECB’s Governing Council.  
Let me say a few words about the location of tonight’s dinner, the Zappeion Hall. It was built 
in the second half of the 19th century as a center to host cultural exhibitions modeled after 
the Crystal Palace exhibition hall that was part of first World’s Fair, held in London in 1851. 
The architecture is neoclassical, with a Corinthian portico, and an organization of spaces that 
is fully in harmony with the purpose for which it was built. The building, inaugurated in 1888, 
was  used  as  the  Olympic  Village  for  the  first of  the  modern  Olympic  Games  in  1896.  The 
building also has a rich political history. In 1979, the signing of the Treaty of Accession of 
Greece into the European Economic Community took place here.  
The  meetings  of  the  Governing  Council  that  take  place  outside  of  Frankfurt  twice  a  year 
serve  an  important  function.  These  meetings  allow  the  Governing  Council  to  conduct  its 
normal  work  activities  while  strengthening  the  cooperation  and  relations  among  our 
respective  institutions.  The  meetings  underline  the  cohesiveness  of  the  Eurosystem  and 
serve as a reminder that the system belongs to all euro-area citizens. Intimate cooperation 
among the members of the Eurosystem team, the national central banks of the system and 
the  ECB,  is  the  key  to  the  success  of  the  single  monetary  policy  of  the  euro  area.  In  this 
regard, let me mention that, as a member of the Eurosystem family, the Bank of Greece has 
enjoyed excellent working relations with all the members of the Eurosystem over the years.  
The  euro  has  been  a  major  success  in  so  many  respects.  Despite  the  skepticism  that 
surrounded its birth, on June 1st the ECB will celebrate its 10th anniversary, with its standing 
high. At all levels, the euro has delivered the goods. At the level of economic performance, 
its creation was intended to promote a macroeconomic environment in which countries could 
thrive in an increasingly competitive market place. The euro area’s track record in terms of 
inflation  performance,  low  interest  rates,  employment  creation,  financial-market  integration, 
and  trade  expansion  demonstrate  conclusively  that  the  original  objectives  of  the  single-
currency area are being fulfilled.  
Furthermore,  the  euro  has  eliminated  the  potential  risk  of  exchange-rate  crises  involving 
national  currencies,  to  which  many  of  our  economies  were  previously  exposed  on  a  daily 
basis in a world characterized by free capital flows. Moreover, the euro is now established as 
the  world’s  second  most  important  currency,  the  significance  of  which  is  not  lost  upon  a 
central  banker.  In  effect,  small  countries,  such  as  Greece,  have  traded  in  the  vulnerability 
associated with the free movement of capital for the greater security and credibility provided 
by a major international currency and its central bank.  
At another, no-less-important, level, the euro is a symbol of shared values and a common 
objective – the objective of bringing our citizens closer together in an environment in which 
they can prosper.  
BIS Review 58/2008 
 1
I need to add, however, that the benefits of a single currency and a credible central bank do 
not  come  automatically.  They  depend  to  an  important  extent  on  the  economic  policies 
pursued by the euro area countries themselves. From a national perspective, therefore, the 
challenge is to maximize the benefits of participation in a monetary union by making further 
progress on the path of reform.  
For Greece, it is particularly important to bring down the relatively high inflation rate in order 
to  improve  its  competitive  position.  To  achieve  this  objective,  it  is  particularly  important  to 
continue  on  a  sustainable  and  credible  path  to  fiscal  consolidation  and  to  improve  fiscal 
performance  by  reducing  the  country’s  high  government  debt  ratio.  In  particular,  public 
finances  should  have  sufficient  room  for  manoeuvre  in  order  to  better  cope  with  expected 
substantial increase in age-related expenditures. It will also be important, in both the public 
and  private  sectors,  to  attain  moderate  labor  cost  developments  that  take  into  account 
productivity  growth,  labor  market  conditions,  and  developments  in  competitor  countries. 
Attention must also focus on overcoming the structural constraints on economic growth and 
job creation, notably by fostering labor force participation. In this regard, the strengthening of 
competition in product markets, which will help keep profit margins at levels consistent with 
price  stability,  and  improvements  in  the  functioning  of  labor  markets,  are  key  elements  in 
raising potential growth.  
For fifty years, the EU and its predecessor organizations have brought peace and stability to 
the member states. The single market and EMU have built on that achievement by creating 
an  edifice  on  which  European  economies  can  grow.  By  continuing  to  work  together  as  a 
team, we will be able to ensure ever-more prosperous lives for our citizens.  
Let me not take up any more of your time, but let me wish you an enjoyable time during the 
remainder of your stay here. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 58/2008
