Seongtae Lee: Recognizing and coping with macroeconomic model 
uncertainty in designing monetary policy 
Opening address by Mr Seongtae Lee, Governor and Chairman of the Bank of Korea, at the 
The Bank of Korea International Conference 2008, Seoul, 26 May 2008. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
I am indeed delighted to be hosting the Bank of Korea International Conference 2008. 
All of us at the Bank of Korea are very honored that world-renowned scholars and central 
bankers  have  been  able  to  get  together  to  benefit  us  with  the  opportunity  of  hearing  their 
collective wisdom on conducting monetary policy. 
I  would  especially  like  to  express  my  deep  gratitude  to  our  keynote  speaker  Professor 
Thomas Sargent, to our moderator Professor Barry Eichengreen, to our roundtable panelists 
President James Bullard of the Federal Reserve Bank of  St. Louis, Deputy Governor Lars 
Svensson of Sveriges Riksbank, Professors Eric Leeper and Yung Chul Park, and to all of 
our chairpersons, speakers and discussants. 
This  year's  conference  is  being  held  under  the  theme  of  “Recognizing  and  Coping  with 
Macroeconomic Model Uncertainty in Designing Monetary Policy”. 
In a rapidly changing environment, this is one of the hottest issues facing policy-makers and 
economists all around the world. This topic is also important to the Bank of Korea given that 
the Korean economy is subject to the highly uncertain global economic situation. 
It is reported that the volatility of output growth and inflation has declined substantially in the 
United States and other major industrial countries since the mid-1980s. 
There  are  various  stories  that  seek  to  explain  what  has  caused  the  decline  in  economic 
volatility.  As  Federal  Reserve  Chairman  Ben  Bernanke  pointed  out,  structural  changes, 
improved macroeconomic policies or a favorable environment may have contributed to the 
“Great Moderation”. 
Although there are disagreements about the causes, I believe that improved monetary policy 
has played a significant role in stabilizing macroeconomic fluctuations. The improvement in 
monetary policy, in turn, may be attributable to advances in macroeconomic theory at least in 
some respects. 
Rational  expectations  and  the  “Lucas  critique”  of  policies  based  on  econometric  models 
motivated the launch of a new framework for the building of truly structural models that can 
analyse  the  effects  of  macroeconomic  policies  and  institutional  changes.  All  these  efforts 
have deepened our understanding of how the economy works and what the optimal policies 
are. 
Despite  the  progress  in  macroeconomic  modeling,  however,  developments  in  economic 
conditions,  especially  in  the  highly  integrated  global  environment,  still  pose  difficulties  for 
central bankers' policy-making. 
Central  bankers  are  now  faced  with  an  even  greater  degree  of  uncertainty,  and  thus  the 
question of how to cope with uncertainty is a big challenge for central bankers and academic 
theorists. 
Uncertainty comes in many forms. One obvious form is simply ignorance of the shocks that 
will disturb the economy in the future. The recent global surge in oil and food prices, which 
has been described as “a silent tsunami”, is a good example. 
BIS Review 71/2008 
 1
But  other  forms  of  uncertainty  can  have  resounding  implications  for  how  policy  should  be 
conducted. Three among them are data uncertainty, model uncertainty and uncertainty about 
how private agents form their expectations about future economic developments and policy 
actions. 
Apart from the issue of measurement, economic data are released after some time-lag and 
revised later. Information is not always adequate to allow a correct assessment of the current 
economic  conditions.  Data  uncertainty  can  induce  instability  in  the  economy.  Even  though 
the  monetary  policy  authority  follows  a  systematic  rule  as  suggested  by  John  Taylor,  real 
time  assessment  of  the  state  of  the  economy  may  lead  to  substantial  errors,  and  thus 
contribute to a dismal outcome for the economy. 
Even  with  accurate  data,  it  is  not  certain  how  macroeconomic  policies  affect  economic 
outcomes. Recently, much attention has been paid to investigating the implications of model 
uncertainty with a focus not only on uncertainty about parameter values in a model, but also 
on uncertainty about which of a set of alternative models best describes the economy. 
Meanwhile, explaining the way that private agents form their expectations is a research area 
of  great  interest.  The  rational  expectations  hypothesis  is  said  to  be  too  restrictive  in 
describing  agents'  formation  of  expectations,  and  no  one  can  be  sure  what  the  optimal 
policies are when agents' expectations differ from the rational expectations hypothesis. 
Thus far, the implications for monetary policy of the several approaches applied to the areas 
of uncertainty mentioned earlier are mixed. 
The  conventional  wisdom  is  that  policy  should  be  more  cautious  in  the  presence  of 
uncertainty  as  suggested  by  William  Brainard  in  1967.  Other  studies,  however,  argue  that 
uncertainty  may  lead  to  more  aggressive  policy  rules.  All  in  all,  different  sources  of 
uncertainty may result in different policy recommendations. 
Despite the current state of the debate not having yet reached a consensus, finding ways to 
deal with uncertainty has the potential not only for investigating optimal policy rules but also 
for resolving some puzzles in asset pricing theories. 
Having  said  this,  these  ways  of  handling  uncertainty  may  not  capture  more  fundamental 
sources  of  uncertainty.  For  example,  we  lack  a  deep  understanding  of  inflationary  or 
deflationary processes. Moreover, the boom and bust of the Japanese housing sector in the 
late eighties and early nineties, and the recent sub-prime mortgage crisis in U.S. suggest that 
the  macroeconomic  implications  of  the  housing  sector  may  have  been  underestimated. 
Despite  the  importance  of  these  issues,  they  are  not  sufficiently  reflected  in  more 
sophisticated models. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Uncertainty comes in various forms and it is something that policy-makers must constantly 
contend  with.  Economists  have  developed  a  range  of  formal  methods  for  recognizing  and 
coping with uncertainty, all of which offer important insights into how policy-makers should 
manage the problem. 
In addition to the theme of modeling uncertainty, this conference will see the presentation of 
interesting  related  papers.  For  instance,  these  papers  will  address  how  we  can  identify 
shocks to fiscal variables, and how the Bayesian framework can be applied to detect regime 
changes or to make macroeconomic models more consistent with the data. 
I  hope  that  this  conference  will  serve  as  a  forum  for  the  better  understanding  of  the  very 
nature of the uncertainty that surrounds our economic environment, and for the discussion of 
how we can manage a range of uncertainties. I believe that our in-depth discussions will lead 
to a better way of dealing with uncertainty in monetary policy-making. 
Drawing  my  remarks  to  a  close,  I  should  like  to  express  my  deepest  gratitude  to  all 
participants for sparing valuable time to be here with us. Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 71/2008
