John Gieve: A tale of two cycles 
Speech  by  Sir  John  Gieve,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  to  the  North  East 
Chamber of Commerce Durham Tees Valley Dinner, Durham, 19 June 2008. 
 Introduction 
Ladies and Gentlemen, it is a great pleasure to be here this evening in what has been a busy 
week for the Bank, with the open letter to the Chancellor in response to the news on Tuesday 
that  CPI  inflation  rose  to  3.3%  in  May,  the  latest  MPC  minutes,  and  the  Chancellor’s 
announcement last night of an enhanced role for the Bank on financial stability. Things have 
certainly changed in the year since your chief executive, James Ramsbotham, asked me to 
speak here this evening. 
The Bank's links with this region go back to 1828 when, in response to a crisis of confidence 
(this one over locally issued bank notes), we opened a branch in Newcastle. The move was 
not well received. The Newcastle Chamber of Commerce, wrote to the Directors of the Bank 
of England, saying "in the absence of any avowed motive for the establishment of a Branch 
of  the  Bank  of  England,  in  Newcastle,  [we]  see  no  prospect  of  good  from  such  an 
establishment.......[We] most earnestly recommend to the Directors of the Bank of England to 
re-consider the policy of the measure they are about to adopt and to abstain from trying such 
an  experiment  on  a  system  of  banking,  the  advantages  of  which  are so  generally  felt  and 
admitted." 
I  am  pleased  that  our  current  Agents,  David  Buffham  and  Will  Dowson  receive  a  warmer 
welcome from Chamber members and others as they travel around the region. Our agents 
are  the  eyes  and  ears  of  the  Bank.  They  make  sure  that  we  take  account  not  just  of  the 
economic statistics, which at best tell us what has just happened (and all too frequently fail to 
do that), but also know what businessmen and women are saying about their own outlook 
and plans. The Monetary Policy Committee receives a report from each region each month 
and I can assure you it always receives a lot of attention. All the members of the Committee 
also get out to meet businesses themselves and that is why I am here in the North East for 
two days. 
The main subject of my speech tonight is the wider economy, and in particular the tale of two 
cycles – the downswing of the financial cycle and the upswing in the commodity price cycle. 
The economic environment in context 
But first, it is important to recognise that the last ten years have been a period of remarkable 
stability for the UK’s economy. It has certainly been the most stable and successful period for 
the economy in my lifetime.1  
When the MPC was set up, Charlie Bean – then a leading academic, soon to be my fellow 
Deputy Governor – estimated that inflation would be away from the target by more than 1 
percentage point in nearly 5 months of every year. Yet this week the Governor’s open letter 
to the Chancellor to explain why inflation last month had deviated by more than a percentage 
point from the target was only the second written in over 10 years. 
And taking the past decade as a whole, this stability of inflation has not come at a cost to 
growth – quite the opposite in fact. Output growth has been high both relative to the rates 
                                                 
1  
Indeed work done at the Bank suggests that in terms of inflation, it has been the most stable decade in many 
lifetimes – that is, since the Restoration at least (Benati (2006)). 
BIS Review 80/2008 
 1
achieved  on  average  over  the  preceding  30  years  and  in  comparison  with  our  European 
neighbours. It also has been remarkably stable.2
Of course that stability at the macro level disguises some big changes in the structure of the 
economy. Indeed it has provided a platform for change. The North East for example is now 
much more diverse than it was and less reliant on a few large industries. And, overall more 
people  are  employed  in  the  region:  the  number  employed  in  the  North  East  has  risen  by 
more than 100,000 in the past ten years. And export growth remains relatively buoyant. 
In  contrast  to  this  picture  of  stability,  the  preceding  3  decades  were  scarred  by  painful 
recessions  where  unemployment  rose  sharply,  and  inflation  fluctuated  wildly.  In  particular, 
there were three episodes between the mid-1970s and early 1990s, when inflation rose very 
sharply, and at around the same time output contracted. While there are many in the room 
that don’t need reminding, I thought I would just give the younger members of the audience a 
reminder of just how desperate those times were (Chart 1). 
In 1975, RPI inflation peaked just shy of a staggering 27% while at the same time output fell. 
It was this era that entrenched the term “stagflation” in the minds of the public. Inflation fell 
back sharply over the subsequent year or so, only to rear its head again in 1979-80 – this 
time peaking at around 22%. Once again output contracted and unemployment rose sharply 
(Chart 2). 
A third and final bout of rising inflation and falling output occurred in the early 1990s, with the 
unemployment  rate  once  again  rising  above  10%.  On  average,  inflation  in  the  1970s  was 
around 13% and 7.5% in the 1980s. 
The UK macroeconomic framework 
Why  was  it  that  output  and  inflation  were  so  volatile  then  and  why  has  economic 
performance improved so much in the past 10 years? These questions are vital as we face 
more uncertain times ahead and to ensure that we avoid repeating the mistakes of the past. I 
would point to three main factors. 
There  have  been  changes  to  the  structure  of  the  UK  economy  that  have  made  it  more 
flexible and adaptable. Labour market reforms enacted over the past twenty-five years have 
led to a more flexible workforce. Unemployment has fallen without generating unsustainable 
growth in wages, and hence inflation. And in recent years the role of migrant labour has been 
important in easing the bottlenecks and skill shortages in what was otherwise an undoubtedly 
tight labour market. Firms have been able to adjust and adapt to events more quickly and 
that  has  produced  less volatility  in  output,  employment  and  inflation  for  the  economy  as  a 
whole. With economic growth expected to slow over the coming year pressures in the labour 
market are likely to ease, reducing the demand for migrant labour, and possibly beginning to 
reverse recent strong inflows. 
A second fundamental change has been to the monetary policy framework. The experience 
of those three recessions and bursts of inflation has led to a settled consensus that monetary 
policy  should  be  directed  at  controlling  inflation  and  that  there  is  no  long-run  trade  off 
between  inflation  and  output  growth.  This  consensus  has  been  embedded  by  transferring 
interest  rate  decisions  to  an  independent  Bank  of  England,  with  a  clearly  defined  inflation 
target  of  2%  measured  by  annual  CPI  inflation.  That  has  helped  build  confidence  that  if 
inflation  does  move  away  from  target,  we  on  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  will  act  to 
ensure  that  it  returns  to  target  in  the  medium  term.  That  confidence  should  ensure  that 
                                                 
2  
It has only deviated by more than 1 percentage point from that average on 4 occasions. To put this in context, 
in  the  preceding  3  decades  stretching  back  to  the  1960s,  annual  GDP  growth  deviated  from  its  10  year 
average by more than 1 percentage point about half of the time (about 20 quarters in each 10 year period). 
2 
 BIS Review 80/2008
employers  and  employees  are  less  likely  to  adjust  their  prices  and  wages  to  a  surprise 
movement  in  inflation.  In  other  words,  their  expectation  of  inflation  in  the  medium-term 
remains low, stable and anchored at the target. And that has helped to contribute not only to 
the stability of inflation, but output as well. 
Reforms  to  both  the  labour  market  and  monetary  policy  have  undoubtedly  played  an 
important  role  in  the  reduction  in  output  volatility  and  emergence  of  a  stable,  low  inflation 
environment. But there was a third factor at play that was probably also quite fundamental. 
Over the first decade of the MPC the economic cycles in the rest of the world were generally 
moderate, although not without excitement. And there is good evidence to suggest that the 
integration of emerging economies, such as China, into the global economy was beneficial to 
countries  like  the  UK.  The  share  of  Chinese  goods  in  total  UK  goods  imports  has  almost 
tripled in money terms  over the past fifteen years to around 8 per cent, and it’s likely that 
much  of  the  content  of  imports  from  elsewhere  originated  in  China.  This  rising  share  of 
Chinese  imports  has  reduced  manufactured  imported  goods  prices  relative  to  other  prices 
and wages. 
Consumer goods price inflation hovered around zero for most of the last ten years, until the 
recent rise in oil prices. As a result, the purchasing power of UK consumers has risen with 
higher real wages achieved without any cost to employers. In other words, for a period the 
beneficial  tailwind  allowed  the  economy  to  run  at  a  higher  level  of  activity  than  would 
otherwise have been the case, without generating additional inflationary pressures. 
But the economic environment overseas has taken a turn for the worse. In many ways it is a 
tale of two cycles. 
The financial cycle 
The  first  cycle  has  been  in  the  financial  sector  in  the  West.  A  banking  cycle  is  not  a  new 
phenomenon but the scale of the expansion of cheap credit for some years and speed of the 
downswing in the last year has been exceptional. 
It started in the US with a real downturn in the housing market and rising default rates on 
sub-prime mortgages in particular. That led to a freeze in the structured credit markets built 
on those loans as investors lost confidence in the credit ratings they depend on. 
In finance at least, it is still true that when America sneezes the rest of the world catches a 
cold  and  the  sub-prime  crisis  swiftly  spread  to  financial institutions  across  the  world.  They 
became  uncertain  about  the  value  of  the  financial  positions  they  held,  let  alone  what  their 
counterparties held. This led to a wider loss of confidence in banks, the hoarding of cash and 
illiquidity in many financial markets which is still not over. 
As financial institutions all around the world have struggled to shrink their balance sheets in 
the face of this storm, there has been a pronounced tightening in the supply of credit. The 
number  of  loan  approvals  for  house  purchases  fell  to  a  new  low  in  April  to  –  on  some 
indicators – its lowest level in over thirty years (Chart 3). 
In the past, the swings in the UK economy have been home grown. Credit squeezes have 
typically resulted from rising domestic arrears and defaults, driven by economic downturns at 
home.  This  time  the  sequence  has  been  reversed.  The  broadest  measures  of  economic 
activity  have  continued  to  grow:  quarterly  GDP  growth  in  the  latest  data  for  2008Q1  was 
0.4% and employment has continued to rise. The level of defaults on corporate and personal 
loans has been low. So the squeeze on new lending has preceded rather than followed the 
slowdown in the UK. The judgement we have to make is how far that tightening will restrain 
the domestic economy in future. 
There is no doubt it is having a material effect already (Chart 4). This is most obvious in the 
housing market, where prices have fallen by around 7% since their peak, and have further to 
fall.  The  drop  in  transactions  and  turnover  is  rippling  through  the  housebuilding  industry, 
BIS Review 80/2008 
 3
estate agencies and mortgage brokers. Of course a fall in house prices benefits buyers just 
as it hurts sellers so there is no necessary link to wider consumption. But the belief that in 
housing you could have your cake and eat it – that is your house would not just provide a 
place to live but would also provide an assured capital gain – has become widespread and 
the shock to expectations appears to be having a wider impact on confidence. There are also 
signs in some of the more timely survey indicators of consumer spending that weakness is 
spreading there too. 
If nothing else were going on, the MPC would expect this prospective weakness in overall 
demand  to  put  downward  pressure  on  inflation  in  the  medium  term  and  that  would  be 
pointing to further rate cuts. 
The commodity price cycle 
However, there is something else going on! Because if the US still drives the financial cycle, 
it  has  become  less  dominant  in  the  world  economy.  According  to  the  IMF,  emerging  and 
developing  countries  together  generated  around  70%  of  world  growth  in  2007,  with  China 
alone generating around 25%. And the world economy has been and still is growing strongly. 
That is what has been driving the rise in oil and commodity prices. For example, since the 
start of 2005, China has accounted for almost all of the increase in world demand for key 
metals  such  as  aluminium,  copper  and  zinc.  And  since  2000,  around  one-third  of  the 
increase in world demand for oil has emanated from China. 
Between 1997 and 2004 commodity prices were largely stable. However, since the end of 
2004,  sterling  non-oil  commodity  prices  have  doubled,  while  sterling  oil  prices  have  more 
than trebled. And half of that rise has occurred in the last 9 months. 
The  strength  of  demand  for  commodities  in  emerging  markets  has  not  been  matched  by 
supply.  In  both  the  oil  and  metals  sector,  new  capacity  can  take  many  years  to  come  on 
stream.  And  in  the  agricultural  sector,  output  has  been  affected  by  adverse  weather 
conditions in North America, Europe and Australia. 
As of yesterday, oil was trading at around $130 per barrel. Relative to the rise in the prices of 
consumer goods and services, oil prices (in US dollars) are now higher than they were in the 
1970s. The rise in oil prices has pushed up on fuel, retail gas and electricity prices. Similarly, 
the  rising  cost  of  agricultural  commodities  has  driven  up  food  prices  (Chart  5).  Taken 
together  energy  and  food  components  can  account  for  1.1  percentage  points  of  the  1.2 
percentage points increase in CPI inflation from 2.1% in December last year to 3.3% in May. 
There is no doubt that the emergence of China, India and other Asian economies in recent 
years is a permanent change in the structure and balance of the world economy. But there 
are signs too that an element of their recent growth may be cyclical. The growing inflationary 
pressures and the scale of the booms in investment are typical of economies reaching the 
top of the cycle. The huge increase in oil and food prices will itself have a dampening effect 
on consumers in those countries – as it will in the West. So we may well see the balance of 
supply and demand shift at some point. 
UK inflation outlook 
But the immediate prospect is for rising inflation. As the Governor explained in his open letter 
to the Chancellor, when the rise in energy prices passes through to consumers, CPI inflation 
is  likely  to  rise  sharply  in  the  second  half  of  the  year,  to  above  4%.  There  is  of  course 
considerable uncertainty around this, and if energy and other import prices rise further, CPI 
inflation could well go even higher in the short term. That is bound to lead to a downward 
adjustment to real take-home pay. That cannot be avoided. Indeed, such an adjustment was 
seen  in  response  to  the  rise  in  energy  prices  in  2004-06.  Over  that  period,  nominal  wage 
4 
 BIS Review 80/2008
growth was broadly stable, and there was a relatively smooth adjustment to real wages in 
response to the rise in energy prices. 
A key risk to the outlook is whether a similar, benign adjustment will occur in response to the 
latest price rises. With inflation having been above target for much of the past three years, 
and set to rise further in the near term, there is a risk that households and businesses may 
start  to  expect  CPI  inflation  to  be  persistently  above  2%.  If  that  happened,  and  those 
expectations were built into higher wages and prices, the benign adjustment would not be 
repeated. So we are closely monitoring developments in inflation expectations. Unfortunately 
inflation  expectations  can’t  be  observed  directly.  But  a  number  of  measures,  including 
household surveys and financial market instruments, can act as a guide (Chart 6). 
While all these measures have their drawbacks, most have risen – in some cases markedly – 
over the past year. It is unclear to what extent these measures contain information about the 
medium-term – the horizon over which the MPC aim to bring inflation back to target. And it is 
comforting that other measures – such as money spending remain stable and in line with the 
average rate of increase since 1997. And the Committee’s commitment to ensuring inflation 
returns to the 2% target should give those setting prices and wages some confidence that 
inflation will be close to target in the future. 
Conclusion 
There is no doubt that the current climate is the most challenging the MPC has ever had to 
face. Balancing the downside risk to demand associated with tighter credit conditions against 
the  inflationary  pressures  emanating  from  the  rest  of  the  world  is  an  enormous  challenge. 
And the immediate prospect is for a deterioration in both output growth and inflation. 
Monetary policy cannot prevent the economy being buffeted by developments in the wider 
world economy but the experience of the past 10 years has shown that the economy is now 
more flexible in responding to events. Crucially we now have a credible framework for setting 
monetary policy to meet the inflation target in the medium term. 
Monetary  policy  cannot  prevent  the  short-run  ups  and  downs  of  economic  cycles.  In  the 
current climate, the Committee believes that, if Bank Rate were set to bring inflation back to 
target  too  quickly,  the  result  would  be  unnecessary  volatility  in  output  and  employment. 
Instead we are focused on returning CPI inflation to the 2% target in around two years, when 
the present sharp rises in energy and food prices will have dropped out of the CPI inflation 
rate. We judge that in order for inflation to return to target it will be necessary for economic 
growth  to  slow  this  year,  reducing  the  pressure  on  supply  capacity  of  the  economy  and 
dampening  increases  in  prices  and wages.  But the  risks  to both  the  upside  and  downside 
remain large and the MPC will continue to make its judgement about the appropriate level of 
Bank Rate month by month. 
The next year is not going to be comfortable for anyone and we already hear calls to change 
the  system,  the  target,  and  our  focus  on  inflation.  But  the  new  framework  and  the 
independence of the Bank was designed for difficult times as well as for plain sailing. I hope 
we  can  look  to  you  and  other  businesses  for  support  in  doing  what  is  needed  to  bring 
inflation back to target. 
 
BIS Review 80/2008 
 5
      BIS Review 80/2008
6 
  BIS Review 80/2008 
 7
