Christian Noyer: Possible ways of improving the process of rating 
Speech  by  Mr  Christian  Noyer,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France,  at  the  Symposium  on 
financial ratings, organised by the Cercle France-Amériques, Paris, 12 December 2007. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure and honour for me to speak at this conference organised by the Cercle 
France-Amériques  and  close  the  rich  and  lively  round  table  discussions  and  the  previous 
speeches on rating agencies and the financial crisis. 
In the current state of turmoil, rating agencies have attracted a large amount of criticism. My 
intention is not to enter into this discussion, but rather to make a few remarks on the rating 
process itself and the possible ways of improving it, in the light of the recent events. 
Preliminary remarks 
An  essential  function  of  financial  markets  is  to  collect  and  process  information.  This 
information is used to assess the risk and return on the various assets, and therefore to help 
price discovery and more generally to take investment and financing decisions. However, the 
process by which this information is factored into prices is complex. Economic agents do not 
all  have  the  same  access  to  data  and  processing  capacities.  There  is  therefore  an 
asymmetry of information on the markets, which is at the root of well known market failures: 
adverse selection (whereby lower quality investments are more readily financed than “good” 
projects) and moral hazard (which encourages investors to take excessive risks). But more 
importantly, gathering and processing this information is costly. There is no incentive for the 
various investors to incur these costs if they believe that others will do it and thus ensure the 
efficiency of the market. 
When banks are engaged in financial intermediation, they gather and process the information 
concerning their borrowers through their customer relations. Bank intermediation is therefore 
a means of overcoming the problems of the asymmetry of information and its accessibility. 
However, on a securitised market, where borrowers are directly in contact with lenders, this 
solution  does  not  exist.  The  rating  system  is  an  answer  to  the  problem,  as  it  enables  all 
players to have access to simple, clear and concise information on the credit risk attached to 
the various classes and categories of financial instruments. The rating activity has expanded 
in parallel with that of bond markets. All major issuers are now rated by one or more rating 
agencies. For them it is a sine qua non condition for widening their investor base. The rating 
system  goes  hand  in  hand  with  the  development  of  large  liquid,  deep  and  international 
markets. It is a precondition and a tool for ensuring the smooth functioning of these markets. 
Securitisation, as we know it today, and which underpins national and international financial 
activity, would be impossible without these ratings. 
A  further  step  was  made  with  the  expansion  of  structured  products.  The  role  of  rating 
agencies now extends well beyond that of mere information providers. The rating process is 
an integral part of the design and financial engineering of these products: it determines the 
size  of  the  tranches  and  the  seniority  levels.  The  rating  of  a  structured  product  is  not  an 
average of the ratings of the underlying assets, in particular for CDOs. It depends on both the 
correlation between the yield on the various securities and the leverage effect embedded in 
the structure. Rating agencies supply the methods and models for assessing risks and their 
correlation. They impose the (liquidity, credit enhancement) conditions that the securitisation 
vehicles  have  to  meet  in  order  to  be  able  to  issue.  From  mere  intermediaries,  they  have 
become quasi securitisation regulators. As a result of their new role and functions, they are 
BIS Review 2/2008 
 1
now  being  held  responsible  for  the  excesses,  malfunctionings  and  turbulences  that  have 
been prevalent on structured product markets for the past three months. 
Rating activity and current turbulences 
The question is not to assign responsibilities, and even less to enter into a blame game. The 
rating  of  structured  products  has  nevertheless  led  to  a  deep  misunderstanding  between 
investors and agencies. There are two reasons for this misunderstanding. 
The first – the most often referred to – is the confusion surrounding the actual scope of the 
rating.  Rating  agencies  consider  themselves  responsible  for  solely  assessing  credit  risk, 
while many fund managers, in particular of short-term investment funds, may have expected 
that ratings would cover all the risks (notably liquidity risk) that weigh on their investments. 
Naturally, one may consider that these managers were – or should have been – informed of 
the exact nature of the rating process. However, one cannot deny that their expectations are 
natural: the smooth functioning and fluidity of the market are based on the provision to all 
economic agents of simple, clear and concise information on all the parameters that affect 
the  risk-return  ratio.  This  is  particularly  the  case  for  AAA-rated  investors.  Contrary  to 
investors in the riskier tranches, which are theoretically more sophisticated, they have less 
incentive,  given  the  low  return  on  the  products,  to  thoroughly  analyse  the  nature  and 
sensitivity of the ratings. They are therefore more dependent on rating agencies. 
In  addition,  investors’  trust  in  the  rating  process  may  have  been  encouraged  by  the 
regulatory and prudential system, which uses ratings as a basis for steering the investment 
strategies and decisions of the institutions in charge of collecting public savings. 
The  second  source  of  misunderstanding  stems  from  the  metric  used  for  rating  structured 
products. It is identical, in terms of presentation, to that used for traditional bond products. 
Yet, the two universes are different. The consequences of assigning a AAA rating to a CDO 
and to a corporate bond are not the same. The risk profile is different. The potential volatility 
of a AAA rating for a structured product, in particular, is far greater than that for a traditional 
product (for a shock, all other things are equal, of the same magnitude). Structured products 
are built on correlations and leverage. If one of the riskier tranches is affected by a default, 
the value (and the rating) of the other tranches will also be affected by contagion, through the 
decrease in their subordination level. Of all asset classes, CDOs are those whose rating is 
the  least  stable  over  time.  To  give  just  one  extreme  example,  a  AAA-rated  CPDO  was 
recently downgraded by nine notches in one day. 
For investors, a AAA rating has traditionally been associated with a stable investment. It is 
now evident that there are stable AAAs and less stable AAAs, which considerably reduces 
the  clarity  of  ratings.  It  would  have  been  simpler  to  adopt  a  specific  metric  for  structured 
products  and,  by  doing  so,  many  misunderstandings  that  were  responsible  for  the  current 
turmoil could have been avoided. 
Avenues for the future 
Hopefully these thoughts will open up some avenues for the future. I believe that there are 
two symmetrical pitfalls to be avoided. 
The first would be to continue as before, with a few minor changes to the existing system. 
The  turmoil  observed  over  the  past  three  months,  and  its  potential  impact  on  the  real 
economy, are too important. Furthermore, the rating process will inevitably play a key role in 
the  implementation  of  Basel  II.  This  will  involve  a  more  refined  assessment  of  risk,  in 
particular through the promotion of internal models, and greater use of external ratings. 
The second mistake would be to rush into the regulation of rating agencies. We cannot rule 
out that, at some stage, such regulation may become necessary. After all, information is a 
2 
 BIS Review 2/2008
public  good  and  rating  agencies  are  the  providers  of  this  good.  But  the  case  for  further 
regulation has not as yet been compelling. 
First  and  foremost,  we  should  consider  the  contents  of  possible  improvements.  I  would 
pinpoint  three  areas,  among  others,  for  consideration:  first,  greater  transparency  of  rating 
methods  and  the  overall  role  of  rating  agencies  in  the  securitisation  process.  Second,  a 
marked difference in the metric used for rating bonds and structured products, which would 
restore confidence in ratings. This could be done in two ways, which could also be combined: 
either  by  adopting  another  rating  scale  for  structured  products  (with  another  symbol  for 
example);  or  by  including  an  additional  measure  in  the  credit  rating,  in  particular  on  its 
volatility in times of market or liquidity stress. Third, a specific rating for liquidity risk. I am 
aware that rating agencies are considering this, despite the difficulties of such an exercise. 
We must hope that the discussions currently underway in international fora, such as the FSF 
and groups of central bankers in which the Banque de France is actively involved, will restore 
the  integrity  of  the  ratings  system,  given  its  prominent  role  in  the  development  of  modern 
financial markets. 
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS Review 2/2008 
 3
