Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Overview of the Philippine economy against the 
background of a difficult global environment 
Remarks  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas), at the Foreign Correspondents Association of the Philippines 
(FOCAP), Manila, 23 July 2008. 
 Ladies and gentlemen of the Foreign Correspondents Association of the Philippines, special 
guests, good morning. Thank you for inviting me again to speak before you today.  
The last time I was here in February, I discussed with you the challenges that the Philippine 
economy would be facing this year. These challenges include the US economic slowdown, 
the  global  financial  market  turbulence  and  the  rising  and  volatile  prices  of  oil  and  other 
commodities. Since we are now in the middle of the year, allow me to provide you with an 
update  of  how  the  economy  is  doing  in  the  midst  of  an  admittedly  more  difficult  global 
environment. 
Indeed  the  economic  environment  has  turned  more  challenging  for  reasons  that  are  well-
known. Global growth has decelerated as a result of a weak US economy, the credit crunch, 
and the high and unstable oil and food prices. Official statistics on 1st quarter GDP of the US 
showed a 1 percent expansion, higher than previously expected but still below par.  
Meanwhile, the strains in global financial markets have persisted and are likely to continue 
for some time. The coordinated credit operations by the major central banks and the policy 
rate cuts by the US have helped ease market tensions, but wider problems in the financial 
system have remained. This makes the operating environment difficult. 
The main problem is uncertainty. First, there is continued uncertainty about the size of losses 
from defaults on US subprime mortgages that the global financial system will eventually have 
to absorb. Second, there is uncertainty about where these exposures will end up. Third, this 
lack  of  information  breeds  fear  of  ratings  downgrades,  of  steep  sell-offs,  and  of  other 
unknown consequences. 
The biggest and most immediate challenge is the sharp spike in global oil and food prices. 
World  oil  prices  continue  to  be  volatile  at  elevated  levels.  Global  food  prices  remain  high 
though  the  increases  have  moderated.  These  concurrent  and  interrelated  shocks  to  the 
economy have contributed to the acceleration of domestic inflation.  
As  a  result,  as  with  most  –  if  not  all  –  countries,  the  domestic  inflation  environment  has 
become  more  challenging.  In  June  2008,  inflation  stood  at  11.4  percent  compared  to  2.3 
percent in the same period last year, bringing the average inflation for the first six months of 
2008 to 7.6 percent. Of late, we have started to see stronger signs of second-round effects, 
with core inflation rising and inflation expectations trending upwards.  
To  prevent  these  inflation  pressures  from  further  feeding  into  the  price-  and  wage-setting 
behavior of economic agents, we raised our policy rates by 25 basis points on 5 June and 50 
basis  points  on  17  July.  In  both  instances,  the  BSP’s  baseline  inflation  forecasts  showed 
more  elevated  inflation  numbers  for  2008  and  2009.  Sustained  high  inflation  can  unseat 
inflation expectations and potentially create a repeating cycle of lingering inflation and wage 
pressures that could prove costly to the economy. In response, we believe that the series of 
policy adjustments will help in steering inflation towards its desired path for the medium term. 
It is important to note that the challenges facing us are largely external in origin. A key issue 
therefore is the Philippines’ ability to weather these shocks. On the upside, the country was 
able  to  build  up  cushions  that  serve  as  sources  of  resilience  for  the  economy  against 
potential shocks. Let me cite some of these buffers and how exactly these have insulated the 
economy from external risks. 
BIS Review 94/2008 
 1
First,  the  Philippine  economy  continued  to  grow  notwithstanding  the  tougher  operating 
environment.  In  the  first  quarter  of  2008,  GDP  grew  by  5.2  percent,  led  by  the  strong 
performance  of  services  on  the  production  side,  and  by  consumption  spending,  on  the 
expenditure side. The strong growth of net factor income from abroad (NFIA) pushed GNP to 
grow  by  7.3  percent.  There  is  resilience  here  because  growth  is  broad-based  and 
notwithstanding the difficult times, the magnitude of growth is quite respectable. 
Second,  the  banking  sector  has  become  stronger  as  a  result  of  the  reform  measures  that 
have  been  implemented  over  the  past  years.  There  is  resilience  here  because  our  major 
financial  intermediaries  have  remained  strong  enough  to  continue  channeling  savings  into 
investment, and therefore supporting production and more sustainable employment. 
The Philippine banking system’s asset base has grown steadily. The overall asset quality of 
banks continued to improve as well, with the NPL ratio now moving closer to the pre-crisis 
level  of  around  4  percent.  With  healthier  balance  sheets,  banks  have  been  able  to  post  a 
steady growth in lending.  
The  banking  system’s  overall  capital  adequacy  ratio  remained  strong,  shored  up  by  the 
increased issuance of hybrid financial instruments to bolster their capital base. The average 
CAR  of  the  banking  system  was  maintained  well  above  regulatory  and  international 
standards  despite  some  decline  caused  by  the  new  requirements  of  the  revised  capital 
framework which is patterned after the Basel 2 Accord. The revised framework is considered 
a more risk-sensitive measure of a bank’s solvency position.  
However, we continue to closely monitor developments, particularly on the spillover effects 
from the slowdown in the US and the global economy as well as higher risk aversion brought 
about by the financial market turmoil in the West. These could pose downside risks to output 
growth that could impact negatively on the banking system’s growth. 
Lastly,  the  country’s  external  payments  profile  remains  a  major  source  of  strength  for  the 
economy. For the first six months of 2008, the BOP surplus has been sustained at US$1.9 
billion. There is resilience here because the existence of a BOP surplus provides space to 
accommodate the volatilities of both the export and investment markets.  
We acknowledge that there are risks given the increase in the trade deficit but remittances 
and income receipts from services coming from a vibrant BPO industry should provide the 
needed  support.  For  the  first  quarter  of  2008,  the  current  account  remained  in  surplus  of 
about 3 percent of GDP despite a wider merchandise trade deficit due to higher oil and food 
costs. The stability of the current account is due to the sustained expansion in remittances. 
Latest data show remittances for Jan-May 2008 totaled US$6.8 billion, growing year-on-year 
by 14.7 percent from the comparable period a year ago. 
As a result of the BOP surplus, our gross international reserves (GIR) increased further to 
US$36.7 billion as of end-June 2008. At this level, the GIR is equivalent to 6.0 months’ worth 
of import cover and 2.9 times short-term external debt based on residual maturity. 
The external debt ratio has also improved. With the build-up in the GIR, the BSP, together 
with  the  National  Government  as  well  as  private  corporations,  were  able  to  prepay  some 
obligations. This has led to the appreciable decline in the country’s total external debt to 35.5 
percent of GDP as of end-March 2008 from 72.9 percent in 2001.  
What is the outlook in the near-term?  
Reflecting the impact of the slowdown in the US economy and the higher oil and food prices, 
economic  targets  have  been  revised.  The  government  now  projects  GDP  to  grow  by 
5.7-6.6 percent while the forecast for inflation is at 9-11 percent. The BOP surplus will reach 
US$2.5  billion.  Exports  are  seen  to  grow  by  5  percent  while  imports  will  expand  by  10 
percent due to higher prices of oil and food imports. 
What can you expect in terms of the BSP’s policy thrusts? 
2 
 BIS Review 94/2008
The policy thrust of the BSP is aimed at ensuring that the headway that we have achieved in 
nurturing a resilient economy and a strong banking sector will continue. 
The BSP’s key monetary policy thrust will remain focused on promoting price stability. In its 
latest  policy  move,  the  BSP  recognized  the  need  for  a  more  decisive  monetary  action  to 
reduce  the  risks  to  inflation  expectations  and  the  long-term  cost  to  output  growth  from 
prolonged  high  inflation.  So  our  eye  is  on  inflation  because  price  stability  is  critical  to 
sustained, durable economic growth. 
In  the  external  sector,  our  policies  will  continue  to  be  directed  at  maintaining  a  market-
determined  exchange  rate  with  scope  for  occasional  official  action  to  address  sharp 
volatilities  in  the  exchange  rate;  maintaining  a  comfortable  level  of  reserves  as  self-
insurance; and ensuring the sustainability of our external debt.  
In the financial sector, we remain firmly committed to institute key reforms that will lead to 
greater efficiency, effective risk management, stronger capital base and improved corporate 
governance  standards  in  the  banking  system.  Given  these  reforms,  we  expect  to  see  the 
continued expansion of bank resources and capital, as well as a further improvement in bank 
asset  quality.  We  also  envision  a  stronger  and  more  resilient  banking  system  as  banks 
improve their ability to anticipate, price and manage risks. 
We will also continue to push for the passage of key legislations intended to develop a deep 
and efficient capital market as a complementary source of funds. This will make credit more 
accessible to a broader set of users and ensure a more efficient mobilization of resources. 
In summary, the BSP is prepared to take all necessary actions to address the threat of high 
inflation  and  promote  price  stability.  We  also  continue  to  be  mindful  of  the  impact  of  any 
policy action on the economy’s growth momentum. The resiliency of our economy allows us 
to have greater flexibility in responding to the challenges that come our way.  
I am now ready to discuss the issues of particular interest to you. Thank you. 
BIS Review 94/2008 
 3
