Ben S Bernanke: The economic outlook 
Testimony of Mr Ben S Bernanke, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve  System,  before  the  Committee  on  the  Budget,  US  House  of  Representatives, 
Washington DC, 17 January 2008. 
 Chairman Spratt, Representative Ryan, and other members of the Committee, I am pleased 
to be here to offer my views on the near-term economic outlook and related issues.  
Developments in financial markets 
Since  late  last  summer,  financial  markets  in  the  United  States  and  in  a  number  of  other 
industrialized countries have been under considerable strain. Heightened investor concerns 
about the credit quality of mortgages, especially subprime mortgages with adjustable interest 
rates, triggered the financial turmoil. Notably, as the rising rate of delinquencies of subprime 
mortgages threatened to impose losses on holders of even highly rated securities, investors 
were  led  to  question  the  reliability  of  the  credit  ratings  for  a  range  of  financial  products, 
including structured credit products and various special-purpose vehicles. As investors lost 
confidence  in  their  ability  to  value  complex  financial  products,  they  became  increasingly 
unwilling to hold such instruments. As a result, flows of credit through these vehicles have 
contracted significantly.  
As  these  problems  multiplied,  money  center  banks  and  other  large  financial  institutions, 
which  in  many  cases  had  served  as  sponsors  of  these  financial  products,  came  under 
increasing  pressure  to  take  the  assets  of  the  off-balance-sheet  vehicles  onto  their  own 
balance  sheets.  Bank  balance  sheets  were  swelled  further  by  holdings  of  nonconforming 
mortgages,  leveraged  loans,  and  other  credits  that  the  banks  had  extended  but  for  which 
well-functioning  secondary  markets  no  longer  existed.  Even  as  their  balance  sheets 
expanded,  banks  began  to  report  large  losses,  reflecting  marked  declines  in  the  market 
prices  of  mortgages  and  other  assets.  Thus,  banks  too  became  subject  to  valuation 
uncertainty,  as  could  be  seen  in  the  sharp  movements  in  their  share  prices  and  in  other 
market indicators such as quotes on credit default swaps. The combination of larger balance 
sheets  and  unexpected  losses  prompted  banks  to  become  protective  of  their  liquidity  and 
balance sheet capacity and thus to become less willing to provide funding to other market 
participants,  including  other  banks.  Banks  have  also  evidently  become  more  restrictive  in 
their lending to firms and households. More-expensive and less-available credit seems likely 
to impose a measure of restraint on economic growth. 
The outlook for the real economy 
To  date,  the  largest  effects  of  the  financial  turmoil  appear  to  have  been  on  the  housing 
market, which, as you know, has deteriorated significantly over the past two years or so. The 
virtual  shutdown  of  the  subprime  mortgage  market  and  a  widening  of  spreads  on  jumbo 
mortgage loans have further reduced the demand for housing, while foreclosures are adding 
to the already-elevated inventory of unsold homes. New home sales and housing starts have 
both fallen by about half from their respective peaks. The number of homes in inventory has 
begun to edge down, but at the current sales pace the months' supply of new homes has 
continued to climb, and home prices are falling in many parts of the country. The slowing in 
residential construction, which subtracted about 1 percentage point from the growth rate of 
real gross domestic product in the third quarter of 2007, likely curtailed growth even more in 
the fourth quarter, and it may continue to be a drag on growth for a good part of this year as 
well.  
BIS Review 6/2008 
 1
Recently,  incoming  information  has  suggested  that  the  baseline  outlook  for  real  activity  in 
2008 has worsened and that the downside risks to growth have become more pronounced. 
In  particular,  a  number  of  factors,  including  continuing  increases  in  energy  prices,  lower 
equity prices, and softening home values, seem likely to weigh on consumer spending as we 
move  into  2008.  Consumer  spending  also  depends  importantly  on  the  state  of  the  labor 
market, as wages and salaries are the primary source of income for most households. Labor 
market  conditions  in  December  were  disappointing;  the  unemployment  rate  increased  0.3 
percentage  point,  to  5.0  percent  from  4.7  percent  in  November,  and  private  payroll 
employment  declined.  Employment  in  residential  construction  posted  another  substantial 
reduction,  and  employment  in  manufacturing  and  retail  trade  also  decreased  significantly. 
Employment in services continued to grow, but at a slower pace in December than in earlier 
months.  It  would  be  a  mistake  to  read  too  much  into  one  month's  data.  However, 
developments in the labor market will bear close attention. 
In the business sector, investment in equipment and software appears to have been sluggish 
in the fourth quarter, while nonresidential construction grew briskly. In light of the softening in 
economic activity and the adverse developments in credit markets, growth in both types of 
investment  spending  seems  likely  to  slow  in  coming  months.  Outside  the  United  States, 
however, economic activity in our major trading partners has continued to expand vigorously. 
U.S. exports will likely continue to grow at a healthy pace in coming quarters, providing some 
impetus to the domestic economy. 
Financial conditions continue to pose a downside risk to the outlook. Market participants still 
express considerable uncertainty about the appropriate valuation of complex financial assets 
and about the extent of additional losses that may be disclosed in the future. On the whole, 
despite  improvements  in  some  areas,  the  financial  situation  remains  fragile,  and  many 
funding markets remain impaired. Adverse economic or financial news thus has the potential 
to  increase  financial  strains  and  to  lead  to  further  constraints  on  the  supply  of  credit  to 
households and businesses. 
Even  as  the  outlook  for  real  activity  has  weakened,  some  important  developments  have 
occurred on the inflation front. Most notably, the same increase in oil prices that may be a 
negative  influence  on  growth  is  also  lifting  overall  consumer  prices.  Last  year,  food  prices 
also increased exceptionally rapidly by recent standards, further boosting overall consumer 
price inflation. The most recent reading on overall personal consumption expenditure inflation 
showed that prices in November were 3.6 percent higher than they were a year earlier. Core 
price inflation (which excludes prices of food and energy) has stepped up recently as well, 
with November prices up almost 2-1/4 percent from a year earlier. Part of this rise may reflect 
pass-through of energy costs to the prices of core consumer goods and services, as well as 
the effects of the depreciation of the dollar on import prices, although some other prices – 
such as those for some medical and financial services – have also accelerated lately.1
Thus  far,  the  public's  expectations  of  future  inflation  appear  to  have  remained  reasonably 
well anchored, and pressures on resource utilization have diminished a bit. Further, futures 
markets  suggest  that  food  and  energy  prices  will  decelerate  over  the  coming  year.  Given 
these factors, overall and core inflation should moderate this year and next, so long as the 
public's  confidence  in  the  Federal  Reserve's  commitment  to  price  stability  is  unshaken. 
However,  any  tendency  of  inflation  expectations  to  become  unmoored  or  for  the  Fed's 
inflation-fighting credibility to be eroded could greatly complicate the task of sustaining price 
stability and reduce the central bank's policy flexibility to counter shortfalls in growth in the 
future. Accordingly, in the months ahead we will be closely monitoring the inflation situation, 
particularly inflation expectations.  
                                                 
1   Prices for some financial services are implicit; for example, depositors may pay for "free" checking services 
only  indirectly,  by  accepting  a  lower  interest  rate  on  their  deposits.  The  Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics  uses 
estimates of such prices, as well as other nonmarket prices, in calculating the inflation rate. 
2 
 BIS Review 6/2008
Monetary policy response 
The Federal Reserve has taken a number of steps to help markets return to more orderly 
functioning and to foster its economic objectives of maximum sustainable employment and 
price  stability.  Broadly,  the  Federal  Reserve's  response  has  followed  two  tracks:  efforts  to 
improve  market  liquidity  and  functioning  and  the  pursuit  of  our  macroeconomic  objectives 
through monetary policy.  
To  help  address  the  significant  strains  in  short-term  money  markets,  the  Federal  Reserve 
has  taken  a  range  of  steps.  Notably,  on  August  17,  the  Federal  Reserve  Board  cut  the 
discount  rate  –  the  rate  at  which  it  lends  directly  to  banks  –  by  50  basis  points,  or  1/2 
percentage point, and it has since maintained the spread between the federal funds rate and 
the discount rate at 50 basis points, rather than the customary 100 basis points. In addition, 
the  Federal  Reserve  recently  unveiled  a  term  auction  facility,  or  TAF,  through  which 
prespecified amounts of discount window credit can be auctioned to eligible borrowers. The 
goal  of  the  TAF  is  to  reduce  the  incentive  for  banks  to  hoard  cash  and  increase  their 
willingness  to  provide  credit  to  households  and  firms.  In  December,  the  Fed  successfully 
auctioned  $40  billion  through  this  facility.  And,  as  part  of  a  coordinated  operation,  the 
European Central Bank and the Swiss National Bank lent an additional $24 billion to banks in 
their  respective  jurisdictions.  This  month,  the  Federal  Reserve  is  auctioning  $60  billion  in 
twenty-eight-day credit through the TAF, to be spread across two auctions. TAF auctions will 
continue as long as necessary to address elevated pressures in short-term funding markets, 
and we will continue to work closely and cooperatively with other central banks to address 
market strains that could hamper the achievement of our broader economic objectives. 
Although  the  TAF  and  other  liquidity-related  actions  appear  to  have  had  some  positive 
effects, such measures alone cannot fully address fundamental concerns about credit quality 
and  valuation,  nor  do  these  actions  relax  the  balance  sheet  constraints  on  financial 
institutions. Hence, they alone cannot eliminate the financial restraints affecting the broader 
economy.  Monetary  policy  (that  is,  the  management  of  the  short-term  interest  rate)  is  the 
Fed's  best  tool  for  pursuing  our  macroeconomic  objectives,  namely  to  promote  maximum 
sustainable employment and price stability. 
Monetary policy has responded proactively to evolving conditions. As you know, the Federal 
Open Market Committee (FOMC) cut its target for the federal funds rate by 50 basis points at 
its September meeting and by 25 basis points each at the October and December meetings. 
In total, therefore, we have brought the federal funds rate down by 1 percentage point from 
its level just before the financial strains emerged. The Federal Reserve took these actions to 
help offset the restraint imposed by the tightening of credit conditions and the weakening of 
the housing market. However, in light of recent changes in the outlook for and the risks to 
growth,  additional  policy  easing  may  well  be  necessary.  The  FOMC  will,  of  course,  be 
carefully  evaluating  incoming  information  bearing  on  the  economic  outlook.  Based  on  that 
evaluation,  and  consistent  with  our  dual  mandate,  we  stand  ready  to  take  substantive 
additional  action  as  needed  to  support  growth  and  to  provide  adequate  insurance  against 
downside risks. 
Financial  and  economic  conditions  can  change  quickly.  Consequently,  the  FOMC  must 
remain exceptionally alert and flexible, prepared to act in a decisive and timely manner and, 
in  particular,  to  counter  any  adverse  dynamics  that  might  threaten  economic  or  financial 
stability. 
A  number  of  analysts  have  raised  the  possibility  that  fiscal  policy  actions  might  usefully 
complement monetary policy in supporting economic growth over the next year or so. I agree 
that fiscal action could be helpful in principle, as fiscal and monetary stimulus together may 
provide broader support for the economy than monetary policy actions alone. But the design 
and  implementation  of  the  fiscal  program  are  critically  important.  A  fiscal  initiative  at  this 
juncture could prove quite counterproductive, if (for example) it provided economic stimulus 
at the wrong time or compromised fiscal discipline in the longer term. 
BIS Review 6/2008 
 3
To be useful, a fiscal stimulus package should be implemented quickly and structured so that 
its effects on aggregate spending are felt as much as possible within the next twelve months 
or so. Stimulus that comes too late will not help support economic activity in the near term, 
and it could be actively destabilizing if it comes at a time when growth is already improving. 
Thus,  fiscal  measures  that  involve  long  lead  times  or  result  in  additional  economic  activity 
only  over  a  protracted  period,  whatever  their  intrinsic  merits  might  be,  will  not  provide 
stimulus when it is most needed. Any fiscal package should also be efficient, in the sense of 
maximizing the amount of near-term stimulus per dollar of increased federal expenditure or 
lost  revenue.  Finally,  any  program  should  be  explicitly  temporary,  both  to  avoid  unwanted 
stimulus  beyond  the  near-term  horizon  and,  importantly,  to  preclude  an  increase  in  the 
federal government's structural budget deficit. As I have discussed on other occasions, the 
nation faces daunting long-run budget challenges associated with an aging population, rising 
health-care  costs,  and  other  factors.  A  fiscal  program  that  increased  the  structural  budget 
deficit would only make confronting those challenges more difficult. 
Thank you. I would be pleased to take your questions. 
4 
 BIS Review 6/2008
