Jean-Claude Trichet: ECB and ESCB – ten-year anniversary 
Address  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
ceremony  to  mark  the  10th  anniversary  of  the  European  Central  Bank  and  the  European 
System of Central Banks, Frankfurt am Main, 2 June 2008. 
 Mr President of the Republic,  
Sehr geehrte Frau Bundeskanzlerin,  
Mr President of the European Parliament,  
Mr President of the European Union,  
Mr President of the European Commission,  
Mr President of the Eurogroup,  
Ministers, Excellencies, fellow Governors,  
Ladies and gentlemen,  
Ten years ago, on 1 June 1998, the European Central Bank was founded, together with the 
European  System  of  Central  Banks,  the  ESCB.  The  primary  mandate  of  the  ECB  and  the 
ESCB  was,  and  is,  to  preserve  price  stability  and  to  safeguard  the  credibility  of  Europe's 
single currency, the euro, which was created seven months later.  
It was the will of the democracies of Europe that led to the creation of the ECB. Its mandate 
and its independence in fulfilling its mandate were given by the people of Europe on a multi-
national and multi-partisan basis. We are faithful to our mandate because we are faithful to 
the democratic will of the Member States.  
Jean  Monnet  writes  in  his  Mémoires:  “Rien  n’est  possible  sans  les  hommes.  Rien  n’est 
durable  sans  les  institutions”.  “Nothing  is  possible  without  men.  Nothing  is  lasting  without 
institutions.”  The  ECB  is,  in  my  opinion,  a  remarkable  illustration  of  the  lucidity  of  the 
conceptual founder of the Community: the institutional construction is solid and has proved to 
be remarkably effective in attaining its goals.  
This  ten-year  period  has  been  short  compared  with  the  duration  of  the  deepening  of  the 
European Union, which is an historic endeavour. But this relatively short period of time has 
been rich in successes. These accomplishments call for celebration, for reflection and also 
for continuous efforts as regards the future.  
In the first place, celebration. 
My predecessor, our dear Wim Duisenberg, in his speech to celebrate the establishment of 
the ESCB ten years ago, referred to “the road we have to travel in the future to make the 
euro a success, which means to make it a stable currency”.  
What can we say now, after ten years? 
I can sum it up in five sentences. 
Since day one, the single currency has fully inherited the degree of credibility and confidence 
that was the privilege of the most credible national currencies before the euro. The credibility 
was such that the medium and long-term market rates of the euro were at the same low level 
as those experienced by the most reliable national currencies before. In spite of a series of 
global  shocks  resulting  from  the  prices  of  oil  and  commodities,  yearly  inflation  since  1 
January 1999 has been 2.1% on average. Price stability in the medium term is essential not 
only  because  it  protects  the  incomes  of  all  our  fellow  citizens  –  and  particularly  the  most 
vulnerable and poorest ones – but also because it is one of the preconditions for growth and 
job creation. Since the euro came into being 15.7 million new jobs have been created, over 
one million more than on the other side of the Atlantic. 
BIS Review 69/2008 
 1
The euro has been a remarkable success. I don't intend to name and shame those who said 
that Europe's single currency would be impossible, or that its introduction would be a failure, 
or that it would be impossible for it to inherit the best previous credibility levels, or that fault 
lines  in  its  construction  would  lead  to  a  permanently  weak  currency.  A  success  indeed. 
Europeans  have  achieved  what  was  deemed  impossible,  what  had  never  been  tried.  As 
Tocqueville said: “L’histoire est une galerie de tableaux dans laquelle il y a peu d’originaux et 
beaucoup  de  copies”.  “History  is  a  gallery  of  pictures  in  which  there  are  few  originals  and 
many copies.” The single currency of Europe is indeed an original, according to Tocqueville's 
definition. This is a time for celebration. 
This is also a time for reflection.  
The  first  ten  years  have  been  extremely  busy  for  the  Executive  Board,  for  the  Governing 
Council,  for  the  ECB  and  for  the  Eurosystem.  The  extraordinary  motivation  of  our  staff 
members is, in my opinion, due to their awareness of, and pride in, making history. And on 
the subject of history, I would like to make some observations. 
Europe's  single  currency  has  ancient  roots:  apart  from  the  single  currency  of  the  Roman 
Empire, two thousand years ago, I could mention George of Podebrady, a king of Bohemia in 
the 15th century, who called for a common currency for Europe, or Victor Hugo's call for a 
single  market  with  a  single  currency  in  Europe  in  the  19th  century.  By  implementing  the 
Economic and Monetary Union enshrined in the Werner report 38 years ago, we have also 
achieved  a  much  older  plan,  an  ancient  vision  of  a  unified  continent,  including  monetary 
union.  
This historic vision has always been closely associated with the search for prosperity and the 
preservation of peace. Voltaire's remark: “En effet l’histoire n’est que le tableau des crimes et 
des malheurs” – “Indeed, history is nothing more than a tableau of crimes and misfortunes” – 
from  the  perspective  of  the  mid-twentieth  century  could  not  have  been  more  apt  .  It  is  no 
surprise  that  it  was  at  that  point  in  time  that  Europeans  decided  to  accelerate  the  march 
towards European unity.  
The single currency is the most advanced feature of European unity and in many respects its 
emblem. We owe it to the lucidity of the founding fathers and to the determination of a series 
of visionary leaders. We saw these founding fathers a moment ago on the screen. To them 
we owe an immense debt of gratitude. Gratitude also to the leaders who maintained a steady 
hand during the 1990s in the run-up to the euro, in a very difficult environment.  
This  anniversary  is  no  time  for  complacency.  But  for  continuous  efforts,  because  the 
challenges lying ahead for Monetary Union will be numerous and demanding. As one of the 
major central banks in the industrialised world, we, like the others, have three challenges to 
cope with in our monetary policy-making: rapid technological progress, globalisation in all its 
dimensions, including the transformation of global finance, and population ageing.  
On top of those three major challenges, the ECB and the Eurosystem have to cope with two 
other  important,  self-assigned  challenges.  The  first  is  the  deepening  of  economic  and 
financial integration at continental level, the progressive completion of a single economy with 
a  single  currency;  we  are  the  only  central  bank  which  is  actively  contributing  to  a  major 
structural transformation of its own economy. The second is enlargement: we are called upon 
to extend progressively the euro area across the European Union as a whole; we are also 
the only central bank to undertake such an endeavour. 
Economic  Union  itself  has  its  own  challenges.  I  see  three  major  challenges  for  the 
Eurogroup,  for  the  governments  of  the  euro  area  and  for  the  Commission.  The  full  and 
complete implementation of the Stability and Growth Pact, which is a crucial component of 
EMU in the absence of a European federal budget. The resolute pursuit of structural reforms 
in  line  with  the  Lisbon  process,  which  are  decisive  in  order  to  raise  the  long-term  growth 
potential of Europe. And the lucid monitoring of the national competitive indicators, including 
unit labour costs.  
2 
 BIS Review 69/2008
Mr President of the Parliament,  
Mr President of the Union,  
Mr President of the Commission,  
Mr President of the Eurogroup,  
Europe  can  count  on  the  ECB  and  on  the  Eurosystem  to  implement  in  this  century  the 
historic task which was assigned to us at the end of the last century. We will be faithful to the 
primary mandate given to us by the Treaty. We know that our fellow citizens are asking us to 
deliver price stability. We know also that price stability is a prerequisite for financial stability, 
a very important objective at the current juncture. All the members of the Governing Council 
make their decisions taking into account the interests of the whole of the euro area, of 15 
countries. We do not consider any particular country, but all 15 of them. 
Sehr geehrte Frau Bundeskanzlerin,  
This year in Aachen, upon receiving the Charlemagne Prize, you quoted Konrad Adenauer: 
“Gerade 
in  Aachen  wird  man  die  Mahnung  verstehen,  dass  Europa  uns  heute 
Schicksalsgemeinschaft ist. Dieses Schicksal zu gestalten ist uns übergeben”. “In Aachen, 
above all, people will understand the call: that Europe, for us today, is a community with a 
common  destiny.  It's  up  to  us  to  shape  that  destiny.”  “Justement  ici  à  Aix  on  comprend 
l’appel  qui  fait  de  l’Europe  aujourd’hui  notre  destin  commun.  Il  nous  appartient  de  donner 
forme à ce destin.”  
A  “common  destiny”:  the  words  of  the  man  with  whom  General  de  Gaulle  achieved 
reconciliation  after  so  many  conflicts.  These  words  apply  even  more  to  the  countries 
belonging to the euro area. In the ECB and in the Eurosystem we are fully convinced that, 
with  our  fellow  citizens,  320  million  of  them,  we  share  a  destiny  in  common  –  wir  teilen 
dasselbe Schicksal – nous partageons un destin en commun. 
I thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 69/2008 
 3
