Ajith Nivard Cabraal: The role of productivity improvement in achieving 
economic prosperity 
Keynote address by Mr Ajith Nivard Cabraal, Governor of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, at 
the Annual General Meeting 2007/08 of the International Chamber of Commerce Sri Lanka, 
Colombo, 17 September 2008. 
 Improvement 
Mr. Chairman, Distinguished Invitees, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I consider it a unique honour to be invited to deliver the Key Note Address at this Annual 
General Meeting of International Chamber of Commerce Sri Lanka (ICC Sri Lanka). I also 
consider it a great privilege to share my thoughts and views on a very timely topic, “The 
Role  of  Productivity 
in  achieving  Economic  Prosperity”  since 
productivity  improvement  is  essential  from  both  a  micro  and  macro  perspective. 
Therefore,  at  the  outset,  I  wish  to  thank  the  ICC  Sri  Lanka  for  inviting  me  to  deliver  the 
keynote  address  on  a  vital  theme  at  this  important  forum  and  giving  me  an  opportunity  to 
plant a few seeds in your distinguished minds so that such seeds may be nurtured by you in 
your future endeavours positioning the country at a higher level in the global environment.  
As we all agree, as individuals, our main objective is to experience a better life and we think, 
act  and  react  aiming  to  achieve  this.  At  the  same  time,  the  main  objective  of  economic 
management is to enhance standard of living of the people. Hence, relevant stakeholders in 
the  country  formulate,  implement,  revise  and  re-implement  economic  and  other  policies  to 
achieve such goals. Whatever the policy we formulate and pursue, the ultimate aim is to 
raise living standards of the nation.  
At the same time, we are all aware that it is compulsory to have higher economic growth and 
fair  distribution  of  benefits  of  growth  for  achieving  higher  standards  of  living.  The  issue  is, 
how can we achieve higher rates of economic growth? 
Theory  will  say  savings,  investments,  diversification,  technology,  hard  work,  attitudes  and 
perceptions.  Yes.  All  these  are  important  and  they  have  certain  importance  in  a  country’s 
overall performance. However, in a highly competitive, globalized environment with a limited 
resource  endowment  all  of  these  factors  would  be  second  to  productivity.  For  sustained 
prosperity, productivity is the key.  
Why is the productivity so important? Economists agree that, in the long-run, productivity 
growth  is  the  principal  means  of  improving  living  standards.  The  rate  of  productivity 
growth  influences  the  economy  in  important  ways,  even  in  the  short  run,  by  affecting  key 
variables such as output growth, employment growth, and the rate of inflation. So, as a first 
step,  let  us  examine  the  need  of  productivity  improvements  in  the  current  global  and 
domestic economic context and the lessons of success by emphasizing on productivity, so 
that we could deal with this topic in a wider perspective.  
In my view, our economy should focus on productivity due to two important reasons. 
First,  limits  in  expanding  agriculture  and  industry  sectors  and  the  resultant  hindrance  of 
economic expansion. Second, in the current economic context, a greater emphasis has to be 
placed in not only expanding the services sector, but also improving its productivity in order 
to  achieve  higher  economic  growth.  Let  me  elaborate  on  these  two  reasons  in  a  broader 
manner.  
The  economic  history  of  countries  clearly  shows  that  there  is  a  set  pattern  of  the 
transformation  of  the  structure  of  economies,  typically  from  agriculture  to  industry 
and  then  to  services.  It  happens  due  to  two  major  reasons.  First,  in  the  first  stage,  the 
economic  value  was  entirely  created  by  agriculture,  which  is  called  the  pre-industrial  era. 
Thereafter,  the  source  of  a  country’s  economic  value  shifted  to  industry  with  fast 
BIS Review 116/2008 
 1
industrialization.  However,  the  value  creation  through  agriculture  and  industry  was 
constrained at a certain point as the performance in both the agriculture and industry 
naturally  depends  mainly  on  the  natural  resource  endowment.  Therefore,  when  the 
natural resource endowment of countries limits further expansion of agriculture or industry, a 
greater need for improving productivity arises.  
Second,  when  growth  is  limited  due  to  constraints  in  agriculture  and  industry,  the 
vacuum has to be filled with some other more efficient economic activity. Otherwise, 
the economy would be stagnant. Hence, the existence of an efficient and vibrant services 
sector has become a necessity for further growth of the economy as a whole and the 
agriculture  and  industry  sector  in  particular.  Although  the  services  sector  was  often 
criticized as a sector that does not create real wealth, both the theory and evidence prove 
that the wide-spread development and also the saturation of agriculture and industry has led 
to the creation of a new source of wealth through a more dynamic growth sector in the form 
of services.  
The services sector is currently the largest and fastest growing economic activity in 
most of the developed and developing world. The World Bank estimates that the share of 
services in the Gross Domestic Product of developed countries is typically between 60 and 
70  percent.  While  these  figures  are  generally  lower  in  emerging  and  least  developed 
countries, they have steadily been increasing over the years. However, it is equally accepted 
that  existence  of  expanded  services  sector  alone  cannot  generate  wealth.  It  has  to  be 
dynamic, vibrant and it should add high values to the economy. The services sector should 
be  more  productive  and  efficient.  Today’s  customer  not  only  demands  services,  but 
demands more productive, efficient and reasonably priced services.  
Let’s take a closer look at Sri Lanka now …. 
Undoubtedly,  Sri  Lanka’s  agriculture  sector  has  made  its  greatest  contribution  to  create 
wealth and employment in the past. As we all are aware, we have been self sufficient in rice 
production  over  the  millenniums.  We  have  been  producing  and  exporting  agriculture 
commodities  for  centuries.  At  the  time  of  independence,  the  agriculture  sector  was 
dominating  with  a  share  of  47  per  cent  of  GDP.  However,  keeping  with  the  global  and 
domestic economic trends, the relative importance of the agriculture sector has been 
shrinking. Accordingly, the share in agriculture reduced to about 12 per cent of GDP by end 
2007.  What  has  been  the  impact?  It  has  not  been  able  to  create  sufficient  value  or 
wealth with the reduced share of sectoral importance. 
While  recognizing  the  historic  importance  of  the  agriculture  sector  we  should 
recognize the fact that it has a limitation in the form of low contribution to the national 
output  and  low  productivity  in  the  current  context.  Notably,  as  about  one  third  of  the 
labour force is engaged in agriculture, its total output is distributed among a large number of 
workers.  According  to  the  World  Development  Report  2006  of  the  World  Bank,  the 
agricultural value added per agricultural worker in Sri Lanka, measured in 2000 US dollars, 
has been US dollars 696 for the period of 1989-91. This has increased only marginally to US 
dollars  737  in  2001-03.  However,  the  comparable  figures  for  other  countries,  even  in 
emerging  countries,  have  been  much  higher  than  these  figures.  What  is  the  result?  As  a 
result,  the  income  of  agricultural  workers  in  Sri  Lanka  has  been  very  low,  keeping 
them below the poverty line.  
At  the  same  time,  underemployment  has  been  the  natural  consequence  since 
employment in agriculture is seasonal and there is a higher concentration of a large 
farm-based  work-force  on  limited  extents  of  cultivable  land.  Even  disastrously,  the 
under-employment in agriculture in Sri Lanka is not only the highest but also on the increase. 
According to the Consumer Finances and Socio-economic Survey of the Central Bank, the 
underemployment in the agriculture sector in 1996/97 stood at 31 per cent of the employed 
and  it  rose  to  36  per  cent  by  2003/04.  In  contrast,  the  underemployment  in  the  services 
2 
 BIS Review 116/2008
increase 
in  recent 
there  are 
times.  Hence, 
sector fell from 20 per cent to 18 per cent between the two reference periods and that in the 
industry remained unchanged at 20 per cent.  
This has to be seen as both a weakness and an opportunity. We know that food prices have 
recorded  an  unprecedented 
immense 
opportunities arising from increased prices and resultant increase in production. At the same 
time, food security has to be ensured in order to avoid adverse consequences of increased 
food  prices  and  also  undue  declines  in  stocks.  Given  these  limitations,  the  obvious 
strategy is to increase productivity. Accordingly, attempts need to be made to concentrate 
on  land,  water,  agricultural  methods,  seeds,  harvesting,  credit  to  agriculture,  transport, 
harvesting storage, stable prices, value addition etc. to raise productivity in agriculture.  
If the growth is constrained by limited expansion in agriculture, can’t we focus more on the 
industry sector? Of course, we can. Unlike the agriculture, which is constrained with limited 
land  availability,  industry  does  not  have  capacity  or  demand  limitations.  Even  the  non-
availability  of  raw  materials  or  essential  inputs  or  the  domestic  demand  for  the  output  no 
longer  does  inhibit  industrial  growth  in  view  of  globalization  of  trade  and  services  and  the 
advancements in information and communication technology. Although the importance of 
the  agriculture  sector  in  Sri  Lanka  is  reducing,  the  share  of  industry  has  been 
improving.  By  end  2007,  the  share  of  industry  remained  at  around  30  per  cent  of  GDP 
compared to 20 per cent in 1950.  
However,  there  are  still  risks  and  weaknesses  in  industry  sector  as  well.  The  higher 
reliance of imported raw material, increased cost of economic infrastructure, higher wages 
per unit of output, overall increase in cost structure, intense global competition and possible 
abolition  of  various  concessions  certainly  tells  us  there  is  an  urgent  need  to  improve 
productivity in the industry sector as well. The demand for the country's industrial goods will 
always  depend  on  its  comparative  and  competitive  advantages.  This  requires  local 
industries  to  raise  productivity  and  efficiency  in  production  so  as  to  successfully 
compete with the rival producers in other parts of the world. 
Since  Sri  Lanka  does  not  have  an  unlimited  natural  resource  base  it  would  be  difficult  to 
enhance growth through industry or agriculture alone. As mentioned above, services sector 
is important for both industry and agriculture sector performance. Hence, we need to focus 
more on services sector.  
However, the focus should be placed on a “more productive” services sector. Although 
we always stress the importance of improving productivity in agriculture and industry sectors, 
a similar significance should be assigned to the services sector as well. Despite the growing 
weight  in  services  in  economies,  productivity  growth  in  services  has  been  slow  in  many 
countries and the share of the working-age population employed in services remains low in 
many countries. If we wish to strengthen economic growth and improve the foundations for 
the  future  performance  of  our  economy,  the  services  sector  will  need  to  do  better.  But 
strengthening growth performance is not the only challenge that we are facing. We are also 
confronted  with  the  growing  globalization  of  services  and  with  rapid  technological  change 
posing the huge challenge of keeping the momentum in the services sector. Addressing such 
challenges  and  strengthening  the  potential  of  services  to  foster  employment  would  be 
definitely  through  increased  productivity  and  innovation.  Certainly  a  productive  services 
sector  would  deliver  more  benefits  in  a  highly  competitive  environment.  Sri  Lanka’s 
telecommunication sector is a good example.  
In  which  areas  have  we  been  below  par?  Although  Sri  Lanka  has  a  huge  potential  in 
services  such  as  education,  health  and  tourism,  we  haven’t  done enough.  So,  also,  has  it 
been in the case of ports, financial services, including banking. We have not been able to 
reduce prices and charges through increased productivity.  
We may need to open domestic services markets to create new job opportunities and foster 
innovation  and  productivity.  Further  regulatory  reform  of  services  markets  will  create  fresh 
opportunities for firms to develop new services, meet emerging global demands and increase 
BIS Review 116/2008 
 3
employment.  It  will  also  increase  the  incentives  for  companies  to  innovate  and  improve 
productivity  growth.  With  all  these,  country  would  reach  higher  level  of  economic 
growth.  
Before I conclude, I would like to address three broader issues based on three important 
macroeconomic fundamentals. First, unemployment; second, exchange rate and the third 
is inflation.  
What  will  unemployment  reduction  do?  The  declining  trend  in  unemployment  to  its 
lowest recorded level in Sri Lanka brings to focus the need for more efficient use of 
labour  through  productivity  improvements.  Precisely,  lower  unemployment  indicates  a 
potential hindrance to future higher growth prospects unless labour productivity is improved 
substantially.  It  has  been  encouraging  to  observe  the  continuous  improvements  in  labour 
productivity  over  the  years,  especially  in  the  industry  and  services  sectors,  which  have 
contributed  well  to  higher  economic  growth.  However,  an  increasing  mismatch  in  labour 
supply and demand is reflected by the high rate of youth unemployment, including graduates, 
and  their  desire  to  join  the  already  expanded  public  service,  while  certain  sectors  in  the 
private  sector  are  finding  it  difficult  to  recruit  necessary  skilled  labour.  This  together  with 
declining labour force available for agriculture employment indicates the need of improving 
productivity  as  a  prerequisite  to  achieve  the  envisaged  higher  growth  targets  and  a  more 
balanced regional development.  
What will the Exchange Rate do? Under the floating exchange rate regime, the Sri Lankan 
currency  can  no  longer  be  regarded  as  a  steadily  and  continuously  depreciating currency. 
With  the  maturing  domestic  foreign  exchange  market,  the  exchange  rate  is  now  more 
responsive  to,  and  determined  through,  market  forces  of  supply  and  demand,  while  the 
intervention by the Central Bank is limited to mitigate excessive volatility in the market and to 
build  up  official  external  reserves.  The  stabilization  of  the  Sri  Lanka  rupee  utmost 
underlines  the  need  for  the  export  and  import  competing  sectors  to  focus  more  on 
productivity 
in  order  to  maintain  external 
competitiveness.  Instead  of  waiting  for  the  exchange  rate  to  depreciate  and  then  for  our 
businesses  to  become  competitive,  it  is  time  for  all  of  us  to  improve  our  productivity  in 
whatever manner we can. The garment sector, I hear is trying to gain from higher productivity 
and also through cost efficiencies.  
How  does  inflation  and  productivity  affect  each  other?  Increased  productivity  is  an 
important prerequisite to achieve low and stable inflation levels in the long-run. The 
lower  productivity  allows  cost  increases  that  flow  through  to  product  prices  and  thereby 
raises  inflation.  Therefore,  the  lower  productivity  growth  thus  represents  a  negative  supply 
shock  that  generates  inflationary  pressures.  In  such  context,  it  is  necessary  to  pay  due 
attention  to  improving  the  productivity  in  order  to  prevent  potential  inflationary  pressure 
associated with high income arising from faster nominal growth and cost-push factors that 
raise  the  cost  of  production.  The  long  run  containment  in  inflation  necessarily  relies  on 
containment of monetary expansion and increase in production in the country, particularly by 
improving productivity.  
As the Central Bank, what we can do? Obviously we cannot produce goods or services for 
the  consumption  of  the  economy,  but  certainly  we  can  create  the  right  conducive 
environment enabling the country’s economic performance.  
Why  should  the  Central  Bank  be  interested  in  productivity?  Our  role  is  to  maintain 
economic  and  price  stability  and  financial  system  stability.  We  also  provide  necessary 
payments and settlement infrastructure. We advise the government in economic affairs and 
policy making, and we provide important agency services such as exchange control, public 
debt  management,  provident  fund  management  and  regional  development  activity.  In  all 
these functions, our Mission is to “contribute to Sri Lanka’s prosperity”. At the same time, the 
Central Bank widely pronounces the theme of “success through productivity”.  
improvements  and  market  access 
4 
 BIS Review 116/2008
work smarter, 
combine better, 
deliver results, 
get it right. 
But,  obviously  this  cannot  be  done  by  ourselves…  The  success  through  productivity 
needs  a  consolidated  national  effort.  That  is  why  we  all  have  to  push  ourselves  to  a 
greater productivity level. We have to,  
• 
• 
• 
• 
It should be noted that the private sector has continued to make commendable efforts in 
order  to  improve  productivity  in  the  country.  What  can  the  ICC  Sri  Lanka  do?  ICC  Sri 
Lanka too can play a prominent and essential role. Since your organization establishes the 
business stance on broad issues of trade and investment policy as well as on vital technical 
or sectoral subjects including financial services, information technology, telecommunication, 
marketing, environment, transportation and etc., a vital role can be played in articulating the 
need for improving productivity. 
Do it now. This will be a major contribution that you make to our country. 
BIS Review 116/2008 
 5
