Mervyn King: Monetary policy developments 
Speech by Mr Mervyn King, Governor of the Bank of England, at the Lord Mayor’s Banquet 
for Bankers and Merchants of the City of London at the Mansion House, London, 18 June 
2008. 
 My Lord Mayor, Mr Chancellor, My Lords, Ministers, Aldermen, Mr Recorder, Sheriffs, Ladies 
and Gentlemen: 
Can it really be only a year since we last met in this magnificent room? With the financial 
crisis continuing, I was tempted to deliver last year’s speech again. But that would not allow 
me  to  welcome  the  Chancellor  to  his  first  Mansion  House  Dinner  as  Chancellor.  After  the 
past – difficult – year, could I say, Chancellor, how much we at the Bank have appreciated 
the  patience  and  good  humour  with  which  you  have  handled  the  “slings  and  arrows  of 
outrageous fortune”. 
Over that year, the west wind of a credit crunch emanating from the United States and the 
east wind of higher energy and food prices resulting from the strength of Asian economies 
have  been  stirring  up  the  waters  through  which  our  economic  ship  must  pass.  These  two 
challenges of rising inflation and falling economic growth have led to a crop of doom-laden 
predictions best captured by my less well-known addition to the well-known words of Robert 
Frost: 
Some say the world will end in fire, 
Some say in ice. 
But whichever it is 
It won’t be NICE. 
That  “non-inflationary  consistently  expansionary”  decade,  as  I  described  it  in  2003,  has 
drawn  to  a  close.  Yesterday  we  learnt  that  inflation  in  May  rose  to  3.3%.  In  line  with  our 
remit, I sent an open letter to the Chancellor. As I said in my letter, inflation is set to increase 
further over the next few months. Oil prices have doubled since the beginning of last year, 
and, in real terms, are now as high as they were in the 1970s. And further sharp increases in 
domestic gas and electricity prices are probably on their way. 
So what should the Monetary Policy Committee do in the face of this rise in inflation? 
The immediate cause of the current pickup in inflation is increases in food and energy prices 
relative to other prices. They are caused by the pressure of demand on the supply of food 
and  energy  in  the  world  as  a  whole.  Part  of  that  pressure  may  well  reflect  expansionary 
monetary policy in the world as a whole. But the rise in commodity prices cannot, by itself, 
generate  sustained  inflation  in  the  United  Kingdom  unless  we  allow  it  to.  We  will  not.  So 
although inflation in the UK will rise in the short term, inflation will then fall back. 
That means that the rate of increase of other prices and domestic costs, notably pay, must 
remain low. The MPC does not take that for granted. Surveys – including our own – indicate 
that  expectations  of  inflation  have  risen,  meaning  that  inflation  is  likely  to  have  some 
tendency to persist. That is why, as I explained in my letter to the Chancellor, we believe that 
a slowdown in the economy this year, creating a margin of spare capacity, will be necessary 
to dampen price and wage pressures and ensure that we fulfil our remit by returning inflation 
to  the  target.  And  growth  is  now  slowing  quite  sharply  –  broad  money  growth  is  falling, 
business surveys point to particularly weak output growth in the second quarter and growth is 
likely to remain subdued for the rest of the year. 
Where Bank rate will ultimately need to move to bring inflation back to target is impossible to 
judge now. Decisions on Bank Rate will be made one month at a time in the careful way that 
the  MPC  has  developed  over  more  than  ten  years.  But  there  should  be  no  doubt that  the 
BIS Review 79/2008 
 1
MPC is prepared to take whatever action is needed to return inflation to the 2% target and to 
keep expectations of inflation in the medium term anchored to the target. 
The  fact  that  growth  and  inflation  are  heading  in  opposite  directions  has  led  some 
commentators to question our monetary framework. Target growth not inflation is the cry. I 
could not disagree more. This is precisely the situation in which the framework of inflation 
targeting  is  so  necessary.  Without  it,  what  should  be  a  short-lived,  albeit  sharp,  rise  in 
inflation, could become sustained. Without a clear guide to the objective of monetary policy, 
and a credible commitment to meeting it, any rise in inflation might become a self-fulfilling 
and generalised increase in prices and wages. And surely the lesson of the past fifty years is 
that,  when  inflation  becomes  embedded,  the  cost  of  getting  it  back  down  again  is  a 
prolonged  period  of  sluggish  output  and  high  unemployment.  Price  stability  –  returning 
inflation to the target – is a precondition for sustained growth, not an alternative. 
We are in the most challenging period since the MPC was set up in 1997. But we have the 
right  framework  in  place  to  ensure  that  inflation  returns  to  the  target and  growth recovers. 
The  stormy  waters  we  are  navigating  now  make  for  an  uncomfortable  passage  compared 
with the calm conditions of the nice decade. Our inflation performance then was surprising 
not  so  much  because  inflation  was  low,  but  because  it  was  so  remarkably  stable.  Neither 
inflation nor growth are likely to be as stable in the future. But even if inflation proves to be 
more variable, it will not be systematically either higher or lower than the target. 
The right framework is essential if we are to maintain low inflation and steady growth. But 
there  are  two  recent  developments  in  our  economy  at  present  that  no  monetary  policy, 
whatever the framework, can prevent. 
The first is the impact on living standards of rising food and energy prices. These prices have 
risen  relative  to  most  other  prices.  Monetary  policy  should  not,  and  in  the  end  cannot, 
prevent such changes in relative prices. They will show up either in higher consumer prices 
or in a lower level of other prices and pay. Either way, the result is the same – a loss of real 
purchasing power. 
This year our real take-home pay will rise at a slower pace than national productivity. Rising 
fuel, gas, electricity and food prices, mean that average real take-home pay will stagnate this 
year. It will not be an easy time, and I know that some families will find it particularly difficult. 
But it is only a temporary slowing in the growth of our real take-home pay and remember that 
this  is  the  opposite  side  of  the  coin  to  the  falls  in  prices  of  manufactured  goods  from 
countries such as China and India, which in the nice decade allowed our standard of living to 
rise at a rate faster than productivity. 
The squeeze on real take-home pay will arguably be an even more significant restraint on 
consumer spending this year than the credit crunch. And it will affect the housing market too 
– lower demand in the high street will go hand in hand with lower demand in the property 
market.  I  have  said  in  the  past  that  there  is  no  causal  link  between  house  prices  and 
consumer spending. That remains the case. How closely they move together depends on the 
underlying forces that are driving them both. This year, the squeeze on real income growth is 
likely to mean that both house prices and consumer spending weaken together. 
The housing market leads me to the second recent development – the reassessment and re-
pricing  of  risk  in  the  financial  sector.  It  is  clear  that  the  housing  market  is  being  severely 
affected by the reluctance of the banking system to expand its balance sheet further. Banks 
are adjusting to the fact that many asset markets are unlikely to re-open in their old form and, 
as they do so, the supply of mortgage finance is being restricted. Once the adjustment in the 
financial  sector  is  complete,  banks  will  be  able  to  resume  lending.  But  the  era  of  cheap 
mortgage finance that underpinned the housing market in 2006 and the first half of 2007 is 
over and, as a result, it is reasonable to expect the ratio of house prices to incomes to fall 
back, though with real interest rates still low by the standards of the past fifty years, not to 
previous averages. 
2 
 BIS Review 79/2008
These  changes  to  our  spending  power  and  to  the  housing  market  are  “real”  shifts  that, 
although  not  easy  to  accept,  we  cannot  side-step.  Lord  Mayor,  we  face  the  most  difficult 
economic challenge for two decades. But I am confident that we can meet it. Inflation will fall 
back and growth will recover. But the cost of the necessary adjustment will depend on the 
credibility of the framework for monetary stability. After all, the value of paper money rests on 
only one thing – trust. Trust in the ability and determination of those setting interest rates to 
maintain the value of money. Central to that is the independence of the Bank of England. An 
independent central bank has, over time and around the world, proved to be a cornerstone of 
the arrangements necessary to underpin trust in paper money. 
So,  Chancellor,  I  welcome  your  intention  to  introduce  a  proper  process  for  making 
appointments to positions on the Monetary Policy Committee. 
I welcome too, Chancellor, the announcements you made tonight about the shape of a new 
framework for financial stability to be embodied in a Banking Bill. I particularly welcome the 
new responsibilities for the Bank of England and associated reforms to our governance. We 
now have the chance to put in place a set of reforms that provide a coherent framework for 
banking regulation. It is an opportunity we must not throw away. I can assure you all that the 
Bank of England will devote time and resources to meeting the new responsibilities which the 
Chancellor plans to give us. 
Lord Mayor, shortly after assuming office, you were quoted as saying, “I think like a lawyer. 
I’m  very  prudent,  very  risk-averse”.  What  a  pity  you  weren’t  running  a  bank  a  year  or  two 
ago! But in a difficult year for the City you have provided leadership and thrown yourself into 
the enormous workload of your office. Tonight all of us here would like to pay tribute to your 
work since you became Lord Mayor, and to thank both the Lady Mayoress and yourself for 
the splendid hospitality which you have extended to us all this evening. 
So I invite you all to rise and join me in the traditional toast of good health and prosperity to 
"The Lord Mayor and the Lady Mayoress, David and Theresa Lewis". 
BIS Review 79/2008 
 3
