Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: SEPA for cards 
Speech by Ms Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central  Bank,  at  the  EFMA  Conference  on  Cards  and  Payments  “SEPA  calls  for  an 
additional European card scheme”, Paris, 9 September 2008. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
I was once travelling in an intercity train which had a little vase with flowers in the Restaurant 
car. The flowers looked a bit withered already. When the waiter was made aware of this he 
said: But yesterday the flowers were still ok! 
The story reminds me of our debates on SEPA. Why should business models which were ok 
and successful yesterday have to be changed now in the light of SEPA? 
I had the pleasure to speak to you 2 years ago. What has actually happened since then? 
On  SEPA  in  general  –  we  are  in  the  middle  of  the  river.  We  have  left  the  bank  with 
fragmented  markets,  but  the  other  side  of  the  river,  with  the  single  market  for  payment 
services has not been reached yet.  
So where do we currently stand regarding SEPA payment instruments? 
• 
January 28th of this year was a remarkable day with the launch of SEPA and the 
SEPA  Credit  Transfer  (SCT)  being  ready  on  time.  In  the  meantime,  in  the  EPC 
Plenary  the  SCT  Rulebooks  and  implementation  guidelines  have  been  adopted.  I 
should also emphasize that the design and launch of the SEPA Credit Transfer has 
required a lot of resources from banks and that it has been very successful with no 
considerable technical problems. Certainly the number is still low given that we are 
in a pilot phase but it is increasing. The SCT is expected to fully take-off when the 
customer-to-bank domain is tackled. The initiative by the European Commission to 
develop  a  European  framework  for  e-invoicing  goes  towards  that  direction  and  is 
very much welcome. 
A topic of great interest today is the SEPA Direct Debit, for which the EPC Plenary 
adopted  Rulebooks  and  implementation  guidelines.  SEPA  Direct  Debit  introduces 
for the first time in recent history – compared to the Renaissance, where trade flows 
could  be  managed  with  hundreds  of  different  coins  and  bills  of  exchange  –  a 
common  legal  framework  for  European  payments  as  defined  in  the  PSD.  This 
directive is now in the phase of transposition into national laws and what I hear this 
progresses well in the different countries.  
 A heated debate takes place about the issue of Multilateral Balancing Fees. Last week the 
European  Commission  announced  its  position  and  issued  a  joint  communication  with  the 
ECB. But is this the clarity on this matter that banks have asked for?  
My reading of the EC position is the following: 
The European Commission has so far not been convinced that an interchange fee is needed 
for  the  banks  to  offer  direct  debits.  Instead,  the  European  Commission  can  imagine  that 
banks recover their costs in a different way, for instance by charging for rejected payments 
as it is the practice in parts of the euro area. 
Independently  of  the  outcome  of  the  debate  about  the  long  term  justification  for  an 
interchange  fee  –  the  European  Commission  would  accept  an  interim  solution.  Interim 
solution means that banks can start with the financial conditions for direct debits in use now – 
in  some  markets  without  interchange  fee,  in  some  markets  with  an  interchange  fee.  More 
generally, the guidance regarding the SEPA direct debit interchange fee aims at ensuring a 
BIS Review 107/2008 
 1
level-playing  field  between  the  SDD  and  the  national  direct  debits  and  at  providing  an 
incentive for banks to go ahead with the migration. I have described this idea in the speech I 
delivered last week in a meeting with representatives of the EPC. 
For  illustration,  let’s  assume  a  customer  makes  approximately  60  direct  debit  transactions 
per year – five each month, one for the rent, one for the energy bill, one for the telephone 
and one for the university of a child living abroad and one for the expenses of this child. If 
banks would charge e.g. 9 cents for a direct debit transaction, banks would recover around 
EUR 5 per year from the other bank in the end.  
I assume that banks will try to convince the Commission that there are costs they would need 
to recover. 
In  the  meantime  –  and  this  is  my  key  message  No  1  –  banks  could  start  offering  SEPA 
direct debit locally and cross border under the conditions described as soon as the PSD is 
adopted in the member states. This is foreseen at the latest November 2009. The length of 
this interim period should be defined carefully to allow a smooth transition to the new SEPA 
environment.  
Let me now turn to cards – the heart of this conference and an important and fast growing 
part of payment services with a huge potential to grow further. 
The EPC has been working a lot on this part of the SEPA project as well. And once credit 
transfers and direct debits are in place, full energy can be devoted to the cards issue. Last 
weekend, when I could not use my German EC-card to pay for the hairdresser in Vienna, I 
thought maybe we are not there yet. Why? I did not ask if it was a technical or a commercial 
issue – what counts is customer convenience in a country with 30 million foreigners visiting 
every year. 
The benefits of a harmonized and integrated cards market are way too obvious to oversee: 
standardisation,  integration  instead  of  current  fragmentation  and  more  competition,  means 
more choice for consumers (which schemes to use), more choice for banks (which schemes 
to issue and to acquire and which processors to use as well as access to cheaper technical 
infrastructure  due  to  standardisation),  more  choice  for  retailers  (which  schemes  to  accept) 
and more choice for infrastructures (which schemes to process). 
A  more  efficient  cards  market  will  create  incentives  not  to  use  cash  as  often  –  this  is 
important for consumers, but particularly for banks. The potential benefit of cards replacing 
cash as a means of payment is considerable. For consumers, using cards instead of cash 
will considerably reduce transaction costs and for banks the use of cards is seen as one of 
the most underestimated profitability drivers.  
Concerning the technical side I am told work is progressing but obviously there is still a lot to 
do. 
Concerning the commercial side – interchange fee is the crucial issue as well. 
We know that the European Commission is in discussion with two credit card organisations. 
Also in this context the models, methodologies, facts and figures will be the basis for the final 
assessment  of  the  justification  of  a  certain  interchange  fee,  because  my  reading  of  the 
European  Commission  decision  on  MasterCard  is:  interchange  fees  are  accepted  under 
certain conditions only. 
Currently, market participants are reflecting about additional ways to offer card services: we 
are aware of 3 different initiatives Monnet, EAPS and Payfair.  
Let me emphasize once more that the cornerstone of SEPA is competition. In this regard, the 
benefits of SEPA in the cards market will only be realised if there is sufficient competition. 
Therefore,  it  is  not  a  secret  that  the  ECB  welcomes  all  initiatives  which  contribute  to  the 
European cards market with customer choice, open access to system and competitive fees.  
Hence, my key message No 2:  
2 
 BIS Review 107/2008
New initiatives in the field of cards should become visible in the form of concrete plans and 
offers in the near future.  
Now  is  the  time  to  use  the  interim  phase  –  the  transition  from  a  fragmented  market  to  an 
open  market  –  to  set  up  new  products,  schemes  and  alliances.  The  possibilities  for  cost 
recovery  should  be  assessed  in  view  of  the  additional  investments  needed  in  the  start-up 
phase.  
SEPA for cards: implementation challenges 
Certainly, on the way towards new schemes – whatever their origin is – and the realisation of 
SEPA for cards, some challenges persist. The SEPA integrated market requires a common 
legal  framework,  which  would  allow  for  example  the  existence  of  a  single  contract  per 
scheme  usable  across  Europe.  DG  Internal  Market  and  national  legislation  bodies  via  the 
PSD Transposition Group are intensively working on the issue.  
It is also essential that all the new European technical standards are definitely fixed, as soon 
as possible. Especially newcomers in the market should be able to build their new products 
directly  on  the  basis  of  the  new  European  technical  standards.  The  EPC  is  intensively 
working on the issue.  
Another  challenge  to  overcome  is  the  subsistence  of  rules  and  arrangements  effectively 
hindering entry and/or activities of new competitors in some countries.  
Finally, for non-bank driven initiatives to be developed, direct access to the current account 
for payment institutions, at reasonable price is an essential element.  
From  the  obstacles  identified,  action  is  still  needed  regarding  the  subsistence  of  national 
rules and arrangements and the issue of access to the bank account for payment institutions, 
at a reasonable price. 
Let’s suppose that some market stakeholders get together for the creation of an additional 
scheme. They would need some scheme rules and some standards first of all. Various parts 
of the market have confirmed that the creation of a new scheme is not an insurmountable 
issue from a technical point of view. Knowing that examples of scheme rules already exist 
and  that  the  EPC  is  working  on  the  card  standards,  the  most  challenging  phase  for  the 
creation of a new scheme seems to achieve a clear commitment and co-ordination among 
members. It is certainly not easy to find an agreement given the different legacy systems – 
you know for example how different the German, French or Belgian schemes are. There is 
need  of  commitment  to  the  objective  at  the  highest  level  within  banks  and  need  of  co-
ordination among the various business departments. The determining factor for the success 
of every undertaking will be leadership.  
Looking forward, as a first step, an additional card scheme could start as a basic offering, 
before becoming a more sophisticated model at a later stage. Overall, I am convinced that 
the benefits of an additional card scheme clearly outweigh the costs. I can reassure you that 
any of the initiatives I mentioned will continue to have our support.  
In this context, I would also like to underline the importance of communication. All the efforts 
that  banks  and  other  stakeholders  take  will  only  be  corroborated  through  adequate 
communication which will activate the demand from the side of merchants and cardholders. 
In addition, proper communication is crucial for the success of SEPA as all stakeholders also 
on the offer side (i.e. banks and schemes) need to be aware about the SEPA requirements 
and benefits.  
The  clarifications  on  the  SEPA  Cards  Framework  in  the  form  of  Q&As  that  the  EPC 
published  on  26  June  are  a  great  step  towards  that  direction.  This  brings  more  clarity  on 
what SEPA represents for the payment cards in Europe and I know it has been received with 
great interest from many parts of the market. I expect that this is only a first step of the banks 
BIS Review 107/2008 
 3
in enforcing their communication vis-à-vis their users and that the work of the banks industry 
on this crucial project gets more visibility in the months to come. The ECB continues to stand 
ready to support the banks. We are working closely with the National Central Banks and the 
European Commission on this issue. 
The ECB prepares a set of Terms of Reference for the SEPA compliance of card schemes 
with  the  aim  to  better  clarify  which  are  the  SEPA  requirements.  The  Terms  of  Reference 
have been on consultation with national card schemes and will be published before the end 
of the year. 
Closing remarks 
Let me conclude by saying that the further harmonisation of the retail payment sector is an 
integral part of the European financial integration process. In the Maastricht Treaty European 
customers were promised a single market – also for financial services. While retail banking 
has  still  some  way  to  go  in  this  regard,  SEPA  presents  an  opportunity  for  change  and 
represents a far reaching initiative with the ambition to reshape the multitude of fragmented 
retail  payments  national  markets  into  an  integrated,  highly-competitive  one.  The  ECB  very 
much supports all progress in this direction.  
I  believe  that  SEPA  is  a  commitment  for  change  towards  efficiency  and  increased 
competition  from  which  all  stakeholders  will  benefit.  It  is  a  high-momentum  period  which 
should be used for constructive efforts, particularly also in the domain of cards. Banks may 
be overwhelmed by the huge amount of micro-management that SEPA requires in order to 
implement the various requirements. Banks are invited to overcome the hurdle of  different 
current practices, find a way forward on the interchange fees and shape their vision on how 
they want to be positioned in the cards business in the near future and on which role they 
would  like  to  play  in  this  field  from  a  customer-bank  relation  point  of  view.  The  ECB 
welcomes all dynamism in this field. 
4 
 BIS Review 107/2008
