Nout Wellink: Basel II – market developments and financial institution 
resiliency 
Opening address by Dr Nout Wellink, President of the Netherlands Bank and Chairman of 
the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, at the Risk Minds Asia Conference – Basel II 
Implementation Summit, Singapore, 4 March 2008.  
 Introduction 
I  am  pleased  to  speak  with  you  this  morning  about  the  Basel  II  capital  framework  in  the 
context of recent market developments. As you know, most global banks are only beginning 
to implement the Basel II framework as of the beginning of this year. The financial turmoil 
therefore has been playing out under the Basel I capital regime. 
In  my  remarks  today,  I  would  like  to  discuss  how  the  implementation  of  the  Basel  II 
framework provides an opportunity for banks and supervisors to strengthen the resilience of 
the banking system to financial and economic shocks.  
I will first discuss some key objectives of capital regulation. I will then discuss how the Basel 
II capital framework is better able to achieve these objectives in the face of rapid financial 
innovation.  Next,  I  will  discuss  some  lessons  from  the  recent  turmoil  and  their  potential 
implications for Basel II going forward. Finally I will talk about the work of the Committee to 
supplement  strong  capital  with  improvements  to  global  liquidity  risk  management  and 
supervision.   
Objectives of capital regulation 
In assessing the implications of the recent turmoil, a key area of discussion has been the role 
of  regulatory  capital.  It  is  clear  that  the  capital  regime  plays  a  key  role  in  shaping  the 
incentives and constraints that banks face when managing their portfolio of risk exposures.   
In  developing  Basel  II,  the  Basel  Committee  had  a  number  of  objectives  in  mind.  One 
objective was to develop a more meaningful link between banks’ on- and off-balance sheet 
risk exposures, and the capital supporting them. Another was to strengthen the links between 
sound regulatory capital and risk-based supervision as a way to create incentives for strong 
risk  management  practices  at  banks.  A  third  objective  was  to  enhance  market  discipline 
through  better  information  about  banks’  risk  profiles,  risk  measurement  techniques  and 
capital. And finally, the Committee sought to develop a framework that was adaptive to rapid 
financial innovation.   
The Basel I framework played an important role in raising capital levels across the banking 
system over the late 1980s and 90s. However, as recent events are demonstrating, it has 
increasingly failed to deliver on the four objectives I have listed. For example, the failure to 
capture off-balance sheet exposures to ABCP conduits and SIVs demonstrates the growing 
gap between banks’ rapidly evolving risk profiles and the regulatory capital framework.  
Changes introduced by Basel II 
How will Basel II do a better job delivering on the four capital objectives I have described to 
you? It does so by moving capital regulation to a better point on a spectrum of two extremes. 
On  one  end  of  the  spectrum,  we  have  Basel  I-like  regimes,  which  rely  on  rigid,  externally 
imposed regulatory ratios which collapse under their own weight as rapid financial innovation 
and capital arbitrage proceed. The result is a breakdown in the link between risk and capital 
(as we have seen in the example of structured credit exposures). On the other end of the 
BIS Review 23/2008 
 1
spectrum,  we  have  full  reliance  on  banks’  internal  credit  models.  Here  we  run  the  risk  of 
regulatory  capital  not  putting  appropriate  constraints  on  banks’  risk  taking,  and  as  we  all 
know,  the  role  of  regulatory  capital  is  to  impose  limits  on  banks  that  do  not  manage 
themselves in a prudent way.  
Basel II falls in the middle of this spectrum by leveraging off and reinforcing the basic building 
blocks  of  sound  credit  risk  management,  but  filtering  these  elements  through  a  rigorous 
regulatory framework. In particular, I am talking about requiring banks to have sound internal 
ratings  classification  systems  that  decompose  any  exposure  into  its  probability  of  default, 
loss  given  default  and  exposure  at  default,  subject  to  stringent  supervisory  standards  and 
internal controls. Moreover, these inputs are filtered through a regulatory framework where 
supervisors conservatively specify correlations within asset classes.  
Let me elaborate a bit more on how Basel II does a better job of capturing the types of risk 
that banks increasingly face. Some of the most important areas relevant to the current crisis 
are the following: 
• 
First, Basel II delivers greater risk differentiation. Banks that move from prime into 
subprime  mortgage  lending  or  that  move  from  traditional  corporate  lending  into 
leveraged  lending  will  see  an  increase  in  their  capital  commensurate  with  the 
changing  business  strategy  and  risk  profile.  Under  Basel  I,  all  such  exposures 
receive the same charge. 
Second,  off-balance  sheet  contractual  exposures  to  SIVs  and  conduits  will  be 
brought  into  the  fold  and  subject  to  regulatory  capital,  whatever  the  accounting 
treatment. 
Third,  there  will  be  a  much  more  risk  sensitive  treatment  for  securitisation 
exposures. This will create more neutral incentives between retaining an exposure 
on the balance sheet or distributing it in the market through securitisation. 
Fourth,  banks  will  have  to  develop  more  rigorous  approaches  to  measure  and 
manage their operational risk exposures and hold commensurate capital. 
Fifth,  banks  will  have  to  develop  more  rigorous  methodologies  for  capturing 
counterparty  credit  exposures,  including  so-called  wrong  way  risk.  This  is  the  risk 
that the exposure increases as the counterparty’s credit quality deteriorates, as we 
saw in the monoline sector. 
In  addition,  Basel  II  has  in  place  a  variety  of  safeguards,  which  also  have  the  benefit  of 
reinforcing supervisors’ objectives to strengthen risk management and market discipline. Let 
me say a few words about some of Basel II’s safeguards. 
• 
For  example,  banks  will  have  to  continuously  improve  the  quality  of  their  internal 
loss data. Basel II requires that banks have at least five years of data, including a 
downturn. Our quantitative impact study work showed that this will raise the bar from 
current practice at many banking institutions.  
Another safety measure is the requirement for banks to estimate their recovery rates 
assuming  a  downturn  in  the  credit  cycle.  This  will  reflect  up  front  in  capital  that 
losses on liquidated collateral will be greater during stressful periods.  
In  order  to  use  Basel  II’s  advanced  approaches,  banks  will  have  to  demonstrate 
robust data management and firm-wide aggregation capabilities. 
The requirement for banks to perform stress tests of their on- and off-balance sheet 
exposures is an additional safeguard. Based in part on these stress tests, banks will 
need  to  demonstrate  to  supervisors  that  they  have  adequate  capital  cushions  to 
manage through a down cycle.  
       2 
 BIS Review 23/2008
 Finally, banks will have to provide much better transparency to the market about the 
range of exposures they hold, including to securitisations and conduits.  
Taken together, these measures will introduce a more rigorous, forward looking perspective 
on the types of risks that banks could face in a downturn. They will require banks to factor 
these risks into minimum regulatory capital, internal capital planning and disclosures to the 
market.  Supervisors  will  reinforce  these  disciplines  by  assessing  banks’  risk  management, 
measurement and capital before capital ratios fall below the minimum requirements. This will 
help  change  incentives  to  anticipate  risks  and  potential  losses  and  to  hold  commensurate 
capital ex ante. 
In sum, all these efforts recognise the fact that banks’ business models and associated risks 
have gotten increasingly complex, and that there is no longer one simple measure that can 
capture them and stand the test of financial innovation. Indeed, the framework, through its 
three pillars and various safeguards, provides multiple perspectives on a banks’ risk taking, 
ensuring that there is no over reliance on any one measure.  
Lessons from the recent turmoil and possible implications for Basel II 
My  remarks  so  far  should  indicate  to  you  that  a  number  of  the  lessons  for  banks  and 
supervisors  will  be  addressed  through  the  improved  capital  framework.  Moreover,  the 
framework puts regulators in a better position to reflect future lessons and change. So the 
first priority is for Basel Committee members and other jurisdictions to press ahead with this 
fundamentally important enhancement to capital regulation.  
The  current  Basel  II  framework,  however,  is  not  perfect.  There  are  opportunities  to  reflect 
some  of  the  new  lessons  within  this  more  adaptive  capital  regime.  Let  me  share  with  you 
some of the issues we have been discussing within the Basel Committee, as well as some of 
our current priorities. While we have a rigorous and ambitious work plan with clear timelines 
to make progress and deliver on these issues, I nevertheless want to caution you that this is 
still work in progress. I will say a few words about each of Basel II’s three pillars. 
In  the  first  pillar,  we  are  taking  a  look  at  the  treatment  of  highly  rated  securitisation 
exposures,  especially  so-called  CDOs  of  ABS.  These  securities  have  recently  been  the 
source of the greatest losses across the banking sector and they have an unusual feature: 
most of the time they perform very well, but when they start experiencing losses, these can 
build very rapidly, producing a real cliff effect. This explains the unprecedented downgrades 
we  have  seen  on  triple-A  super  senior  tranches,  which  exceed  anything  we  have  seen  in 
traditional corporate bonds. These structured securities are highly correlated with systematic 
risk.  The  Basel  Committee  will  look  at  whether  the  capital  charges  for  these  types  of 
exposures are calibrated appropriately in relation to their risks and complexity.   
The Committee also is pressing ahead with our work to introduce a credit default risk charge 
for  the  trading  book.  As  you  know,  there  has  been  a  rapid  growth  of  less  liquid,  credit 
sensitive products in banks’ trading books. These products include structured credit assets 
and leveraged lending. The VAR-based approach is insufficient for these types of exposures 
and needs to be supplemented with a default risk charge. In addition, it is critical that banks 
conduct rigorous Pillar 2 stress testing of their trading book exposures. They must factor in 
liquidity  horizons  and  reflect  these  results  in  their  risk  limits,  economic  capital  and 
concentration  management  strategies.  Many  structured  credit  products  are  tailored  for 
individual investors and have a limited or no secondary market. The Basel II framework has 
guidelines  for  what  should  and  should  not  go  into  the  trading  book  and  these  need  to  be 
reviewed by banks.  
In the second pillar of the Basel framework, supervisors will be reinforcing the importance of 
banks’ stress testing practices. As I mentioned, Basel II already requires that banks conduct 
stress tests of their credit portfolios to validate the adequacy of their capital cushions at all 
points of the credit cycle. However we need to think more about the importance of banks’ 
BIS Review 23/2008 
 3
conducting  scenario  analyses  and  stress  tests  of  their  contingent  credit  exposures,  both 
contractual  and  non-contractual.  These  contingencies  have  implications  for  balance  sheet 
growth and capital. As we have seen, many banks have taken significant exposures back on 
the  balance  sheet  for  reputation  reasons.  Being  better  prepared  for  such  scenarios  going 
forward can help make banks more resilient to stressful conditions.  
In  Pillar  3,  there  are  opportunities  to  further  leverage  off  the  types  of  disclosure  required 
under Basel II. In particular, supervisors need to monitor the type of information that banks 
make  available  for  structured  credit  products.  The  Committee  will  determine  whether 
improvements  are  needed,  particularly  related 
the 
sponsorship of off-balance sheet vehicles.  
to  securitisations,  conduits  and 
Strengthening liquidity risk management and supervision  
So  far  I  have  told  you  about  the  Basel  Committee’s  objectives  in  developing  the  Basel  II 
framework and the lessons we have thus far learned from the recent turmoil, which – taken 
together – will forge a strong capital framework. But a strong capital base is one part of the 
puzzle  –  another  is  strong  liquidity  risk  management  and  supervision.  Banks  with  a  weak 
capital  base  are  vulnerable  to  liquidity  problems  during  periods  of  financial  market  stress. 
However  even  banks  with  strong  capital  can  experience  liquidity  problems  if  they  do  not 
manage this area well.  
Before the market turmoil began last summer, the Committee had already launched a work 
stream to assess the current state of liquidity risk management and supervision. However, as 
a  result  of  the  turmoil,  we  have  accelerated  this  work.  Last  month  we  released  our 
assessment of the weaknesses identified by the crisis and what we think needs to be done 
about it.  
We  are  now  well  along  to  completing  a  fundamental  review  of  the  global  standards  for 
liquidity  risk  management  and  supervision,  which  were  issued  by  the  Basel  Committee  in 
2000. We plan to issue the new standards for public comment this coming July. Some of the 
key areas we will address include the need to enhance overall governance for liquidity risk 
management,  integrating  it  more  closely  with  other  risk  management  disciplines.  We  will 
address the need to strengthen liquidity stress testing practices, including the capture of off-
balance sheet contingent exposures. And we will focus on the importance of firms having in 
place rigorous contingency funding plans that reflect the possibility of major funding sources 
drying  up  for  long  periods  of  time.  Finally,  we  will  have  guidance  for  strengthened 
supervision,  banks’  reporting  to  supervisors  and  market  disclosure.  I  am  convinced  this 
initiative will take liquidity risk management and supervision to a new level. However, I would 
also note the critical importance of rigorous follow up by supervisors on a continuous basis to 
ensure that these standards are implemented in practice.  
Conclusion 
The  banking  sector  needs  to  have  strong  capital  and  liquidity  buffers  to  absorb  financial 
shocks  and  the  uncertainties  around  how  such  shocks  could  play  out  in  the  future  as  the 
process of financial innovation continues. Basel II is an important next step to enhance bank 
resiliency.  Moreover,  it  provides  supervisors  with  a  better  framework  within  which  to  make 
enhancements in the future, as financial markets evolve. There are no simple measures that 
will capture the complex risks that global banks now face. We need multiple perspectives on 
risk, as provided under the three pillars of Basel II. Moreover, there is no substitute for strong 
risk  management, 
to 
continuously  translate  the  basics  of  sound  risk  governance  and  management  to  rapidly 
changing environments. And importantly, regulators need to make sure that the infrastructure 
of  supervision,  regulation  and  transparency  keeps  pace  with  innovation  and  promotes 
appropriate  incentives  for  sound  risk  management.  If  we  take  these  lessons  forward,  I 
liquidity  management  and  supervision.  Risk  managers  need 
4 
 BIS Review 23/2008
believe that we will have a banking sector that is ever more resilient to the next set of shocks, 
whatever their source. Thank you. 
BIS Review 23/2008 
 5
