Nigel Jenkinson: Financial innovation – what have we learnt? 
Speech by Mr Nigel Jenkinson, Executive Director, Financial Stability, Bank of England, to 
the Reserve Bank of Australia Conference on “Lessons from the Financial Turmoil of 2007 
and 2008”, Sydney, 14-15 July 2008. 
This speech is co-authored with Adrian Penalver and Nicholas Vause. 
 Section 1: Introduction 
1. At last year’s conference, we presented a paper highlighting the profound impact of rapid 
financial innovation, deregulation and capital market integration on the performance, risk and 
management  of  the  global  financial  system.  We  particularly  noted  the  benefits  of  financial 
innovation.1  We  argued  that  the  development  of  new  financial  instruments  has  created 
opportunities for households and corporates to improve their management of financial risks 
and  has  facilitated  the  smoothing  of  consumption  and  investment  over  time  and  across 
different states of the world. But we also emphasised that the breakdown of barriers to the 
supply  of  financial  products  and  the  large  volume  of  risk  pooling  and  shifting  within  and 
across  borders  has  increased  the  network  interconnections  within  the  global  financial 
system. That has added to the system’s complexity. And we underlined that understanding 
and addressing the corresponding evolution of financial system risks poses major challenges 
for financial institutions and for financial stability authorities. 
2. The past year has seen these potential major challenges turn into real practical problems. 
We are now almost a year into a credit crisis centred around a sudden evaporation of market 
liquidity  for  many  structured  credit  products  that  rapidly  spilled  over  into  wholesale  bank 
funding  markets  and  beyond,  given  a  complex  web  of  interconnections.2  So  it  is  an 
opportune  moment  to  review  whether  the  financial  innovation  of  recent  years  that  created 
such structured products has indeed been a positive force, as argued by Alan Greenspan3, 
for  example,  or  whether  financial  innovation  has  been  a  malign  development,  producing 
“financial weapons of mass destruction” in the words of Warren Buffett4? 
3  There  is  clearly  some  force  in  both  arguments.  On  balance,  we  continue  to  see 
considerable  benefits  to  households  and  corporates  from  the  broadening  of  choice  in 
financial  products  and  from  improvements  in  the  completeness  of  financial  markets.  But 
equally,  the  severe  pressures  and  strains  of  the  past  year  have  highlighted  the 
pervasiveness of some market frictions that have a major bearing on system-wide behaviour 
and  dynamics,  amplifying  and  transmitting  shocks.  Action  to  lower  these  frictions  is 
consequently important to capture the full benefits of innovation and to ensure that these are 
durable. 
4  This  paper  explores  these  issues  further.  Section  2  provides  a  short  reminder  of  the 
staggering extent of financial innovation in recent decades. Section 3 sets out the theoretical 
vision  of  how  financial  innovation  offers  the  potential  for  substantial  improvements  in  the 
capability of corporates and households to manage financial risks. Section 4 highlights the 
                                                 
1   “Innovation  and  Integration  in  Financial  Markets  and  the  Implications  for  Financial  Stability”,  Rob  Hamilton, 
Nigel Jenkinson and Adrian Penalver, pp. 226-250, The Structure and Resilience of the Financial System, eds 
Christopher Kent and Jeremy Lawson, Reserve Bank of Australia, November 2007. 
2   See  for  example,  the  Bank  of  England  Financial  Stability  Report,  October  2007  and  the  Bank  of  England 
Financial Stability Report, April 2008. 
3   See for example World Finance and Risk Management, delivered at Lancaster House 25 September 2002. 
4   Referring to derivatives in the Berkshire Hathaway Inc. 2002 Annual Report. 
BIS Review 93/2008 
 1
obstacles to fulfilment of that vision given the imperfections in financial markets. Lessons for 
the  future  and  possible  policy  responses  are  discussed  in  Section  5,  while  Section  6 
concludes.  
Section 2: Trends in financial innovation 
5 The pace of change in financial markets in recent years is truly remarkable. A few statistics 
help to illustrate this point and set the scene: 
• 
The outstanding value of interest rate swaps and other derivatives reached almost 
$600 trillion or some 11 times annual global GDP by the end of 2007, according to 
the BIS. Ten years ago the value was around $75 trillion (2 ½ times GDP) (Chart 1). 
The global derivatives market expanded almost 50% during 2007. 
 Chart 1 Outstanding Notional Amounts of 
Derivatives 
Interest rate contracts
Foreign exchange contracts
Credit default swaps
Equity-linked contracts
Commodity contracts
Unallocated
US$trillions
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
 98
99
00
01
02
03
04
05
06
07
Source: BIS. 
      2 
 The credit default swap (CDS) component has experienced explosive growth. The 
outstanding  value  of  CDS  contracts  has  surged  to  more  than  five  times  the 
outstanding principal of global corporate bonds by the end of 2007. Yet only three 
years’ ago, at end-2004, the CDS market was only some 85% of the size of the 
corporate bond market. The CDS market is now by far the more liquid market for 
trading credit risk.  
The outstanding value of commodity derivatives outstanding has risen from around 
$400 billion in 1998 to $9 trillion at the end of 2007. 
Options  markets  have  also  grown  very  strongly.  For  example,  the  outstanding 
principal of interest rate options has increased from $8 trillion to $57 trillion in the 
past decade. 
Innovation and the removal of barriers to cross-border activity has spurred global 
capital market integration. For example, turnover in foreign exchange markets has 
tripled  since  the  BIS  survey  in  2001.  And  cross-border  asset  holdings  have 
outpaced the strong growth in the global stock of financial assets. 
Markets  offering  investors  ready-made  portfolios  rose  very  rapidly  in  advance  of 
the  credit  crisis. 
Issuance  of  asset-backed  securities  (ABS)  globally  was 
$1460 billion in the first half of 2007, up from $425 billion 9 years previously. There 
BIS Review 93/2008
was rapid expansion in the market for collateralised debt obligations (CDO) from 
$75  billion  in  the  first  half  of  2005  to  $200  billion  in  the  first  half  of  2007.  And 
innovation  spawned  greater  complexity.  Investment  banks  launched  a  series  of 
highly complex products such as constant proportion debt obligations (CPDO) and 
re-securitisations of CDOs and ABSs (so called CDO-squared and CDOs of ABS). 
Demand  for  such tailor-made  products  has  plummeted  over  the  past year,  while 
other  markets  such  as  the  corporate  CDS  market  have  continued  to  expand 
rapidly. A possible explanation and assessment of the implications is set out in the 
remainder of the paper.  
 Section 3: Financial innovation: a broadening of choice 
6 A crucial function of the financial system is to help companies and households to manage 
risks. The discharge of this function depends on the type of financial products or contracts 
made available to companies and households to hedge and take on risk exposures in close 
alignment with their individual risk preference and tolerance, as well as the capability of the 
institutions that make up the financial system to manage the risk inherent in these products. 
The focus of this section is on how innovation in financial instruments extends the choice of 
risk  management  products  available  to  companies  and  households,  moving  us  closer 
towards a vision of liquid markets in state contingent securities. But it must also be borne in 
mind  that  imperfections  within  financial  markets  will  affect  the  performance  of  these 
innovative financial products, that may in turn limit their availability. Such frictions may thus 
impact  on  the  ability  of  the  financial  system  to  support  corporate  and  household  risk 
management. That is covered in section 4. 
7 As an illustration of the potential benefits of innovation in contract design and broadening 
choice, consider the market for corporate credit risk. In previous decades, the only securities 
available to investors wishing to invest in corporate debt were corporate bonds. One might 
call such assets “natural assets” as the same instrument that is issued by the borrower is 
also that held by the investor. In this example, the role of the financial system is simply to 
facilitate the intermediation between end borrowers and end investors, and, in some cases, 
to provide a secondary market in the asset, intermediating between alternate end investors. 
There is no transformation of the asset. 
8  Financial  engineering  can,  however,  decompose  the  returns  on  a  corporate  bond  into 
different fundamental components or “atoms” of risk: 
• 
For example, credit default swaps can be used to separate the return on a corporate 
bond into the compensation for default risk and the compensation earned on a risk-
free security. An investor wanting to make an inter-temporal transfer without taking 
on any credit risk, for example, could then buy a bond and purchase credit default 
swap  protection,  thus  retaining  exposure  to  the  cash  flows  on  the  risk  free 
component of the underlying instrument. Synthetically, this expands the volume of 
low risk investment portfolios. On the other side, a market is created for those who 
specifically want to trade default risk which allows cleaner pricing of this dimension 
of  risk.  Efficient  markets  for  each  element  should  raise  the  efficiency  of  the 
corporate bond market as a whole, with attendant benefits for both borrowers and 
investors. 
Furthermore,  because  credit  default  swaps  have  different  maturities,  investors 
could,  for  example,  buy  the  corporate  bond  and  retain  the  resulting  exposure  to 
default risk in the near term. But they could also buy protection against default at 
longer horizons, about which they may be more uncertain. 
Moreover,  nominal  corporate  bonds  can  also  be  separated  into  a  nominal  and 
inflation-linked risk component if the corporate also issues inflation-indexed bonds. 
  BIS Review 93/2008 
 3
Investors can utilise these instruments to buy or sell protection against exposure to 
inflation risk.  
As noted above, the markets for single-name corporate credit default swaps have become 
more liquid than the underlying bonds given the flexibility and specificity they provide to end-
investors. 
9  The  underlying  components  of  risk  can,  of  course,  also  be  recombined  by  financial 
engineering to create new financial products with different risk characteristics. Extending the 
above  example,  single-name  credit  default  swaps  have  been  pooled  together  into 
standardised  indices.  That  creates  a  synthetic  market  in  generalised  corporate  credit  risk, 
enabling  investors  wishing  to  hedge  or  establish  a  new  position  linked  to  macro-economic 
risk  to  do  so.  And  there  are  many  parallels  such  as  products  tracking  equity  indices  or 
commodity prices or emerging market debt to name but a few. 
10  The  value  of  standardised  indices  to  financial  intermediaries  can  be  illustrated  by 
considering a credit default swap dealer, who may find at the end of a day’s trading that they 
have been a net seller of default protection on several dozen corporates. The dealer could 
hedge such a position by buying protection on the standardised indices. The hedge would of 
course not be perfect as in all likelihood the firms in the standardised indices would not be an 
exact match to those whom the dealer had sold protection. But because indices are relatively 
liquid  and  thus  cheaper  to  trade,  the  dealer  may  decide  that  the  resulting  saving  in 
transaction  costs  may  outweigh  the  residual  “basis”  risk  that  results  from  the  hedge  being 
imperfect.  And  through  competition,  the  benefit  would  tend  to  be  shared  by  corporate 
borrowers and investors in corporate credit risk. 
11 Taking the example further, investors who wish to take exposure to generalised corporate 
credit  risk  but  who  wish  to  limit  their  potential  losses  can  do  so  through  trading  options 
contracts  on  the  standardised  indices.  The  array  of  options  with  different  “strike  prices”, 
which represent the thresholds beyond which the options do or do not pay out, allows market 
participants to express opinions about the distribution of possible future aggregate corporate 
conditions. 
12 Credit default swaps are not the only way an investor can engineer a targeted exposure to 
credit  risk.  Alternatively,  an  investor  can  take  a  position  on  corporate  credit  risk  by 
purchasing a securitised product such as a collateralised debt obligation (CDO). In this case, 
a pool of assets such as corporate bonds is created and the payment streams produced by 
these  are  allocated  to  different  classes  or  tranches  depending  on  the  default  experience. 
This allows investors to take positions on the scale of default losses in the underlying asset 
pool.  
13  Stepping  back,  the  extended  example  above  highlights  how  financial  engineering  has 
facilitated  the  decomposition  of  corporate  credit  risk  into  different  subcomponents  and  the 
recombination  of  these  subcomponents  into  new  financial  products  with  different  risk 
characteristics. There are many other examples across the financial system. The consequent 
broadening  of  the  range  of  financial  products  has  improved  choice  and  the  matching  and 
tailoring of products to customer needs. For instance, the ability of non-financial corporates 
to manage their risks has been transformed by their increasing use of derivatives to hedge 
interest  rates  and  currency  risk  as  well  as  their  exposures  to  commodity  prices.  And 
notwithstanding  the  current  squeeze  on  the  availability  of  credit  (and  withdrawal  of  many 
products),  households  have  also  benefited  from  a  significant  expansion  in  the  range  of 
saving and borrowing products compared to the position 20 years ago. 
14  The  practical  examples  described  above  clearly  demonstrate  the  benefits  of  financial 
innovation. Enhancing the capability to transform and transfer risk, and thus improving the 
matching of the supply of risk products to the demands of end investors offers the prospect 
of lower risk premia and greater financial efficiency. And that in turn should lower the cost of 
capital for firms and improve the ability of households to smooth their lifetime consumption 
and to insure against unexpected outcomes.  
4 
 BIS Review 93/2008
15 Taking an even further step back, there is a beguiling vision of financial innovation taking 
us  closer  towards  a  world  of  more  complete  and  efficient  markets  for  state-contingent 
contracts.  The  ability  to  decompose  and  trade  the  distribution  of  many  dimensions  of 
fundamental  risks  creates  a  potential  lattice  of  efficient  risk  prices  which  can  then,  by 
arbitrage, be used to price efficiently the combinations of these risks embedded in “natural 
assets” and in “synthetic assets” structured to meet investor demand. 
Section 4: Frictions and Market Imperfections 
16  The  previous  section  described  how  financial  innovation  has  widened  the  range  and 
choice of financial products available to corporates and households to facilitate improved risk 
management. But it also noted the potential importance of market imperfections and frictions 
in  the  provision  of  such  contracts.  One  year  on  from  the  onset  of  the  current  credit  crisis, 
what  have  we  learned  about  the  performance  of  the  financial  system  and  such  market 
imperfections? 
17  Looking  broadly,  an  important  lesson  from  the  past  year,  is  that  these  frictions  appear 
more  powerful  than  market  participants  and  financial  authorities  previously  judged.  They 
pose substantial barriers and practical limitations to the achievement of a stylised vision of 
full,  complete,  and  efficient  markets  in  fundamental  components  of  risk.  Five  areas  of 
potential weakness are highlighted in turn: incomplete information; alignment of incentives; 
liquidity in financial markets; robustness of market infrastructure; and system dynamics. 
Incomplete information 
18  The  vision  of  a  world  of  complete  and  efficient  markets  for  risk  depends  on  full 
information.  This  full  information  requirement  sounds  deceptively  simple  but  is  actually 
extremely onerous. An investor needs to know the mapping between states of the world and 
the pay-offs they would receive in each state as well as the likelihood of these states of the 
world  materialising.  This  means  not  only  understanding  the  details  of  highly  complex 
contracts  but  also  the  effects  of  the  interplay  between  exposures  and  contracts  of  all  the 
other agents in the economy. So not surprisingly, many of the problems that have occurred 
over the past 10 months have arisen out of incomplete and asymmetric information. There 
are a number of dimensions.  
19  First,  it  is  very  difficult  to  ascertain  the  pay-off  distribution  for  many  instruments.  For 
example, a mezzanine CDO tranche might have attachment and detachment points of say 
7%  and  10%,  meaning  that  for  losses  on  the  underlying  collateral  of  less  than  7%  they 
continue to pay out at par, but become worthless when losses reach 10%. The pay-offs to 
such  instruments  are  therefore  highly  sensitive  to  quite  minor  changes  in  expected  credit 
conditions.  In  a  full-information  world  with  known  probability  distributions,  instruments  with 
such highly sensitive pay-offs are no more difficult to price than any others. But when lack of 
complete information makes the future uncertain, in a Knightian sense, contracts with highly 
sensitive pay-offs to slight changes in credit conditions become increasingly risky. Moreover, 
innovative  instruments  inherently  will  not  have  a  long  run  of  performance  data.  Those 
seeking to summarise their likely performance using statistical metrics based on limited data 
and  drawn  from  very  benign  circumstances  have  a  very  difficult  task.  Many  investors  in 
RMBS and ABS CDOs linked to US sub prime mortgages have been surprised by the extent 
to  which  the  performance  of  these  instruments  has  fallen  short  of  even  their  worst 
expectations. Securities with complex pay-offs, therefore, are highly vulnerable to increased 
macroeconomic uncertainty. 
20 Second, information loss is built into the securitisation process because of the separation 
between the originator of the loan and the end investor. Chart 2 illustrates how information is 
lost at every step in the chain of risk transfer. To some extent, holding a diversified pool of 
underlying loans acts as protection against a lack of information about idiosyncratic risk. But 
BIS Review 93/2008 
 5
the experience of the past year has shown that diversified pools and seniority in the tranche 
structure may not provide adequate protection against highly co-ordinated or “systemic” risk. 
Chart 2 – Information Loss 
 Source: BIS Committee on the Global Financial System 
 
21  Many  investors  had,  of  course,  also  delegated  their  monitoring  responsibility  to  credit 
rating agencies. This offered, potentially, a very significant efficiency gain. Rather than many 
investors  paying  privately  to  be  moderately  informed  –  with  corresponding  substantial 
replication of investment analysis – credit rating agencies were paid to be well informed and 
to make this information public. But we now know that rating agencies were also unable to 
overcome  these  same  underlying  information  problems  and  have  been  forced  to  make 
multiple down-grades to many of their ratings of structured credit products and to modify the 
models they use for ratings. A major problem for the market as a whole has been that once 
investors collectively lost trust in rating agencies, the next most informed participants in the 
market were a long way behind. As a result, there was a step-change down in the level of 
confidence in the likely performance of these assets and a consequent system-wide increase 
in the risk premia required to hold such assets. With hindsight, information generation and 
processing was too reliant on a limited number of rating agencies, and there was too much 
confidence in the ability of individual rating agencies to solve the highly complex information 
problems underlying some securities. 
22 Third, it is very hard to determine counterparty credit risk for state-contingent securities. In 
a  world  of  full  information,  the  state-contingent  survival  of  counterparties  would  be  known 
and  nobody  would  accept  contracts  from  those  who  could  not  honour  them  –  at  least  not 
without  a  substantial  price  discount  by  way  of  compensation.  But  when  investors  cannot 
know the full network of exposures in the financial system, it is extremely hard to estimate 
6 
 BIS Review 93/2008
where the ultimate incidence of losses from an extreme shock will occur. The failure of your 
counterparties’  counterparty  can  shift  you  up  the  queue  of  potential  losers  quite  quickly. 
Moreover,  the  fear  of  potential  counterparty  risk  itself  quickly  affects  the  behaviour  of 
individual firms and thus leads to a collective lowering of risk appetite. 
23 These problems are potentially the most acute for what might be called tail-risk products. 
During the boom, tail-risk products, like deeply out of the money options, seemed an easy 
way to make money. The protection seller could collect a steady stream of premia with the 
extremely  unlikely  prospect  of  having  to  make  a  very  large  payment.  Since  these  sorts  of 
contracts offer “deep” insurance, it is important to the system as a whole that they are held 
by the most robust institutions. Here, the theory of risk transfer was that risk would be re-
allocated to those most able to bear it. In practice, though, those most willing to take these 
risks have in some cases turned out to be those who understood the risks the least and thus 
were  prepared  to  take  it  on  at  too  low  a  price.  This  problem  is  extremely  hard  to  guard 
against because of the difficulty in determining whether a counterparty who is insuring you 
against  risk  (or  a  chain  of  counterparties)  fully  understands  what  they  have  taken  on  and 
have the capacity to make good on their commitment in adverse states of the world. In recent 
months, banks have been forced to write down the value of contracts that they had bought 
from monoline insurers to guarantee the payments promised by their holdings of highly-rated 
CDOs linked to US sub prime mortgages. With the likelihood of such guarantees being called 
upon  appearing  very  small,  the  monolines  wrote  a  large  volume  of  such  guarantees.  But 
more  recently,  this  prospect  has  become  a  distinct  possibility,  and  one  that  threatens  the 
viability of some of the monoline insurers, and thus their perceived ability to pay. 
Incentives 
24 These information problems are difficult enough when risk is treated as exogenous. And 
in a world of full information, “nature” can be the only source of uncertainty. But in practice 
when  there  is  a  lack  of  information  and  uncertainty  about  actions,  the  incentives  facing 
individual actors become very important and can lead to endogenous risk creation within the 
financial system.  
25  These  incentive  problems  have  been  clearly  apparent  in  risk  transfer  markets.  As  has 
been widely described elsewhere, if loan originators do not have sufficient capital at stake, 
they will not screen potential borrowers adequately.  5 In the US sub-prime mortgage market, 
rewarding  loan  originators  by  volume  of  issuance  was  a  recipe  for  lax  credit  assessment 
standards. But even when originators seem to have an economic stake in performance, for 
example by holding some of the “first loss” or equity tranche of a securitisation, this is not 
sufficient to guarantee incentive compatibility, as it is possible to hedge the exposure to the 
equity tranche through a separate market transaction.  
26 There is, though, also a more subtle problem. As mentioned above, holding a diversified 
pool  provides  protection  against  idiosyncratic  risk.  But  the  absence  of  a  concentrated 
exposure can also limit the incentive to monitor individual loans, and thus the pooling of risk 
may lead to a reduction in the overall level of risk screening ex ante and monitoring ex post. 
It was the combination of these misaligned incentives that proved such a problem in the US 
sub-prime  mortgage  market.  Individual  end-investors  had  little  incentive  to  monitor  the 
performance  of  loan  originators,  perhaps  presuming  that  originators had  sufficient  stake in 
the securitisation to provide market discipline. Issuers, though, transferred much of the risk 
and did so comprehensively, as they needed to demonstrate that they had transferred risk 
irrevocably before they could get capital relief. But in the absence of adequate monitoring, 
originators could chase volume at the expense of lending standards. 
                                                 
5   See for example, the Bank of England Financial Stability Report, October 2007. 
BIS Review 93/2008 
 7
27 Therefore, two elements at the heart of the benefits of financial innovation – the ability to 
pool  and  transfer  risk  –  contributed  to  an  endogenous  increase  in  the  level  of  underlying 
credit risk. 
28 There is also a potential incentive problem arising from the separation of legal ownership 
from economic exposure – although this is at the moment a possible difficulty for the future. 
Credit default swaps transfer the risk of economic loss to the seller of protection but the right 
to  trigger  covenants  or  put  a  firm  into  administration  remains  with  the  underlying  asset 
holder. A protected asset holder, therefore, has little incentive to monitor a company closely 
and trigger covenants or force it into administration at the first signs that its business may 
have become unsustainable. And the seller of protection lacks an alternative legal remedy. 
Companies may therefore continue to operate for longer than they did in the past once they 
get into trouble. So, the use of credit default swaps may reduce the probability of default but 
increase loss given eventual default. 
Liquidity 
29 These problems of incomplete information, and misaligned incentives have had a major 
impact on the market liquidity of innovative financial instruments. 
30  As  described  above,  misaligned  incentives  in  origination  and  distribution  allowed  the 
provision of sub-prime mortgages to households with very little prospect of repayment and 
significant vulnerability to modest changes in economic circumstances. So any investor trying 
to estimate the distribution of likely future delinquency rates amongst sub-prime borrowers 
would not only have to consider the range of macroeconomic outcomes but also how much 
this  effect  would  be  amplified  by  poor  credit  risk  screening.  This  would  be  an  extremely 
difficult  variable  to  quantify.  But  because  of  the  sensitivity  of  complex  securities  to  small 
changes in loss rates, differing judgements about the quality of risk screening could make a 
material difference to the value of the instrument. The recognition that risk screening and the 
availability  and  quality  of  information  on  the  performance  of  complex  products  was 
significantly weaker than previously anticipated, as for example investors lost confidence in 
the quality of credit ratings, led to a substantial increase in the risk premium required to hold 
such assets. These effects made the valuation of assets extremely uncertain and contributed 
to the rapid evaporation of secondary market liquidity. 
31  There  is  also  an  important  and  fundamental  tension  between  the  capability  of  financial 
engineering to tailor financial products to meet individual investor demand more effectively 
and secondary market liquidity. The more closely a specific financial instrument is matched 
to the risk preferences of an individual investor, the harder it is to find another investor willing 
to trade that exact instrument in the event of a shock to those risk preferences. 
32 In other words, the improved matching of risk to an individual’s risk profile has given rise 
to  an  increase  in  basis  risk  within  the  system.  As  one  illustrative  example,  any  investor 
wishing to hedge any exposure to the US sub-prime mortgage market over the past year or 
so  would  have  little  alternative  but  to  trade  in  the  standardised  ABX  indices  (which 
themselves have often been relatively illiquid) rather than in the specific instrument they held. 
The developments over the past year have illustrated that hedges have often provided less 
effective than envisaged, and that there was a significant under-pricing of the inherent basis 
risk  of  many  innovative  structured  instruments at  the  point  of  origination,  given  the  lack  of 
secondary market liquidity for such specific risk. Looking forward, it is quite likely that there 
will  be  greater  unbundling  of  complex  instruments  into  standardised  components  that  are 
likely to be liquid and readily traded with low transactions costs, and bespoke elements that 
will command a higher risk premium given their inherent illiquidity. 
8 
 BIS Review 93/2008
Strengthening financial infrastructure 
33 Because of the specificity of the risk, innovative financial products are rarely exchange 
traded. Non-standardised products require the services of a broker-dealer to trade. But over 
the counter (OTC) trading is vulnerable to many operational risks. In particular, investors are 
exposed  to  the  default  of  the  major  broker-dealer  counterparties.  This  was  a  significant 
concern to counterparties of Bear Stearns when it was in distress before being taken over by 
JP  Morgan.  To  moderate  such  concerns  in  the  future,  private  sector  initiatives  are  being 
developed  to  introduce  a  central  clearer  to  the  CDS  market.  Such  initiatives  are  very 
welcome. Although the net positions of CDS dealers generally represent only a very small 
fraction  of  their  gross  positions,  because  these  gross  positions  have  grown  so  rapidly  in 
recent years, inter-dealer positions can sometimes be very significant – even after netting. A 
central clearer that would offset any long bilateral positions that one bank had with another 
with any short positions that the same bank had with a third bank, could significantly reduce 
the  counterparty  risk  in  the  CDS  market.  A  leading  proposal  at  present  is  centred  on  the 
Clearing  Corporation,  which  is  jointly  owned  by  eleven  major  banks  and  other  trading 
platforms.  
34  Counterparty  risk,  as  described  above,  is  particularly  corrosive  for  liquidity  in  financial 
markets.  Investors  become  concerned  not  only  with  the  soundness  of  their  immediate 
counterparties  but  their  counterparties’  counterparties,  and  so  on.  When  risk  crystallises  it 
can  be  unclear  which  financial  institutions  have  been  adversely  affected.  As  a  result  of 
limited  disclosure  and  transparency,  investors  may  limit  the  supply  of  funds  to  a  much 
broader array of counterparties than necessary. This helps to explain why all banks found it 
more difficult to raise funding when the deterioration in the performance of sub prime assets 
became  apparent,  even  though  it  would  later  be  revealed  that  some  banks  were  more 
exposed than others. 
35 A further challenge is that the markets for innovative financial instruments can grow very 
rapidly, outstripping the capacity of back offices to keep up with trading. Towards the end of 
2005, CDS trading had run ahead of the processing of trades to the extent that the major 
CDS  dealers  on  average  had  unconfirmed  trades  outstanding  that  were  equivalent  to  a 
couple of weeks of trading volume. If the reference entities underlying these CDS trades had 
defaulted, it would not have been clear – at least for some time – who was owed money by 
whom.  The  international  authorities  then  set  the  major  CDS  dealers  targets  to  reduce 
volumes  of  unconfirmed  trades,  which  subsequently  fell  significantly.  But  a  backlog  of 
unconfirmed trades did start to cumulate again during the early months of the recent financial 
turmoil,  although  this  has  also  diminished  over  the  past  six  months.  Furthermore,  the 
proportion of new CDS trades that are confirmed electronically and hence immediately has 
increased  sharply  from  around  50%  when  concerns  were  raised  in  2005  to  over  90%  at 
present. 
36 It is also important that innovative financial products are documented sufficiently carefully 
and that their risks are accurately communicated to potential investors. The more complex 
the instrument, the greater the scope for misunderstanding. Investors have recently incurred 
significant  losses  on  complex  securities  like  CDOs  and  a  number  are  expected  to  sue  for 
mis-selling. HSH Nordbank is already suing UBS for the mis-selling of CDOs, for example, 
and  Banca  Popolare  di  Intra  has  a  lawsuit  against  Bank  of  America  for  the  same  reason. 
Wingecarribee Shire Council is also suing Lehman Brothers for the mis-selling of CDOs. 
System dynamics and the amplification of shocks 
37  The  frictions  of  incomplete  information,  imperfect  incentives  and  inherent  illiquidity  of 
bespoke  financial  instruments  may  also  be  amplified  by  adverse  dynamics  within  the 
financial system itself. For example, poorly-designed remuneration structures and short-term 
performance  targets  may  encourage  “herding”  behaviour  within  the  financial  system  that 
BIS Review 93/2008 
 9
raises the costs of taking a contrarian view. And there are also well-documented concerns 
that regulatory design pays insufficient attention to the risk of procyclicality6. 
38 It also appears to be the case that many firms failed to take sufficient account of the likely 
behaviour  of  other  firms,  and  thus  of  system  properties,  when  designing  stress  tests  and 
contingency plans. They were far too confident in their ability to exit or hedge positions in 
high  risk  instruments,  where  trades  were  highly  crowded,  and  were  consequently  under-
prepared for the evaporation of market liquidity. 
39  Moreover,  there  are  some  financial  instruments  (such  as  mortgage-backed  securities 
where the mortgages have prepayment options), where the dynamic hedging behaviour of 
holders  can  amplify  the  price  movement,  as  dynamic  hedging  can  lead  to  additional  short 
hedging  positions  being  required  after  a  price  fall.  With  individual  institutions  being  small 
relative to the market, each individual institution may think that their new short position will 
have  little  or  no  impact  on  market  prices.  But  collectively,  the  aggregate  demand  for  new 
short positions is likely to drag prices further down and amplify the original shock, generating 
additional losses for those who were slower to update their dynamic hedging7.  
Section 5: Some lessons and policy responses 
40 We are  now around a  year into a severe credit crisis centred on  many of the complex 
structured  instruments  described  earlier.  An  immediate  behavioural  response  of  risk 
managers in major financial institutions has been to pull out of these markets entirely. This 
has  dramatically  reduced  primary  and  secondary  market  liquidity  and  increased  price 
volatility, further reducing incentives to invest in these instruments. The short term outlook for 
many of these innovative instruments is poor. And as described in section 4, the past year 
has  revealed  that  market  imperfections  and  frictions  are  more  potent  than  was  previously 
thought. It is clear that there are important limitations on the capacity of the financial system 
to  deliver  all  of  the  benefits  of  financial  innovation  spelled  out  in  section  3.  But  equally  it 
would be wrong to jump to the opposite extreme, given there are clearly major welfare gains 
from improved choice of financial products and better matching of risks.  
41 So what are some of the lessons for financial innovation? What will the landscape look 
like  in  5-10  years’  time,  once  the  dust  has  settled  and  institutional  changes  can  be 
implemented to address the frictions identified? What if anything can policy do to facilitate or 
expedite this process of adjustment? 
42 A first observation is that it is important to distinguish between different financial products. 
As  shown  in  Table  1,  there  has  been  a  huge  dispersion  in  activity  in  different  innovative 
products  over  the  past year.  For  example,  the  corporate CDS  market  grew  by  36%  in  the 
second half of 2007 and appears to be underpinned by strong demand. Other derivative and 
option markets have also continued to grow very rapidly. But on the other hand, new issues 
of  corporate  CDOs,  CLOs  and  ABS  CDOs  have  virtually  completely  stopped.  Complex 
structured  products  with  a  high  premium  on  information  requirements  and  with  a  high 
bespoke  element  have  thus  fared  much  worse  than  simpler  innovative  instruments  where 
there is more natural two-way trading and liquidity. Moreover, it is important not to lose sight 
that  the  success  of  some  products  and  failure  of  others  is  a  standard  feature  of  the 
innovation process and of a competitive economy. 
                                                 
6   See  for  example,  Borio,  C.,  Furfine,  C  and  Lowe,  P  “Procyclicality  of  the  financial  system  and  financial 
stability: issues and policy options” BIS paper 1, March 2001 and BIS Annual Report: The unsustainable has 
run its course and policymakers face the difficult task of damage control, 30 June 2008. 
7   See  Box  9  –  Market  dynamics  and  options  selling,  pp.  60-61,  Bank  of  England  Financial  Stability  Review, 
June 2005. 
10 
 BIS Review 93/2008
Table 1 Growth of selected financial markets (per cent)
OTC derivatives (notional principal outstanding)
FX forwards and swaps
FX options
Interest rate swaps
Interest rate options
98H1 - 07H1(a) 07H1 - 07H2
18.8
8.0
13.7
8.9
05H1 - 07H1(a) 07H1 - 07H2
36.0
8.1
11.0
28.1
23.4
17.2
Credit default swaps
Asset-backed securities (issuance)
15.7
Non-agency RMBS
25.0
CMBS
7.8
Auto loans
6.7
Credit cards
12.0
Student loans
Collateralised debt obligations (issuance)
98H1 - 07H1(a) 07H1 - 07H2 07H2 - 08Q1(b)
-67.5
-93.8
-17.1
19.0
-34.2
-67.4
-40.9
-32.5
-9.8
-56.9
Corporate CDOs
CLOs
ABS CDOs
05H1 - 07H1(a) 07H1 - 07H2 07H2 - 08Q1(b)
-92.1
-74.4
-85.2
121.0
42.5
38.7
-46.0
-56.9
-68.2
Sources: BIS, Dealogic and SIFMA.
(a) Annual growth rate.
(b) Growth of annualised issuance.
 43 It is vital that market forces should be decisive in determining which instruments live or 
die. Regulators and supervisors should try to make the playing field as level as possible and 
certainly  be  on  the  look  out  for  regulatory  distortions  which  unduly  favour  the  creation  of 
particular products or limit the creation of other welfare-improving innovative instruments. But 
the market place should decide which products match issuer and investor desires once all 
risks are correctly priced.  
44 Looking into a crystal ball what are some of our expectations for future financial market 
developments? We will put forward 7 suggestions: 
• 
it  would  be  a  surprise  and  probably  undesirable 
First,  there  will  be  additional  focus  on  simpler,  more  standardised  products.  For 
example, 
if  mezzanine 
resecuritisations were to reappear. Simpler products should be easier to understand 
and  therefore  less  prone  to  radical  changes  in  expectations  of  their  likely 
performance. Improved stability of expectations should help sustain market liquidity 
during  periods  of  stress.  Standardised  products  also  economise  on  information 
requirements and therefore also improve liquidity in secondary markets. 
Second,  products  will  be  more  transparent  in  design  and  content,  to  improve  the 
ease  of  monitoring  and  hence  lower  information  costs.  Increased  transparency 
should not be confused with reams of data. The issuance documentation for many 
securitisations  often  contained  a  barrage  of  statistics.  For  CDOs  of  ABS,  these 
documents could run to thousands of pages given that the documentation for each 
underlying ABS could already comprise of hundreds of pages. Any investor with the 
appetite  to  conduct  due  diligence  would  have  found  this  volume  of  information 
completely indigestible. Products are likely to come with a broader range of standard 
expected performance statistics. 
 BIS Review 93/2008 
 11
     Third,  as  already  recommended  by  the  Financial  Stability  Forum  and  the  CGFS8, 
rating agencies will supply additional information on the risk characteristics of rated 
securities and the sensitivity and uncertainty attached to their ratings. But there will 
also be increased recognition of the limitations and costs of any monitoring function 
for  highly  complex  products.  That,  too,  will  support  greater  standardisation  and 
transparency. 
Fourth,  and  relatedly,  end-investors  will  demand  more  explicit  rules  governing 
acceptable collateral for securitisation and greater due diligence and risk sharing by 
originators  and  issuers.  For  example,  strict  definitions  of  prime/Alt-A/sub-prime 
mortgages  will  be  required  based  on  FICO  scores,  loan-to-value  ratios  and  other 
characteristics.  And  originators  will  be  required  to  report  their  exposure  to  the 
securities  they  issue.  Contracts,  for  example,  may  require  issuers  to  declare  and 
maintain a significant stake in securitisations to align their incentives to screen and 
monitor loans.  
Fifth,  investment  banks  will  continue  to  offer  tailored  products  to  match  specific 
risks. But there will be much greater recognition of the illiquidity and hence cost of 
the bespoke component. Equilibrium liquidity premia will be higher. That is likely to 
lower demand for such products, perhaps substantially. 
Sixth,  banks  and  other  financial  institutions  will  provide  more  information  on 
exposures  as  pressures  to  improve  market  disclosure  and  transparency  continue. 
And already regulators are assembling best practice accounting disclosures which 
should become standard reporting. 
Seventh,  greater  emphasis  on  standardisation  of  products  may 
facilitate 
improvements in market infrastructure. Pressure will continue for more products to 
be  traded  on  exchanges  rather  than  OTC.  That  should  also  help  control 
counterparty and other operational risks. 
Section 6: Conclusion 
45 Financial engineering facilitates the transformation and reshaping of risk. It thus supports 
the  development  of  new  products  that  decompose,  transfer  and  pool  risks  to  match  user 
needs. Innovation thus delivers a broadening of financial choice that enables companies and 
households to improve their management of risk, with attendant gains in economic welfare. 
46  There  are,  however,  a  number  of  frictions  and  market  imperfections  that  lower  the 
effectiveness of financial innovation. There may be insufficient information to gauge the risk 
in new financial instruments. And indeed information can get lost when a chain of parties are 
involved  in  the  creation  of  new  financial  instruments.  If  these  parties  do  not  retain  an 
economic  interest  in  the  performance  of  the  instrument,  its  inherent  risk  can  grow  as 
incentives to screen and monitor weaken. In addition, the benefits of tailoring the risk profile 
to meet the demands of specific investors can be offset by the poor liquidity that might apply 
to  a  bespoke  component.  These  frictions  have  become  much  more  apparent  during  the 
credit  crisis  of  the  past  year,  during  which  time  primary  market  issuance  and  secondary 
market trading of some innovative financial instruments has fallen sharply. 
47 Looking ahead, however, ideas are being developed to lower some of the frictions from 
which  innovative  structured  credit  instruments  in  particular  have  suffered  during  recent 
months. Removal of these frictions will, in some cases, necessitate recognition of additional 
                                                 
8   Report of the Financial Stability Forum on enhancing market and institutional resilience, 7 April 2008; Ratings 
in structured finance: what went wrong and what can be done to address shortcoming, CGFS Paper 32, July 
2008 
12 
 BIS Review 93/2008
costs, for example in the screening of information and in the provision and cost of liquidity, 
that were severely underplayed in the earlier boom in financial markets. Recognition of these 
costs  will,  however,  strengthen  the  resilience  of  the  financial  system  and  underpin  the 
durability of the manifold benefits from financial innovation. 
BIS Review 93/2008 
 13
