Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj: Financial sector education and training in 
Bahrain  
Address by His Excellency Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj, Governor of the Central Bank of 
Bahrain, at the Signing Ceremony: BIBF-SII MoU, Manama, 20 February 2008. 
 Good  afternoon  Lord  Mayor,  Mrs.  Ruth  Martin  and  other  members  of  the  SII  team, 
Colleagues from the BIBF, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
As Governor of the Central Bank of Bahrain (CBB) and in my capacity as Chairman of the 
BIBF, I would like to welcome you all to the launch of a new partnership between the BIBF 
and  the  Securities  &  Investment  Institute  (SII).  I  am  delighted  to  note  that  the  SII  is  the 
largest  and  most  widely  respected  professional  body  for  the  securities  and  investment 
industry in the UK and that its vocational courses attract over 37,000 candidates a year. 
The  CBB  welcomes  and,  indeed,  supports  the  BIBF-SII  strategic  partnership  which  will 
further deepen the scale and scope of internationally recognized qualifications and training 
courses offered by the BIBF. 
In  Bahrain,  we  recognize  and  appreciate  the  value  of  education  and  training,  so  it  is  no 
surprise that fostering and nurturing a vibrant training institute, such as the BIBF, has been 
an integral element of Bahrain’s success as an international financial centre. 
Through the provision of high quality training and education programmes catering specifically 
for the financial sector, the BIBF has helped create a talent pool for banks and other financial 
institutions to draw from. 
Today, Bahraini nationals account for over 70% of total financial sector employment, which 
has  continued  to  accelerate  over  the  years.  In  fact,  Bahrain’s  financial  sector continues  to 
see the highest value-added per worker. The sector employs 2.7% of Bahrain’s civil service 
and private sector workforce, while contributing over 25% of GDP.  
However,  as  you  are  all  aware,  the  financial  services  industry  is  one  of  the  most  rapidly 
growing and evolving segments of the global economy. This means that people working in 
this industry have to keep upgrading their expertise if they are to compete effectively in the 
market for financial sector jobs. 
The BIBF, with the support of the CBB, is committed to fulfilling its mandate of continuously 
growing Bahrain’s talent pool and “Shaping Tomorrow’s Financial Leaders Today”. From its 
modest beginnings, the BIBF has grown into a highly respected institution, which delivers a 
wide  range  of  degree  and  diploma  programmes,  professional  qualifications  and  short-
duration  courses  addressing  the  needs  of  all  segments  of  the  financial  sector  –  banking, 
insurance and capital markets.  
In  conclusion,  I  would  like  to  congratulate  the  BIBF  and  SII  for  reaching  this  significant 
milestone today. Let us all work together to ensure that Bahrain retains its leading edge as a 
financial centre and as a centre of excellence in financial training and education. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 47/2008 
 1
