Y V Reddy: Management of the capital account in India – some 
perspectives 
Inaugural address by Dr Y V Reddy, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Annual 
Conference of the Indian Econometric Society, Hyderabad, 3 January 2008. 
 Guest  of  Honour  Respected  Professor  C.  R.  Rao,  Vice  Chancellor  Dr.  Hasnain,  President 
Professor Radhakrishna, Emeritus Professor Dr. Bhalla and distinguished participants,  
I  am  honoured  by  the  kind  invitation  to  deliver  the  inaugural  address  of  the  Annual 
Conference  of  Indian  Econometric  Society.  It  is  a  pleasure  to  be  meeting  friends  in  the 
profession, more so in my home town, Hyderabad. I have little to add to the themes covered 
in the papers. I thought that it may be of interest to participants if I present before you some 
perspectives  on  a  subject  that  has  recently  gained  prominence  in  policy  circles  and  also 
academia, namely management of the capital account in India.  
Background 
I.  
I would like to recall that in the invited lecture (on Parameters of Monetary Policy in India) at 
your annual Conference in Chennai, in January 2002, I made a brief reference to the issue 
when I said: "while the twin objectives of monetary policy of maintaining price stability and 
ensuring  availability  of  adequate  credit  to  productive  sectors  of  economy  have  remained, 
capital  flows  and  liberalisation  of  financial  markets  have  increased  the  potential  risks  of 
institutions – thus bringing the issue of financial stability to the fore".  
You  will  recall  that  we  had  introduced  two  innovative  measures,  namely,  the  Liquidity 
Adjustment  Facility  (LAF)  and  the  Market  Stabilisation  Scheme  (MSS),  to  manage  the 
challenges  of  monetary  policy  in  the  context  of  large  and  volatile  capital  flows,  to  assure 
macro-stability and, in particular, financial stability.  
While releasing the India Development Report of the Indira Gandhi Institute of Development 
Research  and  speaking  on  the  “Indian  Economy  –  Current  Status  and  Select  Issues”, 
(January 2005) I had mentioned "the possible issues that need to be considered if one were 
to achieve a better management of non-debt components of capital flows that will address 
emerging concerns." 
At  the  current  juncture,  there  are  several  compelling  circumstances,  both  global  and 
domestic,  that  demand  a  revisiting  of  the  issues,  that  we  discussed  earlier,  and  an 
elaboration of the emerging concerns in the current context. 
Global context 
II.  
Let  me  first  briefly  refer  to  the  global  context.  There  are  unprecedented  developments  in 
global financial markets. There are pressures in money and credit-markets which are sought 
to  be  addressed  through  coordinated  actions  by  several  leading  central  banks  to  inject 
liquidity  into  the  overnight  as  well  as  term  money  markets.  The  impact  and  outcomes  of 
these recent actions of monetary authorities still appear unclear, for the immediate future on 
the financial markets and for the longer term on the real economy in terms of growth rate as 
well as price stability. In the meantime, the equity markets in most economies are buoyant 
but are far more volatile over longer periods than in the recent past. There is a widespread 
concern  among  several  central  banks  in  emerging  market  economies  about  the  added 
pressures on monetary management due to the prevailing extraordinarily strong and volatile 
cross-border  capital  flows.  The  concerns  cut  across  continents,  irrespective  of  the  size  of 
economies,  the  degree  of  openness,  the  monetary  arrangements  and  the  exchange  rate 
BIS Review 2/2008 
 1
arrangements. While the actions arising out of the concerns are varied, they normally involve 
a  combination  of  monetary  policy  measures,  both  direct  and  indirect,  and  often  involve 
management  of  the  capital  account  in  several  ways  without  excluding,  in  some  cases, 
administrative  actions.  Some  countries,  recognising  the  pressures  due  to  large  capital 
inflows,  have  taken  recourse  to  countervailing  policies  in  current  account,  mainly  through 
greater recourse to stabilisation funds.  
Our  Finance  Minister  stated,  while  referring  to  "Managing  Capital  Flows"  in  the  Mid-Year 
Review 2007-08, dated December 7, 2007:  
"While  there  are  international  experiences  in  this  regard  with  some 
successful  and  painful  adjustment  process,  the  specific  Indian  context 
requires innovative policy responses. Going forward, this would be a major 
challenge." (Page 57) 
Mainstream academic thinking 
III.  
There is extensive academic work on the capital account but, for convenience, I will source a 
recent comprehensive study on the subject reflecting a discernible fresh thinking among the 
academics. Professor Barry Eichengreen, who admits to seeing "both sides of this coin" and 
is  a  well  respected  authority  on  the  subject,  wrote  a  paper  titled  "The  Cautious  Case  for 
Capital Flows" for Rating Agency Malaysia’s conference on "Free Capital Mobility: What’s in 
store for Asia" held in Singapore on August 01, 2007. In this paper, he refers to four schools 
of thought on free capital flows, and it is instructive for us to consider them in some detail.  
The first school is in favour of an open capital account and is based on the text-book case for 
a  more  efficient  allocation  of  capital.  Professor  Eichengreen  expresses  doubts  about  this 
interpretation and argues that recent experience does not suggest that capital is flowing from 
developed,  where  it  is  relatively  abundant,  to  developing  countries,  where  it  is  scarce.  He 
adds:  
"A further problem is that liberalizing equity market flows is not the same as 
liberalizing  all  capital  flows.  Experience  shows  that  investment  in  equities 
has  more  favorable  effects  than  investment  in  debt  but  that  governments 
are more inclined to liberalize debt flows." 
The second school argues that even if the expectations of the first school are not fulfilled, 
there  are  corollary  benefits  since  foreign  capital  comes  packaged  with  technological  and 
organisational  know-how.  These  benefits  may  be  true  of  equity  and  foreign  direct 
investments;  but  not  true  of  debt  finance.  Professor  Eichengreen  adds  "More  generally, 
evidence  of  the  corollary  benefits  of  capital  account  liberalisation  is  open  to  alternative 
interpretations."  He  says  "Moreover,  there  are  reasons  to  worry  that  capital  account 
liberalisation adopted with an eye toward forcing reform can have costs as well as benefits." 
The third school emphasises the association of capital account liberalisation with crises, and 
Professor  Eichengreen  mentions  that  this  view  "unites  such  otherwise  diverse  minds  as 
Joseph  Stiglitz  and  Jagdish  Bhagwati."  Based  on  recent  developments,  he  notes  two 
interpretations on this aspect, namely, (a) that the world is being made safer for capital flows; 
and  (b)  the  volatility  has  been  temporarily  suppressed,  warranting  a  caution  to  emerging 
markets.  He  considers  that  the  recent  rise  in  volatility  associated  with  the  sub-prime 
mortgage problem in the U.S. is open to both interpretations and concludes as follows: "The 
bottom line is the importance of properly sequencing capital account liberalisation with other 
policies" and in this context he refers to the "need to open trade before opening to capital 
flows" and the need for "sound and stable monetary and fiscal policies and the more flexible 
exchange rate regime appropriate to an environment of open capital markets." 
The  fourth  school  of  thought  refers  to  the  difficulty  that  Asian  countries  are  having  "in 
managing capital inflows and the problems this has created for their competitiveness." There 
2 
 BIS Review 2/2008
is an extensive treatment of strategies adopted so far, including adoption of measures to limit 
inflows, their impact, and objectives, etc. The most significant comment in this regard relates 
to the need for fiscal actions and he says:  
"Again, the message is that capital account openness is beneficial when it 
is  appropriately  teamed  with  other  policies.  And  the  implication  is  that 
countries  that  are  unable  to  use  fiscal  policy  in  this  way,  perhaps  for 
political reasons, should go slow on capital account liberalization."  
Summing  up,  Professor  Eichengreen  refers  to  the  two  challenges,  going  forward,  that  the 
authorities in Asia face in regard to current problem associated with capital flows. The first 
relates  to  the  upward  pressure  on  currencies  as  private  capital  continues  flowing  into  the 
region. He comments,  
"The  main  tool  for  countering  appreciation  of  the  currency  will  be  fiscal 
policy, … If currencies are too strong for comfort, then Asian governments 
need to raise taxes and cut public spending. This is politically challenging, 
but it is a necessary corollary of the decision to free capital flows." 
The second relates to limiting the risks of instability. On this, he comments, 
"If  Asian  stock  and  bond  markets  fall  sharply,  the  negative  shock  could 
spread quickly from leveraged investors to the property sector, from there 
to the banks that have lent to them, and ultimately to the real economy." 
To sum up, the first and second schools of thought which were dominant till recently have 
now been supplemented, or perhaps supplanted, by the third and fourth schools. Further, in 
the second school, there is recognition of difference now between equity and debt flows in 
the  context  of  downside  risks.  The  third  school  focuses  on  the  importance  of  proper 
sequencing  of  liberalisation  of  capital  account  with  other  policies.  The  fourth  school 
elaborates on issues relating to management of capital account and takes a more nuanced 
approach to it. In brief, the third and fourth schools that are of more recent origin, and are 
gaining respectability, are closely aligned with the approach that India has been following. 
The current Indian context 
IV.  
The Ministry of Finance placed a review of the trends in receipts and expenditures at the end 
of second quarter of the financial year 2007-08 on December 7, 2007. In the document, there 
is  exhaustive  analysis  of  several  contemporary 
to  macro-economic 
environment.  The  status  and  issues  relating  to  management  of  capital  account  do  find  a 
prominent  place  in  the  discussion  and  refers  to  the  challenges  for  monetary  management 
and the complexities in managing capital flows in the following passages: 
issues  relating 
"The  predominant  issue  that  continues  to  confront  the  monetary  authority 
during the current year has been the steady increase of forex flows and the 
policy response thereto." [Para 3.1.12 (Page 37)] 
"The management of capital flows is a complex process encompassing a 
spectrum of policy choices, which inter alia, include: the appropriate level of 
reserves;  monetary  policy  objectives  related  to  liquidity  management  and 
interest rates and maintenance of healthy financial market conditions with 
financial stability." [Para 3.1 (Page 56)] 
The Eleventh Five-Year Plan (2007-2012) as approved by the National Development Council 
on  December  19,  2007  makes  several  observations  in  this  regard.  Some  of  these  are 
reproduced here. 
"The problem posed by having to manage large inflows has been discussed 
in Chapter-10. It arises because of the well known "trilemma" that it is not 
possible  to  achieve  three  objectives  simultaneously,  i.e.  free  capital 
BIS Review 2/2008 
 3
mobility,  an  independent  monetary  policy  and  a  stable  exchange  rate. 
Attention should be given to measures to restrain these capital flows and 
enhanced the absorptive capacity in the economy to avoid running into the 
classical  "Dutch  Disease"  situation  where  non-tradeables  become  over-
priced  and  erode  the  competitiveness  of  the  economy  in  the  tradeable 
sector." (Para 2.30) 
"The cautious approach to opening the capital account followed thus far as 
a conscious act of policy has given the government some leeway in limiting 
inflows of certain categories." (Para 2.33) 
"These  problems  illustrate  the  merit  of  the  cautious  approach  adopted by 
the government in the matter of liberating capital inflows. The advantages 
of accessing pool of capital to finance development are recognised in the 
commitment  to  move  gradually  to  fuller  capital  account  convertibility.  But 
the move is to be made gradually at a pace which enables the authorities to 
deal with unexpected volatility. In controlling capital flows it is important to 
recognise  the  relative  attractiveness  of  different  types  of  flows.  In  this 
regard  direct  foreign  investment  is  the  most  preferred  form  of  flow. 
Investments in Indian firms through the stock market and by venture capital 
funds  in  unlisted  companies  are  also  potentially  beneficial.  External 
commercial borrowing and other short term flows are areas where one can 
introduce an element of control to moderate sudden surges. However, even 
with capital calibration it is not easy to manage a surging capital inflows, if it 
occurs.  In  such  situations,  it  is  necessary  to  explore  ways  of  limiting  the 
fiscal  cost  of  sterilising  large  growth  of  reserves:  either  by  making  these 
flows  less  attractive  or  by  means  that  do  not  require  costly  sterilisation." 
(Para 13.72) 
It is noteworthy that there is recognition of the more immediate challenges due to the recently 
observed financial turbulence in the global markets, necessitating a focus on the domestic 
factors in the process of growth and stability in our country. The Prime Minister in his opening 
remarks at the 54th meeting of the National Development Council, on December 19, 2007, 
inter-alia said:  
"There are some clouds on global financial markets following the sub-prime 
lending  crisis.  There  are  worries  that  the  growth  of  the  U.S.  and  other 
leading  economies  may  slow  down  and  some  may  even  go  into  a 
recession. This may impact both our exports as well as capital flows. Our 
economy  is  now  increasingly  integrated  into  the  global  economy  with  the 
external  sector  now  accounting  for  almost  40%  of  GDP  and  hence,  we 
cannot  be  fully  immune  to  international  developments.  This  is  not  to  say 
that  one  must  be  pessimistic  and  must  be  less  ambitious  in  our  growth 
targets. It only implies that we need to redouble our efforts to maintain the 
domestic  drivers  of  growth  and  ensure  that  policy  facilitates  even  faster 
growth." 
To sum up, the public policy in India recognises that 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
(e) 
appropriate management of capital account is critical for both growth and stability; 
the cautious approach to capital account has given us leeway; 
there are preferences in regard to different types of capital flows;  
some fiscal costs are consciously incurred as necessary on account of sterilisation; 
monetary and exchange rate management are very complex in the context of well-
known trilemma, and in the current complex global environment, Indian cannot be 
immune to global development but we should maintain domestic drivers to growth. 
4 
 BIS Review 2/2008
Policy perspectives 
V.  
Admittedly there are several dilemmas, trade-offs and judgments in the process of managing 
capital  account.  The  intensified  pressures  due  to  large  and  volatile  capital  flows  in  an 
atmosphere of global uncertainties make the task significantly complex and critical. I propose 
to summarise the possible approaches in this regard, mainly in terms of analysis. 
First,  a  view  needs  to  be  taken,  though  difficult,  as  to  whether  the  capital  flows  are  of 
enduring nature or temporary. Prudence demands that, in terms of initial reaction, all large 
capital inflows are treated as temporary, and if these flows result in excess volatility in the 
forex markets, some intervention becomes necessary. The judgment about excess volatility 
will depend not merely on the quantity of the flow, but, to some extent, on the quality in terms 
of  components  of  the  capital  flow.  While  the  flows  on  account  of  equity,  foreign  direct 
investment  (FDI)  into  green  field  issues  may  be  considered  to  be  of  a  more  permanent 
nature, flows on account of buy-outs through channels that are only technically FDI may not 
constitute a stable element. Overall, the portfolio investments could be expected to be less 
stable than FDI. The market participants’ views on what constitutes excess volatility are also 
critical in this regard. 
Second, large and lumpy quantities, even when expected, tend to disturb the markets and 
hence,  there  is  a  need  to  even-out  the  impact  of  such  lumpy  flows  through  policy 
interventions and statements, appropriately managing the expectations in the market.  
Third,  while  interventions  are  with  the  objective  of  containing  volatility  in  the  forex  market, 
intervention over a long period, especially when the exchange rate is moving in one direction, 
could  make  interventions  less  effective.  However,  a  critical  question  is  what  would  be  the 
impact  on  expectations  about  future  movements  in  forex  markets  if  no  intervention  takes 
place.  The  challenges  of  intervention  and  management  of  expectations  will  be  particularly 
daunting  when  financial  contagion  occurs,  since  such  events  are  characterised  by 
suddenness, high speed and large magnitudes of unexpected flows, in either direction. The 
quintessence  for  a  relevant  monetary  policy  is  the  speed  of  adjustment  of  the  policy 
measures to rapidly changing situations. 
Fourth, a related issue is whether there should be sterilised intervention and if so, the timing 
and  quantum  of  such  interventions.  There  is  usually  a  cost  attached  to  sterilisation 
operations. At the same time, it is also necessary to assess the indirect cost of not sterilising 
if there are signs of a “Dutch disease” caused by flows in the capital account. Most often, it is 
not a question of whether to sterilise or not, but how much to sterilise. That is an important 
issue of judgment that needs to be made in conjunction with domestic monetary and liquidity 
conditions.  
Fifth issue, relates to the choice and an appropriate mix of instruments for sterilisation. Each 
instrument, namely, Market Stabilization Scheme (MSS), Liquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF) 
and Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR), has different features and interactions. Utilisation of each of 
these will also depend on what is the permanency of the components of the flows and how 
they should be sterilised in the aggregate. Further, each instrument can be used in different 
ways. The LAF is able to take care of very short period flows. The MSS handles the longer 
term flows slightly better than the LAF, and the CRR is more appropriate for addressing fairly 
longer term flows. However, effectiveness of the MSS will depend more on the initiatives of 
the market participants than on the decisions of the Reserve Bank. Operationally, the issue is 
often not “which” instrument but “how much” of each instrument needs to be utilised, with due 
regard to the capital flows, market conditions, and monetary as well as credit developments. 
Sixth, the market interventions for containing volatility in exchange rate and the consequent 
sterilisation  operations  may  need  to  be  complemented  by  measures  for  effective  capital 
account  management,  as  needed.  Just  as  stabilisation  funds  take  care  of  current  account 
shocks, capital account management and market interventions are justifiable to take care of 
capital account shocks.  
BIS Review 2/2008 
 5
Seventh, the continued focus on financial market development would mitigate the challenge 
of capital flows, in the medium term. However, it is important to recognise that maturation of 
financial  markets  takes  time.  Hence,  the  capital  flows  have  to  be  managed  through  other 
tools in the short term, while continuing to work on development of the financial markets. Our 
preference has been for the time tested and proven “gradual” approach. In brief, the issue is 
not either financial market development or management of capital account, but how much of 
each approach should be adopted in a given situation and over time. 
Eighth,  increase  in  absorptive  capacity  of  the  economy  could  be  another  mitigating  factor. 
But, it is not easy to develop absorptive capacity of an economy in the short run and in any 
case it is very difficult to calibrate the absorptive capacity of an economy to match the volatile 
capital  flows.  Further,  the  level  of  current  account  deficit  that  is  considered  generally 
sustainable by global financial markets in respect of emerging market economies is currently 
lower than the large amounts of capital inflows. Hence, enlargement of absorptive capacity is 
an appropriate approach, but only up to the limit of sustainable levels and is achievable over 
the medium term under normal circumstances.  
Finally, it is, sometimes, suggested that encouraging outflows would be a good solution to 
manage  surging  inflows.  Liberalising  outflows  may  not  be  of  great  help  in  the  short  run 
because a greater liberalised regime generally attracts more inflows. Hence, while recourse 
to some encouragement to outflows such as the liberalisation of overseas investment by our 
corporates in the real sector is helpful, it has to be combined with other measures to manage 
the flows depending on their intensity. 
A pragmatic approach 
VI.  
It should be evident from the description of policy perspectives in managing external sector 
that it is essentially pragmatic, iterative and evolving. I propose to briefly narrate some of the 
reasons  for  what  may  appear  to  be  a  more  pragmatic  but  less  clearly  defined  policy  of 
management of the external sector. 
Firstly, international financial markets do not treat Emerging Market Economies (EMEs) like 
India  as  full-fledged  market  economies  but  only  as  economies  in  the  process  of 
marketisation. Hence, financial markets respond differently to the same macroeconomic or 
political development depending on whether it is an EME or an advanced economy. Hence, 
EMEs have to follow a more pragmatic and contextual policy. 
Secondly, the self-correcting mechanisms in markets, particularly the financial markets, are 
expected  to  operate  smoothly  in  the  absence  of  capital  controls.  But,  such  mechanisms 
happen  to  operate  more  efficiently  in  advanced  economies  and  far  less  efficiently  in  the 
EMEs. While there is an advantage in developing the financial sector with appropriate self-
correcting mechanisms, it is not possible to achieve this in the short term, and is particularly 
difficult to achieve during highly uncertain global economic conditions. Hence, the extent of 
or lack of self-correcting mechanisms in an economy should be treated as given, in the short 
term, and a suitable policy of intervention has to be pursued accordingly. 
Thirdly, the real sector flexibilities may be far less in EMEs. For example, opening a business 
or closing a business in India requires a considerable amount of time. Hence, the real sector 
responses to exchange rate movements are not likely to be as flexible as in the advanced 
economies.  One  has,  therefore,  to  make  a  judgment  on  the  extent  of  existence  of  such 
flexibility in the real sector. No doubt, the policy makers have to encourage the real sector to 
change and become more and more flexible to cope with the exchange rate dynamics. At the 
same time, the pressure for change cannot be to such an extent that the volatile exchange 
rate movements seriously disrupt the business environment. 
Fourthly,  there  is  a  problem  in  differentiating  between  the  flexibility  and  the  volatility  in 
exchange rates, in view of the evolving situation in EMEs. The distinction has to be based on 
the preparedness of the markets and the market participants. It is necessary to encourage 
6 
 BIS Review 2/2008
expectations of greater flexibility and give notice to the market participants about increasing 
flexibility so that they are prepared, equipped and enabled to adjust to greater flexibility. Over 
a  period,  what  was  volatile  yesterday  becomes  flexible  tomorrow.  This  is  the  process  by 
which we, in India, have been moving gradually to greater flexibility in exchange rate. 
Finally, generalisation on the effectiveness or otherwise of capital control may not be entirely 
appropriate.  The  effectiveness  of  capital  account  management  should  be  viewed  from 
several angles. Let me mention a few. First – impact on exchange rate expectations. Second 
–  the  counterfactual,  namely  what  could  have  happened  without  capital  controls  at  a 
particular juncture? Third – the short term impact versus the long term effectiveness. Fourth 
–  the  overall  regime  of  current  account  management  in  the  country  concerned,  to  thwart 
capital  account  transactions  in  the  guise  of  current  account.  The  regimes  governing 
repatriation and surrender are also relevant here. Fifth – the administrative framework and 
overall  effectiveness  of  administration  in  the  country,  in  a  given  legal  and  institutional 
framework. Finally, by all accounts, in terms of both growth and stability, China and India, 
who do manage capital account rather actively, have performed exceedingly well in all the 
recent years. 
The Committee on Global Financial System and the Bank for International Settlements have 
constituted  a  Working  Group  to  report  on  the  issue  of  capital  flows  to  emerging  market 
economies, in view of their implications for overall financial stability. It is commendable that 
Dr. Rakesh Mohan, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India has been chosen to head the 
Working Group. We hope to gain from the deliberations of the Group in evolving our policies 
to meet the emerging challenges. 
Conclusion 
VII.  
In  conclusion,  I  would  like  to  submit  that  management  of  capital  account  has  become  an 
important element of public policy in India.  
The emerging challenges to the management, both in the short and over the medium-term 
have been recognised by the policy makers at all levels.  
While the immediate focus is on managing the excess capital inflows and some volatility in 
regard to the excess, I believe that it will be prudent not to exclude the possibility of some 
change  in  course,  due  to  any  abrupt  changes  in  sentiments  or  global  liquidity  conditions, 
despite  strong  underlying  fundamentals  of  the  Indian  economy.  Strategic  management  of 
capital  account  would  warrant  preparedness  for  all  situations,  and  the  challenges  for 
managing  the  capital  account  in  such  unexpected  turn  of  events  would  normally  be  quite 
different.  
The  Reserve  Bank  considers  it  prudent  to  continue  to  analyse  and  monitor  different 
scenarios  and  possible  contingencies  so  that  capital  account  and  monetary  management 
continue to facilitate high growth, while maintaining price and financial stability. 
I have great pleasure in inaugurating the annual conference of Indian Econometric Society 
and I wish you all the best. 
BIS Review 2/2008 
 7
