Usha Thorat: Inclusive growth – the role of banks in emerging economies 
Text  of  the  “Independence  Commemoration  Lecture,  2008”  by  Ms  Usha  Thorat,  Deputy 
Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  Central  Bank  of  Sri  Lanka,  Colombo, 
28 February 2008. 
Assistance of C.S. Murthy, G. Srinivasan, Asha P. Kannan and Sundaram Shankar in preparing this speech is 
gratefully acknowledged. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I am delighted to be here in Colombo and honoured by the invitation of the Central Bank of 
Sri  Lanka  to  deliver  this  year’s  “Independence  Commemoration  Lecture”.  It  is  my  proud 
privilege  to  join  the  illustrious  list  of  previous  speakers,  who  have  added  laurels  to  this 
prestigious  lecture  series.  Today,  I  would  like  to  share  with  you  India’s  experiences  on 
“Inclusive  Growth”  –  a  topic  which  is  both  current  and  close  to  the  hearts  of  public 
policymakers and central bankers of emerging economies.  
Having chosen my topic, I am faced with the, not so unusual, speaker’s dilemma as to from 
where I should begin. And I thought it is best to begin at the very beginning – some three 
millennia ago. Yes, some three millennia ago!! I refer to the “Shanti Mantra” – a peace hymn 
– from the “Kato Upanishad” of the Hindu scriptures which runs like this: 
"Om Sahana Vavatu Sahanau Bhunaktu, Saha Viryam Karawavahai, Tejasvinavaditamastu, 
Ma Vidvishavahai, Om Shanti hi Shanti hi Shanti hi" 
and translates to:  
"Together may we be protected, together may we be nourished, together may we work with 
great  energy,  may  our  journey  together  be  brilliant  and  effective,  may  there  be  no  bad 
feelings between us, Peace, Peace, Peace" 
Indeed, the significance and importance of the “inclusive” concept has been well recognised 
millennia ago.  
Coming  to  current  times,  there  is  growing  realisation  that  while  the  “trickle  down”  effect  of 
economic growth no doubt works, it takes too long a time and hence there is a need to focus 
on inclusive growth. "Inclusive growth", is a little more than just the benefits of growth being 
distributed equitably and evenly; it is the participation of all sections and regions of society in 
the growth story and their reaping the benefits of growth.  
Why inclusive growth? 
I.  
While it is quite evident that inclusive growth is imperative for achieving the equity objective, 
what is, perhaps, not so obvious is, why inclusive growth is now considered essential even to 
sustain the growth momentum. 
First, in many of the emerging market economies, the major chunk of population is based in 
rural  areas.  Significant  increase  in  demand  for  manufacturing  and  services  sectors  has  to 
come  from  the  rural  population.  The  average  monthly  per  capita  consumption  expenditure 
(MPCE)  in  urban  areas  in  India  is  almost  double  that  of  rural  areas.  In  some  States,  the 
disparities are even more glaring. Therefore, it is important to ensure that growth takes place 
in  agriculture,  allied  sectors  as  also  in  secondary  and  services  sectors  in  rural  areas,  and 
amongst urban poor to provide a growing market for the goods and services produced by the 
expanding corporate sector.  
Second, from supply-side management, growth in agriculture is necessary in order to keep 
manufacturing  prices  under  check,  provide  food  security  and  keep  inflation  under  control. 
BIS Review 23/2008 
 1
facilities,  and  other 
Price stability is not merely important as an anti poverty measure but also as an instrument to 
ensure stable and sustained growth. 
Third, higher growth in agriculture and rural areas coupled with demographic dividend (i.e. 
growing proportion of population in the working age group of 15-65) will lead to a rise in the 
savings  level  for  financing  the  increasing  level  of  investments  necessary  to  sustain  the 
overall growth momentum. 
Fourth,  the  limitations  on  increasing  production  and  productivity  in  agriculture  are  driving 
migration to urban areas leading to population pressure in urban areas and increase in urban 
poor. Infrastructure in urban areas needs considerable investment to handle the migration – 
this requires significant investment in housing, water, sanitation, lighting and power, waste 
management,  education,  health 
infrastructure.  Hence,  urban 
development policies have to focus on inclusive investment to deal with the huge armies of 
low-income population likely to move into these areas.  
Fifth,  since  in  many  countries  such  as  India,  the  growth  process  is  knowledge-based  and 
services-led,  the  requirement  of  skilled  labour  is  quite  substantial  in  comparison  to  the 
present availability. In order to ensure adequate supply of skilled labour force, huge social 
sector investment is required covering the vast majority of people who may not be able to 
afford such education and skill development. 
Sixth, whenever we talk of the majority population living in rural areas, it is often identified 
with the agriculture sector. However, it is the unorganised non-farm sector that is increasingly 
absorbing most of the labour force. This sector has huge potential for growth once there is 
sufficient  investment  in  infrastructure  ensuring  linkage  to  markets  and  easier  access  to 
assets  and  skills.  Infusion  of  appropriate  technology,  skills,  and  easier  access  to  credit, 
especially  start-up  capital,  apart  from  facilitating  market  development,  can  make  this 
segment an expanding base for self-sustaining employment and wealth generation and also 
foster a culture of creative and competitive industry. Entrepreneurial development has to be 
encouraged by having an enabling competitive environment and easy availability of finance 
for newer projects and enterprises. In Prof. C. K. Prahalad's words, “If we stop thinking of the 
poor  as  victims  or  as  a  burden,  and  start  recognising  them  as  resilient  and  creative 
entrepreneurs and value conscious consumers, a whole world of opportunity will open up.”1
Thus,  there  are  several  factors  to  be  considered  for  inclusive  growth.  Uppermost  among 
these, is the need for raising the allocative efficiency of investment and resource use across 
different sectors of economy – this can be met by addressing two basic supply-side issues 
viz.  (i)  effective  credit  delivery  system  to  facilitate  productive  investment  in  employment 
impacting sectors especially, agriculture, micro, small and medium enterprises and (ii) large 
scale  investment  in  infrastructural  facilities  like  irrigation,  roads,  railways,  communication, 
ports,  power,  rural/urban  reconstruction  and  in  social  infrastructure  such  as  health  care, 
education and sanitation.  
Financial Inclusion for inclusive growth 
II.  
The  challenges  of  achieving  more  inclusive  growth  can  be  met  by  policies  that encourage 
easier and affordable access to financial services. Both theoretical and empirical researches 
highlight the role of financial development in facilitating economic development (Rajan and 
Zingales,  2004).2  At  the  cross-country  level,  evidence  indicates  that  various  measures  of 
financial  development  are  positively  related  to  economic  growth  (King  and  Levine,  19933; 
                                                 
1   Prahlad,  C  K  'The  Fortune  at  the  Bottom  of  the  Pyramid  -  Eradicating  Poverty  Through  Profits',  Pearson 
Publication, 2005. 
2   Rajan, R.G. and L. Zingales (2003), 'Saving Capitalism from Capitalists', Crown Business, New York. 
3   King,  Robert.  G.  and  R.  Levine  (1993),  'Finance  and  Growth:  Schumpeter  Might  Be  Right',  The  Quarterly 
Journal of Economics, August, 717-737. 
2 
 BIS Review 23/2008
Levine  and  Zervos,  1998).4  Even  the  recent  endogenous  growth  literature,  building  on 
“learning  by  doing”  processes,  assigns  a  special  role  to  finance  (Aghion  and  Hewitt,  1998 
and 2005).5  
While  in  developed  countries,  the  formal  financial  sector  comprising  mainly  the  banking 
system  serves  most  of  the  population,  in  developing  countries,  a  large  segment  of  the 
society, mainly the low-income group, has little access to financial services, either formal or 
semi  formal.  As  a  result,  many  people  have  to  necessarily  depend  either  on  their  own 
sources  or  informal  sources  of  finance,  which  are  generally  at  high  cost.  Most  of  the 
population in developed countries (99 per cent in Denmark, 96 per cent in Germany, 91 per 
cent in the USA and 96 per cent in France) have bank accounts (Peachy and Roe, 2004).6 
However,  formal  financial  sectors  in  most  developing  countries  serve  relatively  a  small 
segment, often no more than 20-30 per cent of the population, the vast majority of who are 
low income households in rural areas (ADB, 2007).7 Owing to several factors such as the 
sharp increase in urbanisation, rural to urban migration as also the increase in urban poverty, 
the share of poor and the low-income households not having any access to finance in the 
urban areas is also increasing in several countries.  
Recent  data  shows  that  countries  with  large  proportion  of  population  excluded  from  the 
formal financial system also show higher poverty ratios and higher inequality. 
Source: World Bank (2006)8 and (2008)9. 
                                                 
4   Levine, R. and S. Zervous (1998), 'Stock Markets, Banks and Economic Growth', American Economic Review, 
Vol.88, pp 537-58. 
5   Aghion, P., and P. Howitt (1998), 'Endogenous Growth Theory', MIT Press. Aghion, P., and P. Howitt (2005), 
'Appropriate  Growth  Policy:  A  Unifying  Framework',  The  2005  Joseph  Schumpeter  Lecture,  European 
Economic Association, Amsterdam. 
6   Peachy, S. and A. Roe (2004), 'Access to Finance - What Does it Mean and How Do Savings Bank Foster 
Access? Brussels: World Savings Bank Institute. 
7   ADB, (2007)'Low-Income Households' Access to Financial Services', International Experience, Measures for 
Improvement and the Future; Asian Development Bank. 
8   World Bank (2006), World Development Indicators, Washington. 
9   World Bank (2008), Finance for All - Policies and Pitfalls in Expanding Access; Washington. 
BIS Review 23/2008 
 3
Inclusive growth in India 
III.  
From an annual average growth rate of 3.5 per cent during 1950 to 1980, the growth rate of 
the Indian economy accelerated to around 6.0 per cent in the 1980s and 1990s. In the last 
four years (2003-04 to 2006-07), the Indian economy grew by 8.8 per cent. In 2005-06 and 
2006-07,  the  Indian  economy  grew  at  a  higher  rate  of  9.4  and  9.6  per  cent,  respectively. 
Reflecting  the  high  economic  growth  and  a  moderation  in  population  growth  rate,  the  per 
capita income of the country also increased substantially in the recent years. An important 
characteristic of the high growth phase in recent years is its resilience to shocks. The Indian 
economy, for instance, successfully avoided any adverse contagion impact of the East Asian 
crisis,  sanctions  like  situation  post-Pokhran  nuclear  test,  and  border  conflict  with  a 
neighbouring country during May-June 1999.  
Despite  the  impressive  numbers,  growth  has  failed  to  be  sufficiently  inclusive,  particularly 
after the mid-1990s. Agricultural sector which provides employment to around 60 per cent of 
the population lost its growth momentum from that point, though there has been a reversal of 
this  trend  since  2005-06.  The  percentage  of  India’s  population  below  the  poverty  line  has 
declined from 36 per cent in 1993-94 to 26 per cent in 1999-2000. The approach paper to the 
Eleventh Plan indicated that the absolute number of poor is estimated to be approximately 
300 million in 2004-05. 
Concerns about financial exclusion, especially in rural areas have surfaced in India in recent 
years  following  the  results  of  the  NSSO's  All-India  Debt  and  Investment  Survey  (AIDIS), 
2002. According to the Survey results, though the share of non-institutional sources of credit 
for  the  cultivator  households  had  declined  from  92.7  per  cent  in  1951  to  30.6  per  cent  in 
1991,  it  had  increased  to  38.9  per  cent  in  2002  mainly  due  to  increase  in  moneylenders’ 
share.  Simultaneously,  the  share  of  institutional  sources  such  as  commercial  banks,  co-
operative societies, etc. increased from 7.3 per cent in 1951 to 66.3 per cent in 1991, before 
declining to 61.1 per cent in 2002. While data later than 2002 are not available in this regard, 
it is expected that the doubling of agriculture credit and other measures since 2004 would 
have led to some improvement in the share of institutional sources.  
Financial sector policy and regulatory framework in India for inclusive growth 
IV.  
The financial sector in India has been primarily dominated by the banking system. Scheduled 
commercial banks (SCBs) occupy a predominant position in the financial system, accounting 
for around three-fourths of the total assets. As at end-March 2007, the public sector banks 
(PSBs) accounted for 70 per cent of the total assets of SCBs. Foreign banks operating in 
India accounted for about 8 per cent of the assets of SCBs. The RRBs and the co-operative 
banks, with two broad segments of urban and rural co-operative banks also form an integral 
part of the Indian financial system. 
Broadly speaking, one can observe two distinct phases in the developments relating to public 
policy objectives underlying banking policy. The first phase viz. the two decades since 1970 
represented the period of State control over the banking system, pre-emption of the major 
part of bank resources by the public sector and directed lending with administered interest 
rates. During this period, the nationalisation of major banks in 1969 saw banking policy giving 
a thrust to branch expansion in the rural and semi urban areas and stepping up of lending to 
the so called priority sectors viz. agriculture, small scale industry, self employed and small 
business  sectors  and  weaker  sections  within  these  sectors.  As  a  result,  the  branches  of 
scheduled commercial banks increased from 8,262 in June 1969 to 69,471 in March 2006. 
The  average  population  per  branch  office  decreased  significantly  from  64,000  to  16,000 
during the above period, with the share of rural branches increasing from 22.2 per cent in 
June  1969  to  a  little  over  51  per  cent  in  March  1998.  Lending  to  the  priority  sectors  was 
increased to the mandated target of 40 per cent. Specialised Regional Rural Banks were set 
up  in  1975,  especially  in  backward  and  tribal  districts  to  cater  to  the  needs  of  the  weaker 
sections amongst farmers and non-farm small businesses entrepreneurs. National Bank for 
4 
 BIS Review 23/2008
Agriculture  and  Rural  Development  (NABARD)  largely  provided  concessional  refinance  for 
lending  done  by  the  rural  cooperative  credit  structure.  The  second  phase  after  the  early 
1990s,  represents  the  period  of  financial  sector  reform,  higher  allocation  of  credit  to  the 
private sector, lower pre-emption by the government sector, moving away from administered 
interest  rates  to  market  determined  rates  even  for  government  borrowing,  introduction  of 
international  best  practices  and  regulatory  policies  for  strengthening  the  financial  sector, 
increased competitiveness with entry of new private sector banks and more foreign banks, 
and allowing private shareholding in public sector banks. Listing of public sector banks on the 
stock  exchanges  made  them  consciously  focus  on  bottom  line,  control  NPAs,  make 
investments in technology and skills and bring about other efficiencies. This period also saw 
consolidation of banking system in terms of branches. Although priority sector lending norms 
continued,  the  definitions  became  progressively  wider  with  several  sectors  and  activities 
getting included. In a sense, this period demonstrated the recognition that inclusive banking 
cannot  be  at  the  cost  of  weakening  financial  institutions  and  that  policies  for  inclusive 
banking have to go hand in hand with encouraging strong and efficient financial institutions. 
The thrust of inclusive financing for the poor in this phase was mainly through government 
sponsored  credit-cum-subsidy  programmes.  The  recovery  performance  in  these  schemes 
was not encouraging and their success in achieving desired outcomes was also tepid.  
A notable development in the second phase of inclusive banking was the launching of the 
SHG  Bank  Linkage  programme  by  NABARD  in  1992.  The  programme  gained  momentum 
when  Reserve  Bank  allowed  banks  to  open  savings  accounts  for  SHGs  despite  their  not 
having  any  legal  form.  The  group  leaders  operate  the  SHG  accounts.  SHGs  facilitate 
collective  decision  –  making  and  provide  “door  step”  banking  to  the  poor.  The  banks,  as 
wholesalers of credit, provide the resources, while the NGOs are the agencies that organise 
the poor, build their capacities and facilitate the process of empowering them. Interest rates 
on loans granted by banks to SHGs are deregulated. Loans to SHGs of individual farmers 
are treated as direct agricultural finance, provided the details of such loans are maintained by 
the  bank/SHG.  As  at  March  31,  2007,  over  2.9  million  SHGs  have  been  linked  to  banks 
involving a total credit flow of over Rs.180 billion. 
The other strategic move in this phase was the creation of Rural Infrastructure Development 
Fund  (RIDF)  in  NABARD,  into  which  public  sector  banks  were  required  to  make  deposits 
towards part of the shortfall in their priority sector lending. The Fund is utilised to make loans 
to State Governments for creation of rural infrastructure. A similar fund was set up in Small 
Industries  Development  Bank  of  India  (SIDBI)  out  of  shortfall  in  meeting  priority  sector 
lending targets by foreign banks. 
Recent strategies for inclusive banking 
V.  
As the economy began to grow at higher rates, the regional and societal disparities called for 
new strategies to ensure that the banking system met the requirements of inclusive growth. 
Such strategies needed to be fashioned in a manner that they did not undermine the stability 
and  efficiency  of  the  financial  system.  Accordingly,  over  the  last  four  years  or  so,  several 
measures have been taken by the Reserve Bank and Government of India to ensure better 
banking penetration and outreach, particularly that the credit needs of agriculture and small 
enterprises are met while allowing sufficient flexibility to each bank to evolve its own policies 
and strategies for the purpose. We shall now discuss some of these initiatives. 
Specific  focus  on  financial  inclusion  commenced  in  November  2005,  when  Reserve  Bank 
advised banks to make available a basic banking “no-frills” account with low or “nil” minimum 
balance as well as charges, with a view to expanding the outreach of such accounts. In such 
accounts, banks are required to make available all printed material used by retail customers 
in the regional language concerned. In order to ensure that persons belonging to low income 
groups,  both  in  the  urban  and  rural  areas  do  not  encounter  difficulties  in  opening  bank 
accounts,  the  know  your  customer  (KYC)  procedure  for  opening  accounts  has  been 
BIS Review 23/2008 
 5
simplified.  Besides  the  Kisan  Credit  Cards  (KCCs),  banks  have  been  asked  to  consider 
introduction of a General purpose Credit Card (GCC) facility up to Rs.25000 at their rural and 
semi urban braches. This facility is in the nature of revolving credit, which entitles the holder 
to withdraw up to the limit sanctioned. Based on assessment of household cash flows, limits 
are  sanctioned  without  insistence  on  security  or  purpose.  Interest  rate  on  the  facility  is 
completely deregulated. Fifty per cent of GCC loans can be treated as priority sector lending.  
Financial  inclusion  is  intended  to  connect  people  to  banks  with  consequential  benefits.  A 
decentralised strategy has been adopted for ensuring financial inclusion. The SLBC identifies 
one district for 100 per cent financial inclusion. So far, SLBCs have reported having achieved 
100 per cent financial inclusion in 68 out of 611 districts in the country. 12 million "No frills" 
accounts have been opened so far, with 11 million of them having been opened by public 
sector  banks.  An  external  evaluation  of  the  progress  made  in  these  districts  is  being 
undertaken to draw lessons for further action in this regard. 
Recognising  that  the  Regional  Rural  Banks  (RRBs)  with  their  dominant  presence  in 
backward and tribal areas can become powerful instruments of financial inclusion, measures 
have been taken to strengthen them through consolidation of the 196 banks into 92 banks, 
making sponsor banks responsible for their performance, liberalising branch licensing in their 
area  of  operation,  recapitalising  RRBs  having  negative  net  worth  and  providing  them  with 
facilities to upgrade their staff skills. Working groups have been set up to explore how these 
banks  could  be  supported  to  bring  in  core  banking  solutions  and  adopt  ICT  solutions  for 
financial inclusion.  
A growing component of inclusive banking is the lending by MFIs that are societies, trusts, 
cooperatives or "not for profit" companies or non-banking financial companies registered with 
the  RBI.  This  sector  currently  covers  8.32  million  borrowers  (Sa-Dhan  Report  2007).  The 
NBFC  segment  within  this  sector  accounts  for  42.8  per  cent  of  the  borrowers  and  is  the 
fastest  growing  segment.  Interest  rates  on  lending  to  MFIs/NBFCs  are  completely 
deregulated;  bank  lending  to  such  entities  for  micro  finance  is  treated  as  priority  sector 
lending. Private sector and foreign banks are observed to be actively supporting this sector, 
which  is  also  attracting  private  equity  funding  and  philanthropy  funding  from  outside  the 
country.  
In order to step up lending to agriculture, in 2004-05, Government of India launched a special 
programme monitored by NABARD for doubling of agricultural credit, and providing relief to 
distressed farmers through rescheduling and settlement schemes. A programme of interest 
rate subvention of 2 per cent on crop loans to farmers was also introduced and this scheme, 
which is being operated for the last three years, is still in force. In 31 districts identified as 
distressed,  a  special  package  was  put  in  place  for  interest  waiver  and  rescheduling  of 
principal over a long period to minimise debt burden, together with provision of fresh loans to 
distressed  farmers.  Government  of  India  and  respective  State  Governments  share  the 
burden of write off. Some State Governments have, on their own, introduced farmers’ debt 
relief programmes.  
Government of India has introduced a comprehensive recapitalisation and reform  package 
for the rural cooperative credit structure, both short term and long term, as this sector was 
plagued by overdues and accumulated losses resulting in choking of credit flow. The reform 
package has financial governance and regulatory components to ensure that the sector once 
strengthened is self-sustaining. The programme is currently under implementation. Measures 
are  also  being  taken  by  the  Government  to  revamp  crop  insurance  and  also  introduce 
weather insurance.  
Reserve Bank has modified the prudential accounting norms for classification of asset quality 
with respect to agricultural loans, keeping in mind the seasonality of crops and cash flows. 
Standing  instructions  are  in  place  for  rescheduling  loans  in  areas  affected  by  natural 
calamities and disasters. In order to enable small farmers with loans up to Rs.25000 to re-
enter  the  credit  system,  banks  have  been  advised  to  introduce  a  simplified  one-time 
6 
 BIS Review 23/2008
settlement scheme for such loans. In order to help distressed farmers who have defaulted on 
loans  due  to  natural  calamities,  or  for  reasons  beyond  their  control,  banks  have  been 
permitted to offer one time settlement under a Board approved policy. Both in rural and urban 
areas,  the  poorer  sections  of  the  society  commonly  avail  of  loans  against  gold  and  silver 
ornaments. These loans entail relatively low risk as they are extended with adequate margins 
and the collateral (gold or silver) is easily marketable, particularly where the size of the loan 
is small. Therefore, the risk weight on such loans up to Rs.100000 has been reduced to 50 
per cent from the level of 125 per cent for all categories of banks.  
Similar  measures  have  been  taken  to  step  up  credit  to  the  micro,  small  and  medium 
enterprises (MSME) sector. The Government  operates a credit guarantee scheme through 
SIDBI for providing credit guarantee to banks for their loans to MSME so that they can give 
such loans based on the viability of the project and not insist on collateral. The guarantee 
premium has been reduced and coverage increased for smaller loans and backward areas. 
Credit  rating  by  SIDBI  at  concessional  rates  and  the  putting  in  place  of  a  comprehensive 
credit  information  system  for  this  sector  will  go  a  long  way  in  better  credit  allocation  and 
pricing. Reserve Bank has issued detailed guidelines for debt restructuring for this sector. In 
view of the importance of creation of employment opportunities in rural areas, especially with 
a focus on women and weaker sections of the society, Reserve Bank’s guidelines stipulate 
that  60  per  cent  of  total  advances  to  the  small  enterprises  sector  should  go  to  micro 
enterprises.  
In 2002, there were more than 2000 small urban cooperative banks in the country providing 
banking  services  to  local  communities.  Many  of  these  banks  were  weak  and  public 
confidence in the system had got eroded. Over the recent period, recognising the important 
role that these banks can play in financial inclusion, a regulatory and supervisory framework 
has been put in place to weed out the non viable banks in a non disruptive manner through a 
consultative  process  with  the  registrar  of  cooperative  societies  and  sector  representatives. 
This strategy has paid huge dividends and confidence has slowly come back to the sector.  
Over the years, concentration of bank branches in metropolitan areas became a concern. To 
mitigate this problem, since 2006, the Reserve Bank approves opening of new branches for 
any bank only on the condition that at least half of such new branches are opened in under-
banked areas as notified by it. Banks too have found that the branches in semi-urban and 
rural areas are commercially viable.  
In  January  2006,  the  Reserve  Bank  permitted  banks  to  utilise  the  services  of  non-
governmental organisations (NGOs/SHGs), micro-finance institutions and other civil society 
organisations as intermediaries in providing financial and banking services through the use of 
business  facilitator  (BF)  and  business  correspondent  (BC)  models.  The  BC  model  allows 
banks to do “cash in-cash out” transactions at a location much closer to the rural population, 
thus addressing the last mile problem. Banks are also entering into agreements with Indian 
Postal  Authorities 
the  enormous  network  of  post  offices  as  business 
correspondents  for  increasing  their  outreach  and  leveraging  the  postman’s  intimate 
knowledge of the local population and trust reposed in him.  
The  Reserve  Bank  of  India  has  been  encouraging  the  use  of  Information  Communication 
Technology  (ICT)  solutions  by  banks  for  enhancing  their  outreach  with  the  help  of  their 
Business  Correspondents.  The  BCs  carry  hand  held  devices,  which  are  essentially  smart 
card readers. The information captured is transmitted to a central server where the accounts 
are  maintained.  These  devices  are  used  for  making  payments  to  rural  customers  and 
receiving  cash  from  them  at  their  doorsteps.  Mobile  phones  have  also  been  developed  to 
serve  as  card  readers.  Account  holders  are  issued  smart  cards,  which  have  their 
photographs and finger impressions. Pilot studies have clearly shown that the technology is 
practical and robust, besides being affordable. Scaling up is, at present, the challenge, and 
some States like Andhra Pradesh are keen that all Government payments should be routed 
for  using 
BIS Review 23/2008 
 7
through these accounts to ensure transparency and efficiency in such payments, apart from 
providing a huge opportunity for ensuring financial inclusion.  
In  the  Union  Budget  2007-08,  the  Government  announced  the  creation  of  two  funds  – 
Financial  Inclusion  Fund  and  Financial  Inclusion  Technology  Development  Fund  –  for 
meeting  the  costs  of  development,  and  promotional  and  technology  interventions  as 
recommended by the Rangarajan Committee.10
Recognising  that  lack  of  awareness  is  a  major  factor  for  financial  exclusion,  the  Reserve 
Bank is taking a number of measures for increasing financial literacy and credit counselling. 
A  multilingual  website  in  13  Indian  languages  on  all  matters  concerning  banking  and  the 
common  person  has  been  launched  by  the  Reserve  Bank  on  June  18,  2007.  Comic  type 
books introducing banking to school children have already been put on the website. Financial 
literacy  programmes  are  being  launched  in  each  State  with  the  active  involvement  of  the 
State government and the SLBC. 
Credit counselling services in addition to financial literacy and financial education are being 
perceived as important tools to enable people to overcome the problem of indebtedness and 
seek  re-access  to  banking  system.  Each  SLBC  convenor  has  been  asked  to  set  up  a 
financial literacy-cum-credit counselling centre in one district as a pilot, and extend it to all 
other districts in due course.  
Easy availability of up to date credit records would go a long way in helping small borrowers 
to  access  credit  and  get  better  pricing.  As  a  step  in  this  direction,  the  Credit  information 
Companies Act has been enacted. Comprehensive records take time to get established and 
it  is  hoped  that  this  activity  will  gain  momentum  once  the  rules  are  notified  and  such 
companies are licensed. 
In the context of the finding that the share of moneylenders in total dues of rural households 
had  increased,  the  Reserve  Bank  constituted,  in  2006,  a  Technical  Group  consisting  of 
senior Reserve Bank Officers and Secretaries from select State Governments to review the 
efficacy  of  the  existing  legislative  framework  which  governs  money  lending,  as  also  the 
enforcement machinery in different States. A model draft of legislation on money lending has 
been prepared by the Group for consideration and adoption by the State Governments for 
improving  the  legal  and  enforcement  framework  for  protecting  the  interest  of  rural 
households.  The  model  legislation  provides  for  a  hassle  free  procedure  for  compulsory 
registration  with  State  Governments.  The  Group  has  also  proposed  establishing  a  link 
between the formal and informal credit providers, to be called “Accredited Loan Providers" for 
use  as  an  additional  credit  delivery  channel.  The  report  has  been  sent  to  the  State 
governments for their consideration.  
Some learning points 
VI.  
First  –  Is  providing  affordable  financial  services  to  the  excluded  regions  and  sections  of 
society a risk to the bottom lines of banks? In other words, does the public policy objective of 
financial  inclusion  conflict  with  commercial  objectives?  Banks  are  special  and  the  banking 
licence,  which  enables  banks  to  be  highly  leveraged  institutions,  casts  responsibilities  on 
them to make available basic banking services to all. At the same time sustained growth of 
their  balance  sheets  would  imply  that  they  penetrate  remote  and  hitherto  un-reached 
segments of population requiring investments in technology and skills for scaling-up. In one 
sense, it seems to be a time horizon issue as, such investments – if made early enough and 
market share enhanced – can actually help the bottom line. This would then represent a win-
win situation for the financial system and society. At the same time in the effort to enhance 
                                                 
10   Rangarajan, C. (2008), Report of the Committee on Financial Inclusion (Final), January. 
8 
 BIS Review 23/2008
scale  and  profits,  there  could  be  a  risk  of  predatory  and  irresponsible  lending  as  the  sub 
prime crisis shows. The use of local community based organisations and social capital such 
as SHGs in low-income communities is a way of handling this challenge. It also points out to 
the fact that interest rates, while covering cost and risk should not be so high so as to add to 
the risk of default because of high burden. There is thus the need to ensure a fair balance 
between sustainability of operations through coverage of costs, and interest burden on the 
borrower. Irresponsible lending also highlights the issue of recovery practices, use of agents 
and the need to be sensitive to the needs of the poor, as in majority of cases there is no 
intent to default. In this context, the need for affordable health, accident and life insurance as 
part of a slew of products for financial inclusion, in addition to financial education and credit 
counselling, cannot be overstated.  
This  brings  me  to  the  second  lesson  viz.  the  issue  of  subsidised  credit;  in  this  context,  I 
would like to quote from a recent speech by Governor Dr. Y.V.Reddy11: 
"Interest  rates  have  been  deregulated  to  a  significant  degree  not  only  to  aid  movement  of 
monetary  policy  to  the  use  of  more  effective  indirect  instruments,  but  also  because 
administered  interest  rate  regime  proved  to  be  inefficient  and  costly,  without  necessarily 
ensuring flow of credit to the needy. The RBI’s recommended approach, however, does not 
preclude subsidisation by the Government but it disfavours excessive use of banking system 
to  cross  subsidise,  especially  if  it were  to  favour  non-poor.  RBI  favours  a  financial  system 
that provides incentives to encourage flow of credit at justifiable terms and conditions and for 
purposes that ensure servicing of interest and principal, i.e., bankability of schemes. There 
has been broad agreement between the Government and the RBI on the above approach, 
and accordingly, subsidies on interest rates through the banking system to small farmers and 
small exporters are currently provided for a limited period. There are several Government-
sponsored programmes intended for the vulnerable sections and these are small-sized loans 
for  which  Government  provides  subsidy,  particularly  for  employment  generation.  Thus,  the 
financial sector, in particular the banking system, is utilised as a conduit by the Government’s 
fiscal policy, to subsidise select activities or vulnerable sections, and RBI plays a supporting 
role  in  enabling  such  measures  while  emphasising  the  longer  term  goals  of  a  conducive 
credit  culture.  The  overall  objective  remains  growth  with  stability,  but  with  elements  of 
selective fiscal support for ensuring inclusive and equitable growth. Currently, the aggregate 
annual  fiscal  burden  of  subsidisation  on  account  of  the  above  measures,  through  the 
financial sector, is estimated to be about a quarter per cent of GDP." 
The  third  important  lesson  from  the  Indian  experience  is  the  value  of  having  multiple 
channels of credit, given the scale and diversity of the country. Thus, direct lending by banks, 
use  of  SHGs  and  MFIs  for  indirect  lending,  use  of  post  offices,  local  organisations  and 
cooperatives as agents, focus on RRBs, the revamp of the cooperative credit structure, both 
urban  and  rural,  NBFCs  purveying  micro-finance  and  even  the  possible  use  of  accredited 
loan providers under money lending legislation – all these reflect this approach.  
Fourth, inclusive growth needs financial institutions to be strong and efficient. The experience 
with  cooperative  banks  under  dual  regulation,  and  deposit  taking  NBFCs  with  poor 
governance,  points  out  the  challenges  in  ensuring  effective  regulation  and  supervision  of 
entities  allowed  to  access  public  deposits.  While  aligning  regulation  with  international  best 
practices,  a  more  relaxed  approach  is  adopted  in  India  for  smaller  units  such  as  regional 
rural  banks  and  small  urban  cooperative  banks  operating  within  a  district,  without 
compromising on solvency and liquidity principles.  
Fifth,  the  outcomes  of  various  programmes  and  policy  measures  get  greatly  enhanced  if 
there 
the  government  machinery 
is  good  understanding  and  coordination  between 
                                                 
11   Dr.  Reddy,  Y.V  (2007),  Speech  on  'Financial  Sector  Policies  for  growth  and  employment'  delivered  at  Bali, 
Indonesia on November 8, 2007. 
BIS Review 23/2008 
 9
responsible  for  development  and  the  banks  operating  in  the  area.  While  the  Government 
functionaries have to appreciate that banks have a responsibility to their depositors as much 
as  to  their  borrowers,  if  not  more,  it  is  equally  important  for  banks  to  strengthen  their 
functioning at the local level for meeting developmental objectives of the Government. The 
various  fora  under  the  Lead  Bank  Scheme  have  been  very  useful  in  sorting  out  mutual 
coordination issues. RBI plays a catalytic, as well as a coordinating role, in these initiatives 
for  enhancing  co-operation  between  the  States  and  the  banking  system.  Where  the  State 
Governments play a pro-active role in updating and computerising land records, routing of 
government  payments  through  the  bank  accounts,  supporting  IT  based  solutions  for 
maintaining and operating bank accounts, and providing extension services to farmers and 
small businesses, the results, indeed, can be dramatic.  
Sixth, in agriculture, minimising yield risk and price risk can bring down credit risk and lower 
the cost of providing credit. This is an area where banks have also taken initiative of setting 
up rural training centres for small enterprises, farmers clubs, knowledge centres and credit 
counselling centres. NABARD and SIDBI, the two development financial institutions, are also 
engaged  in  providing  such  credit  plus  services.  Efforts  in  this  area  need  to  be  scaled  up 
further. 
Seventh, given the rapid urbanisation, the needs of urban poor have to get a separate focus. 
Significant investments will be required in housing, water and sanitation, lighting and power, 
waste management, education and health facilities, and other required infrastructure in urban 
areas – the banking system can play a very important role in this. A High Level Committee 
recently set up by RBI to review the Lead Bank Scheme is examining how focussed attention 
can be paid to the urban areas especially big cities for more inclusive banking.  
Finally,  other  elements  of  financial  services  like  insurance  and  affordable  remittances  are 
also  necessary  for  achieving  the  objective  of  inclusive  growth  –  These  are  areas  in  which 
much more needs to be done.  
To  conclude,  ensuring  that  the  financial  system  plays  its  due  role  in  promoting  inclusive 
growth  is  one  of  the  biggest  challenges  facing  the  emerging  economies,  especially  as  the 
banking  system  in  many  countries  is  in  private  hands.  However,  if  all  stakeholders  realise 
that  “inclusive  banking”  is  good  business,  then  regulatory  and  policy  frameworks  that 
promote accessibility, and responsible banking can definitely lead to the desired outcomes.  
Thank you. 
10 
 BIS Review 23/2008
