European Central Bank: Press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank 
and Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 
7 February 2008. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Vice-President  and  I  are  very  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  our 
press conference. Let me report on the outcome of our meeting, which was also attended by 
Commissioner Almunia.  
On the basis of our regular economic and monetary analyses, we decided at today’s meeting 
to leave the key ECB interest rates unchanged. This decision reflects our assessment that 
risks to price stability over the medium term are on the upside, in a context of very vigorous 
money and credit growth. The current short-term upward pressure on inflation must not spill 
over to the medium term. The firm anchoring of inflation expectations over the medium and 
long term is of the highest priority to the Governing Council, reflecting its mandate. Against 
this  background,  the  Governing  Council  remains  committed  to  preventing  second-round 
effects and the materialisation of upside risks to price stability over the medium term. As the 
reappraisal of risk in financial markets continues, there remains unusually high uncertainty 
about its overall impact on the real economy. While the economic fundamentals of the euro 
area  are  sound,  incoming  data  have  confirmed  that  the  risks  surrounding  the  outlook  for 
economic  activity  lie  on  the  downside.  We  will  continue  to  monitor  very  closely  all 
developments over the coming weeks. 
Allow me to explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis.  
The  latest  information  on  economic  activity  around  the  turn  of  the  year  points  to  a  more 
moderate pace of growth in the euro area than the quarter-on-quarter rate of 0.8% observed 
in  the  third  quarter  of  2007.  This  assessment  is  in  line  with  indicators  for  business  and 
consumer confidence which, while having declined over the past few months, overall remain 
consistent with ongoing growth.  
Looking  ahead,  while  the  slowdown  in  the  economies  of  some  of  the  euro  area’s  major 
trading  partners  is  likely  to  have  an  impact  on  euro  area  real  GDP  growth  in  2008,  both 
domestic and foreign demand are expected to support ongoing growth. This assessment is 
broadly  in  line  with  available  forecasts  from  private  and  public-sector  sources.  The 
fundamentals  of  the  euro  area  economy  remain  sound.  The  euro  area  economy  does  not 
have  major  imbalances  .  Profitability  has  been  sustained  and  unemployment  rates  have 
fallen to levels not seen for 25 years. As a result of the improved economic conditions and 
wage  moderation,  the  number  of  people  employed  and  labour  force  participation  have 
increased  significantly.  Consumption  growth  should  therefore  continue  to  contribute  to 
economic  expansion,  in  line  with  real  disposable  income,  and  investment  growth  should 
provide ongoing support.  
That  said,  uncertainty  about  the  prospects  for  economic  growth  is  unusually  high  and  the 
risks  surrounding  the  outlook  for  economic  activity  have  been  confirmed  to  lie  on  the 
downside.  Risks  relate  mainly  to  a  potentially  broader  than  currently  expected  impact  of 
financial  market  developments  on  financing  conditions  and  economic  sentiment,  with 
negative effects on world and euro area growth. Further downside risks stem from the scope 
for additional oil and other commodity price rises, concerns about protectionist pressures and 
the possibility of disorderly developments due to global imbalances.  
With regard to price developments, according to Eurostat’s flash estimate the annual HICP 
inflation  rate  was  3.2%  in  January  2008,  compared  with  3.1%  in  December  2007.  This 
confirms  the  continued  strong  upward  pressure  on  inflation  in  the  short  term,  stemming 
BIS Review 15/2008 
 1
mainly from strong increases in commodity prices, in particular oil and food prices, in recent 
months.  
Looking ahead, the annual HICP inflation rate will most likely remain significantly above 2% 
in  the  coming  months  and  moderate  only  gradually  in  the  further  course  of  2008.  This 
confirms  our  expectation  of  a  protracted  period  of  temporarily  high  rates  of  inflation. 
Moreover,  it  is  important  to  stress  that  the  moderation  in  the  rate  of  inflation  which  is 
embedded in the December 2007 Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections is based on 
the assumption that the recent rises in commodity prices will be partly reversed, in line with 
futures  prices.  More  fundamentally,  the  projections  assume  that  recent  oil  and  food  price 
dynamics and their impact on HICP inflation do not have broadly-based second-round effects 
on wage and price-setting behaviour.  
Risks to this medium-term outlook for price developments are confirmed to lie on the upside. 
These  risks  include  the  possibility  that  stronger  than  currently  expected  wage  growth  may 
emerge,  taking  into  account  high  capacity  utilisation  and  tight  labour  market  conditions. 
Furthermore,  the  pricing  power  of  firms,  notably  in  market  segments  with  low  competition, 
could  be  stronger  than  expected.  At  this  juncture,  it  is  therefore  imperative  that  all  parties 
concerned  meet  their  responsibilities  and  that  second-round  effects  on  wage  and  price-
setting  stemming  from  current  inflation  rates  be  avoided.  In  the  view  of  the  Governing 
Council, this is of key importance in order to preserve price stability in the medium run and 
thereby the purchasing power of all euro area citizens. The Governing Council is monitoring 
wage negotiations in the euro area with particular attention. Indexation of nominal wages to 
the  consumer  price  index  should  be  avoided.  Finally,  further  rises  in  oil  and  agricultural 
prices, continuing the strong upward trend observed in recent months, as well as increases 
in administered prices and indirect taxes beyond those foreseen thus far pose upside risks to 
the inflation outlook.  
The monetary analysis confirms the prevailing upside risks to price stability at medium to 
longer-term  horizons.  Annual  M3  growth,  although  declining  somewhat  in  December, 
remained very vigorous at 11.5%, whereas M1 growth continues to moderate, reflecting the 
dampening  impact  of  higher  interest  rates.  Broad  money  dynamics  in  recent  quarters  are 
likely to have been influenced by a number of temporary factors, notably the flattening of the 
yield  curve,  which  may  have  supported  some  substitution  into  monetary  assets.  Overall, 
taking  these  special  factors  into  account,  a  broad-based  assessment  of  the  latest  data 
confirms that the underlying rate of monetary expansion remains strong. 
This  conclusion  is  supported  by  the  sustained  expansion  of  loans  to  the  domestic  private 
sector,  which  grew  at  an  annual  rate  of  11.1%  in  December.  Although  the  growth  of 
household borrowing has moderated further over the past few quarters, reflecting the impact 
of  higher  key  ECB  interest  rates  since  December  2005  and  cooling  housing  markets  in 
several  parts  of  the  euro  area,  the  growth  of  loans  to  non-financial  corporations  has 
remained  very  robust.  Bank  borrowing  by  euro  area  non-financial  corporations  was  14.4% 
higher at the end of December 2007 than a year earlier. 
For  the  time  being,  there  is  little  evidence  that  the  financial  market  turbulence  since  early 
August 2007 has strongly influenced the dynamics of broad money and credit aggregates. In 
particular, according to the available data, increased financial market volatility has not led to 
substantial portfolio shifts into monetary assets, as was the case between 2001 and 2003. 
Notwithstanding the tightening of credit standards reported in the bank lending survey for the 
euro area, continued strong loan growth suggests that the supply of bank credit in the euro 
area has not been significantly impaired by the financial turmoil thus far. Further data and 
analysis  will  be  required  in  order  to  obtain  a  more  complete  picture  of  the  impact  of  the 
financial  market  developments  on  banks’  balance  sheets,  financing  conditions  and  money 
and credit growth. 
To  sum  up,  a  cross-check  of  the  outcome  of  the  economic  analysis  with  that  of  the 
monetary analysis confirms the assessment that there are upside risks to price stability over 
2 
 BIS Review 15/2008
the  medium  term,  in  a  context  of  very  vigorous  money  and  credit  growth  and  sound 
economic  fundamentals  in  the  euro  area.  The  impact  of  the  ongoing  reappraisal  of  risk  in 
financial  markets  on  the  real  economy  is  still  surrounded  by  unusually  high  uncertainty. 
Incoming data have confirmed that the risks surrounding the outlook for economic activity lie 
on the downside. Accordingly, we will monitor very closely all developments. The Governing 
Council  remains  committed  to  preventing  second-round  effects  and  the  materialisation  of 
upside risks to price stability over the medium term. It is paramount that medium and long-
term  inflation  expectations  remain  firmly  anchored  in  line  with  price  stability.  Reflecting  its 
mandate, such anchoring is of the highest priority to the Governing Council.  
With  respect  to  fiscal  policies,  a  discretionary  fiscal  loosening  in  EU  countries  should  be 
avoided. There is ample evidence that activist fiscal policies were not effective in stabilising 
European  economies  but  rather  led  to  sustained  increases  in  the  ratios  of  government 
expenditure and debt to GDP. Allowing the free operation of automatic stabilisers in countries 
with strong fiscal positions and safeguarding the long-term sustainability of public finances 
are the best contributions that fiscal policy can make to macroeconomic stability. Countries 
with fiscal imbalances are urged to make further progress with consolidation, in line with the 
requirements of the Stability and Growth Pact. There is a clear risk that some countries will 
fail to comply with the provisions of the preventive arm of the Pact, thereby undermining its 
credibility. 
Structural reforms help economies to adjust to adverse shocks, foster productivity growth 
and  increase  employment  and  competition,  thereby  also  helping  to  reduce  inflationary 
pressures.  In  particular,  enhancing  competition  in  the  services  sectors  and  network 
industries, as well as applying adequate measures in the EU agricultural market, would be 
conducive to price stability in the euro area. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
BIS Review 15/2008 
 3
