Mohamed S Fofana: Benefits of microfinance in Sierra Leone 
Speech  by  Mr  Mohamed  S  Fofana,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Sierra  Leone,  at  the 
Official Opening Ceremony of the ProCredit Bank (SL) Limited, Freetown, 1 February 2008. 
 Madam Chairperson  
Ministers of Government  
Members of the Diplomatic Corps  
Members of the Board of Directors,  
Senior Management and Staff of the ProCredit Bank (SL) Limited  
Heads of Banks and other Financial Institutions  
Colleagues from the Fourth Estate  
Distinguished Ladies & Gentlemen:  
I am happy to be here this afternoon to address this distinguished audience on the official 
opening ceremony of the ProCredit Bank (SL) Limited. The Bank of Sierra Leone issued a 
licence to ProCredit Bank (SL) Limited to conduct banking business in Sierra Leone on 1st 
August, 2007, and the bank opened its doors on 3 August 2007.  
Its activities, since that time, have been largely focused on microfinance promotion; taking 
deposits  from  and  giving  credits  to  small  businesses.  This  is  an  important  mile-stone  in 
Sierra Leone’s poverty reduction drive, which is consistent with Government’s desire to make 
the microfinance sub sector of the financial industry viable and responsive to the needs of 
the vast majority of Sierra Leoneans.  
Madam  Chair,  Distinguished  Guests,  the  benefits  of  microfinance  are  numerous  and  well 
documented, especially as they relate to a country’s effort in reducing poverty. I cannot go 
through all such benefits this afternoon. I will however attempt to highlight a few.  
Credit  to  small  business  will  enhance  the  ability  of  poor  households  to  increase  incomes, 
build assets and reduce their vulnerability in times of economic stress. With better access to 
micro  credit  services  on  a  continuing  basis,  the  poor,  particularly  women,  become  more 
active partners and more importantly, pro-active partners, in the development process.  
Madam  Chair,  though  micro  credit  has  been  used  in  various  forms  in  the  recent  past  to 
address the needs of the most vulnerable in post-conflict Sierra Leone, the providers of the 
micro credit have had an uncoordinated framework with each implementing its own scheme. 
This  sometimes  created  an  unnecessary  duplication  and  waste  in  the  use  of  scarce 
resources.  
Thus, in October 2003, Sierra Leone adopted a national micro finance policy which provides 
the  fundamental  framework  and  direction  for  stakeholders  operating  in  the  microfinance 
industry.  
Recognizing the importance of micro finance in reducing poverty, and in anticipation of the 
growing demand for micro credit products, ProCredit Bank (SL) Limited decided to increase 
its outreach depth to a greater number of small businesses in and around Freetown. Only 
five months after the commencement of operations at its head office, the bank requested and 
was  given  permission  to  open  a  branch  in  Kissy  on  14th  December,  2007.  And  we  are 
delighted  to  note  that  another  branch  will  soon  be  opened  in  Lumley  –  the  West  end  of 
Freetown. The challenge after Lumley is for ProCredit to extend its activities in other areas of 
the country, which may be more deserving for their services.  
By  our  estimates  so  far,  ProCredit  has  already  made  some  mark  in  the  domestic  Banking 
Industry  and  is  poised  to  do  more.  As  at  end  January,  2008,  the  bank’s  credit  portfolio 
amounted to about Le8.0 billion; this was disbursed to 1,440 customers. Deposit base during 
the  same  period  stood  at  about  Le3.0  billion,  with  an  impressive  record  of  5,600  deposit 
BIS Review 33/2008 
 1
accounts.  What  is  important  here  is  that  many  of  these  customers  are  first-time  account 
holders  who  might  have  found  it  difficult  to  open  accounts  with  the  traditional  commercial 
banks.  Loan  recovery  has  also  recorded  a  formidable  and  impressive  rate.  We  therefore 
commend the management and staff for this ground-breaking performance.  
Microfinance  activities now  include  products  such  as  micro  credit,  micro  insurance,  mobile 
banking,  etc,  which  are  designed  to  increase  the  product  portfolio  and  provide  customers 
with  a  variety  of  products  that  are  easily  accessible.  We  believe  that  with  the  increased 
efforts  to  further  institutionalise  microfinance  activities  in  the  country,  we  will  soon  see  a 
wider variety of microfinance products for small scale producers.  
Madam Chair, I believe this is a befitting occasion to discuss what we, at the Bank of Sierra 
Leone,  are  doing  to  foster  an  efficient,  sound  and  stable  financial  sector,  including 
microfinance. The Bank of Sierra Leone, in collaboration with MITAF, is drafting guidelines 
for the regulation and supervision of deposit-taking Microfinance Institutions. Development in 
this area is far advanced. The Bank of Sierra Leone has also recognised the need to bring 
the  legal  framework  for  regulating  the  banking  sector  consistent  with  international  best 
practice.  Hence,  in  consultations  with  our  International  partners,  (ADB,  IMF,  World  Bank, 
etc),  the  Bank  of  Sierra  Leone  is  undertaking  a  comprehensive  review  of  the  Banking  Act 
2000, and the Anti-Money Laundering Act 2005 in order to align them with international best 
practices  and  to  address  some  of  the  weaknesses  which  have  been  identified  while 
implementing them. We anticipate that once these legislations have been amended, the legal 
framework will provide a conducive environment for a more robust banking sector.  
Going  forward,  the  Bank  of  Sierra  Leone  plans  to  draft  operating  guidelines  for  other 
specialised institutions,  including  Merchant  and Agricultural banks,  in  order  to  broaden  the 
financial landscape in the economy.  
Traditional  Commercial  banks,  on  the  other  hand,  should  endeavour  to  increase  product 
innovation  and  diversification.  The  real  challenge  for  all  of  us  is  how  to  enhance  savings 
mobilisation and effectively channel such savings to their most productive use.  
Madam Chair, Distinguished Guests, let me conclude my remarks with a serious appeal to 
the entire banking industry for the better packaging of banking products for our clients. This, I 
believe will enhance our service delivery, which in turn, will enable us offer more affordable 
banking services. Providing affordable banking services has the potential of drawing a larger 
number of Sierra Leoneans to the formal financial system, resulting in an expanded banking 
clientele.  This  also  has  the  potential  of  reducing  delivery  cost  for  the  banks;  hence  the 
potential to increase profit maximization for both banks and their clients.  
Finally, let me thank the Board of Directors and Management of ProCredit Bank for inviting 
me to this occasion. I wish you every success in your operations as you compete to make 
your presence felt in the industry. I would also like to covey appreciation from the Governor, 
who is unavoidable absent on this occasion.  
I thank you all for your attention.  
2 
 BIS Review 33/2008
