Thomas Jordan: Monetary policy in the financial markets crisis 
Summary of a speech by Mr Thomas Jordan, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss 
National Bank, at an event for banks and pension funds, Berne, 2 April 2008. 
The complete speech can be found in German on the Swiss National Bank’s website (www.snb.ch). 
 The origin of the turbulence on the international financial markets which has persisted since 
August 2007 is mainly to be found in the US housing market. On the one hand, a long period 
of low USD interest rates had boosted the demand for residential real estate in the US. On 
the other hand, the structure of the US mortgage market with the associated rapid increase 
in  mortgage  debtors  with  poor  credit  ratings,  and  the  subsequent  securitisation  of  their 
mortgages, had proved to be problematic. Between 2001 and 2006, residential real estate 
prices in the US doubled. At the end of 2006, there was a reversal in the price trend which 
triggered crises in both the real estate and mortgage markets.  
The substantial expansion in sub-prime and Alt-A mortgages, and a deterioration in the credit 
ratings of debtors within these segments, led to a rise in the level of overdue payments and 
defaults. As a result, even securities that gave the appearance of being gilt-edged, but were 
backed by US sub-prime mortgages, lost considerable ground. Since the banks themselves 
have massive investments in this market, they were obliged to make writedowns which, in 
some  cases,  were  hefty.  There  is  still  uncertainty  about  the  volume  of  additional  bank 
writedowns  that  will  be  needed,  so  that  the  situation  on  the  international  money  markets 
remains tense. 
In  this  crisis,  central  banks  have  reacted  fast  and  flexibly  in  order  to  secure  the  supply  of 
liquidity  to  banks  and  counter  distortions  on  the  money  market.  By  means  of  various 
measures,  the  Swiss  National  Bank  was  able  to  stabilise  the  three-month  Libor  within  the 
target  range,  thereby  keeping  fluctuations  in  the  relative  restrictiveness  of  monetary  policy 
low by comparison with other countries.  
However, it is not possible to solve the fundamental problems in the banking sector through 
the  flexible  deployment  of  an  expanded  range  of  monetary  policy  instruments;  neither  can 
they be resolved by means of coordinated actions on the part of central banks alone. The 
banks  themselves  must  make  a  substantial  contribution  to  solving  the  problems  which 
triggered  the  current  crisis.  In  this  respect,  the  most  urgent  matters  are  transparency  with 
regard  to  endangered  positions  and  their  valuation,  increasing  the  capital  base,  and 
improving risk management and control systems. 
BIS Review 37/2008 
 1
