Zeti Akhtar Aziz: The next wave for the financial system in Malaysia 
Keynote address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 
12th Malaysian Banking Summit organised by ASLI "Taking the Leap in Paradigm Shift of 
Banking – New Wave, New Ventures", Kuala Lumpur, 5 June 2008. 
 In  this  recent  decade  we  have  seen  a  period  of  profound  modernisation  of  the  Malaysian 
banking sector. Today, the banking sector has evolved from facilitating and supporting the 
economic growth process to becoming a significant source of growth. Innovation and product 
pioneering  has  proliferated  the  diversity  of  products  and  services  offered.  The  adoption  of 
best business practices, the use of new technologies, systematic cross selling and the new 
means  of  interface  with  consumers  have  become  more  pervasive.  The  banking  system  is 
also  significantly  stronger,  reinforced  by  strengthened  institutional  structures,  enhanced 
financial  safety  nets  and  developed  financial  markets,  that  includes  one  of  the  most 
developed  bond  markets  in  this  region.  Progressive  deregulation  and  liberalisation  have 
increased the flexibilities for banking institutions to capitalise on new business opportunities, 
both onshore and overseas. The strengthened incentives and more competitive environment 
have  also  prompted  continuous  performance  improvements.  Indeed,  these  developments 
have well positioned the banking sector to take the next leap forward. 
It is my pleasure to be here this morning to speak at this year's Malaysian Banking Summit 
which  has  focussed  on  the  theme,  the  next  wave  for  the  banking  system  in  Malaysia.  My 
remarks today will focus on three areas – firstly, the outlook for the Malaysian economy as 
developments  continue  to  unfold  in  the  domestic  and  international  economic  environment. 
Secondly, I will discuss some of the key lessons that may be drawn from the recent credit 
turmoil  and  their  implications  for  the  Malaysian  banking  system.  And  finally,  I  will  take  the 
opportunity to share with you some thoughts on our vision for the financial sector beyond our 
current financial sector masterplan and the thrust of our strategies going forward.  
The Malaysian economy enters this more challenging period following several consecutive 
years  of  solid  growth  that  averaged  6%.  The  economy  grew  by  6.3%  in  2007,  the  fastest 
pace in three years with the growth momentum being sustained in the first half of 2008. In 
the first quarter of this year, the economy expanded by 7.1%.  
This stronger growth was achieved despite the more difficult environment with slower global 
growth  and  increased  uncertainties  in  the  international  financial  markets.  The  successful 
transformation  of  the  Malaysian  economy  in  this  recent  decade  has  been  one  of  the 
important contributing factors. It has led to more diversified sources of growth resulting in a 
more  balanced  economy.  While  the  external  sector  remains  important,  domestic  demand 
now has a more significant role in driving the growth process. In addition, the services sector 
has become a more important source of growth. Moreover, the agriculture sector continues 
to expand as Malaysia benefits from the high commodities prices. These developments have 
continued  to  sustain  our  external  balance  with  the  current  account  of  the  balance  of 
payments likely to continue to record large surpluses.  
Going  forward,  in  the  next  12  to  18  months,  several  external  and  domestic  developments 
need  to  be  taken  into  account  in  the  assessment  of  our  economic  outlook.  First,  the 
slowdown experienced in a number of the major economies is likely to extend into 2009. This 
more prolonged period of slowdown is likely to have spill over effects on other economies 
including emerging economies. Global financial markets are also expected to remain volatile 
as the financial stress experienced by financial institutions in these economies continue to 
have an impact on credit conditions, the housing market and their overall economy. These 
developments have resulted in a number of institutions scaling back their global operations. 
The  disruptions  in  the  credit  markets  have  already  exerted  some  restraint  in  economic 
BIS Review 71/2008 
 1
activity. While the adjustments are still taking place, there remains uncertainty about the full 
magnitude  of  the  losses  and  its  consequent  impact  on  financial  stability  and  thus  on  their 
overall economy.  
Despite these developments, indications are that growth remains resilient here in the Asian 
region, benefiting from the strengthened domestic demand and the increased trade activity 
within  the  region  and  with  the  non-traditional  markets.  The  region  however,  still  remains 
highly integrated to the global economy and international financial system and therefore will 
have to manage the risk of moderation in global growth in the event that a more pronounced 
slowdown occurs in the major developed economies.  
This  risk  is  compounded  by  the  high  and  rising  energy  and  commodity  prices,  which  are 
impacting inflation in most countries today. Stronger demand for grains, the diversion of land 
used  for  food  crops  to  biofuel  crops,  the  higher  transportation  costs  and  adverse  weather 
conditions are some of the factors driving the rise in food prices. As a consequence, rising 
cost pressures on inflation in the global economy can be expected to persist. Should global 
growth however, continue to moderate in the second-half of 2008, this can be expected to 
slow  the  pace  of  increase  in  energy  and  food  prices,  which  in  turn,  will  moderate  the 
inflationary pressures that are currently being felt. 
Several  domestic  factors  have  sustained  the  growth  of  the  Malaysian  economy  indicating 
that external demand has thus far resulted in only a modest moderation in our overall growth 
as  the  underlying  strength  of  the  economy  has  been  able  to  sustain  the  resilience  of  the 
growth  process.  This  has  been  underpinned  by  the  strong  domestic  demand  which  has 
become  a  key  driver  of  growth.  The  strong  growth  that  has  been  achieved  so  far  is  on 
account of the robust expansion in private consumption and investment expenditure.  
Malaysia's economic structure has also become increasingly more diversified with increased 
contribution  to  growth  from  the  services,  agriculture  and  commodities  sectors  and  the 
resource-based  and  knowledge-driven  industries.  Malaysia  is  also  very  much  part  of  the 
regional integration that is taking place. Today, about 63% of our exports are to the countries 
in the Asian region. Efforts are also being put into forging stronger trade linkages with other 
non-traditional markets in West Asia and the Middle East and these efforts are now showing 
positive results. The trade links are also reinforced by increased investment flows within and 
between these regions. The inflow of foreign direct investment into Malaysia has remained 
steady while Malaysia's investments abroad, in particular, to this region are increasing. 
Finally, an important factor supporting the resilience of the economy in this more challenging 
time  is  the  sound  macroeconomic  fundamentals,  the  high  international  reserves  and  the 
capacity for policy stimulus to be undertaken to manage the risks to growth. The economy is 
also  supported  by  the  favourable  financing  conditions  and  strengthened  banking  system. 
Ample liquidity amidst a relatively low interest rate environment and declining non-performing 
loans have sustained private sector access to financing.  
The  urgent  issue  that  may  be  raised  today  is  to  what  extent  will  the  price  adjustments 
announced yesterday have an impact on the economy. Related to this is the extent to which 
inflation will increase and whether this would in turn affect the country's competitiveness. Key 
to dealing with these risks is the flexibility of the Malaysian economy. Malaysia has a proven 
track  record  over  several  decades  in  successfully  dealing  with  difficult  periods  in  our 
economic history. Each time, the flexibility of the economy, the agility of the private sector to 
adjust  and  reinforcement  by  the  policy  response,  has  allowed  the  economy  to  emerge 
stronger.  This  was  demonstrated  during  the  Asian  crisis.  Within  a  period  of  one  year,  our 
economy was able to resume growth, expanding by 6.1% in 1999 and by 8.9% in 2000.  
The current conditions are by no means of such threatening proportions. If managed well by 
all  parts  of  the  economy,  the  economy  will  in  fact  emerge  more  competitive  and  stronger. 
This will require concerted efforts by the private and public sectors to become more efficient 
and  thus  reduce  costs.  This  will  also  require  shifting  resources  to  new  areas  of  activities 
where Malaysia has the competitive advantage. With the aptitude for hard work and prudent 
2 
 BIS Review 71/2008
practices, and the ability for reinvention, this can be realised. To a great extent this has been 
achieved  in  the  financial  sector  which  has  now  emerged  as  an  economic  sector  that 
generates income and employment and accounts for 11% of the economy, from only 4.5% in 
1990.  
The  current  increasing  inflationary  pressures  is  a  global  phenomenon,  the  result  of  rising 
international  prices  of  energy  and  commodities  prices.  In  Malaysia,  domestic  inflation  has 
increased from less than 1% in April 2004 to 3% in April 2008, primarily reflecting higher food 
and energy prices. The Bank's preliminary assessment of the impact of the rationalisation of 
the domestic fuel and energy prices on inflation in 2008, is that it will rise to an average of 
4.2%  for  the  year.  The  initial  price  impact  would  be  felt  in  June  during  which  inflation  is 
expected to be in the region of 5%. The increases in prices are expected to peak in the first 
quarter of 2009 before moderating to less than 3% in the fourth quarter. 
As international prices of commodities are expected to continue to remain high and as direct 
influence over these prices is limited, efforts will have to be focussed on increasing efficiency 
and  productivity  to  reduce  cost  and  to  shift  resources  to  areas  of  comparative  advantage. 
From  the  perspective  of  monetary  policy,  the  concern  would  be  on  the  potential  second-
round  impact  of  these  price  increases,  the  extent  to  which  they  lead  to  more  generalised 
price increases and whether they pose a serious risk to inflationary expectations.  
It must be remembered that the current inflationary pressures is a global phenomenon, and 
that many of our trading partners and neighbours are having similar or higher inflation rates. 
Given  this  fact,  the  increase  in  inflation  is  unlikely  to  erode  Malaysia's  comparative 
advantages in global trade.  
The experience during current international financial turmoil have demonstrated fragilities in 
financial systems even among the developed economies. These events have brought to the 
forefront  key  issues  regarding  financial  intermediation,  financial  innovation  and  the 
corresponding  regulatory  and  surveillance  mechanisms  that  need  to  be  put  in  place  to 
provide the necessary oversight over such activities. Although our domestic financial system 
was not impacted by the sub-prime crisis, its underlying causes bear important lessons for 
Malaysia, and indeed, for other emerging economies, as the forces of globalisation continue 
to drive the modernisation of our financial systems.  
Firstly,  the  combination  of  a  misaligned  incentive  system,  a  favourable  macroeconomic 
environment  and  heightened  competition  generated  excessive  risk-taking  by  financial 
institutions. Under these circumstances which prevailed prior to the current crisis, financial 
innovation occurred at a pace that outstripped the capacity of the financial system to manage 
the  risks  associated  with  such  innovations.  Indeed,  one  of  the  fundamental  underlying 
weaknesses was the erosion of sound practices in the mortgage market segment, with banks 
compromising on sound underwriting standards and risk management practices in pursuit of 
short term gains and market share. While the banking institutions had increasingly employed 
sophisticated  financial  engineering  techniques  to  repackage  mortgages  into  complex 
structured  securities,  such  financial  innovation  was  not  supported  by  commensurate 
enhancements  to  governance  processes  and  the  risk  management  infrastructure  and 
practices.  This  resulted  in  a  significant  underestimation  of  the  risks  being  borne  by  the 
financial institutions and to an overestimation of the capital buffers in the financial system.  
Secondly, the events of the financial and credit market crisis have re-focused attention and 
debate  on  the  susceptibility  of  the  financial  system  to  market  failures.  Indeed,  the  crisis 
unraveled significant gaps in the extent and manner of public disclosures that were made by 
financial  institutions  regarding  their on-  and  off-balance  sheet  risk  exposures.  Investors  on 
the other hand, were over-reliant on credit ratings which were based on methodologies which 
were not sufficiently robust, or lacked transparency about the rating parameters. As a result, 
the effects of market discipline did not occur as expected, while regulators which relied on 
market  discipline  to  take  effect,  did  not  act  pre-emptively  to  add  discipline  where  it  was 
needed.  
BIS Review 71/2008 
 3
Thirdly, developments in the regulatory, accounting and macro-surveillance frameworks had 
not anticipated, nor provided for, the complex inter-linkages of the modern financial system. 
The most significant evidence of this was when large scale downward valuations of assets 
due  to  accounting  rules  heightened  risk  aversion,  which  in  turn  further  constricted  market 
liquidity,  thereby  perpetuating  a  vicious  cycle.  Globally,  episodes  of  financial  crisis  have 
again demonstrated that market, credit and operational risks are closely inter-linked. 
These experiences have underscored the critical importance of good governance, sound risk 
management, rigorous supervision and a strengthened crisis management framework which 
is sufficiently robust to withstand extreme market conditions.  
The  Malaysian  banking  sector  on  the  whole  is  sound.  Domestic  banking  institutions,  in 
particular, have benefited from the broad-based reforms and capacity building measures that 
had  been  undertaken  following  the  Asian  financial  crisis.  Notably,  the  consolidation  of  the 
banking sector, the strengthened board and senior management oversight functions within 
banks,  and  the  more  risk-sensitive  capital  and  the  stress-testing  requirements  have 
contributed  towards  reinforcing  the  core  foundations  for  a  more  resilient  banking  system. 
Banking  institutions  have  also  made  significant  advances  in  the  adoption  of  improved  risk 
management infrastructure and practices.  
Today,  the  payoffs  from  these  efforts  are  evident.  The  banking  sector  has  maintained  a 
steady growth momentum since the Asian financial crisis, with profitability of the Malaysian 
banking  system  growing  by  36.7%  to  record  RM17.7  billion  in  2007.  The  exposure  of  the 
Malaysian banking sector to the sub-prime market has been minimal amounting to only 0.3% 
of the capital base of the banking sector.  
The Malaysian banking institutions are thus now on a stronger foundation to venture into new 
businesses,  undertake  more  complex  risks  and  withstand  shocks.  Their  enhanced 
capabilities are backed by stronger balance sheets, with the risk-weighted capital ratio of the 
banking sector at 13.2% and net non-performing loans ratio of 3.0%.  
On  the  regulatory  front,  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  continues  to  direct  significant  effort  and 
resources towards strengthening our surveillance capabilities to detect, monitor and to deal 
pre-emptively  with  emerging  risks  and  vulnerabilities  in  the  financial  system.  These  efforts 
have  also  been  reinforced  by  improvements  in  the  surveillance  tools  and  processes  to 
enable  pre-emptive  action  to  be  taken  to  avoid  disruptions  to  the  financial  system.  The 
supervisory  processes  have  also  been  enhanced  with  more  granular  and  holistic  risk 
assessments of the financial institutions.  
In  terms  of  the  regulatory  framework,  the  Bank  will  be  outlining  the  approach  for  the 
implementation of Pillar 2 of the Basel II Framework. The Bank is providing further guidance 
in the areas of liquidity and operational risk management, the maintenance of internal capital 
targets, market disclosures, and the valuation processes and controls – particularly for illiquid 
instruments. The guidance will also be issued to address the implementation of the internal 
capital  adequacy  assessment  process  within  the  institutions  to  complement  the  minimum 
regulatory  standards  under  Pillar  1  and  will  also  stipulate  the  minimum  requirements  for 
banks that are adopting the Internal Ratings-Based Approach. Details of the proposed capital 
framework  for  securitization  will  also  be  released  during  the  year.  In  addition,  the  liquidity 
guidelines  will  be  revised  to  strengthen  the  requirements  in  the  management  of  foreign 
currency cash flow mismatches over different time horizons. 
Corporate  governance  will  remain  an  important  priority  of  the  regulatory  framework  in 
preserving  a  sound  financial  system.  The  progressive  adoption  of  more  principle-based 
regulations has placed greater reliance on the effective oversight by boards and the senior 
management  to  ensure  that  the  regulatory  flexibilities  accorded  to  financial  institutions  are 
exercised  in  a  judicious  manner.  A  revised  fit  and  proper  standard  for  directors,  senior 
management  and  controllers  of  financial  institutions  will  be  issued,  complemented  by  an 
improved  and  coordinated  strategy  for  the  education  of  directors  of  financial  institutions  to 
strengthen their oversight responsibilities in a more complex financial landscape. 
4 
 BIS Review 71/2008
The  recent  crisis  also  brought  to  light  the  critical  importance  of  coordinated  and  prompt 
response by regulators in dealing with crises, whether through market interventions or in the 
resolution of banking institutions that are experiencing difficulty. Coordinated actions by the 
Central  Banks  in  Europe  and  the  United  States  have  relieved  the  liquidity  tensions  in  the 
financial  markets.  However,  national  arrangements  for  dealing  with  problem  banking 
institutions are being severely tested.  
Decisive action is vital to ensure the continued intermediation process to stem the spread of 
the financial crisis within the financial system and to the real sector. Such early action will 
also reduce the cost of the crisis. For Malaysia the cost of the crisis ten years ago was less 
than  5%  of  GDP.  Danamodal  in  fact  recorded  a  pre-tax  profit  of  RM200  million  upon  full 
repayment from the recapitalised institutions.  
More  recently,  additional  initiatives  have  been  taken  to  strengthen  the  safety  net,  inter-
agency  coordination  arrangements  and  the  legal  framework  for  interventions.  Today,  we 
have  a  holistic  financial  safety  net  framework  in  Malaysia  which  includes  a  lender  of  last 
resort  framework  and  a  comprehensive  deposit  insurance  system.  The  regulatory  and 
supervisory  framework  is  also  supported  by  enhanced  intervention  framework  for  dealing 
with  banks  under  financial  stress.  The  enhanced  supervisory  intervention  powers  is  to  be 
embodied in the amendments to the various legislations administered by the Central Bank.  
The provision of liquidity support by Bank Negara Malaysia for financial institutions in distress 
is  a  key  component  of  the  safety  net.  In  light  of  recent  international  experiences  of  bank 
failures, the traditional intervention criterion of lending to “solvent but illiquid” banks has been 
put to the test as it becomes increasingly difficult to determine the necessity for intervention 
as  well  as  the  method  and  timing  of  such  measures.  The  extension  of  such  support  will 
therefore be based on a careful balance of various considerations, which include amongst 
others,  its  potential  systemic  implications,  the  cost  of  the  intervention,  the  cost  of  failures, 
avoiding disruptions in the functioning of markets and finally its potential social implications. 
In order to avoid long term moral hazard, the lender of last resort is based on the rigorous 
application  of  viability  tests  and  the  “first  loss  principle”,  where  losses  are  borne  by  the 
shareholders  of  the  financial  institutions.  The  operational  framework  also  needs  sufficient 
flexibility, in terms of policy instruments, acceptable collateral and range of counterparties, to 
deal with exceptional market conditions.  
Going forward, cooperation arrangements for dealing with crises will continue to be further 
enhanced. This includes further strengthening current cooperation arrangements among the 
various regulatory agencies in Malaysia, as well further advancing cross-border cooperation 
in  the  region.  Indeed,  significant  strides  have  already  been  taken  to  strengthen  the 
cooperative  framework  between  central  banks  and  supervisory  agencies  in  the  region  to 
promote  financial  stability  at  the  regional  level.  These  have  included  the  establishment  of 
various  regional  mechanisms  for  cooperation  and  coordination  in  surveillance,  information 
sharing and crisis management. These mechanisms will become increasingly important as 
regional integration continues to deepen and as more Malaysian financial institutions venture 
overseas. 
The  progress  that  has  been  achieved  in  the  financial  sector  has  surpassed  the  initial 
expectations outlined in the financial sector masterplan. The foundation of a vibrant, sound, 
stable and resilient financial sector accords the opportunity of advancing the sector to a new 
level where new opportunities with new formulas and strategies for success can be achieved. 
The  financial  sector  has  been  key  in  supporting  the  transformation  of  the  Malaysian 
economy, to increase its significance and to promote a more diversified economic structure. 
This  has  been  achieved  by  the  increased  financing  extended  via  the  banking  system  and 
capital market. In particular, outstanding loans and private debt securities expanded by an 
average of 7.8% for the period 2001-2007. Malaysia is also ranked third in terms of access to 
credit  amongst  175  countries  surveyed  by  the  World  Bank  in  the  Doing  Business  Report 
2007.  In  an  environment  of  rising  incomes  and  expanding  domestic  demand,  the  further 
BIS Review 71/2008 
 5
modernization  of  retail  banking  will  be  important  going  forward.  With  increasing  financial 
literacy and growing consumer sophistication, product pioneering and cross-selling, the trend 
towards electronic financial transactions will gain significance.  
Increasingly, loans to the corporate sector will become less dominant with an expanding and 
efficient functioning capital market. In particular, the bond market presents opportunities for 
increased  corporate  advisory  and  debt  and  equity  underwriting  business.  Private  debt 
securities  now  represent  45.5%  of  GDP.  An  increasing  trend  that  will  become  even  more 
important in the future are the SMEs. By 2010, it is expected that SMEs contribution to the 
economy  will  be  37%,  and  account  for  22%  of  exports.  Loans  approved  by  the  banking 
institutions  and  development  financial  institutions  to  SMEs  have  increased  by  34.3%  to 
RM63.2 billion in 2007. This trend is expected to accelerate in the future. Microfinancing is 
also  important  for  micro-enterprises  to  accord  to  greater  financial  services  and  hence 
contribute towards balanced growth.  
In the recent three years, the finance and insurance sector expanded by 8.3% per annum, 
outpacing the growth in real GDP of about 6%. The financial sector now accounts for 11.0% 
of  GDP,  with  about  140,000  people  employed  in  the  industry.  Reflecting  the  higher  skilled 
positions  in  the  industry,  the  average  salary  in  the  industry  is  2.4  times  the  country's  per 
capita  income  and  is  amongst  the  highest  in  the  economy.  The  financial  sector's  high 
demand for skilled talent thus require significant investment.  
As part of the strategic positioning of Malaysia to attain a developed economy status in 2020, 
the  financial  sector  moving  forward  also  has  an  important  role  as  a  catalyst  of  economic 
growth. Studies have shown that banks play an important role in promoting the creation of 
new industries as well as in generating spillover effects on other sectors of the economy. In 
developing the financial sector, it contributes substantially to the growth of the professional 
services  sector,  that  includes  the  network  of  supporting  services  encompassing  software 
development,  telecommunications,  shared  services,  and  legal  and  accounting  services. 
Often, the ability of the financial sector to play this catalyst role depends on the sector having 
sufficient critical mass. Such a financial sector is able to play an important role in mobilising 
talent  and  business  linkages  to  strengthen  research  and  development  efforts  and  spur 
innovation  in  other  economic  sectors.  Through  the  channeling  of  productivity,  the  financial 
sector can drive endogenous growth in other economic sectors. 
Let me turn to two areas where Malaysia has strong competitive advantage. The first is in 
Islamic finance and the second is shared services and outsourcing (SSO). Malaysia is at the 
forefront in the development of Islamic finance, housing the world's largest sukuk market with 
65.8%  of  the  global  outstanding  sukuk  as  at  end-March  2008.  Building  on  our  established 
foundation  in  Islamic  finance  in  terms  of  experience,  infrastructure  and  knowledge,  the 
promotion of Malaysia as an international Islamic financial hub is expected to catalyse growth 
in  other  economic  sectors.  Positive  effects  are  expected  to  spill  over  to  the  markets  and 
related industries such as the property market and health, education and business services 
sectors, spreading the sector's growth momentum to the economy. 
Similarly,  there  exists  potential  for  a  greater  mutually  reinforcing  relationship  between  the 
financial sector and the SSO industry in Malaysia. The financial sector's participation in the 
SSO sector is expected to provide the impetus for growth in the information communication 
technology  industry  as  more  technology-driven  hubs  are  established  in  Malaysia.  Indeed, 
Malaysia is ranked as the third most attractive outsourcing centre globally, already housing 
123 SSO centres which include leaders in the finance, technology and energy industries. 
The liberalisation plan moving forward aims to reinforce the role of the Malaysian financial 
sector in the next phase of development, capitalising on core comparative advantages whilst 
reaping  benefits  from  alliances  and  partnerships.  The  strategy  will  focus  on  the  strategic 
positioning  of  the  Malaysian  financial  sector,  with  differentiated  strategies  tailored  towards 
different  sub-sectors  and  markets.  Malaysia  will  pursue  more  aggressive  liberalisation 
strategies to maximise our potential in areas where there will be mutual benefits from such 
6 
 BIS Review 71/2008
greater liberalisation. An area that will be pursued is increased strategic alliances with foreign 
partners  and  greater  foreign  participation  in  our  financial  markets.  This  will  be  key  to 
enhancing our economic and financial interlinkages with other parts of the world.  
In particular, initial advancements to support the ongoing efforts on integration with the other 
South  East  Asian  nations  through  the  ASEAN  Economic  Community  (AEC)  will  facilitate 
broader  and  deeper  economic  cooperation  in  the  region.  It  is  evident  from  the  recent 
ventures  abroad  by  Malaysian  banking  institutions,  that  the  prospects  in  the  region  are 
recognised. There is tremendous potential for Malaysian banks to reap greater benefits from 
increased regional integration through diversification of income streams and the fast-growing 
prosperity  of  the  region.  Such  the  expansion  however,  needs  to  commensurate  with  the 
institutional  capacity.  On  reciprocal  grounds,  consideration  will  be  granted  towards 
enhancing  the  presence  of  ASEAN-origin  financial  institutions  in  Malaysia.  Indeed, 
liberalisation including greater market access may be granted to countries where there are 
also reciprocal potential for Malaysian financial institutions to promote greater economic and 
financial integration in the region.  
The operating landscape moving forward is going to be increasingly challenging. Competitive 
pressures and global developments will continue to shape the transformation process of the 
financial sector. While the growth prospects of the financial sector remain positive, with the 
financial  sector  having  emerged  stronger  and  more  effective,  it  also  has  the  prospects  of 
staying ahead of the curve, break new grounds in the development and quality of banking 
services and delivery channels. The ability to compete will drive performance and innovation 
within the financial sector, raising the potential to contribute to the economy to make the leap 
towards  realizing  Vision  2020.  There  is  a  high  degree  of  confidence  that  the  Malaysian 
financial sector will rise to the challenge.  
On that note, I wish you a productive and successful seminar.  
Thank you. 
BIS Review 71/2008 
 7
