Ardian Fullani: The banking system – promoter of economic 
development 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the regional meeting “The 
banking system – promoter of economic development”, Kukës, 12 September 2008. 
 Dear Governor, 
Dear Mayor of Kukës Municipality, 
Dear Mayor of Prizren Municipality, 
Dear Mr. Uldedaj, 
Dear Mr. Basha, 
Dear participants, 
I am delighted to be here today and there are many good reasons why I was looking forward 
to this gathering.  
For  the  second  time  within  a  relatively  short  period  of  time  I  see  this  gigantic  engineering 
work  growing  every  day  and  taking  its  final  shape.  Every  single  person  visiting  the  road 
segment  Rëshen  –  Kalimash  understands  that  what  they  have  in  front  of  them  is  an 
extraordinary engineering, civil, useful, far-sighted and patriotic work.  
Similarly,  my  return  to  Kukës  after  quite  a  long  time  has  surprised  me.  There  is  now  a 
completed airport, cross-border activity has intensified, the climate is extraordinary and soon 
this town will turn into a city with modern infrastructure. Numerous opportunities are ahead of 
you. Your cleverness stands in perceiving them and making use of them cleverly in order to 
enhance the opportunities of the Kukës community and the North-East region.  
The other reason for making me feel delighted is the presence of my Kosovar counterpart, 
Mr.  Hashim  Rexhepi.  This  meeting  is  of  special  significance.  The  Central  Bank  of  the 
Republic of Kosovo is now growing and consolidating day after day under the management 
of an Albanian professional unlike some time ago when the management of the central bank 
was the task of a foreign central banker.  
Meetings of this kind are now turning into a tradition. After holding similar meetings in Korça, 
Gjirokastra,  Shkodra  and  Saranda  we  are  now  being  introduced  with  a  new  reality  of  the 
North-East region, and I believe that the town of Kukës plays a key role in this area. Through 
these  regional  meetings  we  aim  to  be  in  touch  with  the  economic  and  financial  reality  of 
different regions in Albania. Given the weather, cultural, social, geographical, demographic, 
objective  and  subjective  characteristics,  each  region  has  different  economic  and  social 
development opportunities and levels. From this viewpoint, we aim to fully be acquainted with 
these  specific  characteristics,  identify  all  the  financial  and  natural  resources,  formulate 
“recipes” and other advice which would help in making more rational use of them.  
Beyond what I previously stated, I would like to clarify that the exploration of the potentials 
that  the  different  regions  have  to  offer  and  the  identification  of  their  level  of  use  is  also 
essential in terms of the banking system’s activity, in particular of the geographic expansion 
and financial intermediation.  
Another major reason motivating the Bank of Albania to organize these meetings relates with 
the establishment of a more effective communication channel between the Bank of Albania 
and  the  public.  We  believe  that  the  direct  contact  with  various  social  groups  in  different 
geographic regions (that is to each and every family), in addition to the traditional means of 
communication,  press  conferences,  monetary  policy  or  financial  stability  reports,  is  a  very 
efficient tool and frequently determinant.  
BIS Review 115/2008 
 1
I would like to dwell today on some matters of interest to the entire audience. First I would 
like  to  make  a  brief  outline  of  the  Bank  of  Albania’s  latest  analysis  of  the  economic  and 
financial situation in Albania: 
In brief, three are the main developments of greatest interest to the audience:  
With regard to the international developments, the economic and financial situation has been 
very complex in the last months. Inflation has turned into a point of concern in most foreign 
economies,  mainly  driven  by  the  high  prices  of  raw  materials,  oil  and  food.  In  addition, 
economic activity in developed economies has experienced sharp turns. Euro area economy 
is  at  present  in  front  of  many  questions,  while  the  US  and  some  Asian  economies  have 
shown slow rates of economic growth. Credit crisis has caused many reputable international 
institutions to experience large financial losses and its contamination process is still present. 
Recently,  the  two  US  mortgage  giants,  Freddie  Mac  and  Fannie  Mae,  which  were  on  the 
verge of collapse, were subject to an unprecedented and costly rescue plan designed by the 
US  Treasury  Department.  All  these  issues  have  triggered  uncertainties  in  the  markets, 
causing  the  future  forecasts  to  be  more  challenging  and  the  participants’  exasperation  to 
peak.  
I would consider the immunity shown by our economy in terms of price stability as the most 
outstanding development. Albania’s economic activity is progressing in line with our previous 
expectations.  A  few  days  ago,  INSTAT  published  the  inflation  figure  for  August  2008, 
according  to  which  annual  inflation  marked  2.5%.  Following  a  12-month  period  of  inflation 
rates standing at around 4-4.5%, in line with our forecasts, it is assessed that inflation will 
fluctuate in the next few months at around 3%, which is our quantitative objective.  
Worth to note, however, is that the risk for its upward deviation is still present and it mostly 
relates with the international developments mentioned above. The main risks stemming from 
the internal environment relate to any possible deterioration of the energy situation and the 
plausible  implications  with  the  fiscal  situation  in  the  future.  For  the  moment,  the  main  risk 
stems  from  the  lagged  effects  (otherwise  referred  to  as  second  round  effects)  of  certain 
developments such as the rise of wages beyond an acknowledged logical level. Any similar 
rise would generate new inflation, to later impose another rise in wages, which in turn would 
again and again trigger inflation. I do not think this is the right path. Wage-inflation spirals 
have been studied relatively early and they represent the least appropriate recipes to offset 
the inflation effects.  
I would like now to move to the latest performance of the banking system, with both its good 
sides and the risks associated with them. The Albanian banking system is going through a 
phase of swift development and promotion of new products. I believe you have noticed that 
many banks have been engaged in aggressive marketing strategies which promote different 
types  of  household  loans  and  terms  and  attractive  interest  rates  for  deposits  collection.  In 
addition, banks’ branches and agencies have constantly expanded. Only during the present 
year, 73 new branches and agencies have been opened and 15 others are in the process of 
being opened.  
The same characteristics more or less apply to the District of Kukës as well. Currently, six 
private  banks  perform  their  banking  business  in  Kukës,  while  two  other  banks  are  in  the 
process of commencing to operate. As of end June 2008, the banking system has extended 
a  total  of  about  1.2  billion  leks  of  new  credit  (around  15  million  USD)  of  which  66%  to 
households  and  the  rest  to  the  businesses  in  the  area.  It  is  nice  to  notice  that  this  figure 
accounts for about 66% of deposits collected in this region, providing evidence for a relatively 
high financial intermediation level.  
The rapid development of the banking system, the high competition in the banking market 
and  banks’  eagerness  to  win  their  market  shares  requires  greater  prudence.  The  Bank  of 
Albania  has  taken  a  number  of  measures  to  increase  prudence  in  view  of  attaining  the 
banking system stability. In its last meeting, the Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania 
took the following decisions:  
2 
 BIS Review 115/2008
   Some amendments to the regulation “On risk management in the activity of foreign 
banks’ branches”;  
Some amendments to the regulation “On capital adequacy ratio”;  
Some amendments to the regulation “On credit risk management”;  
Approval  of  the  regulation  “On  minimum  requirements  for  information  disclosure 
from banks and branches of foreign banks”;  
Approval of the regulation “On transparency of banking and financial products and 
services”.  
The entire package of regulations was launched in the open forum we had this spring with 
the banking system. This package aims to better discipline the banking system in terms of 
assessing  credit  risks,  setting  penalties  for  banks  when  non-performing  loans  increase, 
encouraging lending in lek and enhancing transparency with bank clients for each product 
and service.  
Dwelling further on the issue of financial stability, I would like to underline that the Bank of 
Albania  is  scrutinizing  cautiously  the  developments  in  the  external  sector  of  the  economy, 
which for the moment remain a concern in terms of long-term developments in economy. The 
stable  growth  of  imports  in  goods  and  services  and  the  current  deficit  deepening  require 
special  attention.  The  main  implications  relate  among  others  with  the  financial  stability  at 
home while they have their roots in the imposed correction of long-term imbalances within a 
very short period of time.  
Triggered by the increase of real estates prices, the steady appreciation of the lek, workers’ 
remittances and the rapid growth of credit and budget expenditure during the present year, 
the high current deficits have become a dominant phenomenon in the external sector of the 
economy. Their automatic and abrupt adjustment would prompt the correction of exchange 
rates to the rapid and strong depreciation of the lek, drop in private and public consumption 
and reduced economic activity which could generate crisis in the external sector and spread 
to  economy,  hence,  jeopardizing  the  financial  stability  at  home.  Availing  myself  of  this 
opportunity to address to the audience I would like to explore this issue further. Skipping the 
theoretical  arguments,  I  would  note  that  the  high  current  deficits  mainly  originate  from  the 
consumers’ behaviour. 
In plain words, what I am trying to say is that in a general economic level we consume more 
than we produce. This extra consumption, which is mainly financed by borrowing, is mainly 
driven by our expectations for higher income in the future. That is, in a household level, there 
is deficit, triggered by the insufficient income to cover household consumption.  
The international financial crisis and the negative consequences on the global economic and 
financial activity stem from household consumption beyond the sources (providing additional 
financing from banking loans) and the rise of real estates prices. This consumption approach 
was followed by the increase of current deficit and long-term liabilities for households.  
When these liabilities exceeded the long-term equilibrium level, the household sector could 
no longer pay off the accumulated debt.  
What were the consequences?  
An extreme and constrained adjustment of consumer behaviour and approach. Households 
could no longer pay their debts to banks and maintain the same level of consumption. These 
individual imbalances altogether appeared in a macro level, mainly in the form of abrupt fall 
of  demand,  slower  economic  activity  and  depreciation  of  the  exchange  rate  (US  dollar 
depreciation).  Naturally,  the  financial  system  could  not  escape  from  being  affected  by  this 
challenging contagion.  
BIS Review 115/2008 
 3
What I have stated above points out the necessity of making thorough analysis at a micro 
level in addition to the macro ones. That is, the recipes for attaining a stable macroeconomic 
situation should begin and be sustained by prudent analyses at a micro level.  
It is for this reason that I would like to dwell on and explore one of the indicators that affects 
the structure and modelling of household budget. I refer here to workers’ remittances which 
have played a key role in smoothing consumption and at a lower level, meeting investment 
needs, mainly for real estates and small household businesses. Remittances have somehow 
offset the low productivity and the negative effects triggered by unemployment. In addition, 
they  have  helped  to  preserve  financial  stability,  by  establishing  more  balanced  ratios 
between income and expenditure.  
Given the importance of workers’ remittances, one would rightly raise the following question: 
What is their perspective? How can they be managed more effectively?  
For a relatively long period of time, they have been vital to our country. According to a Bank 
of Albania survey on the first quarter of 2008, about 26% of Albanian households living in the 
territory of the Republic of Albania  are recipients of remittances from abroad. Households’ 
geographical distribution indicates that 59% of recipient families live in the rural areas while 
the  rest  in  the  urban  ones,  receiving  about  66%  and  34%  of  total  workers’  remittances, 
respectively. Remittances represent the most important component of rural families’ monthly 
income, accounting for about 40%.  
The largest part of workers’ remittances (about 70%) for the first quarter of 2008 was used 
for non-productive purposes. About 48% was used for consumption, which entails meeting 
households’  everyday  needs  for  food,  clothes,  furniture,  etc.,  16%  for  construction  and 
reconstruction and 10% for education and medical purposes.  
Around 19% of remittances are used for investment and savings, providing evidence for their 
economic impact on Albania.  
Despite these figures, their future prospective is yet unclear. The integration of Albanians into 
their host countries, their economic and financial situation and other similar reasons have a 
negative  impact  in  the  long  term.  Our  analyses  and  assessments  show  that  the  difficult 
economic  situation  the  developed  economies  have  been  experiencing,  expressed  in  the 
economic slowdown, unemployment growth and increase of inflation, has also provided its 
impact  on  the  performance  of  remittances  which  have  grown  less  this  year  relative  to  the 
previous years. Empirical studies of the Bank of Albania show that the cease of these flows 
would  put  our  consumption  model  and  the  long-term  balance  of  the  external  sector  of  the 
economy in the difficult position.  
Our concern related to the household budget stands in the fact that the behaviour model we 
adopt at a household level can also affect the behaviour model of given regions.  
The Albanian economy  has by and large made evident progress, detaching itself from the 
IDA country group. Macroeconomic indicators have for a relatively long period been positive 
and stable. However, beyond the nationwide average indicators, detailed statistics by regions 
indicate that welfare in mountain areas has progressed at slower rates relative to the other 
regions. According to World Bank assessments, an average resident in the mountain area 
has 12% less per capita real consumption than the average resident in Tirana, while in 2002 
this figure was 9%. According to the same source, the average rural coast resident has 34% 
higher per capita consumption than the average mountain rural resident. Generally, poverty 
has  a  strong  positive  relation  with  the  family  size  and  a  negative  relation  with  age  and 
education.  
In contrast, the District of Kukës has great potentials for more prosperity in this area. First, 
your district is distinguished for its rare natural beauty and diversity from the mountain and 
ethnographic  tourism  viewpoint.  The  opening  of  the  border  with  Kosovo  in  particular  has 
provided us with real opportunities to perceive the Northern Alps as a single complex with 
their continuity to Kosovo and why not to Montenegro. I think the completed airport, which 
4 
 BIS Review 115/2008
could  very  well  be  used  for  the  transportation  of  winter  sports  fanatics,  is  another  strong 
point. It is the local authorities’ task, to undertake in co-operation with the local stakeholders 
projects and feasibility studies, which in a later time may be submitted and presented to the 
central authorities or the specialized international operators. I would like to inform you that at 
the moment, their interest is overwhelming and concrete. Time is ripe for you to increase the 
marketing of these potentials and point out their strong advantages accurately.  
Second, your district is well-known for being rich in minerals. I do not know if you have any 
geological inventories or maps which accurately identify the mineral resources. If you don’t, 
this  is  too  late.  The  current  price  structure  is  very  favourable  and  I  believe  that  any 
reactivation of existing mines and the opening of new mines implies more employment, more 
hope for this region and fewer migratory movements.  
Third,  your  district,  in  particular  the  town  of  Kukës,  finds  itself  in  a  crucial  economic 
crossroad,  not  only  in  terms  of  roads  but  also  of  air.  Unfortunately,  statistical  information 
related  to  cross-border  economic  and  financial  activity  is  missing.  Nonetheless,  I  have  to 
admit that the potentials are not being rightly handled. We are the same people, speaking the 
same language and sharing the same customs, hence, there is no point for us to be held 
back by the absurd barriers of time. The completion of the new road and its stretch to the 
largest  harbour  in  the  country  create  the  proper  grounds  to  turn  the  Kukës  town  into  an 
extraordinary transit point for passengers, goods, services, art and culture.  
Fourth, your district should make clever and great use of the presence of a university in this 
town. My call is just plain: invest in mobilizing a professional and specialized teaching team. 
Spend  on  education,  on  knowledge  and  the  culture  it  produces.  In  this  context,  the  local 
government  could  set  financial  stimuli.  The  final  goal  will  be  to  establish  a  national 
educational centre, which serves to the local community living on both sides of the border. I 
honestly hope the future managers grow and be a product of this university.  
Fifth, I believe you should pay your utmost attention to the presentation and spreading out of 
information  on  the  potentials  your  district  has  to  offer.  Pretending  you  possess  something 
that is worth it is only one side of the coin. The other is how able you are to find buyers, to 
get them buy what you  want to sell. In this context, the complete identification, regulation, 
presentation  and  promotion  of  these  great  potentials  are  of  prime  priority.  For  analogy 
purposes, I would like to bring an example: It is now for two years that the Bank of Albania 
has  been  organizing  the  yearly  competition  “The  Governor’s  Award  for  the  best  diploma 
thesis”. Last year, the third prize went to a student of the University of Shkodra for a very 
original  thesis  which  introduced  the  potentials  and  opportunities  of  the  Puka  Region,  the 
development of mountain tourism and the positive macroeconomic impact it will bring to the 
region. This paper was assigned a prize for the originality of the topic chosen to be explored 
and the economic impact its presentation may have. The thesis did not only seek to present 
a profitable business opportunity, but also make an assessment of the positive impact this 
investment would have on the life of the community. The positive influence on the latter is 
crucial  for  important  strategic  investors.  We  awarded  this  paper  not  only  for  its  original 
exploration by a passionate student from Puka, but also to increase public awareness and 
promote  this  new  and  modern  mentality.  When  a  single  student  manages  to  produce  this 
much, a university, a local community and all of us together have great potentials to achieve 
even more. I brought with me today a copy of this thesis.  
Dear participants, 
I tried to briefly discuss some issues that I personally find vital and benefiting for you and the 
Bank  of  Albania.  Perhaps  my  speech  may  have  sounded  somehow  provoking;  however  I 
believe  this  is  the  right  time  for  us  to  put  a  halt  to  some  transition  phenomena  or 
impairments. Although I am aware of the numerous and complex problems, I can clearly see 
some light at the end of the tunnel. The chances are right there. Our duty is not to waste 
them.  On  behalf  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  I  assure  each  institution,  individual,  company, 
BIS Review 115/2008 
 5
undertaking or initiative that we are open to collaborate for the best of future progress and 
prosperity of this community.  
Thank you once again for your attention and hospitality. 
6 
 BIS Review 115/2008
