Donald L Kohn: Implications of globalization for the conduct of monetary 
policy 
Speech by Mr Donald L Kohn, Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve System, at the International Symposium on “Globalisation, Inflation and Monetary 
Policy”, organised by the Bank of France, Paris, 7 March 2008. 
 in 
this  general  approach 
to  policymaking  has  proven  effective 
Let  me  begin  by  saying  that  I  agree  with  the  thrust  of  John's  remarks.  He  is  right  that 
globalization  has  not  fundamentally  changed  the  way  central  banks  should  do  business. 
Although production chains and capital markets are more integrated across countries than 
before,  and  gross  trade  flows  now  account  for  a  larger  share  of  gross  domestic  product 
(GDP)  in  most  nations,  the  dynamics  of  aggregate  output  and  inflation  remain  at  least 
qualitatively  the  same.  Accordingly,  central  banks  should  continue  to  conduct  monetary 
policy  in  the  same  forward-looking  manner  as  they  have  for  the  past  twenty  years  or  so, 
adjusting policy rates in response to current and expected future movements in output and 
inflation,  taking  account  of  the  lags  in  monetary  policy.  When  exchange  rates  are  free  to 
adjust, 
fostering 
macroeconomic stability over time in many countries.1  
In  my  remarks,  I  will  expand  on  another  of  John's  points  –  namely,  that  monetary  policy 
making  has  been  complicated  by  globalization,  particularly  by  rising  trade  volumes  and 
increased capital market integration. That is true in several ways. For one thing, globalization 
has likely made the domestic economy more sensitive to foreign shocks, so central banks 
must now pay more attention to events around the globe. And, the integration of China and 
other countries into the world market economy has expanded the scale and complexity of the 
foreign  developments  that  central  banks  must  monitor.  Finally,  globalization  has  probably 
made  the  link  between  policy  actions  and  economic  outcomes  more  uncertain  by,  among 
other things, strengthening the role of the exchange rate in the monetary policy transmission 
mechanism. 
Recent increases in prices for oil and other commodities illustrate some of the complications 
that  globalization  creates  for  policymaking.  Those  price  increases  have  raised  inflation 
worldwide  while  accentuating  already  weakening  growth  prospects  in  some  countries  in 
recent months. Commodity prices depend on a wide range of demand and supply factors, 
and  sorting  out  their  various  contributions  can  be  difficult.  In  recent  years,  potential 
constraints on the expansion of supply, especially of petroleum, have played a role. But in 
addition, the emergence of China, India, and other industrializing Asian economies as major 
consumers of oil and other raw materials has complicated the analysis, partly because these 
countries exert such a strong influence on global markets and partly because the structure of 
their economies is changing so rapidly. 
Disentangling  the  various  global  forces  influencing  commodity  prices  can  be  useful  in 
assessing  the  implications  of  those  prices  for  domestic  output  and  inflation,  and  hence 
monetary  policy.  For  example,  it  matters  whether  a  rise  in  oil  prices  results  from  demand 
factors, such as stronger global real activity, or supply factors, such as a hurricane that shuts 
down production. For an oil-importing country, a demand-driven price increase would have 
less negative implications for domestic real activity than a supply-driven increase because an 
expanding world economy would help boost demand for the country's exports. For the United 
                                                 
1   David  Reifschneider  and  Steven  Kamin,  of  the  Board’s  staff,  contributed  to  these  remarks.  The  views 
expressed are my own and do not necessarily represent those of other members of the Board on the Federal 
Open Market Committee. 
BIS Review 28/2008 
 1
States,  however,  a  rise  in  oil  prices  driven  by  stronger  real  Chinese  activity  would  not 
necessarily lead U.S. export volumes to rise substantially, given the low propensity of China 
to import from the United States. 
Policymakers focus on the inflation outlook, and so we need to consider what global forces 
imply for the future when assessing the inflation consequences of rising commodity prices. 
Will prices for crude oil and other commodities continue to rise rapidly in the face of robust 
growth in China and other newly industrializing economies? Or do current prices on the spot 
and  futures  markets  already  fully  incorporate  the  likelihood  of  continued  growth  in  those 
economies, in which case prices would remain near their current level? In the first scenario, 
climbing energy prices, for example, would continue to boost headline inflation directly and 
would  indirectly  boost  non-energy  prices  through  higher  costs  of  production;  moreover,  a 
continuing  rise  in  oil  prices  might  potentially  threaten  the  stability  of  long-run  inflation 
expectations  and  nominal  wage  demands.  In  contrast,  a  flattening  out  of  oil  prices  would 
restrain  overall  inflation,  directly  by  stabilizing  a  key  component  of  energy  prices  and 
indirectly  by  ceasing  to  put  upward  pressure  on  inflation  through  pass-through  and 
expectational effects. 
Because  monetary  policy  has  a  limited  ability  to  counter  short-term  price  surprises,  the 
distinction between transitory and persistent influences on inflation from oil and other factors 
is critical. If we were to project a continued significant rise in energy prices over the medium 
run, we would need to factor that expectation into the outlook for overall inflation. Doing so 
could have important implications for the stance of monetary policy – all the more so if we 
expected  rising  energy  costs  to  lead  to  higher  inflation  expectations  and  elevated  wage 
gains.  
Still, a leveling out in oil prices seems the more likely scenario. Surprised as we have been 
by the rapid, extended run-up in energy costs over the past few years, one would think that 
the  price  of  a  storable  commodity  such  as  oil  should  already  embody  expectations  of 
continued rapid growth in the developing economies. However, the large run-up in spot and 
futures prices in recent weeks indicates that market participants are still revising their views 
of  long-term  demand-supply  conditions.  In  these  circumstances,  policymakers  must  be 
mindful of the uncertainties surrounding the outlook for commodity prices and the risk that 
past  or  future  increases  in  these  goods  could  yet  embed  themselves  in  higher  long-run 
inflation expectations and a persistently faster rate of overall price increases. 
Besides  these  complications,  globalization  has  made  the  workings  of  the  monetary  policy 
transmission mechanism more unpredictable. For one, the determination of asset prices is 
now more dependent on conditions in financial markets worldwide, making the link between 
domestic policy actions and movements in the prices of bonds or equities more uncertain. 
For example, the correlation of quarterly changes in the federal funds rate with the variation 
in U.S. Treasury yields has fallen from 0.6 before 1990 to 0.3 since then. To be sure, the 
falling  correlation  probably  reflects  a  variety  of  factors,  possibly  including  more  systematic 
and predictable monetary policies. But global financial markets also seem to have played a 
role; as Chairman Bernanke has pointed out, savings from abroad, especially Asia, appear to 
have held down intermediate and longer-term U.S. interest rates from 2004 to 2006 even as 
monetary policy was tightened. As we have seen in recent months, the increased integration 
of financial markets has also facilitated the transmission and amplification across borders of 
many  shocks,  such  as  changes  in  the  perceived  riskiness  of  certain  assets  and  the 
compensation required to hold them. 
The role of the exchange rate is another complication that has only grown with globalization. 
Of  course,  flexible  exchange  rates  make  it  possible  for  central  banks  to  achieve  their 
domestic economic objectives. But the exchange rate is a notoriously difficult asset price to 
predict, and its response to any particular policy action is highly uncertain, as we found, for 
example, in 2001, when aggressive rate cutting in the United States was accompanied by a 
strengthening in the dollar. Even with an apparent decline in the pass-through of exchange 
2 
 BIS Review 28/2008
rates  into  import  prices,  the  increase  in  trade  volumes  arising  from  globalization  has 
presumably boosted the relative importance of the exchange rate in the economy, thereby 
strengthening an unpredictable factor in the monetary policy transmission mechanism.  
Despite  the  increased  openness  of  the  domestic  economy  to  foreign  shocks  and  greater 
uncertainty  about  the  monetary  policy  transmission  mechanism,  economic  volatility  in  the 
United  States  and  other  advanced  economies  has  declined.  That  stability  may  be 
attributable, in part, to the increasing ability of global product and capital markets to buffer 
the domestic economy against internal shocks. Because of globalization, net exports likely 
absorb  a  greater  proportion  of  downshifts  in  domestic  spending,  foreign  competition  helps 
discipline  domestic  price  increases,  and  –  as  a  consequence  of  greater  cross-border 
holdings  of  assets  –  gains  and  losses  on  domestic  assets  are  realized  in  part  by  foreign 
investors.  Together  with  the  implementation  of  better  monetary  policies  in  many  countries, 
these particular aspects of globalization likely contributed to the "Great Moderation." 
John  addresses  the  question  of  whether  greater  economic  integration  has  increased  the 
gains  to  be  had  from  policy  cooperation  and  coordination.  We  have  seen  an  example 
recently  in  which  policy  cooperation  of  a  particular  type  seemed  to  pay  dividends.  In 
December,  simultaneous  and  in  some  cases  coordinated  actions  by  a  number  of  central 
banks  to  supply  liquidity  to  banks  apparently  helped  relieve  stresses  in  interbank  funding 
markets. Coordination and cooperation were called for because banks today operate in many 
markets  simultaneously,  and  pressures  in  one  market  can  readily  spill  over  to  others, 
especially when the normal channels for arbitrage have been disrupted by financial turmoil. 
The Federal Reserve and other central banks are examining the implications of this episode 
for their methods of supplying liquidity and for responding to future interruptions in the flow of 
liquidity across markets. 
Successful  coordination  in  the  provision  of  liquidity  raises  the  question  of  whether 
appreciable gains might be had from coordination of monetary policies more generally. John 
is skeptical, and so am I. Gains from formal policy coordination never seemed large, and it is 
not clear that globalization has increased them appreciably. Policies agreed to under one set 
of  circumstances  may  no  longer  be  appropriate  when  circumstances  change,  as  they 
inevitably will. Monetary policy should be able to adjust quickly to such changes; agreements 
that  must  be  renegotiated  can  tie  policymakers'  hands.  That  does  not  mean  that  no 
circumstances  exist  in  which  coordinated  monetary  policy  actions  would  be  beneficial,  but 
such  circumstances  are  probably  quite  rare.  Ultimately,  global  stability  depends  on  good 
performance  in  individual  countries,  and  the  record  of  recent  decades  suggests  that,  in 
general, good performance is most readily achieved when central banks focus on their own 
mandates for domestic price stability and growth.  
BIS Review 28/2008 
 3
