Randall S Kroszner: Federal Housing Administration Housing 
Stabilization and Homeownership Act 
Testimony of Mr Randall S Kroszner, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve  System,  before 
the  Committee  on  Financial  Services,  US  House  of 
Representatives, Washington DC, 9 April 2008.  
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website. 
 Chairman  Frank,  Ranking  Member  Bachus,  and  other  members  of  the  Committee,  I  am 
pleased to be here today to discuss efforts to address the current problems in the mortgage 
and housing markets. In my testimony this morning, I will briefly review the current situation 
in the housing market and ongoing efforts to help prevent avoidable foreclosures. Then I will 
expand  on  what  additional  steps  might  be  taken  by  homeowners,  lenders,  servicers, 
investors, and the Congress to address this important issue. I will also address the need to 
take the housing situation seriously and some aspects of the discussion draft of the Federal 
Housing  Administration  (FHA)  Housing  Stabilization  and  Homeownership  Retention  Act  of 
2008.  
The current situation 
The mortgage market has long been a source of strength in the U.S. economy, but it is facing 
very significant challenges today, especially in the subprime segment that serves consumers 
who  have  shorter  or  weaker  credit  records.  In  recent  years,  slowing  home  prices  and  a 
loosening  of  underwriting  standards  have  contributed  to  sharp  increases  in  delinquencies 
and foreclosures. As of January 2008, the most recent month for which data are available, 
about  24  percent  of  subprime  adjustable-rate  mortgages  (ARMs)  were  90  days  or  more 
delinquent,  twice  the  fraction  that  were  delinquent  by  this  definition  one  year  ago.  For 
mortgages  overall,  more  than  1.5  million  foreclosures  were  started  during  2007,  up  53 
percent  from  the  previous  year.  All  told,  the  consensus  expectation  is  that  the  number  of 
foreclosures in 2008 will likely exceed the number in 2007. 
Both  delinquency  and 
families  and 
communities  affected.  Recent  declines  in  house  prices  have  eroded  the  equity  that 
homeowners have in their homes, which has made it difficult or impossible for many of them 
to  refinance  their  mortgage  on  more  favorable  terms  compared  to  their  current  mortgage, 
even if interest rates have declined since they took out their loan. Tighter lending standards 
have also limited opportunities for these families to refinance. When struggling homeowners 
cannot  put  themselves  on  a  sustainable  financial  footing,  neighborhoods  also  suffer  – 
properties are not maintained and foreclosures, particularly when they are clustered together, 
put further downward pressure on house prices. This is bad news for investors, too, because 
as  property  values  decline,  the  substantial  costs  associated  with  foreclosure  rise  even 
further. Finally, falling home prices can have local and national consequences because of the 
erosion of both property tax revenue and the support for consumer spending that is provided 
by household wealth. 
traumatic  experiences 
foreclosure  are 
the 
for 
Ongoing efforts to help struggling borrowers 
Given the high cost of foreclosures to everyone involved – lenders, investors, borrowers and 
their  communities  alike  –  it  is  in  everyone's  interest  to  develop  prudent  loan  modification 
programs and provide for other assistance to help borrowers avoid preventable foreclosures. 
Indeed, policymakers and stakeholders have been working hard to find effective responses 
BIS Review 42/2008 
 1
to the increases in delinquencies and foreclosures. The steps that have been taken so far 
include  initiating  programs  designed  to  expand  refinancing  opportunities  and  efforts  to 
increase the pace of loan workouts.  
One example of positive steps being taken is the effort by NeighborWorks America and the 
Homeownership Preservation Foundation to offer financial counseling services through the 
Homeowner's  HOPE  Hotline.1  With  the  encouragement  and  leadership  of  the  Treasury 
Department,  the  national  Hope  Now  Alliance  –  a  broad-based  coalition  of  government-
sponsored  enterprises  (GSEs),  industry  trade  associations,  counseling  agencies,  and 
mortgage servicers – is working to find ways to help troubled borrowers, particularly those 
facing interest rate resets, through loan modification plans.2 Recent actions by the Federal 
Open  Market  Committee  to  lower  the  target  federal  funds  rate  and  resulting  decreases  in 
short-term interest rates also should help mitigate the problems associated with interest rate 
resets. 
Useful steps also are being taken by the FHA, which provides insurance on a variety of fixed- 
and variable-rate mortgage products that can be used by borrowers who want to refinance 
their home and who meet specified underwriting and other criteria. For example, the agency 
recently established the FHASecure plan to help borrowers who are delinquent because of 
an interest rate reset and who have some equity in their home. FHASecure provides such 
borrowers the opportunity to refinance into an FHA-insured mortgage. Separately, the FHA's 
loan limits recently were raised significantly by the Economic Stimulus Act of 2008, further 
expanding the potential reach of the FHA's mortgage insurance programs. We understand 
that  the  FHA  is  studying  additional  ways  that  the  agency's  insurance  programs  could  be 
expanded  or  modified,  consistent  with  existing  statutory  authorities,  to  better  help  troubled 
borrowers. 
The  Federal  Reserve  has  been  working  with  financial  institutions  and  community  groups 
around  the  country  to  address  the  challenges  posed  by  problem  loans.  For  example,  we 
have  been  providing  community  coalitions,  counseling  agencies,  fellow  regulators,  and 
others with detailed analyses that identify neighborhoods with especially high concentrations 
of foreclosures. Last week the Federal Reserve made available to the public a set of dynamic 
maps  and  data  that  illustrate  the  regional  variation  in  the  condition  of  securitized,  owner-
occupied  subprime  and  alt-A  mortgage  loans  across  the  United  States.3  Armed  with  this 
information,  community  organizations  and  leaders  can  better  target  their  scarce  resources 
toward helping borrowers in the greatest need of counseling and for other interventions that 
may help prevent foreclosure.  
Communities also are searching for ways to address the challenges that foreclosed homes 
can present, such as decreased home values and vacant properties that can deteriorate from 
neglect. Toward this end, the Federal Reserve has recently engaged in a partnership with 
NeighborWorks America to identify effective strategies to stabilize neighborhoods that have 
large  clusters  of  vacant  properties  due  to  foreclosures.  Working  together,  we  will  develop 
materials  and  tools  as  well  as  convene  training  sessions  to  help  communities  build  local 
capacity for acquiring and managing vacant properties. The ultimate goal is to return these 
properties to useful purposes, whether it is to provide affordable rental housing or to supply 
new homeownership opportunities in low- and moderate-income communities. 
                                                 
1   The telephone number for the nationwide Homeowner’s HOPE Hotline is 888-995-HOPE. 
2   Hope Now is an alliance between counselors, mortgage market participants, and mortgage servicers to create 
a unified, coordinated plan to reach and help as many homeowners as possible. For more information see: 
www.hopenow.com. 
3   The maps show data for each state and for most counties and zip codes. They are available on the website of 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. 
2 
 BIS Review 42/2008
Loss-mitigation strategies to reduce foreclosures 
In cases where it is not possible for the distressed mortgage borrower to refinance his or her 
mortgage  into  a  more  sustainable  mortgage  product,  the  next-best  solution  may  be  some 
type  of  loss-mitigation  arrangement  between  the  lender  or  servicer  and  the  distressed 
borrower.  The  Federal  Reserve,  in  conjunction  with  the  other  federal  banking  agencies 
(which include the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Federal Deposit Insurance 
Corporation, and the Office of Thrift Supervision), the Conference of State Bank Supervisors 
and  the  National  Credit  Union  Administration,  has  issued  guidance  urging  lenders  and 
servicers  to  pursue  such  arrangements,  when  feasible  and  prudent,  as  an  alternative  to 
foreclosure.  For  the  lender,  servicer,  and  investor,  working  out  a  distressed  loan  with  a 
struggling borrower makes economic sense if the net present value (NPV) of the payments 
under  a  loss-mitigation  strategy  exceeds  the  NPV  of  proceeds  that  would  be  received  in 
foreclosure. 
Loss mitigation can be advantageous to both the borrower and the lender because the costs 
associated with foreclosure can be very substantial. Historically, the foreclosure process has 
usually taken from a few months up to a year and a half, depending on state law and whether 
the borrower files for bankruptcy. Anecdotal evidence suggests that the time to complete a 
foreclosure has been increasing recently, as the number of foreclosures has risen and the 
average  time  that  properties  remain  on  the  market  has  lengthened.  The  losses  to  lenders 
and investors from foreclosures include not only the missed mortgage payments during that 
period,  but  also  the  costs  of  taxes,  legal  and  administrative  fees,  real  estate  owned  sales 
commissions, and maintenance expenses. Additional losses arise from the often significant 
reduction  in  value  when  a  property  is  repossessed  even  in  stable  housing  markets, 
particularly if the property is unoccupied for some period. In fact, a recent estimate based on 
subprime  mortgages  foreclosed  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  2007  indicated  that  total  losses 
exceeded 50 percent of the principal balance. Whether the losses are that large in all cases 
is  difficult  to  know,  but  what  is  known  is  that  the  foreclosure  process  itself  destroys 
considerable  value.  The  existence  of  such  costs  raises  the  real  prospect  that,  by 
restructuring  distressed  loans  in  those  cases  in  which  the  borrower  wants  to  stay  in  the 
home,  borrowers,  lenders,  servicers,  and  investors  may  all  be  able  to  achieve  a  better 
outcome than is attainable if the foreclosure process is allowed to run its course.  
Lenders,  servicers,  and  investors  have  historically  relied  on  repayment  plans  as  their 
preferred loss-mitigation technique. Under these plans, delinquent borrowers typically repay 
the  mortgage  arrears  over  a  few  months  in  addition  to  making  their  regularly  scheduled 
mortgage payments. These plans often are most appropriate if the borrower has suffered a 
reversible setback, such as a temporary illness. However, anecdotal evidence suggests that 
even in the best-case scenarios, borrowers given repayment plans redefault at a high rate, 
especially when the arrears are large. 
Loan  modifications,  which  involve  any  permanent  change  to  the  terms  of  the  mortgage 
contract, may be preferred when the higher payments associated with a repayment plan do 
not result in a sustainable solution. In a loan modification, the borrower's monthly payment is 
reduced through a lower interest rate, an extension of the maturity of the loan, a write-down 
of the principal balance, or a combination of all three of these measures. The effort by the 
Hope Now Alliance to freeze interest rates at the introductory rate for five years for eligible 
borrowers  with  an  adjustable-rate  mortgage  is  an  example  of  a  modification,  in  this  case 
applied to a class of borrowers. 
To date, permanent modifications in this credit cycle episode, as in the past, have typically 
involved a reduction in the interest rate or an extension of the loan terms, while reductions of 
principal balance have been quite rare. But the current housing difficulties differ from those in 
the  past,  largely  because  of  the  pervasiveness  of  situations  known  as  negative  equity 
positions in which the amount owed on the mortgage exceeds the current market value of the 
property. A distressed borrower with a negative equity position may have neither the means 
BIS Review 42/2008 
 3
nor  the  incentive  to  remain  in  the  home.  In  this  environment,  servicers  and  investors  may 
well  find  principal  reductions  that  restore  some  equity  for  at-risk  homeowners  to  be  an 
effective means of avoiding delinquency and foreclosure.  
Although  principal  write-downs  may  be  especially  germane  today  given  the  prevalence  of 
negative equity positions, they are not necessary or appropriate for all borrowers who have 
negative  home  equity  or  who  become  delinquent  on  their  mortgage.  On  the  contrary,  a 
strategy of targeting write-downs to certain groups of borrowers may provide the best path 
forward. For example, one possibility would be to limit the availability of write-downs to those 
borrowers  with  high  debt  payment-to-income  ratios  and  loan-to-value  ratios  significantly  in 
excess of 100 percent before loan modification, but with the capacity to carry a written-down 
mortgage. In any event, it seems clear that principal reductions should be part of the tool kit 
that servicers and investors bring to bear as they deal with delinquent loans. 
loan  modifications, 
including  principal  write-downs.  Enhanced  guidance  on 
Additional actions that could help reduce avoidable foreclosures 
Several  steps  could  be  taken  to  provide  further  impetus  to  loan  modifications,  including 
principal  write-downs,  in  appropriate  circumstances.  One  such  step  that  could  be  taken 
relatively quickly by the industry is the development of a template that would guide servicers 
and others as they consider whether, and under what circumstances, to pursue various types 
of 
loan 
modifications could help forge a common understanding among servicers and the investor 
community  on  when  a  particular  loan  modification  tool  is  most  appropriate.  This  guidance 
would help address the concern expressed by servicers that expanding the rate of principal 
reductions  may  expose  them  to  increased  litigation  risks  even  in  situations  where  the 
servicer reasonably determines that such action is beneficial to investors in comparison to 
other available options. The Hope Now Alliance organized by the industry and the Treasury 
Department successfully created guidelines dealing with interest rate resets. Leadership also 
is  needed  to  provide  guidance  for  other  loan  modification  tools  and  to  clarify  the  "best 
practices" to be followed by servicers in order to mitigate servicers' litigation risks. 
The Congress can take another important step to facilitate greater use of loan modifications 
by moving quickly to reconcile and enact FHA modernization legislation permitting the FHA 
to  increase  its  scale  and  improve  the  management  of  potential  risks  borne  by  the 
government.  Such  legislation  could  improve  the  FHA's  ability  to  reach  a  wider  range  of 
borrowers  while  allowing  the  agency  to  develop  appropriate  underwriting  and  pricing 
methodologies for any increased risks assumed. 
Separately,  the  GSEs  –  Fannie  Mae  and  Freddie  Mac  –  could  be  asked  to  do  more. 
Recently, the Congress has greatly expanded Fannie Mae's and Freddie Mac's role in the 
mortgage  market  by  temporarily  increasing  the  conforming  loan  limits  for  these  GSEs.  In 
addition, their federal regulator, the Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight, has lifted 
some  of  the  constraints  that  were  imposed  on  these  entities  because  they  have  resolved 
some  of  their  recent  accounting  and  operational  problems.  Thus,  now  is  an  especially 
appropriate time to ask the GSEs to move quickly to raise more capital, which they will need 
to  take  advantage  of  these  new  securitization  and  investment  opportunities,  to  provide 
assistance  to  the  housing  markets  in  times  of  stress,  and  to  do  so  in  a  safe  and  sound 
manner. As the GSEs expand their roles in our mortgage market, there is a strong need for 
the Congress to move forward on GSE reform legislation, including the creation of a world-
class  GSE  regulator.  As  the  Federal  Reserve  has  testified  on  many  occasions,  it  is  very 
important for the health and stability of our housing finance system that the Congress provide 
the GSE regulator with broad authority to set capital standards, establish a clear and credible 
receivership  process,  and  define  and  monitor  a  transparent  public  purpose  –  one  that 
transcends just shareholder interests – for the accumulation of assets held in their portfolios.  
4 
 BIS Review 42/2008
Desirable characteristics of an initiative to encourage loan workouts 
Going beyond the current proposals for FHA modernization and permitting the FHA greater 
latitude to set underwriting standards and risk-based premiums for mortgage refinancing – in 
a way that does not increase the expected cost to the taxpayer – would allow the FHA to 
help  more  troubled  borrowers.  For  example,  an  FHA-insured  refinancing  product  with 
insurance priced to reflect the risks to the taxpayers might encourage servicers to consider 
providing  delinquent,  at-risk  mortgage  borrowers  a  principal  write-down  as  a  loan 
modification alternative. The draft FHA Housing Stabilization and Homeownership Retention 
Act  of  2008  includes  provisions  designed  to  allow  the  FHA  to  offer  such  products,  which 
could be a useful tool in helping reduce preventable foreclosures. 
As you move forward in considering whether to enact a bill and, if so, what its precise design 
should be, it will be important to consider a wide range of issues. In many cases, a judgment 
must be made as to how to strike an appropriate balance among competing considerations. 
Among the issues you will have to consider are at least the following five:  
Mitigating moral hazard 
1.  
Homeowners  who  can  afford  to  pay  their  current  mortgage  should  not  be  encouraged  to 
default in order to qualify for a write-down. To discourage borrowers who would otherwise 
have  the  ability  to  continue  making  their  payments  from  becoming  delinquent,  a  variety  of 
steps  could  be  taken.  For  example,  eligibility  for  assistance  under  the  program  could  be 
restricted  to  borrowers  who  had  relatively  high  debt  payment-to-income  ratios  at  some 
specified date before the creation of the program. In addition, steps could be taken to make it 
costly  for  homeowners  who  attempt  to  quickly  cash-in  on  the  equity  provided  through  a 
principal write-down. For example, participating borrowers could be required to pay an exit 
fee  when  the  refinancing  loan  is  extinguished.  As  another  example,  borrowers  could  be 
required to share with the government or with the holder of the borrower's existing mortgage 
either the equity created through a write-down or the future appreciation in the home price, or 
both,  over  some  specified  time  period.  In  other  words,  the  government  or  investor  would 
have what is known as a "soft-second." In addition, programs that provide for the voluntary 
participation  of  lenders  and  servicers  should  provide  a  natural  brake  on  moral  hazard,  as 
lenders  and  servicers  would  remain  free  to  pursue  other  options  available  to  them  in 
situations  where  they  believe  the  borrower  has  the  ability  to  repay  his  or  her  existing 
mortgage.  
Mitigating adverse selection 
2.  
A robust defense against adverse selection – the incentive of current servicers or lenders to 
send only their worst credits to the government-insured mortgage program – is necessary to 
protect the interests of the taxpayer. Mechanisms that would discourage adverse selection 
include: (i) a loan seasoning requirement (for example, a period during which the new loan 
could be sent back to the original servicer/lender if it redefaults) and (ii) a fee structure that 
imposes costs on the servicer/lender if the new government-insured loan goes bad within a 
specified  period  or  pays  a  bonus  if  the  loan  continues  to  perform  over  the  whole  of  that 
period. 
Turning the FHA into a world-class mortgage insurer 
3. 
With modernization and expansion, the FHA could play an important role in relieving stress in 
the  mortgage  and  housing  markets  as  well  as  in  restarting  securitization  markets. 
Securitization markets are needed to help relieve capital stresses on banks and to provide 
more affordable mortgages to borrowers. To this end, more consideration needs to be given 
to how the FHA can scale up quickly and improve its processes and underwriting systems so 
that  they  are  comparable  in  quality  with  those  currently  being  used  by  Fannie  Mae  and 
BIS Review 42/2008 
 5
Freddie Mac. In addition, providing the FHA with broad authority to offer innovative products 
that meet market needs and to outsource loan underwriting and other program elements to 
private-sector providers could allow the FHA to insure more mortgage borrowers and to do 
so more quickly. The FHA needs to be better able to compete in today's marketplace and it 
needs access to the best risk-management tools available when managing the risks to the 
government.  
Protecting the taxpayer 
4.  
Any  government-insured  mortgage  offered  under  a  refinancing  program  needs  to  be 
prudently underwritten, regardless of whether a principal write-down is part of the deal. First 
and foremost, this means establishing a meaningful amount of homeowner equity. Second, it 
means using sound underwriting criteria to ensure that borrowers are reasonably likely to be 
able to repay the government-insured loan on a sustained basis. Third, it means allowing the 
FHA to engage in sensible risk-based pricing of its mortgage insurance products, including 
substantial flexibility in setting its initial premium and annual premiums.  
Negotiating junior liens 
5.  
From  one-third  to  one-half  of  all  subprime  mortgages  pertain  to  properties  that  also  have 
junior liens. When held by an entity other than the first lien holder, these junior liens present 
a variety of serious obstacles to a successful refinancing, especially one involving a principal 
write-down. Typically, the junior lien holder must agree either to remove his lien in return for 
a portion of the proceeds from the refinancing or re-subordinate his claim to the new loan. 
The valuation of the junior lien holder's claim on the property is often difficult to negotiate. 
One  way  of  dealing  with  this  problem  in  the  case  of  a  restructuring  with  an  FHA-insured 
mortgage is to offer a junior lien holder a specified share of the government's or investor's 
"soft second." Another way of dealing with junior liens is to provide the servicer with financial 
incentives  to  aggressively  negotiate  with  the  junior  lien  holder  while  capping  any  potential 
payout available to the junior lien holder from the government program.  
Elements of these considerations are already reflected in the discussion draft. For example, 
Title  I  of  the  discussion  draft  includes  exit  fees  and  shared  appreciation  mortgages  to 
address  concerns  about  borrower  moral  hazard.  It  also  contains  features  to  protect  the 
taxpayer,  such  as  widening  the  range  of  insurance  premiums  and  creating  a  meaningful 
amount of borrower home equity. As for adverse selection, risk-based insurance premiums 
paid by the servicer are crucial, and Title I could be clearer about the FHA's authority to use 
risk-based premiums.  Other steps to guard against adverse selection could include a loan 
seasoning requirement or other forms of warranties given by the lender to the government 
about loan performance.  
Given  the  magnitude  of  the  potential  foreclosures  on  the  horizon,  more  steps  should  be 
taken  to  modernize  the  FHA  and  to  deal  with  the  junior  lien  holders.  The  FHA  needs  the 
resources  and  the  incentives  to  manage  the  risks  to  the  government  well  and  to  offer 
mortgage  insurance  products  that  will  be  attractive  to  servicers.  As  for  junior  lien  holders, 
despite the government's best efforts, it may be difficult for servicers or lenders to negotiate 
with  junior  lien  holders  on  the  borrowers'  behalf.  The  FHA  needs  substantial  flexibility  to 
provide  incentives  to  servicers  to  negotiate  with  junior  lien  holders  to  address  this  difficult 
problem.  
The  Congress  may  be  concerned  that  the  loan-by-loan  approach  could  prove  insufficient. 
Title  II  of  the  discussion  draft  would  permit  substantial  flexibility  to  expand  the  program  if 
needed  by  introducing  a  bulk-refinance  mechanism  if  economic  conditions  warrant  such 
action.  This  mechanism  would  rely  on  an  auction-based  process  to  price  and  deliver 
mortgages for refinancing. Note that an auction-based approach would still have to contend 
with some of the problems mentioned above, including moral hazard, adverse selection and 
the resolution of junior liens. Title II would grant authority to the implementing agencies to 
6 
 BIS Review 42/2008
build  in  features  needed  to  address  these  and  other  issues.  If  you  move  forward  with  this 
legislation, it will be important that the implementing agencies have full latitude to exercise 
such authority.  
In the design and details of a principal write-down program based on a government-insured 
refinancing,  it  is  critical  to  strike  the  right  balance  between  the  interests  of  borrowers, 
servicers, investors, and taxpayers. For example, the larger the required principal reduction 
on  a  troubled  loan,  the  fewer  loans  that  lenders  or  servicers  will  offer  voluntarily  for 
refinancing into an FHA-insured product, thereby reducing the "take up" rate for the program. 
However, a larger principal write-down better protects taxpayers from future losses and gives 
the borrower a greater incentive to stay current on the refinanced mortgage.  
As  another  example,  the  more  incentives  given  to  servicers  to  use  an  FHA  refinancing 
program,  either  through  direct  payments  or  through  shared  appreciation  agreements,  the 
more they would be willing to incur the costs of refinancing borrowers. Such incentives might 
increase  the  number  of  borrowers  who  might  be  considered  for  a  government-backed 
program. But such incentives also would raise the cost of the program for the borrower and 
possibly for the government as well.  
As a final example, providing investors with some of the benefits of any shared-appreciation 
agreements might encourage them to allow servicers to write down principal and refinance 
borrowers into a government-backed program. However, providing the government with such 
agreements  could  be  one  means  of  compensating  taxpayers  for  shouldering  the  risks 
associated with the program. 
Even if the right balance for the program can be struck, obstacles remain to the successful 
implementation of a government program designed to forestall preventable foreclosures. For 
example,  even  though  workouts  may  often  be  the  best  economic  alternative,  mortgage 
securitization  and  the  constraints  faced  by  servicers  may  make  such  workouts  less  likely. 
Trusts  vary  in  the  type  and  scope  of  modifications  that  are  explicitly  permitted,  and  these 
differences  raise  operational  compliance  costs  and  litigation  risks  for  the  servicer.  So  that 
servicers do not try to unduly avoid litigation risks, leadership is needed to clarify their duties.  
Conclusion 
FHA  modernization  and  GSE  reform  are  needed  to  address  the  ongoing  shortcomings  of 
current mortgage-oriented government initiatives. In addition, the GSEs should be strongly 
encouraged  to  raise  additional  capital  so  that  they  can  fulfill  the  expanded  role  that  the 
Congress has recently extended to them.  
Separately,  the  Congress  should  carefully  evaluate  whether  to  take  additional  actions  to 
reduce  the  rate  of  preventable  foreclosures.  Properly  designed,  such  steps  could  promote 
economic  stability  for  households,  neighborhoods,  and  the  nation  as  a  whole.  Although 
lenders and servicers have scaled up their efforts and have adopted a wider variety of loss-
mitigation techniques, more can, and should, be done.  
The  fact  that  many  troubled  borrowers  have  properties  that  are  now  worth  less  than  the 
principal amounts remaining on their mortgages suggests that lenders and servicers should 
give greater consideration to the use of principal reductions as one of the loan modification 
options in their tool kit. Principal write-downs would be facilitated by providing the FHA the 
flexibility  to  insure  a  broad  range  of  refinancing  products  for  a  larger  number  of  at-risk 
borrowers,  including  products  that  offer  borrowers  an  affordable,  restructured  mortgage  if 
their lender voluntarily agrees to write-down the principal amount of the borrower's mortgage. 
The voluntary nature of the program assures that only borrowers who the servicer or lender 
believes cannot successfully carry their current mortgage contract would be considered for 
such a program. If the Congress decides to move down this road, it should carefully consider 
the steps that should be taken to mitigate moral hazard, avoid adverse selection, and ensure 
that the financial interests of the taxpayer are adequately safeguarded. 
BIS Review 42/2008 
 7
