Shamshad Akhtar: Asia – impact of recent global developments and 
central bankers’ response 
Speech  by  Dr  Shamshad  Akhtar,  Governor  of  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan,  at  the  Asia 
Lecture, Emerging Markets, Madrid, 4 May 2008. 
 Introduction 
A.  
1.  Deepening  financial  globalization,  driven  mainly  by  far-reaching  financial  market 
liberalization  and  openness  and  benign  global  economic  environment,  has  helped  nations 
accumulate  capital  surpluses  and  augment  cross  border  flows.  Exploiting  excess  liquidity, 
financial  institutions  over-leveraged  themselves  through  esoteric  and  innovative  structured 
products and loan markets (both on- and off-balance sheets). In an environment of enhanced 
risk  appetite  and  high  returns,  households,  corporates  and  other  industry  participants 
invested  in  these  products.  Growing  defaults  and  lack  of  liquidity  to  back  these  securities, 
however,  generated  an  unprecedented  credit  crunch.  In  the  process  of  unwinding  and 
settling  their  obligations,  several  global  banks,  investment  houses  and  other  entities  faced 
substantial financial losses. Resultant loss of confidence of investors created additional risks 
to financial stability. 
2. The risk appetite for these products consequently turned into risk aversion. Facing losses 
in  asset  backed  securities  and  persistent  dollar  depreciation,  investors  opted  to  hedge 
themselves by investing in global commodities. While advanced countries were dealing with 
the  losses  emanating  from  securitized  products,  growing  investor  demand  for  global 
commodities  resulted  in  an  exceptional  hike  in  international  prices  of  strategic  food,  oil, 
metals and other products. 
3. The world is not unaccustomed to episodes of crisis and has developed experience and 
expertise to deal with these events. What is unusual in this round is that the global economy 
is faced with multidimensional crises: (i) liquidity crunch in interbank and money markets, of 
an  unprecedented  nature,  in  the  otherwise  most  lubricated  and  well  nurtured  markets;  (ii) 
downturn  and  distress  in  housing  markets;  and  (iii)  bizarre  trends  in  global  commodities’ 
markets. Added to this is the unfolding food crisis. The vibrations and gyrations of a crisis 
that emerged in one small segment of the financial sector in the US were deeply felt across 
other segments around the globe. These events are a fresh reminder of the costs associated 
with financial globalization, particularly when there are gaps in the oversight of markets and 
risk management guidelines are compromised and violated. 
4. Given that the epicenter of this wave of global financial crisis are the developed financial 
markets,  the  firefighting  by  the  US  and  European  central  bankers  is  helping  contain  the 
contagion.  Fed  and  ECB’s  vigilance  on  markets,  reliance  on  conventional  tools,  such  as 
lowering  of  policy  rates,  and  use  of  unconventional  tools  –  ranging  from  special  liquidity 
facilities  offered  on  the  basis  of  low  grade  assets  as  collateral  –  to  rescue  operations  for 
housing  and  investment  banks  (traditionally  not  in  the  purview  of  central  banks)  are  some 
examples of how these institutions dealt with the crisis. These central bankers are striking a 
balance  between  monetary  stability  and  financial  stability,  while  walking  a  tight  rope  of 
weighing  the  tradeoffs  between  economic  growth  and  inflation  risks.  Steepest  reduction  in 
the  Fed  funds  rate  reflects  that  the  US  weighs  economic  growth  risks  more  serious  to  its 
fundamentals  and  to  the  global  economy  while  ECB  and  BOE  weigh  inflation  risks  more 
seriously. Irrespective of this positioning, all three have acted forcefully to stabilize financial 
markets  by  easing  liquidity  in  the  interbank  and  money  markets.  If  the  global  economy 
accelerates  by  early  2009  as  anticipated,  all  monetary  authorities  will  generally  shift  their 
focus back to containing inflation. 
BIS Review 59/2008 
 1
5. In my remarks, I will confine myself to the impact of the recent global developments on 
Asia  and  the  implications  for  central  banks  and  their  policy  responses.  In  offering  these 
perspectives, few qualifiers are in order: 
• 
inter-linkages  deepened,  with 
The  spillover  impact  of  disruptions  in  developed  markets  historically  has  had  a 
limited  impact  on  Asia.  As  the  region  grew  faster  than  the  rest  of  the  world,  the 
economies  expanded  and 
the  channels  of 
transmission maturing rapidly. 
Asia’s resilience was proven after the 1997 Asian financial crisis as the region was 
quick to rebound and regain macroeconomic stability. Despite its growing exposures 
and linkages with world economy, Asia’s strong export base and oil revenues have 
helped the region to build external current account surpluses; consequently Asia’s 
foreign  exchange  reserves,  which  rose  to  $3.9  trillion  (and  constitute  62%  of  the 
world  reserves)  now  act  as  a  strong  buffer.  Smaller  economies  of  Asia,  however, 
have limited ability to withstand shocks and their macroeconomic stability has been 
disrupted and their reserves’ level has declined in the face of exogenous shocks. 
Unlike  past  episodes  of  crisis,  the  global  economy  today  faces  multidimensional 
challenges. Interdependence among economies introduces its own complications. 
Finally, what is worrisome is that neither the financial markets’ turmoil is over nor the 
US economic slowdown has bottomed out. Equally uncertain is the outlook for the 
oil  and  food  prices.  Unfolding  events  in  these  areas  could  deepen  the  impact  of 
developments on Asia. 
   6. Economic growth outlook. In the wake of growing economic diversity and divergence of 
Asia, it is no surprise that the impact of global developments varies considerably across the 
region. Interestingly, Asia performed fairly well in the last two quarters of 2007 when, in the 
first round, the US slowdown was confined primarily to the housing sector. As the liquidity 
crunch  deepened,  defaults  grew  and  financial  losses  magnified,  resulting  in  a  fall  in  US 
consumer  spending  and  confidence.  These  and  associated  developments  started  to  filter 
down across Asia and are now visibly impacting key economic indicators of the region. While 
the growth outlook for Asia has softened, the growth prospects remain sound and the overall 
base line of Asia is strong. 
7.  Despite  multiple  forecasts,  there  is  a  broad  consensus  that  Asia’s  economic  growth  is 
likely to slow down: 
• 
IMF – Regional Economic Outlook (REO) forecasts that Asia’s growth in 2008 will 
be 6.2% – or about 1¼ percentage points lower than 2007. Growth of China, with its 
growing  global  linkages,  is  anticipated  to  be  2.2%  lower  than  the  2007  outcome, 
India about 1% and the rest of Asia 0.5%. 
World Bank – East Asia Pacific Updates, 2008 forecasts that developing East Asia 
growth will falter by 1.5% to 8.5% relative to 2007 but that expected growth is in line 
with the trends prevailing in the past. Large deceleration in the growth of China in 
2008 impacts the average for East Asia. 
Asian  Development  Bank  –  Asian  Development  Outlook,  2008  forecasts  that  its 
member  developing  countries  will  grow  by  7.6%  or  almost  one  percentage  point 
lower than last year. 
Fund  managers  and  other  private  entities  revised  their  forecast  for  different 
countries by 0.5% to 1.5%. 
   8.  The  2008  outlook  for  Asia  would  depend  on  how  uncertainty  regarding  the  US  and 
European  economic  scenarios  resolves  itself.  While  growth  outlook  has  already  been 
moderated, economic activity in Asia will be strong as domestic demand remains robust and 
is being backed by investment growth particularly in China, India, and ASEAN 5. 
2 
 BIS Review 59/2008
9. Trade prospects. After faltering somewhat, Asia’s exports have regained momentum; in 
the  recent  quarter  they  grew  by  double  digits.  Decline  in  the  US  and  European  markets’ 
demand  hit  Asia  hardest  in  few  sectors  including  IT,  electronic,  electrical  and  office 
machinery industry. Asia’s exports performance was nonetheless better than the experience 
of  the  2001  recession,  as  commodity  and  non-traditional  exports,  and  exports  to  newer 
markets continued to grow. 
10.  Growing  trade  integration  within  the  region  has  also  served  Asia  well.  While  Asia’s 
exports to countries outside the region have swelled to $1.7 trillion by 2006, (relative to $0.4 
billion  in  the  1990s)  intra  regional  trade  grew  faster  from  under  $0.2  billion  to  $1.6  trillion. 
Consequently, intra regional trade constitutes almost half of the total trade in Asia, and is set 
to grow further as Asia is gearing itself for greater market diversification. Impetus to this will 
come as Japan continues to recover, China deepens its trade with Latin America and other 
regions,  and  India  opens  up  further  on  the  back  of  growing  middle  class  incomes  and 
demand. The regional integration is also evident from the growing momentum and scale of 
regional free trade agreements. 
11. Larger economies of Asia and the ASEAN 5 have a dual cushion of continued large, if 
not  growing,  external  current  account  surpluses  and  exceptionally  high  foreign  exchange 
reserves.  However,  few  economies  face  growing  macroeconomic  vulnerabilities.  Largely 
reliant  on  import  of  oil  and,  now,  food,  external  current  account  deficits  in  these  countries 
have  reached  unsustainable  levels.  Macroeconomic  instability  and  developments  in  the 
international  environment  have  also  impacted  foreign  inflows  to  these  countries.  In  this 
scenario financing external current account deficits is a challenge complicated further by the 
exceptional  rise  in  sovereign  spreads  in  international  markets  as  the  liquidity  constraints 
deepened. 
12.  Implications  for  financial  markets.  Benefiting  from  the  recapitalization,  restructuring 
and  stronger  regulatory  and  supervisory  systems  in  the  post  financial-crisis  period,  Asian 
financial markets have been performing well. Emerging Asia’s financial assets, as percent of 
their  GDP,  rose  to  306.3,  higher  than  the  ratios  for  Latin  American,  African  or  European 
countries (155.1, 168.7 and 139.0, respectively), but lower than the world ratio of 401.5. 
13.  Relative  to  trade,  Asia’s  financial  markets  are  less  integrated  particularly  within  the 
region. Emerging Asia (excluding Japan) holds only 10 percent of the world’s total value of 
bonds,  equities  and  bank  assets.  Growth  and  diversification  of  capital  flows  to  Asia  is 
impressive. Foreign direct and portfolio flows to Asia have reached almost $989 billion or 2% 
of the world flows and 9.3% of Asian GDP. Three-fourths of the portfolio flows to Asia were 
directed to equity markets. 
14. In contrast, Asian investors have less than 20% of their equity portfolios (in most cases 
less  than  10%)  in  markets  outside  the  region  and  are  less  dependent  on  overseas  bank 
lending.  Notwithstanding,  stock  market  correlations,  co-movements  of  interest  rates  and 
bond  yields,  and  foreign  participation  in  selected  markets,  do  reflect  that  Asia’s  financial 
markets are gradually, but not completely, undergoing global integration. 
15. In general, Asia’s (excluding Japan’s) exposure to the sub-prime mortgage market was 
limited and confined to few banks in relatively more developed financial markets. The related 
losses were estimated to be in the range of $20-30 billion and in most cases these losses 
have  been  accounted  for.  Asian  central  banks’  exposure  to  US  mortgage-based securities 
was  also  limited,  except  for  China,  where  these  holdings  were  backed  by  Government 
mortgage entities. 
16. Financial stress resulted in delays in certain financial deals with Asia but had otherwise 
little  impact  on  the  region’s  banks  and  financial  institutions.  Steeper  impact  has  been 
observed  on  securities  markets,  and  to  a  lesser  extent  on  bond  markets,  driven  by 
revaluation  of  risks  in  financial  markets  and  worries  about  the  global economic  outlook.  In 
some  cases  this  resulted  mainly  in  correction  of  valuation/returns  on  securities.  While  the 
equity markets recovered towards the end of 2007 – with several indices hitting new highs in 
BIS Review 59/2008 
 3
October  –  they  came  under  pressure  in  the  beginning  of  2008  as  myths  regarding  Asia’s 
decoupling from the US and Europe faded. By mid-March 2008, most Asian equity indices 
were down 15-25 percent for the year. Despite the dampening effects on the Asian equity 
markets, they largely outperformed the mature markets and the world average indices. 
17. International debt markets did not go unscathed. Reflecting the liquidity constraints and 
higher risk premiums, spreads for offshore borrowing widened significantly for both sovereign 
and other borrowers. Spreads rose for Asia in line with the trends in emerging markets and 
virtually  doubled  and  tripled  (but  were  below  US  high  yield  debt  markets).  Risk  premiums 
magnified  further  for  countries  facing  complex  economic  and  political  environments.  The 
iTraxx Asia ex‐Japan Credit Default Swap (CDS) Index (including sovereign, corporate and 
financial issuers) surged by almost 300 bps over the last nine months. 
18.  Inflationary  pressures.  Most  worrisome  have  been  the  inflationary  pressures  facing 
Asia. Rise in oil prices towards the end of 2007 and its subsequent surge in 2008 reaching 
$120  per  barrel,  and  the  food  supply  shortages  in  economies  that  had  approached  self 
sufficiency, are two major problems. Oil importing economies are now facing high external 
current  accounts  deficits  whose  stress  has  resulted  in  currency  depreciation.  In  other 
economies,  rise  in  US  dollar  price  of  oil  has  been  offset  by  an  appreciation  of  exchange 
rates. 
19. Inflationary pressures and expectation are on the rise as: (i) Governments allow full or 
partial  pass-through  to  food  and  oil  prices,  (ii)  core  inflation  rises  due  to  fiscal  pressures 
magnified by subsidies on food, agriculture inputs and oil products, and budgetary recourse 
to central bank borrowings, and (iii) investors seek safe havens in the commodities exchange 
markets.  The  depreciating  dollar  can  also  be  given  its  share  of  blame  for  the  record  high 
price of oil, almost double its price just one year ago (from $63/barrel to $119/barrel). Given 
the  fast  pace  of  economic  activity,  it  has  not  taken  long  for  price  changes  in  metals, 
commodities,  and  oil  to  manifest  themselves  in  higher  labor  costs  and increased  prices  of 
many finished goods and services. 
20. Financial turmoil, its fallout and contagion, is by no means the only reason for the global 
commodity  price  pressures.  It  has  to  be  recognized  that  the  current  trend  in  global 
commodity prices is not a one-off distortion or a cyclical spike. The global commodity prices 
uptrend reflects growing population stress and is likely to now stabilize at a new and higher 
level.  Food  prices  hike  is  driven  by  multiple  factors,  key  among  which  are:  (i)  rising 
population  and  consumption  demand  including  the  China  and  India  factor,  (ii)  low  and 
stagnating yields, and (iii) farmers switching to crop production for bio-fuels. Larger debate 
and financing support to resolve the food crisis is likely to rejuvenate food production, albeit 
with a lag. 
21. Policy responses of central banks. As highlighted above, the first round effects of the 
financial market turmoil were largely contained in Asia, given their limited direct exposure to 
the sub-prime mortgage and other asset based securities. With grimmer economic outlook 
and concerns regarding financial stability, both at the home front and globally, Fed, BoE and 
ECB are taking steps to ease monetary policy through liquidity support and lowering interest 
rates  to  avert  recessionary  tendencies  from  permeating  deeper.  Asian  countries  face  a 
different  set  of  challenges,  though, like  developed  countries,  they  have  the  difficult  task  of 
striking an adequate balance between growth and inflation risks. 
22. Since economic growth was steadier in 2007, more immediate preoccupation of Asia’s 
central  bankers  since  July  2007  has  been  to  deal  with  growing  inflationary  pressures. 
Inflation  rates  in  Asia  rose  beyond  projections  and  in  case  of  inflation  targeting  regimes 
resulted  in  clear  breaches.  China  and  India,  the  two  large  economies,  have  resorted  to 
monetary tightening, but primarily through raising cash reserve requirements by 700 bps and 
350  bps  since  July  2007,  respectively.  These  attempts  to  curb  liquidity  in  the  system  and 
excessive  demand  pressures  have  not  arrested  the  structural  rise  in  prices.  Pakistan  has 
been in a monetary tightening mode since April 2005 and has cumulatively raised the policy 
4 
 BIS Review 59/2008
rate by 350 bps with the last two rounds of increase of 100 bps taking place after July 2007. 
Meanwhile,  other  countries  have  held  the  policy  rates  steady.  In  only  few  cases,  such  as 
Thailand  and  the  Philippines,  growth  risks  outweighed  inflation  risk.  Consequently,  policy 
rates  were  moderately  lowered  to  ease  monetary  policy  but  with  inflation  creeping  high, 
scope for loose monetary policy may no longer exist. 
23. The complexity for central bankers in Asia is that food inflation, with 40-50% weightage in 
price indices, is a major driver of inflationary pressures. An excessive monetary tightening in 
this  situation  would  end  up  creating  complications  for  the  economy  without  the  desired 
impact on food inflation that is principally propelled by supply side constraints. At the same 
time, if monetary policy ignores stubbornly high food inflation, second round impacts would 
eventually  strengthen  the  inflationary  expectations.  To  resolve  this  dilemma,  governments 
are resorting to fiscal subsidies to avoid full pass-through. High fiscal deficit countries cannot 
afford these subsidies and as such have resorted to a gradual and phased pass-through of 
rise in prices to consumers. 
24. Exchange rate appreciation emerging in a number of Asian economies may offset some 
of  the  inflationary  pressures.  However  this  option  is  not  available  to some  countries  either 
because  currencies  are  pegged  or  external  current  account  deficits  are  high.  Given  these 
limitations,  it  is  best  for  countries  to  focus  on  fiscal  consolidation  to  allow  fiscal  space  for 
subsidies.  However,  this  should  be  perceived  as  a  short  term  policy  response,  while 
encouraging  appropriate  investments  in  the  agriculture  sector  to  raise  productivity  and 
improve functioning of the wholesale and retail markets under vigilance of local authorities, 
being more non-inflationary ways of dealing with the current chaos in commodity markets. 
25. The financial market turmoil and its consequences offer Asian central bankers a number 
of lessons. Financial globalization with all its benefits does carry significant risks which hit the 
weak  and  under-regulated  financial  systems  more  adversely  than  others.  Liquidity  crunch 
and an economic downturn may lead to losses on a wider range of securities, including some 
of  the  more  highly-rated  securities  that  Asian  financial  institutions  hold  in  much  larger 
amounts. Moreover, global banks might withdraw financing to Asian economies because of 
liquidity  problems  faced  in  their  home  markets,  which  might  adversely  affect  credit 
conditions. 
26. The present events are a reminder that the effects of contagion from small segments of 
financial  markets  (i.e.  the  sub-prime  paper  and  its  structured  products  which  are  a  small 
proportion of financial assets) or small financial institutions cannot be underestimated as they 
can threaten and destabilize financial systems and – given the cross border exposures – can 
create unexpected turbulence for global financial markets and economy. 
27. This dispels any notions of a decoupling from the US economy. The size and scale of 
interaction between Asia and the US brings immeasurable benefits when the going is good, 
but it will also bring a measure of misery when the economy is in trouble. Asian central banks 
and governments need to better integrate with each other to mitigate and hedge such risks in 
future, take advantage of higher returns, and participate in developments in their own region. 
28. Increased appetite for, and under-pricing of risk, needs to be checked so that Asia does 
not  repeat  the  US  mistakes.  Asian  financial  markets  and  regulators  have  to  be  wary  of 
speculators  and  traders  that  will  invariably  be  promoting  a  range  of  high  risk  financial 
products. Supervisory bodies must fully understand and meticulously examine the extremely 
technical financial products that they regulate. 
29.  Liquidity  operations  and  excessive  lowering  of  policy  rates,  while  easing  short  term 
constraints,  inducing  financial  stability,  and  reviving  US  and  other  economies,  do  however 
pose the attendant risk of inducing global inflationary pressures. The associated bail out of 
investors  presents  a  “moral  hazard”.  Besides  promoting  once  again  the  issuance  of 
alternative investment vehicles without proper due diligence, floatation of these products and 
injection of liquidity carries the potential risk of recreating economic bubbles in stock and real 
estate markets. 
BIS Review 59/2008 
 5
30. Asian central banks must realign the institutional framework to face these repercussions 
while  addressing  the  challenges  of  the  highly  intertwined,  multidimensional  crisis  on 
economic growth. 
31. In conclusion, let me reiterate that there is now a broad consensus that slowdown of the 
US and Europe is likely to have a more distinct impact on Asia. Impact has been slow to filter 
down to Asia in 2007, but is predicted to impact economic growth in 2008. The initial set-
back to exports in the categories of IT, electrical and electronic products has been offset by 
growth  in  nontraditional  exports  and  diversification  of  trade  to  newer  markets,  so  much  so 
that Asian exports grew by double digits in a number of countries. 
32. Losses on account of sub-prime mortgage markets were limited on the balance sheets of 
banks and financial institutions and have been written off. In the financial sector, the steepest 
decline was registered in the securities markets that were fast to recover with the Fed and 
ECB  policy  stance,  however,  the  markets  remained  volatile  with  corrections  in  valuations 
already factored in. 
33. Intertwined with financial market turmoil is risk aversion to financially innovative products, 
and  investors’  move  to  global  commodities  whose  demand  pressures  broke  all  historical 
price  behavior  patterns  and  reached  new  levels.  This  price  spiral  of  strategic  commodities 
such as oil, wheat and other products has created dilemmas as pass-through mechanisms 
are  augmenting  inflationary  pressures,  while  not  passing  through  this  is  complicating 
macroeconomic management. 
34. Asia’s inherent strength and resilience remains intact, supported by all time high reserves 
being  fed  by  surpluses  in  external  current  account  and  boosted  regularly  by  robust  export 
growth, which in the case of net oil exporting countries has received additional impetus from 
oil  export  revenues.  This  has  allowed  the  region  to  withstand  economic  shocks  but 
appropriate policy responses are critical to contain the impact of these shocks. 
35. Asia’s central banks faced additional but different challenges than their counterparts in 
the West: headline inflation in China has increased to over 8% and in few other countries it 
has  hit  double  digits.  To  the  extent  this  is  driven  by  uptrend  in  international  oil  and  food 
prices with the latter being more a supply side phenomena, central banks in Asia have held 
on  to  their  monetary  policy  stance.  Asia  in  any  case  has  been  undergoing  monetary 
tightening  since  2007  (or  a  little  earlier)  and  in  some  cases  demand  pressures  have  led 
monetary  tightening  via  adjustments  in  reserve  ratios  while  holding  policy  rates.  Greater 
vigilance remains essential in order to ensure that hike in commodity prices does not set off 
second round inflationary expectations leading to rising core inflation which in some cases is 
already rising because of domestic overheating or over-borrowings by the Government. To 
the  extent  inflation  rate  is  being  contained  through  fiscal  measures,  this  in  turn  will  also 
impact monetary trends and require further tightening. 
6 
 BIS Review 59/2008
