Zdeněk Tůma: Education as investment in human capital 
Speech  by  Mr  Zdeněk  Tůma,  Governor  of  the  Czech  National  Bank,  for  the  graduation 
ceremony, The New Anglo-American College, Prague, 20 June 2008. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, dear colleagues, 
It is my pleasure to be here today and to share with you some thoughts that concern the role 
of  education  as  an  investment  in  human  capital  in  the  long-term  development  of  our 
economy and society in general. 
Today  it’s  commonplace  for  politicians  to  swear  by  concepts  like  investment  in  education, 
knowledge-based economy or the effect of education on long-term economic growth. They 
are also quick to add something about the necessity to pay for university education, at least 
those on the right wing of the political spectrum. 
Don’t worry, we haven’t met today to assess individual political ideas, and we all know that 
sometimes it’s a long road from what politicians say to what they do. However, the fact that 
you are sitting here today indicates that viewing education as an investment has its place in 
today’s society regardless of political preferences.  
I  would  like  to  use  this  opportunity  to  point  out  that  although  the  concept  of  investment  in 
education may be somewhat misused and can have unfortunate overtones for somebody, it 
has a rigorous theoretical foundation and is of high empirical relevance. In fact, I would only 
like to reinforce the conclusion you have no doubt arrived at – that you made a good choice 
when you invested in your further education. 
In 1987, when Robert Solow was awarded Nobel Prize in Economics for his contributions to 
the  theory  of  long-term  economic  growth,  it  was  already  clear  that  his  model  of  long-term 
economic growth had certain shortcomings in its description of reality. On the one hand, this 
is  by  no  means  unexpected,  as  all  economic  models  suffer  from  a  similar  syndrome  to  a 
certain degree. On the other hand, the causes of the empirical problems surrounding Solow’s 
model are very inspiring from our point of view. The whole issue revolves around determining 
to what extent long-term economic growth is aided by human labour and capital measured as 
the  sum  of  all  previous  investments  that  are  still  in  use.  In  practical  calculations,  the 
contribution of human labour is always simplified as the ratio of wages paid to output. This 
ratio is about two-thirds for the developed world. Therefore, two-thirds of output in developed 
countries are used to remunerate labour and the remaining one-third to remunerate capital. 
Problems occur if the contributions of human labour and capital calculated in this way are 
applied  to  two  countries  at  a  different  level  of  development.  In  such  cases,  there  is  a 
significant degree of divergence between the characteristics of these economies observed in 
reality and predicted by the model. 
It had been clear for a relatively long time that if the share of human labour in output was 
only  one-third,  Solow’s  model  would  provide  a  very  good  picture  of  reality  in  international 
comparison. To overcome this inconsistency, however, it was necessary to come up with the 
idea of introducing a new variable in the model that would represent human capital. Although 
this may seem obvious today – as such things always seem to be as soon as someone else 
thinks of them – it was a novelty in the late 1980s. It was another Nobel Prize Laureate in 
economics Robert Lucas who divided human labour into a part reflecting people’s general 
capacity  for  work,  and  the  contribution  of  human  capital  that  was  a  result  of  previous 
investment in education. 
What Lucas did was very simple from today’s point of view. Using the extensive structure of 
US economic data, he chose the average wage of people with basic education as a basic 
remuneration of people’s capacity for work. Then he gradually added the average wage of 
BIS Review 81/2008 
 1
other people after each finished year of education. The results showed that every additional 
year  of  education  up  to  the  level  of  a  bachelor’s  degree  increases  the  wage  by  8%  on 
average. In the United States, if you finish high school and obtain a bachelor’s degree, which 
means you invest eight years in education, you can look forward to a wage two-thirds higher 
than the wage you would get if you only finished basic education. 
Although  Lucas’s  calculations  didn’t  include  subsequent  stages  of  education,  as  the 
bachelor’s  degree  was  sufficient  to  reduce  the  share  of  basic  human  labour  in  output  and 
improve Solow’s original concept, it’s clear that things don’t stop at the bachelor’s degree. On 
the contrary, one could say, it seems that a simple linear relationship ceases to be valid here, 
and  every  additional  year  brings  an  even  higher  wage  increase  compared  to  the  previous 
years. 
Regardless of  the  size of  the  increase,  investment  in  education  is by  no  means  an  empty 
slogan. I wish you that you all become a living proof of this. 
2 
 BIS Review 81/2008
