Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: Priorities for EU infrastructures and 
prospects of transatlantic infrastructures 
Speech by Ms Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central Bank, at the EUROFI Conference, Nice, 12 September 2008. 
 Question 1: What are the priorities to develop the competitiveness of EU securities 
infrastructures? 
Answer  1:  Firstly,  from  a  central  bank  perspective  a  clear  priority  for  EU  securities 
infrastructures  is  to  overcome  the  current  fragmentation  which  leads  to unnecessarily  high 
costs, especially for cross-border transactions.  
I see T2S as a good example of this. T2S, as a neutral and borderless shared settlement 
infrastructure,  will  yield  positive  scale  effects,  and  it  will  promote  competition  in  asset 
servicing, as CSDs strengthen their offerings in services other than settlement. 
Secondly, harmonisation, harmonisation will lead to further cost savings, transparency and 
foster  competition  in  the  value  chain.  We  will  see  significant  initiatives  in  harmonisation 
efforts throughout the securities life cycle, assisted by the catalytic effect of T2S.  
The  Eurosystem,  itself,  will  initiate  work  of  the  T2S  advisory  Group  together  with  market 
participants to develop action plans for harmonising both settlement-related processes and 
processes related to corporate actions.  
Thirdly, in order for securing the competitive market place of the single market and thereby 
maintain  and  attract  issuers  and  investors  to  Europe,  we  need  to  re-think  the  risks  to  the 
robustness  and  resilience  of  the  entire  financial  system,  which  includes  securities 
infrastructures.  
First  of  all  we  need  a  single  set  of  standards  consistently  implemented  in  the  European 
Union. In this respect, I welcome the request of ECOFIN to ESCB and CESR to finalise their 
recommendations. (this will also facilitate harmonisation and avoid regulatory arbitrages that 
can lead to the “race to the bottom”).  
Second, the current financial crisis is showing how fast problems in one market can spread 
over to other markets. In consequence, the operational processes, risk management policies 
and procedures of each system are more related to those of other systems.  
Therefore priorities should be made to obtain a holistic and systemic European (and maybe 
global) approach to widening our risk assessment concepts and our coordination with other 
market  participants  within  the  value  chain,  so  that  risk  and  crisis  management  procedures 
can be optimised.  
After the publication of the CPSS report on interdependencies, central banks are currently 
investigating if and if so how there is a need to revise the regulatory framework consistently 
with  the  new  challenges  stemming  from  the  growing  interdependencies.  Enhanced  co-
operation between the relevant authorities is surely one of the answers. 
Question 2: What are the main expected impacts of transatlantic infrastructures on the 
competitiveness of European markets and on EU stakeholders? Could global 
infrastructures emerge one day? 
Answer  2:  At  the  trading  level,  significant  changes  in  market  structures  are  underway  and 
several European and transatlantic cooperation and mergers have already taken place or are 
foreseen. Stock Exchanges and the new MTFs (multilateral trading facilities) are extending 
BIS Review 110/2008 
 1
the  range  of  instruments  offered  on  their  trading  platforms  to  create  genuine  competition. 
This offers the potential for lower costs for intermediaries and all classes of investors.  
It also improves the prospects for retail investors to diversify their securities portfolios across 
Europe,  increasing  the  potential  returns  on  investments  and  diversifying  their  exposure  to 
financial risks. Issuers should also benefit from greater market depth for their fund raising.  
I think we should carefully reflect on three issues: 
1. 
How to draw a balance between regional and global needs? Or in other terms, is a 
transatlantic  infrastructure  the  best  (soundest  and  more  efficient)  answer  to  a 
“regional”  market?  Or  will  a  network  of  interoperable  regional  infrastructure  better 
fit? 
A global market does not necessarily require only one global infrastructure. On the 
contrary competition among a few can be beneficial for the users. 
So far transatlantic infrastructure has been a US-based infrastructure also serving 
European  markets.  The  higher  integration  of  US  markets  provided  undoubtedly  a 
competitive advantage to them in doing so.  
2. 
3. 
But  nothing  prevents  a  transatlantic  infrastructure  offering  services  in  Europe  and  then 
expanding to other regions. 
The first two questions are for all market participants and regulators. The last one is more for 
EU  (potential)  provider.  [T2-S  has  the  potential  for  being  one  of  this  –  in  the  future  – 
transatlantic infrastructure.] 
The  impact  of  the  transatlantic  infrastructures  also  requires  changes  in  the  way  national 
authorities operate, being it regulators, supervisory authorities or overseers, since systemic 
risks extend beyond national borders.  
In this aspect, we need to establish effective co-operation arrangements among national and 
transatlantic supervisory authorities to develop common practices of supervisory structures in 
financial  services,  including  common  reporting  and  risk  management  standards  without 
loosing sight of legitimate regional supervisory priorities.  
We could make a parallel to the success of the CLS system, which indicates the possible 
benefits  in  reduced  risk  and  increased  efficiency  in  global  financial  services.  CLS  also 
suggests that we should not lose sight of the global dimension; in particular, Asia is a large 
and rapidly growing part of the financial markets.  
I  can  understand  that  the  market  participants  with  global  businesses  would  like  to  see 
progress towards a global infrastructure; but they have also been very clear in telling us that 
the major cross-border costs in securities markets arise from lack of harmonisation. It is for 
that reason the Eurosystem has pledged to engage with market users to start harmonisation 
efforts firstly within the field of settlement and corporate action processes. Market users were 
right to say that consolidation should not be attempted without harmonisation. Global – and 
transatlantic – harmonisation have to be achieved before single securities infrastructures can 
be introduced.  
Question 3: What evolutions are required in post-trading arrangements to support the 
development of transatlantic trading infrastructures ie NYSE-Euronext, Nasdaq-OMX? 
Answer 3: The first area is harmonisation to ensuring transatlantic and global infrastructures 
are  properly  overseen  and  regulated  while  accommodating  legitimate  regional  supervisory 
priorities.  I  see  two  challenges  here:  first,  regulators  and  overseers  generally  tend  to  lag 
behind  financial  innovation  and  integration;  and  second,  Europe  currently  still  lacks  a 
common regulatory and supervisory structure and framework, which would be an important 
pre-requisite  in  achieving  a  regulatory  level  playing  field.  In  cases  of  transatlantic  mergers 
2 
 BIS Review 110/2008
like  the  NYSE  Euronext  merger,  the  risk  of  a  potential  “regulatory  spill-over”  of  existing  or 
future US legislation and regulations would be smaller with the existence of a European SEC 
than without it. So I think the truism that we have to get the European house in order to be 
prepared for the global challenges is also true when it comes to securities infrastructures.  
Furthermore,  there  will  doubtless  be  work  to  enhance  or  develop  relatively  efficient 
settlement  links  or  bridges  between  the  two  US  settlement  engines  and  various  CSDs  in 
Europe, to provide a degree of integration of post trading functionality.  
The  global  challenges  may  be  more  profound  in  asset  servicing  than  in  settlement  – 
however, I believe that T2S will be of value in simplifying and helping to produce safer and 
more efficient solutions as the core and central functionality of the financial system. 
BIS Review 110/2008 
 3
