Tukiya Kankasa-Mabula: Technological developments in Zambia and the 
surrounding region 
Official opening speech by Dr Tukiya Kankasa-Mabula, Deputy Governor – Administration, 
Bank  of  Zambia,  at  the  SADC  Central  Banks  IT  Forum  2008  Annual  Conference, 
Livingstone, 3-7 March 2008. 
 Protocol 
• The Chairman of the SADC ICT Forum, Mr Paulo Maculuve 
• The ICT Directors from the SADC Central Banks 
• Mrs. Esselina Macome (Dr), General Manager and Board Member, Banco de Moçambique 
• The ICT members of staff from SADC Central Banks represented here 
• Other members of staff from SADC Central Bank represented here 
• Representatives of Hardware and Software Suppliers 
• Members of the Press 
• Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen 
On behalf of the Bank of Zambia Governor, I would like to extend a very warm welcome to 
you all to the “SADC Central Banks IT forum 2008 Annual conference”. To our colleagues 
from outside Zambia, I wish to extend a special welcome to you to Zambia, and in particular 
to Livingstone, our tourist capital especially at this time of the year. Like the rest of Zambia, 
Livingstone is a city of tranquility with an easy-going African charm. Apart from the famous 
Victoria  Falls,  other  tourist  spots  include  the  Mukuni  Cultural  Village  a  well  stocked  curio 
market, among the many other attractions. I therefore urge you to find time or indeed stay an 
extra day or more to sample this special menu that Livingstone can offer. 
Mr  Chairman,  it  is  pleasing  to  note  that  the  SADC  Information  and  Communications 
Technology (ICT) Forum will this year be hosting its 13th Annual conference in Livingstone, 
Zambia. Bank of Zambia, is therefore pleased to join other sister Central Banks who have 
previously hosted this Annual Conference. 
Distinguished Delegates, as you are all aware, Information and Communications Technology 
(ICT) plays a strategic role in the day to day operations in all our Central Banks. The rapid 
evolution of ICT, which is generally called the “ICT revolution”, has been exerting a profound 
impact on the world’s economies. As we all can acknowledge, technological innovation has 
brought about the speedy processing and transmission of information, resulting in substantial 
reduction  in  costs,  wider  networking,  and  globalization  on  an  unprecedented  scale  and 
scope. 
Distinguished  Delegates,  the  central  banks  within  the  SADC  region  have  registered 
significant  developments  and  advances  in  the  areas  of  Payment  Systems,  Website 
development, and Banking Supervision Application, just to mention a few projects emanating 
from the SADC ICT Forum initiatives. These projects have been possible and successfully 
implemented  largely  due  to  the  co-operation  and  collaboration  that  exists  between  the 
Central Banks in the region. 
The issues that will be discussed at this Conference are very important in the context of the 
realization  of  some  of  the  key  objectives  of  our  central  banks  that  can  only  be  achieved 
through sound implementation of the ICT solutions. This Conference, therefore, offers all of 
us  various  opportunities  to  effectively  contribute  to  positive  developments  of  our  central 
banks. 
Mr Chairman, I am informed that one of the notable projects being undertaken collaboratively 
is on ICT Governance implementation within the central banks using the Control Objectives 
for Information and related Technologies (COBIT) framework. 
BIS Review 42/2008 
 1
Ladies and Gentlemen, you will be delighted to learn that just last week a number of board 
members from central banks in Africa and across the world converged here in Livingstone to 
discuss  the  subject  “Trends  in  Central  Bank  Governance”.  Indeed  good  corporate 
governance  is  generally  acknowledged  as  important  in  economic  management  and 
therefore, the role that ICT Governance plays, in this regard, can not be over emphasized. 
I  am  also  informed  that  this  conference  will  discuss  some  of  the  solutions  available  for 
implementing  Business  Continuity  Planning  (BCP)  and  the  progress  so  far  made  in  this 
regard. Indeed business continuity planning and management for ICT resources is critical to 
the  operations  of  our  Central  Banks.  The  level  of  investment  and  dependence  on  ICT 
services  is  significant  and  few  organizations  could  operate  for  long  today  without  these 
resources. I therefore urge you to critically review this area that is equally important to the 
implementation of good corporate governance. 
Mr  Chairman,  allow  me  also  to  talk  about  financial  inclusion  or  access  to  finance  for  all. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, as you are aware most of our rural areas are mostly unbanked due 
to  infrastructural  obstacles.  It  is  my  hope,  therefore,  that  you  will  include  on  your  agenda 
issues to do with ICT solutions to address financial inclusion for sustainable development. 
Let me now turn my attention to another key issue that I expect delegates to discuss at this 
Conference. This relates to the crucial role that the SADC IT Forum plays in the Regional 
Indicative  Strategic  Development  Plan  (RISDP),  which  is  the  SADC  long-term  (15-Year) 
Strategy. It is envisaged that the Committee of Central Bank Governors (CCBG) in SADC will 
continue to work on the process of monetary and financial integration in the region. In order 
to  meet  this  aspiration,  there  is  a  need  to  harmonise  central  banking  practices  and 
procedures  across  the  SADC  region  and  benchmark  these  against  international  best 
practices.  I  therefore  trust  that  this  Conference  will  seek  to  prepare  a  RISDP  Action  Plan 
which will steer ICTs within the SADC region to higher levels. Equally important, I also expect 
that  this  initiative  will  assist  central  banks  to  harmonise  ICT  functions  and  come  up  with 
shared regional communication infrastructures that promote economic development. 
Distinguished Delegates, at this juncture let me also thank representatives of the hardware 
and  software  suppliers  for  coming  to  this  Conference.  These  are  our  partners  and  the 
technologies that have been implemented in our central banks would not have been possible 
without their technical advice, expertise and innovation. It is the wish of the Bank of Zambia 
that  in  future  all  the  SADC  central  banks  can  enter  into  group  agreements  on  certain  ICT 
services that are provided by the vendors. We also believe that this would enable us share 
the  cost  of expensive  ICT  resources  in  order to  achieve economies of  scale  and  leverage 
effective support from vendors of common software applications. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, may I conclude by expressing my gratitude and thanks to the staff of 
the ICT Department at Bank of Zambia for successfully organizing this Conference. I wish 
you fruitful deliberations during this business week. 
It is now my pleasure and honour to declare the 2008 SADC ICT FORUM CONFERENCE 
OFFICIALLY OPENED.  
I thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 42/2008
