Mark Carney: Flexibility versus credibility in inflation-targeting 
frameworks 
Remarks  by  Mr  Mark  Carney,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  the  7th  BIS  Annual 
Conference, Lucerne, Switzerland, 27 June 2008.  
 It  is  an  honour  for  me  to  participate  in  this  panel  alongside  Martin  Feldstein  and  Stanley 
Fischer. Just as central bankers are forward looking in the conduct of monetary policy, it is 
entirely appropriate that the BIS coordinate a session that looks beyond price stability to the 
challenges ahead. With the challenges that we currently face, it is understandable that some 
may  desire  greater  flexibility  in  the conduct  of monetary  policy.  However,  the  value  of  this 
greater flexibility depends on the extent to which it detracts from monetary policy credibility. I 
will concentrate my brief remarks today on the themes of flexibility and credibility. 
I  would  like  to  state  at  the  outset  that  what  follows  is  a  discussion  of  ideas  worthy  of 
consideration.  It  should  not  be  seen  as  having  any  bearing  on  the  current  conduct  of 
monetary  policy  in  Canada.  The  Bank's  current  inflation-control  agreement  with  the 
Government of Canada will remain in effect until the end of 2011. Changes to our agreement 
with  the  Government,  if  any  were  desired  by  both  parties,  would  only  come  into  effect 
thereafter. 
Arguments for greater flexibility 
There are two broad classes of arguments for greater flexibility in the design and application 
of monetary policy frameworks. The BIS has done a great deal of useful work on asset-price 
targeting  in  particular  and  on  the  complicated  interplay  between  monetary  policy  and 
financial  stability  in  general.  My  fellow  Canadian,  Bill  White,  framed  the  discussion  about 
flexibility for inflation targeters with his paper "Is Price Stability Enough?" In this paper, Bill 
argues that policy-makers should respond flexibly to shocks that create persistent financial 
imbalances. In particular, he suggests that policy-makers should extend the inflation horizon 
and pre-emptively tighten policy when faced with such shocks. This would have the practical 
consequence  of  purposely  deviating  from  the  inflation  target  temporarily  in  order  to  avoid 
more costly deflationary busts down the road. 
Others  argue  that  globalization  creates  similar  imperatives.  For  instance,  throughout  this 
decade, there has been a secular disinflation (relative to target) in goods prices, reflecting 
the  efficiencies  from  creating  global  supply  chains  and  outsourcing  some  production  to 
emerging markets. Some suggest that these same emerging markets are creating persistent 
commodity-price inflation.1 Finally, the current international monetary order – wherein a large 
dollar block coexists with floating currencies – may create additional shocks, including low 
long-term interest rates and unevenly distributed exchange rate adjustment. Should any of 
these forces be taken into consideration in either the design of monetary policy frameworks 
or the choice of monetary policy parameters? 
Flexibility and adjustment 
Arguments for flexibility in monetary policy frameworks can be considered in the context of 
the  broader  principle  that  policy  flexibility  helps  lower  adjustment  costs.  In  theory,  social 
                                                 
1   That  view  is  certainly  not  unanimous,  as  I  argue  in  "Capitalizing  on  the  Commodity  Boom:  the  Role  of 
Monetary Policy" (speech to the Commodities, the Economy, and Money conference, Calgary, 19 June 2008). 
BIS Review 85/2008 
 1
welfare  is  reduced  when  there  are  constraints  on  the  ability  of  policy-makers  to  optimize 
economic  adjustment.  Policy  frameworks  should  be  flexible  enough  for  the  natural 
adjustment  processes  in  the  economy  to  determine  the  speed  of  adjustment  to  shocks. 
Throughout  this  decade  in  Canada,  we  have  seen  how  policies  that  promote  flexibility  in 
labour  and  product  markets  reduce  adjustment  costs.  In  contrast,  policy  constraints  on 
market  prices  –  such  as  fixed  exchange  rates  or  subsidized  energy  prices  –  make 
adjustment  to  economic  shocks  more  costly.  If  a  shock  is  major  and  has  widespread 
consequences, such rigidities impose costs on other countries because those flexible prices 
must adjust in an unnecessarily large or rapid way. 
In  the  face  of  large  and  possibly  persistent  shocks,  the  design  and  parameterization  of 
monetary  policy  frameworks  depends  in  part  on  the  trade-off  between  flexibility  and 
credibility.  This,  in  turn, is  a  function  of  both  the  extent  to  which  (inflexible)  rules enhance 
credibility and our ability to make the judgments required to deploy any flexibility in a credible 
manner. 
The principle of policy flexibility is already embodied in our macroeconomic models. When 
we calculate the policy response to shocks in these models, it is optimal for policy to allow 
inflation to return to target at different speeds, depending on the type and characteristics of 
the shocks hitting the economy. This implies different amplitudes of the inflation cycle and 
different time horizons for inflation to return to target. 
In  contrast,  the  parameters  in  today's  inflation-targeting  frameworks  generally  do  not  vary 
with the type of shocks hitting the economy. For example, the numeric value of the target 
itself is held constant in the face of all shocks, even though it might sometimes be beneficial 
to  temporarily  adjust  it  to  lean  against  the  wind.  This  point  can  also  be  cast  in  terms  of 
making  the  operational  target  –  i.e.,  core  inflation  –  a  function  of  the  shocks  hitting  the 
economy. As well, the band or confidence interval around the target is held constant, even 
though it may sometimes be beneficial to worry less about inflation volatility in a period of 
highly volatile, but transient, shocks. Finally, the time horizon for returning inflation to target is 
usually held constant. As a consequence, it can be too short to factor in fully the longer-run 
disruptions associated with, for example, building asset imbalances. 
The  current  parameters  are  not  arbitrary.  In  Canada,  the  2-per-cent  target  for  the  total 
consumer price index reflects the measurement bias inherent in the CPI, the risks associated 
with  the  zero  lower  bound  and  concerns  about  downward  nominal  wage  rigidities.  The 
1-percentage-point range around the target reflects the unconditional variance of the inflation 
process.2 The 18- to 24-month time horizon reflects the lagged response to monetary policy 
action.3  
This  inflexibility  has  significant  value.  It  provides  clarity  of  objectives  and  holds  central 
bankers  accountable.  When  policy  lacks  credibility,  it  can  be  beneficial  to  have  simple 
inflexible  elements  in  the  framework  because  they  demonstrate  the  policy-makers' 
commitment to that policy. If the inflation target is achieved, it enhances the credibility of the 
central bank and creates a virtuous circle whereby increased policy credibility further anchors 
inflation expectations, which then contribute to a more stable macroeconomic environment, 
which, in turn, enhances policy credibility. We should be careful neither to underweight the 
value of resulting simple heuristics nor to minimize the risks of complicating them. 
It can also be argued that the range should be conditional on the nature of the shock to inflation. 
                                                 
2  
3   Note that in Canada, unlike some countries, the CPI fully captures the direct effect on inflation of changes in 
house prices in the "owned accommodation" component  of the CPI, which includes mortgage interest cost, 
replacement  cost,  property 
insurance,  maintenance  and  repairs,  and  "other  owned 
accommodation expenses." This component represents 16.5 per cent of the CPI basket. 
taxes,  house 
2 
 BIS Review 85/2008
When then to be flexible? 
Once  credibility  is  achieved  and  the  operation  of  the  framework  better  understood,  could 
credibility  be  retained  if  the  parameters  were  adjusted  to  reflect  the  characteristics  of  the 
shocks hitting the economy at any particular time? Flexible inflation targeting works well with 
temporary or one-off shocks. Whether it can adapt to address unique but longer-lived shocks 
(such  as  an  asset  boom  or  secular  changes  wrought  by  globalization)  is  the  pertinent 
question. What constitutes a "unique" shock? Can we expect authorities, if they are granted 
flexibility,  to  be  sufficiently  disciplined  not  to  decide  that  all  shocks  are  uniquely  virulent? 
Everyone always thinks they live in interesting times. 
Financial imbalances certainly are interesting. However, it is not clear that monetary policy-
makers  should  be  the  first  line  of  defence.  Recent  events  in  a  variety  of  jurisdictions 
demonstrate the shortcomings of the current system where the degree of financial stability is 
a by-product, rather than an objective, of regulatory policy. Central banks, as guardians of 
macroeconomic  stability,  naturally  ask  whether  they  should  play  a  role.  It  does  not 
necessarily  follow  that  that  role  extends  to  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  Central  banks 
may have the ability to foresee macrofinancial instability. Whether they have the appropriate 
tools to prevent it is another matter. I am most sympathetic to the idea that policy-makers 
should  consider  the  development  of  macroprudential  regulations  to  restrain  procyclical 
liquidity  creation  among  financial  institutions.  The  design  and  scope  of  such  regulation 
remains to be determined and in many jurisdictions, including Canada, there are the added 
complications of determining where to house this regulatory authority and how to coordinate 
it with other regulators.4  
If  the  regulatory  framework  is  appropriately  designed,  could  it  be  reinforced  by  monetary 
policy? Professor Issing provides one answer. He argues that the ECB's monetary pillar can 
act  as  a  signal  for  flexibility,  perhaps  in  the  monetary  policy  horizon,  in  the  presence  of 
excess credit creation. Michael Woodford agrees that money and credit can have a useful 
role, but cautions against incorporating them in the monetary policy reaction function.5  
Do  those  situations  that  arise  from  the  globalization  process  create  a  case  for  additional 
policy  flexibility?  There  are  some  practical  difficulties  such  as  the  conflicting  implications 
globalization may have for consumer-price inflation. For example, its impact on manufactured 
goods  prices  argues  for  a  lower  target;  its  impact  on  commodity  prices  for  a  higher  one.6 
Moreover, these conflicting forces are basically price-level effects, though ones that could go 
on for some time. Similarly, the current international monetary order argues for tighter policy 
due to artificially low long-term interest rates and for looser policy in countries that have seen 
excessive  exchange  rate  appreciation.  Further  complicating  matters  is  the  fact  that  the 
globalization process is neither monotonic nor relentless. Its impacts will wax and wane over 
time, raising the question of how frequently policy parameters might be adjusted in the face 
of  these  shifting  trends.  In  the  pursuit  of  flexibility,  how  do  we  prevent  this  from  looking 
terribly arbitrary? 
These  difficulties  are  not  trivial,  so  considerable  care  needs  to  be  taken.  The  benefit  of 
greater flexibility may not be worth the risk of forfeited credibility, particularly if it simply adds 
                                                 
4   For a full discussion, see M. Carney, "Principles for Liquid Markets" (speech to the New York Association for 
Business Economics, New York, New York, 22 May 2008). 
5   See the presentations by Issing and Woodford to this conference, published by the BIS. 
6   Some of these effects are not that material. Recent Bank of Canada research estimated that, on average, the 
direct effect of consumer goods imported from China reduced the inflation rate by about 0.1 percentage points 
per  year  from  2001  to  2006.  See  L.  Morel,  "The  Direct  Effect  of  China  on  Canadian  Consumer  Prices:  An 
Empirical Assessment" (Discussion Paper No. 2007-10, Bank of Canada, 2007). 
BIS Review 85/2008 
 3
to  confusion  about  the  conduct  of  policy.  This  points  to  the  overriding  importance  of 
communication, rightly stressed by Alan Blinder.7  
The  current  environment  underscores  many  of  the  strengths  of  flexible  inflation  targeting. 
The  commodity-price  shock  has  resulted  in  inflation  rising  above  target  in  a  number  of 
jurisdictions.  Provided  expectations  are  well-anchored,  policy  appropriate,  and 
communication effective, people will look through this spike to the eventual return of inflation 
to its well-understood target. Of course, this implies the need for short-term flexibility in the 
target,  but  a  well-designed  inflation-targeting  regime  allows  for  temporary  deviations  from 
target in the face of shocks. Provided the framework retains credibility, that flexibility can and 
should be used. 
Price-level targeting 
There  is  one  final  consideration.  Inflation-targeting  regimes  have  one  element  of  flexibility 
that could potentially reduce credibility: their use of an annual inflation measure that allows 
monetary  authorities  to  overlook  price-level  adjustments  that  they  believe  to  be  one-off 
events. Bygones are bygones. This is not a problem when shocks are small and symmetrical 
because  the  price  level  will  fluctuate  around  the  level  consistent  with  the  inflation  target. 
Indeed, that has been our experience in Canada over 15 years of targeting inflation. Shocks 
have been random and the price level has ended up almost exactly where one would have 
expected since we adopted a 2-per-cent target. However, if shocks were large and one-sided 
and  policy  did  not  respond,  the  price  level  would  drift  from  the  expected  path.  Such  a 
persistent error would reduce credibility over time. 
It is worth considering whether targeting the price level would enhance policy credibility in the 
face  of  a  large,  persistent  shock.  If  anticipated,  temporary  price-level  drift  could  be 
accommodated by extending the horizon, while credibility would be retained by the fact that 
the drift would be tracked and eventually reversed. If unanticipated, the promise to correct it 
that  is  central  to  price-level  targeting  could  preserve  credibility.  The  Bank  of  Canada  is 
currently pursuing a research agenda to determine the gains from adding greater price-level 
memory to the inflation-targeting framework. 
Conclusion 
To conclude, constraints in the policy framework may have helped to gain credibility for the 
framework when it was new, but now that it is better understood, it is time to ask whether we 
can do better. In principle, we could do better by making inflexible elements more flexible or 
by giving the framework more memory about the price level to compensate for any loss of 
credibility.  Doing  so  should  increase  social  welfare  by  allowing  policy  to  be  better  aligned 
with the natural adjustment processes in the economy, thereby adding to the social welfare 
benefits that come from delivering low, stable, and predictable inflation. 
                                                 
7   See the presentation by Blinder to this conference, published by the BIS. 
4 
 BIS Review 85/2008
