Glenn Stevens: Liquidity and the lender of last resort  
Text  of  the  Seventh  Annual  Sir  Leslie  Melville  Lecture,  ANU-Toyota  Public  Lecture  Series 
2008  by  Mr  Glenn  Stevens,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  at  the  Australian 
National University, Canberra, 15 April 2008. 
I  thank  Vanessa  Rayner  for  assistance  in  compiling  this  address.  The  original  speech,  which  contains  various 
links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the Reserve Bank of Australia’s website.  
 It is a great honour to be invited to deliver the Melville Lecture. Sir Leslie Melville is one of 
the revered father figures of the economics profession, and of central banking, in Australia. 
I cannot claim to have known him, or ever met him. But it does not take long in reading about 
his contribution to the economic life of the nation to see what a remarkable man he was. 
There  are  a  number  of  people  who  have  spoken  eloquently  of  Melville’s  life,  including 
previous speakers in this series. I cannot improve on those words. The interested reader can 
do no better than to consult a number of biographical essays written by Selwyn Cornish,1 Ian 
Macfarlane’s  Inaugural  Melville  Lecture  in  2002,  and  the  first  hand,  and  rather  poignant, 
reminiscences in Ross Garnaut’s 2004 Lecture. 
My topic today is one that I think Melville would have been interested in, namely, the role of 
central banks as providers of liquidity and as lenders of last resort in times of crisis. I say 
“would”, because there is nothing about it in his writings that I have been able to uncover. 
Perhaps this is because in the 1930s depression there were few bank failures in comparison 
with that in the 1890s, and other macroeconomic issues were more to the fore.2 But there 
was some discussion at the Commonwealth Bank during the 1930s about supporting other 
institutions. Melville must have seen at least some of that discussion though it would have 
been  very  early  in  his  time  there.  By  the  mid  1940s,  moreover,  Melville  was  intimately 
involved  in  the  international  discussions  that  led  to  the  establishment  of  the  IMF,  which  in 
many respects was intended to address the same issues in an international setting. 
Had he been working in the circumstances in which we have lived recently, I am sure Melville 
would have been very engaged in discussion about the role of the central bank. So it seems 
an appropriate occasion on which to review our thinking on this important matter. With that 
assertion then, let me proceed. 
I shall begin with the question: what do we mean by liquidity? I will then talk about the role of 
the central bank in supplying it. I will then go on to talk about the role of lender of last resort, 
why we need it, and the complications that arise in carrying out this role in the modern era. 
Through all this, my motivating question is: what lessons do we draw from, and what new 
questions are to be asked as a result of, the events of 2007 and 2008 for the central bank’s 
role in managing liquidity for the system, and (perhaps) supplying it to individual entities?  
I  wish  to  state  clearly  at  the  outset  that  these  remarks  are  prompted  by  what  we  have 
observed internationally over the past year, not by anything at home. The Australian financial 
system remains in good shape, as set out in the Reserve Bank’s recent Financial Stability 
Review. Nothing said here should be taken as carrying any implication to the contrary.  
                                                 
1   See Cornish (1993), Cornish (1999) and Cornish (2007) for essays. 
2  
In  contrast  to  the  depression  of  the  1890s  where  54  of  the  64  deposit  taking  financial  intermediaries  were 
forced  to  shut  their  doors,  there  were  only  three  financial  institutions  that  suspended  payments  during  the 
1930s. See Fitz Gibbon and Gizycki (2001). 
BIS Review 43/2008 
 1
Liquidity 
The term “liquidity” is widely used but rarely defined. Until quite recently, the noun “liquidity” 
was  often  found  to  be  preceded  by  the  adjective  “excess”.  That  expression  –  “excess 
liquidity” – simply became shorthand, I think, for the low structure of global interest rates, the 
associated  ease  of  obtaining  credit  and  the  tendency  for  leverage  to  rise.  Of  course,  at  a 
global level, that process is now in reverse. 
For my purposes today, it is important to be more specific. There are several senses in which 
the  word  is  used.  Transactional  liquidity  is  the  ability  to  buy  and  sell  assets  without 
significantly affecting the price. The market for government debt in most advanced countries 
is usually thought to be pretty liquid in this sense. Some other markets can be rather less 
liquid. In the recent turmoil, such transactional liquidity as there had been for many complex 
financial products disappeared very quickly. 
A  second  concept  is  funding  liquidity,  which  is  the  ability  of  an  intermediary  to  raise  the 
necessary cash to fund, or continue to fund, its chosen set of assets. This sort of liquidity can 
also be pretty fickle. Over recent years, some firms’ business models had been based on the 
assumption  they  could  obtain  liquidity  easily  and  cheaply  in  wholesale  funding  markets. 
These models ended up being quite vulnerable to a disruption in market conditions. In these 
cases,  managers  needed  to  be  very  nimble,  and  probably  a  bit  lucky,  to  re  engineer  their 
model quickly enough when conditions changed abruptly. Some were not that lucky. 
The  past  year  has  re  affirmed,  contrary  to  some  earlier  predictions,  the  importance  of  the 
large core banks even in a world of more developed capital markets. Banks are a key source 
of  funding  liquidity  for  other  institutions  operating  in  financial  markets  –  securitisation 
vehicles,  structured 
investment  vehicles  (the  so  called  SIVs),  conduits,  non  bank 
intermediaries and so on. Funding pressures on those vehicles were quickly transmitted back 
to  the  core  banks  in  numerous  countries.  When  shocks  to  markets  occur,  it  is  therefore 
doubly important that banks be able to manage their own funding needs. In many instances, 
this proved to be more difficult over the past nine months than bankers had anticipated. 
Not surprisingly, the recent turmoil has prompted many calls for the regulatory community to 
devote  more  resources  to  ensuring  that  banks  strengthen  their  liquidity  management.  The 
reviews  under  way  will  be  most  useful  if  they  address  liquidity  issues  under  conditions  of 
market  disruption,  when  everyone  is  scrambling  for  liquidity,  not  just  firm  specific  events. 
Regulators  will  also  be  reviewing  arrangements  to  facilitate  the  smoother  functioning  of 
markets at the national and international levels. 
But  there  is  another,  rather  important,  sense  in  which  the  word  “liquidity”  is  used,  and  in 
which  I  will  use  it  today.  Here  I  am  referring  to  funds  at  the  central  bank  –  what  we  in 
Australia call exchange settlement funds, though they have differing names in various other 
countries. These balances are used by banks and other participants in the payments system 
to settle their obligations with each other and with the Reserve Bank. Individual institutions 
can borrow and lend these funds in the overnight market but, for the system as a whole, the 
only source of these funds is the central bank itself.3
I turn now, therefore, to a discussion of central bank liquidity operations. 
Central bank liquidity operations 
In normal times, liquidity operations are pretty straightforward. The central bank forecasts the 
inflows to and outflows from the system resulting from its own transactions and transactions 
                                                 
3   Of course, the way the central bank conducts its own operations will have an effect on market conditions more 
generally. To that extent, the central bank affects ‘liquidity’ in the broader senses as described above, though 
its influence, while powerful, is not the only one at work. 
2 
 BIS Review 43/2008
by  the  government,  and  makes  arrangements  to  offset  these  flows  with  new  dealings  that 
meet  the  system’s  demand  for  cash  at  the  price  –  the  interest  rate  –  thought  to  be 
appropriate for monetary policy purposes.  
On occasion, however, the private sector can experience considerable mood swings insofar 
as its demand for liquidity is concerned. Just this sort of thing happened at the beginning of 
August  2007  when,  around  the  world,  concerns  about  creditworthiness  and  general 
uncertainty  in  the  wake of  the  US  sub  prime  problems  saw  participants  in  money  markets 
suddenly pull back. They became, individually, much less inclined to lend to others and much 
more  keen  to  borrow  and  hoard  funds,  for  fear  of  what  might  eventuate  tomorrow.  The 
upshot was that the system as a whole suddenly had a much higher demand for liquidity at 
the central bank than it had before.  
In  the  face of  a  sudden  flight  to  liquidity  like  this,  it  is  the central  bank’s  job  to supply  the 
necessary  cash  to  meet  the  demand.  This  is  a  straightforward  application  of  Bill  Poole’s 
(1970) result that when the shocks are predominantly to the demand for money, the central 
bank best stabilises the economy (admittedly a pretty simple stylised economy in the model) 
by meeting that demand. Technically, that is achieved by exchanging cash for other assets, 
through  open  market  operations.  This  should,  in  my  view,  occur  elastically  at  a  constant 
interest rate.4
All of this assumes, though, that the private sector has enough assets that the central bank 
regards as being of acceptable quality to take onto its own balance sheet in exchange for the 
cash  the  private  sector  desires.  The  question  then  is  how  big  a  pool  of  such  assets  the 
financial system (and, by extension, individual institutions) should carry in normal times, and 
the  extent  to  which  central  banks should  be  prepared  to  widen  the  eligibility  criteria  for  its 
own operations under unusual circumstances. 
There is a big philosophical issue here, and it has come more into focus as a result of the 
recent financial turmoil. Central banks’ liquidity operations have traditionally been in a limited 
range  of  securities,  often  conducted  with  a  select  group  of  institutions,  relying  on  them  to 
“distribute”  the  liquidity  to  the  rest  of  the  system  as  needed.  But  capital  markets  have 
developed in ways never contemplated when those traditional approaches were established. 
It is much more likely than in the past that disturbances will originate in markets and involve 
counterparties which are several steps removed from the central bank’s traditional sphere of 
direct operation. 
How  should  central  banks  respond  in  this  world?  One  approach,  which  has  already  been 
adopted  to  some  extent  by  many  central  banks,  is  to  widen  the  pool  of  eligible  assets  for 
central bank transactions – in effect liquefying more of the assets on the balance sheets of 
the intermediaries with which central banks already deal. This has been complemented by 
being prepared to deal with a broader range of institutions (the RBA was already prepared to 
deal with quite a wide range of counterparties even before the recent events). 
A  more  radical  step,  which  some  people  (though  no  current  central  bankers,  to  my 
knowledge) have proposed, would be for the central bank to transact directly in the markets 
where the problems originated, addressing them “at source”. Willem Buiter and Anne Sibert 
(2007),  for  example,  have  proposed  that  central  banks  might  be  prepared  to  transact  in 
instruments like Collateralised Debt Obligations – which have been at the core of the recent 
questions of liquidity and asset quality – in order to provide transactional liquidity. 
                                                 
4  
In  our  arrangements,  the  Reserve  Bank  ensures  that,  on  a  daily  basis,  that  there  are  enough  exchange 
settlement funds in the system as a whole to keep the interest rate for overnight loans in the money market – 
the  ‘cash  rate’  –  at  the  level  judged  by  the  Reserve  Bank  Board  to  be  appropriate  for  the  economy’s 
macroeconomic circumstances. If the system, for some reason, needs more funds than before, that will quite 
quickly be accommodated through our standard procedures. 
BIS Review 43/2008 
 3
These ideas raise significant questions. What would be the consequences were the entire 
balance sheets of a large set of institutions to, in effect, become highly liquid because any of 
the assets could be sold to the central bank at short notice (at a market price, assuming that 
could be determined, and a suitable over collateralisation of course)? 
One view is that this would be a good thing, because, for the private sector, holding large 
amounts  of  low  yielding  assets  in  order  to  guard  against  occasional  spikes  in  liquidity 
preference is costly. Arguably, this cost is unnecessary since the central bank can provide 
liquidity  to  the  system  on  those  occasions  as  needed,  at  little  cost,  against  any  asset  it 
deems  suitable.  On  this  view,  a  reduction  in  “unnecessary”  holdings  of  low  yielding  liquid 
assets would lower costs of intermediation and result in a higher real capital stock, raising 
per capita income over time. 
But such ready provision of liquidity would trouble many people including, I suspect, most of 
my central banking forebears. An asset can be illiquid for several reasons, including genuine 
uncertainty about its underlying value. If private institutions took on additional liquidity risk, 
confident that the central bank would always help them out if liquidity conditions tightened, 
they could easily end up taking on more of these other risks as well. This would leave both 
them and the central bank in an awkward position at some future time should things take a 
turn for the worse. And for the central bank to act as a market maker of last resort in markets 
for more exotic instruments would be a very big step, potentially with many unforeseeable 
consequences. 
These are pretty big questions. I suspect that they will increasingly be debated over time. My 
own view, given what we know at present, is that in periods of particularly unusual market 
duress, central banks should be prepared to move beyond the normal scope of operations to 
provide  liquidity  against  a  broad  range  of  assets  and  over  a  longer  maturity  than  might 
normally  be  considered.  There  are  two  provisos.  First,  the  central  bank  has  to  be  able  to 
make a reasonable valuation decision about the underlying asset, and take sufficient excess 
collateral (a “haircut”) to protect its own position. This probably rules out exotic instruments 
except  under  the  most  dire  of  circumstances.  Second,  a  preparedness  for  forceful 
intervention  in  a  crisis  situation  has  to  be  balanced  with  some  thinking  about  ways  of 
restraining developments in the other direction when risk appetite is high. That, needless to 
say, is no easy matter. 
The “lender of last resort” 
Having talked about normal liquidity operations, we must then turn our attention to the role of 
lender of last resort, where the central bank lends to one specific entity, when no one else 
will. The first question is: why do  we need it? The reason is the possibility – albeit a very 
remote one – that a panic could put overwhelming pressure on a perfectly sound institution 
that, though prudently managed, cannot possibly hold enough liquid assets to withstand the 
pressure unaided. Some entity has to be prepared to lend in such a situation if the market 
will not, otherwise the panic can imperil the institution concerned, and perhaps the financial 
system as well.5
The notion has quite a history. The earliest use of the term seems to have been attributed to 
Sir Francis Baring, who in 1797 referred to the Bank of England as “the dernier resort”, able 
to provide funds to an entity when all other sources had been closed off.6 Early writings on 
                                                 
5  
I should be clear here that I am not talking about the narrow role where central banks routinely provide funds 
to an institution that has had some operational snag and found itself short of funds at the end of the day. Such 
standing facilities operate routinely in most countries. We are really interested here in the much more taxing 
situation  where  the  standing  facility  is  not  adequate.  This  is  where  the  lender  of  last  resort  really  has  an 
important decision to make, about whether to lend and, if so, on what terms. 
6   See Humphrey and Keleher (1984), p. 79. 
4 
 BIS Review 43/2008
what is “good” collateral? and  
what is an appropriate rate of interest?  
the idea came from Henry Thornton (1802) and Walter Bagehot (1873). Thornton, writing in 
the late 18th and early 19th centuries, saw the Old Lady of Threadneedle Street as playing a 
stabilising role in times of crisis, to prevent a rapid reduction in credit caused by a shrinkage 
of the deposit base of the banking system.  
Bagehot’s classic Lombard Street appeared in 1873 with what has ever since been seen as 
the consummate statement of the responsibility of the lender of last resort. For Bagehot, it 
was  clear  that  the  Bank  of  England  should  lend  substantial  liquid  resources  on  a  secured 
basis to a financial institution that had reasonable asset quality (i.e. was solvent) but which 
faced  short  term  funding  difficulties.  Bagehot’s  dictum  was  “Lend  freely  against  good 
collateral at a high rate of interest”. It is frequently quoted still, and has been referenced more 
often over the past year than for a long time.7
The question is how to put it into practice. Even leaving aside the obvious potential difficulties 
in assessing solvency in real time, the Bagehot formula leaves open two important questions:  
• 
• 
The collateral involved is not necessarily going to be the standard sort of liquid assets. By 
definition, much of that collateral may already have been used before the bank reached the 
point of needing a loan of last resort. So the assets in question are likely to be some part of 
the  bank’s  loan  book,  or  some  physical  asset  of  the  bank.  Presumably  it  is  “good”  if  it  is 
priced at a value that could be realised if necessary under “normal” market conditions. But for 
some  assets,  valuations  are  notoriously  difficult,  especially  in  periods  of  economic  and 
financial distress where there is a large amount of uncertainty about where market pricing 
might eventually settle. 
As for the interest rate, Bagehot’s formula is often invoked with reference to a “penalty rate”, 
even though he did not actually stipulate that.8 It is customary to motivate the need for the 
penalty by pointing to moral hazard: the possibility that banks may behave imprudently if they 
expect  to  be  “bailed  out”  inexpensively  should  they  get  into  trouble.  That  is  an  important 
point. But how does one decide how much penalty is enough? Should it, like most penalties, 
be related to the extent of the misdemeanour? If the bank has just been incredibly unlucky, 
should  the  penalty  be  lighter  than  if  it  has  been  imprudent?  Would  we  always  be  able  to 
distinguish between those two cases?  
Clearly, since the intention is to keep the bank operating, the penalty should not be so big 
that  it  leaves  the  bank’s  interest spread  between  assets and  liabilities  negative, since  that 
would  actually  hasten  insolvency.9  Some  aspects  of  the  penalty  are  also  likely  to  be  non 
pecuniary  for  the  institution  per  se,  but  nonetheless  not  ineffective.  The  price  of  official 
                                                 
7  
In  Australia’s  history,  since  Federation,  there  have  been  few  instances  where  last  resort  support  has  been 
provided.  The  first  was  to  the  Primary  Producers  Bank  by  the  Commonwealth  Bank  in  1931.  The  Reserve 
Bank also provided loans to three private banks in support of those banks’ efforts to provide funds to illiquid 
building societies in 1974 and 1979 (see Fitz-Gibbon and Gizycki (2001)). 
8   Some commentators associate Bagehot’s dictum with the application of a ‘penalty’ rate of interest. However, 
as Goodhart (1999) points out, Bagehot did not state that the interest rate necessarily needs to be above the 
market rate prevailing after the onset of the panic. While Bagehot insisted on a ‘high’ rate of interest, it seems 
that the only condition was that the interest rate be above the pre panic market rate. 
9   There is a case for it being relatively small, in fact, particularly if the ‘haircut’ taken on the collateral is large 
enough  to  reduce  the  risk  to  the  central  bank  to  a  trivial  size.  Martin  (2005)  is  in  support  of  central  banks 
providing last resort support at low interest rates if required. She concludes that one of the main reasons why 
Bagehot  insisted  on  a  imposing  a  high  rate  of  interest  was  because  England  was  operating  under  a  gold 
standard at the time, and the Bank of England therefore had to ration overall liquidity. With this not a concern 
in today’s world, Martin argues that central banks should be able to provide last resort loans at relatively low 
interest rates if need be. 
BIS Review 43/2008 
 5
assistance may, for example, involve the departure of the CEO, some other executives and 
some or all of the board, and losses for shareholders. 
Apart  from  these  issues,  other  potential  complications  can  be  noted.  One  is  disclosure.  In 
almost  all  circumstances,  disclosure  is  highly  desirable:  an  informed  market  is  a  fair  and 
efficient one. But the communications surrounding emergency liquidity assistance are critical 
in determining the chances of success. It would appear that it was information that the Bank 
of England was about to offer assistance to Northern Rock – which, objectively, should have 
strengthened its position compared with the alternative – that precipitated the queues in the 
streets.  Wholesale  lenders  to  that  institution  would  have  already  known  that  it  was  under 
pressure,  but  the  news  of  official  assistance  told  retail  depositors,  in  effect,  there  was  a 
problem and they reacted accordingly. The design of the UK deposit insurance system may 
also have been a contributor, in that less than full insurance and the possibility of a delay in 
receiving insured funds can add to the incentive for a run. In this complex situation, the UK 
authorities found it difficult to stabilise things, until the government issued a strong guarantee 
of Northern Rock’s obligations. 
A final issue is the re financing of the last resort loan in the private sector once the situation 
has stabilised. If there is ongoing general market turmoil, as in the case in question, then it 
can be difficult for a private firm to replace the public funding at a price that allows the bank 
in question to remain viable. In such an instance, the government faces the choice between 
providing  the  institution  with  longer  term  support  –  either  a  long  term  loan  or  taking 
ownership  –  subsidising  a  takeover  or  closing  it.  In  the  UK  case,  Northern  Rock  is  being 
taken into public ownership for a time. In the US, the takeover of Bear Stearns – which, of 
course, is not strictly a bank – by JPMorgan Chase is being assisted by a long term facility 
provided by the Federal Reserve, which carries some credit risk for the Fed. In each case, 
there  is  ongoing  discussion  about  what  value  the  previous  shareholders  can  reasonably 
expect to get from the resolution. The prospect of legal action is, of course, a potential further 
complication. 
All  this  illustrates  that  the  role  of  lender  of  last  resort  is  actually  quite  challenging  in  the 
modern world. Thankfully, observations in the time series of large financial near failures are 
few, and recent ones have been in other countries. But when they do occur, it is important to 
learn as much as we can from them. Central banks and supervisory authorities around the 
world are seeking to do just that. No doubt very thorough evaluations and recommendations 
will  appear  in  due  course.  At  this  point,  I  would  summarise  the  general  lessons  from  the 
recent events as follows. 
First, well designed regular facilities that allow adequate access to central bank liquidity in 
times of pressure – either generalised or firm specific – are helpful in avoiding the authorities 
finding themselves in the position of needing to contemplate the extension of a loan of last 
resort. 
Second, if firm specific assistance beyond the normal channels is required, the central bank 
has  to  have  very  quickly  a  clear  idea  of  the  solvency  of  the  entity  concerned,  and  of  the 
quality of collateral available in order for the terms of any assistance to be set. A good deal of 
that  information  has  to  come  from  the  prudential  supervisor.  Where  that  is  not  the  central 
bank  itself,  this  means  that  an  effective  relationship  between  the  central  bank  and  the 
supervisor is essential. 
Third, the government needs to be involved early on, for several reasons. Apart from the fact 
that it owns the central bank and would therefore ultimately carry any risk the central bank 
might take on in these transactions, there is a need for clear and consistent communication 
by all the authorities at an early stage. Further, any decision to extend support to an insolvent 
institution  on  systemic  or  national  interest  grounds  would  be  one  properly  taken  by  a 
government under advice, not a central bank itself. 
Fourth,  if  support  for  an  institution  in  difficulty  were  to  turn  out  to  be  more  than  just 
temporary, the public sector would face difficult issues of how to structure that support. Any 
6 
 BIS Review 43/2008
such  support  should,  however,  come  at  considerable  cost  to  the  private  owners  and 
managers of the troubled entity. Public sector support should not be used to “bail out” private 
shareholders or those who were responsible for running the troubled institution. 
Conclusion 
Australians have been observing the major financial events of the past year mainly from the 
sidelines. While there have been some pressures coming through to our system, the most 
dramatic outcomes have been offshore. We can, nonetheless, draw some conclusions from 
these  events.  We  have  learned,  or  perhaps  re  learned,  a  good  deal  about  the  nature  of 
liquidity, markets and the role of central banks over the past year. 
One key lesson is the importance of liquidity in markets and to institutions, something that 
perhaps had not been emphasised as much as it should have been in regulation, where the 
emphasis has been very much on capital. We have further learned that, under conditions of 
great uncertainty, liquidity pressures can erupt in markets that had seldom been affected in 
the past. Central banks have responded quickly and flexibly to such events, but it has proven 
difficult to contain the pressures fully. Some quite important questions remain for the longer 
run, which central banks will be considering. 
A  second  lesson  is  the  difficulty  in  resolving  a  problem  with  an  individual  institution  under 
strained overall conditions. Bagehot’s formula provides only the most general of guidance; 
making it operational requires considerable judgement. If and when such an event comes, it 
tends to have its own unique elements and a particular set of circumstances as backdrop. 
Speed  and  flexibility  in  response  are  essential.  So  is  consistent  and  early  communication, 
since  disclosure  of  support,  if  not  managed  very  carefully,  could  turn  out  to  make  the 
situation worse rather than better. 
A third lesson is that a loan of last resort is, in the end, probably simply bridging finance while 
a takeover or major re structure of the recipient institution is organised. The recipient would 
very likely see a change in its business model, management, board and ownership structure. 
It  could  well  require  a  pretty  clear  statement  of  temporary  government  support.  All  of  this 
would need to be organised very quickly. 
To  be  in  a  position  to  help,  central  banks  have  to  keep  an  ear  closely  tuned  to  market 
developments – a sceptical one in the years of good times, and a sensitive one in periods of 
duress. A very good working relationship with the prudential supervisor, where that is not the 
central bank, is also essential. This is the case in Australia. 
I am not sure exactly what Sir Leslie Melville might have made of these conclusions. But we 
know  that  he  responded  practically  and  effectively  to  the  issues  of  his  day,  which  were 
concentrated  around  the  role  of  policies  in  preserving  economic  and  financial  stability.  I 
imagine he would expect those of us in the field 70 years later to be equally practical in the 
light  of  the  experiences  of  our  own  time.  These  demonstrate  all  too  clearly  that  for  all  its 
apparent  sophistication,  the  modern  financial  system  still  needs  the  occasional  stabilising 
hand of a government and/or central bank. Melville would certainly have recognised that very 
quickly. To meet these challenges, we will need to continue to adapt our own thinking and 
practices.  
References 
Australian Financial System Inquiry (1981), Australian Financial System: Final Report of the 
Committee  of  Inquiry,  (J  Campbell,  Chairman),  Australian  Government  Publishing  Service, 
Canberra. 
Bagehot,  W.  (1873),  Lombard  Street,  A  Description  of  the  Money  Market.  Reprint,  Smith, 
Elder & Co, London, 1912.  
BIS Review 43/2008 
 7
No 
No 
Paper 
Paper 
2001-07. 
Available 
Research 
Discussion 
Buiter, W. and A. Sibert (2007), “The Central Bank as a Market Maker of Last Resort: From 
Lender  of  Last  Resort  to  Market  Maker  of  Last  Resort”,  VoxEU.org  Research  Column. 
Available at http://www.voxeu.org/index.php?q=node/459. 
Cornish, S. (1993), “Sir Leslie Melville: An Interview”, Economic Record, 69(207), pp. 437-
457. 
Cornish,  S.  (1999),  “Sir  Leslie  Melville:  Keynesian  or  Pragmatist?”,  History  of  Economics 
Review, 30, Summer, pp. 126-150. 
Cornish, S. (2007), “Sir Leslie Galfreid Melville”, in J.E. King (ed.), A Biographical Dictionary 
of Australian and New Zealand Economists, Edward Elgar Publishing, Cheltenham, pp. 187-
192. 
Fisher, C. and C. Kent (1999), “Two Depressions, One Banking Collapse”, Reserve Bank of 
Australia 
at 
1999-06. 
http://www.rba.gov.au/PublicationsAndResearch/RDP/RDP1999-06.html. 
Fitz-Gibbon, B. and M. Gizycki (2001), “A History of Last-Resort Lending and Other Support 
for  Troubled  Financial  Institutions  in  Australia”,  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia  Research 
Discussion 
at 
http://www.rba.gov.au/PublicationsAndResearch/RDP/RDP2001-07.html. 
Garnaut, R. (2004), “The Boom of 1989 and Now”, Remarks to the Third Sir Leslie Melville 
Lecture, Canberra, 3 December. 
Goodhart, CAE. (1999), “Myths about the Lender of Last Resort”, in C. Goodhart and G. Illing 
(eds) (2002), Financial Crises, Contagion, and the Lender of Last Resort: A Reader, Oxford 
University Press, Oxford, pp. 227–248. 
Goodhart,  CAE.  (2008),  “Liquidity  and  Money  Market  Operations”,  Presentation  to  the 
London  School  of  Economics,  Financial  Markets  Group  Conference  on  “The  Regulatory 
Response 
at 
http://fmg.lse.ac.uk/events/detail.php?mainid=1&eventid=2276&ecatid=319&termcode=LT. 
Humphrey,  TM.  and  RE.  Keleher  (1984),  “The  Lender  of  Last  Resort:  A  Historical 
Perspective”, in C. Goodhart and G. Illing (eds) (2002), Financial Crises, Contagion, and the 
Lender of Last Resort: A Reader, Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp. 73–108. 
Macfarlane, IJ. (2002), “Sir Leslie Melville: His Contribution to Central Banking in Australia”, 
Remarks  to  the  Inaugural  Sir  Leslie  Melville  Lecture,  Canberra,  22  March.  Available  at 
http://www.rba.gov.au/Speeches/2002/sp_gov_220302.html. 
Martin, A. (2005), “Reconciling Bagehot with the Fed’s Response to September 11”, Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report No 217. 
Poole,  W.  (1970),  “Optimal  Choice  of  Monetary  Policy  Instruments  in  a  Simple  Stochastic 
Macro Model”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 84(2), pp. 197–216. 
Thornton,  H.  (1802),  An  Enquiry  into  the  Nature  and  Effects  of  the  Paper  Credit  of  Great 
Britain, Reprint, George Allen & Unwin Ltd, London, 1939. 
January.  Available 
Financial  Crisis”, 
Available 
London, 
the 
30 
to 
8 
 BIS Review 43/2008
