Ajith Nivard Cabraal: Responsibilities of financial institution directors in 
the current turmoil  
Address  by  Mr  Ajith  Nivard  Cabraal,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Sri  Lanka,  at  the 
Seminar  on  Regulation,  Governance  and  Legal  Responsibilities  of  Directors  of  the 
Registered Finance Companies, Colombo, 24 April 2008. 
 Deputy Governors, Assistant Governors, Directors of Finance Companies, My dear friends, 
I welcome you warmly to this seminar organized by the Department of Supervision of Non-
Bank Financial Institutions. I also want to say “thank you” to all of you for taking the time to 
participate at this important occasion. 
You may have wondered as to why the Central Bank has decided to have a seminar of this 
nature and invited you to spend nearly half a day with us. Therefore, at the outset, I will try to 
give you a little insight into the financial turmoil that the world is facing today. Many of you, I 
am sure, are aware of the upheaval that is taking place worldwide, and I am also sure many 
of you understand the risks that are associated with it.  
My dear friends, somewhere around July-August of last year, various changes took place in 
the financial world. It started softly, like all difficulties, like all problems, and then suddenly, 
we realized that it was gathering momentum. The expression “sub-prime issue” was first of 
all, whispered; people didn't say it out loud; many didn’t even know what it is. However, they 
soon realized that there was a serious issue that was brewing; some danger lurking. Then, 
gradually people realized that a major calamity was taking place in the financial markets of 
the world. 
The crisis gathered momentum and then people also realized that the problem was highly 
complex; little by little, the major triple A rated banks also started to feel the impact. Banks 
realized that they have to change positions, and they started doing that. Some of the biggest 
banks in the world, who were highly rated for many many years, and held in esteem all over 
the world as being institutions that could never be in danger, began to feel the pinch. 
Then,  we  heard  about  the  European  Central  Bank,  the  Federal  Reserve  and  the  Bank  of 
England pumping money into the mortgage markets in order to save the markets. We also 
heard about Northern Rock. The Bank of England had to put in well over 30 billion pounds, 
that is, more than double the GDP of Sri Lanka, just to save this one institution. The rescue 
even led to the nationalisation of the Northern Rock Bank: an outcome unthinkable just a few 
months  ago!  Then  came  Bear  Stearns,  and  the  writedowns  of  the  major  banks.  The  Bear 
Stearns share, which was trading at well over US$ 100/- per share just a week before the 
event, was to be given to JP Morgans at $2. At the same time, the Federal Reserve was to 
pump many more billions of dollars to prop up the Bank. Now they have negotiated the price 
per share up to $10, or so I believe, but yet an amazing debacle! Then, there was also the 
case of Société Générale, which, although some what unconnected to the sub-prime issue, 
showed what may be happening underneath a calm exterior. 
While  all  this  was  happening  the  risk  of  the  US  economy  going  into  recession  was 
increasingly  becoming  very  real.  So,  the  US  Government  and  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank 
have to come up with what is now hailed as a “Policy Stimulus Package”, (which actually is 
what we, in our part of the world may quite naively and innocently call a “Hand-out”), in order 
to  deal  with  the  situation.  The  US  Government  generous  hand-out  was  going  to  be  to  the 
tune of a massive 160 billion dollars, more than 5 times the GDP of Sri Lanka! So, this is the 
type of turmoil that the world is in today. 
We,  in  Sri  Lanka,  cannot  think  that  we  are  well  isolated  from  all  these  problems  and  that 
these happenings will not affect us. We cannot think that the deadly virus will not catch up 
BIS Review 55/2008 
 1
with us and infect us as well. It is therefore time for us to reflect on these situations and try to 
be a step ahead. That is what saves financial markets – being a step ahead!  
I remember in February 2007, our Central Bank introduced an additional 1% provision for all 
performing loans of banks, because we realized that there was bubble that was forming. But, 
the  public  and  media  reaction  to  that  policy  action  was  somewhat  rough.  The  next  day’s 
newspaper  headlines  said  that  Cabraal  has  delivered  a  kidney  punch  to  the  banks;  some 
claimed that we were killing the industry; others lamented that we are making it difficult for 
the  banks  unnecessarily.  Today,  one  year  and  2  months  later,  people  realize  that  our 
anticipation  has  saved  the  day.  We  don't  want  everyone  to  get  up  and  shout  and 
acknowledge  it.  But  perhaps  those  of  you  who  are  directors  of  finance  companies,  as 
persons who are responsible for about 5% of the financial system of this country, would now 
realize  that,  there  are  certain  steps  that  need  to  be  taken  early  in  order  to  safeguard  the 
entire industry.  
Sometimes, some people tell us, “our shareholders have been the ones who have made us. 
Our depositors have been continuously supported us. Therefore, we are responsible to our 
shareholders  and  depositors,  and  nobody  else”.  Perhaps,  there  is  some  truth  in  that 
statement.  But,  think  about  this  a  little  more  deeply.  What  would  happen  if  one  finance 
company fails? Do you think your depositors are going to have the same confidence in you, 
even if it is somebody else that has failed? Do you think they are going to say, “it’s okay. 
Only one finance company has failed. The company that we have deposited our money in is 
okay. Therefore, we can go on without any problem”. Do you remember the finance company 
crisis in the late 1980s and early 1990s? When one finance company failed, what happened? 
Why is it that Northern Rock had to be supported so strongly by the Bank of England, even 
though it is not a clearing bank? Isn’t it simply because the Bank of England realized that if 
one major bank fails, the domino effect, or the contagion effect will take place? So, my dear 
friends, it must be now clear to you, that as directors, you are not only responsible to your 
shareholders;  you  are  not  only  responsible  to  your  own  depositors;  you  are  also  indirectly 
responsible to all depositors. Don't forget that if one fails, the resulting effect on the industry 
and the markets is going to be very very serious. Nobody is going to be spared. That's why 
we want you all to understand your responsibilities. That's why we take the necessary steps 
to  regulate  the  industry  so  diligently.  We  have  a  responsibility,  to  preserve  the  financial 
system stability of this country. We take that responsibility seriously. We realize that if one 
finance company were to have difficulties, that it can have harmful effects on the others as 
well. That is why we issue directions and circulars. That is why we have teams who are well 
trained  to  supervise,  monitor  and  regulate.  We  want  to  be  regulators  who  will  be  able  to 
understand you, and work with you in order to preserve the financial system stability of this 
country.  
Occasionally, we place advertisements in the newspapers saying that such and such banks, 
finance companies and leasing companies are regulated by the Central Bank. Do you know 
that  immediately  after  our  advertisements,  we  get  many  calls?  The  callers  say,  “we  have 
deposited our money in such and such institution. But, we don’t see its name in your list. Is 
that  institute  regulated?”  When  we  say  that  such  organization  is  not  regulated,  many  get 
frightened. So you see, people take regulation seriously. People believe that if something is 
regulated, then there is some element of order that is brought into that system. We are well 
aware  of  this  and  therefore  we  take  a  lot  of  pains  to  fulfil  the  regulating  task.  We  have  a 
Deputy  Governor  in-charge  who  looks  into  all  these  aspects.  We  have  the  Department  of 
Supervision of Non-Bank Financial Institutions that supervises finance companies. They take 
their jobs seriously. That is why they are organizing a seminar of this nature.  
Today,  the  business  world  is  continuously  looking  at  risk  and  trying  to  figure  out  how  to 
manage  risk  and  hedge  against  risk.  Sometimes,  unfortunately,  some  directors  of  finance 
companies think that they are immune from this risk. Some of them say: “we have a highly 
respected chairman; we have a super CEO. We have entrusted the entire management to 
those wonderful persons; they are very good; they are well known; they know their subject; 
2 
 BIS Review 55/2008
so therefore we can take it easy and relax.” That appears to be their philosophy. If you think 
so,  you  may  do  that.  But  remember,  you  would  be  doing  that  at  your  own  risk!  You  must 
realize  that  you  are  also  fully  responsible.  It  is  the  collective  board  that  will  be  held 
accountable. 
Recently, you may have recently seen some advertisements that were placed by the Failed 
Finance Companies Commission, summoning all the directors, in the course of their inquiry. 
They  have  not  said,  “we  will  summon  only  the  chairmen  and  CEOs  of  the  failed  finance 
companies”. No. They have summoned all. That is perfectly correct because every Director 
is responsible. So, each one of you too, will be responsible in the future with regard to your 
Company. That is why we have invited eminent professionals to come and explain to you, 
your  duties  and  responsibilities.  Sometimes,  directors  may  not  really  appreciate  their 
responsibilities  and  they  may  be  quite  comfortable  about  leaving  key  decisions  to  their 
colleagues, whom they trust implicitly. Maybe, you may comfortably place your trust in them, 
and  indeed  you  may  think  you  are  entitled  to  do  so,  because  you  are  working  together. 
Nevertheless,  when  you  take  up  a  position  as  a  board  member,  you  also  have  a 
responsibility to discharge your responsibility in a very professional and systematic manner.  
My dear friends, it is necessary for everyone to exercise a certain financial discipline within 
the organization. If the top people are lax, or if the board members do not ask the questions 
that  need  to  be  asked,  then  the  tendency  is  for  financial  discipline  to  erode  within  the 
company. My dear Chairmen and CEOs, don't be frightened of, or upset with, the people who 
ask tough questions at Board Meetings. My dear Directors, don't feel over-awed or shy to ask 
the tough questions at Board meetings. You must do that. We want you, as Directors, to do 
that  because  it  is  not  possible  for  the  Department  of  Supervision  of  Non-Bank  Financial 
Institutions to be doing all the questioning from the Chairmen & CEOs. We are performing a 
regulatory function. We will see whether the overall framework is in place. We will want to 
see whether your overall risk assessment positioning is acceptable. But, the actual running of 
the business is your responsibility. You have to ask the tough questions. You have to ensure 
that sound internal controls are in place. You have to look at the future plans to ascertain 
whether you are on the right track.  
Often, I have seen eminent and respectable people accepting board positions, but not getting 
involved in the governance of the company. That is not good enough, especially in finance 
companies. Remember that your personal liability, will also be at stake in case of failure and 
such loss can be quite substantial if you have not taken the right steps. So, take the interest; 
take the time to study, and, be diligent in your activities. Actually, if you do that, you will find 
that  it  is  much  better  for  your  Company,  much  safer  for  yourself,  much  easier  for  the 
regulator, and much easier for the market.  
My dear friends, risk can be a sudden occurrence. Risk can, at the same time, be slow in 
coming.  You  don’t  know  which  risk  is  there,  but  you  have  to  be  alive  to  risk.  Today, 
management is all about risk management. What are the risks in doing something? What will 
be the repercussions? What will be the dangers? You have to think-safety first, just like how 
it is said at some of the modern construction sites. When you go to some construction sites, 
you see a large sign that says “safety first”. Why? Because you have to survive before you 
are able to construct, and accidents can be both painful and costly. In looking at safety, in the 
case of financial institutions, the important factor is to focus on liquidity management. You 
may be profitable. You may be having a very good plan for the future. But if you do not have 
liquidity, i.e., if you do not have cash to meet your obligations, you cannot survive. It is like a 
very fit athlete who can run very fast. But, if the athlete cannot breathe for some reason, he 
will soon be dead notwithstanding his fitness. Your liquidity, or your cash inflows and cash 
outflows  is  also  like  breathing  in  and  out.  These  cash  flows  have  to  be  monitored  very 
carefully. Liquidity management has to be practised diligently. The board members of finance 
companies must also learn and appreciate the principle of liquidity management. Don't think 
that it can only be left to the executives of the company. In the final analysis, the executives 
may not even be responsible in a legal sense. The legal responsibility will rest with you! 
BIS Review 55/2008 
 3
I am sure the other speakers will expand on all these aspects that I touched upon. So, I will 
now conclude with a few overall thoughts. 
My dear friends, take your responsibilities as Directors very seriously. Keep abreast of what 
is happening. Keep abreast of the markets. Keep abreast of the risks that are taking place, 
both  globally  and  locally.  Watch  the  world  and  environment  carefully.  Be  alive  to  new 
techniques. Take the interest to do all that, because if you do, then we can all have a healthy 
market.  That  is  what  we  at  the  Central  Bank,  are  hoping  you  would  discharge  your 
responsibilities diligently. The last thing we would like to do is to call you up and to say that 
your  business  is  not  run  properly.  We  don’t  want  to  do  that.  But,  at  the  same  time,  in  the 
interest  of  the  entire  system,  there may  be  occasions  that we  have  to  do  that.  So,  please 
understand the rationale for our regulation. We are responsible for financial system stability 
and you, in an indirect way, are also responsible for that.  
4 
 BIS Review 55/2008
