Y V Reddy: Global financial turbulence and the financial sector in India – 
a practitioner’s perspective 
Address by Dr Y V Reddy, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Meeting of the Task 
Force  on  Financial  Markets  Regulation,  organized  by  the  Initiative  for  Policy  Dialogue, 
Manchester, United Kingdom, 1 July 2008.  
 Madam Chairperson, Governor Williams, and friends, 
At the outset I would like to thank The Initiative for Policy Dialogue, and Professors Stiglitz, 
Griffith-Jones, and Ocampo for providing me this opportunity to participate and incidentally 
share  my  thoughts  on  the  recent  developments  in  the  global  financial  markets  and  its 
implications for both the developing and the developed countries. My presentation will initially 
provide  a  broad  overview  of  the  global  developments  and  then  move  on  to  briefly  list  the 
aspects of market and regulatory failures which characterised the recent developments. I will 
then lay down the broad contours of the financial sector policies in India, with the details of a 
few  specific  initiatives  relevant  to  financial  stability.  The  concluding  remarks  will  be  in  the 
nature of a few broad issues for further debate. 
I.  
Global financial markets 
Recent developments 
While the trigger for the global developments in the financial markets during the recent past 
was the rising default rates on sub-prime mortgages in the US, the source of the problem 
was  perhaps  not  the  macro-global  imbalances  but  significant  mispricing  of  risks  in  the 
financial  system.  Easy  monetary  policy  in  major  financial  centres,  globalisation  of  liquidity 
flows, wide-spread use of highly complex structured debt instruments and the inadequacy of 
banking  supervision  in  coping  with  financial  innovations,  contributed  to  the  severity  of  the 
crisis. The persistent under pricing of risks was suspected by several central banks for quite 
some time, but it was felt by many that these risks were widely dispersed through financial 
innovation and that they would not pose any serious problems to the banking system. When 
the sub-prime crisis did occur, however, it triggered a wide contagion affecting many of the 
large global financial institutions. Banks, in particular, appear to have ceased to trust each 
other’s creditworthiness leading to difficulties in the money markets in the US, Europe and 
the UK resulting in drying up of liquidity, since each financial institution attempted to shore up 
its own liquidity to meet its obligations. The problems of maturity mismatch in the conduits or 
structured  investment  vehicles  (SIVs)  created  by  the  banks  for  purposes  of  securitisation 
manifested  themselves  in  a  sudden  spurt  in  demand  for  liquidity  from  banks  to  meet  their 
liquidity support obligations to the SIVs or to fund the assets of the SIVs that were taken on 
to their balance sheets. It is now realised that the relevant banks have leveraged excessively 
and  had  not  fully  recognised  the  risks  or  had  seriously  underpriced  them,  thus  warranting 
large capital infusion. Uncertainty about the possible losses yet to be disclosed by several of 
them has not yet ceased.  
These developments have brought forward several new realities that pose severe challenges 
to macro-economic management, in particular to monetary and regulatory policies globally. 
First,  concerns  relating  to  the  US  slowdown  and  its  intensity  have  mounted  in  view  of  the 
potential  spill  over  on  to  the  global  economy.  Second,  threats  to  the  global  economy  are 
emanating from advanced economies in sharp contrast to earlier crises which stemmed from 
BIS Review 87/2008 
 1
financial 
turmoil  reflecting  relatively  stronger  macroeconomic 
the emerging world. Third, there are indications that protectionist tendencies have increased 
around  the  world  in  anticipation  of  the  growing  possibilities  of  slower  growth  in  advanced 
economies. Fourth, linkages between financial sector developments and the real sector have 
become more worrisome than before, with apprehensions that financial turmoil may spill over 
to  the  real sector  with adverse  implications  for  employment  and  growth.  With  tightening  in 
lending standards, deterioration in asset quality and deceleration in consumer loan demand, 
there are indications that events in the financial markets are beginning to have a persisting 
impact on the real economy as well. Fifth, higher and more volatile prices of food, energy and 
other  commodities  have  compounded  the  problem,  causing  a  significant  upside  bias  to 
inflation  and  inflation  expectations  across  the  world,  complicating  the  conduct  of  monetary 
policy  at  a  time  of  severe  financial  stress.  Further,  while  rising  energy  prices  may  be  an 
exogenous shock for several countries, for the global economy as a whole it is endogenous. 
Sixth, terms-of-trade losses due to soaring commodity prices not only reduce the capacity of 
a re-balancing of the world economy but also impact several countries in different ways but 
essentially in an adverse fashion. In fact, it is possible that new global economic imbalances 
are emerging on account of large movements in commodity prices, especially oil. Seventh, 
Emerging  Market  Economies  (EMEs)  are  exhibiting  resilience  until  now  in  the  face  of  the 
global 
framework  and 
sustainable  macroeconomic  balances.  However,  until  how  long  and  to  what  extent  it  will 
persist  is  uncertain.  On  the  other  hand,  inflationary  pressures  appear  to  be  common  to 
mature economies and EMEs but the latter are under greater stress. 
The central banks in major countries have had to take recourse, in appropriate mix, to three 
instruments  to  avoid  serious  spill-over  of  these  issues  in money  or  credit  markets  into  the 
wider economy: (i) adjustment of interest rates for borrowing and lending; (ii) money market 
operations  designed  to  inject  special  liquidity  in  order  to  avoid  a  break-down  in  payment 
systems among banks, and (iii) to put in mechanisms for financial transactions among the 
largest of the financial intermediaries which automatically impact the second and third rung 
intermediaries.  Central  banks  in  major  industrialised  economies,  by  and  large,  responded 
with injection of liquidity for a longer period than is usually done; they also resorted to dilution 
in  the  quality  of  collateral  required  for  liquidity  support.  Most  of  these  operations  have  not 
been  conducted  at  the  penal  rates  expected  in  such  situations.  This  is  an  unprecedented 
package  which,  some  observers  believe,  is  indicative  of  the  seriousness  of  the  underlying 
problems. In addition, there were some specific-institution oriented operations, namely, in the 
United  States,  Germany  and  the  United  Kingdom.  While  there  have  been  inflationary 
pressures in most economies, the USA has been faced with a threat of serious slowdown in 
growth warranting a series of cuts in policy rates in recent months. 
In recent weeks, concerns over inflationary pressures globally have taken the centre-stage 
even while there are no indications as to whether threats to financial stability have been fully 
resolved and whether persistent threats of recession in USA have abated. Consequently, the 
policy  dilemmas  have  become  more  acute  at  the  current  juncture.  The  most  urgent  and 
short-term priority for central bankers at the current juncture seems to be to calm the nerves 
about  inflation  or  to  anchor  inflation  expectations,  with  an  implicit  recognition  that  a 
somewhat elevated headline inflation in the short-term may be difficult to avoid. Further, high 
inflation  rates  when  accompanied  by  higher  variability  of 
inflation,  raises  greater 
uncertainties.  These  acute  policy  dilemmas  at  the  current  juncture  between  growth  and 
inflation  have  to  be  faced  in  the  background  of  financial  turbulence  which  is  yet  to  calm 
down.  There  are  also  calls  for  fundamental  re-think  on  macro-economic,  monetary  and 
financial sector policies to meet the new challenges and realities, which perhaps represent a 
structural  shift  in  the  international  financial  architecture  demanding  potentially  enhanced 
degree of coordination among monetary authorities and regulators. A review of the policies 
relating to financial regulation, in a way, needs to address both the acute policy dilemmas in 
the short run and a fundamental re-think on broader frameworks of financial and economic 
policies over the medium-term. 
2 
 BIS Review 87/2008
Market failures 
What are some of the identifiable sources of market failures that led to the current financial 
turbulence?  
First,  the  prolonged  benign  macroeconomic  conditions  gave  rise  to  complacency  among 
many market participants and led to an erosion of sound practices, resulting in adoption of 
poor credit risk appraisal standards.  
Second,  some  of  the  standard  risk  management  tools  and  models  used  by  market 
participants  were  not  equipped  to  estimate  the  potential  impact  of  adverse  events  for 
structured credit products and high uncertainty around model estimates that largely missed 
the underlying combination of risks. Further, these risk models, generally tended to induce 
the market participants to adopt a unidirectional approach.  
Third, many investors, including institutional ones, with the capacity to undertake their own 
credit analysis, did not undertake sufficient in-house examination of the risks in the assets 
underlying structured investments.  
Fourth,  the  role  of  credit  rating  agencies  (CRAs)  in  the  recent  market  developments  has 
attracted attention.  
Fifth,  the  distortions  in incentive  structures  can  be  seen  from  various  perspectives  namely 
incentives for originators, arrangers, distributors and managers in the originate-to-distribute 
model;  the  compensation  schemes  in  financial  institutions  not  distinguishing  between 
realised  and  unrealised  profits;  encouraging  financial  structures  tailored  to  obtaining  high 
ratings etc. 
Sixth, weaknesses in public disclosures by financial institutions on the type and magnitude of 
risks associated with their on- and off-balance sheet exposures are noticeable.  
Seventh, large commercial banks and investment banks have assumed increasingly similar 
risk  profiles,  use  similar  models  to  assess  and  are  subject  to  the  same  risk-management 
challenges under the given circumstances.  
Eighth,  there  is  a  new  dimension  to  bank  liquidity,  with  the  shifting  emphasis  to  a  market 
based wholesale or purchased liabilities. This makes banks increasingly dependent on the 
market for raising liquidity, while markets may have a tendency to shy away from providing 
liquidity when they are most needed.  
Regulatory shortcomings 
While  the  foregoing  brings  out  the  failures  of  the  markets  and  of  the  market  participants, 
some of the regulatory shortcomings identified are as follows.  
First, the regulators recognised some of the underlying vulnerabilities in the financial sector 
but failed to take effective action, partly because they may have overestimated the strength 
and  resilience  of  the  financial  system  or  they  assumed  that  the  risks  were  well  distributed 
among  entities  outside  the  banking  system.  Many  analysts  and  policymakers  had  raised 
concerns  about  excessive 
loose  underwriting  standards,  and  asset 
overvaluations, all of which have in the absence of timely effective actions laid the seeds for 
crises.  
including  the  capital  adequacy 
Second, 
framework,  contributed  to  the  growth  of  unregulated  exposures,  excessive  risk-taking  and 
weak liquidity risk management.  
Third,  weaknesses  in  the  application  of  accounting  standards  and  the  shortcomings 
associated  with  the  valuation  and  financial  reporting  of  structured  products  played  a 
significant  role  in  the  current  turbulence  through  pro-cyclical  valuations  and  lack  of  full 
disclosure of banks’ true risk profile through the cycle.  
in  regulatory  arrangements, 
limitations 
taking, 
risk 
the 
BIS Review 87/2008 
 3
Fourth, the crisis revealed the need to adapt some of the tools and practices of central banks 
to  manage  system  liquidity  in  the  light  of  banks’  cross-border  operations.  The  recent 
experiences  have  highlighted  the  differences  in  emergency  liquidity  frameworks  of  central 
banks,  on  aspects  such  as  range  of  collateral,  range  of  eligible  counterparties;  and  the 
differences in central bank practices.  
Fifth, supervisors did not adequately address deterioration in risk management standards in 
the  regulated  entities,  which  did  not  fully  reckon  the  risks  associated  with  new  financial 
instruments, and there were shortcomings in consolidated supervision.  
Sixth, deficiencies in crisis management and bank resolution frameworks, including deposit 
insurance,  have  been  observed,  especially  where  central  banks  do  not  have  a  central 
supervisory role.  
Seventh,  the  complex  inter-relationship  between  regulation,  the  inappropriate  accounting 
practices, and regulators’ excessive dependence on external ratings may have exacerbated 
the market turbulence.  
Menu of solutions 
The  above  underlying  factors  clearly  demonstrate  a  need  to  enhance  the  resilience  of  the 
global  system  and  consider  some  of  the  prescriptions  that  have  been  proffered  for  the 
consideration of the policy makers. The recent developments in the global financial markets 
have  been  closely  followed  by  many.  These  include  market  participants,  central  bankers, 
supervisors,  multilateral  institutions,  political  leaders,  analysts,  academicians,  and  also  the 
layman.  With  so  much  attention  being  focused  on  the  ongoing  turbulence,  by  so  many 
stakeholders, we have a wide menu of solutions and prescriptions. I will quickly run-through 
some of these.  
First,  risk  management  frameworks  including  the  governance  arrangements  in  banks  and 
financial  institutions  need  to  be  reviewed  by  the  managements  in  the  light  of  the  recent 
experiences.  
Second,  supervisors  need  to  play  a  more  active  role  in  scrutinizing  the  risk  management 
practices, including stress testing and governance arrangements, off balance sheet entities 
and structured products.. At the same time, it is crucial to recognize that risk management 
cannot be achieved solely by regulation. Consolidated supervision and prudential reporting 
should  be  applied  to  off  balance  sheet  entities  associated  with  financial  institutions  and  to 
loans sold with implicit or explicit recourse. There is a need to review the prudential norms 
linked to external ratings assigned by the CRAs.  
Third, supervisors should encourage institutions to develop more robust models which use 
more prudent and reliable assumptions and stress testing methodologies; and monitor more 
closely the internal processes, and controls for managing risk.  
Fourth, there is a need to rationalise the regulatory and supervisory prescriptions with a view 
to reducing the scope for arbitraging. This also calls for closer coordination of the relevant 
supervisors / supervisory arms.  
Fifth, it is necessary to correct the imbalances in the incentive mechanisms at various levels.  
Sixth, greater transparency is not only necessary to make the markets more efficient and to 
optimise  the  allocation  of  capital,  but  it  is  also  considered  to  be  the  best  insurance  policy 
against irrational herd behaviour and unjustified contagion in times of stress.  
Seventh, there is a need to collectively review and resolve the element of pro-cyclicality in 
prudential regulations, accounting rules, and the attitude of the authorities that tend to apply 
these.  
Eighth, it is necessary for the CRAs to improve their governance and rating methodologies.  
4 
 BIS Review 87/2008
Ninth, arguably it is useful to re-visit the relevant accounting standards and explore the scope 
for applying fair value accounting through the cycle so as to mitigate pro-cyclicality.  
Tenth,  supervisors  should  have  clear  authority  to  intervene  at  the  first  sign  of  weakness, 
preferably much before the institution’s net worth turns negative.  
Finally, deposit insurance systems should aim to limit the likelihood of retail depositor runs in 
troubled banks through adequate coverage, and have the capacity to pay depositors quickly.  
II.  
Indian experience 
Ensuring financial stability 
In  contrast  to  the  above  global  scenario,  India  has  by-and-large  been  spared  of  global 
financial  contagion  due  to  the  sub-prime  turmoil  for  a  variety  of  reasons.  The  credit 
derivatives market is in an embryonic stage; the originate-to-distribute model in India is not 
comparable to the ones prevailing in advanced markets; there are restrictions on investments 
by resident  in such products issued abroad; and regulatory guidelines on securitisation do 
not permit immediate profit recognition. Financial stability in India has been achieved through 
perseverance of prudential policies which prevent institutions from excessive risk taking, and 
financial markets from becoming extremely volatile and turbulent. As a result, while there are 
orderly  conditions  in  financial  markets,  the  financial  institutions,  especially  banks,  reflect 
strength and resilience. While supervision is exercised by a quasi-independent Board carved 
out of the RBI Board, the interface between regulation and supervision is close in respect of 
banks  and  financial  institutions,  and  on  market  regulation,  a  close  coordination  with  other 
regulators exists. Let me recount this experience which, in some ways, reflects a policy that 
aimed to assure financial stability while maintaining growth momentum at reasonable levels 
and giving a high priority to price stability. 
Investment portfolio 
In  the  year  2000  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  (RBI)  conducted  a  stress  test  of  the  banks’ 
investment portfolio in an increasing interest rate scenario, when the general trend then was 
decreasing interest rates. At that time, banks in India were maintaining a surrogate capital 
charge for market risk, which was at a variance from the Basel norms. On the basis of the 
findings, in order to equip the banking system to be better positioned to meet the adverse 
impact of interest rate risk, banks were advised in January 2002 to build up an Investment 
Fluctuation Reserve (IFR) within a period of five years. The prudential target for the IFR was 
5  per  cent  of  their  investments  in  “Held  for  Trading”  (HFT)  and  “Available  for  Sale”  (AFS) 
categories. Banks were encouraged to build up a higher percentage of IFR up to 10 per cent 
of  their  AFS  and  HFT  investments.  This  counter-cyclical  prudential  requirement  enabled 
banks  to  absorb  some  of  the  adverse  impact  when  interest  rates  began  moving  in  the 
opposite direction in late 2004. Banks have been maintaining capital charge for market risk 
as envisaged under the Basel norms since end-March 2006. 
The  regulatory  guidelines  in  India  require  banks  to  classify  their  investments  in  three 
categories,  similar  to  the  international  standards.  The  investments  included  in  the  Held  to 
Maturity (HTM) category was capped at 25 per cent of the total investments and banks are 
allowed  to  carry  the  investments  in  the  HTM  category  at  cost,  subject  amortisation  of 
premium, if any. With the change in the direction of the movement of interest rates in 2004, 
the cap on the HTM category was reviewed in the light of the statutory prescriptions (referred 
to as statutory liquidity ratio (SLR) in India) requiring banks to mandatorily invest up to 25 per 
cent of their Demand and Time Liabilities (DTL) in eligible government securities. In view of 
the  statutory  pre-emption  and  the  long  duration  of  the  government  securities,  banks  were 
permitted to exceed the limit of 25 per cent of total investments under Held to Maturity (HTM) 
category  provided  the  excess  comprised  only  of  the  SLR  securities,  and  the  total  SLR 
BIS Review 87/2008 
 5
securities  held  in  the  HTM  category  was  not  more  than  25  per  cent  of  their  DTL.  Such 
shifting was allowed at acquisition cost or book value or market value on the date of transfer, 
whichever is the least, and the depreciation, if any, on such transfer was required to be fully 
provided for. The above transition is consistent with international standards that do not place 
any cap on HTM category, and was considered advisable taking into account the statutory 
nature of the SLR while ensuring prudence and transparency in valuation on transfer to HTM 
category. While the earlier prescription for this category was relatively more conservative, the 
changes in September 2004 recognised the dynamic interface with the interest rate cycles 
and were counter-cyclical.  
Capital adequacy – risk weights 
In view of the increase in growth of advances to the real estate sector, banks were advised to 
put in place a proper risk management system to contain the risks involved. Banks were also 
advised to put in place a system for ensuring proper checking and documentation of related 
papers before sanctioning / disbursing of such loans. In June 2005, the RBI advised banks to 
have  a  board  mandated  policy  in  respect  of  their  real  estate  exposure  covering  exposure 
limits, collaterals to be considered, margins to be kept, sanctioning authority/level and sector 
to  be  financed.  In  view  of  the  rapid  increase  in  loans  to  the  real  estate  sector  raising 
concerns about asset quality and the potential systemic risks posed by such exposure, the 
risk weight on banks' exposure to commercial real estate was increased from 100 per cent to 
125  per  cent  in  July  2005  and  further  to  150  per  cent  in  April  2006.  The  risk  weights  on 
housing loans extended by banks to individuals against mortgage of housing properties and 
investments  in  mortgage  backed  securities  (MBS)  of  housing  finance  companies  (HFCs), 
recognised  and  supervised  by  National  Housing  Bank  (NHB)  were  increased  from  50  per 
cent to 75 per cent in December 2004. However, on a review, banks were advised to reduce 
the risk weight in respect of exposures arising out of housing loans up to Rs.30 lakh (USD 
75,000 approx) to individuals against the mortgage of residential housing properties from 75 
per cent to 50 per cent, in view of the lower perception of risks in these exposures.  
In the light of the strong growth of consumer credit and the volatility in the capital markets, it 
was felt that the quality of lending could suffer during the phase of rapid expansion. Hence, 
as a counter cyclical measure, we increased the risk weight for consumer credit and capital 
market exposures from 100 per cent to 125 per cent. 
Provisions against standard assets 
The  prudential  norms  relating  to  income  recognition,  asset  classification  and  provisioning, 
introduced during 1992-93 are being continuously monitored and refined to bring them on par 
with  international  best  practices.  In  keeping  with  this,  several  measures  were  initiated  in 
2005-06. The provisions for standard assets were revised progressively in November 2005, 
May 2006 and January 2007, in stages in view of the continued high credit growth in the real 
estate sector, personal loans, credit card receivables, and loans and advances qualifying as 
capital market exposure and a higher default rate with regard to personal loans and credit 
card  receivables,  which  emerged  as  a  matter  of  concern.  The  standard  assets  in  the 
following categories of loans and advances attract a two per cent provisioning requirement (i) 
personal  loans  (including  credit  card  receivables);  (ii)  loans  and  advances  qualifying  as 
capital market exposure; (iii) real estate loans (excluding residential housing loans), and (iv) 
loans  and  advances  to  systemically  important  non-deposit  accepting  non-banking  finance 
companies (NBFC-ND-SI). In order to ensure continued and adequate availability of credit to 
the highly productive sectors of the economy, the provisioning requirement for all other loans 
and advances, classified as standard assets was kept unchanged, viz., (i) direct advances to 
the agricultural and SME sectors at 0.25 per cent; and (ii) all other loans and advances at 0.4 
per cent.  
6 
 BIS Review 87/2008
Exposure to Inter-Bank Liability 
In  order  to  reduce  the  extent  of  concentration  of  bank’s  liabilities  the  RBI  had  issued 
guidelines to banks in March 2007 placing prudential limits on the extent of their Inter-Bank 
Liability  (IBL)  as  a  proportion  of  their  networth  (200%).  Those  banks  which  had  a  higher 
capital  adequacy  ratio  of  125%  of  the  regulatory  minimum  were  allowed  a  higher  limit  of 
300% of networth. In addition, prudential limits have also been placed on the extent to which 
banks may access the inter-bank call money market both as a lender and as a borrower.  
Financial regulation of systemically important NBFCs and banks’ relationship with 
them 
The RBI has been strengthening the regulatory and supervisory framework for non-banking 
finance companies (NBFCs) since 1997 with the objective of making the NBFC sector vibrant 
and  healthy.  The  focus  was  initially  on  deposit-taking  NBFCs.  These  efforts  were  pursued 
further during 2006-07, when a major thrust was on strengthening the regulatory framework 
with regard to systemically important non-banking financial companies so as to reduce the 
regulatory gaps. At that time, the regulatory focus was also widened to include systemically 
important non-deposit taking NBFCs and prudential norms were specified for these entities. 
The application of different levels of regulations to the activities of banks and NBFCs, and 
even among different categories of NBFCs, had given rise to some issues relating to uneven 
coverage of regulations. Based on the recommendations of an Internal Group and taking into 
consideration  the  feedback  received  thereon,  a  revised  framework  to  address  the  issues 
pertaining  to  the  overall  regulation  of  systemically  important  NBFCs  and  the  relationship 
between banks and NBFCs was put in place in December 2006.  
Securitisation guidelines 
The RBI has issued guidelines on securitisation of standard assets in February 2006. The 
guidelines are applicable to banks and financial institutions, including non-banking financial 
companies (NBFCs). These guidelines provide for a conservative treatment of securitisation 
exposures for capital adequacy purposes, especially in regard to the credit enhancement and 
liquidity facilities. The regulatory framework encourages greater participation by third parties 
with  a  view  to  ensure  better  governance  in  the  structuring  of  special  purpose  vehicles 
(SPVs),  the  products,  and  the  provision  of  support  facilities.  A  unique  feature  of  these 
guidelines, which may be at a variance with the accounting standards, is that any profits on 
sale of assets to the SPV are not allowed to be recognised immediately on sale but over the 
life of the pass through certificates issued by the SPV. We believe that these guidelines, as a 
package, have ensured an appropriate incentive mechanism for securitisation transactions.  
Banks’ investment in non-SLR securities 
RBI had emphasised that banks should observe prudence in order to contain the risk arising 
out  of  their  non-SLR  (i.e.,  non  government)  investment  portfolio,  in  particular  through  the 
private placement route. Detailed prudential guidelines on the subject were issued in June 
2001,  which  were  reviewed  and  revised  in  November  2003.  These  guidelines,  inter  alia, 
address aspects of coverage, regulatory requirements, listing and rating requirements, fixing 
of  prudential  limits,  internal  assessments,  role  of  Boards,  disclosures,  and  trading  and 
settlement in debt securities. Banks were specifically advised that they should not be solely 
guided by the ratings assigned to these securities by the external rating agencies but that 
they should do a detailed appraisal as in the case of direct lending. 
Marking-to-market 
The  Indian  accounting  standards  are  generally  aligned  to  the  International  Financial 
Reporting Standards, though there are some differences. In India, we are yet to fully adopt 
BIS Review 87/2008 
 7
the  marking-to-market  requirements  as  available  in  the  international  standards.  The  Indian 
standards are relatively conservative and do not permit recognition of unrealised gains in the 
profit  and  loss  account  or  equity,  though  unrealised  losses  are  required  to  be  accounted. 
Banks  are  required  to  mark-to-market  the  investments  in  the  Held  for  Trading  (HFT)  and 
Available for Sale (AFS) categories at periodical intervals, on a portfolio basis, and provide 
for  the  net  losses  and  ignore  the  net  gains.  This  has  proved  to  be  a  stabilising  factor, 
inasmuch as it has not induced an imbalance in the incentive structures and has also proved 
to be less pro-cyclical.  
Moral suasion and supervisory review 
Moral  suasion  and  public  articulation  of  concerns  has  helped  in  achieving  a  desired  re-
balancing  of  suspected  excesses  in  risk-taking  among  banks.  Some  of  the  areas  where 
moral suasion has been used are the need for banks to monitor unhedged foreign currency 
exposures of their corporate clients, adoption of appropriate incentive mechanisms by banks 
for encouraging disclosures of derivative exposures by their corporate clients, banks’ reliance 
on non-deposit resources to finance assets, their excessive reliance on wholesale deposits 
and uncomfortable loan-to-value (LTV) ratios in respect of housing loans etc.  
A  supervisory  review  process  (SRP)  was  initiated  with  select  banks  having  significant 
exposure  to  sensitive  sectors,  including  reliance  on  call  money  market,  in  order  to  ensure 
that effective risk mitigants and sound internal control systems are in place. In the first round, 
a framework was developed for monitoring the systemically important individual banks. The 
second  round  of  SRP  was  directed  to  analyse  banks’  exposure  to  sensitive  sectors  and 
identify outliers. Based on the analyses of these outlier banks, guidelines were issued to all 
banks indicating the need for better risk management systems in banks at operating levels.  
In brief, in India the focus is on regulatory comfort, going beyond regulatory compliance. In a 
choice  between  emphasis  of  regulations  on  saving  capital  and  protecting  depositors’ 
interests or reinforcing financial system stability, the latter have always prevailed. 
Indian experience of financial sector liberalisation and development 
III.  
It  is  necessary  to  clarify  that  while  the  measures  mentioned  above  are  aimed  at  fostering 
financial stability, in order to enhance efficiency several other initiatives have been taken to 
liberalise  the  macro-policy  environment  in  which  banks  operate  through  a  re-orientation  of 
regulatory  prescriptions  by  replacing  micro  regulations  with  macro-prudential  regulations, 
providing an enabling environment for universal banking, improved corporate governance in 
private sector banks, and enabling consolidation of banks in the private sector. Some other 
important  measures  that  promoted  a  vibrant  and  robust  operating  environment  and 
framework for the banking system that promoted growth and business opportunities include a 
reduction in pre-emption through reserve requirements; shift to market determined pricing for 
government securities; disbanding of some of the administered interest rates; auction-based 
repos-reverse repos for short-term liquidity management; facilitation of improved payments 
and settlement mechanism; setting up of the Clearing Corporation of India Limited (CCIL) to 
act as central counter party for facilitating payments and settlement system relating to fixed 
income securities, money market instruments and foreign exchange transactions; setting up 
of  INFINET  as  the  communication  backbone  for  the  financial  sector;  introduction  of 
Negotiated  Dealing  System  (NDS)  for  screen-based  trading  in  government  securities; 
introduction of Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) System; debt recovery tribunals, asset 
reconstruction  companies,  settlement  advisory  committees,  corporate  debt  restructuring 
mechanism,  etc.  for  quicker  recovery/  restructuring  of  stressed  assets;  promulgation  of 
Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Securities Interest 
(SARFAESI) Act, 2002 and its subsequent amendment to ensure creditor rights; setting up of 
Credit  Information  Bureau  of  India  Limited  (CIBIL)  for  information  sharing  on  defaulters  as 
8 
 BIS Review 87/2008
also other borrowers. These growth oriented initiatives have appropriately complemented the 
stability oriented initiatives. 
Development orientation 
In  the  context  of  the  rapidly  evolving  financial  landscape,  the  RBI  has  also  been  suitably 
reorienting its regulatory and supervisory framework to meet the needs of the common man. 
It has also been the endeavour of the RBI to improve credit delivery and customer service by 
banks. The RBI has simultaneously focussed on financial inclusion and extension of banking 
services  to  the  unbanked  areas  of  the  economy.  The  guidelines  on  lending  to  the  priority 
sector included improvement of credit delivery to those sectors of the economy that impact 
large  segment  of  the  population,  the  weaker  section  and  to  the  sectors  which  are 
employment-intensive such as agriculture and tiny and small enterprises. In order to improve 
credit  delivery  to  micro  and  small  and  medium  enterprises  (MSMEs),  the  RBI  has  urged 
banks  to  review  their  institutional  arrangements  for  delivering  credit  to  the  SME  sector, 
especially  in  identified  clusters  in  various  parts  of  the  country,  and  to  take  measures  to 
strengthen  the  expertise  in  and  systems  at  branches  located  in  or  near  such  identified 
clusters  with  a  view  to  providing  adequate  and  timely  credit.  The  RBI  has  taken  several 
measures  in  recent  years  aimed  at  providing  customer  service  at  reasonable  cost.  These 
measures  include  enhancing  customer  protection  and  disclosures,  code  of  ethics  and 
grievance redressal, among others. The RBI’s broad approach to financial inclusion aims at 
“connecting people” with the banking system and not just credit dispensation; giving people 
access  to  the  payments  system;  and  portraying  financial  inclusion  as  a  viable  business 
model  and  opportunity.  The  RBI  has  been  initiating  measures  to  improve  the  outreach  of 
banks and their services, and promote financial inclusion in less developed states and union 
territories. 
Monetary policy 
As a part of the conduct of monetary policy, the RBI monitors, inter alia, monetary and credit 
aggregates. It uses both liquidity and interest rate instruments to achieve the monitory policy 
objectives.  Pre-emptive  actions  have  been  taken  since  2004  to  withdraw  monetary 
accommodation  which  was  reinforced  with  measures  aimed  at  moderating  early  signs  of 
over-heating.  Further,  appreciation  of  the  possible  permanent  and  temporary  components 
with regard to oil prices has been articulated in the policies. While undertaking a nuanced 
approach  to  managing  aggregate  demand  recognising  the  elements  of  shock  and 
consequent  impact  on  inflation  expectations,  the  underlying  demand  conditions  warranted 
several interest rate and liquidity measures in recent weeks.  
While monetary policy influences aggregates, reality is often dis-aggregated. Hence, the RBI 
uses  prudential  regulatory  policies  to  complement  the  monetary  policy  measures  and 
objectives.  It  is  pertinent  that  the  lender  of  last  resort  function  is  not  separate  either  from 
monetary and liquidity management or from financial regulation. Thus both monetary policy 
and  prudential  regulations  are  used  as  complementary  tools  to  achieve  the  central  bank 
objectives and they both support and reinforce each other. 
Concluding remarks on broader issues 
IV.  
The detailed account given above of the developments in the global and the Indian financial 
sector  would  be  incomplete  without  devoting  some  attention  to  the  broader  issues.  These 
issues need to be reckoned and debated widely lest the response to recent developments be 
construed as internal to the financial sector, warranting only such sector-specific solutions. 
First, whether the benefits of financial liberalisation and financial globalisation need to be re-
evaluated? It is possible to argue that liberalisation of trade in goods has contributed more to 
growth and price stability than financial sector initiatives. In particular, it may be argued that 
BIS Review 87/2008 
 9
the  incentive  frameworks  for  financial  intermediaries  appear  to  be  disproportionate  to  their 
conceivable  contribution  to  the  economy.  The  arguments  in  favour  of  persevering  with 
financial innovation and urging regulators to continue to give priority to facilitate innovations 
should be viewed in this context. 
Second, whether the regulators have placed greater emphasis on savings of capital in banks 
rather  than  on  the  interests  of  the  depositors  and  on  systemic  stability?  The  recent 
compulsions for shoring up of capital by some of the global financial institutions in advanced 
economies  seem  to  suggest  this.  What  induced  the  regulators  to  permit  such  excesses  in 
leverage and savings of capital? Does this also involve issues pertaining to governance and 
accountability of regulators? 
Third,  whether  there  is  a  beginning  of  fiscalisation  of  the  financial  sector  in  view  of  the 
intensification of the links between the two? For example, the recent episodes of participation 
of the sovereign wealth funds in the re-capitalisation of banks tantamount to fiscal support. 
Further, large doses of liquidity support to financial markets by regulators against collateral 
may also involve quasi-fiscal costs, under some circumstances.  
Fourth, whether there is, what may be called, financialisation of the political economy? The 
attractiveness  of  financial  intermediaries  in  terms  of  high  profitability,  significant  growth  – 
especially  cross-border,  massive  spread  of  investors,  and  the  inadequate  scope  for 
application  of  principles  of  rules  of  origin  in  the  financial  sector  could  have  resulted  in 
enhanced  clout  for  these  intermediaries  in  the  political  economy.  Incidentally,  Professor 
Jagdish Bhagwati’s reference to Wall Street – Washington links is relevant in this context.  
Fifth, whether there has been excessive financialisation of corporates, in the sense that large 
corporates  take  significant  positions  in  the  financial  markets  through  their  treasury 
operations?  Increasingly,  many  of  the  positions  of  the  corporates  in  the  financial  markets 
may not be related to their underlying business. Do we have an issue when such activities of 
corporates in the financial markets, unrelated to their underlying business, are not regulated 
the way similar activities of financial market intermediaries are regulated?  
To conclude, on the way forward, to exit the current financial turbulence and fortify against 
future similar episodes, we may need to look beyond reforms within the financial sector and 
address  broader  related  issues  that  impinge  on  the  balance  between  the  sovereign,  the 
regulators, the financial institutions and the markets. 
Thank you. 
10 
 BIS Review 87/2008
