Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Banking sector developments in the Philippines 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas), at the ILF MOA Signing Ceremony, Manila, 25 March 2008.  
 Members of the Monetary Board, Undersecretary Roberto Tan, BAP President Ramon Sy, 
Mr. Paul Favila, fellow bankers, special guests, good morning.  
I am glad we now have this Memorandum of Agreement for the Enhanced Intraday Liquidity 
Facility. This MOA will help the Philippine banking sector adapt and respond better and faster 
to increasingly dynamic and challenging developments in the financial markets.  
Congratulations are therefore in order to all those involved in the process that has led to this 
MOA signing today. Let us give everyone a well-deserved round of applause.  
Indeed, operational adjustments in the ILF provide participants greater flexibility in the use of 
their securities. For instance, instead of earmarking the securities for ILF use for the whole 
week, participants can now make daily changes in their securities pool.  
In addition, availments will be made only when the need arises. Furthermore, availment costs 
have been reduced to encourage more participation to the ILF. 
Ladies and gentlemen. These are challenging times and now, more than ever, we need to 
close  ranks  to  address  the  issues  that  concern  the  banking  sector  in  a  coordinated  and 
comprehensive manner.  
On our side at the Bangko Sentral, we assure you that our lines of communication are kept 
open  at  all  times  for  discussions  and  consultations.  I  expect  the  same  from  your  end, 
particularly when it concerns programs that will benefit the financial system in particular and 
our economy in general.  
I will be the first to say that we have done a lot to strengthen our banking sector. This has 
been  validated  and  repeatedly  acknowledged  here  and  overseas.  However,  we  should 
continue  our  reform  agenda  to  keep  in  step  with  global  developments.  Let  us  choose 
innovation, over stagnation.  
United, we can make further improvements in our banking sector as well as our payment and 
settlements system to make it stronger, more efficient, and consistently aligned with world-
class standards.  
Mabuhay ang Philippine banking sector! Maraming salamat sa inyong lahat. 
BIS Review 33/2008 
 1
