John Hurley: Launch of the Single Euro Payments Area (SEPA) 
Address by Mr John Hurley, Governor of the Central Bank & Financial Services Authority of 
Ireland,  on  the  Occasion  of  the  Launch  of  the  Single  Euro  Payments  Area,  Dublin, 
28 January 2008. 
 Introduction 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  Pat  McLoughlin,  Chief  Executive,  of  the  Irish  Payment  Services 
Organisation. 
I am delighted, together with IPSO, to welcome you all to the Central Bank this evening to 
mark  the  beginning  of  a  new  era  for  the  European  payments  industry  and  its  customers. 
SEPA, about which you will undoubtedly be hearing a lot more over the next couple of years, 
is  an  acronym  for  the  term  “Single  Euro  Payments  Area”,  designed  to  do  for  electronic 
payment instruments – such as credit transfers, direct debits and card payments – what the 
introduction  of  euro  notes  and  coins  in  2002  has  already  done  for  cash  transactions.  So, 
SEPA  is  the  next  logical  step  on  the  road  to  completing  the  internal  market  following  the 
introduction of the euro. 
Since  January  1999,  priority  or  large  value  payments  in  euro  have  been  facilitated  in  a 
standardised  way  by  the  TARGET  real-time,  gross  settlement  system  operated  by 
Eurosystem national central banks. TARGET provides the Eurosystem with a means to settle 
its  own  monetary  policy  operations,  and  also  delivers  to  the  European  banks  a  real-time, 
gross settlement system in central bank money. However, private citizens and businesses in 
euro-area countries require a comparable facility for making low value – or “retail” – non-cash 
payments in euro. The aim of SEPA is to provide all consumers, whether private citizens or 
corporate  bodies,  with  better  payment  services  and  more  efficient  payment  instruments, 
while at the same time facilitating further European integration by improving competition and 
innovation in the retail payments market. 
Until  now,  each  euro-area  member  state’s  national  retail  payments  market  has  tended  to 
remain  more  or  less  isolated  from  those  of  other  countries,  with  levels  of  efficiency  and 
service  varying  from  place  to  place.  Cross-border  euro  retail  payments  in  particular  have, 
therefore,  been  less  efficient  in  many  respects  than  comparable  payments  made  within  a 
member  state,  as  payment  systems’  technical  standards,  rules  and  procedures  vary  from 
country to country. 
The SEPA project 
Following  close  collaboration  within  the  banking  industry  in  Europe,  the  SEPA  project 
officially  “went  live”  today,  with  the  formal  launch  by  Europe’s  banks  of  the  SEPA  Credit 
Transfer Scheme, the first of the new SEPA payment instruments; over the next four to five 
weeks, all of the Irish banks offering retail payment services will be in a position to offer this 
new service to their customers. 
Direct  debit  payments  will  be  covered  by  the  SEPA  Direct  Debit  Scheme,  but  will  not  be 
available  until  November  2009,  when  the  EU  Commission’s  Payment  Services  Directive  is 
transposed into national law throughout the EU. 
The SEPA project also covers payment cards. In this regard, the SEPA Cards Framework 
has been in force since 1 January 2008. This framework outlines high-level principles and 
rules that will allow European consumers to use payment cards to make payments and cash 
withdrawals throughout the euro-area on the same basis as in their “home” countries. 
BIS Review 11/2008 
 1
So  how  will  SEPA  improve  the  situation?  The  project  will  deliver  common  retail  payment 
instruments – in other words, credit transfers, direct debits and payment cards – that can be 
used for euro-denominated payments not just within the euro area, but throughout the entire 
EU, together with Iceland, Liechtenstein, Norway and Switzerland. When the SEPA project 
has  been  concluded,  all  euro-area  bank  customers  in  particular  will  be  able  to  use  one 
payment  account  in  one  country,  and  one  set  of  standardised  payment  instruments,  to 
conduct  all  of  their  payments  business.  All  euro-area  payments  will,  in  effect,  become 
domestic  payments,  and  there  will  no  longer  be  any  differentiation  between  national 
payments and cross-border payments. 
The focus of SEPA is on making efficient and standardised payment options available to EU 
consumers. The greatly simplified payments world that will result is expected to deliver major 
benefits,  particularly  for  those  with  a  requirement  to  make  cross-border  payments.  SEPA 
should also result in enhanced competition, since all consumers using payment services, and 
not just those making cross-border payments, should be able to choose between all payment 
service providers throughout the euro area that offer SEPA-compliant products, regardless of 
where those payment service providers might be located. Existing legislation on cross-border 
payments in euro stipulates that banks can charge no more for a cross-border payment than 
for its domestic equivalent. 
While  the  Eurosystem  and  the  EU  Commission  are  strong  advocates  of  SEPA,  it  remains 
primarily a market-driven project. The role of the Eurosystem in relation to SEPA is that of a 
catalyst, or facilitator, while leaving the project’s implementation to the banking industry. 
In Ireland, the Central Bank, in its capacity as payment systems overseer, is fully committed 
to  the  successful  implementation  of  SEPA  by  the  Irish  banking  community.  The  Irish 
Payment  Services  Organisation,  IPSO,  is  the  body  with  primary  responsibility  for  ensuring 
the implementation of SEPA. In this context I would like to take the opportunity afforded by 
this  evening’s  event  to  acknowledge  publicly  the  efforts  of  Pat  McLoughlin,  the  Chief 
Executive of IPSO (and of his predecessor in this role, Stewart MacKinnon, now leading the 
SEPA initiative at the European level as the Secretary General of the European Payments 
Council), the members of the IPSO SEPA Implementation Task Force, and indeed all of their 
colleagues  at  every  level  in  the  IPSO  member  banks,  in  preparing  the  Irish  banking 
community to meet the challenges posed by SEPA; in a few minutes, Pat will speak about 
SEPA from his own perspective. 
National Payments Implementation Programme 
In fact, SEPA is but one of a number of important developments currently in progress in the 
area  of  payments.  A  closely  related  project  is  the  National  Payments  Implementation 
Programme,  or  NPIP,  an  initiative  involving  the  Central  Bank,  the  Department  of  the 
Taoiseach, the Department of Finance, and IPSO. The aim of NPIP is to develop a strategy 
for  the  future  payments  infrastructure  in  Ireland  that  will  be  inclusive  of,  and  deliver 
efficiencies to, all sectors of the economy. 
The  active  involvement  of  all  of  these  constituencies  is  indicative  of  the  importance  being 
attached  to developing  Ireland’s  payments  infrastructure.  In addition,  many  other  groups  – 
representing, for example, consumers, the business community, and the wider public service 
– have already become involved in NPIP, and it is intended that others will be encouraged to 
participate as and when the need arises during the course of the project. 
There is significant common ground between NPIP and SEPA, with the focus in each case 
being very much on electronic payments. The successful implementation of both NPIP and 
SEPA will require the delivery of electronic payment methods that are: 
• 
• 
safe and efficient; 
easy to use; 
2 
 BIS Review 11/2008
accessible to everyone. 
• 
Other significant changes are also occurring throughout Europe in the arena of payment and 
settlement systems. The TARGET system is in the course of being replaced by TARGET2, 
which  provides  harmonised  prices  and  services,  together  with  improved  efficiency  and 
additional functionality. TARGET2 commenced operations in November last and Ireland will 
be  in  the  second  group  of  countries  to  migrate  to  the  new  system  in  February.  Finally, 
TARGET2  Securities,  or  T2S,  will  harmonise  the  settlement  of  securities  trades  in  central 
bank  money,  by  concentrating  securities  and  cash  settlements  in  euro  within  an  efficient 
single  platform.  T2S  will  act  as  a  catalyst  to  integrate  European  post-trading  financial 
services, and will foster competition by providing harmonised access to settlement services 
within the European financial market. 
Conclusion 
While the successful development and implementation of all of these systems will involve a 
significant  effort  on  the  part  of  all  those  involved,  the  end  result  should  provide  significant 
benefits to the economy as a whole, as well as to all payment systems users, whether large 
corporate bodies, or private citizens. 
To conclude, I hope that I have managed to convey something of the significant changes that 
are occurring, and will continue to occur, in the arena of payment and settlement systems 
over the next few years, and in which Ireland will play its full part. 
Thank you for your attention. I will now call upon Pat McLoughlin, the Chief Executive of the 
Irish Payment Services Organisation, to say a few words about the launch of SEPA. 
BIS Review 11/2008 
 3
