Emsley D Tromp: Threats and opportunities for the economy of Curacao 
in a period of international financial turbulence 
Speech by Dr Emsley D Tromp, President of the Bank of the Netherlands Antilles (Bank van 
de  Nederlandse  Antillen),  on  the  occasion  of  the  fundraising  seminar  of  the  Stanley  Lamp 
Foundation, Willemstad, 4 April 2008.  
 Ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon, 
I think you agree with me that to stand still at the impact of the international financial turmoil 
on  our  economy  is  a  well-targeted  theme  for  this  seminar.  I  very  much  appreciate  this 
initiative  of  the  Stanley  Lamp  Foundation  and  the  generous  support  provided  by  our  local 
KPMG office headed by Ralph. I fully endorse the objective of the foundation to promote the 
education of our youth and, hence, their development and the development of our society as 
a  whole.  This  is  a  crucial  condition  for  building  up  a  successful  country  in  the  new 
constitutional structure of the Kingdom. I think the late Stanley can be very proud on Ference 
and  Roan,  who  have  become  successful  professionals  and  are  a  perfect  example  of  the 
huge return that good education generates, not only for them and the companies they work 
for, but also for Curacao. 
In  my  address  this  afternoon,  I  shall  focus  on  the  macroeconomic  aspects  of  the  current 
international financial developments. First, I shall briefly describe the causes of the current 
international  financial  instability  and  discuss  some  of  the  consequences  on  our  economy. 
This  will  be  followed  by  a  brief  overview  of  the  recent  developments  in  the  economy  of 
Curacao.  Together  with  the  opportunities  created  by  the  constitutional  changes,  I  shall 
subsequently indicate some of the reforms that are necessary to create a solid foundation for 
strong sustainable growth and resilience against future external shocks. 
The current international financial turmoil ranks very high on monetary policy makers’ agenda 
around  the  globe.  Virtually  every  day  brings  a  new  surprise  in  the  financial  markets.  The 
scale  and  speed  at  which  financial  globalization  has  developed  generated  excesses  in 
financial  markets  that  are  currently  unwinding.  The  recent  events  represent  an  overdue 
repricing  of  risk,  triggered  by  significantly  higher-than-expected  defaults  in  US  subprime 
mortgages. The ample availability of liquidity in the international financial markets promoted 
the development of innovative but complex new securities with a distant link to the original 
loan (the so-called originate and distribute model). The lively trade in these securities and, 
hence, their high liquidity gave a false sense of reduced risk. Financial institutions worldwide 
invested  large  sums  in  these  securities.  When  American  home  owners  got  into  problems 
servicing 
things,  caused  by  weakening  economic 
circumstances  related  to  the  sharply  rising  prices  of  oil  and  other  raw  materials,  investors 
became aware of the associated risks and started to sell these securities. Due to a lack of 
buyers,  prices  dropped  rapidly,  making  the  securities  worthless.  Also  other  structured 
financial products suffered from the evaporated trust in mortgage-backed securities. Because 
of the enormous amounts invested in these securities, the write-offs have grown to gigantic 
proportions, causing major problems for many well-known international financial institutions. 
As  a  result,  the  share  prices  of  these  financial  institutions  fell  sharply  on  securities 
exchanges  worldwide  and  dragged  most  other  share  prices  in  their  fall.  Investors  have 
become  very  nervous  and  react  strongly  on  economic  news  resulting 
in  volatile 
developments in securities prices. 
Since the origin of the current international financial instability lies in the United States, this 
economy is expected to go through a brief recession this year, affecting also countries that 
rely  significantly  on  exports  to  the  US  market.  As  a  result,  world  economic  growth  is 
projected  to  slow.  Particularly  a  US  recession  is  likely  to  affect  the  number  of  American 
their  mortgages,  among  other 
BIS Review 41/2008 
 1
visitors to our islands. The market share of American visitors in the total number of visitors 
determines the impact on the tourism sector on the respective islands. In Curacao, this share 
is approximately 20%, implying that the impact will be moderate. 
What  about  the  financial  sector?  Our  local  financial  institutions  have  no  or  very  limited 
exposure to mortgage-backed securities or other structured financial products, resulting in a 
negligible  direct  impact  from  the  crisis  around  these  securities.  Of  course,  they  will  be 
affected  indirectly  by  the  declining  international  interest  rates  and  securities  prices  in  the 
wake of the financial crisis. The international financial and business services sector is likely 
to be affected to a greater extent, because the companies operating in this sector are very 
active in the international financial markets and have a larger exposure to innovative financial 
products.  Nevertheless,  since  these  companies  operate  outside  of  our  economy,  the 
domestic impact will probably be limited to some reduction in the services provided by local 
companies and professionals. 
Due to the peg of our guilder to the US dollar, the sharp reduction in US interest rates we 
have  witnessed  in  the  last  few  months  results  also  in  lower  domestic  interest  rates.  This 
development is enhanced further by the debt relief as part of the constitutional changes. The 
repayment of a major part of the government debt by the Dutch government will result in an 
increase of domestic liquidity and lower yields on new debt issues. Lower domestic interest 
rates will promote higher consumption and investment growth, resulting in a higher growth 
rate of our economy. 
Given this favorable outlook, I like to turn now to the current state of our economy and the 
likely impact of the current international financial turbulence on our economy. That is to say: 
looking ahead, how does the consequent drop in the US interest rate affect our economic 
developments?  The  economy  of  Curacao  is  finally  picking  up  after  a  marginal  annual 
average growth rate of 0.3% in real terms since the end of the economic recession in 2001. 
Economic growth increased to 1.4% in 2006 and a further acceleration is expected in 2007. 
The inflation rate remained stable at 3.0%, which is relatively high as a result of the impact of 
the rising world oil prices. The stronger growth was translated in an improvement of the labor 
market. The unemployment rate started to decline from its peak of 18.2% in 2005 to 12.0% in 
2007. Youth unemployment declined also during this period from 44.0% to 24.2%. Although 
this  decline  is  more  than  welcome,  I  think  the  fact  that  almost  a  quarter  of  our  youth  is 
unemployed remains unacceptable.  
The  improved  economic  performance  is  primarily  private  sector  led.  Particularly  private 
investments  grew  strongly,  but  private  consumption  contributed  also  significantly  to  the 
expansion. The high investment growth was due largely to the construction of new hotels and 
the expansion of existing hotels. This wave of new investment projects was triggered by the 
remarkable recovery in the number of tourists since 2006. During the previous three years, 
the number of stay-over visitors remained stagnant, reflected by an average annual increase 
of  only  a  half  percent.  However,  2006  posted  a  growth  of  6%  and  2007  even  28%,  the 
highest  growth  figures  in  the  Netherlands  Antilles.  Consequently,  the  occupancy  rate  rose 
rapidly and has surpassed now the 90% limit. The rising occupancy rate created confidence 
with the existing hotels that the time was right to expand their room capacity. In addition, the 
potential for further strong growth in the number of tourists attracted new investors and the 
attention of large international hotel chains. Curacao’s tourism is still rather underdeveloped 
compared to many destinations in the region, including Aruba and St. Maarten. So, there is 
substantial room for further growth. Moreover, cruise tourism is also performing well after its 
recovery in 2005, although the growth rate is decelerating. 
The  result  of  the  investments  in  hotels  is  that  room  capacity  will  be  expanded  by 
approximately 1,000 units in 2008. Based on current construction and intended projects in 
the years ahead, an average 1,000 rooms per year will be added between 2009 and 2111. 
Applying  the  common  multiplier  in  the  hotel  sector  that  each  room  creates  2.5  direct  and 
indirect  jobs,  approximately  10,000  jobs  will  be  created  from  now  until  2011,  enough  to 
2 
 BIS Review 41/2008
eradicate  unemployment  in  Curacao.  Prominent  among  these  are:  (i)  the  Santa  Barbara 
Plantation master plan which envisions not only the luxury Hyatt Regency Curaçao hotel, but 
also as a 30-slip marina, beach club, 52 vacation club units, 128 condominium homes, 106 
residential lots and 94 terrace homes. Additionally, it will include an 18-hole championship 
golf course, the first signature golf course on the island, designed by top golf architect Peter 
Dye; (ii) The Rif master plan which encompasses not only the 243 room 5-star Renaissance 
Hotel, but also a 50-slip marina, another 5-star hotel, a 3-star hotel, condominiums, a second 
mega pier and food and retail facilities; and (iii) The Jan Thiel master plan which envisions a 
5-star  350  room  Westin  hotel,  condominiums  and  residential  homes.  The  investments  to 
realize these projects run into billions of guilders, creating the prospect of strong economic 
growth  in  the  coming  years.  Realization  of  these  projects  may  put  us  on  growth  path 
consistent with sustainable double digit growth for some times to come. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  this  encouraging  outlook  however,  is  not  guaranteed.  While  the 
prospect of a permanent resolution of our debt problem in the context of the constitutional 
changes  and  the  consequent  drop  in  the  US  interest  rate  have  significantly  improved  the 
availability of funds to finance our growth, there are still some dark clouds on the horizon. 
Our  current  investment  climate  has  several  deficiencies  that  will  seriously  hamper  the 
realization of these projects if not addressed adequately. 
The  policy  agenda  to  enhance  the  investment  climate  should  focus  on  those  government 
policies that promote incentives and opportunities for firms to invest productively, create jobs, 
and  expand.  This  policy  agenda  should  cover  a  broad  terrain  including  stability,  security, 
regulation,  taxation,  finance,  infrastructure,  labor  markets,  and  a  speedy  and  efficient 
decision making process to approve project by the government apparatus. Since it involves 
so many issues, investment climate improvements should be an ongoing process of policy 
adjustment and fine tuning. We have to start now with these policy adjustments if we want to 
make  progress  in  the  improvement  of  our  investment  climate  and  prepare  our  island 
effectively on its new constitutional status of a country within the Kingdom.  
With  this  in  mind  and  with  so  many  policy  areas  influencing  investment-driven  economic 
growth, priorities are essential, and we must be careful to ensure that they are combined in a 
coherent manner. If I have to make a selection, I would single out the following policy areas 
to address with priority: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
In  these  areas,  the  effectiveness  of  measures  depends  on  policy  transparency,  good 
governance, broad public support, and economic and political stability. I would like now to 
share  my  views  with  you  on  the  challenges  for  the  government  of  Curaçao  in  addressing 
these four policy areas on the road to the new constitutional status and a bright future.  
One of the weaknesses of our investment climate is the still inflexible labor market, because 
of  the  rigid  rules  on  hiring  and  firing,  the  mandatory  benefits,  and  the  high  overtime 
compensation.  Despite  all  the  recommendations  that  have  been  given  by  international 
organizations to reform the labor market regulations, little progress has been made. Indeed, 
measures  have  been  taken  to  flexibilize  the  labor  market,  but  some  of  them  have  been 
reversed, though approval procedures became more even-handed and decision times were 
shortened. To enhance our competitiveness and potential growth, it is essential to be able to 
use labor more flexibly, provided that individual protection against abuse is preserved.  
Despite a decline in our unemployment rate, it remains high in double-digit figures, especially 
among our youth. The main reason for Curaçao’s structural unemployment is not so much 
the  absence  of  jobs,  certainly  not  in  view  of  the  demand  for  labor  in  the  booming  tourism 
The labor market;  
The capital market;  
The existing red tape and bureaucracy; and  
The tax regime. 
BIS Review 41/2008 
 3
sector, but a qualitative mismatch between supply and demand. Despite our high literacy rate 
and  the  availability  of  institutions  providing  higher  education  and  language  training,  many 
investors find that the availability of well-trained workers is limited.  
Our investment climate will, therefore, benefit greatly from public investment in education and 
training  to  reduce  the  qualitative  mismatch  between  labor  demand  and  supply  –  an  area 
championed by the late Stanley Lamp. Being important determinants of our long-term growth 
potential,  we  should  therefore  have  an  economic  policy  that  focuses  on  enhancing 
investments  in  physical  as  well  as  human  capital.  Investment  in  our  human  capital,  for 
example through improving education and training, will enhance the way that investments in 
physical capital are put to use. The investments in human capital must be targeted towards 
our youth as well as the unemployed population. This is especially important in view of the 
thousands of jobs to be filled in our tourism sector in the coming years. You will agree with 
me  that  economic  progress  should  in  the  first  place  benefit  our  own  people.  We  should 
attract labor from abroad only if positions cannot be filled on the local labor market. 
In  addition,  our  education  and  training  system  should  not  only  focus  on  the  labor  force  in 
those  sectors  where  our  economy  has  a  competitive  advantage.  It  should  also  focus  on 
creating  a  skilled  labor  force  that  can  attract  knowledge-based  industries  and  services 
companies,  particularly  in  high  value-creating  activities,  to  promote  diversification  of  our 
economy. Such diversification is essential to reduce our vulnerability to external shocks. The 
resulting increase in productivity will have a more permanent impact on our long-term growth 
prospects. Thus, for Curaçao to become more attractive for investors, we must take some 
major actions to improve the quality of our labor force and the functioning of the labor market. 
Ladies and gentlemen, another major bottleneck for investments in our country is the lack of 
long-term financing, the implicit high interest rates, and the absence of vehicles to provide 
equity capital to the various projects that are being undertaken. The high cost of capital leads 
to the postponement or even cancellation of business investment decisions. The issuance of 
private debt securities, equity, and the establishment of a venture capital fund for promising 
new  businesses  can  be  considered  solutions  to  overcome  these  bottlenecks.  Hence,  the 
further development of our capital market will make the transmission of financial resources to 
investors more efficient and less costly. As a result, local investors will not have to rely solely 
on  bank  financing,  which  is  more  expensive  because  of  the  intermediation  costs  involved. 
This  is  an  area  where  I  think  much  progress  can  be  made  in  light  of  the  forthcoming 
constitutional  changes  and  the  opportunities  arising  out  of  the  current  turbulence  in  the 
international financial markets. 
A welcome development in our domestic capital market is the prospect for a further decline in 
interest rates, contributing to lower financing costs. Interest rates showed already a gradual 
declining trend caused mainly by increased competition among domestic financial institutions 
and from abroad. This trend is expected to be enhanced by the debt relief agreed with the 
Dutch  government  coupled  with  the  decline  in  US  interest  rates  as  a  consequence  of  the 
economic  downturn.  The  redemption  of  a  considerable  part  of  the  government  debt  will 
substantially increase the availability of funds for the private sector at more attractive terms. 
In addition, yields on new government bond issues will decline due to a lower risk premium 
associated with a reduced debt and more competition among investors for these bonds. The 
substantial  oversubscription  on  the  latest  bond  issue  by  the  central  government  at  prices 
above nominal value serves as an example. 
Another weakness of our investment climate is the current administrative barriers, the long 
and  unacceptable  delays  in  administrative  decisions  by  government  departments  and 
excessive discretion in administrative functions. In particular, the requirements for start-ups, 
procedures for obtaining permits for non-nationals, and migration regulations are seen as a 
major source of frustration by the business community. Ladies and gentlemen, establishing a 
business  and  getting  a  basic  business  license  are  automatic  in  most  countries  and  are 
usually  accomplished  in  a  matter  of  days  or  even  hours.  On  our  island,  however,  these 
4 
 BIS Review 41/2008
processes are discretionary and can take months or in some cases even more than a year. 
The long delays in obtaining permits are equivalent to a substantial loss of opportunities to 
capture  investments.  In  other  words,  the  existing  red  tape  and  bureaucracy  weaken  our 
competitiveness  relative  to  other  economies  in  the  region.  If  we  are  to  benefit  from  the 
current  favorable  environment  with  respect  to  the  tourism  sector  and  move  to  a  path  of 
higher growth, it is essential that progress be made in this area. 
One  of  the  main  changes  accompanying  the  new  constitutional  status  of  Curaçao  is  the 
elimination of the double layer of government. This will reduce the administrative barriers in 
the government apparatus considerably, facilitating the decision-making process of policies 
and projects. In this respect, it is important that the government streamlines its administrative 
procedures,  aimed  at  eliminating  all  unnecessary  bureaucracy  and  simplifying 
the 
procedures  for  obtaining  business  and  work  permits  and  business  visas.  In  addition,  the 
creation  of  the  mentioned  one-window  agency  to  serve  potential  investors  as  well  as  to 
provide aftercare services to existing investors is long overdue. Moreover, when we start with 
our new constitutional status, we must be cautious not to implement any new measures that 
might have an adverse impact on our investment climate. What we should do is to embrace 
the  possibilities  that  the  new  status  offers  us  by  making  our  administrative  system  more 
transparent and efficient. 
Ladies and gentlemen, another policy area that needs our attention is the tax system, which 
plays also a key role in shaping the investment climate. On the one hand, the government 
needs  revenues  to  fund  the  public  services  –  including  those  that  improve  the  investment 
climate – and to accomplish its social goals. On the other hand, taxes represent a cost to 
firms, which reduce their incentives to invest and create jobs. All societies, including our own, 
struggle to find a balance between efficiency, equity, and sustainability of the tax system. To 
realize such a balance, it is crucial that policy makers maintain an effective policy dialogue 
with the business community. 
A  number  of  studies  on  the  Curaçao  economy  conducted by  international  organizations  in 
recent  years  concluded  that  there  is  a  need  for  fiscal  reform.  With  the  new  status 
approaching, Curaçao will have the opportunity to include all the necessary reforms in a new 
tax system, contributing to the improvement of the investment climate.  
In  my  view,  the  new  tax  system  of  Curacao  should  be  simple  and  transparent.  Direct  tax 
rates  should  be  competitive  compared  to  other  countries,  especially  in  our  region,  to 
encourage consumer spending and investment by raising disposable income. This will lead 
to  more  economic  activities,  broadening  the  base  of  the  sales  tax.  In  addition,  a  more 
effective  and  efficient  assessment  and  collection  system  should  also  be  an  important 
component of the new tax system,  since it can ensure budget neutrality in the face of the 
reduction in direct tax rates.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  we  are  part  of  a  globalized  world  and  the  current  international 
financial instability will also affect our economy, although I estimate the direct overall impact 
to be rather limited. In fact, our economic performance is improving and the prospects are 
encouraging, especially in tourism. To meet current and potential investors’ expectations, we 
should speed up the implementation of structural reforms to create an attractive investment 
climate.  Together  with  the  changes  taking  place  to  prepare  the  island  for  its  new 
constitutional  status,  providing  an  excellent  opportunity  to  correct  the  economic  and  social 
imbalances in our society with substantial financial and technical Dutch support, we will be 
able to create a solid foundation for strong sustainable growth in the years ahead of us. With 
the right decisions, hard work, and broad consensus among all stakeholders, I am convinced 
that we will realize a better future for all of us in the new country of Curacao. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 41/2008 
 5
