Paul Tucker: Monetary policy and the financial system  
Remarks  by  Mr  Paul  Tucker,  Executive  Director  and  Member  of  the  Monetary  Policy 
Committee  of  the  Bank  of  England,  at  the  Institutional  Money  Market  Funds  Association 
Annual Dinner, London, 2 April 2008. 
 Alongside many others, the money market fund industry has for months now been grappling 
with turmoil and fragility across financial markets. It continues to pose serious challenges for 
all of us, and so I shall use this evening to summarise briefly a few of the strands in my own 
thinking about monetary policy and the financial system. 
Monetary policy 
First,  monetary  policy.  The  tightening  of  credit  conditions  domestically  and  internationally 
makes  it  likely  that  aggregate  demand  will  slow,  with  a  risk  that  it  will  slow  considerably. 
There is, in consequence, a meaningful downwards threat to inflation over the medium term. 
Usually,  the  MPC  would  respond  by  cutting  Bank  Rate  sufficiently  to  offset  more  or  less 
entirely what we judged, over time, to be the impact of the tighter financial conditions on the 
path of spending, so as to ensure that aggregate demand remained broadly in line with the 
economy’s  productive  capacity.  But  conditions  do  not  favour  such  a  “business  as  usual” 
approach  to  demand  management.  That  is  because,  alongside  those  downside  risks  to 
inflation, there are also upside risks to inflation over the medium term – and I am stressing 
“medium  term”  –  stemming  from  the  rise  in  commodity  prices  and  the  decline  in  sterling’s 
exchange rate. In the near term, CPI inflation is very likely to rise to materially above our 2% 
target.  The  question  is  whether  that  unavoidable  temporary  rise  will  remain  just  that, 
temporary;  or  whether  it  will  feed  into  medium-term  expectations  of  inflation,  and  so  get 
reflected in wages and prices going forward and, thus, in domestically-generated inflation. 
Given this unusual combination of significant downside and upside risks to the medium-term 
inflation outlook, the broad policy strategy is to offset some but not all of the adverse shock to 
demand from tighter credit conditions. And to do so by changing Bank Rate gradually and 
with  transparency  about  that  broad  strategy.  To  be  clear,  this  approach  probably  means 
allowing a degree of slack to develop in the economy, in the interests of avoiding taking risks 
with  inflation  on  the  upside.  Only  by  underpinning  the  credibility  of  the  nominal  anchor 
provided by the MPC’s commitment to the inflation target will we maintain scope to cushion 
the real economy from the effects of the stresses in the international financial system. If we 
implement  this  strategy  successfully,  we  will  be  able  to  provide  more  durable  support  for 
demand and activity. 
If,  by  contrast,  we  were  to  adopt  a  course  that  let  the  inflation  genie  out  of  the  bottle,  we 
would find ourselves needing to tighten policy, exacerbating the slowdown in activity. 
That broad strategy is not a recipe for inaction. The central projection in February’s Inflation 
Report was for inflation to return to close to the 2% target over the coming two to three years, 
conditional  on  the  market’s  expectation  of  further  cuts  in  Bank  Rate.  But  nor  does  the 
strategy determine a definite path for Bank Rate over the coming months. Each of us on the 
MPC must form a judgment month by month on which of the risks to the inflation outlook – 
from financial conditions or from rising costs – is proving more potent, and so a judgment on 
the degree to which we can set a course that underpins demand. 
Since  the  February  Inflation  Report,  oil  prices  are  around  10%  higher,  and  sterling’s 
exchange rate around 4% lower, so the immediate cost pressures are worse. The good news 
is  that,  in  the  labour  market,  nominal  earnings  growth  has  so  far  remained  subdued, 
notwithstanding the rise in near-term inflation expectations revealed by a range of surveys. 
BIS Review 38/2008 
 1
This is perhaps suggestive of the adjustment in real take-home pay made necessary by the 
sharp increase in firms’ costs due to the further rises in commodity prices. In manufacturing, 
firms’ input costs have risen sharply over the past twelve months; and output price inflation 
has reached nearly 6%. A big question is to what extent competition amongst retailers will 
dampen the pass through into retail prices. Anecdotally, retailers still sound as though they 
are  competing  fiercely  on  prices,  and  driving  down  other  costs  in  order  to  maintain  their 
margins. 
Meanwhile, on the other side of the ledger, many essentially backward-looking indicators of 
UK real demand and activity have held up reasonably well. But we should not yet place great 
weight on that. It can sometimes take time for disturbances to affect real economic activity. In 
the United States, arguably there was quite a lag between the onset of problems in housing 
finance and the pass through to spending. The UK looks to be quite a lot better than the US. 
The latest data for Q4 last year did, however, suggest that household spending on durables 
slowed quite significantly. And we are seeing softening in consumer confidence and property 
market conditions. So the picture on the real economy is mixed. 
What  is  clear  is  that  credit  conditions  are  unambiguously  tighter  than  two  months  ago, 
underlining  that  source  of  downside  risk  to  the  outlook  for  demand  and  inflation.  In  retail 
lending markets, banks have raised the interest rates charged (relative to Bank Rate) on new 
lending,  but  they  have  all  been  doing  much  the  same  and  many  borrowers  seem  to  have 
been willing to pay the extra. In consequence, banks generally may not have achieved their 
desired  conservation  of  balance  sheet  capacity,  and  we  are  now  seeing  the  withdrawal  of 
some lending products. 
And in wholesale markets, the spread between the price that the banks themselves pay for 
funds,  roughly  LIBOR,  and  the  expected  central  bank  policy  rate  has,  again,  widened 
significantly  over  the  past  couple  of  months  across  the  major  international  markets.  Many 
financial contracts are linked closely to three-month LIBOR so, other things being equal, the 
increase  in  money  market  spreads  has  the  effect  of  reducing  the  level  of  Bank  Rate 
consistent with unchanged monetary conditions. 
At  the  Committee’s  March  meeting,  I  judged  that  an  immediate  further  cut,  following 
February’s, might very easily have been misunderstood as a change of strategy away from 
the one focused on the medium-term outlook for inflation that I have spelled out this evening. 
My own vote at the April meeting will depend on all the data, some of it still to reach us, since 
then. 
Financial system deleveraging: legacy portfolios 
Whatever  path  monetary  policy  takes  in  the  UK  in  the  months  ahead,  it  is  clear  that  the 
process of deleveraging in the financial system is not complete. Some asset prices embody a 
hefty discount for the current illiquidity in markets, which feeds into the accounting measure 
of financial firms’ capitalisation, and so into perceptions of counterparty credit risk and money 
market conditions. In consequence, there remains a risk that credit creation – the lubricant 
that  the  financial  system  provides  to  the  real  economy  –  will  be  further  impaired.  Several 
features of our financial system lie behind this, and I want to touch on just a few of them. 
Financial markets have swung from a prolonged period of underpricing risk to now plausibly 
overpricing risk on at least some products. And yet, one might think perversely, we have also 
swung  from  an  over  abundant  supply  of  credit  to  a  much  more  restrictive  supply  of  new 
credit.  The  global  insurance  industry  provides  an  interesting  contrast  with  banking  in  this 
respect. For sure, it too is capable of systematically misjudging risks. But when a shift in risk 
appreciation and pricing occurs, the reinsurance industry often separates the run off of old 
portfolios containing mispriced contracts from the establishment of new vehicles, capitalised 
separately to take advantage of attractive terms on new business. And for regular insurance, 
many contracts are annual, so adversely priced business can run off fairly quickly. Banking 
2 
 BIS Review 38/2008
typically works quite differently. Banks around the world are carrying portfolios of term loans 
that are the legacy of the boom years. There is uncertainty – amongst banks’ management, 
shareholders and funders – about the degree of fundamental impairment in those portfolios. 
New  loans  are  booked  to  the  same  balance  sheets.  And  so  many  banks  face  a  choice 
between, on the one hand, conserving capital and liquidity to support legacy portfolios; and, 
on the other hand, deploying capital and liquidity to write new business on what some see as 
the  attractive  terms  and  conditions  now  available.  The  banking  system  simply  is  not 
structured routinely to insulate new business from the legacy of past mistakes; funding and 
capital are fungible. 
This predicament may be exacerbated by other features of the current environment. 
One is an apparent reluctance on the part of banks to raise fresh capital except where the 
market thinks that it is beyond doubt that they need to do so. Given the feedback from credit 
conditions to asset prices and the real economy and so potentially to banks’ future earnings, 
it  might  seem  slightly  odd  for  banks  internationally  to  be  maintaining  distributions  to 
shareholders but tightening credit availability in order to preserve resources. This has to be 
seen in the wider context. 
One possible explanation for banks holding back from raising fresh capital is that they may 
want to avoid giving an adverse signal about themselves. If there is a co-ordination problem, 
the regulatory authorities internationally should be able to tackle it, allied to ensuring prudent 
valuations  of  legacy  portfolios.  But  another  possible  explanation  is  that,  like  some  other 
market  participants,  bankers  may  believe  that  many  legacy  assets  are  fundamentally 
undervalued  at  present  and  that  the  markets  for  securitised  assets  will,  with  time,  recover 
and reopen. On that view, banks are avoiding becoming overcapitalised on a fundamentals 
(or forward looking) basis, and so setting off another expansionary phase in the credit cycle, 
a  little  further  down  the  road.  The  serious  puzzle  which  that  underlines  is  why  there  is  a 
dearth  of  buyers  for  the  supposedly  undervalued  paper.  With  the  terms  and  availability  of 
financing from banks and dealers having tightened, levered funds are hardly likely to be the 
US  Cavalry.  But  it  is  interesting  that  there  has  not  been  more  interest  from  investment 
institutions  with  ostensibly  long  holding  periods,  which  are  largely  unlevered  and  are  not 
exposed  to  liquidity  risk  from  borrowing  short  and  lending  long.  What  we  commonly  hear 
from contacts is that investment managers do not want to be caught out if asset prices fall 
further before they recover. But no one can seriously believe that they can spot the bottom of 
the  market,  and  short-term  horizons  should  not  weigh  heavily  in  longer-term  investment 
institutions.  All  of  which  suggests  that  there  may  be  structural  impediments.  Those  could 
include some combination of the reasonable difficulty that some asset managers experience 
in  assessing  the  quality  of  securitised  assets;  and  mandates  and  accounting  policies  that 
may have the effect of shortening asset managers’ time horizons. 
The challenge for your own industry seems to have been slightly different. The managers of 
some money funds around the world, although I am sure not all of your members, joined in 
the “search for yield” by going down the credit spectrum and increasing maturity mismatch 
during the boom in credit markets. As those funds have moved back towards home base, 
shortening  the  maturity  and  increasing  the  liquidity  of  their  assets,  one  effect  has  been  a 
reduction in the net supply of term funding into the international banking system. 
That has been one of many contributors to the liquidity strains evident in money markets. But 
those strains have also been exacerbated by an unexpected breakdown in the technology for 
liquidity insurance provided by central banks. 
For well over a century, throughout industrialised world there has in effect been something 
akin  to  a  Social  Contract  between  the  banking  system  and  the  authorities.  The  banking 
system is permitted to profit from undertaking leveraged maturity transformation in the course 
of intermediating the liquid savings of depositors into illiquid loans to households, firms and 
others.  In  doing  so,  commercial  banks  provide  liquidity  insurance,  whether  via  demand 
deposits or committed lines of credit. They can do this because their deposit liabilities are 
BIS Review 38/2008 
 3
money,  which  puts  them  at  the  heart  of  the  payments  system  and  is  what  makes  them 
special; banks are at the heart of a monetary economy. In return, the authorities respond with 
a  combination  of  prudential  supervision,  to  contain  the  risks  that  banks  run;  deposit 
insurance,  to  protect  savers;  and  liquidity  insurance  from  the  central  bank.  Smaller 
commercial banks can try to buy liquidity insurance from their larger brethren. Large banks 
cannot realistically do the same. But there is no cast iron guarantee that asset markets will 
remain  liquid  in  all conditions.  So since  Bagehot’s  day,  central  banks  have  stood  ready  to 
provide  unlimited  liquidity  against  good  collateral  at  a  rate  that  is  higher  than  the  normal 
market  rate.  However,  during  the  period  of  turmoil  since  last  summer  it  has  proved  toxic, 
here and overseas, for banks to access liquidity on those terms from central banks unless in 
broad and quality company. That has created uncertainty about the access of banks to the 
central banks in practice, and has required innovation and clear assurances from the central 
banking community.  This  alone  will  require  reforms  to  the  way  in  which  central  banks  use 
their balance sheets, and money creating power, to sustain financial stability. 
Banks  will  also  need  to  adapt.  It  seems  that  at  not  a  few  firms,  the  discipline  of  risk 
management somehow got separated from that of balance sheet management (or funding). 
It was effectively assumed that financing markets would remain open come what may. There 
is  a  question  of  whether  treasury  management  should  somehow  be  insulated  from  the 
pressures  of  a  profit  centre.  Separately,  assumptions  were  made  about  relationships 
between  asset  prices  that  have  proved  groundless.  One such  is  the spread  between  term 
money  market  rates  and  expected  central  bank  policy  rates.  So  long  as  the  so-called 
LIBOR/Overnight  Index  Swap  spread  was  narrow  at  all  maturities,  few  market  participants 
cared  about  whether  they  hedged  against  a  LIBOR-based  instrument  when  in  fact 
sometimes  they  really  needed  a  hedge  relative  to  a  risk-free  rate.  We  sense  that  some 
international  fixed-income  asset  managers  would  like  there  to  be  OIS-based  contracts 
alongside  LIBOR-based  financial  contracts,  so  that  they  can  tailor  their  hedges  more 
precisely. There should be wider benefits from contracts based purely on the risk-free rate 
rather  than  embodying  liquidity  premia  and  credit-risk  premia  of  various  kinds.  That  is 
something for the industry. 
But  better  liquidity-insurance  technology  and  better  risk  management  will  not  abolish  the 
credit cycle. Looking further ahead, the big question will be whether the authorities can tame 
the  credit  cycle  without  sacrificing  the  incentives  to  enterprise  that  are  so  important  in  a 
dynamic economy. The debate about the micro regulation of banks will need to take account 
of whether or not we can deliver that macroprudential objective. For too long, the debate has 
got  sidetracked.  Into  whether  we  can  rely  on  monetary  policy  “mopping  up”  after  bubbles 
burst. Or into whether monetary policy could be used to control asset prices as well as doing 
its orthodox job of steering nominal trends in the economy, which I should say can include 
taking  account  of  prospective  risks  of  inflation  volatility  over  the  medium  term.  Ideas 
circulating already include minimum margin requirements or capital ratios that vary not only 
across firms but also through time as credit conditions change. We need calmly to explore 
whether  there  are  also  other  possibilities.  But  let  me  make  this  absolutely  clear:  there  are 
formidable  obstacles  to  finding  a  solution.  In  the  monetary  sphere,  a  regime  of  floating 
exchange rates allows individual countries to pursue their own domestic monetary objectives. 
But  in  a  world  in  which  capital  flows  freely,  local  attempts  to  control  the  pace  of  credit 
creation,  particularly  within  the  financial  system,  may  not  work.  All  of  that  will  need  to  be 
thought through. But first we need to concentrate on the immediate challenges. 
Summary 
In a speech four months ago, I stressed that “we must try to avoid a vicious circle in which 
tighter  liquidity  conditions,  lower  asset  values,  impaired  capital  resources,  reduced  credit 
supply, and slower aggregate demand feed back on each other”. I identified monetary policy, 
liquidity policy, and regulatory capital policy as being amongst the instruments the authorities 
would need to use. That remains the case, as the stress in the global financial system has 
4 
 BIS Review 38/2008
continued and, in the US at least, evidence of a feedback loop is apparent. Each of those 
instruments is constrained in some degree. That underlines the need for close co-operation 
between the authorities and the industry, and internationally. 
BIS Review 38/2008 
 5
