John Hurley: Current state of the Irish economy 
Opening statement by Mr John Hurley, Governor of the Central Bank and Financial Services 
Authority  of  Ireland,  to  the  Joint  Committee  on  Finance  and  the  Public  Service,  Dublin, 
15 July 2008. 
 Good  afternoon  Chairman  and  members  of  the  Joint  Committee  and  thank  you  for  the 
invitation  to  speak  with  you  today  on  the  current  state  of  the  economy  and  the 
banking/financial services sectors. I am accompanied by Tony Grimes, the Director General 
of the Central Bank and Tom O’Connell, Assistant Director General, Economics. 
Earlier  this  year,  I  outlined  to  the  Committee  our  unitary  organisational  structure  and  I 
emphasised,  in  particular,  how  the  Central  Bank  and  Financial  Regulator  work  closely 
together  in  response  to  the  market  turbulence.  I  don’t  intend  today  to  describe  those 
arrangements again except to say that the structure continues to work very well and there 
continues to be the closest cooperation. 
It is worth reminding ourselves that we have a very different economy now as compared to 
20 to 25 years ago. Since then, Ireland has transformed itself from being a country with a 
relatively low standard of living to one where average income per head is now well above the 
EU average. Not only are living standards much higher, employment has grown rapidly and 
we have seen strong development in manufacturing, business and financial services sectors, 
helped  by  the  fact  that  we  have  been  hugely  successful  in  attracting  foreign  investment. 
Clearly,  the  economic  situation  has  changed  significantly,  but  in  terms  of  where  we  are 
starting from, the position is very different from the 1980s. 
As you know, we published our Annual Report last week and, in my statement today, I will 
outline the rationale behind our latest forecasts for economic growth. In our earlier forecasts, 
it was always emphasised that there were many downside risks and vulnerabilities that could 
push  growth  lower.  These  risks  related  to  the  potential  for  interaction  between  global 
financial market turbulence, rising global energy and food prices and the slowing of activity 
within the economy, which was already underway. 
In recent months, almost all of these downside risks have materialised and this has led to a 
greater-than-expected slowdown in growth and higher-than-anticipated inflation. 
Notwithstanding the more challenging short-term outlook, we continue to believe that growth 
in the economy should gradually recover and inflation moderate. However, this recovery is 
not guaranteed and the evolution of the economy will be very much influenced by how we 
respond  to  the  current  challenges  we  face.  As  a  country  we  have  benefited  considerably 
from  the  prudent,  stability-focussed  policy  approach  we  have  followed  in  recent  decades. 
This  has  helped  to  deliver  domestic  economic  stability,  has  contributed  significantly  to 
attracting  foreign  investment  and  has  greatly  facilitated  growth.  To  ensure  a  sustainable 
recovery, it is very important that we maintain this approach and focus on key policy areas 
under  our  control.  These  include  the  public  finances,  the  efficiency  and  effectiveness  of 
public spending, particularly in relation to increasing the productive capacity of the economy, 
and overall competitiveness. 
The updated assessment 
While  the  emergence  of  a  slowdown  in  the  economy  was  not  unanticipated,  the  loss  of 
momentum has been greater than expected this year. This has arisen from a sharper-than-
expected  adjustment  in  the  housing  sector  alongside  a  deterioration  in  the  international 
environment. Our current forecasts are that both GNP and GDP growth will remain positive 
this year, albeit significantly less than 1 per cent. It will be the end of July before we finalise 
BIS Review 91/2008 
 1
our  forecasts,  but  a  ballpark  estimate,  at  this  point  in  time,  would  be  around  0.5  per  cent 
growth this year and about 2 per cent in 2009. 
In  common  with  other  developed  economies,  Ireland  is  facing  significant  inflationary 
pressures arising from very elevated levels of energy and other commodity prices. We are all 
conscious of the experiences of the 1970s, when the response to the oil price increases of 
the time resulted in persistently high inflation. This undermined growth and employment in 
the  economy  and  was  especially  damaging  to  those  on  fixed  incomes.  While  the  current 
situation is not identical, there are some similarities. It is important to accept that economic 
conditions here have weakened and we cannot compensate ourselves on an economy-wide 
basis for commodity price increases over which we have no control. As we know from past 
experience,  if  we  attempt  to  do  so,  recovery  inevitably  becomes  delayed.  Ireland’s 
competitiveness  position  has  weakened  in  recent  years  because  wage  and  broader  cost 
inflation has been higher than in our main trading partners. It is vital for our growth prospects 
to ensure that our competitiveness position improves rather than deteriorates further. 
Based on the potential for future growth in productivity and the labour force, the medium-term 
outlook for the economy remains favourable and growth will return to stronger levels, if the 
appropriate  corrective  action  is  taken.  Growth  should  pick  up  next  year  on  the  basis  of  a 
bottoming  out  in  domestic  housing  output  and  some  improvement  in  the  external 
environment. 
Residential housing market 
The housing market weakened significantly during 2007 with sharp declines in both output 
and  prices.  Most  economic  commentators  had  envisaged  an  adjustment  in  the  housing 
market because, for a number of years, housing output was well above the sustainable rate 
taking account of underlying housing needs. Housing investment peaked at around 13 per 
cent of GDP in 2006, which was well in excess of international norms. This is likely to reduce 
to about 7½ per cent of GDP in 2008, which represents a very substantial scaling back of 
activity. The significant weakening in the housing sector is going to detract considerably from 
growth this year. 
Housing output should broadly stabilise during the course of next year, but clearly risks are to 
the  downside.  In  general,  however,  the  declines  in  both  output  and  prices  represent  a 
movement  towards  a  more  sustainable  position  in  the  long  term.  Unfortunately  the 
adjustment process is a difficult, if unavoidable, one. 
The external environment 
Two fairly distinct sets of events are driving global economic developments at the moment. 
Firstly,  housing  market  adjustments  are  taking  place  in  a  number  of  the  major  developed 
economies  alongside  associated  difficulties  in  financial  markets.  Secondly,  a  sharp  rise  in 
commodity  prices  is  placing  upward  pressure  on  global  inflation  and  causing  a  transfer  of 
income  from  countries  importing  these  commodities  to  those  producing  them.  The 
combination  of  these  events  is  having  a  negative  impact  on  output  growth  globally. 
Unfortunately, this slowdown is affecting the US and UK economies disproportionately, two 
of  our  major  trading  partners.  Economic  activity  has  remained  stronger  in  the  euro  area, 
although an easing in the growth rate is expected in the short-term before a recovery towards 
its potential growth rate of about 2 per cent. The risks to the growth outlook are probably on 
the downside, however, in all of these economies. 
Another  negative  outcome  of  these  events  is,  of  course,  the  sharp  upward  pressure  on 
headline  inflation  rates  globally.  Central  banks  are  very  focussed  on  this  issue  and  are 
particularly  concerned  that  the  rise  in  commodity  prices  does  not  spread  out  into  higher 
inflation generally. In order to counter these risks within the euro area, the ECB Governing 
2 
 BIS Review 91/2008
Council  decided  to  raise  its  interest  rates  at  its  last  meeting.  Price  stability  is  a  vital 
foundation  for  sound  economic  performance  and  prosperity  over  the  longer  term  and 
preserves  the  purchasing  power  of  incomes  and  savings.  Inflation,  in  contrast,  creates 
uncertainty for savers and investors and undermines confidence in an economy in a way that 
ultimately damages the welfare of its citizens. 
I would like to turn now to financial market developments. Over the past year, there has been 
a generalised disruption in normal money market operations between banks. This resulted 
mainly  from  uncertainty  regarding  the  extent  of  losses  on  complex  financial  instruments 
linked  to  sub-prime  mortgages  in  the  US.  Central  banks  responded  quickly  to  counteract 
these adverse conditions in money markets. The ECB, in particular, was in a position to take 
strong action in the light of the pre-existing arrangements whereby banks had an extensive 
range of collateral that could be used to access central bank liquidity. These arrangements 
effectively  addressed  the  problems  at  the  short-end  of  the  money  market.  However,  with 
questions of transparency and asset valuation remaining, term interest rates continue to be 
elevated with higher than normal spreads remaining between longer-term rates and official 
rates. This will only change when confidence is restored among financial market participants. 
Domestic banking sector 
The Irish financial sector is not immune to these international financial developments which 
are persisting for longer than expected. Term funding is not as readily available on wholesale 
markets and this has increased the need for banks to concentrate on liquidity management. 
Internationally, share prices of financials have fallen significantly and Irish shares have also 
suffered. It is important, however, to point out that Irish financial institutions have negligible 
exposures to impaired US sub-prime and related structured credit products, and loan arrears 
remain historically low. Accordingly, the banking sector here has not experienced the write-
down of assets that has required several other international banks to raise additional capital. 
In  line  with  the  results  of  previous  exercises,  the  preliminary  results  of  our  latest 
macroeconomic stress tests on the banking sector, which are designed to test the financial 
position  of  banks  in  the  face  of  a  serious  economic  downturn,  suggest  that  the  banking 
sector’s  financial  buffers  remain  strong.  This  strength  is  an  essential  prerequisite  for  the 
more challenging times that have arisen. 
A recovery to medium-term potential growth 
Growth should pick up somewhat next year as the fall in domestic housing output levels off. 
Thereafter, growth in the Irish economy could begin to return towards its long run sustainable 
potential rate of close to 4 per cent. However, this recovery is not guaranteed and, as I have 
said  earlier,  will  be  influenced  by  how  we  respond  to  the  current  challenges  we  face.  To 
ensure a sustainable recovery in growth back towards potential, it is important to focus on 
some key areas under our own control. These include the public finances, the efficiency and 
effectiveness of public spending, particularly in relation to increasing the productive capacity 
of the economy, and overall competitiveness. 
The slowdown in economic activity is impacting significantly on the fiscal position. Exchequer 
data indicate a sizeable decline in tax revenue in the first half of 2008, primarily reflecting a 
marked slowdown in property related taxes, but also indicative of a slowdown in consumer 
spending. On the expenditure side, the weakening of the labour market is increasing social 
expenditure.  This  points  to  significant  deterioration  in  the  fiscal  deficit  for  2008  relative  to 
earlier projections. I note that the Department of Finance has revised its estimate for the full 
year General Government Balance to a deficit of about 2¾ per cent of GDP. Our own internal 
estimates are broadly in line with this assessment. 
The slowing of growth coupled with the risks facing the economy presents significant issues 
for fiscal policy. On the basis of current trends, it will be a major challenge to remain within 
BIS Review 91/2008 
 3
the terms of the Stability and Growth Pact next year. It should be emphasised, however, that 
the  targets  set  under  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  represent  a  prudent  approach  to  the 
management of the public finances. 
Within  these  constraints,  it  will  be  necessary  to  carefully  manage  the  allocation  of  scarce 
public  funds  and  to  focus  on  measures  to  increase  the  efficiency  and  effectiveness  of 
government  spending,  both  current  and  capital.  A  particular  priority  within  the  capital 
programme should be the maintenance of expenditure on key infrastructural projects, which 
can enhance productivity and improve the potential for the economy to grow in the future. 
Policies that promote productivity and competitiveness can help the economy to weather the 
effects of adverse developments and of lower growth in the global economy. They also serve 
to increase the medium-term performance of the economy, protect employment and allow for 
sustainable  increases  in  living  standards.  For  these  reasons,  in  addition  to  my  earlier 
remarks  about  the  need  to  improve  competitiveness,  boosting  productivity  growth  and 
promoting flexibility in response to short-term shocks are particularly important. In addition to 
enhancing  the  efficiency  of  public  spending  and  continuing  to  address  the  country’s 
infrastructure deficit, a number of other measures can be identified which would promote this 
goal.  These  include  greater  competition  in  the  more  sheltered  sectors  of  the  economy, 
continuing  to  encourage  innovation  and  R&D  activity  and  enhancing  the  skill  level  of  the 
labour force. 
To  conclude,  we  are  now  in  a  more  challenging  environment.  This  makes  it  particularly 
important to ensure that policy remains focussed on sound economic management and that 
timely decisions are taken to redress the unfolding situation. As I have said earlier, we have 
benefited considerably from following such an approach. 
It  has  underpinned  domestic  economic  stability,  helped  us  to  attract  substantial  foreign 
investment  and  greatly  facilitated  growth.  It  is  vital  for  our  prospects  for  a  sustainable 
recovery in growth that we continue to follow such a path. 
4 
 BIS Review 91/2008
