Philipp Hildebrand: Current state of the financial system in Switzerland 
Introductory remarks by Mr Philipp Hildebrand, Vice-Chairman of the Governing Board of the 
Swiss National Bank, at the half-yearly media news conference, Geneva, 19 June 2008. 
 The  Swiss  National  Bank  publishes  its  sixth  annual  report  on  financial  stability  today.  My 
comments are based on this report. I will begin with a brief assessment of the current state of 
the financial system. Then I will present the most important lessons which the Swiss National 
Bank has learned from the credit market turmoil.  
As you know, the situation in the Swiss banking sector worsened significantly in 2007 as a 
result of the correction in the US real estate market. In the second half of the year, profits fell 
at the Swiss big banks and there was a substantial deterioration in their capital base. The 
other Swiss banks, by contrast, were hardly affected by the turmoil. Most of them were able 
to benefit from the buoyant Swiss economy and surpass the good results they had achieved 
the previous year.  
Since the beginning of 2008, developments at the big banks have been mixed. On the one 
hand, in the first quarter of 2008, they suffered losses in the international credit markets due 
to  further  deterioration  in  the  international  credit  markets.  On  the  other  hand,  they 
strengthened their capital bases and partially reduced their risk positions. 
In the past few months, the overall market environment has calmed somewhat. Nonetheless, 
it  is  too  early  to  sound  the  all-clear.  The  ongoing  price  corrections  on  the  US  real  estate 
market  will  probably  continue  to  put  a  strain  on  the  US  economy.  Ultimately,  this  will  spill 
over to countries outside the US, although according to our assessment the affects will be 
limited.  Consequently,  although  the  SNB  expects  a  slowing  in  momentum  in  the  coming 
quarters, it expects the decline in economic growth to be less pronounced than in the US.  
However, there is considerable uncertainty attached to the current forecast. This means that 
market participants, and in particular the banks, also need to take less favourable scenarios 
into  account.  A  clear  escalation  of  the  crisis  in  the  US  real  estate  market  would  heavily 
depress economic growth in the US and this, in turn, would leave a more pronounced mark 
on  Switzerland.  Moreover,  real  estate  prices  have  risen  appreciably  in  recent  years  in  the 
US, as in other countries. Price corrections can already be observed here and there in the 
real estate markets of other countries. Further developments of this kind cannot be ruled out. 
We do not see any greater risks for the Swiss real estate market at the present time.  
As  already  mentioned,  the  Swiss  big  banks  have  reduced  some  of  their  risk  positions  in 
recent months. However, they remain exposed with regard to international developments. So 
far, the financial market turmoil has mainly affected the trading portfolios of the big banks, 
and hardly any losses have been recorded in traditional lending business. This could change. 
Should the general economic situation indeed deteriorate further, the solvency of borrowers 
would also worsen. This would result in losses in the big banks’ lending portfolios. The effect 
on banks with a domestic business focus would depend on the extent of the deterioration in 
the international environment. 
Entering into risk is a bank’s core business and, as such, is desirable. What is important is 
that these risks can be both calculated and carried. However, experience shows that is not 
always the case. In each of the three most recent international financial crises, a Swiss big 
bank was particularly hard hit. Each time a crisis occurred an increasing amount of equity 
was wiped out. This should serve as a warning. If the wheels are not set in motion now, the 
impact of the next crisis could be even more severe.  
Should  a  big  bank  collapse,  the  consequences  for  Switzerland  would  be  dire.  Therefore, 
measures need to be taken now in order to ensure that the Swiss big banks are sufficiently 
BIS Review 80/2008 
 1
resilient  in  the  future.  The  SNB  and  the  Swiss  Federal  Banking  Commission  recognise  a 
need  for  action  in  –  basically  –  four  areas:  capital,  liquidity,  monitoring  and  crisis 
management. In our stability report we discuss measures in all four areas. Today I would like 
to focus on the most important measures in the area of capital.  
It is in the nature of the financial markets that there will always be crises. Even with the best 
risk management, banks can be hit suddenly by unexpected events or developments. I am 
convinced  that  managements  will  continue  to  misjudge  situations  in  the  future.  This  is 
something  we  have  to  live  with.  The  financial  system  therefore  needs  to  be  made  more 
resilient  to  possible  shocks.  This  means  the  buffers  in  the  financial  system  have  to  be 
increased. Fine-tuning of the current regulations is necessary in many respects. However, in 
my  view  it  is  an  insufficient  response  to  the  steadily  increasing  complexity  of  financial 
markets.  It  is  therefore  questionable  whether  the  current  regulatory  approach,  with  its 
increasingly complex provisions that intervene at an ever deeper level in the daily business 
of  banks,  is  the  right  one.  The  authorities  are,  by  nature,  always  a  step  behind  the  latest 
developments. Even the most complex models will never be infallible. In the current crisis, 
the  model-based  form  of  risk  measurement  failed.  The  SNB  therefore  believes  that  two 
fundamental  adjustments  need  to  be  made  to  the  capital  requirements  for  the  Swiss  big 
banks.  
First, the risk-weighted capital requirements for the Swiss big banks need to be tightened. 
One way of achieving this would be by using an appropriate multiplier to increase the capital 
requirements under Basel 2.  
Second, a limit on leverage – often referred to as “leverage ratio” – needs to be introduced 
for  the  big  banks  as  a  complement  to  the  risk-weighted  capital  requirements.  As  clearly 
outlined in our Financial Stability Report, leverage at the Swiss big banks is very high, and 
since the mid-1990s, average indebtedness at the two big banks has risen from 90% to over 
97%. That means over CHF 97 of borrowed capital for every CHF 3 of equity. This ratio is 
also  very  high  by  international  standards.  In  terms  of  return  on  equity,  high  leverage  may 
appear attractive. In terms of financial stability, however, it is also a source of risk. Thus, in 
the current crisis, losses arose on Swiss big bank risk positions which are relatively small in 
comparison to total assets. However, because leverage was high, in the case of UBS these 
losses destroyed almost half the bank’s equity.  
The  two  measures  mentioned  above  have  a  complementary  effect.  The  risk-based 
requirements  ensure  the  best  possible  risk-sensitivity  for  capital  adequacy  purposes. 
Alongside  this,  a  leverage  ratio  would  guarantee  a  minimum  safety  buffer  which  does  not 
depend  on  complex  models.  Thus,  the  leverage  ratio  would  be  a  protection  against 
unexpected shocks that are not sufficiently covered by the risk-weighted requirements. This 
limitation  set  on  the  degree  of  indebtedness  would  mean  that  capital  requirements  would 
increase  for  activities  based  on  large  amounts  of  borrowed  funds,  such  as  proprietary 
trading. In the US, banks have long been subject to a leverage ratio. They have to comply 
with a capital-to-assets ratio of at least 5% in order to be considered as well capitalised. 
The Swiss Federal Banking Commission (SFBC) – as the authority with responsibility for this 
area – is currently in the process of spelling out in detail what measures will be needed in the 
area  of  capital  adequacy  requirements.  Careful  planning  will  be  particularly  important  with 
respect to implementation of the new measures. First of all, the current crisis has to be seen 
through. The appropriate measures then need to be introduced progressively over a number 
of years. In this project, the SFBC can count on the full support of the SNB, in the interests of 
securing a long-term strengthening of the Swiss financial system.  
2 
 BIS Review 80/2008
