Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj: Toward a more integrated Arab insurance 
market 
Address by His Excellency Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj, Governor of the Central Bank of 
Bahrain,  at  the  General  Arab  Insurance  Federation  General  Conference  2008,  Manama, 
26 February 2008. 
 Your Highness Sheikh Khalifa Bin Salman Al Khalifa, the Prime Minister, Your Excellencies, 
Ladies and Gentlemen  
I am pleased to welcome Your Highness to the opening session of the 27th General Arab 
Insurance Federation Conference. I am also honored to express my most sincere thanks and 
appreciation to Your Highness for the kind patronage of this important event.  
The care and attention which Your Highness granted to the financial sector in the Kingdom of 
Bahrain,  has  always  reflected  the  pioneering  role  and  relentless  efforts  exerted  by  Your 
Highness in the further development of this vital sector, as one of the key segments of the 
national  economy.  Please  accept  our  heartily  thanks  for  the  blessed  efforts  of  Your 
Highness,  as  we  have  always  opted  for  your  guidance  and  support  to  further  develop  the 
financial sector in the Kingdom of Bahrain.  
I  also  welcome  the  participants  and  guests  wishing  them  a  pleasant  stay  in  Bahrain,  and 
success in their endeavors.  
It  goes  without  doubt  that  the  presence  of  this  large  number  of  distinguished  Arab  and 
foreign  insurance  companies  shall  give  this  conference  a  new  positive  dimension,  and 
constitutes a  qualitative  leap  in  exploring  the  best  methods  to  develop  the  Arab  insurance 
businesses, in order to cope with the immense developments observed by Arab economies.  
I  also  wish  to  extend  my  thanks  and  appreciation  to  the  organizers  for  their  excellent 
preparations of this vitally important conference, which is truly one of the significant regional 
and international activities in which over 1000 leading elite participants are taking part.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Today’s conference is being held under the title “Toward a more integrated Arab Insurance 
Market”.  The  agenda  reflects  topics  important  to  all  industry  players  and  the  CBB.  The 
development  of  the  insurance  industry  in  Bahrain  has continued  its  growth  in  line with  the 
CBB’s strategic objectives. The financial services sector in Bahrain accounts for 27% of the 
country’s GDP.  
Following the assumption of the supervisory and regulatory responsibilities for the insurance 
sector  in  August  2002,  the  Central  Bank  of  Bahrain  viewed  this  as  an  opportunity  to 
undertake  several  initiatives,  aimed  a  creating  a  qualitative  regulatory  framework  for  the 
further development of the insurance sector. 
The  CBB  issued  directives  and  regulations  in  line  with  international  standards  as 
promulgated  by  the  International  Association  of  Insurance  Supervisors  (IAIS)  while  at  the 
same time keeping in mind recognized international insurance practices. 
Standards  focusing  on  capital  adequacy  and  solvency  and  key  areas  of  corporate 
governance are now an integral part of the insurance regulatory framework in place for all 
insurance firms and brokers operating in the Kingdom. 
The  establishment  of  international  standards  and  their  implementation  has  bolstered 
Bahrain’s  reputation  as  a  regional  centre  where  sound  practices  prevail.  This  has 
encouraged many insurance and reinsurance firms to choose Bahrain as a base. 
BIS Review 47/2008 
 1
in 
the 
field  of 
Islamic  banking,  supporting 
The  Central  Bank  of  Bahrain  has  also  put  in  place  a  framework  allowing  for  the 
establishment of captive insurance firms. This initiative by the CBB is the first of its kind in 
the  Middle  East  region,  aiming  to  fulfill  the  insurance  needs  of  major  industrial,  oil,  and 
service  firms  that  seek  to  establish  their  own  insurance  companies.  Bahrain  succeeded  in 
2006 in attracting Tabreed Company as the first captive insurance company, licensed in the 
GCC.  
The  lack  of  a  specialised  centre  in  the  region  aimed  at  fostering  the  development  of  the 
captives market led to the CBB’s initiative in this regard.  
Furthermore, Bahrain has also attracted takaful and retakaful insurance businesses, who are 
benefiting  from  the  well  structured  regulatory  environment.  The  CBB  benefited  from  its 
successful  experience 
the  successful 
implementation  of  sound  regulatory  framework  for  takaful  businesses.  There  are  several 
common  areas  shared  by  takaful  and  Islamic  banking.  In  addition,  the  CBB  identified  the 
need by Islamic banks to transact with takaful firms to meet their insurance requirements. 
Bahrain  is  a  founder  and  an  active  member  in  many  of  the  Islamic  financial  standards 
committees.  These  committees  are  a  reflection  of  the  market  realities  and  the  need  for 
change in an evolving industry. There is a strong demand by clients for takaful products, at a 
time when firms rendering such services in the Arab market are still relatively few.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
The theme of today’s conference is of special significance considering the global challenges 
faced  by  the  Arab  insurance  markets  to  integrate,  and  work  towards  consistency  in 
legislations. It also lays the foundations for insurance companies to enter new markets and 
stimulate integration to pave the way towards one Arab insurance market that is capable of 
competing globally.  
I am grateful to Bahrain’s insurance community for its substantial contributions and sincere 
efforts, and again wish to thank the organizers and participants in this important conference 
wishing  you  all  successful  and  fruitful  deliberations  to  further  contribute  in  developing  the 
integration of the Arab insurance industry. 
2 
 BIS Review 47/2008
