Bandid Nijathaworn: Meeting security and risk challenges in the finance 
and infrastructure sectors 
Opening address by Dr Bandid Nijathaworn, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the 
seminar  on  “Meeting  Security  and  Risk  Challenges  in  the  Finance  and  Infrastructure 
Sectors”, Bangkok, 11 February 2008. 
 Distinguished guests 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure to be here this morning, to give this opening remark for the seminar on 
“Meeting Security and Risk Challenges in the Finance and Infrastructure Sectors”. And those 
of you who come from abroad to join the seminar, let me also welcome you to Bangkok. 
Today,  risk  management  and  security  concern  are  important  management  issues  for  all 
businesses,  as  companies  increasingly  operate  in  an  evolving  global  environment  of  rapid 
technological change and innovation. 
Great  advance  in  information  technology  has  brought  about  radical  changes  in  the  way 
modern businesses are conducted and managed, and in the way new products and delivery 
channels  are  created.  Yet  while  these  changes  have  imparted  important  benefits  to 
businesses in terms of profitability and efficiency, they also pose greater challenge in terms 
of the risk exposure and the management of risks. In this regard, I think financial services 
and  banking  is  of  no  exception.  It  is  one  industry  that  continues  to  face  this  important 
challenge. 
Banking business, basically, is about risk-taking, managing risk and profiting from risk. The 
growing  sophistication  and  complexity  of  financial  activities,  brought  on  by  financial 
innovation and globalisation, have made risk management a key and important task for all 
banks. 
In particular, the integrity of real-time information on changing prices, valuation of financial 
position,  and  warning  on  breaches  of  internal  control  is  most  critical  now  for  bank’s  top 
management in taking timely and prudent decision. The recent episode in the global financial 
market has demonstrated again the costly implication of weaknesses in this area. 
For  these  reasons,  information  technology  and  its  management  has  become  a  key  part  in 
business strategy as it can provide lever to create competitive edge and innovate business 
model, especially for providing customer reach in a cost-effective manner. But on top of this, 
pressure from competition and the need to cut costs also have forced banks to rethink their 
business  models  and  strategies,  leading  to  fundamental  changes  in  the  business  process 
that include the proliferation of outsourcing, electronic banking, and the use of the internet. 
Again, while these developments are positive, they also expose banks to a different aspect of 
risk  management,  for  example  how  to  manage  and  control  outsourced  activities.  Such  an 
environment, if not properly managed, can lead to greater technological and security risk, as 
well as to malicious activities. 
For central banks, one of our key mandates is to ensure financial system stability. A key part 
of this is to make certain that banks and financial markets perform their functions efficiently, 
and that their business poses no systemic threat to the financial sector and the economy. 
Hence, for a long time now, the main focus of bank regulation and supervision have been to 
ensure that banks manage their exposure to risk effectively. These include exposure to credit 
risk, market risk, liquidity risk, and operational risk. Much progress has been made in honing 
the  approach  for  a  more  accurate  assessment  and  a  more  effective  management  of  risk, 
culminating in the Basle II, which is a global standard for bank’s risk management. 
BIS Review 18/2008 
 1
But, in spite of what has been achieved, mishaps can and do happen. From time to time, we 
still  read  about  banks  suffering  large  losses  that  originate  from  the  under-management  of 
these  risks.  More  often  than  not,  the  losses  are  linked  to  a  breach  of  internal  controls  or 
systems that have been put in place to rein in excessive risk-taking in the first place. 
Ladies and gentlemen. 
On  the  security  risk  aspect,  the  growth  of  electronic  banking  and  real-time  funds  transfer 
have made the challenge of risk management even greater, as the nature of security risk to 
banks  has  shifted  considerably.  Clearly,  the  main  concern  now  is  not  so  much  about 
ensuring  property  security  or  preventing  theft  of  physical  assets,  but  about  ensuring 
information security and preventing identity theft. The concern is not so much about control 
over access to restricted areas and cash vault, but about ensuring proper authorized access 
to the IT systems and the electronic funds transfer network. And the issue is not so much 
about  keeping  bank  premises  open  after  a  major  disaster,  but  about  ensuring  that  all  key 
banking operations and network continue to function uninterrupted under a proper business 
continuity plan. 
These  are  aspects  of  modern  security  risks  to  banks.  They  are  part  of  the  broader 
operational risks, which have received greater attention as the business of banking moves 
further  and  further  away  from  face-to-face  transactions.  In  Thailand,  to  address  this 
challenge,  we  as  bank  supervisors,  have  over  the  past  years  provided  best-practice 
guidance to the local banking industry in a number of important areas, including loss data 
collection,  business  continuity  management  and  plan,  IT  security,  outsourcing,  and  IT 
disaster recovery. 
In  addition,  Basel  II  will,  for  the  first  time,  impose  an  explicit  capital  charge  on  banks  for 
operational risks, on top of the traditional credit and market risks. Implementation of Basel II 
in Thailand will begin at the end of this year, and the preparation for its implementation is 
progressing on schedule. I am confident that with the implementation of Basel II, the quality 
of  risk  management  by  banks  in  Thailand,  especially  with  respect  to  operational  risks,  will 
improve further. 
I  have  taken  a  lot  of  your  time  in  this  opening  remark.  But  the  topic  of  today’s  seminar  is 
important.  So,  without  further  ado,  may  I  declare  the  seminar  open  and  wish  you  all  a 
successful deliberation over the next two days. Thank you again for the invitation, and thank 
you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 18/2008
