Lucas Papademos: European Central Bank’s Annual Report 2007 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Lucas  Papademos,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central 
Bank,  to  the  Committee  on  Economic  and  Monetary  Affairs  of  the  European  Parliament, 
Strasbourg, 21 April 2008. 
 Madam Chair,  
Honourable members of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs,  
It is a great pleasure and privilege to present to you today the ECB’s Annual Report 2007. 
This presentation is a key pillar of the ECB’s accountability relationship with the European 
Parliament.  In  my  introductory  statement,  I  will  first  review  economic  and  monetary 
developments  in  2007,  summarise  our  current  assessment  of  the  macroeconomic  outlook, 
and explain our monetary policy decisions and operations. I will then briefly address fiscal 
policies  and  structural  reforms.  Finally,  I  will  focus  on  financial  market  conditions  and 
prospects  and  will  conclude  by  discussing  envisaged  policy  measures  aimed  at  restoring 
confidence and strengthening the resilience of the financial system.  
Before  doing  so,  I  would  like  to  highlight  an  important  event:  the  third  enlargement  of  the 
euro area with the adoption of the euro by Cyprus and Malta on 1 January 2008. Thanks to 
the meticulous preparations of all parties concerned, the changeover to the euro was very 
smooth  and  efficient  in  both  countries.  The  single  currency  was  received  with  great 
enthusiasm  by  the  Cypriot  and  Maltese  people  and  we  warmly  welcome  them  to  the  euro 
area.  
Economic and monetary developments 
2007 was a very good year for the euro area in terms of economic activity. Real GDP grew 
by 2.7%, mainly driven by domestic demand. Euro area exports also benefited from strong, 
albeit  moderating,  global  growth.  However,  in  the  second  half  of  2007,  the  outlook  for 
economic activity was clouded by unusually high uncertainty, stemming from the difficulty of 
ascertaining the potential impact on the real economy of the financial turmoil that erupted in 
August 2007. The balance of risks to the growth outlook tilted to the downside. 
With regard to inflation, the year 2007 was characterised by a number of challenges. In the 
euro  area,  average  annual  HICP  inflation  last  year  was  2.1%,  that  is,  slightly  above  the 
ECB’s  definition  of  price  stability.  However,  in  the  last  quarter  of  the  year,  annual  inflation 
rates rose sharply, reaching a peak of 3.1%, driven largely by substantial increases in oil and 
food  prices.  Notwithstanding  these  price  shocks,  wage  growth  remained  moderate  and 
medium to longer-term inflation expectations firmly anchored at levels consistent with price 
stability.  Nevertheless,  risks  to  price  stability  over  the  medium  term  were  clearly  on  the 
upside in 2007 in view of the potential adverse impact of several factors, particularly possible 
rises in commodity prices and the likelihood of second-round effects on the wage and price-
setting.  
Money  and  credit  expansion  remained  very  vigorous  throughout  2007.  In  particular,  bank 
loans to non-financial corporations continued to grow at a robust pace in the second half of 
the  year,  largely  unaffected  by  the  financial  turmoil.  The  analysis  of  these  developments 
confirmed the Governing Council’s assessment that upside risks to price stability prevailed. 
To contain upside risks to price stability, the Governing Council raised the key ECB interest 
rates  by  a  total  of  50  basis  points  in  the  first  half  of  2007,  to  4%.  Since  the  summer,  the 
Governing Council has kept the key ECB interest rates unchanged, in view of the unusually 
high uncertainty surrounding the macroeconomic outlook as a result of the financial turmoil. 
BIS Review 48/2008 
 1
The latest information and analysis clearly confirm the Governing Council’s assessment that 
upside risks to price stability prevail over the medium term. Most importantly, there is a risk 
that  the  current  temporarily  high  annual  inflation  rates,  which  may  persist  for  a  rather 
protracted period of time, could have second-round effects on wage and price-setting, in a 
context of moderating but ongoing economic growth and continuing very vigorous money and 
credit expansion.  
Although  global  economic  growth  is  moderating  this  year,  it  is  expected  to  continue  to 
support euro area external demand, partly as a consequence of strong growth in emerging 
market  economies.  Both  investment  and  consumption  should  continue  to  contribute  to 
economic  expansion  as  profitability  has  been  sustained,  credit  growth  remains  robust  and 
employment  conditions  have  improved.  At  the  same  time,  this  outlook  for  growth  is 
surrounded  by  unusually  high  uncertainty  and  downside  risks,  stemming  in  particular  from 
continuing  financial  market  tensions,  which  may  last  longer  than  initially  expected,  from 
further unanticipated rises in oil and food prices, which may dampen aggregate demand, and 
from protectionist pressures.  
Against  this  background,  the  Governing  Council  believes  that  the  current  monetary  policy 
stance will contribute to achieving price stability. As we have stressed, the firm anchoring of 
medium  to  longer-term  inflation  expectations  is  of  the  highest  priority  to  the  Governing 
Council.  We  remain  strongly  committed  to  preventing  second-round  effects  and  the 
materialisation of upside risks to price stability over the medium term. Especially in a period 
of heightened financial market volatility, such as the one we are experiencing at present, the 
ECB’s solid commitment to do what is necessary to preserve price stability over the medium 
term can help to establish an environment of greater certainty for economic agents. Equally, 
our  manifest  dedication  to  be  active  in  the  money  markets  when  required  to  ensure  their 
orderly functioning can contribute to instilling confidence and dealing with stress in financial 
markets.  
Monetary policy and liquidity management 
The  Eurosystem  has  clearly  distinguished  between  its  decisions  determining  the  monetary 
policy stance to maintain price stability and its money market operations conducted in order 
to  implement  this  stance  and  provide  liquidity  to  relieve  pressures  in  interbank  money 
markets.  
Three features of the Eurosystem’s operational framework have been essential in supporting 
the functioning of the euro area money market. First, a large set of counterparties has access 
to the Eurosystem’s refinancing operations. Second, a wide range of high-quality collateral is 
eligible for Eurosystem operations. Third, the operations are of sufficient size to effectively 
facilitate the redistribution of liquidity among banks.  
The  Eurosystem’s  operational  framework  has  proved  sufficiently  flexible  and  effective  in 
dealing with the money market tensions caused by the financial market turmoil. The ECB has 
adjusted the distribution of liquidity over the reserve maintenance period, without, however, 
modifying the total average supply of bank reserves over the whole maintenance period. The 
ECB has also conducted fine-tuning operations more frequently and lengthened the average 
maturity of its open market operations. All these measures have allowed the ECB to keep 
very short-term interest rates close to the policy rate and to contain potential spillover effects 
to other segments of the financial markets and the real economy. In this way, the ECB has 
contributed  to  safeguarding  financial  system  stability  and  to  mitigating  macroeconomic 
volatility. 
2 
 BIS Review 48/2008
Fiscal policies and structural reforms 
Before I turn to financial market conditions, let me briefly address fiscal policy developments 
and structural reforms. Last year, I noted during my presentation of the Annual Report that 
the best time to repair the roof is when the sun is shining. A few countries did take advantage 
of strong economic growth to improve their structural fiscal position. Some other countries, 
however, did not capitalise on the good economic times to bring their fiscal house in order. 
With  clouds  gathering  on  the  economic  horizon,  these  countries  will  have  to  proceed  with 
fiscal consolidation in line with the Stability and Growth Pact under potentially less favourable 
economic conditions. Those Member States that have been more prudent may let automatic 
stabilisers  operate  freely.  In  all  countries,  however,  containing  the  share  of  public 
expenditure  in  total  national  income  and  enhancing  the  quality  of  public  finances  should 
receive greater attention.  
Over  the  past  decade,  structural  reforms  in  product  and  labour  markets  have  paid  off, 
contributing to a strong and steady increase in employment in the euro area. Lower taxes on 
labour,  greater  labour  market  flexibility  and  increased  product  market  competition  have 
supported job creation and potential output growth. Further progress with structural reforms, 
economic integration and cross-border competition are needed to address some countries’ 
diverging  competitiveness  positions  and  support  the  smooth  functioning  of  the  euro  area 
economy. 
Financial stability and supervision 
Since  last  summer,  the  global  financial  system  has  been  undergoing  a  process  of  risk 
repricing and balance-sheet deleveraging. This process, which is still ongoing, did not come 
as a total surprise to us. Indeed, the ECB, in particular in its Financial Stability Review, as 
well as other central banks and international institutions, had issued repeated warnings about 
the  potential  underpricing  of  risks  in  a  number  of  markets,  including  the  US  sub-prime 
mortgage markets. For instance, in my speech before this Committee last year, I noted that 
the unabated growth in the volume and complexity of new financial instruments could have 
made these markets vulnerable to disruptive adjustments, as it was not always clear where 
the risk exposures ultimately lay. But although we had pointed to the risks associated with 
the  accumulation  of  imbalances  and  had  identified  several  vulnerabilities  in  the  financial 
system, it was difficult to foresee the specific nature and all the propagation channels of the 
market turmoil, as well as its intensity and duration.  
At  the  current  juncture,  the  outlook  for  financial  stability  in  the  euro  area  continues  to  be 
characterised by considerable uncertainty. The magnitude of the total valuation and income 
losses  facing  the  global  financial  system  and  their  distribution  across  individual  financial 
institutions is uncertain, although several estimates have been made. It is also unclear what 
the  impact  will  be  on  the  intermediation  of  credit  to  the  household  and  corporate  sectors. 
Moreover,  further  tensions  in  structured  credit  markets  cannot  be  excluded  in  view  of  the 
ongoing weakness in the US housing market, and there is a risk of adverse developments in 
the credit cycle.  
All in all, the risks to euro area financial system stability have materially increased over the 
past  eight  months.  Looking  ahead,  the  ongoing  adjustment  of  global  financial  markets  is 
likely  to  last  for  some  time,  its  interaction  with  the  real  economy  could  prove  more  wide-
ranging and the shock-absorption capacity of the euro area financial system could be further 
tested.  However,  following  a  number  of  years  of  high  profitability,  the  euro  area  banking 
sector has a strengthened financial position to face credit-cycle pressures. 
Authorities, at the EU and global levels, have taken measures to facilitate the adjustment of 
financial  markets  and  address  the  revealed  weaknesses  in  the  financial  system.  Private 
sector initiatives have also been launched with the same objective. Further policy responses 
are  being  prepared  to  restore  confidence  and  to  strengthen  the  resilience  of  the  financial 
BIS Review 48/2008 
 3
system.  The  roadmap  of  objectives  and  actions  agreed  by  the  ECOFIN  Council  and  the 
recommendations  of  the  Financial  Stability  Forum,  strongly  endorsed  by  the  G7  finance 
ministers  and  central  bank  governors,  are  consistent  and  converge  to  a  very  large  extent. 
What  is  essential  is  the  effective  and  timely  implementation  of  the  recommendations  and 
envisaged  actions.  Let  me  highlight  the  importance  of  two  major  areas  where  prompt 
implementation is warranted in order to restore confidence and improve market functioning. 
First, improving transparency and enhancing valuation practices should be a top priority, as 
the  lack  of  adequate,  relevant  and  timely  information  about  risk  exposures,  valuations  of 
complex illiquid instruments, write-downs, and the ultimate holders of risk has contributed to 
the loss of confidence and has impaired market functioning. Financial institutions are called 
upon to make full and immediate disclosure of on and off-balance-sheet risk exposures and 
losses,  following  the  leading  market  practices  as  well  as  the  guidance  provided  by 
supervisors  and  accounting  standard-setters.  In  the  medium  term,  it  is  of  the  utmost 
importance to converge towards best practices on risk valuation and disclosure in order to 
facilitate the assessment of the risk profile of financial institutions by investors, markets and 
public authorities.  
Moreover, the turmoil highlighted the implications of the increased exposure of some banks 
to  complex  financial  instruments,  which,  unfortunately,  was  not  always  matched  by  a  full 
understanding of the inherent risks and their possible impact on banks’ capital and liquidity 
positions.  This  underscores  the  importance  of  having  in  place  robust  risk  management 
practices, including liquidity risk management, stress-testing and contingency funding plans. 
The role and use of credit ratings should also be reassessed. Credit rating agencies should 
expand  the  information  provided  on  the  risk  characteristics  of  structured  finance  products 
and differentiate their ratings by introducing a separate rating scale for such products.  
Thankfully,  a  number  of  necessary  improvements  in  rules,  procedures  and  practices  are 
already  in  the  pipeline.  The  Basel  II  framework  is  expected  to  improve  transparency  and 
foster  more  sophisticated  internal  control  and  risk  management  systems.  Supervisors  will 
monitor  the  effective  implementation  of  the  new  framework  to  ensure  that  relevant 
information is actually disclosed and that banks retain adequate capital and liquidity buffers, 
commensurate  to  their  risk  profile,  throughout  the  economic  cycle.  That  said,  the  lessons 
drawn from the financial turmoil also point to certain aspects of the framework that need to 
be revisited, such as the treatment of exposures to structured finance products and to off-
balance-sheet vehicles.  
The financial industry retains a primary responsibility and has strong incentives to promote 
the  smooth  functioning  of  the  financial  system.  It  thus  has  to  demonstrate  its  capacity  to 
implement actions regarding transparency, valuation and risk management practices so as to 
finally turn the page on this difficult episode. Supervisors and central banks around the globe 
will be monitoring very closely the adequacy of the actions taken by the financial industry to 
restore  market  confidence.  In  this  context,  an  appropriate  balance  needs  to  be  struck 
between market discipline and sound regulation that does not stifle financial innovation. 
Finally, the experience of the turmoil also showed that EU arrangements for financial stability 
should  be  enhanced.  An  important  element  of  this  process  is  the  strengthening  of  the 
cooperation and exchange of information between central banks and prudential supervisors 
in both crisis prevention and crisis management. In situations of financial stress, enhanced 
cooperation is important to allow both central banks and supervisory authorities to perform 
their respective functions more effectively.  
Payment and securities settlement systems 
Before closing, I would like to say a few words on developments in the field of payment and 
settlement systems, where the year 2007 was marked by major achievements. As you are 
aware,  the  Eurosystem  is  engaged  in  four  big  projects  to ensure  well-functioning payment 
4 
 BIS Review 48/2008
and  securities  settlement  systems  in  the  euro  area:  TARGET2,  TARGET2-Securities,  the 
update  of  the  correspondent  central  banking  model  (CCBM2),  and  SEPA.  In  tandem  with 
these efforts to promote the integration of payment and settlement systems, the ESCB and 
the Committee of European Securities Regulators are currently developing recommendations 
to ensure the soundness and safety of the European post-trading sector.  
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  ECB  places  the  greatest  value  on  the  fulfilment  of  its 
accountability obligations. In last year’s Resolution you made a number of suggestions to the 
ECB  and  requested  us  to  report  back  on  the  follow-up  given  to  them.  We  carefully 
considered  these  suggestions  and  I  am  pleased  to  inform  you  that  in  his  letters  of 
transmission of this year’s Annual Report to President Pöttering and to you, Madame Berès, 
as  Chair  of  this  Committee,  President  Trichet  has  provided  an  overview  of  the  follow-up 
measures taken by the ECB. 
I thank you for your attention. I am now at your disposal for questions. 
BIS Review 48/2008 
 5
