V Leeladhar: Consolidation in the Indian financial sector  
Special address by Mr V Leeladhar, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, on the 
occasion of the International Banking & Finance Conference 2008, organised by the Indian 
Merchants' Chamber, Mumbai, 17 April 2008. 
  Dear Friends, 
1. It is my pleasure to be here with you this morning on the occasion of International Banking 
&  Finance  Conference  2008  of  the  Indian  Merchants’  Chamber.  I  am  grateful  to  the 
organisers for having afforded me this valuable opportunity to address this august audience 
and share some of my thoughts on the subject of consolidation in the Indian financial sector. 
The Chamber has indeed come a long way since its establishment in the pre-independence 
days in September 1907 under the presidentship of late Sir Manmohandas Ramji. In that era, 
it performed the role of the nation’s watchdog on the economic front under the alien rule. The 
Chamber also has the unique distinction of having had the patronage of the Father of the 
Nation,  Mahatma  Gandhi  as  its  honorary  member  since  1931.  The  Chamber,  during  its 
functioning of hundred years, has done yeoman service to the country and society at large in 
promoting the cause of business community through strengthening the government-business 
partnership and representing the business point of view before the public policy authorities 
and I hope that it will continue to perform its productive role in the national policy formulation, 
in the days to come as well.  
2. In my address today, I would like to briefly touch upon the experience in and the emerging 
contours of consolidation in the Indian financial sector, that have taken shape over the past 
few  decades,  in  the  RBI-regulated  entities,  as  a  result  of  a  calibrated  policy  response 
designed for the purpose.  
Consolidation in the financial sector 
3.  Consolidation  of  business  entities,  through  mergers  and  acquisitions,  is  a  world-wide 
phenomenon. The numerous mergers and acquisitions all over the world, including in India, 
in the real as well as in the financial services sector, appear to be driven by the objective of 
leveraging the synergies arising from the process of merger and acquisition. However, such 
structural changes, particularly in the financial system, can also potentially have public policy 
implications. With this brief backdrop, I would like to present an overview of consolidation in 
the Indian financial sector, particularly amongst the banks, development financial institutions 
and the non-banking financial companies.  
The Indian scenario 
The diversity of statutory frameworks 
4. In the context of consolidation in the financial sector in India, let me say a few words about 
the  unique  features  of  the  Indian  credit  institutions  and  their  operating  environment.  While 
talking about consolidation in the Indian milieu, it is important to bear in mind that there is 
diversity of the governing statutes applicable to different entities in the Indian credit system. 
Further, they are governed by divergent statutory provisions, depending upon the nature of 
their operations and the form of their organisation or ownership.  
Thus, while the private sector banks are subject to the provisions of the Banking Regulation 
Act, 1949, the public sector banks are governed by their respective founding statutes and by 
BIS Review 46/2008 
 1
those provisions of the B R Act which have been made specifically applicable to them. The 
urban  co-operative  banks,  on  the  other  hand,  are  governed  by  the  provisions  of  the 
Cooperative Societies Act of the respective State or by the Multi-State Cooperative Societies 
Act, as also by the provisions of the B R Act which are specifically applicable to them.  
The development financial institutions (DFIs),  which were  founded by  a statute, attract the 
provisions of those statutes while the DFIs structured as limited companies, were subject to 
the provisions of the Companies Act, 1956, but both the types of the DFIs are regulated and 
supervised by the RBI under the provisions of the R B I Act, 1934.  
The  Regional  Rural  Banks  (RRBs)  were  created  under  the  RRBs  Act,  1976  and  are 
regulated  by  the  RBI  but  supervised  by  the  NABARD,  while  the  non-banking  financial 
companies are subject to the provisions of the Companies Act, 1956 and are regulated and 
supervised by the RBI under the provisions of the RBI Act.  
The  housing  finance  companies,  which  are  a  sub-set  of  the  NBFC  category,  are  currently 
regulated and supervised by the National Housing Bank while the rural co-operative credit 
structure falls within the regulatory and supervisory domain of the NABARD.  
History of consolidation in the Indian banking sector 
5.  In  the  context  of  consolidation  in  the  Indian  banking  sector,  it  may  be  recalled  that  the 
Report of the Committee on Banking Sector Reforms (the Second Narasimham Committee - 
1998) had suggested, inter alia, mergers among strong banks, both in the public and private 
sectors and even with financial institutions and NBFCs. Indian banking sector is no stranger 
to the phenomenon of mergers and acquisition across the banks. Since 1961 till date, under 
the provisions of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, there have been as many as 77 bank 
amalgamations in the Indian banking system, of which 46 amalgamations took place before 
nationalisation of banks in 1969 while remaining 31 occurred in the post-nationalisation era. 
Of the 31 mergers, in 25 cases, the private sector banks were merged with a public sector 
bank while in the remaining six cases both the banks were private sector banks.  
Since  the  onset  of  reforms  in  1990,  there  have  been  22  bank  amalgamations;  brief 
particulars of these are furnished in the Annex-I. It would be observed that prior to 1999, the 
amalgamations of banks were primarily triggered by the weak financials of the bank being 
merged, whereas in the post-1999 period, there have also been mergers between healthy 
banks driven by the business and commercial considerations.  
Consolidation in the commercial banking segment – recent developments 
6. The consolidation efforts in the Indian banking sector can be broadly placed, as per the 
nature of the entities involved and of the mergers, into several categories viz., (a) voluntary 
amalgamation  between  private  sector  banks;  (b)  compulsory  amalgamation  of  a  private 
sector bank; (c) merger between public sector banks; (d) merger of a non-banking financial 
company (NBFC) with a private sector bank; and (e) merger of a housing finance subsidiary 
with  the  parent  public  sector  bank.  Let  me  present  a  brief  overview  of  the  policy  and 
processes involved in each type of merger. 
Voluntary amalgamation between private sector banks 
(a)  
7.  As  regards  the  statutory  provisions,  the  procedure  for  voluntary  amalgamation  of  two 
banking companies is laid down under Section 44-A of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (the 
Act),  which  is  easy  to  follow  and  cost  effective.  After  the  two  banking  companies  have 
passed the necessary resolution proposing the amalgamation of one bank with another bank, 
in  their  general  meetings,  by  a  majority  in  number  representing  two-thirds  in  value  of  the 
shareholding of each of the two banking companies, such resolution containing the scheme 
of  amalgamation  is  submitted  to  the  Reserve  Bank  for  its  sanction.  If  the  scheme  is 
2 
 BIS Review 46/2008
sanctioned by the Reserve Bank, by an order in writing, it becomes binding not only on the 
banking companies concerned, but also on all their shareholders.  
Pursuant  to  the  recommendations  of  the  Joint  Parliamentary  Committee,  the  RBI  had 
constituted a Working Group to evolve the guidelines for voluntary merger between banking 
companies. Based on the recommendations of the Group, the RBI had issued guidelines in 
May  2005  laying  down  various  requirements  for  the  process  of  such  mergers  including 
determination of the swap ratio, disclosures, the stages at which Boards will get involved in 
the  merger  process,  etc.  While  amalgamations  are  normally  decided  on  business 
considerations  (such  as  the  need  for  increasing  the  market  share,  synergies  in  the 
operations of businesses, acquisition of a business unit or segment, etc.), the policy objective 
of  the  Reserve  Bank  is  to  ensure  that  considerations  like  sound  rationale  for  the 
amalgamation, the systemic benefits and the advantage accruing to the residual entity are 
evaluated in detail. While sanctioning the scheme of amalgamation, the Reserve Bank takes 
into account the financial health of the two banking companies to ensure, inter alia, that after 
the amalgamation, the new entity will emerge as a much stronger bank. 
8. The experience of the Reserve Bank has been, by and large, satisfactory in approving the 
schemes  of  amalgamation  of  the  private  sector  banks  in  the  recent  past  and  it  had  no 
occasion  to  reject  any  scheme  of  amalgamation  submitted  to  it  for  approval.  There  have 
been  five  voluntary  amalgamations  between  the  private  sector  banks  so  far  while  one 
amalgamation  between  two  private  sector  banks  (Ganesh  Bank  of  Kurundwad  and  the 
Federal  Bank)  was  induced  by  the  RBI,  in  the  interest  of  the  depositors  of  the  former.  A 
majority  of  these  voluntary  mergers  was  between  healthy  banks,  somewhat  on  the  lines 
suggested  by  the  First  Narasimham  Committee.  The  committee  was  of  the  view  that  the 
move towards the restructured organisation of the banking system should be market-driven 
and  based  on  profitability  considerations  and  brought  about  through  a  process  of mergers 
and acquisitions.  
Compulsory amalgamation of a private sector bank 
(b)  
9. Compulsory amalgamations are induced or forced by the Reserve Bank, under Section 45 
of the Act, in public interest, or in the interest of the depositors of a distressed bank, or to 
secure proper management of a banking company, or in the interest of the banking system. 
In  the  case  of  a  banking  company  in  financial  distress,  which  has  been  placed  under  the 
order of moratorium, under Section 45(2) of the Act, on an application made by the Reserve 
Bank to the Central Government, the Reserve Bank can, for the foregoing reasons, frame a 
scheme of amalgamation for transferring the assets and liabilities of such distressed bank to 
a much better and stronger bank. Such a scheme framed by the RBI is required to be sent to 
the banking companies concerned, for their suggestions or objections, including those from 
the  depositors,  shareholders  and  others.  After  consideration  the  same,  the  RBI  sends  the 
final scheme of amalgamation to the Central Government for sanction and notification in the 
official gazette. The notification issued for compulsory amalgamation under Section 45 of the 
Act is also required to be placed before the two Houses of Parliament.  
10.  Most  of  the  amalgamations  of  the  private  sector  banks  in  the  post-nationalisation  era 
were induced by the Reserve Bank in the larger public interest, under Section 45 of the Act. 
In  all  these  cases,  the  weak  or  financially  distressed  banks  were  amalgamated  with  the 
healthy  public  sector  banks.  The  over-riding  principles  governing  the  consideration  of  the 
amalgamation  proposals  were:  (a)  protection  of  the  depositors’  interest;  (b)  expeditious 
resolution; and (c) avoidance of regulatory forbearance. The amalgamations of the erstwhile 
Global  Trust  Bank  and  the  erstwhile  United  Western  Bank  with  public  sector  banks  are 
recent examples. Even in such cases, commercial interests of the transferee bank and the 
impact of the amalgamation on its profitability were duly considered.  
The mergers of many weak private sector banks with the healthy ones, have brought us to a 
creditable stage today when not a single private sector bank in the country has the capital 
adequacy ratio of less than the minimum regulatory requirement of nine per cent. This now 
BIS Review 46/2008 
 3
paves  the  way  for  effective  implementation  of  the  Prompt  Corrective  Action  (PCA) 
Framework  by  the  RBI,  which  could  not  be  invoked  earlier  when  the  banking  system  was 
populated by many weak banks, without creating confidentiality issues.  
Merger of public sector banks 
(c)  
11.  The  statutory  framework  for  the  amalgamation  of  the  public  sector  banks,  viz.,  the 
nationalised banks, State Bank of India and its subsidiary banks, is, however, quite different 
since  the  foregoing  provisions  of  the  B  R  Act  do  not  apply  to  them.  As  regards  the 
nationalised banks, the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 
1970 and 1980, or the Bank Nationalisation Acts authorise the Central Government, under 
Section  9(1)(c),  to  prepare  or  make,  after  consultation  with  the  Reserve  Bank,  a  scheme, 
inter alia, for transfer of undertaking of a “corresponding new bank” (i.e., a nationalised bank) 
to another “corresponding new bank” or for transfer of whole or part of any banking institution 
to  a  corresponding  new  bank.  Unlike  the  sanction  of  the  schemes  by  the  Reserve  Bank 
under  Section  44-A  of  the  B  R  Act,  the  scheme  framed  by  the  Central  Government  is 
required,  under  Section  9(6)  of  the  Bank  Nationalisation  Acts,  to  be  placed  before  both 
Houses of Parliament. Under this procedure, the lone merger that has happened so far was 
the  amalgamation  of  the  erstwhile  New  Bank  of  India  with  the  Punjab  National  Bank, 
occasioned by the weak financials of the former. However, the post-merger experience was 
considered  to  be  not  altogether  satisfactory  on  account  of  the  problems  in  effective 
integration of the two entities.  
12. As regards the State Bank of India (SBI), the SBI Act, 1955, empowers the State Bank to 
acquire,  with  the  consent  of  the  management  of  any  banking  institution  (which  would  also 
include a banking company), the business, including the assets and liabilities of any bank. 
Under this provision, what is required is the consent of the bank sought to be acquired, the 
approval  of  the  Reserve  Bank  and  the  sanction  of  such  acquisition  by  the  Central 
Government. Several private sector banks were acquired by the State Bank of India following 
this route. However, so far, no acquisition of a public sector bank has materialised under this 
procedure. Similar provisions also exist in respect of the subsidiary banks of the SBI.  
13. It would thus be seen that there are sufficient enabling statutory provisions in the existing 
statutes  governing  the  public  sector  banks  to  encourage  and  promote  consolidation  even 
within  the  public  sector  banks  through  the  merger  and  amalgamation  route,  and  the 
procedure to be followed for the purpose has also been statutorily prescribed.  
Consolidation and its impact on the branch network 
14. It may  be mentioned here that one of the likely effects of consolidation in the banking 
sector may be the rationalisation of the branch network of the banks concerned, resulting in 
the likely closure of certain branches of the merging banks, where there might be an overlap 
in  their  catchment  area.  Generally,  as  part  of  consolidation  process,  the  emerging  bank 
would  be  more  inclined  to  shift  its  branches  and  focus  of  operations  from  the  rural  to  the 
urban  and  semi-urban  areas,  which  are  usually  more  remunerative.  However,  the  current 
regulatory  regime  for  branch  authorisation  does  not  generally  permit  closure  of  the  rural 
branches  of  the  banks.  Such  a  requirement  is  in  tune  with  the  philosophy  of  financial 
inclusion which emphasises increasing penetration of the banking services in the unbanked 
and under-banked areas of the country. For instance, under the new Branch Authorisation 
Policy of the RBI announced in September 2005, during the year 2007-08 (April-March), of 
the  4117  branch  authorisations  issued  1979  were  for  the  under-banked  centres.  In 
aggregate, 627 authorisations were issued during the year for opening of rural branches and 
1471  branches  in  the  semi-urban  areas.  I  would  like  to  emphasise  that  the  new  branch 
authorisation  policy  does  not  preclude  the  possibility  of  any  urgent  proposals  for  opening 
bank branches being considered by the RBI even outside the annual plan, specially in the 
rural / under-banked areas, anytime during the year. 
4 
 BIS Review 46/2008
15.  In  brief,  RBI  has  been  discharging  the  mandate  given  to  it  for  branch  licensing  as 
required by law, public policy and regulatory comforts. Let me add that under the new policy, 
all the branch-authorisation requests of the banks were granted by RBI, subject to the banks 
fulfilling the criteria laid down for opening of branches in under-banked areas, except in the 
case  of  a  few  banks  where  there  were  serious  regulatory  discomfort  on  account  of  their 
indiscretions and contravention of the regulatory norms. It is interesting to note in this context 
that  in  the  USA,  for  instance,  for  lesser  regulatory  violations,  the  banks  are  subjected  to 
"cease  and  desist"  order  from  the  regulator,  severely  restricting  their  activities  during  the 
currency of the order. 
Merger between a private sector bank and an NBFC 
(d)  
16.  As  I  mentioned  earlier,  the  Reserve  Bank  is  vested  with  the  discretionary  powers  to 
approve  the  voluntary  amalgamation  of  two  banking  companies  under  the  provisions  of 
Section 44-A of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949. However, these powers do not extend to 
the  voluntary  amalgamation  of  a  non-banking  company  with  a  banking  company  where 
amalgamations were governed by sections 391 to 394 of the Companies Act, 1956 in terms 
of which, the scheme of amalgamation has to be approved by the High Court. Hence, the 
banks were advised in June 2004 that where an NBFC is proposed to be amalgamated with 
a banking company, the banking company should obtain the approval of the Reserve Bank 
after the scheme of amalgamation is approved by its Board but before it is submitted to the 
High Court for approval. 
17.  Subsequently,  in  pursuance  of  the  recommendations  of  the  Joint  Parliamentary 
Committee (JPC), a Working Group was constituted by RBI to evolve guidelines for voluntary 
merger  of  banking  companies.  Based  on  the  recommendations  of  the  Group  and  in 
consultation with the Government, it was proposed in the Annual Policy Statement of April 
2005  to  issue  guidelines  on  merger  and  amalgamation  between  private  sector  banks  and 
with  NBFCs.  The  guidelines  were  to  cover:  process  of  merger  proposal,  determination  of 
swap ratios, disclosures, norms for buying / selling of shares by promoters before and during 
the  process  of  merger  and  the  Board’s  involvement  in  the  merger  process.  The  principles 
underlying  these  guidelines  were  also  to  be  applicable,  as  appropriate,  to  public  sector 
banks, subject to relevant legislation. Accordingly, the guidelines were issued in May 2005. 
18. There have been a few instances of mergers of the NBFCs with the private sector banks. 
The first such merger occurred in May 1999 when the RBI approved the merger of Twentieth 
Century  Finance  Corporation  Ltd.,  an  NBFC,  with  Centurion  Bank  Ltd.  Subsequently,  in 
2003, the merger of IndusInd Enterprises & Finance Ltd. (IEFL), one of the promoters of the 
IndusInd Bank Ltd., with the bank was also approved. Further, the Kotak Mahindra Finance 
Ltd.,  an  NBFC,  was  converted  into  Kotak  Mahindra  Bank  Limited,  by  amending  its 
Memorandum and Articles of Association, and was granted a banking licence by the RBI in 
February 2003. In June 2004, the merger of Ashok Leyland Finance Ltd., an NBFC, with the 
IndusInd Bank Ltd. was approved by the RBI. Besides, certain banks also have significant 
stakes in some of the NBFCs. For instance, the Development Bank of Singapore (DBS) has 
a major stake in Cholamandalam Investment & Finance Ltd. while the Barclays Bank has a 
major holding in Rank Investments Ltd.  
In view of the recent global developments, the current policy of merger of NBFCs with banks 
will require a comprehensive review. 
Merger of a housing finance subsidiary with the parent public sector bank  
(e)  
19.  There  have  also  been  a  few  instances  where  the  housing  finance  subsidiaries  of  the 
public sector banks were merged with the parent bank. During April 2002 and March 2007, 
the  merger  of  the  housing  finance  subsidiaries  of  Andhra  Bank,  Vijaya  Bank,  Corporation 
Bank and Bank of Baroda with the respective parent banks was approved by the RBI. The 
mergers were triggered primarily by the rising cost of funds of the housing finance entities, 
which adversely impacted the viability of their business models. The approvals for mergers 
BIS Review 46/2008 
 5
from  the  RBI  became  necessary  as  there  was  a  change  in  the  structure  of  the  banks’ 
subsidiaries, which had been established under Section 19(1) of the B R Act, 1949 with the 
regulatory approval of the RBI.  
Attempted mergers that did not materialise 
(f)  
20. Let me also take this opportunity to point out that all the attempts made for merger of 
banks do not necessarily result in a successful outcome. There has been an instance where 
despite the process of merger having progressed quite a bit, it did not eventually fructify. The 
case of the attempted merger of the then UTI Bank and the erstwhile Global trust Bank can 
be cited in this regard. While the scheme of voluntary amalgamation of the two banks had 
been  submitted  to  the  RBI  for  approval,  the  approval  was  kept  on  hold  pending  the 
completion of the SEBI investigations. It may be recalled that, in the run up to the proposed 
merger, the SEBI had initiated certain investigations into the share-price manipulation of the 
GTB shares. While the approval from the RBI was yet to be granted, the proposed merger 
was called off by the parties concerned. Thus, the merger did not materialise.  
Consolidation of the Development Financial Institutions (DFIs) 
21. It may be recalled that the DFIs were set up in the country in the post-independence era 
for providing long-term finance to the industrial projects to facilitate industrial development, in 
the absence of alternative sources of long-term funds. Hence, to enable the DFIs to play this 
role,  they  were  also  provided  access  to  certain  concessional  sources  of  funds  by  way  of 
allocation  of  SLR  Bonds  and  lending  from  the  Long  Term  Operation  Funds  of  the  RBI. 
However, with the onset of financial sector reforms, and pursuant to the recommendations of 
the  First  Narasimham  Committee,  the  access  by  the  DFIs  to  the  traditional  concessional 
sources  of  funds  was  gradually  phased  out.  Consequently,  the  raising  of  resources  at 
market-related rates, increased their cost of funds, thereby, affecting the very viability of their 
business model, coupled with increasing competition from the banks. The DFIs came within 
the regulatory purview of the RBI in 1991 for the first time, and the regulatory domain of the 
RBI, till recently, extended to the seven Term-Lending Institutions (TLIs – EXIM Bank, ICICI 
Limited,  IDBI,  IDFC  Limited,  IFCI  Limited,  IIBI  Limited,  and  TFCI  Limited)  and  three  Re-
Financing Institutions (RFIs – NABARD, NHB and SIDBI).  
22.  The  Committee  on  Banking  Sector  Reforms  (Second  Narasimham  Committee)  had 
recommended  in  1998 that  the  DFIs  over  a  period  of  time  should  convert  themselves  into 
banks and there should be only two forms of intermediaries – banking companies and non-
banking finance companies, and if a DFI does not intend to become a bank with a banking 
licence, it should be categorised as an NBFC. The Working Group for Harmonising the Role 
and operations of DFIs and Banks (Khan Working Group – KWG), was also of the view that a 
full banking licence be eventually granted to the DFIs. Based on these recommendations, the 
RBI had released a “Discussion Paper” (DP) in January 1999 soliciting wider public debate 
on the issue. The DP had, inter alia, envisaged a transition path for the DFIs for becoming 
either  a  full-fledged  NBFC  or  a  bank.  Based  on  the  feedback  received  on  the  DP,  the 
Monetary and Credit Policy for the year 2000-2001, outlined the broad approach proposed to 
be adopted for considering the proposals in the area of Universal Banking. The Policy stated 
that the principle of “Universal Banking” was a desirable goal and any DFI, which wished to 
transform into a bank, should have the option to do so, provided it was able to fully satisfy the 
prudential  norm  applicable  to  the  banks.  For  the  purpose,  such  a  DFI  was  expected  to 
prepare  a  transition  path  for  consideration  of  the  Reserve  Bank.  Thus,  in  due  course,  the 
recommendation  of  the  Narasimham  Committee  to  have  only  banks  and  the  restructured 
NBFCs  in  the  system,  could  be  operationalised.  Accordingly,  in  April  2001,  the  FIs  were 
advised several operational and regulatory issues relevant in evolving their transition path to 
a universal bank and for formulating a road map for the purpose.  
23. In the light of the RBI guidance, two leading term lending institutions viz., the erstwhile 
IDBI and ICICI Limited got converted into a commercial bank, each. The four term-lending 
6 
 BIS Review 46/2008
institutions (IDFC Ltd., IFCI Ltd., IIBI Ltd. – since wound up, TFCI Limited) which were in the 
category of NBFCs, are now regulated as per the norms applicable to the NBFCs. However, 
the  EXIM  Bank  and  the  three  RFIs  (NABARD,  NHB  and  SIDBI)  continue  to  be  under  the 
regulatory domain of the RBI and are regulated as per the norms applicable to the financial 
institutions. 
towards 
triggered 
the  move 
Consolidation of the Regional Rural Banks (RRBs) 
24.  The  RRBs  were  established  under  the  RRBs  Act,  1976  with  a  view  to  create  an 
institutional  mechanism  for  delivery  of  rural  credit  through  an  entity  which  would  have  the 
local feel but the expertise of the commercial banks for catering to the rural credit needs. The 
RRBs are owned jointly by Government of India, sponsor banks and State governments of 
50, 35 and 15 per cent, respectively, and were expected to have region-specific limited area 
of operation. Over the years, their number had increased to 196, operating in 26 States of 
the  country,  being  sponsored  by  27  scheduled  commercial  banks  and  one  State  Co-
operative Bank. However, with their limited size, scope and area of operations, competition 
from  the  rural  branches  of  the  commercial  banks  and  the  rising  cost  of  operations  due  to 
upgraded  wage  structure  on  par  with  the  commercial  banks,  their  profitability  and  viability 
was  adversely  affected.  This 
their  consolidation.  The 
consolidation  of  the  RRBs  was  first  suggested  by  the  Working  Group  to  Suggest 
Amendments to the RRBs Act, 1976 (Chalapathy Rao Committee) in 2001. It had suggested 
that while retaining the regional character of these institutions, the number of sponsor banks 
may be reduced. Subsequently, the Advisory Committee on Flow of Credit to Agriculture and 
related Activities (Vyas Committee) had suggested in 2004 that in the first stage, all RRBs of 
a sponsor bank in a State should be amalgamated into a single unit in that State and at the 
second  stage,  there  should  be  a  State-level  consolidation  of  RRBs.  Subsequently,  the 
Internal  Working  Group  on  RRBs,  constituted  by  the  RBI  (Sardesai  Committee)  in  June 
2005, also suggested two options for strengthening RRBs, namely, merger between RRBs of 
the  same  sponsor  bank  in  the  same  State  or  the  merger  of  RRBs  sponsored  by  different 
banks in the same state.  
25. The main triggers for these recommendations were the small size of the RRBs which had 
made their operations unviable leading to significant amount of accumulated losses – which 
was not considered desirable. In order to improve the operational viability of RRBs and to 
take advantage of the economies of scale by reducing transaction cost, Government of India 
initiated, in September 2005, a process of amalgamation of RRBs sponsor bank-wise. The 
first  set  of  amalgamations  took  place  on  September  12,  2005  when  28  RRBs  were 
amalgamated to form 9 new RRBs. The amalgamations were carried out under Section 23-A 
of the RRBs Act, 1976, which provides that the Central Government, after consultation with 
the  National  Bank,  the  concerned  State  Government  and  the  Sponsor  Bank  may 
amalgamate two or more RRBs. The process of amalgamation is still continuing.  
26. As a result of such amalgamations, the number of RRBs has come down to 91 as on 
March 31, 2008 as against 133 and 196 RRBs as on March 31, 2006 and 2005, respectively. 
It needs to be noted here that this consolidation has occurred only amongst the RRBs, and 
not  with  the  sponsor  banks,  and  has  been  achieved  without  amendment  to  the  governing 
statute of the RRBs. The structural consolidation of the RRBs has resulted in formation of 
new RRBs, which are financially stronger and bigger in size in terms of business volume and 
outreach.  Thus,  the  emerging  RRBs  will  be  able  to  take  advantages  of  the  economies  of 
scale  and  reduce  their  operational  costs.  With  the  advantages  of  local  feel  and  familiarity 
acquired by the RRBs,  they would  now be better placed to achieve the objectives of rural 
development and financial inclusion.  
BIS Review 46/2008 
 7
Urban Co-operative Banks (UCBs) 
27. The UCBs probably pose the most complex issues for a regulator since their governance 
is  subject  to  the  provisions  of  the Cooperative  Societies  Act,  which  is administered  by  the 
State governments while their banking operations are governed by the B R Act, administered 
by  the  RBI,  leading  to  a  duality  of  control.  Hence,  any  move  towards  consolidation  in  this 
sector, required a very special and collaborative approach involving all the stakeholders. The 
constitution of the Taskforce for Cooperative Urban Banks (TAFCUB), for each State, at the 
initiative of the RBI, with representation from all the stakeholders was, therefore, a step in 
this direction and has proved effective in resolving the intractable issues of the UCBs.  
28. The spectacular growth of UCBs in the late nineties and up to 2003, which had resulted 
in  increasing  their  penetration,  ironically,  also  led  to  certain  weaknesses  in  the  sector  that 
adversely affected public perception and thereby, their competitiveness. A major reason for 
the  decline  in  public  confidence  was  the  crisis  faced  in  2001  by  a  large  multi-state  co-
operative  bank  in  the  State  of  Gujarat,  when  the  bank  witnessed  a  sudden  “run”  on  its 
branches, following rumours of its large exposure to a leading stock broker who had suffered 
huge losses in the share market. The large-scale withdrawal of deposits within a short time 
resulted in severe liquidity problems for the bank. The bank was also holding about rupees 
800 crore of inter-bank deposits from a large number of UCBs within and outside the State, 
which posed a systemic risk. In order to protect the interests of the general public and also 
that  of  the  other  co-operative  banks,  RBI  issued  directions  to  the  bank  restricting  certain 
operations  (acceptance  of  fresh  deposits,  restricting  payments  to  any  single  depositor  to 
Rs.1000 and ban on fresh lending) and requisitioned the Central Registrar of Co-operative 
Societies, New Delhi to supersede the Board of Directors and appoint an Administrator. An 
order of moratorium was also enforced on the bank by the Central Government for a short 
period.  The  bank  was  subsequently  placed  under  a  scheme  of  reconstruction  with  the 
approval of Reserve Bank of India.  
29. The Gujarat episode was followed by another major crisis in the state of Andhra Pradesh 
in  2002,  when  one  of  the  largest  co-operative  banks  in  the  State  faced  a  run,  following  a 
newspaper  report  regarding  an  inquiry  instituted  into  the  affairs  of  the  bank  by  the  State 
Registrar  of  Cooperative  Societies.  The  bank was  in  a  weak  position,  and  ultimately,  after 
attempts for its revival failed, its licence was cancelled by the Reserve Bank in 2004. 
30.  The  decline  in  public  confidence  in  the  UCB  sector,  deepened  in  the  aftermath  of  the 
crisis  in  Gujarat  and  Andhra  Pradesh  and  concomitantly,  the  position  of  UCBs  generally 
deteriorated. As on June 30, 2004, 732 out of 1919 UCBs were categorised In Grade III or IV 
signifying weakness and sickness. With a view to facilitating consolidation and emergence of 
strong entities and providing an avenue for non-disruptive exit of weak/unviable entities in the 
co-operative banking sector, RBI had also issued guidelines in February 2005 to the UCBs to 
encourage merger/amalgamation in the UCB sector. Although the Banking Regulation Act, 
1949  (As  Applicable  to  the  Cooperative  Societies)  does  not  empower  Reserve  Bank  to 
formulate  a  scheme  with  regard  to  merger  and  amalgamation  of  co-operative  banks,  the 
State  Governments  have  incorporated  in  their  respective  Co-operative  Societies  Acts  a 
provision  for  obtaining  prior  sanction  in  writing,  of  the  RBI  for  an  order,  inter  alia,  for 
sanctioning  a  scheme  of  amalgamation  or  reconstruction.  The  Reserve  Bank’s  role  in  the 
merger of the cooperative banks is, thus, confined to the examination of only the financial 
aspects  of  the  scheme  of  merger  and  to  protect  the  interests  of  depositors  of  the  banks 
concerned  as  well  as  ensuring  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  while  considering  such 
proposals.  Subsequently,  recognising  that  the  UCBs  are  an  important  part  of  the  financial 
system  in  India,  it  was  also  considered  necessary  for  them  to  emerge  as  a  sound  and 
healthy network of jointly owned, democratically controlled, and ethically managed banking 
institutions  providing  need-based  quality  banking  services,  essentially  to  the  middle  and 
lower  middle  classes  and  marginalised  sections  of  the  society.  Recognising  the  systemic 
risks and keeping in view the needs of its clientele, the Reserve Bank reviewed the entire 
gamut  of  legislative,  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  for  these  banks,  and  in  March 
8 
 BIS Review 46/2008
2005, brought out a draft “Vision Document” for the UCBs, setting out the broad approach 
and strategies needed to be adopted to actualise this vision.  
31. The Urban Cooperative Banking sector witnessed a decline in the total number of banks 
from 1926 in March 2004 to 1793 in August 2007. Despite this decline in numbers, public 
confidence in the sector continued to rise as reflected by the increase in deposits by 6.1 per 
cent during 2006-07 on the top of 8.6 per cent in the previous year, thereby reversing the 
declining  trend  of  2004-05  when  the  deposits  of  the  UCBs  had  declined  by  4.7  per  cent. 
Further,  the  decrease  in  the  number  of  weak  and  sick  banks  indicated  an  improved  risk 
profile  of  the  sector.  Thus,  the  number  of  UCBs  in  Grade  III  and  IV  (the  banks  with 
considerable supervisory concerns) constituted 31 per cent of the total number of banks in 
March 2007 as against the corresponding figure of 37 per cent in March 2006. The decline in 
number of banks was brought about by liquidation/ merger of banks and rejection of licence 
applications of banks and the continuance of the policy of not entertaining applications for 
licence to set up new UCBs.  
32. Unlike in the past, the perception of the sector and of the State governments towards this 
contraction in the urban cooperative banking sector has undergone a change. As envisaged 
in the Vision Document for UCBs, drawn up by the RBI in consultation with the UCBs, State 
governments, etc., adoption of a consultative approach to regulation and supervision, which 
is participatory and transparent, has resulted in appreciation of the regulatory actions of the 
RBI by all stakeholders. Earlier, the requisition for liquidation of a bank was protested by the 
bank and the sector, and often resulted in non-implementation or delay in implementation of 
the requisition by the State governments. The process has now become smooth and quicker, 
as the decisions are based on the recommendations of the Taskforce for Cooperative Urban 
Banks  (TAFCUB),  constituted  in  states  that  have  signed  Memorandum  of  Understanding 
(MOU) with the RBI. The TAFCUB has representatives from state government, UCB sector 
and  the  RBI.  Till  April  16,  2008,  MOUs  had  been  signed  with  16  state  governments  and 
Central  Government,  which  encompass  1586  UCBs  constituting  87.1  per  cent  of  the  total 
number of banks, which account for 93.8 per cent of the total deposits of the UCB sector.  
33.  I  may  mention  that  a  medium-term  framework  for  urban  co-operative  banks  up  to  the 
year  2010  has  been  drawn  up  in  order  to  facilitate  the  development  of  this  sector  into  a 
strong and vibrant system comprising entities conforming to all prudential requirements. The 
Standing Advisory Committee for Urban Co-operative Banks is increasingly being used for 
continuous dialogue with the various stakeholders of the sector. 
The  deposits  with  the  Grade  I  and  Grade  II  UCBs  (the  banks  with  no  /  low  supervisory 
concerns) as a proportion of total deposits of the UCBs , excluding the two banks in Gujarat 
and Andhra Pradesh, which faced the crisis, amounted to 77.5%. This indicates that, at the 
moment,  there  is  considerable  improvement  in  the  regulatory  comfort  as  far  as  UCBs  are 
concerned.  The  process  of  improved  cooperation  and  collaboration  with  all  stakeholders 
under the MoU is likely to strengthen the position further.  
Impact of UCBs on the amount of claims settled by the DICGC 
34. In the context of the UCBs, it is appropriate to mention the impact of their operations on 
the pay out by the DICGC to the depositors affected by the weak UCBs. It is instructive to 
note  that  since  the  inception  of  DICGC  in  1962  till  the  year  2000-01,  claims  paid  to  co-
operative banks by the Corporation amounted to Rs.71.9 crore, which constituted 27.43 per 
cent of the total claims paid by the Corporation during the period. However, since the year 
2001,  the  quantum  of  claims  paid  in  respect  of  co-operative  banks  multiplied  manifold,  on 
account of failure of large UCBs since then.  
Thus,  during  the  period  between  2000-01  and  2006-07,  the  claims  paid  in  respect  of  co-
operative  banks  aggregated  Rs.2226.60  crore.  Further,  out  of  total  claims  of  Rs.2594.30 
crore paid in respect of all the banks up to 2006-07, over 88 per cent of the amount paid was 
in  respect  of  176  UCBs  alone.  However,  with  the  added  improvements  in  the  regulatory 
BIS Review 46/2008 
 9
comforts in the new environment of co-operation and collaboration the position of UCBs is 
poised to improve. 
Local Area Banks (LABs) 
35. The LAB Scheme was introduced in August 1996 pursuant to an announcement made by 
the then Finance Minister in his budget speech and the Guidelines for setting up the LABs 
were thereafter issued by the RBI. The objective of setting up the LABs was to bridge the 
gaps in credit availability and enhance the institutional credit framework in the rural and semi-
urban areas and to provide efficient and competitive financial intermediation services in their 
areas of operation. The LAB Scheme envisaged a minimum capital of Rs. 5 crore and an 
area of operation comprising three contiguous districts. Out of the 227 applications received 
by  the  RBI  for  setting  up  LABs,  only  six  banks  were  actually  licensed.  Of  the  six  LABs 
originally licensed, two have since ceased to exit as the licences granted to one of them was 
cancelled  in  January  2002  on  account  of  grave  irregularities  observed  in  their  operations 
while another one, whose financial position was unsatisfactory, was amalgamated in August 
2004 with the Bank of Baroda under section 45 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949. Thus, 
there are only four LABs functioning at present, all of which are non-scheduled banks. The 
LABs  were  subject  to  the  provisions  of  the  B.  R.  Act,  RBI  Act  and  prudential  norms  on 
income recognition and asset classification, etc., since their inception.  
36.  In  July  2002,  a  Review  Group  headed  by  Shri  G.  Ramachandran,  former  Finance 
Secretary,  was  appointed 
the  LAB  Scheme  and  make 
recommendations. Based on the recommendations of the Group and with the concurrence of 
the Government of India, it was decided by the RBI that no new LABs would be licensed till 
the existing LABs were placed on a sound footing. The existing LABs were also advised by 
the RBI in November 2003 to attain a capital of Rs. 25 crore and a CRAR of 15% over a 
period  of  5  to  7  years.  In  the  absence  of  any  feasible  restructuring  options,  it  has  been 
decided to maintain status quo in regard to the LABs, under the existing framework.  
the  working  of 
to  study 
that 
interest.  While  ensuring 
Non-Banking Financial Companies (NBFCs) 
37.  NBFCs  are  an  important  component  of  the  service  sector  which  was  a  significant 
contributor  to  the  growth  of  the  economy.  It  is  important  for  the  NBFCs  to  efficiently 
intermediate and enhance credit delivery to the dispersed, under-banked and under-serviced 
sections of the economy. However, it is also the Reserve Bank’s responsibility to protect the 
depositors’ 
the  public  deposit-taking  companies  and 
systemically important non-deposit taking companies are well regulated, the Reserve Bank is 
looking to further strengthening of the NBFC sector so as to help the sector grow in terms of 
its asset base. Reserve Bank had given an option to the NBFCs to voluntarily move out of 
public  deposits  acceptance  activity  if  they  found  the  regulatory  costs  outweighed  their 
benefits. In case an NBFC voluntarily chose to get out of public deposits, the Reserve Bank 
would,  in  fact,  help  the  NBFC  in  its  efforts,  including  imparting  training  and  technology 
support.  
38. The NBFCs falling within the regulatory domain of the RBI can be broadly classified as 
the deposit-taking NBFCs (other than the Residuary Non-Banking Companies), Non-Deposit 
taking  NBFCs  and  the  Residuary  Non-Banking  Companies  (RNBCs).  NBFCs  are  broadly 
engaged  in  four  types  of  activities  viz.,  equipment  leasing,  hire  purchase,  loans  and 
investments.  Regulatory/supervisory  norms,  governing  their  operations  differ  reflecting  the 
concerns specific to the segment.  
39.  As  a  part  of  consolidation  in  the  NBFC  sector,  the  number  of  deposit-taking  NBFCs 
(NBFCs-D) has come down steeply from 710 as at the end of June 2003 to 376 as at the end 
of March 2008. The amount of public deposits held by them is also showing a declining trend 
and has come down from Rs 5035 crore (March 2003) to Rs 2043 crore (March 2007). The 
bank borrowings of NBFCs-D at Rs 14,923 crores are not significant in relation to the credit 
10 
 BIS Review 46/2008
extended by them at Rs 37,990 crores as at end of March 2007. Further, the deposits held 
by  NBFCs  including  RNBCs  (Rs  24,665  crore  as  at  end  March  2007)  is  not  significant 
(0.95%) when compared to deposits held by commercial banks (Rs 26,08,309 crore) as on 
March 31, 2007. Considering that the amount of deposits held and bank borrowings of the 
deposit-taking NBFCs is not significant in relation to the aggregate bank deposit and credit, 
the systemic risk may not be considered significant. Furthermore, the number of non-deposit 
taking  NBFCs  (NBFCs-ND)  declined  from  13139  as  on  June  2003  to  12458  as  at  end  of 
March 2008.  
40. The number of RNBCs registered with the Bank has decreased from five as on March 31, 
2003  to  three  as  at  the  end  of  December  2006.  Of  these,  two  companies  accounted  for 
virtually  the  entire  deposits  as  the  deposits  of  the  third  company,  at  less  than  rupees  one 
crore,  were  insignificant.  However,  in  contrast  to  the  trend  of  deposits  of  the  NBFCs,  the 
Aggregate  Deposit  Liability  (ALD)  of  the  RNBCs  has  been  showing  a  rapid  growth.  The 
deposit  liability  of  RNBCs  increased  from  Rs.15,065  crore  as  on  March  31,  2003  to 
Rs.22,622 crore as on March 31, 2007, showing an increase of 33.9 per cent. While the ALD 
of one company recorded a declining trend, the other large RNBC recorded a steady growth. 
However, it may be pointed out here that in view of the changes in the operating environment 
of  the  RNBCs,  their  business  model  has  now  become  non-viable  and  there  is  a  need  for 
them to explore a new business model.  
41. The total deposits of NBFCs as on March 31, 2007 were Rs 24, 665 crore of which the 
deposits  with  deposit-taking  NBFCs,  other  than  the  RNBCs,  were  Rs  2,043  crore  forming 
only 8.3 percent of the total public deposits of the NBFCs. The deposits with the RNBCs as 
on  March  31,  2007  amounted  to  Rs  22622  crore  which  has  been  growing  steadily.  As 
already mentioned, the business model of RNBCs has become non-viable.  
Taking into account the declining number of deposit-taking NBFCs, declining trend of public 
deposits  held  by  NBFCs,  strengthening  of  regulatory  prescription  in case  of  NBFCs-ND-SI 
and RNBCs, low level of NPAs and relatively low level of bank borrowings by the sector, the 
potential systemic risk from this segment is low at this point of time, even as the process of 
consolidation  is  gaining  momentum.  In  these  circumstances  at  the  appropriate  stage,  the 
proposal of restricting public deposit taking activities only to banks may have to be taken up 
for consideration. 
Conclusion 
42.  Over  the  years,  there  has  been  considerable  progress  in  consolidation  in  India  in  the 
private sector banks and the mergers have happened not only between the weak and the 
healthy banks but also, of late, between healthy and well-functioning banks as well. The RBI 
has been supportive of the initiatives for consolidation and there have been no cases so far 
where  the  approval  for  merger  of  banks  was  denied  by  the  RBI,  since  the  proposals 
conformed to the requirements and guidelines of the RBI.  
In the case of the urban cooperative banks, notable degree of consolidation has taken place 
over  the  years  with  a  good  number  of  weak  UCBs  getting  weeded  out  from  the  system, 
through mergers and amalgamations. 
In the case of the RRBs, their number has reduced to less than half of their original number 
and the existing RRBs are in much better financial health.  
What  is  noteworthy  is  that  the  consolidation  in  the  UCB  and  the  RRB  sector  has  been 
achieved  through  innovative  ways  devised,  within  the  existing  statutory  framework  and 
without waiting for any legislative amendments to come about.  
The  DFIs  have  been  largely  phased  out  in  an  orderly  manner  with  only  a  few  refinancing 
institutions left now.  
BIS Review 46/2008 
 11
The NBFCs sector too has witnessed a fair degree of consolidation with a sharp reduction in 
the  number  of  deposit-taking  NBFCs,  with  their  aggregate  deposits  amounting  to  not  a 
significant proportion of the total deposits of the banking system, and hence, not a source of 
systemic risk. However, RNBCs will have to quickly gear up to a change in their business 
model. 
Though consolidation in the public sector banking segment, which accounts for about 75 per 
cent of the assets of the banking system, is still a work in progress, there are enabling legal 
provisions for the purpose in the respective statutes of the public sector banks. The RBI, as 
the regulator and supervisor of the banking system, would continue to play a supportive role 
in  the  task  of  banking  consolidation  based  on  commercial  considerations,  with  a  view  to 
further  strengthening  the  Indian  financial  sector  and  support  growth  while  securing  the 
stability of the system.  
Thank you. 
12 
 BIS Review 46/2008
Annex- I 
List of Indian commercial banks merged since January 1990 under the provisions of 
the Banking Regulation Act 1949 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of the  
Transferor Bank 
Name of the  
Transferee Bank 
Date of 
amalgam-
mation
1.  Bank of Tamilnad Ltd. 
Indian Overseas Bank  
20.02.1990 
2.  Bank of Thanjavur Ltd. 
3.  Parur Central Bank Ltd.  
Indian Bank  
Bank of India 
4.  Purbanchal Bank Ltd. 
Central Bank of India 
5.  Kashi Nath Seth Bank Ltd. 
State Bank of India  
20.02.1990 
20.02.1990 
29.08.1990 
01.01.1996 
6.  Bari Doab Bank Ltd.  
Oriental Bank of Commerce 
08.04.1997 
7.  Punjab co-operative Bank Ltd. 
Oriental Bank of Commerce   08.04.1997 
8.  Bareilly Corporation Bank Ltd.  
Bank of Baroda 
9.  Sikkim Bank Ltd.  
10.  Times Bank Ltd. 
11.  Bank of Madura Ltd.  
12.  Benaras State Bank Ltd. 
Union Bank of India 
HDFC Bank Ltd. 
ICICI Bank Ltd. 
Bank of Baroda 
13.  Nedungadi Bank Ltd. 
PNB 
14.  South Gujarat Local Area Bank Ltd. 
Bank Of Baroda 
03.06.1999 
22.12.1999 
26.02.2000 
10.03.2001 
20.06.2002 
01.02.2003 
25.06.2004 
15.  Global Trust Bank Ltd. 
Oriental Bank Of Commerce  14.08.2004 
16.  Bank of Punjab Ltd 
17. 
IDBI Bank Ltd. 
Centurian Bank 
IDBI Ltd. 
01.10.2005 
02.04.2005 
18.  The Ganesh Bank of Kurundwad Ltd. 
The Federal Bank Ltd. 
02.09.2006 
19.  United Western Bank Ltd. 
IDBI Ltd. 
03.10.2006 
20.  Bharat Overseas Bank  
Indian overseas Bank 
31.03.2007 
21.  The Sangli Bank Ltd  
ICICI Bank Ltd. ( Voluntary)   19.04.2007 
22.  Lord Krishna Bank Ltd. 
Centurion Bank of Punjab Ltd. 
(voluntary) 
29.08.2007 
 BIS Review 46/2008 
 13
