European Central Bank: Press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank 
and Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 
6 November 2008. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Vice-President  and  I  are  very  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  our 
press conference. We will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing 
Council, which was also attended by the President of the Eurogroup, Prime Minister Juncker, 
and Commissioner Almunia. 
On  the  basis  of  its  regular  economic  and  monetary  analyses,  at  today’s  meeting  the 
Governing Council decided to reduce the key ECB interest rates further by 50 basis points, 
following the previous coordinated interest rate cut on 8 October 2008. The outlook for price 
stability  has  improved  further.  Inflation  rates  are  expected  to  continue  to  decline  in  the 
coming months, reaching a level in line with price stability during the course of 2009. The 
intensification and broadening of the financial market turmoil is likely to dampen global and 
euro area demand for a rather protracted period of time. In such an environment, taking into 
account  the  strong  fall  in  commodity  prices  over  recent  months,  price,  cost  and  wage 
pressures in the euro area should also moderate. At the same time, the underlying pace of 
monetary  expansion  has  remained  strong  but  has  continued  to  show  further  signs  of 
deceleration. All in all, the information available and our current analysis indicate a further 
alleviation of upside risks to price stability at the policy-relevant medium-term horizon, even 
though they have not disappeared completely. At this juncture, it is therefore crucial that all 
parties,  including  public  authorities,  price-setters  and  social  partners,  fully  live  up  to  their 
responsibilities.  The  level  of  uncertainty  stemming  from  financial  market  developments 
remains  extraordinarily  high  and  exceptional  challenges  lie  ahead.  We  expect  the  banking 
sector to make its contribution to restore confidence. The Governing Council will continue to 
keep  inflation  expectations  firmly  anchored  in  line  with  its  medium-term  objective.  In  so 
doing, it supports sustainable growth and employment and contributes to financial stability. 
Accordingly, we will continue to monitor very closely all developments over the period ahead.  
Allow me to explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis.  
When analysing current developments in economic activity, we face an extraordinarily high 
degree of uncertainty in large part stemming from the intensification and broadening of the 
financial  market  turmoil.  The  world  economy  as  a  whole  is  feeling  the  adverse  effects,  as 
tensions  increasingly  spill  over  from  the  financial  sector  to  the  real  economy  and  from 
advanced economies to emerging market economies. In the case of the euro area, the latest 
survey  data  confirm  that  momentum  in  economic  activity  has  weakened  significantly,  with 
sluggish domestic and external demand and tighter financing conditions. Looking forward, it 
will  be  crucial  to  lay  sound  foundations  for  a  recovery.  For  this  to  materialise  as  early  as 
possible, it is of the utmost importance to maintain discipline and a medium-term perspective 
in macroeconomic policy-making, and to avoid second-round effects. It is equally important 
that the banking sector takes fully into account the significant support measures adopted by 
governments to deal with the financial turmoil. These measures should be supporting trust in 
the  financial  system  and  should  help  to  prevent  undue  constraints  in  credit  supply  to 
companies and households. In combination with the recent broad-based falls in commodity 
prices, these measures should help to restore confidence.  
In the view of the Governing Council, a number of the downside risks to economic activity 
identified  earlier  have  materialised,  particularly  those  stemming  from  the  financial  market 
tensions. Other downside risks continue to relate to disorderly developments due to global 
BIS Review 133/2008 
 1
imbalances  and  rising  protectionist  pressures,  as  well  as  to  the  possibility  of  renewed 
increases in commodity prices. 
With regard to price developments, annual HICP inflation has remained considerably above 
the  level  consistent  with  price  stability  since  last  autumn.  However,  it  has  been  steadily 
declining  since  July,  falling  –  according  to  Eurostat’s  flash  estimate  –  to  3.2%  in  October, 
from 3.6% in September and 3.8% in August. The continued high level of inflation is largely 
due  to  both  the  direct and  indirect  effects  of  past  surges  in  energy  and  food  prices  at  the 
global level. Moreover, strong wage growth in the first half of the year, in spite of a weaker 
growth  momentum,  combined  with  a  deceleration  in  labour  productivity  during  the  same 
period, resulted in a significant increase in unit labour cost.  
Looking forward, recent sharp falls in commodity prices, as well as the ongoing weakening in 
demand, suggest that the annual HICP inflation rate will continue to decline in the coming 
months and reach a level in line with price stability during the course of 2009. Depending, in 
particular,  on  the  future  path  of  oil  and  other  commodity  prices,  some  even  stronger 
downside movements in HICP inflation cannot be excluded around the middle of next year, 
particularly  due  to  base  effects.  These  movements  would  be  short-lived  and  therefore  not 
relevant from a monetary policy perspective. Looking through such volatility, however, upside 
risks  to  price  stability  at  the  policy-relevant  horizon  are  alleviating.  The  remaining  upside 
risks relate to an unexpected increase in commodity prices, as well as in indirect taxes and 
administered prices, and the emergence of broad-based second-round effects in price and 
wage-setting  behaviour,  particularly  in  economies  where  nominal  wages  are  indexed  to 
consumer  prices.  The  Governing  Council  calls  for  these  schemes  to  be  abolished.  It  is 
imperative  to  ensure  that  medium  to  longer-term  inflation  expectations  remain  firmly 
anchored at levels in line with price stability. 
Turning  to  the  monetary  analysis,  the  annual  growth  rates  of  broad  money  and  credit 
aggregates,  while  still  remaining  strong,  continued  to  decline  in  September.  Taking  the 
appropriate medium-term perspective, monetary data up to September confirm that upside 
risks to price stability are diminishing but that they have not disappeared completely.  
A closer examination of the money and credit data indicates that the recent intensification of 
financial tensions has already had an identifiable impact, particularly in the form of outflows 
from  money  market  funds  and  greater  inflows  into  overnight  deposits.  However,  the  full 
impact of investors’ uncertainty on their portfolio allocation behaviour is still to be seen in the 
coming months. Both portfolio shifts between non–monetary and monetary assets and shifts 
between  different  types  of  monetary  assets  can  therefore  not  be  ruled  out  in  the  period 
ahead.  Hence,  such  effects  will  need  to  be  taken  into  account  when  assessing  monetary 
growth and its implications for price stability over the medium term.  
There  is  also  some  evidence  in  the  September  data  that  the  recent  intensification  of  the 
financial  tensions  has  triggered  a  slower  provision  of  bank  credit  to  euro  area  residents, 
mostly taking the form of smaller holdings of securities. At the same time, for the euro area 
as a whole, up to September there were no indications of a drying-up in the availability of 
bank  loans  to  households  and  non-financial  corporations.  In  particular,  the  maturity 
composition  of  loans  suggests  that  non-financial  corporations  continued  to  obtain  funding, 
also at relatively long maturities. However, more data and further analysis are necessary to 
form a robust judgement. 
To  sum  up,  the  intensification  and  broadening  of  the  financial  market  turmoil  is  likely  to 
dampen  global  and  euro  area  demand  for  a  rather  protracted  period  of  time.  In  such  an 
environment,  taking  into  account  the  strong  fall  in  commodity  prices  over  recent  months, 
price, cost and wage pressures in the euro area should also moderate. At the same time, a 
cross-check  of  the  outcome  of  the  economic  analysis  with  that  of  the  monetary  analysis 
confirms  that  the  underlying  pace  of  monetary  expansion  has  remained  strong  but  has 
continued  to  show  further  signs  of  deceleration.  Hence,  when  taking  all  information  and 
analysis  into  account,  there  is  a  further  alleviation  of  upside  risks  to  price  stability  at  the 
2 
 BIS Review 133/2008
policy-relevant medium-term horizon, even though they have not disappeared completely. At 
this juncture, it is therefore crucial that all parties, including public authorities, price-setters 
and social partners, fully live up to their responsibilities. The level of uncertainty stemming 
from financial market developments remains extraordinarily high and exceptional challenges 
lie ahead. We expect the banking sector to make its contribution to restore confidence. The 
Governing Council will continue to keep inflation expectations firmly anchored in line with its 
medium-term  objective.  In  so  doing,  it  supports  sustainable  growth  and  employment  and 
contributes  to  financial  stability.  Accordingly,  we  will  continue  to  monitor  very  closely  all 
developments over the period ahead.  
In the area  of fiscal policy,  medium-term challenges, such as population ageing, strongly 
underline the need for fiscal policy to focus on medium-term sustainability and thereby build 
confidence.  Accordingly,  and  as  recently  confirmed  by  the  ECOFIN  Council  and  the 
European Council, the fiscal policy provisions of the Maastricht Treaty and the Stability and 
Growth Pact should continue to be applied fully. The fiscal rules are one of the indispensable 
pillars  of  EMU  and  the  single  currency,  which  must  remain  firmly  in  place  so  as  not  to 
undermine  the  confidence  in  fiscal  sustainability.  Finally,  the  current  situation  calls  for 
ensuring the high quality and timeliness of statistical information on government interventions 
to ensure the transparent and accountable use of public funds.  
Turning  to  structural  policies,  the  ongoing  period  of  weak  economic  activity  and  high 
uncertainty about the economic outlook will require a significant degree of resilience from the 
euro area economy. The current situation should therefore be seen as a catalyst to foster the 
implementation of necessary domestic reforms so that countries may fully exploit the benefits 
offered  by  the  enhancement  of  international  trade  and  market  integration,  in  line  with  the 
principle of an open market economy with free competition. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
BIS Review 133/2008 
 3
