Christian Noyer: The history and future of corporate social responsibility 
Welcome speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France, at the Symposium 
ICCA – EABH, Paris, 27 October 2008. 
 Minister, 
Chairman, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  welcome  you  to  the  Banque  de  France  today  together  with  the 
founder of the Institute for Corporate Culture Affairs, Manfred Pohl, who has organised this 
event. I would also like to thank Ms Kosciusko-Morizet for doing us the honour of joining us in 
this debate, in her capacity as Secretary of State for the Environment. Welcome to all! I wish 
to thank those who have come from neighbouring countries, and especially those who have 
travelled from further a field to take part in this symposium. 
This  symposium  is  being  held  in  this  prestigious  setting  that  is  rich  in  history:  the  Golden 
Gallery  of  the  Hôtel  de  Toulouse.  It  is  in  this  Hôtel  that  the  Banque  de  France  set  up  its 
headquarters two hundred years ago to this year. Much time would be required to recount 
the  history of  this building.  I  should  at  least  mention  that  this  Gallery  was  designed  at  the 
start of the 17th century by François Mansart for Mr de la Vrillière, a minister of Louis XIII. It 
was then renovated in the style of the day at the start of the following century by Robert de 
Cotte, the First Architect of Louis XIV, for the Count of Toulouse, the legitimated son of the 
Sun King and its new owner. 
Naturally, this place provides an appropriate setting for putting matters into perspective. This 
is most apposite for the discussions to which Mr Pohl invites us today, because they should 
be considered from both a historical and forward-looking perspective. Japanese philosophy 
teaches us that visiting the past teaches us new things. 
This privileged setting nevertheless does not isolate us from the world. The turmoil that we 
are experiencing gives a particular significance to your work. The current financial crisis and 
the  unprecedented  financial  cooperation  between  countries  to  preserve  financial  stability 
should add a new dimension to the debate on Corporate Social Responsibility. 
I therefore hope that this approach in perspective will shed light on both the implications of 
the Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) and its potential role as a force for change in a 
globalised world. 
CSR  is  a  concept  whereby  companies  and  financial  institutions  not  only  consider  their 
profitability  and  growth,  but  also  the  interests  of  society  and  the  environment  by  taking 
responsibility  for  the  impact  of  their  activities  on  stakeholders,  employees,  shareholders, 
customers, suppliers, and civil society represented by NGOs. Companies (including banks) 
must take on new responsibilities that go beyond a simple policy of “paternalism” vis-à-vis 
their suppliers, customers and employees, such as that practised up until recent times. 
I would now like to discuss three questions in particular. 
The first is whether CSR is a stable concept or one that is still evolving? This concept broadly 
stems  from  that  of  sustainable  development,  which  is  defined  as  development  that  meets 
present needs without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own. Its 
blueprint was set out at the 1992 UN Conference on Environment and Development in Rio 
de  Janeiro  (the  first  Earth  Summit).  It  is  based  on  the  principle  of  development  that  is 
economically  efficient,  socially  equitable  and  ecologically  sustainable.  CSR,  whose  initial 
objective was accountability, still largely appears to be an evolving paradigm closely linked to 
the current transition towards a new economic model. 
BIS Review 132/2008 
 1
In this respect, Rio brought to the fore the need for an ISO standard at the company level in 
order for companies themselves to take account of their impact and change their processes 
as  part  of  a  preventive  approach.  The  UN  addressed  this  dimension  and  brings  together, 
under  its  aegis,  the  initiatives  of  the  major  companies  that  adhere  to  a  relatively  general 
charter. The Johannesburg World Summit on Sustainable Development (also known as Rio 
Plus 10 or the Second Earth Summit), largely focused on companies wishing to take centre 
stage in the protection of the planet and adopt a proactive role. 
The  ethical  dimension  of  CSR  lends  strength  to  the  questions  of  stakeholders  and 
employees  as  to  how  their  funds  are  used.  The  financial  turmoil  of  recent  months  may 
provide new avenues for analysing or developing CSR. 
My second question is: will the concept of CSR, whose global spread has been promoted by 
globalisation, result in new forms of managerial responsibility? 
It is vital that, in companies, the CSR approach feeds into risk management. 
Banks,  for  instance,  seek  to  better  understand,  beyond  their  direct  impact  (environmental 
footprint), their indirect role through the projects, investments or businesses they choose to 
fund, i.e. through the financing of a more sustainable economy. 
Some experts have even introduced the concept of “sustainable finance”. This is the notion 
whereby the banking sector commits to ensuring transparency, long-term governance, well-
informed  choices  and  sustainable  markets.  In  2003,  the  network  of  NGOs,  Banktrack, 
defined  a  benchmark  against  which  civil  society  could  measure  the  commitment  of  the 
banking sector in terms of sustainability. 
The  current  financial  crisis  left  no  doubt  as  to  the  fact  that  financial  institutions  exert  a 
substantial indirect impact on society and its economy. This impact may be considerable in 
both directions and go far beyond the mere financing of projects or management of risk. 
Perhaps confidence in the financial sector could be rekindled thanks to such notions, with a 
return to fundamentals: simplicity (of products in particular, circuits and funding of companies 
or virtuous projects), transparency, ethics and balance. 
My  third  question  is:  can  CSR  give  rise  to  an  alternative  or  complementary  regulatory 
approach that could reinforce global regulation policies? 
This would imply that the taking into account of CSR in management models would result in 
a certain form of self-regulation, for example with recognised codes of conduct. 
Different incentives are contributing to this, such as pressure from direct stakeholders and 
NGOs and regulatory incentives, in particular in terms of reporting. 
Lastly, I would like to say a few words about the Banque de France. I wish to stress that, as a 
company,  CSR  is  of  great  importance.  Its  current  sustainable  development  strategy 
combines a two-pronged approach: an Environmental Footprint Reduction Programme and a 
review  of  its  tasks  in  the  light  of  sustainable  development.  In  this  respect,  the  Banque  de 
France  will,  for  example,  seek  to  develop  the  financial  culture  of  the  public,  spread  best 
practice in the fight against money laundering, encourage economic and financial research in 
new fields, such as the development of “carbon finance”. 
I attach great importance to these subjects, and my  wish is to see the Banque de France 
adopt  its  own  sustainable  development  charter,  which  formalises  its  commitments.  This 
should be achieved by the end of this year and will no doubt further enhance the actions of 
the Banque de France. 
In the light of this collective awareness of the environmental (finitude and fragility of natural 
resources),  economic  and  societal  implications,  central  banks  perform  their  task  of 
preserving financial stability while taking into account and anticipating events. This approach, 
as  recent  developments  have  shown,  has  to  be  increasingly  systemic  and  co-operative, 
involving companies, banks, governments and central banks. The interactivity between the 
2 
 BIS Review 132/2008
players and the combination of their respective responsibilities should constitute a virtuous 
basis for a “sound financing of a sustainable economy”. “Sound financing of a sustainable 
economy” and “financial stability” are mutually reinforcing concepts. 
I  would  like  to  thank  you  for  giving me  the  opportunity  of  presenting  these  considerations, 
before  handing  the  floor  to  Ms  Kosciusko-Morizet.  Minister,  please  allow  me  to  stress  the 
formidable  efforts  you  have  made,  both  at  the  national  and  European  level  together  with 
President Sarkozy and Mr Borloo, to provide sustainable solutions to the current challenges. 
You take a long-term view by calling for “a common battle” – these are your own words– in 
favour of the economy and the environment. This is clearly an “awareness” that we have to 
share collectively today! 
BIS Review 132/2008 
 3
