Tarisa Watanagase: Global financial crisis and economic integration in 
Asia 
Address by Dr Tarisa Watanagase, Governor, Bank of Thailand, at the TU-JBIC International 
Conference on “The Future of Economic Integration in Asia”, Bangkok, 21 November 2008. 
 Distinguished Speakers and Guests,  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  is  my  honor  and  pleasure  to  accept  the  invitation  from  the  Faculty  of  Economics, 
Thammasat  University  and  Japan  Bank  for  International  Cooperation  to  speak  at  this 
congregation of prominent researchers and policy makers in the International Conference on 
“The Future of Economic Integration in Asia”. I would also like to congratulate the organizers 
for  putting  together  a  concrete  and  thorough  program  covering  all  core  aspects  of  Asian 
economic  integration  that  need  better  understandings  and  brainstorming  efforts  from 
academics, as well as the public and private sectors. I believe that the knowledge and views 
from this avenue will certainly provide important inputs for shaping the future direction and 
pace of economic integration in our region.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
While trade and financial integration in Asia has been gathering significant momentum for the 
past  decade,  the  current  global  financial  crisis  has  manifested  an  extraordinary  case  and 
timing for us to reassess and rethink carefully about the future course of further integration 
among  our  regional  economies  and  beyond.  Therefore,  it  is  very  timely  to  talk  about  the 
global financial crisis and its implications for economic integration in Asia.  
In  doing  so,  first,  let  me  start  with  the  current  financial  crisis  and  its  relation  with  global 
financial imbalances and economic integration. Then I will briefly discuss the stage of Asian 
economic  integration  and  highlight  the  benefits  it  rendered  in  cushioning  a  number  of 
regional economies from the adverse effects from the crisis. After that, I will draw the lessons 
from  the  current  crisis  that  should  further  help  gear  our  integration  towards  the  path  that 
reaps the most benefits and minimizes potential risks along the way.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
During 2004-2006, one of the main potential threats to the world economy centred around 
the global financial imbalances arising from the chronic and rising US current account and 
fiscal deficits. Although most economists believed that the situation was not sustainable, no 
one could predict the timing and extent of the unwinding process, nor whether the US would 
face a hard on soft landing. The current crisis, unfortunately, manifests an abrupt unwinding 
of the imbalances. The trigger point of the crisis is clearly the subprime lending problem in 
the US, a new phenomenon. However, most economists would agree that the root cause of 
the  crisis  lies  beneath  excessively  accommodative  monetary  policy  that  led  to  excessive 
credits, and in turn, to asset price bubbles, a repeating cause of past crises. Other important 
driving factors behind rising credit expansion and bubbles included rising financial innovation 
and its complexity and lax supervision.  
The  global  financial  imbalances  could  not  have  heightened  rapidly  since  the  early  2000s 
without  fast  rising  global  economic  integration.  Both  global  trade  and  financial  integration 
aided the growing US domestic consumption as well as the twin deficits of the current and 
fiscal  accounts.  Trade  integration  facilitated  exports  especially  from  Asia  to  meet  the  US 
demand.  On  the  other  hand,  increasing  financial  integration  allowed  emerging  economies 
with fast rising export revenues to invest the money in the US market where there is a wide 
variety  of  financial  assets  and  instruments.  At  the  same  time,  financial  institutions  in  most 
BIS Review 147/2008 
 1
advanced  economies  and  a  number  of  emerging  economies  have  invested  in  opaque 
financial  products,  which  originated  in  the  US  and  spread  globally  through  financial 
integration. Therefore, with economic integration at the global level, the large global saving-
investment mismatches between the US, who is a net spender, and emerging market Asia 
and others, who are net savers, were allowed to persist for a continued period. In addition, 
with  global  financial  integration,  what  was  originally  expected  to  be  a  US  problem  once 
imbalances unwind, has turned into a global crisis. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
One common and frequently asked question is whether further integration at both the global 
and  regional  levels,  especially  financial  integration,  should  be  deterred  as  it  has  created 
channels that allow a financial crisis in one country to spread to various parts of the world. I 
believe  that,  like  all  economic  matters,  integration  offers  benefits  and  comes  with  costs. 
While we see significant adverse impacts of global integration, Asian economic integration, in 
fact,  has  a  crucial  role  in  helping  a  number  of  our  regional  economies  withstand  this 
enormous external destabilizing shock. Hence, our essential tasks are about determining an 
appropriate pace of further integration and making us increasingly resilient in response to the 
fast changing environment.  
To  elaborate  the  above  points,  allow  me  to  briefly  talk  about  the  developments  of  Asian 
economic integration with the world and within the region. On the trade side, there are two 
important  on-going  forces.  First,  international  trade  with  the  economies  outside  the  region 
has risen significantly especially due to the emergence of China and India in the world trade 
arena, as well as policies to lower trade barriers and establish trade agreements. Second, 
within  East  Asia,  intra-regional  trade  has  grown  rapidly  and  surpassed  trade  with  the 
outsiders  since  2004.  The  driver  is  vertical  integration  of  the  production  networks  of 
multinational corporations across regional economies.  
On  the  financial  side,  since  the  Asian  financial  crisis,  East  Asian  economies  have  taken 
various  efforts  to  deregulate  and  deepen  the  financial  markets  and  liberalize  their  capital 
account. We have witnessed significantly rising financial linkages within East Asia. We have 
also  seen  rising  FDI  activities  both  within  the  regional  economies  and  with  other  regions. 
Increasing  regional  FDI  is  largely  a  result  of  the  aforementioned  regional  production 
networks.  Portfolio  investment  has  also  increased  significantly  prior  to  the  period  of  the 
subprime problem due to increasing demand of international investors for emerging market 
assets.  Meanwhile,  the  lessons  from  the  Asian  crisis  are  still  kept  in mind  as  international 
borrowing, especially short-term borrowing, has continued to be below the pre-crisis levels in 
most regional economies.  
Overall, economic integration in our region has proceeded quite rapidly. However, the degree 
of  regional  financial  integration  still  lags  that  of  trade  integration.  It  is  also  important  to 
mention that the financial markets in East Asia are integrated relatively more with the global 
markets  than  with  each  other.  One  important  evidence  is  that  the  regional  stock  markets 
have moved more closely with the US market. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Now I would like to get back to the earlier point to explain why I think that regional economic 
integration has played a role in helping the regional economies deal with this current financial 
crisis.  
It  is  evident  that  regional  trade  integration  has  provided  a  better  buffer  against  declining 
export demand from the G3 economies. Even though the main final demand for East Asian 
products  through  intra-regional  trade  is  still  in  the  G3  economies,  the  strong  and  growing 
domestic demand in regional economies especially China and India over the years gives a 
significant additional cushion for our exports compared with the past crises. Export revenues 
that  the  Asian  economies  have  accumulated  over  the  years  largely  through  the  regional 
2 
 BIS Review 147/2008
production  network  have  been  a  major  contributor  to  the  build  up  of  foreign  reserves  at  a 
comfortable level.  
Furthermore, efforts to increase regional financial integration have come hand-in-hand with 
financial  sector  reforms  and  fostered  regional  cooperation,  particularly  in  terms  of  crisis 
prevention  and  management.  Regional  surveillance 
through  enhanced  channels  of 
communications and platforms of information sharing has been a main focus across different 
fora of economic ministers and central banks in Asia and the Pacific. The main regional crisis 
management tool, reserves pooling arrangement under the Chiang Mai Initiative, has been 
enlarged and its activation process has also been streamlined to better serve the needs of its 
members.  
Surely,  Asian  economies  cannot  decouple  from  the  global  economy  as  we  still  depend 
considerably on other economies outside the region. However, I believe that post Asian crisis 
regional integration and cooperation have helped most of our regional economies to stand by 
each other amid the turbulent environment.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Although the regional economies have become increasingly more resilient and have focused 
on fostering effective regional crisis prevention and management mechanisms, we still need 
to be vigilant about the on-going risks. Moreover, there are important lessons from this crisis 
that  we  need  to  take  into  consideration  in  choosing  the  direction  and  pace  of  further 
economic integration in the new environment.  
First, while innovations and the removal of barriers to cross-border activity have expedited 
global capital market integration, they could also bring about complexities, less transparency, 
and therefore greater possibility and magnitude of systemic risks. Sophistication of financial 
products  has  led  to  inadequate  understandings  of  market  players  as  well  as  lack  of 
transparency  in  certain  securities  markets  and  intermediaries.  One  notable  example  is  the 
unregulated and non-standardized markets for structured products where a fair evaluation of 
the instruments as well as of the counterparty risk has been very difficult, not only for market 
players but also for supervisors.  
Second, the current financial crisis demonstrates the amplifier role of the financial sector in a 
boom-bust economic cycle. In the environment of fast credit expansion, rising capital inflows, 
and  lack  of  proper  regulation,  the  inherent  procyclical  nature  of  the  financial  sector  has 
contributed to one of the unprecedented build-up of financial imbalances in the US during the 
boom and a disorderly unwinding of these imbalances during the bust.  
Third, the crisis also raises a crucial question about the role of monetary policy in maintaining 
macroeconomic  and  financial  stability.  The  important  question  is  whether  monetary  policy 
should  be  employed  to  help  deter  the  build-up  of  asset  price  bubbles  apart  from  the 
macroeconomic stability objective.  
And  fourth,  Asian  financial  markets  have  been  more  susceptible  to  negative  events  in  the 
major financial markets. Volatilities in the regional financial markets have increased, driven 
increasingly  more  by  actions  of  international  investors.  We  have  witnessed  large  capital 
reversals  during  the  periods  of  risk  aversion  as  their  investment  positions  were  unwound 
both in the stock and bond markets.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
These four important lessons will be important inputs for us while we cautiously proceed with 
further integration. This crisis experience clearly shows that a financial crisis can happen in 
any markets regardless of the level of market development, size, and region. To date, the 
economies  that  have  been  hard  hit  by  the  crisis  originated  in  the  US  through  financial 
spillover effects include the Euro zone, UK, and some economies in Eastern Europe, Asia, 
and Latin America. It is confirmed again that, whenever financial imbalances arise, financial 
BIS Review 147/2008 
 3
distress  can  easily  occur  and  become  rampant  due  to  the  increasing  linkages  across  the 
globe. 
So I believe that the key to our endeavor is to 1) take a careful step of further integration, 2) 
increase  economic  and  financial  resiliency,  and  3)  be  ready  to  deal  with  unforeseen  risks 
ahead.  
We can compare this important decision of embarking on further integration to the situation 
where  we  are  already  in  a  sea  expedition.  If  we  are  already  in  the  middle  of  the  ocean, 
sailing back to the origin or resisting further integration seems likely a bad idea. However, to 
reach the destination safely and be able to weather the likely stormy sea along the way, we 
need to plan ahead in navigating the boat and be ready to adjust the speed. Moreover, we 
need to make sure that the boat is in a good condition. We must therefore be alert and well 
prepared to deal with the storms and other dangers.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The next important question is “how to carefully set the appropriate path and pace of further 
integration in the new economic and financial landscape?” With the principle of market-led 
integration in our region, the role of the authorities is in terms of promoting integration and 
establishing infrastructures that may be too costly at the initial stage for the private sector. In 
this spirit, the direction and speed of integration will be largely determined by market forces. 
The  private  sector  will  therefore,  all  the  more  important,  need  to  spearhead  with  their 
ingenuity, creativity, and determination and also work closely with authorities.  
However, the authorities still have a main role in determining the degree of capital account 
openness  which  is  a  necessary  condition  for  greater  financial  integration  with  external 
markets. It is true that resisting further capital account liberalization over an extended period 
is  likely  ineffective  and counterproductive.  Yet,  as  recent  events  have  demonstrated,  large 
and volatile capital flows can become a destabilizing effect on an economy, and, with limited 
monetary policy tools, it may be necessary to “throw sand in the wheel” when circumstances 
warrant to preserve the overall economic and financial stability. This is still a topic for open 
debate, but I think I would like to move on to other important points.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
To  facilitate  greater  integration  both  at  the  global  and  regional  levels,  increased  economic 
and financial resiliency is unquestionably a prerequisite for success. In our region, much has 
been achieved since the Asian financial crisis recovery period.  
Overall,  East  Asian  economies  have  become  more  resilient.  The  managed  float  exchange 
rate and Inflation Targeting monetary policy frameworks that a number of regional economies 
have adopted after the Asian crisis have proven to be effective tools in maintaining economic 
stability and have had a role in helping spur economic growth. They have also had a role in 
helping dent financial imbalances especially excessive external borrowings and their maturity 
mismatches. The latest numbers of external debt to GDP in East Asia (except for the case of 
South Korea) stood below 30 percent in 2007, declining from the range of 62 to 168 percent 
from the peak during 1998 whereas the ratio of foreign reserves to short-term debt in most 
regional economies jumped from approximately 1-3 times in 1998 to 4-8 times in 2007. 
Nevertheless,  as  mentioned  earlier,  the  direct  role  of  monetary  policy  in  curbing  financial 
imbalances apart from price stability will need to be revisited. It may be very well be the case 
that some tightening monetary policy is needed along side prudential measures in curbing 
financial imbalances.  
On the financial sector side, reforms that have been put in place to foster transparency and 
governance  as  well  as  to  strengthen  regulation  and  supervision  have  also  resulted  in 
significantly  healthier  financial  institutions  across  the  region  in  terms  of  solvency,  liquidity, 
and profitability. These reforms aiming to ascend to the international best practice such as 
the IMF’s Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP), the Basel II capital standard, the 
4 
 BIS Review 147/2008
fair value accounting rules or IAS 39, will help ensure financial sector stability in the long-
term as well as escalate the level of competitiveness and resiliency of the regional financial 
institutions.  However,  research  studies  are  needed  in  finding  ways  to  mitigate  the 
procylicality problem associated with the adoption of Basel II standard and the IAS39 rules.  
Nevertheless, much more still needs to be tackled further. More emphasis will be needed on 
improving  and  enhancing  risk  assessment  and  management  of  bank  and  non-bank 
corporations  as  well  as  strengthening  authorities’  responsiveness  to  risks.  Deepening  and 
broadening  capital  markets,  particularly  the  relatively  infantile  corporate  bond  markets  will 
continue  to  be  one  of  the  top  priorities  as  liquid  and  well  functioning  local  capital  markets 
would  help  the  domestic  financial markets  withstand  risks  in  the  increasingly  more  volatile 
world capital market better. The important tasks in this area include improving the legal and 
regulatory  frameworks  to  ensure  investor  protection  and  increase  transparency,  enlarging 
and  diversifying  the  investor  base, and  finding ways  to  improve  the  quality  of  international 
and local credit rating agencies’ over-the-cycle risk assessment.  
In addition to the above crucial works, I would like to stress the challenge in human resource 
development as the world becomes more complex. This crisis has notably demonstrated the 
lack  of  financial  experts  who  are  well-versed  in  financial  innovation  and  risk  management 
both in the public and private sectors. We need experts who can deal with problems through 
creative thinking as unforeseen risks likely lie ahead along the future path of integration. The 
sharing  of  knowledge  and  information  will  crucially  help  fill  the  gap  among  our  regional 
experts.  
As for regional cooperation, it is essential to further enhance regional surveillance especially 
in  the  areas  of  financial  markets.  Crisis  management  increasingly  needs  close  regional 
coordination  to  strengthen  effectiveness  of  the  chosen  measures  and  avoid  beggar-thy-
neighbor  actions.  And  in  terms  of  the  scope,  we  also  need  to  reach  out  more  to  our 
neighbors  in  South  Asia  and  the  Middle  East  so  that  they  become  the  more  important 
partners in both trade and investment spheres.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
To  conclude,  Asian  economies  have  come  a  long  way  in  this  sea  expedition  of  economic 
integration. Throughout the journey, our boats have survived many storms. We know that we 
can lend a hand to one another if our fleet of boats moves together as a group. During this 
current heavy storm, we learn that we need to be wise in steering the boats to go forward. 
There is no turning back. After all, we know from experience that all storms will end one day 
and  the  more  resilient  fleets  will  recover  faster  and  have  a  better  chance  of  reaching  the 
destination.  
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS Review 147/2008 
 5
