Ewart S Williams: Coping with the international financial crisis 
Address by Mr Ewart S Williams, Governor of the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago, at 
the  Grenada  Chamber  of  Industry  &  Commerce  20th  Annual  Banquet  and  Awards 
Ceremony, St George, Grenada, 22 November 2008. 
 Salutations: 
The Honourable Tillman Thomas – Prime Minister 
The Honourable Nazim Burke & Mrs. Burke – Minister of Finance 
Mr. George Harford – Director 
Mrs. Yvonne Gellineau-Simon – President 
Mr. Richard Duncan – Managing Director 
I am pleased to have this opportunity to address you at your Twentieth Annual Banquet and 
Awards Ceremony. 
Let me congratulate the Grenada Chamber of Commerce firstly for your longevity (surviving 
since 1921 is an enormous achievement) and for your service to Grenada in general, and the 
private  sector  of  Grenada,  in  particular.  From  time  to  time,  policymakers  in  the  Caribbean 
tend  to  take  the  private  sector  for  granted,  or  rather  fail  to  capitalize  on  the  enormous 
advantages that could derive from close private-public sector collaboration. Large countries 
with  large  markets  could  depend  on  the  forces  of  the  market  mechanism,  although  as 
recently seen in the US, in times of crisis, markets cease to work properly, whereupon close 
collaboration  between  public  and  private  sector  becomes  not  optional  but  the  only 
prescription for survival. 
Small countries, like Grenada, need to exploit the synergies inherent in a close private-public 
sector partnership and institutions like the Chamber of Commerce need to be at the centre of 
this partnership, for the good of the economic development and survival of the country. 
I am sure that you would agree with me that the last few months have seen unprecedented 
events as regards geopolitics and the world economy. Even his ardent critics will concede 
that the election of Barack Obama as President of the United States was nothing short of 
momentous. Here is someone who four years ago was a little-known first term Senator, but 
who was able to organize a crusade and kindle such passion to become the first African-
American President of the U.S... For many, that’s pretty close to a miracle. 
And for many, the events that are continuing to unfold in the global economy are no less 
momentous  and  even  less  explicable.  The  very  respected  Alan  Greenspan,  the  former 
Chairman  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve,  described  the  recent  meltdown  in  global  financial 
markets as a veritable tsunami. US Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson, who is now trying to 
bring some order to the chaos, insist that the current crisis is without doubt a “once in a life-
time event”. 
What started, in the US, as a well-intentioned effort to facilitate homeownership among lower 
income  wage-earners  has  now  mushroomed  into  a  global  financial  meltdown  with  far-
reaching implications for the major economies as well as for innocent bystanders all over 
the world. 
Clearly, this is a bit of over-simplification because, while the roots of the turmoil may have 
been in the sub-prime crisis, this was by no means the only factor. Excessive risk-taking by 
the world’s largest financial institutions: overleveraging (meaning taking risks with borrowed 
money) greed, and a disdain for prudential regulation also played substantial parts in a very 
complex mosaic. 
BIS Review 153/2008 
 1
What  is  also  incredible  is  the  speed  with  which  this  turmoil  has  unfolded  (it  could  make 
Usain Bolt green with envy). 
Things appeared to be reasonably under control up to August. September was a difficult 
month  for  credit  markets  following  the  failure  of  Lehman  Brothers  and  the  collapse  of 
Freddie Mac, Fannie Mae and AIG. 
But  October  was  just  unbelievable,  as  several  other  major  financial  institutions  failed  or 
had  to  be  bailed  out  by  Governments:  credit  markets  seized  up,  and  interbank  lending, 
which is the grease of the international financial system, almost completely stopped. When 
the  dust  cleared,  the  world’s  major  stock  markets  had  declined  by  an  average  of  40 
percent: the investment banking sector in the US had virtually disappeared, or had been 
transformed and the world’s largest banks and perhaps the largest insurance company were 
being supported by government funds. 
The  economic  slowdown  in  the  US,  which  had  been  mild  up  to  July-August,  deepened 
significantly after the credit market seizure in mid-September. In the third quarter, US GDP 
declined  and  with  an  even  larger  decline  in  the  making  for  the  current  quarter,  the  US 
economy  is  now  formally  in  recession,  though,  to  the  millions  that  have  lost  their  jobs 
(unemployment  is  now  at  6.7  per  cent,  the  highest  rate  for  more  than  two  decades)  ,  the 
recession came some time ago. 
But the US has lots of company, the UK has been in recession for several months now, and 
within the last two weeks, Germany and Japan announced that they were also in recession. 
Governments all over the world have been implementing policy actions to address the root 
cause of the financial stress and to support global economic recovery. The initiatives have 
included  programmes  to  purchase  distressed  assets,  use  of  public  funds  to  recapitalize 
banks and provide comprehensive deposit guarantees and coordinated reductions in policy 
interest rates by major central banks. 
Market  conditions  are  starting  to  respond  to  these  actions.  Interbank  lending  is  slowly 
reappearing  and  the  major  banks  are  beginning  to  lend  again,  though  still  at  very  high 
interest rates. 
But the bad news continue and even seem to get worse, particularly in the US. 
Over  the  last  few  days,  you  would  have  seen  that  all  three  US  automakers,  one  of  the 
flagship sectors in the US economy, are on the verge of bankruptcy and could go down if 
they do not receive US$25 billion of support from the Government. In a worst case scenario, 
this could put as many as 3 million people out of jobs. And as if that was not bad enough 
yesterday the focus shifted to CITIBANK. Up to recently one of the crown jewels of the world 
banking system, Citibank’s very survival is now in jeopardy, its stock price having fallen by 
about 50 per cent in one week. 
And what about us in the Caribbean 
First  a  little  story.  Couple  weeks  ago  we  hosted  a  semi-annual  meeting  of  the  regional 
central bank governors and in comparing notes we came to the conclusion that while we 
were  trying  to  explain  to  our  separate  publics  that  the  Caribbean  was  not  going  to  be 
seriously affected by the international crisis, for a number of technical reasons, our publics 
knew better. They were looking at television, seeing the US, Europe and countries around 
the world, virtually falling apart, financially and economically, and saying to themselves, that 
it can’t be different with us in the Caribbean. 
In hindsight, perhaps, we may have been trying to protect our people too much, because as 
things are unfolding we are all going to be affected – and in some cases, to a great extent. 
Most countries in the region have not been seriously affected through the “financial channel”, 
meaning simply that our banks have not collapsed. This is so because our banks depend 
2 
 BIS Review 153/2008
more on domestic deposits than borrowing from abroad. That’s not to say that a few high net-
worth individuals, who were in the US stock market or perhaps some pension funds did not 
lose some money, though pension fund losses should not be serious, since in all Caribbean 
jurisdictions there are restrictions on foreign investments by pension funds. In reality, pension 
funds hold most of their assets in government securities. 
Jamaica was perhaps the most seriously affected through the financial channel and this was 
because of their specific circumstances. It is no secret that Jamaica has a very high level of 
official external debt (about US$6 billion or 50 per cent of GDP, while external reserves are 
about  US$2  billion).  Given  the  global  financial  market  jitters  and  the  flight  to  quality  by 
investors, the prices of Jamaican Government global bonds declined sharply. Unfortunately 
the  Jamaican  banking  system  holds  a  significant  part  of  this  debt  and  thus  the  decline  in 
bond  prices  raised  the  prospect  of  some  banking  system  instability.  The  Bank  of  Jamaica 
had to establish a US$300 million facility to provide assistance to the commercial banks. This 
notwithstanding,  credibility  problems  have  remained  and  this  is  being  reflected  in  capital 
flight, which has led to a sizeable depreciation of the Jamaican dollar. 
In  addition,  Jamaica  has  also  seen  a  decline  in  migrants’  remittances,  which  is  a  major 
source  of  foreign  exchange  earnings  (US$1.8  billion  a  year).  The  Jamaican  authorities 
have indicated that so far tourism has not been affected, but I suspect, that it is just a matter 
of time. 
Unlike  Jamaica,  the  Bahamas  has  already  seen  a  sharp  decline  in  tourism.  In  a  national 
television address, Prime Minister Ingraham observed that since August, all the major hotels 
on  the  islands  began  to  experience  the  lowest  occupancy  rates  in  many  years,  and  that, 
advanced  bookings  for  the  next  year  painted  an  even  bleaker  picture.  Many  of  you  must 
have  read  that  the  Atlantis  Hotel,  the  largest  hotel  in  the  region,  had  to  send  home  800 
employees,  because  of  the  reduction  in  tourist  arrivals.  The  Bahamas  is  also  facing  a 
“cessation of direct foreign investment in the tourism sector because of the poor outlook for 
the industry and because of financing difficulties”. 
As you know, tourism is the mainstay of the Bahamian economy; because of the decline in 
the sector, non-performing loans in the banking sector have increased by 40 per cent. 
In Barbados, you have a similar situation of declining tourism activity, and the postponement 
of investments in the tourism sector. This has led to a sharp slowdown in economic activity 
so much so that the Government has embarked on a public sector-led recovery programme, 
in the context of a social compact, involving the private sector and the trade unions. 
In Trinidad and Tobago,  the  impact  of  the  global  crisis  is  currently  being  reflected  in  the 
unfolding  developments  in  the  energy  sector.  The  global  slowdown  has  already  led  to  a 
dramatic fall in oil prices by about two-thirds, from a high of US$147 per barrel to around 
US$52 per barrel; there have also been sizeable declines in the prices of other energy sector 
products – LNG, methanol, ammonia and urea. In addition to the decline in energy prices, 
several  of  the  petro-chemical  plants  have  had  to  cut  output  because  of  a  slowdown  in 
demand. As a result of these factors, government revenues are now projected to decline by 
about 15 per cent, compared with the budget. 
In the light of the global economic slowdown and the decline in budget revenues, on Friday 
evening  Prime  Minister  Patrick  Manning  announced  cutbacks  in  government  discretionary 
spending and in outlays on certain development projects. Prime Minister Manning pointed to 
the  economic  difficulties  being  faced  by  the  CARICOM  region,  which  is  Trinidad  and 
Tobago’s  second  largest  export  market  and  undertook  to  maintain  the  resources  of  the 
CARICOM Petroleum Fund. 
I  must  confess  that  I  am  not  very  up  to  date  on  the  specifics  of  the  Grenada  case,  but  I 
would guess that you would face pretty much the same risks and vulnerabilities as the other 
OECS territories: 
BIS Review 153/2008 
 3
 Grenada is a highly open economy and as such, very vulnerable to exogenous shocks, like 
the crisis that is currently confronting us all today. In addition to your vulnerability to natural 
disasters, you may well have to face: 
• 
A decline in visitor arrivals as well as a postponement of foreign investment in the 
tourism sector, given that current uncertainties may cause investors to play safe, at 
least for the time being; 
Like the rest of the Caribbean, you  are likely to face a reduction in remittances 
from abroad; and 
Any other exports you have could face difficulties in Caribbean markets 
• 
All these factors could lead to a slowdown in the pace of economic activity in Grenada. In 
addition, you have a pretty high public debt burden, and other things being equal, you could 
expect  an  increase  in  debt  servicing  costs  (certainly  on  external  debt),  which  would  place 
additional pressures on your already strained public finances. 
So  you,  like  the  rest  of  us  in  the  region,  could  face  challenges  arising  out  of  the  global 
financial crisis, if you are not doing so already. 
But  for  all  the  negative  consequences,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  Grenada  has  tremendous 
positives  and  perhaps  your  real  challenge  is  seizing  the  opportunities  presented  by  these 
difficult times. And what are some of these opportunities: 
• 
One immediate benefit you will have is lower fuel prices – one example of what is 
good for you is bad news for me; 
My understanding is that your agricultural sector is currently recovering from the 
ravages  of  recent  hurricanes;  but,  this  crisis  should  spur  you  to  move  beyond 
recovery, towards not only agricultural self-sufficiency, but towards making Grenada 
one of the regional food-baskets. You have a ready market in Trinidad and Tobago, 
where food shortages and in particular, insufficient supplies of fruits and vegetables 
are contributing to an over 30 per cent increase in food prices; 
The crisis presents an opportunity for you to strengthen your skills bank by luring 
back skilled Grenadians and West Indians, who could be the first to suffer from the 
labour market problems in the US, UK and other places. There are highly qualified 
Caribbean people out there who just want the nudge to come back home and the 
unemployment  and  uncertainty  in  the  US  and  UK  may  be  just  enough  to  tip  the 
balance, to provide that nudge. 
And  some  of  these  returning  nationals  may  be  able  to  bring  not  only  skills  but 
capital, as well, in the form of direct investment. Interest rates are much higher in 
the Caribbean than in the industrialized world, rates of return on capital are higher 
here than they are currently in the US and it’s our job to go out and showcase our 
advantages  to  the  Caribbean  diaspora;  to  entice  them  to  set  up  businesses  back 
home. This is the right time and we should not lose the opportunity once again. 
   Ladies and gentlemen, in my many years of working with the IMF I have been exposed to 
many  economies,  both  developed  and  developing,  both  large  and  small.  I  have  seen 
economies waste resources and I have seen economies do miracles with little. 
I  can  tell  you  that  by  developing  country  standards,  the  OECS  economies  are  very  well 
endowed. As a region we have abundant sun, sand and good weather (most of the time); our 
most attractive art, music and culture; proximity to the United States, fairly good educational 
resources,  and  fluency  in  the  English  language,  which  has  become  the  language  of  trade 
and business. 
I  know  also,  the  frustrations  that  Caribbean  governments  have  faced  in  their  quest  for 
economic transformation. Oft-times globalization has not worked to our advantage. 
4 
 BIS Review 153/2008
I am acquainted with the loss of preferences in Europe for our agricultural commodities; our 
efforts  at  light  manufacturing,  which  floundered  in  the  face  of  technological  advances, 
increases in labour costs and the advent of China as the world’s manufacturer; and when the 
region tried to adapt through offshore banking, the Financial Action Task Force and new 
regulatory  standards  ensured 
the  death  of  another  promising  avenue  of  potential 
diversification. 
But many of our countries have continued to adapt and to remake themselves. And Grenada 
is  one  of  those  that  has  shown  the  ability  to  adapt.  Your  success  in  exporting  tertiary 
educational  services  is  a  case  in  point.  Grenada  has  a  world  class  medical  school  that 
caters for students from the US and the Caribbean region. Some experts think that Grenada 
could  capitalize  on  this  platform  and  its  current  tourist  industry,  to  expand  into  medical 
tourism and assisted living geared, for example, to the aging US population. 
And while light manufacturing on a large scale may be out of the question, there is still room 
to  exploit  your  comparative  advantage  in  niche  industries,  like  organic  spices  –  nutmeg 
and mace. 
You as business people know better than I ever can, that the current global environment will 
not provide you a free lunch. Rather, you will have to earn your keep through your ingenuity, 
by continually adapting and by continuously becoming more competitive and efficient in what 
you do. 
Ladies and gentlemen, one lesson that the current crisis should teach us is that we need to 
enhance  the  region’s  competitiveness,  in  order  to  survive.  This  crisis  should  also  provide 
additional impetus to the regional integration movement. 
Former  Barbadian  Prime  Minister  Owen  Arthur,  who  has  been  a  leading  proponent  of  the 
CSME  recently  reminded  us  that  “delays  in  carrying  out  regional  economic  and  financial 
integration,  as  contemplated  under  the  CSME,  will  compromise  severely  the  region’s 
capacity to take advantage of new economic partnership agreements with our major trading 
partners, or to fit the regional economy into the evolving global economy”. 
While he recognized that the recently signed EPA was not a perfect agreement, he defined it 
as  an  important  instrument  of  economic  engagement  and  cooperation,  which  if  used 
properly, would help the region build new competitive industries. 
I noticed that the theme of your Banquet and Awards Ceremony this evening is “Fostering 
Development through Partnership”. I am not sure which partnerships you had in mind. I 
nevertheless  invite  you  to  seek  to  build  partnerships,  throughout  the  region,  to  ensure  the 
implementation of the CSME and the EPA, since it may be the best way of guaranteeing the 
development of Grenada and the region as a whole. 
Thank you for inviting me and I wish your organization all the best. 
BIS Review 153/2008 
 5
