Henrique Meirelles: Brazil-Argentina Local Currency Payment System 
Speech by Mr Henrique Meirelles, Governor of the Central Bank of Brazil, at the Inauguration 
of the Brazil-Argentina Local Currency System, Buenos Aires, 2 October 2008. 
 It is an honor to attend today the launching of the Brazil-Argentina Local Currency Payments 
System  (SML).  I  am  certain  that  this  initiative  will  be  a  watershed  in  the  bilateral  relations 
between  the  two  nations.  Coincidentally,  the  new  system  kicks  off  in  a  period  of  financial 
turmoil and liquidity crunch in international trade, in which cooperation among central banks 
becomes fundamental to facilitate trade and to deepen economic ties. 
Central  banks  are  responsible  for  ensuring  adequate  international  payments  systems.  In 
processes  of  economic,  financial  and  trade  integration,  the  objective  is  to  establish  an 
efficient  payments  structure  for  intra-regional  transactions. When  flexible  and  unobstructed 
payments systems are available, trade transactions flow with greater ease and lower costs, 
and financial flows tend to intensify. This is what we expect from the new SML system. 
Initial  obstacles  have  been  overcome.  The  mechanism  of  the  SML  will  trigger  significant 
changes  in  the  way  in  which  companies  export  and  import.  In  Brazil,  exporters  may  now 
operate  in  real,  while  Argentine  businesspeople  may  operate  in  pesos.  Each  one  of  our 
countries  established  a  consistent  framework  for  management  of  the  system.  The  priority 
was  to  create  a  secure  arrangement  that  will  provide  both  exporters  and  importers  with  a 
simplified way to settle their transactions with a degree of ease similar to that with which they 
effect payments within their own countries. From this point forward, there is no doubt that the 
private sector will take it upon itself to create new financial products and further deepen the 
real-peso market. 
Indeed, deepening of the real-peso market, reduction of trade obstacles and access on the 
part of small and medium exporters are the primary objectives of this initiative. Despite non-
compulsory, the facilities and lower costs of the SML should attract exporters and importers. 
There  will  be  no  foreign  exchange  contracts,  despite  documentation  currently  required  will 
remain mandatory. The essential alteration for Brazilian exporters will be the need to register 
the operation in real.  
With  elimination  of  a  third  currency in  direct  transactions  among  companies,  exporters  will 
set  their  prices  in  the  currency  of  their  own  countries.  Thus,  they  will  be  better  able  to 
calculate their margins precisely, since they will no longer be exposed to exchange rate risk. 
At the start, it will be possible to carry out trade operations between the two countries with 
terms  of  up  to  360  days.  Payments  of  services  related  to  trade  (for  example,  freight  and 
insurance) can also be made in own currencies. 
Operations  may  be  contracted  on  the  basis  of  an  exchange  rate  negotiated  with  financial 
institutions or the SML rate itself, calculated based on the average real-dollar rate published 
daily  by  the  Central  Bank  of  Brazil,  and  the  Argentine  reference  peso-dollar  rate.  At  the 
closing  of  both  markets,  the  SML  rate  will  be  announced  daily.  Financial  settlement  of 
operations  carried  out  through  the  system  will  take  place  in  three  business  days  (d+2). 
Banking  institutions  that  have  Reserve  Accounts  at  the  Brazilian  Central  Bank  may  be 
accredited to operate in the system. Authorization to operate on the exchange market is not 
a prerequisite. 
The  SML  is  a  highly  promising  initiative  for  small  and  medium  businesses  that  have  less 
access to derivative mechanisms to neutralize foreign exchange risk. At the same time, large 
companies have also shown interest in the system, primarily those that already have mature 
operations in the two economies. 
BIS Review 124/2008 
 1
There  is  no  doubt  whatsoever  that  the  system  we  have  just  inaugurated  will  not  only 
stimulate trade transactions between Brazil and Argentina but also enhance competitiveness 
in both countries.   
This  initiative  is  a  first  and  important  step  forward  toward  greater  integration  of  our 
economies and of Mercosul. Congratulations to all of those who have played a role in making 
this historic moment feasible. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 124/2008
