Pierre Duguay: Fostering financial system stability 
Remarks  by  Mr  Pierre  Duguay,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Pictou 
County Chamber of Commerce, Pictou, Nova Scotia, 27 November 2008. 
 Good evening. It's a great pleasure to be here. When I last spoke in Nova Scotia three years 
ago  –  almost  to  the  day  –  I  discussed  the  Bank  of  Canada's  role  in  strengthening  the 
country's financial system to make it resilient to shocks so as to limit damage from inevitable 
economic  and  financial  storms.  It  was  a  timely  metaphor,  given  that  I  spoke  shortly  after 
Hurricane Katrina had breached the levees of New Orleans. We were concerned at that time 
about the buildup of global economic imbalances, and about the narrowing of risk spreads 
which  suggested  that  risk  was  perhaps  being  underestimated  and  vulnerable  to  a  sudden 
reversal. These factors have since proven to be key contributors to the current, worldwide 
turmoil in financial markets. A third contributing factor, which we didn't foresee, has been the 
extent  to  which  financial  markets  had  expanded  without  proper  support  structures,  like  a 
house built on sand. I'll have more to say on this point a bit later in my remarks. 
So, I thought it would be worthwhile to review the risks we were aware of leading up to the 
current  crisis,  what  took  us  by  surprise,  and  what  we  have  learned  must  be  done  to 
strengthen financial system resiliency for the future, both here and abroad.  
The Canadian financial system has fared relatively well through this crisis, thanks to effective 
regulation  and  prudent  practices  that  have  worked  like  sandbags  to  protect  our  financial 
system from the storms in today's global economy. In this respect, we may be a model for 
much  of  the  world.  But,  because  our  prudential  regulation  is  focused  on  protecting 
institutions, rather than supporting core financial markets, we have learned that there is still 
much work to do in this area. So I will also discuss some reforms that may be necessary to 
mitigate  the  effects  of  future  global  financial  crises.  I  will  close  with  a  few  words  on  the 
current economic situation in Canada. 
The global financial crisis 
We have all heard a great deal about the tumultuous global events that began in the summer 
of  2007  as  a  result  of  rapidly  rising  delinquencies  on  subprime  mortgages  in  the  United 
States.  The  sudden  realization  that  exposure  to  these  defaults  was  both  widespread  and 
difficult to locate (because of a lack of transparency) led to a drying up of liquidity and an 
increase in bank funding costs. That turmoil accelerated dramatically this September, moving 
far beyond liquidity problems to a more acute and broad-based crisis of confidence, sparked 
by  a  series  of  failures  and  near-failures  of  financial  institutions  in  the  United  States  and 
Europe,  and  increased  prospects  of  a  world  recession.  As  a  result,  wholesale  funding 
markets came to a standstill in many countries, and commercial banks essentially stopped 
making  unsecured  loans  to  one  another  at  terms  longer  than  overnight.  The  crisis  rippled 
through  various  markets  as  investors  became  very  risk  averse.  Corporate  bond  spreads 
surged to new all-time highs, equity prices plunged, and foreign exchange rates became very 
volatile. 
Investors'  concerns  about  the  impact  of  the  turmoil  on  the  global  economy  turned  into  a 
vicious circle. Financial institutions became increasingly reluctant to extend credit, given their 
own funding difficulties and their concerns about what an economic slowdown would imply 
for  the  credit  quality  of  their  loan  portfolios.  Tighter  credit  conditions  and  the  increased 
difficulties  that  businesses  faced  in  trying  to  raise  funds  have,  in  turn,  contributed  to  the 
slowdown  in  the  world  economy.  Another  contributing  factor  was  the  drop  in  consumer 
confidence triggered by the wealth destruction that resulted from sharp falls in equity markets 
and housing prices. The combination of these factors has produced extremely volatile and 
BIS Review 148/2008 
 1
difficult  financial  conditions,  and  what  has  become  the  deepest,  broadest,  and  longest 
financial crisis since the 1930s.  
In  response,  governments  and  central  banks  around  the  world  –  including  the  Bank  of 
Canada  –  have  undertaken  a  series  of  unprecedented  actions  aimed  at  stabilizing  the 
financial system. These include making available significant overnight and term liquidity to a 
broad range of market participants; guarantees of bank deposits and borrowing; purchases 
of  bad  assets;  and  capital  injections  for  financial  institutions.  The  G-7  Plan  of  Action 
announced  in  early  October  has  provided  the  foundation  for  urgent  and  unprecedented 
measures to stabilize financial markets and restore the flow of credit, essential to continued 
economic  expansion.  Importantly,  it  included  a  commitment  from  G-7  leaders  to  use  all 
available tools to support systemically important financial institutions and prevent their failure. 
Governments in industrialized countries and in some systemically important emerging-market 
economies have also pledged to take steps to encourage economic growth and to reduce the 
severity of the global recession. 
Canada’s response 
Consistent with the G-7 Plan of Action, the Bank of Canada has acted swiftly to ensure that 
adequate  liquidity  is  available  to  institutions  within  our  borders.  Our  actions  have  been 
significant.  We  have  moved  aggressively  by  expanding  the  Bank  of  Canada's  provision  of 
term purchase and resale agreements (PRAs) to a total of $34 billion. Term PRAs provide 
liquidity  to  key  market  participants  for  terms  up  to  three  months  against  a  wide  range  of 
securities. Further, we have widened the range of assets we accept, and extended the range 
of counterparties with whom we will transact. We also introduced a new term-loan facility for 
those financial institutions that participate directly in the Large Value Transfer System, taking 
their non-mortgage loan portfolios as collateral.1  
I should point out that none of these liquidity measures are inflationary because they involve 
sales of government debt either from the Bank's portfolio or from new issuance rather than 
an increase in the money supply.2 The substitution of risk-free government securities for less 
liquid assets on the balance sheets of core financial institutions acts as a kind of lubricant to 
the machinery of banking. In return, these core institutions are expected to pass on the extra 
liquidity through other market participants and, ultimately, into the real economy. 
The federal government has also been actively working to address the impact of the financial 
crisis. In recent weeks, it announced the Canadian Lenders Assurance Facility, a voluntary 
program of insurance for interbank lending to ensure that Canadian institutions are not put at 
a  competitive  disadvantage  to  their  international  peers  when  raising  funds  in  wholesale 
markets. The government has also increased to $75 billion the amount of insured mortgage 
pools  that  it  will  buy  from  financial  institutions,  thus  supporting  the  availability  of  credit  to 
Canadian households and businesses. 
How does the Bank of Canada deal with risks? 
The  Bank  of  Canada's  role  in  fostering  financial  system  stability  is  not  always  well 
understood. So let me explain our work in this area a bit more.  
                                                 
1   As  well,  as  part  of  an  unprecedented  coordinated  action  by  the  world's  major  central  banks,  the  Bank  of 
Canada entered into a US$30 billion reciprocal currency-swap arrangement with the U.S. Federal Reserve. 
This facility would only be activated in the event of an acute shortage of U.S. dollars in Canada, but it does 
provide the Bank with additional flexibility to address rapidly evolving developments in financial markets. 
2   Proceeds from new issuance of government debt related to Bank operations are held on deposit at the Bank 
of Canada. 
2 
 BIS Review 148/2008
As  part  of  its  commitment  to  Canadians,  the  Bank  fosters  the  safety  and  efficiency  of  the 
financial system, both in Canada and around the world. Our goal is to encourage a resilient 
system  that  can  withstand  shocks  –  even  large  shocks.  The  Bank's  power  to  achieve  this 
goal  comes  from  our  central  position  as  Canada's  monetary  authority.  This  makes  us  the 
ultimate provider of liquidity to Canadian financial institutions and to the country's financial 
system more generally. It also gives us a prominent voice in international organizations as 
well as in such domestic bodies as the Financial Institutions Supervisory Committee (FISC) 
and the Senior Advisory Committee (SAC). FISC and SAC provide forums for the Federal 
Deputy Minister of Finance, the Superintendent of Financial Institutions (OSFI), the Governor 
of the Bank of Canada, the Chair of Canada Deposit Insurance Corporation (CDIC), and the 
Commissioner of the Financial Consumer Agency of Canada (FCAC) to share information, 
coordinate actions, and advise the federal government on financial sector policy. 
At  the  international  level,  the  Bank,  the  federal  Department  of  Finance,  and  the 
Superintendent  of  Financial  Institutions  are  represented  on  the  Financial  Stability  Forum 
(FSF). The impetus for this global forum came from a summit of G-7 leaders in Halifax more 
than a dozen years ago, and the FSF truly came to life in the wake of the Asian crisis of the 
late 1990s. This entity brings together senior representatives of national financial authorities 
from  selected  countries  to  promote  international  financial  stability,  reduce  the  spread  of 
shocks,  and  increase  market  resiliency.  The  importance  of  the  FSF  as  a  source  of  global 
coordination was recently underscored by the G-20 leaders, with their call for its expansion to 
include top emerging-market economies such as China and India. 
As you can tell from that description, the Bank has essentially two key tools at its disposal. 
One is our power to supply liquidity; the other is our capacity to produce the solid research 
and analysis that underpins our advice and enables us to influence public sector decisions 
and  private  sector  behaviour.  We  do  not  supervise  financial  institutions  for  depositor 
protection  –  that  falls  within  the  realm  of  OSFI  and  CDIC.  Nor  do  we  regulate  financial 
markets  for  investor  protection  –  a  responsibility  carried  out  by  the  provincial  securities 
commissions.3  
To carry out our responsibilities, we monitor trends in financial developments in Canada and 
abroad,  assess  their  implications  for  financial  system  stability,  and  identify  risks  to  the 
Canadian financial system so that we can act and convince others to act, to limit damage 
from economic and financial storms. We publish our assessments, based on this monitoring, 
in our semi-annual Financial System Review. The next issue will be published and posted on 
the Bank's website on 11 December. 
Strengthening resiliency 
At the beginning of my remarks, I spoke briefly about the need to strengthen the resilience of 
our financial system.  
As  I  have  already  noted,  in  Canada  we  have  taken  many  of  the  correct  steps,  some 
beginning 20 years ago, as we worked to strengthen the supervisory system for individual 
financial  institutions.  The  coordination  among  domestic  agencies  with  an  interest  in  the 
financial  services  sector  is  based  on  a  long  history  of  effective  collaboration  and  on  a 
common understanding of where mandates interact. Yet there is still work to do so that we 
can be even better prepared the next time a crisis crashes onto our shores. History shows 
this is inevitable, given the difficulty investors have in going against the crowd and resisting 
the extremes of heady optimism in good times, and fear and even panic in bad times. 
                                                 
3   We also have statutory responsibility for the oversight of risk containment measures in systemically important 
clearing and settlement systems. This infrastructure has continued to function very well throughout the global 
turmoil. 
BIS Review 148/2008 
 3
Given that inevitability, it is imperative that we address the weaknesses in the global financial 
system and in the regulatory and supervisory architecture that were exposed by the current 
crisis, if we are to increase the resiliency of the financial system to shocks and better support 
economic  stability.  The  Financial  Stability  Forum  has  examined  lessons  from  the  current 
crisis and made a number of recommendations earlier this year aimed at enhancing market 
and  institutional  resiliency.  Work  continues  under  the  guiding  principles  of  the  FSF,  to 
encourage a financial system that:  
• 
• 
• 
operates with less leverage;  
is immune to the misaligned incentives that contributed to the current crisis; and  
has stronger oversight and greater transparency so that risks can be more readily 
identified and dealt with.  
Collectively, we must find ways to improve the transparency of complex products traded in 
financial markets, so that investors are better able to assess the risks they take on. We must 
also examine how best to strengthen macroprudential regulation (as opposed to institution-
centered microprudential regulation) by: 
bolstering controls on leverage;  
• 
encouraging the buildup of adequate capital buffers in good times that can be drawn 
• 
upon in bad times, thus dampening the credit cycle;  
developing  mechanisms  to  provide  liquidity  to  core  financial  markets  so  that  they 
remain open; and  
expanding  the  amount  of  financial  infrastructure  that  is  properly  risk-proofed,  for 
example, custodial banks and clearing houses for credit default swaps (CDS).  
  Economic outlook 
Let me close with a few words about the economic outlook. The intensification of the global 
financial crisis has led in Canada to an increase in credit spreads and a tightening in credit 
conditions generally. The global recession is deepening, and with it there have been further 
declines in the prices of many commodities and a deterioration in Canada's terms of trade, 
which reduces Canadian incomes. The nature of the slowdown in the United States, with the 
acute weakness in the housing and auto sectors, is particularly problematic for our exporters. 
These factors present serious challenges to Canadian industries, including key Nova Scotia 
industries  in  the  primary  resources,  manufacturing,  and  tourism  sectors.  Thus,  while 
domestic demand in Canada remains relatively healthy and the depreciation of the Canadian 
dollar will offset some of the declines in external demand, the risks to growth and inflation in 
Canada  identified  in  the  October  Monetary  Policy  Report  appear  to  have  shifted  to  the 
downside. In the face of the crisis, we have already cut official interest rates by half, to 2 1/4 
per cent over the past year and have stated that some further monetary stimulus will likely be 
required to achieve the inflation target over the medium term. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. We have avoided the worst effects of the global financial crisis, thanks to a 
resilient financial sector built on the conservative lending practices of Canadian banks, and to 
our effective regulation and prudent practices in the sector. Still, the crisis is being felt in our 
economy. But we have taken bold steps to re-open financial markets and I can assure you 
that the Bank of Canada will continue to provide as much liquidity as is needed to encourage 
the re-establishment of the normal functioning of Canadian financial markets. You can also 
count on the Bank to add its voice to calls for initiatives to strengthen the resiliency of both 
the domestic and international financial systems.  
4 
 BIS Review 148/2008
