Lucas Papademos: Opening address at the Fifth ECB Central Banking 
Conference 
Speech by Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice President of the European Central Bank, at the Fifth 
ECB Central Banking Conference “The Euro at Ten: Lessons and Challenges”, Frankfurt am 
Main, 13 November 2008. 
 Introduction  
I.  
On  behalf  of  the  Executive  Board,  I  would  like  to  welcome  you  to  the  Fifth  ECB  Central 
Banking  Conference,  taking  place  in  the  tenth  year  of  the  ECB’s  establishment.  We  are 
delighted  that  this  year’s  conference  has  attracted  many  distinguished  participants  from 
academia,  central  banks,  governments,  international  institutions  and  the  financial  sector. 
Your  contributions  will  ensure  that  this  conference  will  provide  insightful  and  thought-
provoking  analysis  and  generate  debate  on  many  policy  issues  of  relevance  to  central 
banking. 
As  we  will  be  celebrating  the  10th  anniversary  of  the  introduction  of  the  single  European 
currency in a few weeks’ time, the theme of this conference is, of course, focused on “The 
Euro at ten: lessons and challenges”. The introduction of the euro was a historic milestone in 
the  process  of  European  monetary,  economic  and  political  integration,  with  wide-ranging 
implications  for  the  European  and  global  economies.  Accordingly,  this  conference  will 
concentrate  on  several  issues  of  relevance  to  the  performance  of  the  euro  area  economy 
and  financial  system  and  on  the  challenges  for  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  and  the 
performance of other central banking tasks in an increasingly integrated global economy. 
The euro: economic performance and policy challenges 
II.  
The first session will examine the macroeconomic performance of Economic and Monetary 
Union,  its  achievements  and  challenges,  over  the  past  ten  years.  There  are  several  key 
questions to be addressed. First, has the euro and the single monetary policy established a 
zone of monetary stability as envisaged, with all the direct and indirect benefits this entails for 
the 320 million citizens of the euro area? The evidence unambiguously provides a positive 
answer. The euro has been a resounding success: it has established itself as a stable and 
credible currency, which has become the second most important currency in the world after 
the US dollar. A deeper analysis, however, should reveal the contribution of monetary policy, 
and  of  other  factors,  to  this  achievement  and  the  challenges  that  lie  ahead  and  must  be 
effectively  addressed  in  order  to  ensure  the  preservation  of  price  stability  in  the  years  to 
come.  
A second key question is whether – or to what extent – the euro has contributed to boosting 
the trend growth of the euro area economy by strengthening competition, enhancing market 
efficiency,  raising  productivity  growth  and  increasing  labour  utilisation.  The  answer  to  this 
question if less straightforward and the evidence seems, at first sight, to be rather mixed. On 
the one hand, average annual economic growth in the euro area has remained virtually the 
same (2.18%) over the ten years following the introduction of the euro (1999-2007) as in the 
two  preceding  decades  (2.14%  (1990-1999)  and  2.27%  (1980-1989)).  On  the  other  hand, 
employment grew impressively, namely by 18.67 million, or 1.36% per annum, over the past 
ten  years,  compared  with  5.99  million,  or  0.49%  per  annum,  in  the  previous  decade.  A 
deeper analysis could reveal how the euro has contributed to strengthening the performance 
of  the  real  economy,  but  also  how  other  factors  constrained  and  partly  offset  its  positive 
impact,  and  it  will  also  point  to  important  challenges  ahead,  parts  of  which  stem  from  the 
divergences in the performance in terms of growth and competitiveness across the member 
BIS Review 139/2008 
 1
countries in the euro area. We are looking forward to the paper by Wyplosz and Mongelli, 
and to the discussion that will follow, for answers to these and other relevant questions. 
Another important set of issues, which will be addressed in the second session, concerns the 
role of the euro in fostering the integration of financial markets in Europe and in promoting 
the efficiency and stability of the European financial system – and through it – of the broader 
economy in the euro area. Assessing the impact of the euro on the integration, efficiency and 
stability of the European financial system requires careful analysis in order to disentangle its 
contribution  from  the  influence  of  other  factors  that  have  simultaneously  affected  the 
development and functioning of the financial system. 
Indeed, the globalisation of financial markets and institutions, which was fostered by financial 
innovation  and  technological  advances,  has  played  a  key  role  in  shaping  the  overall 
environment  and  influencing  the  processes  that  determine  financial  market  efficiency  and 
stability.  Moreover, 
interdependence  of  our 
economies  and  financial  systems  have  important  implications  both  for  the  conduct  of 
monetary policy and for the performance of the central banking task of safeguarding financial 
stability. These implications – and there are many – will be examined and assessed in the 
third session on the basis of the paper by Kashyap, Rajan and Stein and in the concluding 
policy panel. And, in between, two other panels will address – from both an analytic and a 
policy point of view – other important challenges confronting the euro area, in particular those 
stemming from its future enlargement and its evolution towards an optimal currency area. 
interconnectedness  and 
increasing 
the 
The ongoing financial crisis: lessons and challenges for central banks 
III.  
Over the past ten years, the ECB has performed its tasks in an often difficult economic and 
financial environment that was adversely affected by sizeable and persistent shocks; and it 
has  had  to  face  some  extraordinary  challenges.  The  first  was  the  unique,  historically 
unprecedented  challenge  of  conducting  the  single  monetary  policy  successfully  so  as  to 
preserve  price  stability  in  a  newly  established  monetary  union  of  politically  independent, 
though  economically  well-integrated,  member  countries.  The  other  major  and  exceptional 
challenge  is  the  one  we  are  still  facing  today:  the  preservation  of  price  stability  and  the 
safeguarding of financial stability in the euro area during the worst financial crisis in decades.  
The  ongoing  financial  crisis  which  is,  in  many  respects,  unprecedented  in  intensity,  scope 
and  complexity  has  highlighted  the  role  of  the  ECB  in  safeguarding  financial  stability.  The 
events  of  the  past  year  allow  us  to  draw  a  number  of  conclusions  concerning  the 
responsibilities  and  actions  of  central  banks  in  general,  and  of  the  ECB  in  particular,  in 
contributing  to  preserving  price  stability  through  both  crisis  management  and  crisis 
prevention. And they have also shown how the conduct of a monetary policy aimed at the 
preservation of price stability and the performance of tasks aimed at safeguarding financial 
stability require the appropriate use of available policy instruments. Let me briefly elaborate 
on a number of pertinent lessons learnt and on the challenges to be faced. 
It is by now widely accepted that a main underlying cause of the current global financial crisis 
was the same one that had fuelled similar episodes in earlier times: the excessive growth of 
credit globally over a long period of time and the associated high leverage in the financial 
system  and  in  the  non-financial  sectors  of  some  countries.  Central  banks,  through  their 
monitoring  and  analysis  of  monetary  and  credit  developments,  can  provide  early  warning 
signals  about  the  building-up  of  financial  imbalances  that  may  lead  to  excesses  in  the 
financial  markets  –  through  various  channels  involving  an  under-pricing  of  risk  and  an 
increase in market liquidity that can fuel asset price bubbles which will eventually be followed 
by market corrections. And such corrections will be the more severe, the higher the degree of 
leverage and the more prolonged the period of excessive credit growth. There is substantial 
empirical evidence across countries and over different periods in support of this proposition. 
The  ECB’s  monetary  policy  strategy,  which  includes  a  comprehensive  analysis  of 
developments  in  money  and  credit,  is  well-suited  to  provide  useful  information  about 
2 
 BIS Review 139/2008
monetary risks to financial stability that can have longer-term implications for price stability 
and output volatility. 
A  second  related  policy  issue  is  whether  –  or to  what  extent  –  central  banks  should  “lean 
against the wind” of financial market excesses that can be expected to turn into a financial 
storm and whether they can do this both in a manner that is consistent with the preservation 
of  price  stability  and  by  effectively  using  the  single  policy  instrument  at  their  disposal,  the 
interest  rate.  In  principle,  this  can  be  done,  and  should  be  done,  under  certain 
circumstances. This would require the monetary policy stance to be tightened in periods of 
booming  financial  markets,  so  as  to  contain  the  risk  of  instability  to  the  price  level  over  a 
longer-term horizon (when the boom could turn into a bust); in other words, in order to buy 
insurance against the risk of a financial crisis in which financial intermediation could grind to 
a  halt.  Such  a  policy  could  also  help  address  the  problem  of  moral  hazard  that  may  be 
created  by  policies  that  aim  only  to  mitigate  the  impact  of  adverse  shocks  to  financial 
stability, and thus treat asset booms and busts asymmetrically. In practice, however, a policy 
of “leaning against the wind” is not always feasible; it may by itself not be an effective means 
to contain unsustainable asset price bubbles in the presence of exuberant expectations and 
it may not be compatible with the maintenance of price stability over the medium term.1
Consequently,  the  single  instrument  of  monetary  policy  –  the  central  bank  interest  rate  – 
cannot always be used, cannot be used systematically, to simultaneously achieve the price 
stability  objective  (over  the  medium  and  longer  term)  and  effectively  safeguard  financial 
stability.  Clearly,  additional  tools  must  be  employed  to  this  end.  Central  banks  can  further 
strengthen  their  analytical  tools  and  methodologies  that  can  help  identify  risks  and 
vulnerabilities  in  the  financial  system  and  provide  early  warning  signals  of  emerging 
imbalances and potential instabilities. And central banks – via their financial stability reviews 
and  other  means  –  have  done  so  fairly  successfully.  But  the  recent  experience  has  also 
shown that, despite the communication of such early warnings, the financial markets did not 
hear,  or  did  not  want  to  hear  them  for  several  reasons,  including  the  influence  of 
inappropriate  incentive  structures  at  different  stages  of  the  financial  intermediation  and 
securitisation chain. What is, therefore, needed is a more effective use of regulatory policy 
instruments by supervisory authorities that can help contain procyclicality in risk assessment 
and the increase in leverage that is characteristic of asset market booms. Pre-provisioning 
measures during the upswing phase of the cycle and more effective and longer-term oriented 
risk management can contribute to this end. 
More generally, and this a third important lesson learnt from the ongoing financial crisis, the 
effective safeguarding of financial stability – both in preventing and in managing a financial 
crisis – requires parallel and complementary action by central banks and supervisors, and an 
enhanced cooperation and exchange of information between them. It is evident that this can 
be achieved most effectively and efficiently when central banks are responsible for banking 
supervision,  or  are  actively  involved  in  the  performance  of  supervisory  tasks  –  as  well  as 
have access to pertinent information – in collaboration with a separate supervisory authority. 
However,  irrespective  of  the  organisational  structure  and  the  institutional  responsibility, 
effectively  reducing  the  likelihood  of  a  recurrence  of  financial  crises  affecting  markets  and 
institutions requires the fruitful cooperation of the central banks and supervisory functions. 
Let  me  now  conclude  by  briefly  pointing  to  two  other  important  lessons  and  associated 
challenges that have been highlighted by the ongoing financial crisis: the first concerns the 
                                                 
1   An  overvaluation  of  asset  prices  can  occur  –  and  has  occurred  –  in  an  environment  of  relatively  stable 
consumer  prices.  In  such  an  environment,  a  significant  change  in  the  policy  interest  rate  to  contain  credit 
growth and asset price dynamics could be inconsistent with the preservation of consumer price stability over 
the medium term. An alternative means of containing bank credit expansion by reducing the rate of growth of 
central bank money – at a given policy interest rate – would effectively entail a rise in market interest rates and 
could pose similar problems of potential inconsistency. 
BIS Review 139/2008 
 3
role  and  actions  of  central  banks  in  mitigating  the  impact  of  financial  turbulence  on  the 
financial system and the broader economy; the second is related to the need to strengthen 
the cross-border financial stability arrangements globally and in Europe. 
The  recent  experience  has  demonstrated  the  crucial  role  of  central  banks  in  crisis 
management through the provision and management of liquidity in the money markets and, 
in  exceptional  cases,  by  providing  emergency  liquidity  assistance  to  individual  institutions. 
Since the eruption of the market turmoil, central banks in advanced economies have used 
various  policy  instruments  to  limit  its  effects.  The  ECB’s  operations  in  the  money  markets 
have been based on a fundamental principle: the separation of the monetary policy stance 
from  liquidity  management.  The  monetary  policy  stance  is  defined  by  the  level  of  the  key 
ECB  interest  rates  and  is  determined  with  a  view  to  achieving  the  primary  objective  of 
preserving price stability over the medium term. Liquidity management aims at ensuring the 
orderly functioning of money markets and at mitigating financial stability risks. 
The provision and management of liquidity by central banks has alleviated pressures in the 
money markets and has kept spill-over effects on the credit markets and the real economy 
contained.  In  particular,  the  provision  of  unlimited  liquidity  by  the  ECB  to  the  euro  area 
banking  system  against  an  expanded  list  of  eligible  collateral  since  mid-October  should 
effectively  eliminate  concerns  about  liquidity  risk  and  further  reduce  pressures  in  the  term 
money market. Central banks, however, cannot address some of the underlying causes of 
money market tensions, such as concerns about counterparty credit risk and the continuing 
uncertainty  regarding  banks’  other  funding  sources  and  capital  positions.  The  measures 
being taken by governments should address these problems over time. 
The separation principle that guides the conduct of monetary policy and the management of 
liquidity  during  a  financial  market  correction  implies  that  the  policy  interest  rate  is  not 
employed to alleviate stresses in the financial system if upside risks to price stability prevail. 
Only if the preservation of price stability is secured over the medium term, and will not be 
jeopardised  by  a  change  in  the  monetary  policy  stance,  can  the  policy  interest  rate  be 
employed to mitigate the impact of financial market stresses in the economy, including their 
potential effects on medium-term price developments. 
Finally,  I  would  like  to  stress  that  the  financial  crisis  has  underscored  the  importance  of 
international  cooperation  and  concerted  action  in  addressing  the  liquidity  needs  of  cross-
border financial institutions and ensuring the efficient distribution of liquidity at a global level. 
In  particular,  the  Federal  Reserve,  the  ECB  and  other  major  central  banks  cooperated 
closely  and  their  concerted  liquidity  provision  enhanced  the  effectiveness  of  liquidity 
management  globally.  There  is  an  emerging  consensus  on  the  need  to  strengthen 
cooperation  between 
for  major  cross-border 
institutions and to promote a more convergent and consistent application of regulations. In 
the  European  Union,  the  implementation  of  measures  to  improve  supervisory  cooperation, 
and  to  accelerate  the  convergence  of  supervisory  rules  and  practices,  has  gained 
momentum.  And  there  is  a  growing  understanding  of  the  need  to  strengthen  the  pan-
European  character  of  financial  stability  arrangements  for  crisis  prevention  and  crisis 
management.  Regardless  of  the  institutional  framework  that  may  be  adopted,  what  is 
essential  is  to  ensure  the  effective  cooperation  and  the  sharing  of  relevant  information 
between central banks and supervisors in a timely and efficient manner.  
the  supervisory  authorities  responsible 
Concluding remarks 
IV.  
Over the past ten years, the euro has established itself as a stable and credible currency and 
the single European monetary policy has preserved price stability, and thus the purchasing 
power  of  the  euro,  in  the  euro  area.  In  addition,  the  euro  has  played  an  important  role  in 
insulating euro countries from other adverse effects that the financial crisis could have had 
on their economies, via the foreign exchange markets and other channels, if the euro had not 
existed. And some Member States that have not yet adopted the euro as their currency have 
4 
 BIS Review 139/2008
indeed  experienced  such  effects. Therefore,  the  euro  and  the  liquidity  management  of  the 
ECB have also played an important role in safeguarding financial stability in the euro area. 
With these thoughts on some lessons that could be learnt from our experience with the euro, 
from the ongoing financial crisis and from the contribution of the ECB and central banks to 
the preservation of financial stability, I wish us all a fruitful and enriching conference. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 139/2008 
 5
