Tarisa Watanagase: Financial globalization and market turbulence 
Opening remarks by Dr Tarisa Watanagase, Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the Bank 
of  Thailand’s  International  Symposium  on  “Financial  Globalization  and  Emerging  Market 
Economies”, Bangkok, 7 November 2008. 
 Professors, Distinguished Participants, Fellow Central Bankers, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure for me to welcome you to the BOT International Symposium 2008 on 
“Financial Globalization and Emerging Market Economies”. This symposium is the third in a 
series of International Symposia organized by the Bank of Thailand. From its first meeting 
eight  years  ago,  this  symposium  series  has  been  a  gathering  of  prominent  academics, 
policy-makers  and  market  participants  to  discuss  current  issues  on  both  monetary  and 
macroeconomic  policies  from  an  international  perspective  of  either  emerging,  regional,  or 
global economies.  
Over the past several years, a common theme for us as the organizer has been the focus on 
inflation  targeting  and  its  implications  on  monetary  and  financial  sector  policies  where 
appropriate.  Through  this  series  of  symposia,  a  body  of  knowledge  has  been  timely 
accumulated to be put to great tests from the increasing trend in financial globalization and 
the accompanying turbulence in recent years.  
When the topic for this year’s symposium was chosen prior to this current market turmoil, it 
was not apparent at the time that the turbulence would indeed turn out to be one of the most 
challenging events since the Great Depression. So this is an extraordinary time for the world 
financial market and probably most suitable for an international symposium on the subject of 
financial globalization.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Financial  globalization  has  certainly  made  the  international  financial  landscape  look  very 
different today compared to just a decade ago. And almost every day, new events continue 
to re-shape it even further.  
One  aspect  among  these  changes,  however,  remains  constant.  That  is,  despite  the 
complexity and sophistication of today's financial institutions as well as instruments that are 
developed to manage all kinds of risks, the remarkable degree of global financial linkage still 
makes financial turmoil transmit from one country to another at an ever faster pace than we 
have previously anticipated.  
Like all financial crises of the recent past, several weaknesses and excesses were initially 
submerged and only later found to be much larger than the initial estimates, contributing to 
the  permanent  boom-bust  cycle  that  seems  to  always  accompany  modern  business  and 
finance.  Understanding  the  various  causes  of  the  crises  is  only  the  initial  step  towards 
resolving  its  short-term  impacts  and  preventing  its  recurrence,  if  entirely  possible,  in  the 
longer-term.  
In  the  meantime,  we  will  probably  continue  to  have  to  witness  an  intensification  of  the 
financial  crisis.  As  mortgage-related  assets  deteriorate  further,  economic  growth  will 
inevitably slow down even more, along with the downside risks of financial and the economic 
outlook.  With  disheartened  creditors  and  investors,  access  to  capital  markets  as  well  as 
short-term  funding  markets  become  increasingly  impaired,  impeding  any  possibility  of  a 
sustained recovery in the securities and credit markets. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Global financial markets are now at a critical juncture. Risk aversion across the system has 
risen to unprecedented levels, and an aggressive deleveraging process is under way. Many 
BIS Review 141/2008 
 1
financial  institutions  need  to  raise  significantly  more  capital  at  a  time  when  their  ongoing 
earning power appears to have been permanently reduced. These dynamics will intensify the 
current  global  slowdown  and  have  an  impact  although  somewhat  indirectly  on  emerging 
market economies, despite the relative strength of these countries’ financial institutions. 
In  response  to  the  renewed  tensions,  the  authorities  of  a  number  of  countries  have 
introduced a number of measures and initiatives to address the problems at both market and 
individual institution levels. This should eventually encourage private investors to re-enter the 
market and  complete the deleveraging process. Meanwhile, coordinated efforts have been 
strengthened  to  ensure  adequate  liquidity  at  an  appropriate  interest  rate  as  inflationary 
pressure began to subside. 
Although it remains uncertain when the current financial storm will end, these international 
co-operations if properly executed will undoubtedly speed up the resolution of this crisis and 
ultimately limit its economic and financial consequences worldwide.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
In  this  context,  from  an  emerging  market  perspective,  the  question,  therefore,  goes  way 
beyond just how to cope with the current turmoil, but reaches deep down into the direction of 
market development over the medium to longer term as well. 
Within the realm of central banks, for example, the traditional science of monetary policy has 
so far been based on the idea that the central bank’s objective should be to maximize the 
economic  well-being  of  the  people  in  the  country  by  minimizing  the  deviations  of  inflation 
from  its  optimal  rate  and  the  deviations  of  real  economic  activity  from  its  so-called  natural 
growth  path.  However,  today  it  is  clear  that  the  central  bank’s  role  in  fostering  financial 
stability  is  essential  and  this  role  will  become  more  prominent  in  the  world  of  increasing 
financial integration.  
Experiences  of  the  recent  crises  indicate  that  monitoring  financial  imbalances  is  crucial  in 
preventing financial turmoil from occurring. It has long been recognized that a weak financial 
system  undermines  the  efficacy  of  monetary  policy  measures  and  can  overburden  the 
monetary authorities. For this reason, it may be desirable for prudential policy frameworks to 
be  strengthened,  thereby  addressing  the  build-up  and  unwinding  of  the  imbalances  more 
effectively. In this context, the Bank of Thailand has also monitored seven areas of financial 
imbalances,  including  those  in  the  financial  market,  real  estate,  household  and  corporate 
sectors on a regular basis.  
Going  forward  to  a  time  when  all  this  global  financial  crisis  is  resolved,  it  may  also  be 
appropriate to revisit and rethink the standard financial regulatory framework, particularly in 
emerging and even in a more developed part of the world. Given the magnitude of market 
adjustment,  volatility  and  contagion  across  markets,  risk  diversification  is  easier  said  than 
done. This is especially true as markets and institutions seem to correlate highly in a crisis 
situation  as  risk-aversion  intensified.  The  current  financial climate,  therefore,  highlights  the 
importance of supervisory coordination. This coordination should include both domestic and 
cross-border  dimensions  and  encompass  key  regulators  and  central  banks.  This  is  for  the 
benefit of information sharing and elimination of regulatory arbitrage, which has been one of 
the fundamental causes of this crisis.  
Given  increasing  financial  integration,  and  growing  complexity  of  financial  instrument, 
market,  counterparty  links,  and  changing  demarcation  line  between  different  financial 
institutions  and  financial  players,  we  have  witnessed  emergence  of  the  new  channels  and 
process of spread of systemic risk, through broader groups of players – banks, investment 
banks,  insurance  companies,  and  non-banks  –  all  of  whom  are  regulated  under  different 
framework, or not even regulated. 
Because of this, there is a pressing need to rethink the regulatory framework in order to be in 
keeping with this new paradigm.  
2 
 BIS Review 141/2008
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It has been said that this crisis will soon lead to major changes in the geopolitical world order. 
These changes are speculated to lead to a marked decline in U.S. influence throughout the 
world  and  as  a  result  the  much  talk  about  subject  of  the  “new  world  order”.  In  our  view, 
however, it might be more fruitful to discuss about the new global framework as a check on 
global imbalances rather than a new world order.  
This  is  because  the  ultimate  winners  or  losers  from  globalization  are yet  to  be  decided.  A 
long historical perspective is, therefore, needed in order to put the net social cost and benefit 
of globalization into a proper context. A new wisdom from financial globalization, however, is 
emerging. As Professor Rodrik will probably agree, reaping the benefits from globalization is 
by  no  means  automatic.  Globalization,  financial  or  trade  liberalization,  all  need  supporting 
institutions  for  their  gains  to  materialize.  Furthermore,  past  experiences  according  to 
Professor Michael Bordo of Rutgers University, also indicate that although the globalization 
winners appear to outnumber losers in an increasingly integrated world, it is still possible that 
the losers (even temporary ones) can create a backlash that will once again cause a retreat 
in the globalization process.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  is  obvious  that  a  global  financial  crisis  will  need  a  global  solution.  This  symposium  on 
financial globalization is thus very timely and come at a time when policy makers and market 
participants are in dire need of a better solution. And this year, we are honored to have with 
us  many  distinguished  speakers  from  well-regarded  institutions  to  discuss  this  important 
topic. We have Professor Dani Rodrik of Harvard University as our keynote speaker on the 
topic  of  “The  Disappointments  of  Financial  Globalization”,  followed  by  five  leading 
international researchers, namely Dr. Claes Berg, Sveriges Riksbank; Professor Raghuram 
Rajan,  University  of  Chicago;  Professor  Jose  Antonio  Ocampo,  Columbia  University;  Dr. 
Arvind  Subramanian,  the  Peterson  Institute  for  International  Economics;  and  Dr.  Robert 
McCauley,  Bank  for  International  Settlements  who  will  be presenting  their  in-depth  studies 
over  the  next  two  days  on  broad  range  of  issues,  a  part  of  which  I  have  barely  begun  to 
touch upon.  
This symposium will also be rounded up by a panel discussion on “Financial Globalization in 
Emerging  Market  Economies”  which  should  provide  an  interesting  discussion  on  the 
implication of financial globalization and the current financial crisis from an emerging market 
perspective.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
I would like to conclude by saying that the recent developments in financial markets around 
the world will stimulate considerable review and analysis in the months and years to come. 
Across  the  globe,  legislatures,  regulators,  financial  supervisors  are  already  hard  at  work 
trying to distill the lessons to be drawn from this experience and their implications for future 
policies. For the private sector, banks, credit-rating agencies, and the investment community 
are also trying their best in coping and adapting to these developments.  
For  central  banks,  the  implementation  of  monetary  policy  will  certainly  become  a  more 
challenging  task  as  a  result  of  the  current  financial  turmoil.  A  lasting  stabilization  of  the 
financial system obviously requires a holistic policy approach which successfully integrates 
monetary  policy  objectives  into  development  framework  for  the  financial  markets.  In  the 
longer term, the response of both public and private sectors to this experience should help 
create a stronger financial system. 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
On this note, I very much look forward to this two-day symposium. I hope that we will have 
many  opportunities  to  touch  upon  various  issues  about  monetary  policy  and  regulatory 
BIS Review 141/2008 
 3
implications  of  the  ongoing  events.  I  wish  you  a  successful,  productive  and  memorable 
meeting.  
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 141/2008
