Ipumbu Shiimi: Namibia’s payment system reform initiative 
Speech by Mr Ipumbu Shiimi, Assistant Governor of the Bank of Namibia, at the NamSwitch 
Press Conference, Windhoek, 2 December 2008.  
 Members of the Media  
MDs and officials of Banking Institutions  
My Colleagues, officials of the Bank of Namibia present  
Ladies and Gentlemen  
It  is  with  great  pleasure  to  welcome  you  to  the  Bank  of  Namibia  this  afternoon.  We  are 
especially  grateful  to  the  media  practioners,  who  will  share  this  wonderful  news  with 
members of the public, for responding positively to our invitation. We are also delighted that 
our partners in the payment system reform initiative, banking institutions, have joined us at 
this press conference. Once again welcome.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  one  of  the  Bank  of  Namibia’s  responsibilities  is  to  ensure  financial 
stability.  An  efficient  and  effective  payment  system  is  a  key  factor  in  achieving  financial 
stability. This means individuals and businesses are able to pay for goods and services or 
transfer money from one entity to another entity in a manner that is safe, cost effective and 
reasonably  fast.  For  example  when  a  person  pays  with  a  cheque,  a  stable  and  effective 
payment system would ensure that payment is secure and the money will be received faster.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  we  have  invited  you  to  share  with  you  information  on  milestones 
achieved in the Namibian payment system reform initiative, undertaken jointly by the Bank of 
Namibia  and  commercial  banks.  Until  not  so  long  ago  our  payment  system  was  highly 
integrated  with  that  of  South  Africa.  In  fact  Namibia  dependent  heavily  on  South  Africa’s 
payment system infrastructures for clearing and settlements of most of the payment system 
instruments e.g. cards and ATMs. This dependency made the country vulnerable to risks that 
would affect the payment system in South Africa and placed the oversight of critical payment 
system infrastructures outside the jurisdiction of Namibia.  
It  is  against  this  background  that  reforms  were  initiated.  The  efforts  made  towards  the 
payment system reform project started to bear fruits after the implementation by the Bank of 
Namibia  of  the  Namibia  Inter-bank  Settlement  System  (NISS)  on  10  June  2002.  After  the 
settlement  system  was  put  in  place,  there  was  a  need  to  reform  the  clearing  side  of  the 
National Payment System (NPS). The establishment by the commercial banks of Namclear 
(Pty) Limited, in 2003, paved the way to modernise and automate various clearing systems 
starting with the Electronic Funds Transfer (EFT) System in 2004. The Cheque Processing 
System was rolled out in 2005 ending with the Card System (NamSwitch) in 2008.  
The NamSwitch system was implemented in a phased approach because of the nature of 
payments,  facilities,  and  systems  that  are  involved.  The  Automated  Teller  Machine  (ATM) 
solution went live on 21 April 2008 and the Point-of-Sale (POS) was recently rolled out on 16 
November 2008, thus bringing the reform project on the clearing side, to an end. Ladies and 
Gentlemen  this  is  an  achievement  worth  mentioning  as  Namibia  now  has  its  own 
independent payment infrastructures, with the Bank of Namibia having adequate regulatory 
oversight  over  these  systems.  I  am  aware  that  to  a  normal  eye,  it  is  difficult  to  notice  the 
changes  that  have  taken  place  because  this  change  was  managed  seamlessly.  However 
with a careful eye significant benefits brought about by the reform are visible. For example it 
use to take about up two weeks to clear a cheque, now this only takes at most fives days and 
in most cases is less than that.  
Ladies and gentlemen, on behalf of the Bank of Namibia and indeed on my own behalf, let 
me thank and commend the banking industry for a job well done. The industry has shown 
commitment in ensuring that all the systems were implemented. Despite the slippages that 
BIS Review 159/2008 
 1
we experienced along this journey, we have proven that in unison we can achieve greater 
things. It shows that with the spirit of teamwork we can achieve all what we intend to achieve. 
I believe that this is the path we will continue to follow in the future.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  we  should  all  understand  that  reform  projects  are  done  with  due 
regard to national interests. I do not believe that our intention to bring about reform initiatives 
will  negatively  affect  the  operation  of  the  industry  and  NPS.  The  Bank  of  Namibia 
understands  that  such  initiatives  are  expensive  and  sometimes  costs  involved  run  into 
millions of Namibia Dollars. Our position is that benefits far outweigh the costs incurred in the 
process. We all need a situation where if there are disruptions in the South African payment 
environment,  for  example,  Namibia  catches  no  cold.  Building  our  own  systems  will  also 
enable us manage inherent payment system risks and exposures sufficiently well.  
In conclusion, Ladies and Gentlemen, although milestones have been achieved in terms of 
implementing  required  clearing  and  settlement  systems,  certain  issues  remain  to  be 
addressed. I am aware that there are some card transactions that are still cleared and settled 
in South Africa. I am pleased to learn that there are measures in place to ensure that such 
transactions are cleared and settled in Namibia before the end of the first quarter of 2009.  
With these few words, Ladies and Gentlemen, I thank you for listening. 
2 
 BIS Review 159/2008
