Tarisa Watanagase: The changing financial environment and 
implications for central banks 
Welcome address by Dr Tarisa Watanagase, Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the 27th 
SEANZA Governors’ Symposium, Bangkok, 20 September 2008. 
 Fellow Governors, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  is  my  privilege  to  extend  a  warm  welcome  to  all  SEANZA  Governors  and  distinguished 
participants to the 27th Governors’ Symposium and the Central Banking Course.  
At  the  outset,  I  would  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  express  my  sincere  gratitude  to  Mr. 
Jaime Caruana, the former Governor of the Bank of Spain, and currently the Counsellor and 
Director  of  the  Monetary  and  Capital  Markets  Department  of  the  IMF,  who  flew  half  way 
around the world to be with us today to share his views and enrich us with his experiences 
from a global perspective.  
This  year’s  theme  of  the  Governors’  Symposium  is  “The  Changing  Financial  Environment 
and Implications for Central Banks”. I believe you would all agree that the discussions on this 
topic  couldn’t  have  come  at  a  more  appropriate  time,  given  the  current  financial  market 
turbulence we are encountering today.  
Right now, all eyes are focusing on what solution central banks will come up with to resolve 
the current global crisis. This gathering is the first regional meeting of governors amidst the 
turmoil,  and  so  we  should  take  this  opportunity  to  exchange  views  and  reflect  on  how  the 
financial  environment  which  is  undergoing  a  major  transformation  as  we  speak,  will  have 
implications on our roles as central banks.  
Looking at the overall picture, what is now going on in Wall Street may remind us of what 
happened  in  our  region  11  years  ago.  At  a  glance,  the  root  causes  of  both  events  are 
strikingly similar: investors taking excessively high risks creating asset price bubbles, against 
the background of lax prudential and monetary policy. 
With today’s financial environment, however, changes in the regulatory requirements, market 
players, business models of financial firms, as well as economic conditions have all played a 
part in escalating the impact of financial turmoil through the creation of a broader and deeper 
financial system.  
What  is  unfolding  right  now  is  taking  place  in  the  world’s  largest  economy  with  deepest 
capital  markets,  most  sophisticated  financial  instruments  –  and,  let  me  also  add, the  most 
advanced risk management tools. 
Given the increased complexity and magnitude of the current crisis, this calls into question 
whether  the  tools  available  at  hand  to  policy  makers  are  adequate  in  ensuring  economic 
stability, the essence of our mission as central bankers. 
No matter how large the storm is, we have to lean against the wind and adhere to a set of 
principles which central banks have been practicing. I try to sum up these principles which 
guide us not only in weathering this storm, but also in sunnier days, when the role of crisis 
prevention cannot be overlooked. 
The first and foremost principle rests upon the authorities’ ability to carry out prompt and 
preemptive actions with the best set of available information in dealing with changes in the 
market conditions and practices. Of course, we all know that to be able to identify where the 
risks are is no longer a simple task in this current environment. But once any significant sign 
of  imbalances  in  the  economy  is  detected,  central  banks  need  to  be  vigilant  and  act  in  a 
timely manner. True, it is difficult to counter the sentiments of the government, investors and 
BIS Review 120/2008 
 1
the public alike if central banks play their role of “taking away the punch bowl when the party 
gets  going”.  In  a  nutshell,  this  implies  that  we  central  bankers  need  to  be  watchful  and 
decisive, not to be swayed by these voices. 
Second, we also need to maintain flexibility in the conduct of central banking policies. By 
this,  I  mean  flexibility  in  terms  of  policy  instruments  and  also  in  terms  of  using  innovative 
methods to deal with the evolving challenges. For example, we may not be able to just rely 
on, say, using traditional solutions of raising interest rates to address rising inflation, but we 
may also have to resort to a mix and match of the toolkit available to us. Here I think of some 
of the prudential measures that could help cool down asset prices, which is a case in point of 
how monetary and supervisory policies can be intertwined.  
Indeed,  central  banking  policies  need  regular  evaluation  as  its  effectiveness  could  be 
undermined by the evolving financial landscape. In sum, we need to continually evaluate 
the  effectiveness  of  our  policy  tools,  in  particular,  the  potency  of  monetary  policy 
transmission mechanism in the changing financial environment. 
My  third  point  is  that  good  central  bank  governance  is  also  essential.  To  maintain  its 
credibility, any central bank should strive to be independent, accountable and transparent. I 
don’t need to touch on all three pillars of good central bank governance, but on transparency 
I should add that effective public communication is key to achieving our policy goals. This is 
especially important for monetary policy since effective public communication can play a 
crucial role in anchoring expectations in both sunny days and during the storm.  
Fourth and finally, regional cooperation in the areas of surveillance and financing should 
be  further  fostered.  Regional  surveillance  can  help  contribute  to  financial  stability  by 
strengthening the policy framework at the national level. Cooperative financing arrangements 
at  the  regional  level  designed  to  supplement  resources  provided  by  the  IMF  can  also 
enhance  effectiveness  in  crisis  prevention  and  resolution.  Here  I  see  great  strides  being 
made in these cooperative efforts in the region, including swap mechanisms that have been 
developed and are being expanded.  
Furthermore,  cooperative  efforts  in  promoting  the  practice  of  information  sharing  and 
capacity  building  will  help  strengthen  competency  of  regional  central  banks  to  safeguard 
against external shocks and disturbances. Although the practice of information dissemination 
among the regional peers is nothing new, there is still room for improvement to facilitate a 
more structured approach and timely delivery. 
Ladies and gentlemen, these are just some food for thought to precede the more detailed 
discussions and lively debate to follow. I certainly look forward to hearing the views of Mr. 
Caruana,  who  has  been  among  those  at  the  centre  of  the  challenges  facing  us.  His 
perspectives will be valuable for our further discussions and deliberations.  
And we will learn more from Mr. Glenn Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia; 
Mr. Kiyohiko Nishimura, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan; and Mr. Heng Swee Keat, 
Managing  Director  of  The  Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore,  who  will  lead  the  discussions 
focusing on their respective country’s experiences. This will be in keeping with our tradition in 
learning  from  one  another  to  further  enhance  SEANZA  cooperation  and  promote  greater 
stability in the region.  
In concluding my remarks,  
I would like to reiterate to you my warmest welcome, and may I also wish us all a successful 
and fruitful meeting, which would hopefully bring us on the right track towards weathering the 
storm in anticipation of sunnier days. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 120/2008
