Mark Carney: From hindsight to foresight 
Remarks  by  Mr  Mark  Carney,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  Women  in  Capital 
Markets, Toronto, Ontario, 17 December 2008.  
 It has been a difficult year for capital markets professionals. The turmoil has deteriorated into 
a full-blown financial crisis. Most financial markets have experienced historic falls in prices, 
and some are strained to the point of closing. Issues of financial stability that were once the 
obsession of a pessimistic few are now the daily concern of many. Policy-makers have had 
to respond with bold measures. These will work, although it will take time for confidence to 
return and for capital to flow once again. In the interim, the dramatic repricing of risk across 
financial  assets  will  be  increasingly  mirrored  in  the  real  economy.  Businesses  are  already 
beginning  to  postpone  large  investments,  and  households  now  hesitate  over  major 
purchases. Partly as a consequence of financial instability, next year will be a trying one for 
many Canadians.  
Few forecast these events; although, in an outbreak of retrospective foresight, an increasing 
number  now  claim  they  saw  it  coming.  The  reality  is  that  among  all  the  banks,  investors, 
academics and policy-makers, only a handful were able to identify ahead of time the causes 
and  potential  scale  of  the  crisis.1  Central  banks,  ministries  of  finance  and  international 
financial  institutions  all  believed  either  that  risks  were  being  adequately  managed  or  that 
vulnerabilities  lay  elsewhere.  Around  the  world,  private  banks  exceeded  their  regulatory 
capital  requirements.  Clearly,  though,  risks  were  not  being  managed  properly  and  capital 
was inadequate. 
Now, in the rush to respond, we must avoid building the financial equivalent of the Maginot 
line  –  overpreparing  for  a  repeat  of  current  events  while  remaining  vulnerable  to  the  root 
causes of the next crisis. Rather, we must develop early-warning systems with precision and 
with teeth. This will require progress internationally and domestically. 
Internationally, both the Financial Stability Forum (FSF) and the International Monetary Fund 
(IMF) must become more effective. There are several ways of accomplishing this. The first is 
to  divide  more  clearly  responsibilities  between  these  bodies,  with  the  IMF  having  primary 
responsibility  for  surveillance  (i.e.,  the  early-warning  system)  and  the  FSF  for  coordinating 
the  development  of  a  resilient  financial  system.  Second,  policy-makers  themselves  must 
become  more  engaged.  The  value  of 
their 
bureaucracies  possess  unique  powers  of  insight,  but  rather  that  they  can  convene  senior 
policy-makers,  challenge  them,  and  then  forge  a  consensus  on  how  to  foster  sustainable 
global  economic  growth.  Third,  countries  must  recognize  that  membership  in  these 
organizations brings responsibilities. This is why Canada successfully pushed at the recent 
G-20 summit for mandatory regular reviews of each country's financial system by the IMF (a 
process  carried  out  under  the  Financial  Sector  Assessment  Program  or  FSAP).  Finally,  it 
matters who is around the table. In Washington last month, G-20 leaders agreed to expand 
the  FSF  to  include  key  emerging  markets.  These  countries  not  only  have  first-hand 
experience of financial crises but also are the major surplus countries who, as major capital 
providers, need to be part of a global solution.2  
international  organizations 
is  not 
that 
                                                 
1   Examples include Bill White, formerly of both the Bank of Canada and the Bank for International Settlements; 
Harvard University's Ken Rogoff; Nouriel Roubini of New York University; Wynne Godley of Cambridge; and 
Bernard Connolly of AIG Financial Products. 
2   M. Carney, "Reflections on Recent International Economic Developments" (Speech to the Canadian Club of 
Montreal, Montréal, Quebec, 25 September 2008). 
BIS Review 160/2008 
 1
Domestic  responsibility  for  financial  stability  is  currently  shared  among  a  large  number  of 
federal  and  provincial  bodies.  This  includes  the  Bank  of  Canada,  which  is  mandated  by 
legislation to "promote the economic and financial welfare of Canada." Today I would like to 
focus on how the Bank can fulfill this broad mandate by contributing to financial stability in 
Canada.  
A macroprudential approach 
A  clear  lesson  of  the  current  crisis  is  the  need  to  take  a  macroprudential  approach  to 
financial stability. Macroprudential surveillance assesses current risks by looking at the broad 
economic and financial conditions that can contribute to the buildup of risks to the financial 
system  and  the  economy  as  a  whole.  Macroprudential  regulation  seeks  to  improve  the 
resiliency  of  the  financial  system  by  designing  standards  and  codes  to  limit  the  buildup  of 
financial and economic imbalances. Put simply, a macroprudential approach focuses on the 
forest, not the trees.  
Two topical fallacies of composition illustrate the point. The first is what Keynes termed the 
"paradox  of  thrift."  It  may  be  individually  rational  for  people  to  want  to  save  more  and 
businesses to invest less during uncertain economic times. If this behaviour is widespread, 
however, it becomes collectively irrational. Fear of recession feeds a recession. Similarly, a 
bank may decide to hoard capital in anticipation of increased loan losses during a slowdown. 
If  all  banks  do  the  same,  their  actions  will  exacerbate  the  downturn  and  increase  their 
eventual  losses.  It  is  well-known  that  timely  and  properly  calibrated  monetary  and  fiscal 
policy can address the first issue. It is less widely recognized that macroprudential regulation 
can address the second.  
In  many  ways,  the  central  bank  is  ideally  suited  to  bring  a  macroprudential  approach  to 
financial  stability.  Our  mandate  demands  that  we  take  an  economy-wide  perspective. 
Further, we have a strong motivation to maintain a stable, efficient financial system because 
we rely on it to transmit our monetary policy actions. However, we do not have many of the 
tools  necessary  to  secure  financial  stability.  Monetary  policy  is  a  blunt  instrument,  poorly 
suited to addressing financial imbalances. Instead, macrofinancial stability should be one of 
the core objectives of financial regulation. Until it is, under the current framework, the Bank 
can promote financial stability through two tools: liquidity and advocacy.  
The Bank is the ultimate source of liquidity within the economy. We have used our recently 
enhanced  powers  under  the  Bank  of  Canada  Act  extensively  throughout  the  crisis,  with 
measures  that  now  total  more  than  $36  billion  of  term  liquidity.  There  are  four  important 
points  of  context.  First,  we  are  not  supplying  net  liquidity  to  the  system  –  there  is  no  new 
central  bank  money.  Rather,  we  are  redistributing  liquidity  by  exchanging  liquid  assets  for 
high-quality,  though  less-liquid  ones.  Second,  we  are  substantially  over-collateralized  to 
protect our balance sheet.3 Third, consistent with Canada's relatively strong banking system, 
our liquidity provision has not been as large as elsewhere. For example, the Bank of Canada 
is  currently  providing  liquidity  equivalent  to  around  1  per  cent  of  total  domestic  banking 
assets. The comparable figures are 4 per cent in Europe, 5 per cent in the United Kingdom 
and 6 per cent in the United States. Finally, while the provision of extraordinary liquidity by 
central banks is limiting the damage from the crisis, it has long been apparent that official 
liquidity, irrespective of size, cannot re-open markets on its own. 
The Bank's second tool – advocacy – has not received the same profile as the first – a fact I 
hope to begin to change today. The Bank can promote financial stability by influencing public 
sector  policies  and  private  sector  behaviour.  We  do  this  in  two  ways;  by  leveraging  our 
                                                 
3   For example, at the end of November, the Bank had collateral for its term purchase and resale agreements 
worth 105 per cent of the amount outstanding in term PRAs. 
2 
 BIS Review 160/2008
position in key domestic and international organizations, and by producing solid analysis and 
research to ground our advice. Domestically, we work closely with representatives from the 
Federal  Department  of  Finance,  the  Office  of  the  Superintendent  of  Financial  Institutions 
(OSFI), the Canada Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Financial Consumer Agency of 
Canada. We meet regularly to share information, coordinate actions, and advise the federal 
government  on  financial  sector  policy.  Within  this  group,  the  Bank  of  Canada  is  the  only 
organization that brings a solely macroprudential perspective to the table – a perspective we 
intend increasingly to assert. 
Improving our analysis and sharpening our accountability 
In recent years, the Bank has made financial stability a strategic priority. Strengthening this 
priority was one of the primary motivations behind our internal reorganization last month. We 
now have a department dedicated to financial stability, and we are investing heavily in our 
research  and  analysis.  We  are  hiring  senior  capital  markets  professionals  and  drawing  on 
leading  academics  as  special  advisers.  In  addition,  the  mandate  of  the  Bank's  Governing 
Council has been sharpened to add financial stability assessment to its responsibilities. The 
deputy governors and I should be held accountable for our analysis; others for whether or not 
they follow our advice.  
To be clear, we are not seeking to identify every worthy reform in the financial sector (they 
are  legion).  Rather,  we  will  seek  to  identify  stresses  in  the  economy  as  well  as  the 
regulations and practices that have the potential for serious macroeconomic consequences. 
In  doing  so,  we  will  want  occasionally  to  change  behaviours,  conventions  and  even 
regulations to mitigate threats. 
The latest edition of the Bank's Financial System Review (FSR), which was published last 
week, is a first step. It contains, for the first time, the judgment of the Governing Council as to 
the main risks to Canadian financial stability. I will return to this shortly. First, I will say a few 
words regarding an article in the current FSR, which details efforts by Bank staff to construct 
an early-warning indicator for financial stress in Canada.4  
An early-warning system 
The  Bank  of  Canada  has  developed  a  financial  stress  indicator,  the  FSI,  which  uses  a 
number of domestic variables to measure the degree of financial stress in the economy.5 As 
you would expect, the FSI is now showing record levels of stress. It is correlated with how 
you all probably feel. While this indicator does an excellent job of measuring stress in real 
time, our objective is to develop empirical measures that could forewarn of potential financial 
crises.  In  other  words,  given  that  the  FSI  accurately  measures  financial  stress,  what 
accurately predicts changes in the FSI? 
It  has  been  clear  for  some  time  that  rapid  growth  in  credit  and  sustained  growth  in  asset 
prices  often  precede  financial  crises.  Bank  researchers  have  found  a  promising  tool  for 
assessing  Canada's  vulnerability  to  crisis:  a  combination  of  growth  in  domestic  business 
credit  and  real  estate  prices  that  tends  to  be  a  good  predictor  of  changes  to  the  Bank's 
financial  stress  indicator  one  to  two  years  in  the  future.  However,  this  combination  was 
unable  to  predict  the  current  crisis  because  the  root  causes  came  from  outside  Canada. 
There  is  ongoing  work  at  the  Bank  to  refine  these  tools,  which  could  prove  important,  not 
                                                 
4   M.  Misina,  P.  St-Amant,  and  G.  Tkacz,  "Credit,  Asset  Prices,  and  Financial  Stress  in  Canada",  Financial 
System Review (Ottawa: Bank of Canada, December 2008): 29-33. 
5   M. Illing and Y. Liu, "An Index of Financial Stress for Canada" (Working Paper No. 2003-14, Bank of Canada, 
2003). 
BIS Review 160/2008 
 3
only  for  predicting  future  periods  of  financial  instability  and  thereby  prompting  timely 
corrective  actions,  but  also  for  the  development  of  countercyclical  capital  rules  that  I  will 
discuss in a few minutes.  
Current risks to stability 
In the FSR, five major risks to financial stability were identified: first, the liquidity and funding 
of financial institutions; second, their capital adequacy; third, the state of household balance 
sheets; fourth, the possibility of a more prolonged downturn in the global economy; and fifth, 
the threat of a destabilizing unwinding of global financial imbalances. Let me now spend a 
few minutes discussing the first three of these risks in some detail, although I should stress 
that these are risks, and not the most likely outcomes. 
Funding and liquidity 
The  current  crisis  began  in  the  summer  of  2007  as  liquidity  dried  up,  leading  to  major 
disruptions  in  money  and  bond  markets.  In  response,  the  Bank  of  Canada  provided 
exceptional liquidity to core financial institutions, with the expectation that this liquidity would 
cascade through the financial system. This was indeed the case this past spring. With the 
intensification  of  the  crisis  since  September,  our  liquidity  efforts  have  been  significantly 
expanded.  While  these  actions  have  sharply  lowered  money  market  spreads  and 
encouraged some lending at longer maturities, conditions remain far from normal.  
Bond issuance has been slow to return, which is putting greater pressure on banks as the 
sole  source  of  lending  growth.  In  tandem,  financial  institutions  have  curtailed  their  central 
roles  as  intermediaries  and  market-makers.  This  feeds  illiquidity  and  volatility  in  financial 
markets and delays the return of confidence in the financial system. This could aggravate the 
adverse feedback loop between the financial system and the real economy. 
In  essence,  we  have  gone  from  one  extreme  –  with  overabundant  liquidity  leading  to  the 
misallocation of capital – to another – where, in some systemically important markets, capital 
is  barely  being  allocated  at  all.  The  challenge  for  policy-makers  is  to  provide  transition 
support that effectively restarts rather than replaces markets. As I have argued elsewhere, 
this may require structural changes to some markets, including the greater use of clearing 
houses, and a re-thinking of the scale and frequency of central bank liquidity operations.6  
Procyclical capital adequacy 
The second risk identified in the FSR is the procyclicality of bank capital. Put simply, banks 
characteristically  increase  leverage  in  a  boom,  further  feeding  the  expansion,  before 
reducing  leverage  in  a  downturn,  exacerbating  the  slowdown.  Regulation  often  reinforces 
these tendencies when it should lean against them. This is now a serious global problem. 
Banks outside of Canada are under enormous pressure to reduce leverage. Given the scope 
of likely ultimate losses from structured products alone, it would take an enormous amount of 
capital  to  reduce  average  leverage  ratios  to  Canadian  levels.  Bank  of  Canada  research 
estimates  that  U.S.,  U.K.  and  European  banks  would  need  to  raise  a  combined  US$1.2 
trillion to bring their leverage ratios down to Canadian levels. These capital needs will rise 
linearly  with  any  recession-induced  writedowns.  In  this  environment,  banks  are  inclined  to 
hoard capital, rather than deploy it. In a world with guarantees, liquidity and funding support, 
regulators should not reinforce this tendency.  
                                                 
6   M. Carney, "Building Continuous Markets" (Speech to the Canada-United Kingdom Chamber of Commerce, 
London, England, 19 November 2008). 
4 
 BIS Review 160/2008
In  Canada, our  banks  are  not  facing  the  same  pressures  to  de-lever  as  their  counterparts 
abroad.  Still,  their  loan  portfolios  would  experience  higher  credit  losses  in  a  deep  or 
prolonged downturn. The risk identified in the FSR is that market forces could compel banks 
to  maintain  higher  capital  ratios  than  necessary  to  guard  against  the  possibility  of  worse 
economic outcome. This could lead banks to slow balance sheet growth, which would tighten 
lending conditions for both households and businesses and weaken the economy. Ultimately, 
the financial institutions themselves would suffer from this self-fulfilling prophecy.  
Given  these  concerns,  the  Superintendent  of  Financial  Institutions  last  month  took  the 
welcome  step  of  giving  Canadian  banks  more  flexibility  by  allowing  them  to  raise  the 
proportion of preferred shares that comprise their Tier 1 capital from 30 per cent to 40 per 
cent. The lower absolute leverage of Canadian institutions and the higher quality of their Tier 
1 capital should mean that they can expand lending faster than their international peers. The 
value of this virtually unique advantage of our economy should not be underestimated. 
The Bank is working with its international counterparts to examine how the current regulatory 
capital  framework  may  amplify  fluctuations  in  economic  and  financial  conditions.7  Under 
current rules, capital requirements are linked to the credit risk in an institution's portfolio. In 
an upturn, risk goes down, banks are required to hold less capital, and the growth of credit 
increases. The problem is that this can amplify swings in financial conditions and lead to the 
emergence of financial imbalances. Recall the link between credit growth and future financial 
stress that I just mentioned. Then, during the downturn when credit risk increases, banks are 
required  to  increase  capital  holdings,  thus  exacerbating  the  economic  weakness  and 
financial stress. 
This is the motivation for proposals to have capital requirements move procyclically. Banks 
could  be  required  to  build  up  capital  buffers  during  times  of  rapid  credit  expansion.  This 
would  strengthen  their  balance  sheets  and  reduce  the  risk  that  financial  imbalances  will 
develop  from  overly  easy  financial  conditions.  During  a  downturn,  banks  could  then  draw 
down these buffers, which would reduce the need to liquidate assets or restrict loan growth 
at  a  time  when  credit  conditions  and  asset  prices  are  already  under  stress.  In  this  way, 
capital requirements would moderate the ups and downs of the credit cycle – the reverse of 
what currently happens – reducing the risk of a future crisis.  
This  macroprudential  approach  to  capital  requirements  is  tremendously  important,  but  it  is 
also  complex,  with  a  number  of  practical  and logistical  concerns.  Such a  system  could  be 
accomplished by linking capital requirements to movements in credit-cycle indicators, such 
as loan growth and asset prices. For example, our research on the determinants of financial 
stress that I mentioned a moment ago can help inform the development of such regulatory 
guidelines. It is probably unrealistic to think that ex ante a perfect formula can be derived. 
Ultimately, there are important questions regarding the balance of rules and discretion and, 
regarding the latter, who should exercise that discretion.  
Household balance sheets 
The third risk relates to the health of Canadian household balance sheets. Household credit 
makes up about 60 per cent of the Canadian banking sector's total loan exposure, so losses 
on  household  lending  would  likely  have  an  immediate  impact  on  capital  adequacy  and 
forward  profitability.  The  household  sector  could  be  an  important  channel  through  which 
global economic weakness affects the Canadian financial sector more widely. 
While the Canadian household sector remains relatively healthy, its resilience will be tested 
during the recession. Various indicators of financial stress, such as bankruptcies and loans in 
                                                 
7   See  "Recent  Proposals  for  Procyclical  Capital  Requirements",  Financial  System  Review  (Ottawa:  Bank  of 
Canada, December 2008): 15. 
BIS Review 160/2008 
 5
arrears,  have  increased  recently  from  historically  low  levels.  Falling  equity  markets  and 
softening house prices have put pressure on household balance sheets at a time when the 
ratio of debt to income is already at a record high of 140 per cent. The household debt-to-
asset ratio has risen as the credit crisis intensified, reaching 19 per cent at the end of the 
third  quarter  –  the  highest  level  since  1990.  At  the  same  time,  the  debt-service  ratio  of 
households actually declined modestly to 7.5 per cent, well below the historical average of 
9.2 per cent seen since 1992, owing to lower effective borrowing costs. This gives a measure 
of assurance that most households can comfortably manage their debts.  
The health of Canadian households is obviously important to our banking sector. If the global 
economic downturn were significantly more severe than projected, then household defaults 
in Canada could rise sharply. This risk would be magnified if banks begin to tighten credit 
conditions to households more significantly than they have so far. In the FSR, we examined 
these  risks  using  a  simulated  stress  test.  Specifically,  we  examined  an  extreme  scenario 
where  nominal  household  income  drops  at  an  average  annual  rate  of  2  per  cent  for  six 
straight  quarters  as  a  result  of  global  economic  weakness.  Such  an  event  could  double  – 
from  3  per  cent  to  6  per  cent  –  the  proportion  of  Canadian  households  considered  to  be 
vulnerable;  that  is,  with  debt-service  ratios  above  40  per  cent  of  income.  Further,  those 
vulnerable households would own 13 per cent of total household debt, a figure double the 
average of the past 10 years. If this scenario were to materialize, it would prompt significant 
losses among Canada's banks. 
However, it is important not to overplay this scenario, since it actually illustrates the strength 
of our system. First, the scenario is extreme – the annual growth of household income has 
not been negative during any quarter over the 37 years for which data are available. Second, 
while the average Tier 1 capital ratio of our banks would fall from 9.7 per cent to about 8.8 
per cent, this figure is still more than two times the minimum ratio allowed under the Basel II 
Accord, and well above OSFI's 7 per cent threshold. 
There  are  a  number  of  reasons  why  the  risk  posed  by  household  balance  sheets  is 
significantly  lower  in  Canada  than  elsewhere,  not  the  least  of  which  is  Canada's  more 
conservative lending culture. For example, subprime mortgages account for less than 5 per 
cent of Canadian mortgage lending, roughly one-third the level in the United States. Further, 
since  Canada  requires  insurance  on  high-loan-to-value  mortgages  and  Canada  Mortgage 
Bonds  carry  an  explicit  sovereign  guarantee,  there  has  been  no  negative  feedback  loop 
between the housing market and the financial sector as has been all too apparent in other 
major economies. While Canada's debt-service ratio remains below its historical average, as 
I mentioned, the debt-service ratio in the United States remains above its historical average. 
Further, the absolute cost of household debt in Canada – both mortgage and other loans – 
has fallen by about 100 basis points since the onset of the crisis last year. 
Nonetheless, the Bank of Canada will continue to closely monitor the risk posed to financial 
stability  from  household  balance  sheets.  In  addition,  the  Bank  will  closely  consider  the 
possibility that households may be more sensitive to shocks to their income or wealth as it 
develops its outlook for Canadian growth and inflation. 
Conclusion 
In times of crisis, it is easy to understand the links between financial stability and the real 
economy. While these are all too apparent, it is sometimes hard to see the end of the crisis. 
But  end  it  will.  The  actions  that  policy-makers  are  taking  will  be  effective.  The  global 
economy  will  emerge  from  this  period  of  weakness.  In  the  years  ahead,  when  times  are 
better, the need to promote financial stability may not be as clear-cut, even though it will be 
no less important. The Bank of Canada will continue to take a macroprudential approach. We 
will use all the tools at our disposal to promote financial stability at home and abroad and, in 
so doing, continue to contribute to the economic and financial welfare of Canada. 
6 
 BIS Review 160/2008
