Radovan Jelašić: The impact of the crisis on Serbia’s financial sector 
Speech by Mr Radovan Jelašić, Governor of the National Bank of Serbia, at the "Conference 
on  the  Future  of  Financial  Markets  of  Central  and  South  East  Europe",  Sarajevo, 
23 October 2008. 
 Effects so far  
Likely future course of the crisis  
Long-term effects  
“We  are  acting  with  unprecedented  speed  taking  unprecedented  measures  that  we  never 
thought would be necessary”, said the US Treasury Secretary, Mr. Paulson on 14 October 
this year – and the world is slowly beginning to understand the full meaning of his words. The 
Government has returned in style, replacing banks as lender but also as guarantor, and even 
owner  of  financial  institutions.  And,  in  a  matter  of  days,  circumstances  have  changed  so 
much that such moves are not only approved, but even welcomed and applauded!  
And while we know that, after these turbulences in the global financial market, nothing will be 
the same, all we know about the crisis itself is that it has reached one of its many peaks over 
the past few weeks and that its depth and duration cannot be foreseen. Today, I would like to 
talk about the impact of these unprecedented challenges on the financial sector of Serbia, 
focusing in particular on: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
1. The effects on the Serbian banking system are already evident, as private individuals have 
lost  no  time  in  responding  to  external  shocks.  Fortunately,  as  our  citizens  have  long  ago 
learnt that it is not clever to wait for the unhurried and overly optimistic politicians to explain 
what the future has in store, the following trend has emerged since Q2: а) receding volume 
of  borrowing  by  households,  with  the  exception  of  mortgage  loans,  b)  much  pricier  new 
loans, c) notable slowdown in external borrowing by banks. In several months, we will feel 
nostalgia for the “good old times” when we, the central bankers, strove to suppress the credit 
boom by all means available and with different success. But where central banks have failed, 
financial crisis has succeeded, by force. And to be honest, commercial banks did go a step 
too  far:  a)  they  advertised  borrowing  and  borrowing  alone,  with  hardly  any  mention  of 
savings; b) products were offered by banks, but also by agents, merchants, etc.; c) telephone 
calls  to  potential  clients  became  a  usual  practice,  luring  customers  into  yet  another  cash 
credit or credit card.  
However, my main concern is not whether private individuals will manage to repay their loans 
or not. The real question here is what will happen to enterprises. With the Government itself 
paying a margin of 3-4%, which source of finance can enterprises rely on? And if the entire 
economy can only borrow at double-digit interest rates, and even such borrowing is in short 
supply, how will this reflect on the country’s economic growth? 
At  this  point,  we  may  safely  conclude  that  the  measures  taken  by  the  US  and  EU 
governments and their respective central banks have so far produced no results, that money 
has not been costlier for over a decade, that the key policy rates of central banks and the 
market  price  of  money  (EURIBOR)  are  still  moving  in  the  opposite  directions,  that  excess 
money pumped into the banking system by the ECB is returned in the form of deposits rather 
than lending, while trust among financial agents has troughed and the economy is already 
heading for recession! 
2. It is practically impossible to foresee the future course of the crisis. Earlier taboos, such as 
the valuation of balance-sheet categories, are being broken overnight, the governments are 
nationalizing  the  banking  sector  in  order  to  “strengthen  the  market  mechanism”,  stock 
exchanges  are  even  rewarding  such  moves  and  there  is  no  end  to  government  plans! 
BIS Review 129/2008 
 1
Learning from history, the governments have clearly decided that it is better to overreact than 
underreact, but, unfortunately, with little success so far!  
The future course of events will largely hinge on:  
• 
How far will the Government go in acquiring ownership of the banking sector and 
when and how will it pull out – if, indeed, it wants to?  
To what extent can central banks replace the financial sector as lenders and should 
they do so?  
What  will  happen  if  governments  are  really  faced  with  the  obligation  to  pay  out  a 
major portion of the promised funds, which could well lead to bankruptcy as in the 
case of Iceland?  
  The situation is already unravelling, and a number of countries – primarily Ukraine, Hungary 
and  Kazakhstan  –  are  mooted  as  potential  “victims”!  Why  these  countries?  The  answer  is 
fairly simple: a) high level of debts maturing in the next year – question of possibility and cost 
of refinancing, b) high share of foreign currency clause indexed loans, with savings mostly in 
the  domestic  currency  –  at  times  of  exchange  rate  turbulences,  c)  heavy  dependence  on 
inflow of foreign capital (foreign direct investment and foreign borrowing). The only reason 
why  Serbia  is  not  in  the  same  category  as  these  countries  are  its  high  foreign  exchange 
reserves, restrictive monetary policy and banking supervision. I must say I am rather pleased 
that  armchair  critics  are  now  praising  my  “farsightedness”  and  “conservativeness”  which 
have turned out to be the key buttress of stability of the Serbian financial sector.  
3.  And  finally,  we  need  to  face  the  long-term  effects  of  this  crisis  which  will  certainly  last 
much longer than was expected several months ago. When I speak of these effects, I will 
focus on our region and country:  
• 
The Government is returning in style, and I am, personally, slightly apprehensive of 
this because of my experience with the Government and its mechanisms. The role 
of the Government will increase, both in the financial and in the real sector. The only 
hope left is that this role will remain indirect, rather than direct, and that it will be of 
limited duration!  
The role of financial sector supervision will gain strength, both locally and in the EU. 
There is always a positive side to any crisis, and now Europe has understood that a 
single  monetary  and  economic  union  is  incompatible  with  a  nationally-based 
financial sector supervision. This is simply a negation of reality.  
The old adage: “What you pay is what you get” best illustrates the period ahead of 
us. Domestic deposits will come to play a key role in financing both enterprises and 
households.  And  because  of  this,  we  will  need  to  invest  even  more  efforts  to 
maintain a stable financial sector and build up public trust in the banking sector. This 
will be a major challenge, especially given our recent history and the efficiency of 
the media in whipping up unnecessary panic.  
The  banking  industry  is  in  need  of  a  thorough  overhaul!  Not  only  will  the  job  of 
supervisors finally receive the respect and appreciation it deserves, but commercial 
bankers will also have to tighten their belts a little and be more realistic.  
   And just one final comment: although, as central bankers, it is our job to be “concerned”, this 
time there is really much cause for worry. That I, at my 40 years of age, am concerned is 
perhaps not as important as the fact that reputed central bankers of 60 and more are – and 
they have already been through thick and thin. But the challenges we are now facing are also 
an opportunity, and I am sure that once again we will come out as winners! 
2 
 BIS Review 129/2008
