Eddie Yue: Islamic finance – its potential to bring new economic growth 
to Hong Kong 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Eddie  Yue,  Deputy  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary 
Authority, for the Hong Kong Islamic Finance Forum, Hong Kong SAR, 25 November 2008.  
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
I would like to thank the organisers for inviting me to speak at this forum, which is being held 
in Hong Kong for the first time.  
In the past several months, we have witnessed the unfolding of a global financial crisis. The 
sub-prime problem in the US and the ensuing credit crunch in the industrialised economies 
have spread and brought about a weakening of confidence in the solvency of the financial 
system. Concerns about credit risk exposures among financial market participants mounted 
following the failure of Lehman Brothers. Interbank money markets in many economies came 
under  extreme  pressure  or  seized  up  entirely.  Extraordinary  and  concerted  efforts  by 
governments  and  central  banks  to  restore  confidence,  inject  liquidity  and  recapitalise  the 
banking  system  appear  to  have  paid  off  to  the  extent  of  preventing  the  collapse  of  the 
banking  and  financial  system  although  credit  and  money  markets  remain  stressed.  As  the 
turmoil deepened, people have also focussed attention on the wider impact of the crisis on 
the real economy, leading to a grimmer outlook for global economic performance.  
Against the backdrop of this global financial crisis, Islamic finance is inevitably affected and 
subject to challenging conditions reflected by a steep slowdown in activities such as sukuk 
issuance and declines in equity value managed by Islamic funds. New sukuk brought to the 
market in the first three quarters amounted to some US$13 billion, down 40% from the same 
period last year.1 But the pullback in new sukuk issuance and the widening of sukuk yield 
spreads are generally in line with what has been happening in the conventional market. This 
broadly  suggests  that  the  global  sukuk  market  slowdown  has  more  to  do  with  the  general 
market conditions and a general reluctance to issue US dollar instruments. Observers say 
that while there are still those who wish to issue sukuk, investors would prefer to stay on the 
sidelines in the current volatile market environment. It is true that the industry is experiencing 
a temporary setback, but this also reflects how closely integrated Islamic finance is with the 
global financial system, which is not at all bad news for the industry because when global 
markets  stabilise  and  take  a  turn  for  the  better  –  as  they  must  in  the  long  run  –  Islamic 
finance will ride on that curve and excel. 
While we are in the midst of a global financial turmoil and there are many challenges lying 
ahead of us, I’m delighted to find this impressive gathering of regulators, shariah scholars, 
business leaders and practitioners who commit themselves to the future development of the 
financial  market.  Your  presence  here  is  ample  evidence  that  there  remains  plenty  of 
opportunities  even  in  circumstances  like  these  and  that  a  forward-looking  view  is  more 
important than ever. Today, I’m particularly honoured to join you in the discussion of a topic 
that has been recognised as a source of sustainability and growth – Islamic finance. There 
are two main issues that I would like to talk about today. 
First,  despite  the  current  financial  turmoil,  we  continue  to  see  the  long  term  potential  in 
Islamic finance. There are two good reasons for this. One is that the Islamic finance industry 
is in many ways fortunate to be at an early stage of development during this turmoil. Despite 
the effects of a temporary shortage of liquidity, which has been a worldwide phenomenon, 
                                                 
1   Source: Bloomberg. 
BIS Review 146/2008 
 1
the  degree  of  damage  has  been  far  lower  than  that  to  the  much  wider  network  of 
international  finance,  primarily  because  of  the  more  restricted  spread  of  Islamic  financial 
instruments  across  regions  and  the  generally  lower  level  of  leverage  allowed  in  Islamic 
financial  transactions.  Although  Islamic  finance  has  grown  by  leaps  and  bounds  in  recent 
years, assets held by Islamic financial institutions and insurance operators known as takaful 
providers  are  estimated  to  be  US$1  trillion,  accounting  for  only  about  1%  of  the  financial 
assets  in  the  overall  banking  and  insurance  sectors.2  The  industry’s  remarkable  annual 
growth rate of 15% to 20% has to be viewed in perspective: after all it began from a small 
base.  This  suggests  that  there  is  still  ample  room  for  growth  on  the  supply  side  in  the 
provision of Islamic financial products. 
On the demand side, the potential of Islamic finance is often linked to the 1.4 billion-strong 
Muslim population worldwide, and some people appear to believe that this obviates the need 
for  further  development  of  Islamic  finance.  But  population  is  not  the  only  factor:  economic 
development in Islamic regions also has to be taken into account. The IMF has estimated 
that there are some US$800 billion worth of investment projects under way or in the pipeline 
in  countries  of  the  Gulf  Cooperation  Council  (GCC)  over  the  next  five  years,  with  major 
projects in the oil and gas sectors, infrastructure and real estate. According to a UK research 
report,  the  annual  investment  rate  in  the  range  of  US$200  billion  to  US$300  billion  in  the 
GCC is about half the annual rate of India and one-tenth that of China.3 As some of the deals 
may be of a scale that requires financial risks to be spread internationally, global banks are 
already geared up to tap this market through the formation of Islamic bank subsidiaries and 
Islamic  banking  windows.  With  the  increased  participation  of  global  and  regional  players, 
project financing opportunities will increasingly attract interest from investors worldwide and 
that  project  finance  will  need  to  be  delivered  in  forms  that  comply  with  the  principles  of 
Islamic  finance.  This  in  turn  will  fuel  the  demand  for  Islamic  finance.  There  is  clearly  very 
significant long-term potential across most of the region. 
The  second  issue  is  our  continuous  commitment  to  developing  Islamic  finance  in  Hong 
Kong. The Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region acknowledged in 
his  Policy  Address  in  2007  that  Islamic  finance  offers  huge  potential  for  development.  To 
further  consolidate  Hong  Kong’s  position  as  a  global  financial  centre,  Hong  Kong  should 
actively leverage on this new trend by developing an Islamic financial platform. Our priority is 
to push ahead with the development of an Islamic bond market. There should be no doubt 
about our determination to establish a platform for Islamic finance in Hong Kong. 
In  a  recent speech,  the  Secretary  for  Financial  Services  and  the  Treasury  also  mentioned 
that  having  reviewed  Hong  Kong’s  legal,  taxation  and  regulatory  regimes,  there  is  no 
fundamental  obstacle to  accommodating  a  sukuk  market  in  our  existing  system.  Technical 
modifications  to  the  taxation  regime  to  provide  a  level  playing  field  for  Islamic  finance 
transactions are being pursued as a priority. 
With our commitment and status as an international financial centre, we believe that Hong 
Kong is well positioned to develop Islamic finance. We should play to our key strengths and 
capabilities  and  I  would  like  to  highlight  two  very  important  aspects  on  which  Hong  Kong 
intends to capitalise. 
The  first  aspect  relates  to  the  core  strengths  of  Hong  Kong  in  providing  a  stable  and  free 
economy. Hong Kong has been ranked the freest economy in the world for 14 consecutive 
years by the Heritage Foundation. We have no foreign exchange controls and do not impose 
tax on offshore income, capital gains, dividends, estate or sales. There is free movement of 
capital,  talent  and  goods.  It  is  a  combination  of  many  factors  including  political  stability,  a 
                                                 
2   Sources: Islamic Financial Services Board; IFSL Research. 
3   Source: Chatham House report on “The Gulf as a Global Financial Centre”. 
2 
 BIS Review 146/2008
strong  legal  and  regulatory  regime,  and  a  pro-business  market  environment  which  makes 
Hong Kong a popular city for international business in Asia. Given these core values, there 
are no barriers to entry and no obstacles to mobility for financial and human capital from local 
and overseas financial institutions planning to engage in Islamic or conventional finance in 
Hong Kong. 
The  second  aspect  is  the  unique  role  Hong  Kong  plays  in  the  economic  development  of 
China. In the past three decades when the Mainland was achieving economic liberalisation, 
Hong Kong has capitalised on its strong cultural and geographic links to become the gateway 
connecting  the  Mainland  market  to  the  world.  Our  close  and  increasing  economic 
cooperation with the Mainland undoubtedly makes Hong Kong the natural choice for anyone 
wishing to tap into China’s high savings rate and huge growth potential. 
Hong  Kong  is  the  premier  capital  formation  centre  for  the  Mainland  and  hence  a  global 
investment  platform  for  enterprises  from  around  the  world  wishing  to  gain  exposure  to 
China’s growth. This is demonstrated by the fact that we have the largest, deepest, and most 
open Chinese capital markets outside of the Mainland: half of our stock market capitalisation 
comprises Mainland related companies. At the end of August, our stock market was the sixth 
largest in the world and the second largest in Asia in terms of market capitalisation. It ranked 
first in the world in securitised derivatives turnover, and first in Asia for stock options turnover 
and  exchange-traded  funds  turnover.  It  also  ranked  fifth  in  the  world  in  total  equity  raised 
through IPOs.4
In  the  other  direction,  many  Mainland  companies  have  set  up  regional  headquarters  or 
offices  in  Hong  Kong  as  part  of  their  strategies  to  step  up  their  international  presence. 
Continuously high growth in recent years has resulted in a vast accumulation of wealth on 
the  Mainland  and  the  authorities  there  are  progressively  liberalising  the  requirements  for 
Mainland financial institutions to invest overseas. As a result, Hong Kong has benefited from 
the outward investment flows given our geographic, cultural and linguistic affinities with the 
Mainland  and  our  ability  to  provide  a  broad  access  to  numerous  Asia-Pacific  and  global 
markets.  The  potential  demand  for  wealth  management  thus  presents  capital-market 
intermediaries in Hong Kong with huge opportunities. 
We are also the first jurisdiction outside of the Mainland with the ability to conduct renminbi 
banking business and deal in renminbi-denominated financial products. The establishment of 
a renminbi bond market in Hong Kong last year marked a key milestone in the development 
of renminbi business here. It has helped entrench Hong Kong as a testing ground and pilot 
market for China’s continuing financial reform and liberalisation. 
There is clearly immense scope for us to leverage on our key strengths as a close business 
partner, a capital formation centre and a financial intermediary for the Mainland economy in 
the  development  of  Islamic  finance.  There  are  opportunities  for  us  to  extend  our  reach  to 
potential Islamic investors and financiers in the Middle East and Asia. The addition of Islamic 
finance  as  a  new  asset  class  in  our  financial  system  will  add  value  to  Hong  Kong  as  a 
thriving financial centre and a leading financial services hub in Asia. 
As a major financial centre, Hong Kong – with its flexible and innovative market participants 
and  its  responsive  government  –  has  always  stood  ready  to  adapt  to  and  embrace  new 
ideas. Even if the current financial environment appears unfavourable to the development of 
Islamic finance in the short term, this is, at worst, a temporary setback as future prospects 
remain promising. We at least do not intend to be put off by temporary difficulties from our 
goal of making Hong Kong an Islamic financial hub. Indeed we believe that this is a good 
time  to  do  the  groundwork  of  installing  the  necessary  legal,  taxation  and  market 
infrastructure. 
                                                 
4   Source: World Federation of Exchanges. 
BIS Review 146/2008 
 3
To name just a few developments in the past 12 months: a new Dow Jones Islamic Market 
Index was launched to track China-related equities listed on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange; 
Islamic mutual funds were introduced by a local bank and an asset management company 
featuring China-related equity investments through the stock market platform in Hong Kong; 
and an exchangeable sukuk linked to the shares of a Mainland company listed in Hong Kong 
was  issued  in  March,  enabling  investors  to  gain  exposure  to  China’s  growth  story.  The 
response  so  far  has  been  highly  encouraging:  for  example,  the  sukuk  was  10  times 
oversubscribed.  
Likewise, positive progress is achieved in the development of Islamic banking in Hong Kong. 
Following the first Islamic banking window introduced three months ago, I’m glad to witness 
yet another market player who is set to launch its Islamic banking window in Hong Kong at 
this  auspicious  occasion  today.  The  increasing  number  of  banks  taking  part  in  Islamic 
banking activities will add further momentum to the development of an Islamic capital market 
in Hong Kong by providing an important tool for funding and liquidity management.  
The  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority  will  continue  to  give  full  support  to  the  HKSAR 
government in its initiative to develop Islamic finance in Hong Kong by acting as a market 
enabler  and  infrastructure  provider.  The  HKMA  has  taken  important  steps  and  devoted 
considerable  resources  to  promote  the  industry  in  Hong  Kong.  We  are  now  focusing  our 
efforts on four major areas: first, building Hong Kong’s international profile and forging closer 
ties  with  market  participants  in  the  Middle  East;  secondly,  promoting  market  infrastructure 
and establishing policies conducive to the development of Islamic finance; thirdly, promoting 
talent  and  knowledge  of  Islamic  financial  principles  among  market  professionals  in  Hong 
Kong; and fourthly, encouraging the development and launch of Islamic finance products in 
Hong Kong. 
Concluding remarks 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  potential  for  the  growth  of  Islamic  finance  is  clear.  The 
foundations for its development here in Hong Kong have already been laid. It is essential for 
all of us to look beyond the current global financial turbulence and treat the development of 
Islamic finance as an investment in the future. With this in mind, I would like to encourage all 
of you, whether you are regulators, financial institutions or investors, to look critically at the 
opportunities that lie before us. Islamic finance is a new asset class that has the potential to 
bring new economic growth to Hong Kong and the region given our wealth of knowledge in 
financial intermediation, our experience, and our agility in adopting innovative products. So 
let us work together towards building a stronger and stronger link and increasing cooperation 
with other global players to identify and capitalise on new opportunities. Today’s holding of 
the  Islamic  Finance  Forum  in  Hong  Kong  is  a  significant  step  on  a  journey  that  is  just 
beginning. I look forward to travelling this road with all of you. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 146/2008
