Miguel Fernández Ordóñez: Recent developments in the Spanish 
economy 
Testimony  of  Mr  Miguel  Fernández  Ordóñez,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Spain,  to  the 
Parliamentary Budget Committee, Madrid, 7 October 2008.  
 Budgetary  discussions  this  year  are  taking  place  at  a  time  when  the  Spanish  economy  is 
deep in a process of adjustment proving much more pronounced than initially expected. The 
international backdrop is marked by the weakening of the US economy, sharp rises in oil and 
commodities prices and, above all, the scale and persistence of the turmoil on international 
financial  markets.  Given  the  latest  events  in  the  United  States  and  Europe,  it  is  no 
exaggeration  to  say  that  we  are  faced  with  a  global  financial  crisis  without  precedent  in 
recent  times  which  will  require  an  overhaul  of  the  principles  that  have  governed  the 
regulation of international finances in recent decades. 
The  world  economy  is  in  exceptional  circumstances,  with  a  general  loss  of  economic 
dynamism,  surging  inflationary  pressures  and  serious  financial  instability  problems.  These 
are  exacerbating  and  accentuating  the  adjustment  of  the  Spanish  economy  which  the 
exhaustion  of  the  cycle  had  already  set  in  train,  following  a  long  period  of  expansion. 
Moreover, this is the first occasion on which the Spanish economy has faced such a process 
since joining the Economic and Monetary Union, which provides undoubted buttresses but 
also poses considerable challenges. The economic policy debate behind the preparation and 
approval of the Budget is thus of crucial importance. 
The far-reaching changes in the Spanish economy in recent decades have equipped it with 
the  wherewithal  to  overcome  this  difficult  stage  and  to  subsequently  resume  a  path  of 
sustained growth, allowing convergence to continue. But if these factors are to operate, the 
authorities and all agents must face up to the current circumstances and make the required 
efforts, and economic policies must prevent any slippage and enable the factors conducive to 
the resumption of sustained growth to come into play. 
Naturally, I shall focus today on the diagnosis of the situation of the Spanish economy and on 
its  economic  policy  implications.  But  these  would  both  be  incomplete  without  some,  albeit 
brief, reference to the deterioration of the international setting and to the economic outlook in 
the euro area which, as you know, will determine monetary policy developments. 
Last  year,  the  growth  of  the  world  economy  reached  5%.  The  forecasts  available  for  this 
year, however, place the figure below 4%, with scarcely any scope for the start of a recovery 
in  2009.  Moreover,  any  recovery  will  be  moderate,  slow  and  subject  to  a  degree  of 
uncertainty fuelled, among other developments, by a rise in major inflationary pressures in 
most  economies.  In  my  view,  there  are  three  basic  factors  behind  this  deterioration  of  the 
global economic situation. 
The  first  is  the  adverse  behaviour  of  the  US  economy,  weighted  down  by  the  continuing 
decline in its real estate sector, which is depressing household and investor confidence. Until 
relatively  recently,  the  emerging  economies  have  been  considerably  more  dynamic,  partly 
offsetting  the  greater  slackness  in  the  more  industrialised  countries  such  as  the  United 
States. However, doubts over the real ability of these economies to continue posting robust 
growth rates amid the virtual stagnation of the more advanced countries are ever greater. 
The increase in oil and commodities prices is the second of the basic factors behind recent 
developments in activity and inflation at the global level, despite the relative easing since the 
summer.  The  effects  of  these  price  rises  have  been  fully  felt  in  the  more  advanced 
economies,  while  in  the  emerging  economies  the  pass-through  of  higher  energy  costs  is 
proving slower and is still far from complete. 
BIS Review 122/2008 
 1
the  American 
the  serious  problems  besetting 
But  it  is  the  third  of  these  factors  that  will  most  likely  influence  developments  in  the  world 
economy in the coming quarters. I refer here to the severe worsening of the financial crisis in 
United States and in much of Europe, and to the turmoil on international financial markets.  
Somewhat more than a year back now, when the US subprime mortgage crisis broke, there 
was  great  uncertainty  over  the  scope  and  duration  of  the  episode  then  beginning.  Today, 
there  is  unfortunately  no  doubt  that  we  are  facing  a  global  financial  crisis  of  enormous 
proportions. 
Although at first the difficulties appeared to be confined to just a few investment funds and 
relatively  minor  US  mortgage  institutions,  the  overall  number  of  banks  affected  has  since 
widened  considerably.  We  have  witnessed  a  process,  with  no  practical  solution  in  sight, 
involving  nationalisations,  bankruptcies,  bank  interventions,  the  creation  of  new  investor 
guarantee schemes and considerable curbs on market practices, such as those affecting the 
short-selling of equities. 
The  list  of  institutions  affected  includes  most  notably:  the  major  investment  banks,  whose 
business  model  has  succumbed  to  the  turmoil;  the  US  government-sponsored  mortgage 
agencies; one of the biggest worldwide insurers; and major US credit institutions. In Europe, 
UK, Danish and Icelandic banks have been involved, as have more recently those from euro 
area  countries  such  as  Belgium,  the  Netherlands,  Luxembourg,  France  and  Germany. 
Moreover,  several  European  governments  have  announced  their  readiness  to  guarantee 
their banks’ deposits. 
The foregoing developments pale into insignificance in the face of the importance of the US 
Treasury’s  decision  to  propose  a  far-reaching  programme  whose  stated  aim  is  to  tackle 
globally 
initial 
appropriation  of  $700  billion  for  this  programme,  and  its  dramatic  presentation  by  the  US 
Treasury Secretary, illustrate the scale of the problem. As you are aware, the plan was finally 
approved following heated debate in the House of Representatives and in the Senate. 
Clearly, beyond its effects on specific banks, this unprecedented crisis is profoundly shifting 
some  of  the  key  coordinates  that  have  framed  global  financial  developments  in  recent 
decades. An economy such as Spain’s, which has been financing a substantial proportion of 
its expenditure abroad, can hardly isolate itself from the consequences of such deep-seated 
changes. 
International 
risk 
undervaluation  to  one  in  which  extraordinary  caution  is  exercised  in  their  evaluation.  Past 
experience has clearly shown the tendency of markets to overreact. It is even possible that 
certain  recent  developments  reflect,  at  least  partly,  an  excessive  reaction.  But  it  is 
unreasonable  to  expect  that,  once  the  situation  has  returned  to  normal,  international 
financing conditions will simply be as they were prior to the summer of 2007, which nobody 
today hesitates to qualify as excessively lax. 
Likewise, few question the fact that the expansion of the balance sheets of a large number of 
major  financial  institutions  exceeded  limits  which  should  not  have  been  overstepped.  The 
current  deleveraging  process  may  initially  reflect  the  correction  of  some  of  the  excesses 
committed. But taking a broader view, it also reveals a more fundamental movement towards 
a general reduction in the debt levels of financial intermediaries and the containment of credit 
flows,  the  effects  of  which  must  likewise  be  felt  by  the  ultimate  borrowers,  namely 
households and firms. 
Finally, I should point out that the magnitude of the imbalances generated and the scale of 
intervention  designed  have  prompted  a  necessary  pause  for  reflection  on  the  role  the 
economic authorities should play in developing and supervising financial markets. 
For the moment, however, I shall simply reiterate that one of the aspects highlighted by the 
current  financial  crisis  is  how  important  it  is  for  central  banks  to  have  the  appropriate 
instruments  with  which  to  manage  their  liquidity  provision  policies  with  sufficient  flexibility. 
from  a  situation  of  widespread 
financial  markets  have  moved 
financial  system.  The 
2 
 BIS Review 122/2008
And all the more so in the presence of turmoil which, as at present, is profoundly altering the 
operation of the channels through which liquid resources are normally re-distributed among 
the  various  banks  that  apply  for  them.  In  this  respect,  it  is  widely  acknowledged  that  the 
Eurosystem’s  monetary  policy  operational  framework  is  allowing  euro  area  banks'  liquidity 
requirements to be met, thereby preventing the emergence of additional pressures that might 
exacerbate the situation on financial markets. 
In  any  event,  returning  to  the  most  important  macroeconomic  developments  that  will 
influence the performance of the Spanish economy, it is clear that financial conditions in the 
euro  area,  as  in  the  rest  of  the  world,  have  tightened  notably.  Such  tightening  has 
compounded the adverse effects of the oil and commodities shocks on agents' real incomes 
and output capacity. The latest data, for the second quarter of the current year, show how 
the growth rate in the euro area has weakened to 1.4%, standing below potential. The latest 
ECB  projections  pointed  to  increases  of  between  1.1%  and  1.7%  this  year,  and  between 
0.6% and 1.8% in 2009, subject to considerable uncertainty and to downside risks that have 
increased in recent weeks. 
In addition, while growth was slowing, inflationary pressures were heightening and inflation 
expectations were being revised upwards, which has raised the risk that they may become 
unanchored. Nobody doubts that an eventual loss of control of inflation, with the subsequent 
deterioration in price expectations, would contribute to seriously exacerbating a slide towards 
economic weakening in the area.  
Such is the difficult setting in which the ECB Governing Council has had to take its monetary 
policy  decisions.  These  decisions  have  been  pondered  bearing  in  mind  at  all  times  the 
impact of tighter financial conditions and of the change in the dynamism of demand. Thus, 
against a backdrop of growing uncertainty, it was decided to hold interest rates steady until 
last July, when the materialisation of some of the previously identified risks to price stability 
made a 25 bp increase necessary. 
At the recent Governing Council meeting, however, we noted a weakening in activity in the 
area  and  the  fact  that  the  latest  price  data  point  to  the  onset  of  some  easing.  Inflationary 
risks have therefore diminished somewhat, though they have not disappeared, meaning that 
monetary  policy  should  continue contributing  to  containing  them.  Given  the  seriousness  of 
the  tensions  on  international  financial  markets,  we  also  reiterated  the  readiness  of  the 
Eurosystem to provide all the liquidity required for as long as should prove necessary.  
Let me now turn to the Spanish economy. As I was able to explain to you here before the 
summer,  the  change  in  cycle  in  Spain  had  started  before  the  episode  of  financial  turmoil, 
making  itself  felt  mainly  in  the  real  estate  sector,  which  set  in  train  a  correction  of  the 
excesses that had built up during the long expansionary phase.  
These  excesses  had  largely  arisen  owing  to  the  global  environment  of  financial  laxity  and 
undervaluation  of  risk,  and  to  monetary  and  financial  conditions  that  were  particularly 
accommodative  for  Spain  following  EMU  membership.  These  conditions  were  based  on 
interest rates that held at low levels over a very extensive period and which were conducive 
to  rapid  indebtedness  by  households  and  by  firms,  mainly  those  related  to  the  real  estate 
sector. 
In any event, the adjustment of the real estate sector began slowly, mirroring the gradualism 
with  which  the  determinants  of  residential  investment  changed.  Hence,  as  the  change  in 
monetary policy stance that began in late 2005 progressively passed through to household 
and corporate borrowing costs and as the overpricing of housing became more patent, the 
dynamism of the sector eased off. 
However, this gradual pattern was altered when the international financial crisis raised credit 
risk premiums across the board, blocked a most significant part of banks' wholesale funding 
mechanisms and spread uncertainty and mistrust, most particularly in respect of economies 
subject to real estate adjustments. Against this background, the demand for housing fell off 
BIS Review 122/2008 
 3
drastically, when the production of houses was still at a very high volume. House prices, after 
several  years  of  increasingly  more  moderate  rises,  began  to  post  small  declines  in  some 
market indicators as from the second quarter of this year, while housing starts fell by almost 
half.  This  abrupt  change  in  scenario,  together  with  the  tightening  of  financing  conditions, 
which  I  shall  address  in  greater  detail  later,  meant  that  real  estate  companies  had  to 
restructure, with some of them even going bankrupt. This series of factors compounded the 
correction  of  the  residential  sector  with  adverse  consequences  for  employment,  which  is 
acting as the main channel through which the adjustment of the sector is spreading to the 
rest of the economy. 
Household  consumption  is  rapidly  reflecting  the  deterioration  in  confidence,  against  a 
backdrop  of  considerable  financial  tensions,  and  the  abrupt  turnaround  in  the  employment 
situation. As a result, a certain rise in the saving rate consistent with the current scenario of 
greater uncertainty and financing difficulties might be taking place. I should stress that this 
far-reaching  slowdown  in  private  consumption  is  the  factor  that  is  most  contributing  to  the 
loss of dynamism in the economy. Business investment also slowed rapidly, in line with the 
changing  financial  conditions,  the  profile  of  domestic  demand  and  the  deterioration  in 
business  confidence.  Nonetheless,  exports  are  sustaining  a  relatively  high  growth  rate, 
despite  worsening  world  trade  so  far  this  year,  and  they  are  providing  some  support  to 
investment in equipment.  
This sound performance of foreign sales, along with the marked cut in the rate of increase of 
imports, has seen the external sector make a positive contribution to GDP growth for the first 
time since 2001, partly cushioning the slowdown in national demand. Net external demand is 
therefore providing a buffer of support against the widespread weakening trend. 
On  the  supply  side,  the  fact  that  the  sharp  adjustment  in  employment  is  taking  place  just 
when  labour  costs  are  posting  high  increases  is  of  particular  relevance.  This  is  because 
collective  bargaining  is  taking  on  board  the  deterioration  in  inflation  expectations  and 
because the activation of indexation clauses is passing through last year’s inflation deviation 
to wages. Unfortunately, there is a risk that this will occur again in 2009, potentially causing 
second-round effects in an economic situation in which the behaviour of employment is very 
important, as I stated, for regulating the cyclical downturn in the economy. Furthermore, this 
increase  in  wages  has  not  been  accompanied  by  productivity  gains  on  a  similar  scale. 
Therefore, the increases in unit labour costs continue to be higher than those of our trading 
partners. If, moreover, business margins were to continue widening as they have in the past, 
the difficulties for the economy of competing abroad would increase, undermining one of the 
potential sources of recovery. 
Inflation posted a rapid increase in the first half of the year, despite the loss of momentum of 
activity. As in other countries, the surge in oil and food commodities prices largely explains 
this, although the Spanish economy’s high energy dependence and low energy taxes have 
tended to amplify this effect. The latest figures point to the start of what should be a phase of 
gradual containment, though I shall return to this point later. 
Among  the  factors  that  have  weakened  expenditure  growth  is  the  tightening  of  financial 
conditions.  Given  its  close  relation  to  the  international  financial  crisis,  it  is  appropriate  to 
focus on the analysis of the behaviour of credit in Spain during this period. 
Loans granted by resident banks to Spanish households and firms began to slow before the 
increase  in  defaults  on  US  subprime  mortgage  loans  unleashed  the  present  international 
financial  crisis.  The  gradual  increase  in  financing  costs,  the  downward  revision  of 
expectations of future income and rises in wealth, and the very levels of debt attained had 
already acted before the summer of 2007 to lower the growth rate of debt towards a more 
sustainable pace. 
Naturally,  greater  caution  in  risk  assessment  and  the  sharp  reduction  in  international 
financing flows that the international financial crisis has entailed have further dampened the 
supply side, likewise contributing to slowing credit. 
4 
 BIS Review 122/2008
As  an  overall  result  of  both  forces,  the  latest  figures  show  year-on-year  growth  rates  of 
financing to Spanish households and firms of around 10% and 7%, respectively. Analysed 
from a shorter time perspective, the expansion of credit proves somewhat more moderate, 
although it is not significantly removed from nominal GDP growth. As might be expected in 
the current situation, characterised by greater uncertainty and risk aversion, new loans are 
being granted under more onerous conditions than in the past, which include lower loan-to-
value ratios and shorter maturities. 
The trajectory followed by credit in Spain to August may be said to be behaving in a manner 
consistent with the process of adjustment the Spanish economy is undergoing and with the 
prevailing global conditions, which entail higher financial costs, heightened risk aversion and 
serious difficulties in obtaining funds on international financial markets. 
From  the  standpoint  of  financial  stability,  Spanish  banks  have  demonstrated  greater 
resilience than their counterparts in many other countries. But as I have previously stated, 
there is no room for complacency here, since the challenges ahead are considerable. A crisis 
such  as  that  currently  rocking  worldwide  financial  markets  can  hardly  be  neutral  for  those 
who  depend  on  such  markets  to  a  relatively  greater  extent.  And  nor  can  the  fact  that  a 
sizeable  portion  of  the  Spanish  financial  system’s  financing  flows  is  tied  in  one  way  or 
another to the real estate sector be ignored either. 
However,  for  numerous  reasons,  including  most  notably  the  quality  of  our  regulation  and 
supervision,  Spanish  banks  have  not  been  involved  either  in  the  generation,  marketing  or 
acquisition  of  the  toxic  financial  products  that  are  inflicting  such  harm  on  the  international 
financial  system.  Their  levels  of  efficiency,  profitability  and  solvency  have  placed  them, 
moreover, in a position of relative strength to withstand this crisis. 
Accordingly,  and  in  the  light  of  the  events  currently  unfolding  daily  in  the  international 
financial system, I wish to make a call in my capacity as governor of the Banco de España 
for  calm,  and  to  reiterate  my  confidence  in  the  Spanish  financial  system,  which  is  well 
managed, regulated and supervised. I can assure you that at present there is no threat to 
Spanish depositors' savings. 
All  these  considerations  on  the  international  financial  crisis  add  great  uncertainty  to  the 
outlook  for  growth  in  the  Spanish  economy.  The  information  available  points  to  practically 
zero or even negative quarter-on-quarter rates of change in the second half of the year, and 
to the extension of the adjustment into 2009, with rates of increase in output that are more 
difficult to gauge but which will probably also be weak. The ongoing correction of residential 
investment may be expected to intensify, since the figures for work under way will show next 
year that housing starts have ground to a halt. It is likewise foreseeable that the slowdown in 
consumption will continue, due above all to the weakness of employment, and that business 
investment  will  mirror  the  decline  in  activity.  Accordingly,  the  contribution  of  domestic 
demand  to  GDP  growth  might  turn  negative,  and  would  only  be  relieved  by  the  external 
sector  if  the  buoyancy  of  exports  and,  as  seems  likely,  the  slowdown  in  imports  continue. 
The  importance  that  the  dynamising  effect  of  the  external  sector  acquires  in  the  current 
circumstances highlights the relevance of competitiveness in the future. 
The  foreseeable  trend  of  inflation  points  to  increasingly  more  moderate  average  price 
increases during the rest of the year, owing largely to the baseline effects of the energy and 
processed food price increases late last year and to the recent declines in crude oil prices, 
provided  these  are  sustained.  This  trajectory  should  extend  over  the  coming  year,  further 
supported  by  the  sluggishness  of  demand.  However,  to  attain  fuller  and  more  sustainable 
convergence  with  the  euro  area,  the  upside  risks  stemming  from  the  indirect  and  second-
round effects of cost and price increases this year must be prevented from materialising. 
The macroeconomic basis on which the government has drawn up the State Budget for 2009 
includes,  in  its  main  outline,  the  trajectory  of  the  macroeconomic  adjustment  I  referred  to 
earlier. But it is subject to major downside risks, especially as regards the course of domestic 
demand and, in particular, of residential investment. It should further be borne in mind that 
BIS Review 122/2008 
 5
the  global  economic  situation  and  the  impact  of  the  international  financial  turmoil  tend  to 
heighten these risks. 
The  design  of  the  Budget  should  take  into  consideration  the  pronounced  change  in  the 
economy’s cyclical situation, and bear in mind the speed at which public finances are being 
affected. In previous public appearances I have warned that the sound fiscal results of the 
previous  years  had  a  component  very  closely  linked  to  the  expansion  of  the  real  estate 
sector,  which  would  tend  to  disappear  in  lower  growth  phases.  Unfortunately,  the  loss  of 
momentum  of  tax  revenue  is  proving  acute.  And  combined  with  the  significant  revenue-
related impact of the expansionary measures taken this year, that means that the end-year 
figures for public finances in 2008 will be worse than projected only a few months ago, and 
that the general government balance at the end of the year will be in deficit. 
The weakness of activity in 2009 will give rise to a deficit-widening dynamic which, given the 
uncertainty facing us, will mean that that the deficit may be greater than forecast in the draft 
Budget.  I  must  reiterate  here  the  call  for  prudence  in  fiscal  policy  management,  whereby 
budgetary  policy  should  focus  on  allowing  the  automatic  stabilisers  to  continue  deploying 
their  intended  countercyclical  effect,  while  preserving  the  bases  for  maintaining  a  sound 
position in the long term. Given the uncertainty surrounding the world growth scenario, it is 
important  that  fiscal  policy  should  retain  room  for  manoeuvre  in  the  face  of  potential 
situations  of  greater  weakness.  Nothing  could  be  worse  than  having  to  face  fresh  turmoil 
when the only option possible is that of having to reduce the deficit, as we have had to do in 
the  past  and  as  has  happened  recently  in  other  developed  countries.  Further,  the  major 
advantage for the Spanish economy that maintaining a comparatively low public debt/GDP 
ratio entails should be preserved. 
Watchfulness  will  also  be  needed  to  prevent  current  expenditure  overruns  that  reduce  the 
leeway  available  to  undertake  public  investment  programmes  and  fulfil  other  productive 
expenditure  commitments  made  in  the  Budget.  We  should  not  forget  that  when  public 
overspending occurs, the subsequent adjustment usually falls on productive spending and, 
most  particularly,  on  public  investment,  with  adverse  consequences  for  long-term  growth 
potential.  In  the  current  circumstances,  moreover,  having  some  scope  to  carry  out  the 
infrastructure  investment  plans  under  way  is  crucial  for  smoothing  the  adjustment  in  the 
construction sector. 
The State Budget should, in my view, comply with these premises. But the regional and local 
governments  also  have  a  major  role  to  play  in  this  task,  since  they  account  for  a  most 
significant  portion  of  public  spending  –  and,  in  particular,  of  public  investment  –  and  are 
facing a phase of rapid decline in their revenue-raising capacity. 
Elsewhere, a worrying aspect of the scenario I have described is the speed and intensity of 
the response by employment, which is amplifying the effect of the correction of the housing 
sector  on  the  rest  of  the  economy.  This  reveals  the  persistence  of  inadequacies  in  the 
workings of factor and product markets that mean that the weight of the adjustment falls on 
the  level  of  employment,  hindering  the  necessary  reallocation  of  productive  factors  across 
sectors.  
The behaviour of wage costs and the high margins seen in certain activities tend, moreover, 
to make the inflationary episode more persistent, with the adverse consequences this may 
have for price and cost-formation habits and for the trend of the relative prices and costs that 
bear on the economy's competitiveness. 
It is therefore very important not to lose sight of the fact that the main instrument available in 
the current circumstances is that of making structural reforms that enhance the economy’s 
flexibility, liberalise certain sectors and markets, and increase competition. Despite the efforts 
made in recent decades, there are still numerous areas of the Spanish economy that need 
reforms. I do not intend to address these in detail, but I shall refer briefly to those spheres 
where  I  consider  pressing  action  is  needed.  And  I  should  stress  that  it  is  here  where  the 
potential room for manoeuvre to counter weakening growth in the euro area is to be found. 
6 
 BIS Review 122/2008
In  the  labour  market,  it  is  imperative  to  bring  about  a  milder  reduction  in  employment  in 
cyclical slowdowns. In this connection, we must explore channels which provide a response 
by wages to changes in the economic environment, aligning them to productivity gains, and 
avoiding  upward  inertia  in  the  face  of  external  shocks  introduced  by  mechanisms  such  as 
wage indexation clauses. It is also vital to hold long-term unemployment at low levels, and to 
do this the move from unemployment to employment status must be made easier, improving 
the workings of employment services and the effectiveness of active policies. 
In the housing market, the regulations governing renting must be improved to make it more 
flexible and profitable so as to promote the acquisition of houses for investment purposes, 
and  thus  help  reduce  excess  supply.  Further,  putting  these  houses  on  the  rental  market 
would make it easier to meet the population's demand for residential services.  
In services activities and, in particular, in the distributive sector there is also much scope to 
set  in  place  a  more  competitive  environment  and  achieve  sizeable  gains  in  efficiency.  I 
consider  that  the  transposition  of  the  services  directive  offers  a  unique  opportunity  for 
headway  in  achieving  the  objective  of  reducing  our  rate  of  inflation  and  increasing  the 
economy's competitiveness and household purchasing power in a setting in which incomes 
have been dented by dearer oil and the slowdown in employment. 
With the same objectives, improvements in the regulation of the network industries and, in 
particular, of the energy sector should be made to promote competition and increase energy 
efficiency. The same applies for port, airport and railway freight transport services, sectors 
which are essential for strengthening the competitiveness of Spanish industry and exporters. 
To  conclude,  I  am  confident  that  if  the  Spanish  economy  is  capable  of  mobilising  the 
potential  nurtured  over  many  years  of  building  up  stability  and  improving  the  workings  of 
markets  and  institutions,  then  it  may  rise  to  the  challenges  and  difficulties  facing  it  and 
continue to make progress in the medium term in narrowing the welfare differences with the 
most advanced countries. 
1 
 
 
BIS Review 122/2008 
 7
