Savenaca Narube: The Fiji economy – facing the global crisis  
Summary of an address by Mr Savenaca Narube, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji, to 
the Fiji Australia Business Council, Suva, 2 December 2008. 
 Global crisis 
• 
Looking  at  a  snapshot  of  domestic  economic  conditions,  the  economy  declined 
heavily  in  2007  but  is  recovering  this  year,  albeit  at  a  low  growth  rate.  The  trade 
deficit  is  widening  and  exerting  pressure  on  foreign  reserves.  Moreover,  inflation 
rose to a 20-year high but is expected to moderate in 2009. Investment has fallen. 
Unemployment is rising and poverty is worsening. Now Fiji faces the global financial 
crisis. 
The IMF has revised world growth successively, down to 3.7 percent this year and is 
expecting  a  global  recession,  with  growth  forecast  at  2.2  percent  in  2009.  Of  our 
trading  partners,  New  Zealand,  Japan  and  the  Euro-zone  are  in  recession,  while 
growth in the US and Australia has slowed considerably. 
The crisis has resulted in sharp swings in the Fiji dollar vis-à-vis the currencies of 
our  trading  partners.  However,  the  Nominal  Effective  Exchange  Rate  remains 
stable. 
The financial crisis will affect us through the recession in our major markets and also 
in the changes to the exchange rate.  
Exposure to trade in goods and services 
• 
Fiji’s  commodity  exports  will  be  affected  insofar  as  external  demand  falls.  Hence, 
demand-driven  exports,  such  as  tourism,  water  and  garments  are  likely  to  slow 
down. Supply-driven exports, while unaffected from the global crisis, are bound by 
on-going  structural  constraints.  Overall,  there  is  likely  to  be  a  slowdown  in  the 
growth of total exports. 
Tourism is anticipated to be under threat from the fallout of the global financial crisis. 
Visitor  arrivals  from  the  US,  Europe  and  Japan  are  already  falling,  while  New 
Zealand tourist arrivals are flat. The Australian market remains resilient and is a key 
source  of  growth.  Exchange  rate  movements,  particularly  with  the  Australian  and 
New Zealand currencies, will further dampen demand. 
Personal remittances are likely to decline further. 
Overall, imports are expected to rise. The weakening of the Fiji dollar, coupled with 
higher duty, is likely to raise the price of cement and cars out of Japan, dampening 
demand. On the other hand, the strengthening of the Fiji dollar against the Aussie 
and  Kiwi  dollars  will  lower  food  prices  received  from  Australia  and  New  Zealand. 
However, demand may be inelastic. 
The trade balance may worsen. 
Growth outlook 
• 
After contracting in 2007 (-6.6%), our economy is showing some recovery in 2008 
(1.2%). Forecasts for 2009 and 2010 are 2.4 percent and 1.9 percent, respectively.  
BIS Review 155/2008 
 1
        The  major  drivers  of  growth  are  tourism,  agriculture,  manufacturing,  mining  and 
water,  while  the  major  drag,  particularly  for  2010  and  2011,  is  the  reduction  in 
Government expenditure, following the fiscal stimulus expected for 2009.  
These  growth  rates  are  too  low,  compared  to  our  Pacific  neighbours  and  similar 
small island developing countries. 
Key challenges and policy mix 
Our key challenges are: 
• 
o 
o 
o 
o 
Budgetary measures 
o 
 Safeguarding Fiji’s external position 
Raising exports 
Raising investment 
Raising and sustaining growth 
o 
Pro-growth (fiscal deficit is 3% of GDP for 2009, support for priority sectors 
– tourism, agriculture, ICT) 
Balance  of  Payments  (BOP)  support  –  bio-fuel,  import  substitution 
(increase in tariffs), enticing Fiji diaspora 
Investment – infrastructure development, tax incentives 
o 
Monetary measures 
o 
BOP – credit ceiling, exchange controls 
o 
Investment – low interest rates, special approvals for priority sector lending 
Government has indicated an expansionary stance for 2009. While a good increase 
is noted for capital expenditure, operating expenditure is too high, as a percentage 
of GDP. Nevertheless, the deficit is sustainable. 
On  money  and  credit  conditions,  commercial  banks’  lending  rate  continues  to 
decline and was around 8 percent in October. Our lending rate is the lowest in the 
region. Lending for investment purposes is rising. 
Monetary policy objectives – year-end inflation are still expected at 7.5 percent but 
will moderate next year. Foreign reserves remain under pressure. 
Summary 
• 
Current  weak  domestic  economic  fundamentals  will  be  exacerbated  by  the  global 
financial  crisis.  The  key  challenges  must  be  met  with  coordinated  monetary  and 
fiscal policies.  
The current policy mix is appropriate. There is a need to raise growth in the medium 
term  and  the  only  way  to  do  this  sustainably  is  to  raise  exports  of  goods  and 
services. 
     2 
 BIS Review 155/2008
