Ben S Bernanke: Current economic and financial conditions 
Speech  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve System, at the National Association for Business Economics 50th Annual Meeting, 
Washington DC, 7 October 2008. 
 Good afternoon. I am pleased to have once again the opportunity to address the National 
Association for Business Economics. My remarks today will focus on recent developments in 
the financial sector and the economy and on the challenges we face.  
As you know, financial systems in the United States and in much of the rest of the world are 
under extraordinary stress, particularly the credit and money markets. The losses suffered by 
many  banks  and  nonbank  financial  firms  have  both  constrained  their  ability  to  lend  and 
reduced  the  willingness  of  other  market  participants  to  deal  with  them.  Great  uncertainty 
about the values of financial assets, particularly more complex and opaque assets, has made 
investors extremely reluctant to bear credit risk, resulting in further declines in asset prices 
and  a  drying  up  of  liquidity  in  a  number  of  funding  markets.  Even  secured  funding  has 
become expensive and difficult to obtain, as lenders worry about their ability to sell collateral 
in illiquid markets in the event of default. In addition, many securitization markets, such as 
the  secondary  market  for  private-label  mortgage-backed  securities,  remain  closed  or 
impaired.  
Considerable  experience  in  both  industrialized  and  emerging  economies  has  shown  that 
severe  financial  instability,  together  with  the  associated  declines  in  asset  prices  and 
disruptions in credit markets, can take a heavy toll on the broader economy if left unchecked. 
For  this  reason,  the  Federal  Reserve,  the  Treasury,  and  other  agencies  are  committed  to 
restoring market stability and are working assiduously to ensure that the financial system is 
able to perform its critical economic functions. Recent actions by the Congress have given 
the  Treasury  new  tools  and  resources  to  address  the  stressed  conditions  of  our  financial 
markets and institutions. The Federal Reserve has also been granted a new authority, the 
ability to pay interest on bank reserves, which will allow us to expand our lending as needed 
to support the system while better managing the federal funds rate. These tools will provide 
important additional support for the government's efforts to strengthen financial markets and 
the economy. 
Let me briefly review recent financial developments. On the heels of nearly a year of stress in 
credit markets, investors' and creditors' concerns about funding and credit risks at financial 
firms intensified over the summer as mortgage-related assets deteriorated further, economic 
growth  slowed,  and  uncertainty  about  the  economic  outlook  increased.  As  investors  and 
creditors lost confidence in the ability of certain firms to meet their obligations, their access to 
capital markets as well as to short-term funding markets became increasingly impaired and 
their  stock  prices  fell  sharply.  Among  the  companies  that  experienced  this  dynamic  most 
forcefully  were  the  government-sponsored  enterprises  (GSEs),  Fannie  Mae  and  Freddie 
Mac;  the  investment  bank  Lehman  Brothers;  and  the  insurance  company  American 
International Group (AIG). 
The Federal Reserve believes that, whenever possible, such difficulties should be addressed 
through private-sector arrangements – for example, by raising new equity capital, as many 
firms have done, by negotiations leading to a merger or acquisition, or by an orderly wind-
down.  Government  assistance  should  be  provided  with  the  greatest  reluctance  and  only 
when the stability of the financial system, and thus the health of the broader economy, is at 
risk. In those cases when financial stability is threatened, however, intervention to protect the 
public interest may well be justified.  
BIS Review 121/2008 
 1
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac present cases in point. The Federal Reserve had long warned 
about  the  systemic  risks  posed  by  these  companies'  large  portfolios  of  mortgages  and 
mortgage-backed  securities,  as  well  as  the  problems  arising  from  the  conflict  between 
shareholders'  objectives  and  the  government's  goals  for  the  two  firms.  Given  the  scale  of 
losses  in  their  portfolios,  raising  enough  new  capital  from  private  investors  was  infeasible. 
The  firms'  size  and  their  government-sponsored  status  precluded  a  merger  with,  or 
acquisition by, another company. To avoid unacceptably large dislocations in the mortgage 
markets,  the  financial  sector,  and  the  economy  as  a  whole,  the  Federal  Housing  Finance 
Agency (FHFA) put Fannie and Freddie into conservatorship and the Treasury, drawing on 
authorities recently granted by the Congress, made financial support available. The Federal 
Reserve,  acting  in  a  consultative  role,  worked  closely  with  FHFA  in  evaluating  the  GSE 
portfolios  and  capital  positions.  Based  on  the  joint  findings  of  the  agencies,  we  supported 
FHFA's decision to place the companies into conservatorship as necessary and appropriate, 
given  their  conditions  and  systemic  importance.  The  government's  actions  appear  to  have 
stabilized the GSEs, although like virtually all other firms they are experiencing effects of the 
current crisis. Nonetheless, we already have seen benefits of their stabilization in the form of 
lower mortgage rates, which should help the housing market. 
The difficulties at Lehman and AIG raised somewhat different issues. Like the GSEs, both 
companies were large and complex and deeply embedded in our financial system. In both 
cases,  as  the  firms  approached  default,  the  Treasury  and  the  Federal  Reserve  sought 
private-sector  solutions,  but  none  was  forthcoming.  Attempts  to  organize  a  consortium  of 
private firms to purchase or recapitalize Lehman were unsuccessful. With respect to public-
sector solutions, we determined that either facilitating a sale of Lehman or maintaining the 
company  as  a  free-standing  entity  would  have  required  a  very  sizable  injection  of  public 
funds  –  much  larger  than  in  the  case  of  Bear  Stearns  –  and  would  have  involved  the 
assumption  by  taxpayers  of  billions  of  dollars  of  expected  losses.  Even  if  assuming  these 
costs  could  be  justified  on  public  policy  grounds,  neither  the  Treasury  nor  the  Federal 
Reserve  had  the  authority  to  commit  public  money  in  that  way;  in  particular,  the  Federal 
Reserve's loans must be sufficiently secured to provide reasonable assurance that the loan 
will be fully repaid. Such collateral was not available in this case. Recognizing that Lehman's 
potential failure posed risks to market functioning, the Federal Reserve sought to cushion the 
effects  by  implementing  a  number  of  measures,  including  substantially  broadening  the 
collateral accepted by the Fed's Primary Dealer Credit Facility (PDCF) and Term Securities 
Lending  Facility  (TSLF)  to  ensure  that  the  remaining  primary  dealers  would  have 
uninterrupted access to funding. 
In the case of AIG, the Federal Reserve and the Treasury judged that a disorderly failure of 
AIG would have severely threatened global financial stability and the performance of the U.S. 
economy.  That  judgment  reflected  our  assessment  of  prevailing  market  conditions,  AIG's 
central  role  in  a  number  of  markets  other  firms  use  to  manage  risks,  and  the  size  and 
composition of AIG's balance sheet. To avoid the default of AIG, the Federal Reserve was 
able to provide emergency credit that was judged to be adequately secured by the assets of 
the  company.  To  protect  U.S.  taxpayers  and  to  mitigate  the  possibility  that  lending  to  AIG 
would  encourage  inappropriate  risk-taking  by  financial  firms  in  the  future,  the  Federal 
Reserve  further  ensured  that  the  terms  of  the  credit  extended  to  AIG  imposed  significant 
costs and constraints on the firm's owners, managers, and creditors.  
AIG's difficulties and Lehman's failure, along with growing concerns about the U.S. housing 
sector  and  economy,  contributed  to  extraordinarily  turbulent  conditions  in  global  financial 
markets  in  recent  weeks.  Equity  prices  have  fallen  sharply,  the  cost  of  short-term  credit, 
where  such  credit  has  been  available,  has  spiked,  and  liquidity  has  dried  up  in  many 
markets. One money market fund's losses forced it to "break the buck" – that is, the value of 
its assets fell below par – an event that triggered extensive withdrawals from a number of 
money market funds. Those funds responded to the surge in redemptions by attempting to 
reduce their holdings of commercial paper and large certificates of deposit issued by banks. 
2 
 BIS Review 121/2008
Some  firms  that  could  not  roll  over  maturing  commercial  paper  drew  on  back-up  lines  of 
credit  with  banks  just  as  the  banks  were  finding  it  even  more  difficult  to  raise  cash  in  the 
money markets. At the same time, a marked increase in the demand for safe assets – a flight 
to quality and liquidity – resulted in a further drop in the value of mortgage-related assets and 
sent the yield on Treasury bills down to a few hundredths of a percent. 
Developments  during  the  summer  pressured  not  only  nonbank  financial  firms,  but  also  a 
number  of  depository  institutions,  including  Washington  Mutual  (WaMu)  and  Wachovia.  In 
recent  weeks,  these  two  institutions  suffered  deposit  outflows  and  reduced  access  to 
wholesale funding. The Office of Thrift Supervision, WaMu's regulator, closed that company 
and  appointed  the  Federal  Deposit  Insurance  Corporation  (FDIC)  as  receiver;  the  FDIC 
immediately  sold  the  institution  to  JPMorgan  Chase.  In  the  case  of  Wachovia,  to  avoid 
serious adverse effects on economic conditions and financial stability, the Secretary of the 
Treasury,  in  consultation  with  the  President  and  on  the  recommendation  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  and  FDIC,  authorized  the  FDIC  to  use  its  funds  to  facilitate  the  sale  of  that 
company's banking operations without loss to creditors. Both Citicorp and Wells Fargo have 
offered to buy the company and negotiations are continuing. Most importantly, however, in 
either case all depositors and creditors of Wachovia are fully protected, and depositors and 
other customers will experience no interruption in banking services. 
By  potentially  restricting  future  flows  of  credit  to  households  and  businesses,  the 
developments  in  financial  markets  pose  a  significant  threat  to  economic  growth.  The 
Treasury  and  the  Fed  have  taken  a  range  of  actions  to  address  the  very  tight  funding 
conditions that now prevail. For example, the Treasury implemented a temporary guarantee 
program for balances held in money market mutual funds, helping to stem the outflows from 
these funds and thus reducing their need to sell assets into already distressed markets. The 
Federal Reserve has taken a number of steps, including putting in place a temporary lending 
facility that provides financing for banks to purchase high-quality asset-backed commercial 
paper  from  money  market  funds.  The  Fed  has  also  significantly  increased  the  quantity  of 
funds  it  auctions  to  banks  and  has  accommodated  heightened  demands  for  funding  from 
banks and primary dealers; as of last Wednesday, our various lending facilities, including our 
securities lending program, were providing more than $800 billion of liquidity to the financial 
system.  To  address  dollar  funding  pressures  worldwide,  we  have  significantly  expanded 
reciprocal  currency  arrangements  (so-called  swap  agreements)  with  foreign  central  banks. 
These  agreements  enable  the  foreign  central  banks  to  provide  dollar  funding  to  financial 
institutions  in  their  jurisdictions,  which  helps  to  improve  the  functioning  of  dollar  funding 
markets globally. In addition, this morning the Federal Reserve announced a new facility that 
will  help  provide  liquidity  to  term  funding  markets  by  purchasing  three-month  commercial 
paper and asset-backed commercial paper directly from eligible issuers. 
The  expansion  of  Federal  Reserve  lending  is  helping  financial  firms  cope  with  reduced 
access  to  their  usual  sources  of  funding.  Recently,  however,  our  liquidity  provision  had 
begun  to  run  ahead  of  our  ability  to  absorb  excess  reserves  held  by  the  banking  system, 
leading  the  effective  funds  rate,  on  many  days,  to  fall  below  the  target  set  by  the  Federal 
Open  Market  Committee.  This  problem  has  largely  been  addressed  by  a  provision  of  the 
legislation the Congress passed last week, which gives the Federal Reserve the authority to 
pay  interest  on  balances  that  depository  institutions  hold  in  their  accounts  at  the  Federal 
Reserve  Banks.  The  Federal  Reserve  announced  yesterday  that  it  will  pay  interest  on 
required  reserve  balances  at  10  basis  points  below  the  target  federal  funds  rate,  and  pay 
interest on excess reserves, initially at 75 basis points below the target. Paying interest on 
reserves should allow us to better control the federal funds rate, as banks are unlikely to lend 
overnight balances at a rate lower than they can receive from the Fed; thus, the payment of 
interest  on  reserves  should  set  a  floor  for  the  funds  rate  over  the  day.  With  this  step,  our 
lending facilities may be more easily expanded as necessary. So long as financial conditions 
warrant, we will continue to look for ways to reduce funding pressures in key markets.  
BIS Review 121/2008 
 3
Economic  activity  had  shown  signs  of  decelerating  even  before  the  recent  upsurge  in 
financial-market tensions. As has been the case for some time, the housing market continues 
to be a primary source of weakness in the real economy as well as in the financial markets. 
However, the slowdown in economic activity has spread outside the housing sector. Private 
payrolls  have  continued  to  contract,  and  the  declines  in  employment,  together  with  earlier 
increases in food and energy prices, have eroded the purchasing power of households. This 
sluggishness of real incomes, together with tighter credit and declining household wealth, is 
now showing through more clearly to consumer spending. Indeed, since May, real consumer 
outlays  have  contracted  significantly.  Meanwhile,  in  the  business  sector,  worsening  sales 
prospects  and  a  heightened  sense  of  uncertainty  have  begun  to  weigh  more  heavily  on 
investment spending as well. 
The intensification of financial turmoil and the further impairment of the functioning of credit 
markets seem likely to increase the restraint on economic activity in the period ahead. Even 
households with good credit histories are now facing difficulties obtaining mortgage loans or 
home equity lines of credit. Banks are also reducing credit card limits, and denial rates on 
automobile  loan  applications  reportedly  are  rising.  Businesses,  too,  are  confronting 
diminished access to credit. For example, disruptions in the commercial paper market and 
tightening of bank lending standards have made it more difficult for businesses to obtain the 
working  capital  they  need  to  meet  everyday  operating  expenses  such  as  payrolls  and 
inventories. 
All told, economic activity is likely to be subdued during the remainder of this year and into 
next  year.  The  heightened  financial  turmoil  that  we  have  experienced  of  late  may  well 
lengthen the period of weak economic performance and further increase the risks to growth. 
To support growth and reduce the downside risks, continued efforts to stabilize the financial 
markets are essential. The Federal Reserve will continue to use the tools at its disposal to 
improve market functioning and liquidity. 
Inflation  has  been  elevated,  reflecting  the  steep  increases  in  the  prices  of  oil,  other 
commodities, and imports that occurred earlier this year, as well as some pass-through by 
firms to consumers of their higher costs of production. However, more recently, the prices of 
oil and other commodities, while remaining quite volatile, have fallen from their peaks, and 
prices of imports show signs of decelerating. In addition, expected inflation, as measured by 
consumer  surveys  and  inflation-indexed  Treasury  securities,  has  held  steady  or  eased. 
These  recent  developments,  together  with  economic  activity  that  is  likely  to  fall  short  of 
potential for a time, should lead to rates of inflation more consistent with price stability. Still, 
the inflation outlook remains highly uncertain, in part because of the extraordinary volatility of 
commodity prices. We will need to continue to monitor price developments closely. 
Overall, the combination of the incoming data and recent financial developments suggests 
that the outlook for economic growth has worsened and that the downside risks to growth 
have increased. At the same time, the outlook for inflation has improved somewhat, though it 
remains uncertain. In light of these developments, the Federal Reserve will need to consider 
whether the current stance of policy remains appropriate. 
The intensification of the financial crisis in recent weeks made clear that a more powerful and 
comprehensive  approach  involving  the  fiscal  authorities  was  needed  to  solve  these 
problems.  On  that  basis,  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  with  the  support  of  the  Federal 
Reserve,  went  to  the  Congress  to  ask  for  a  substantial  program  aimed  at  stabilizing  our 
financial markets. As you know, last week the Congress passed and the President signed the 
Emergency  Economic  Stabilization  Act.  This  legislation  provides  important  new  tools  for 
addressing the distress in financial markets and thus mitigating the risks to the economy. The 
act  adds  broad,  flexible  authorities  to  buy  troubled  assets,  to  provide  guarantees,  and  to 
directly  strengthen  the  balance  sheets  of  individual  institutions.  Notably,  the  legislation 
establishes  a  new  Troubled  Asset  Relief  Program,  or  TARP,  under  which  the  Treasury  is 
authorized  to  purchase  as  much  as  $700billion  of  troubled  mortgages,  mortgage-related 
4 
 BIS Review 121/2008
securities, and other financial instruments from financial firms that are regulated under U.S. 
law  and  have  significant  operations  in  the  United  States.  The  act  also  raises  the  limit  on 
deposit insurance at banks and credit unions from $100,000 to $250,000 per account, a step 
that  should  reinforce  depositors'  confidence  in  the  security  of  their  funds  and  thus  help  to 
stabilize depository institutions. And, as I mentioned, the act provides the Federal Reserve 
the  authority  to  pay  interest  on  reserves,  which  will  allow  us  to  better  manage  the  federal 
funds rate as we provide liquidity to the markets. We will begin exercising that authority this 
week. 
The TARP's purchases of illiquid assets from banks and other financial institutions will create 
liquidity and promote price discovery in the markets for these assets. This in turn will reduce 
investor uncertainty about the current value and prospects of financial institutions, enabling 
banks and other institutions to raise capital and increasing the willingness of counterparties 
to engage. More generally, increased liquidity and transparency in pricing will help to restore 
confidence  in  our  financial  markets  and  promote  more  normal  functioning.  With  time, 
strengthening our financial institutions and markets will allow credit to begin flowing again, 
supporting economic growth. 
The  interests  of  taxpayers  are  carefully  protected  under  this  program.  First,  the  Congress 
has  required  extensive  controls  and  oversight  to  ensure  that  the  allotted  funds  are  used 
appropriately and effectively. Second, the $700 billion allocated by the legislation is not an 
authorization to spend but rather an authorization to purchase financial assets. The Treasury 
will be a patient investor and will likely hold these assets for an appreciable period of time. 
Eventually, however, some assets will mature, and the Treasury will choose to sell others to 
private  investors.  Financially,  in  the  long  run,  the  taxpayer  may  come  out  either  ahead  or 
behind in this process; in light of the many uncertainties, no assurances can be given. But 
the ultimate cost of the program to the taxpayer will certainly be far less than $700 billion. 
Third,  and  most  important,  restoring  the  normal  flow  of  credit  is  essential  for  economic 
recovery.  If  the  TARP  promotes  financial  stability,  leading  ultimately  to  stronger  economic 
growth  and  job  creation,  it  will  have  proved  a  very  good  investment  indeed,  to  everyone's 
benefit. 
To be sure, there are many challenges associated with the design and implementation of the 
TARP,  including  determining  which  assets  will  be  purchased  and  how  prices  will  be 
determined.  The  Treasury,  with  the  advice  and  cooperation  of  the  Federal  Reserve,  is 
working to address these challenges as quickly as possible. It is unlikely that a single method 
will  be  used  for  acquiring  assets;  inevitably,  some  experimentation  will  be  necessary  to 
determine which approaches are most effective. Importantly, the legislation that created the 
TARP  does  provide  sufficient  flexibility  to  allow  for  different  approaches  to  solving  the 
problem – subject, of course, to the close oversight that will ensure that the program's funds 
are used in ways that are in the interest of taxpayers. 
These  are  momentous  steps,  but  they  are  being  taken  to  address  a  problem  of  historic 
dimensions.  In  one  respect,  however,  we  are  fortunate.  We  have  learned  from  historical 
experience with severe financial crises that if government intervention comes only at a point 
at which many or most financial institutions are insolvent or nearly so, the costs of restoring 
the system are greatly increased. This is not the situation we face today. The Congress and 
the  Administration  chose  to  act  at  a  moment  of  great  stress,  but  one  at  which  the  great 
majority  of  financial  institutions  have  sufficient  capital  and  liquidity  to  return  to  their  critical 
function  of  providing  new  credit  for  our  economy.  The  steps  being  taken  now  to  restore 
confidence in our institutions and markets will go far to resolving the current dislocations in 
the markets. I believe that the bold actions taken by the Congress, the Treasury, the Federal 
Reserve, and other agencies, together with the natural recuperative powers of the financial 
markets, will lay the groundwork for financial and economic recovery. 
BIS Review 121/2008 
 5
