Seong-Tae Lee: Global stagflation threat and monetary policy  
Opening address by Mr Seong-Tae Lee, Governor and Chairman of The Bank of Korea, at 
the 16th Central Banking Seminar, Seoul, 21 October 2008. 
 Opening remarks 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Let me extend a hearty welcome to all central bankers gathered here from around the world 
to take part in the Bank of Korea’s “Central Banking Seminar”. I would like to express my 
special thanks as well to our keynote speaker, Professor Dr. Hermann  Remsperger of the 
Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank. 
This  seminar,  now  in  its  sixteenth  year,  is  held  to  promote  exchanges  of  experience  and 
opinion among the staff of central banks of various countries. We hope as well that it will lead 
to a consensus among us on major monetary policy issues. 
At  the  present  time,  countries  around  the  world  face  a  very  grave  situation.  Economic 
slowdown  and  inflation  are  occurring  simultaneously  and  the  worldwide  financial  turmoil  is 
worsening. 
In this context the theme of this week's seminar, the "Global Stagflation Threat and Monetary 
Policy" merits deep interest and close attention of all central banks. 
Global economy facing triple whammy 
After  enjoying  a  long  period  of  prosperity  under  low  inflation,  the  global  economy  is  now 
experiencing acute difficulties in the three areas of economic activity, prices and finance. 
The global economy is shrinking fast, led downward by the advanced economies, due to the 
combined  shock  of  persistently  high  oil  prices  and  the  US  subprime  mortgage  meltdown. 
Emerging economies, too, which had for some time seemingly decoupled from the advanced 
ones, are now also showing signs of slowdown. 
What is more, inflation rates around the world continue to run at high levels due to the knock-
on effects of the sharp rises in prices of international commodities including oil and grains. 
In the midst of all this, counterparty risks are emerging starkly in the international financial 
markets  and  the  volatility  of  price  variables  such  as  share  prices  and  exchange  rates  has 
grown greatly. A severe credit crunch has thus erupted in response to credit risk reappraisal 
and the ongoing deleveraging by financial institutions. In consequence, emerging countries 
now  face  difficulties  in  securing  foreign  currency  liquidity,  as  they  are  perceived  to  have 
relatively higher credit risk. 
Central bank policy tasks 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
When a cost shock occurs, such as a steep rise in oil prices, it is widely acknowledged that 
the  central  bank’s  policy  options  are  constrained.  This  is  because  the  resulting  economic 
slowdown and inflation go hand-in-hand. 
Past experience and the consensus among economists suggest that, when there is a high 
risk  of  second-round  effects,  in  other  words  when  a  cost  shock  feeds  into  overall  price 
increases by way of rising wages, monetary tightening is necessary. 
BIS Review 128/2008 
 1
In  the  situation  we  face  today,  however,  the  financial  markets  are  very  unstable  and  their 
future direction is unclear. We therefore need to be cautious in coping with price pressures. 
This  is  because  the  downside  risks  to  growth  increase  while  the  upside  risks  to  prices 
dwindle, as the financial market turmoil has an ever greater impact on the real economy. A 
forward-looking monetary policy that takes account of medium and long term macroeconomic 
trends  also  becomes  more  difficult  at  a  time  like  this,  as  uncertainty  mounts  concerning 
economic conditions at home and abroad. 
For  countries  facing  foreign  currency  fund-raising  problems,  meanwhile,  constraints  on 
monetary  policy  easing  may  exist  even  when  the  downside  risk  to  growth  is  substantial. 
Easing of monetary policy could adversely affect their foreign exchange supply and demand 
conditions. 
Even though central banks are confronted with such manifold difficulties, however, they must 
do their utmost as far as circumstances allow, to prevent the erosion of the foundation for 
price  stability.  Only  if  they  act  in  this  way  can  central  banks,  whose  main  purpose  is  the 
maintenance of price stability, retain public confidence. And on this basis they can secure the 
effectiveness of their monetary policy. 
Closing remarks  
Fellow central bankers, 
I  am  sure  that  this  week's  seminar  will  provide  an  opportunity  for  lively  discussion  on  the 
most  desirable  ways  for  central  banks  to  tackle  the  stagflation  threat,  particularly  when 
financial markets are in turmoil as they are today. 
Drawing my remarks to a close, let me express my wish that this seminar may contribute to 
stronger cooperation among all of our central banks, by fostering good fellowship among us. 
Although I know your days this week will be fully occupied, I hope you will also spare a few 
moments to savor the beauties of Korean culture and the autumn colors. 
2 
 BIS Review 128/2008
