Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Sustaining Malaysia as a platform for international 
Islamic finance  
Address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the Launching 
of  HSBC  Amanah  Malaysia  Berhad:  "Sustaining  Malaysia  as  a  Platform  for  International 
Islamic Finance", Kuala Lumpur, 25 November 2008. 
 It is my pleasure to be here today at this official launch of "HSBC Amanah Malaysia Berhad" 
(HSBC Amanah). This launch is significant in a number of respects. It reflects the continued 
expansion of Islamic finance in Malaysia , taking place at a time of great uncertainty in the 
glo  bal  financial  system.  The  launch  of  HSBC  Amanah,  as  an  Islamic  subsidiary  of  an 
international financial group, is also significant as it will contribute towards enhancing further 
the  international  dimension  of  Islamic  finance  in  Malaysia,  thus  strengthening  our 
international financial and economic linkages with other parts of the world.  
The  Islamic  subsidiary  represents  the  transformation  of  the  Islamic  banking  window 
operations  into  a  dedicated  entity  that  allows  for  greater  strategic  direction  and  drive  of 
performance  for  the  Islamic  banking  business.  The  advancement  of  the  Islamic  subsidiary 
institutions  structure  has  the  potential  to  further  complement  the  goals  of  the  group  by 
providing an alternative model to spur the expansion of the banking business. It will pave the 
way for providing strong support in terms of capital, resources and operational infrastructure 
to  elevate  performance.  In  doing  so,  it  will  also  contribute  towards  enriching  further  the 
diversity of players and strengthening the institutional infrastructure of the Malaysian Islamic 
banking system.  
The continued growth of Islamic finance in Malaysia  
The international economic and financial environment is expected to remain very challenging 
with several major economies now in recession and continued uncertainties prevailing in the 
international financial system. In spite of this, the Asian economies are still growing, albeit at 
a more modest pace. The dominance of domestic demand and increasing regional economic 
integration have enhanced the prospects for Asia to sustain a modest pace of growth.  
In this challenging international financial environment, it is encouraging that Islamic finance 
has  continued  to  demonstrate  its  evolution  and  strong  growth.  Islamic  finance  has  now 
become a new vehicle contributing to increasing the financial linkages not only within Asia 
but  also  with  the  rest  of  the  world  thereby  facilitating  cross-border  allocation  of  capital 
globally. Indeed, a number of international financial centres have recognised Islamic finance 
as an integral part of their financial system in order to complete the suite of financial products 
and services being offered, and therefore are actively developing this segment. The Islamic 
finance industry has not only continued to grow but it has also been able to present a higher 
level of dynamism.  
The  key  indicators  of  the  Islamic  banking  sector  continue  to  record  a  progressive  pace  of 
development.  The  Islamic  banking  assets  have  expanded  by  23%  to  RM234.9  billion 
compared  with  a  year  ago.  The  Islamic  banking  industry  now  accounts  for  16.7%  of  total 
assets in the industry. Similar trends can be observed in the growth of deposits that have 
reached RM180.4 billion, an increase of 27.7% during this period while, total financing has 
also  increased  by  24.5%  to  RM143.4  billion.  This  growth  has  also  accompanied  by  an 
increase in the number of full-fledged Islamic banking branches. From January to September 
this year, 93 new branches were opened thereby enhancing the outreach of Islamic financial 
products and services.  
BIS Review 146/2008 
 1
Another area that has seen significant growth is in the Sukuk market. The Malaysian sukuk 
market has expanded significantly with an average annual growth rate of 22 per cent since 
2001. Despite the current market conditions that have affected the volume of new bonds and 
Sukuk  issuance,  the  Islamic  capital  market  has  continued  to  structure  innovative  Islamic 
financial instruments. By the first half of 2008, the composition of the more innovative Sukuk 
Musharakah had increased to 84% as compared to 58% of the total sukuk issuance in 2007.  
In addition, several new Islamic financial products have been introduced including residential 
mortgage  backed  securities,  Commodity  Murabahah  deposit  products,  commodity  based 
financing, credit card based on ujrah , as well as, structured products based on Musharakah, 
Mudarabah and Ijarah.  
Malaysia  has  acquired  a  unique  market  space  for  driving  Shariah-based  innovation  by 
combining the depth of knowledge with the drive for innovation. The Islamic financial services 
industry in Malaysia possesses a conducive environment for innovative advancement that is 
supported by a regulatory framework that ensures not only the stability of the system but also 
promotes the active and vibrant functioning of the system.  
These  developments  and  continued  evolution  of  Islamic  finance  have  demonstrated  the 
ability to not only meet the rapidly changing requirements of the global economy, but also to 
remain competitive in a challenging environment . Following the greater international interest 
in Islamic finance, it has gained an increasingly prominent role in the international financial 
system. This is reflected by the active involvement from governments, corporate sectors and 
global investors from both Islamic and non-Islamic countries.  
Potential role of foreign Islamic subsidiaries  
The policy for the establishment of foreign Islamic subsidiaries in our Islamic financial system 
is also part of the initiative to enhance the outreach of Islamic finance and to strengthen our 
international  linkages.  It  reflects  part  of  the  further  liberalisation  of  the  Islamic  financial 
services  industry  in  Malaysia.  Foreign  Islamic  subsidiaries  have  the  potential  to  promote 
innovative  product  development  and  enhanced  international  integration  of  the  Islamic 
financial system.  
Firstly, by leveraging on the global networks available, foreign Islamic subsidiaries are well 
positioned  to  engage  in  innovative  product  development  in  a  more  cost  effective  manner. 
Malaysia  provides  an  enabling  platform  such  structuring  of  Islamic  financial  products  and 
instruments.  The  recent  establishment  of  the  International  Shariah  Research  Academy 
(ISRA) as a premier research entity has further enhanced the infrastructure to facilitate this 
innovative process. ISRA focuses on applied research in Shariah and Islamic finance, and 
provides  the  avenue  for  greater  engagement  between  industry  players  and  scholars.  In 
addition,  the  tax  neutrality  treatment,  has  paved  the  way  for  the  introduction  of  innovative 
products  such  as  Ijarah  Munthahiah  Bithamleek  (leasing  ending  with  ownership)  and 
Musharakah Mutanaqisah (diminishing partnership) in home financing, and currency option 
using the concept of Hamish Jiddiyah (security deposit) and Tawarruq (monetisation).  
Secondly , foreign Islamic subsidiaries have an important role in enhancing the international 
linkages of the Islamic finance industry regionally and internationally. Reinforced by a  well 
developed legal, regulatory and Shariah framework and with three decades of experience, 
our Islamic financial system offers a unique platform as a meeting place between those that 
require funds and those with surplus funds. Malaysia has the full complement of the financial 
infrastructure,  products  and  institutions.  This  is  reinforced  by  the  adoption  of  international 
regulatory best practices and liberal foreign exchange administration rules. This environment 
has  encouraged  the  issuance  of  ringgit  denominated  sukuk  by  multilateral  institutions  and 
foreign  multinational  corporations  in  our  market.  It  has  also  increased  participation  of 
investors in our Islamic financial markets. In a number of the sukuk issuances, the foreign 
subscribers  (other  than  from  Asian  region)  represent  more  than  two  thirds  of  total 
2 
 BIS Review 146/2008
subscribers. Given the investment opportunities in the East Asian region, there are significant 
potential business activities, especially in the Asia-Pacific region. To optimize the business 
potential, Islamic financial institutions need to develop their niche strengths and leverage on 
Malaysia's resources to extend the operations to both the regional and global market.  
As a foreign Islamic banking subsidiary, the potential to provide greater market access in the 
domestic economy and improve the overall financial inclusion is also important. This includes 
the offering of new financial products to the different domestic economic segments.  
Concluding remarks 
On this occasion of the official launch of HSBC Amanah Malaysia Berhad, let me take this 
opportunity to congratulate HSBC Bank Malaysia Berhad on the initiative to establish its own 
of  the  Islamic  banking  subsidiary  and  for  its  commitment  to  contribute  to  the  success  of 
Islamic  finance.  By  allocating  dedicated  resources  in  the  Islamic  subsidiary  in  Malaysia, 
HSBC Bank will enhance its potential to contribute to the advancement of Islamic banking 
business going forward.  
I wish HSBC Amanah Malaysia Berhad every success in its endeavours.  
BIS Review 146/2008 
 3
