Mario Draghi: Challenges now facing the world economy 
Statement by Mr Mario Draghi, Governor of the Bank of Italy, on behalf of Albania, Greece, 
Italy,  Malta,  Portugal,  San  Marino  and  Timor  Leste  at  the  Seventy-Eighth  Meeting  of  the 
Development  Committee  (Joint  Ministerial  Committee  of  the  Boards  of  Governors  of  the 
Bank and the Fund on the Transfer of Real Resources to Developing Countries), Washington 
DC, 12 October 2008. 
 Energy and food prices and financial turmoil 
Today, the economies of both developed and developing nations are faced with high energy 
and  food  prices  and  financial  distress,  which  are  severely  testing  their  resilience.  Steady 
leadership, high-quality analysis, and bold answers are needed to overcome the many new 
challenges that now confront the development process. 
The World Bank has acted quickly to respond to the emergency situation created in several 
developing countries as a result of rising food prices, demonstrating that it is indeed able to 
respond effectively and in a timely manner to rapidly evolving circumstances. However, more 
must be done. It is now important to strike the appropriate balance between alleviating short-
term needs and longer term development goals and achieve an effective division of tasks in 
the international donor community. 
The  recent  financial  turmoil  puts  an  extra  premium  on  the  role  of  both  Bretton  Woods 
institutions as providers of financial and advisory services, and as facilitators of international 
dialogue. As financial authorities worldwide contemplate how to reshape existing regulatory 
frameworks  to  prevent  and  contain  financial  instability,  the  Bank  must  retain  its  role  as  a 
source of assistance in the allocation of limited financial resources to infrastructure and to 
social safety nets to promote equitable growth. 
Development and climate change: two complementary economic challenges 
We  welcome  the  new  Strategic  Framework  on  Development  and  Climate  Change  for  the 
World Bank Group (WBG). The launch of this strategy is a positive step toward facilitating a 
more prominent role for the Bank in fighting climate change. 
Climate  change  epitomizes  the  intricacy  of  development  challenges  in  an  increasingly 
interdependent  world.  Adaptation  and  mitigation  of  its  effects  entail  not  only  substantial 
financial  costs,  but  also  inter-temporal  and  spatial  tradeoffs  in  welfare  distribution.  Though 
the battle against climate change is often mistakenly viewed as being opposed to economic 
growth, it is, in fact, an economic and development issue in several respects. 
• 
First, climate change will increasingly affect the availability and the relative prices of 
productive factors, such as land, food, and energy.  
Second,  the  impact  on  economic  activity  of  unmitigated  climate  change  and  its 
budgetary  implications  are  potentially  significant  for  advanced,  emerging,  and 
developing countries alike. 
Finally, environmental protection offers an opportunity for growth, not an obstacle to 
development.  This  principle  should  underpin  economic  policies  in  advanced  and 
developing  countries,  as  well  as  development  assistance,  whether  bilateral  or 
multilateral. 
  BIS Review 123/2008 
 1
The role of the World Bank in fighting climate change 
As an international organization, the World Bank is well-positioned to face the challenges of 
combating the effects of climate change as they relate to “global public goods.” As a financial 
institution,  it  is  well  suited  to  address  the  intergenerational  problems  that  climate  change 
poses.  Finally,  as  a  multisectoral  development  agency,  the  Bank  can  make  use  of  its 
expertise in many policy areas and engage clients in fruitful dialogue, providing an extensive 
menu of customized policy options. 
We particularly welcome the emphasis placed by the Strategic Framework on market-based 
instruments and energy efficiency. In particular, well-functioning and more integrated carbon 
markets are not only cost-effective environmental tools, they also have the potential to foster 
a more cooperative stance by developing countries by providing new incentives for them to 
join mitigation efforts and support innovative technologies. 
Both  Italy  and  the  European  Union  are  leaders  in  pioneering  market-based  instruments  to 
address  climate  change.  The  European  Trading  System,  while  still  in  its  early  stages  and 
with  ample  scope  for  improvement,  is  the  world’s  first  trading  scheme  in  operation.  Its 
success has provided a benchmark for the introduction of similar schemes worldwide. The 
Bank can contribute positively to the promotion of more liquid and integrated carbon markets 
and help clients reap the gains that will result from an increased demand for environmental 
protection. 
As regards energy efficiency, we believe that policy dialogue has the potential to generate 
benefits  for  both  industrialized  and  developing  countries.  The  Bank  traditionally  has  a 
comparative  advantage  in  the  area  of  energy  sector  reform  as  it  can  help  clients  pursue 
sustainable energy policies, establish sound regulatory systems that may mobilize additional 
private sector resources, and ease the financial challenges posed by climate change. 
Enhancing voice and participation of developing and transition countries 
We welcome the proposed sequential approach to enhancing “Voice” within the World Bank 
Group. The proposal of a single package that envisages different milestones will accelerate 
the Voice reform process, a process that will add to the Bank’s legitimacy and credibility by 
increasing the representation of its poorest members. We also believe that the World Bank 
Group  will  benefit  from  early  adoption  of  those  measures  that  already  meet  with  broad 
consensus among its membership. 
With capital realignment being the most complex issue, we support the proposal to the Board 
to launch a more comprehensive shareholding structure review, setting the deadline at the 
2011 Spring Meetings. We believe that the members’ relative shareholdings in IBRD should 
be based on the principle of relative weight in the world economy. In this vein, we also favor 
maintaining a link between the Bank’s shareholding and the outcome of negotiations on IMF 
quotas. Considering the specific mandate of the Bank, we think that contributions to IDA and 
Trust  Funds  cumulated  over  time  should  also  be  included  in  the  criteria  for  realignment. 
Additionally, the underlying principle for introducing further criteria should be the preservation 
of the Bank’s financial soundness. 
The definition of broader shareholding realignment should also provide stable guidance for 
future review of shareholder representation. A realignment plan addressing all these issues 
cannot  be  arrived  at  hastily;  on  the  contrary,  it  must  be  the  result  of  a  thorough  and 
comprehensive process. 
Finally, fairness and widespread acceptability of the capital realignment plan, as well as the 
need  for  a  virtuous  corporate  governance  incentive  structure,  will  require  that  the 
shareholdings  of  the  most  severely  underrepresented  members  be  adjusted  consistently, 
irrespective of their classification as developed or developing countries. 
2 
 BIS Review 123/2008
Conclusion 
Unprecedented challenges now face the world economy and require a renewed effort on the 
part of the Bank in the pursuit of its traditional development mission. These challenges also 
call for a sharper focus by the Bank, within its poverty reduction mandate, on the provision of 
global public goods. 
• 
The  current  financial  turmoil  has  only  added  to  the  distress  caused  by  oil  and 
commodities price increases. At a time when the demand for IBRD loans is likely to 
increase,  it  is  important  that  the  Bank  remain  focused  on  the  provision  of 
infrastructure – both social and physical – that can shelter the poorest of this world 
from the dramatic impact of present and future shocks. In view of this daunting task, 
IBRD resources are extremely limited, requiring that careful consideration be given 
to avoid spreading these resources too thinly over too many objectives. A few select 
priorities  should  instead  emerge  from  an  active  policy  dialogue  with  borrowing 
countries. 
Emerging global challenges require that the Bank recognize and clarify its role as a 
major actor in the protection of global public goods. This calls for a clearly framed 
and  articulated  operational  strategy  that  includes  detailed  assessments  of  the 
budget and of the implications for the Bank’s balance sheet of entering these new 
areas of business. 
 Confronting  these  unprecedented  challenges  requires  an  institution  that  enjoys  strong 
governance and the full support of its membership. The Voice reform effort aims to ensure 
that both of these conditions are met. 
In this endeavor, the Bank, as a truly global institution, needs to reach out to all its members 
countries  –  borrowers  and  donors  alike  –  ensuring  equitable  representation  and  a  strong 
capital base. To achieve this goal, the Bank’s governance structure must be aligned with its 
characterization as a global multilateral financial institution, reassuring capital markets that its 
commitments  are  backed  by  high-grade  callable  resources  and  that  its  products  address 
development needs otherwise unmet. 
Today,  important  steps  are  being  taken  to  meet  these  conditions,  and  we  trust  President 
Zoellick  to  successfully  steer  the  institution  in  the  direction  that  the  WBG’s  global 
membership has indicated and endorsed at this meeting. 
BIS Review 123/2008 
 3
