Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: Do you SEPA? The ECB's point of view 
Keynote  speech  by  Ms  Gertrude  Tumpel-Gugerell,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
European Central Bank, at the 3rd International Payments Summit, Milan, 27 October 2008. 
 Introduction 
What  does  “to  SEPA”  mean?  Does  it  mean  to  follow  a  fashion  or  to  pay  lip  service  to  an 
idea?  To  me,  it  means  more  than  that:  it  means  being  fully  committed  to  creating  a  more 
integrated  retail  payments  market  in  Europe,  enabling  competition  and  innovation,  and  in 
general making retail payments more efficient, safer and easier to use. 
People may wonder why, at a time of unprecedented financial turmoil, we continue to focus 
our  attention  and  energy  on  payment  issues.  I  would  argue  that  the  payments  business, 
which  generates  about  one-quarter  of  all  banking  revenue1,  is  rock-solid.  At  a  time  when 
banks’  other  sources  of  income  are  more  volatile,  they  can  count  on  reliable  and  regular 
revenues being generated through payment services. So far, it appears that banks that are 
active as universal banks have been able to weather the crisis better than specialised banks.  
Even at the current juncture, European integration of trade will continue, and the integration 
of payments has to follow suit. Moreover, there is a need for SEPA at such a time of distress, 
as  it  will  contribute  to  a  smooth  and  safe  underlying  payments  infrastructure  for  stable 
transactions at the retail banking level and thus to safeguarding financial stability. 
At  last  years’  International  Payments  Summit,  SEPA  was  in  its  warm-up  phase.  Is  it  now 
going  full-steam  ahead,  or  has  the  engine  stalled?  Let’s  have  a  look  at  the  status  of  the 
different components of the vehicle, namely SEPA Credit Transfer (SCT), SEPA Direct Debit 
(SDD) and SEPA for Cards. 
Do you SCT? 
In January 2008, we all welcomed the launch of the SEPA Credit Transfer. Now, at a time 
when banks are under stress, it is tempting to slow down the process of modernisation and 
innovation  of  payment  services.  This  reaction  is  understandable,  but,  actually,  we  need  to 
respond in precisely the opposite way.  
However,  the  ongoing  financial  turmoil  is  only  part  of  the  story.  The  gap  still  needs  to  be 
closed between being technically ready to send and receive SCTs and actively offering user-
friendly  SCT  products  and  services  to  customers.  Thus,  customer  experience  of  the  SCT 
cannot  yet  be  fully  compared  with  national  credit  transfers.  For  instance,  it  is  not  always 
possible to make payments with a scheduled execution date and/or periodic payments. The 
online  banking  applications  for  the  SCT  –  if  it  is  available  at  all  –  are  sometimes  more 
complex than those for national credit transfers. Often, the SCT is offered in the same way 
as  other  cross-border  instruments  for  payments  to  countries  outside  Europe,  although  it 
should be considered a domestic payment instrument. 
Based on data collected by the Eurosystem, half a year after the launch of the SCT, SCT 
transactions account for only about 1.4% of total credit transfers in the euro area. The use of 
SCTs seems to be mainly restricted to cross-border transactions. Although corporates which, 
together  with  public  administrations  may  bring  a  critical  mass  of  payments  to  the  SEPA 
environment, claim that they can see the benefits of SEPA, they are still taking a cautious 
                                                 
1   Source: European Payment Profit Pool Analysis, McKinsey & Company, 2005. 
BIS Review 129/2008 
 1
approach  towards  its  actual  implementation.  One  of  the  major  difficulties  cited  relates  to 
obtaining IBAN and BIC information. In this respect, I am happy to observe that in Italy the 
IBAN  became  the  single,  exclusive  standard  used  to  identify  current  accounts  in  the 
execution  of  domestic  payments  as  of  January  2008.  I  expect  that  the  provision  of  good 
quality  services  for  deriving  IBAN  from  national  account  numbers  and  reliable  directory 
services will also help to overcome this obstacle in other countries. 
Do you SDD? 
Although  some  SEPA  Direct  Debit  pilot  projects  have  been 
launched  by  banks, 
infrastructures  and  IT  providers,  it  cannot  be  denied  that  the  SDD  is  having  some  engine 
trouble. I have recently discussed the three main problems faced by the SDD, namely the 
migration of mandates, the uncertainty of users and the multilateral interchange fee for direct 
debits.  
It is claimed that it is a heavy burden to have to sign new mandates when switching from the 
national  direct  debit  schemes  to  the  SEPA  direct  debit  schemes.  Nevertheless,  some 
countries  have  already  found  a  solution  to  ensure  the  continued  legal  validity  of  existing 
direct  debit  mandates,  while  others  are  still  looking  for  an  answer.  The  European 
Commission  and  the  European  Payments  Council  are  gathering  information  on  this  issue, 
and I would welcome more transparency in this regard.  
Owing  to  different  national  business  practices,  many  opinions  were  voiced,  in  particular 
about the SDD, even before the product was visible: “it is not safe enough”; “it is too safe to 
be  efficient  and  inexpensive”;  “it  is  not  modern  enough”;  “it  is  too  different  from  previous 
procedures”. Consequently, direct debit users are somewhat uncertain about what form the 
SDD  would  take.  All  users,  including  here  in  Italy,  should  be  reassured  that  their  special 
needs can be met by means of individual offers from their banks, by transparent additional 
optional services that are offered by groups of banks or by additional services offered at the 
level of whole banking communities. 
Users are obviously concerned about prices. They will only embrace the SDD scheme if it is 
clear  that  the  prices  of  these  services  will  not  go  up.  In  this  respect,  the  review  of  EU 
Regulation  25602  will  extend  its  scope  from  credit  transfers  and  card  payments  to  include 
direct  debits.  Thus,  the  price  of  making  a  cross-border  direct  debit  will  not  exceed  that  of 
making  a  national  direct  debit.  Increasing  the  national  prices  would  clearly  be  against  the 
spirit of the review and would severely affect banks’ reputations and credibility in the eyes of 
their customers. 
Costs and prices are not only a matter of concern in the customer-to-bank domain, but also 
in the bank-to-bank domain. The multilateral interchange fee for the SDD has proven to be a 
controversial issue. To encourage the market to move ahead, the European Commission and 
the European Central Bank have proposed an interim solution. The objective of the interim 
solution  is  to  have,  right  from  the  start,  a  level  playing-field  in  place  for  the  both  the  SDD 
scheme and the national, legacy direct debit schemes.  
Allowing a properly justified multilateral interchange fee (MIF) for cross-border SDDs during 
an interim phase would help to get the engine running. At national level, the existing legacy 
MIF  could  remain  in  place  and  be  applied  to  both  legacy  direct  debits  and  SDDs.  Any 
changes to the legacy MIF should be applicable to the SDD scheme, too. Given that most 
direct  debits  will  initially  still  be  conducted  at  the  national  level,  the  vast  majority  of  direct 
debits would thus be treated in the same manner. Customers, in particular, creditors, would 
not need to be afraid of price increases.  
                                                 
2   Regulation (EC) No 2560/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 19 December 2001 on cross-
border payments in euro. 
2 
 BIS Review 129/2008
In the long term, an alternative compensation model for SDD will have to be devised, as it is 
understood that the transaction-based MIF will have to be phased out for both the SDD and 
for legacy direct debits at both national and cross-border levels. 
Different  models  can  be  conceived  or  are  already  in  use  for  covering  costs  and  providing 
incentives for those involved in offering and using direct debits. If this compensation is based 
on  a  proper  calculation  and  methodology,  it  should  also  be  acceptable  to  the  competition 
authorities. 
Unfortunately, public perception of the problems faced by the SDD has deflected attention 
away from the considerable achievement that the design of SEPA Direct Debit represents. 
For the first time, customers will have access to a direct debit instrument that can be used 
not only at the national level, but also on a pan-European level. Banks, CSMs (clearing and 
settlement mechanisms) and IT providers have launched pilot projects for the SEPA Direct 
Debit, and I am convinced that SDD will bring great benefits to its users in 2009. 
Do you SEPA for cards? 
The SEPA for Cards scheme started officially on 1 January 2008. However, although several 
individual card schemes have adapted their rules to SEPA requirements, SEPA for Cards is 
difficult to perceive and is even invisible to merchants and cardholders. This is mainly owing 
to the fact that the EPC did not create a scheme for card payments, but rather a framework, 
which owing to its more general nature, leaves some room for interpretation. 
The Eurosystem has repeatedly voiced its expectation that the banking industry will set up at 
least one additional European card scheme. At the moment, I know that several projects are 
underway on one or more European card schemes, and I hope that they will soon release 
their  prototypes  to  the  public.  For  the  interlinking  of  existing  schemes,  a  degree  of 
determination is required to move beyond an interim solution towards a long-term merging of 
the schemes. 
As with SEPA Direct Debit, the main obstacle to the work towards a European card solution 
seems to be the gridlock regarding the future of the multilateral interchange fee.  
To bring SEPA for Cards to fruition, it is necessary to surmount these obstacles, as national 
card  schemes  are  at  risk  of  extinction,  and  competition  might  decrease  to  a  duopoly  of 
international schemes with similar business models.  
Again, discussion of these obstacles should not divert attention away from the great benefits 
that  SEPA  for  Cards  will  bring  to  banks,  merchants  and  cardholders.  Better  security 
standards, more choice and higher acceptance levels will be an incentive to increase card 
usage which, in turn, also has the potential to lower cash usage, which can be quite costly for 
banks and for society as a whole.  
the  Eurosystem.  Thus,  we  are  closely  monitoring 
Who drives SEPA? 
Having discussed what “to SEPA” means, let me turn to the question of who is in the driving 
seat of the SEPA process. The creation of SEPA is a major European policy objective for the 
European  Commission  and 
the 
developments,  assessing  the  state  of  preparation  and  providing  guidance  to  the  market 
where necessary. Here, I refer back to the guidance we recently gave in the SDD dossier. 
Also, in the upcoming weeks, we will have a further exchange of views on the possibility and 
necessity of a migration end-date for the SCT and the SDD. 
Notwithstanding  the  aforementioned  political  objective,  I  wish  to  emphasise  that  the 
establishment  of  SEPA  is  a  market-driven  project.  It  is  up  to  the  banks  to  win  over  their 
customers  and  convince  them  through  marketable  and  user-friendly  SEPA  products  and 
services.  Likewise,  service  providers 
to  banks,  such  as  clearing  and  settlement 
BIS Review 129/2008 
 3
infrastructures,  and  information  and  communication  technology  suppliers  are  expected  to 
drive SEPA. One of the organisers of this Summit, SIA-SSB, has underlined its commitment 
to the SEPA project. It is one of the first CSMs to have published its self-assessment against 
the  Eurosystem’s  Terms  of  reference 
the  SEPA-compliance  of  retail  payment 
infrastructures. I expect others to soon follow suit. 
for 
Who will “go SEPA”? 
The expectation is for SEPA to be more than a policy vision. It should address the needs of 
all users of payment services, irrespective of whether they are corporates, SMEs, merchants, 
public administrations or retail customers. However, in order to reap the benefits of SEPA, 
users  need  to  “go  SEPA”.  By  “going  SEPA”,  I  mean  be  ready  to  change:  change  habits, 
change national practices, even change focus, if necessary. 
For corporates, SEPA is expected to enable bank relationships and account structures to be 
rationalised.  A  centralised  treasury,  better  liquidity  management  and  optimised  payment 
processing  will  be  made  possible.  Even  for  smaller,  mainly  nationally-oriented  corporates, 
SEPA  is  expected  to  provide  benefits  as  competition  in  the  banking  sector  will  increase, 
leading to a broader range of banks and banking services to choose from. However, in order 
to realise these benefits, corporates may have to adapt their customer-to-bank interfaces and 
internal processes to SEPA standards. The direct cost of making these adaptations might be 
considerable. Another reason for the reluctance to “go SEPA” that I touched upon earlier is 
the difficulty of obtaining the IBAN and BIC information of business partners and clients. 
Public administrations, i.e. tax authorities, customs and social security systems, initiate and 
receive  large  volumes  of  payments  for  salaries,  social  benefits,  taxes,  pensions,  etc.  As 
political actors, it is essential that public administrations “go SEPA”. I understand that there is 
quite some frustration on the part of the market regarding the lack of operational involvement 
of  public  administrations  to  date.  Yet  there  are  countries  where  public  administrations  do 
participate  closely  in  SEPA  implementation  structures  and  actively  promote  SEPA,  for 
example through the mass distribution of information on SEPA in letters regarding taxation or 
the provision of dedicated web pages explaining SEPA to citizens. This is what I understand 
by “going SEPA”. 
Will SEPA keep going? 
At  the  moment,  SEPA  is  at  a  crossroads.  Contention  over  sticky  issues,  such  as  the 
interchange fees for card payments and the SDD, has the potential to stall progress in other 
areas  of  the  project.  Waiting  for  a  final  verdict  and  insisting  on  positions  that  will  not  be 
sustainable will lead the project up a dead-end street. SEPA will only get up and running if 
appropriate  action  is  taken  in  a  timely  manner.  Before  I  conclude,  let  me  mention  three 
crucial action points: 
• 
• 
• 
a migration end-date for SCT and SDD; 
communication; and 
eSEPA. 
Migration end-date for SCT and SDD 
For  SEPA  to  be  ultimately  successful,  it  is  important  to  have  a  schedule  for  replacing  the 
national  payment  instruments  with  SEPA  payment  instruments.  We  all  know  that  it  is 
inefficient and costly if two schemes continue to run in parallel for a prolonged period of time. 
Dual processing will not generate the economies of scale that SEPA is capable of delivering 
and  will  hinder  stakeholders  in  fully  reaping  its  benefits.  Maintaining  national  instruments 
means that fragmentation along national borders will be preserved. 
4 
 BIS Review 129/2008
Continued national fragmentation will prevent the opening of the European retail market to 
pan-European competition. Hence, the focus in the debate on a migration end-date for SCT 
and SDD from a competition authorities’ point of view should not be on the setting of an end-
date,  but  on  the  consequences  if  no  end-date  is  set.  Currently,  different  options  for  a 
migration  end-date  are  being  discussed.  A  migration  end-date,  whether  it  is  staggered  by 
individual instrument or common to both the SCT and the SDD, may be achieved through 
self-regulation  by  the  banks  or  through  regulation  by  the  authorities.  Banks  and  regulation 
authorities will  discuss what  is  the best  way  forward.  The  migration  end-date(s)  should  be 
communicated in early 2009.  
Communication 
The public at large still knows very little about SEPA and its advantages. Yet, users need to 
know more  about SEPA, SEPA instruments and the different possibilities that exist to add 
features to core schemes so that they fulfil specific needs. In short, information about SEPA 
needs  to  be  communicated  more  effectively  to  users:  SEPA  must  be  “sold”  to  users. 
Continuous and increased efforts are called for to explain the changes and advantages that 
SEPA will bring.  
It  is  up  to  the  banking  industry  to  provide  more  information  to  customers  and  to  convince 
them with concrete, marketable and high-quality offers. Banks have direct contact with their 
customers and are best placed to inform them. Naturally, public authorities should also play a 
role  in  disseminating  information  and  lead  by  example  by  actually  using  SEPA  products. 
However, it is crucial for banks to effectively communicate what SEPA is about to users. 
eSEPA 
SEPA  does  not  stop  at  the  development  and  implementation  of  the  core  SEPA  payment 
schemes.  In  order  to  ensure  a  competitive,  forward-looking  and  innovative  SEPA,  it  is 
necessary to develop Additional Optional Services (AOS) that add features to the core SEPA 
payment  schemes.  Designing  and  offering  payment  services  for  specific  contexts  and 
channels will allow customers to realise cost-savings, reduce their risk and save liquidity. To 
be  concrete,  this  is  about  priority  payments,  e-invoicing  and  e-reconciliation,  mobile 
payments  or  payments  at  online  merchants.  Studies  have  shown  that  e-services  promise 
substantial economic benefits both on the demand and the supply side. Thus, I expect that, 
in the future, this International Payments Summit will change its slogan from “Do you SEPA?” 
to “Do you eSEPA?” 
Conclusion 
I am convinced that SEPA is more than just a passing fad. It acts as an engine for creating a 
more integrated retail payments market in Europe, enabling competition and innovation, and 
making  retail  payments  in  general  more  efficient,  safer  and  easier  for  users.  Let’s  keep  it 
running, let’s SEPA! 
BIS Review 129/2008 
 5
