Jean-Claude Trichet: Undervalued risk and uncertainty – some thoughts 
on the market turmoil 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Fifth 
ECB Central Banking Conference “The Euro at Ten: Lessons and Challenges”, Frankfurt am 
Main, 13 November 2008. 
 I.  
Introduction  
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I am very pleased to welcome you to what we consider to be the ECB’s flagship conference 
and  to  this  dinner  in  these  beautiful  surroundings.  The  focus  of  this  conference  is  on  the 
lessons and challenges facing the euro, as it reaches its tenth anniversary. In recent months 
there  has  been  no  shortage  of  challenges,  far  from  it.  As  for  the  lessons,  I  shall  come  to 
those towards the end of my address.  
This evening, I would like to share with you some thoughts about the main factors bringing 
about the financial market turmoil that has shaken the global economy for more than a year 
now, and raise some of the possible long-term solutions.  
The calm and the storm  
II.  
Until early 2007 we were living in a period often described as the “Great Moderation”. The 
world  economy  was  growing  vigorously,  macroeconomic  indicators  were  significantly  less 
volatile and, most importantly, inflation was low. Financial markets were performing strongly. 
Many  asset  prices  were  rising,  while  volatilities  and  risk  premia  were  exceptionally  low. 
Profitability in the financial sector was high, and banks seemed liquid and well capitalised.  
However, there were warning signs, even back in 2006, that global markets were “priced for 
perfection”  and  that  even  a  small  change  in  conditions  could  severely  disrupt  financial 
markets.1  Several  policy  makers  had  indicated  to  market  participants  that  they  needed  to 
prepare for a significant correction. As chairman of the Global Economy Meetings of central 
bank  governors,  I  myself  reported  my  colleagues’  sentiments  on  this  matter.  At  the  same 
time, several financial stability reports – including from the ECB, the Bank for International 
Settlements  (BIS),  the  Financial  Stability  Forum  (FSF)  and  other  organisations  –  analysed 
vulnerabilities and warned of emerging weaknesses.2  
We knew that a storm was brewing but, admittedly, we did not know exactly where. Neither 
did we know what would trigger it, or when it would come.  
As we all know today, the turmoil erupted in August 2007 when investors around the world 
suddenly faced a dramatic change in liquidity conditions, and it became increasingly difficult 
                                                 
1   See, among others, IMF, Global Financial Stability Report (GFSR), 2006 and J. Gieve, “Pricing for perfection,” 
speech delivered at the Bank of England, December 2006. 
2   The ECB noted signs of risks in several subsequent issues of the Financial Stability Review (FSR) in 2006 
and 2007; see also the speech by J. C. Trichet, “Some reflections on the development of credit derivatives,” 
delivered at the International Swaps and Derivatives Association in April 2007. Research by ECB staff also 
suggested increases in systemic risks among large and complex banking groups (LCBGs), particularly in the 
US and less so in Europe (see P. Hartmann, S. Straetmans and C. G. de Vries, “Banking system stability: a 
cross-Atlantic perspective,” ECB WP No. 527 and NBER WP No 11698, 2005). 
BIS Review 139/2008 
 1
for banks to refinance themselves in the wholesale money market.3 For many months, we 
have been facing a financial turmoil that was triggered by a liquidity shortage, countered by 
rapid and resolute action from central banks. The storm intensified very significantly in mid-
September 2008, when some large failures of financial institutions led to a general loss of 
confidence and to a very severe reaction in financial markets. This transformed the turmoil 
into crisis, and the liquidity shortage became a massive threat to solvency for many financial 
institutions in a large set of countries.  
How can we conceptualise the sudden emergence of this turn of events in the terminology of 
risk  assessment?  A  useful  analogy  is  to  think  about  the  series  of  events  during  the 
development of the crisis as so-called “black swan” events. As many of you probably know, 
the analogy draws from the observation that for centuries people, including scientist, thought 
all  swans  to  be  white.  Nobody  considered  that  this  assessment  could  ever  change.  In  the 
discovery of the Australian continent, however, swans with black feathers were found there. 
A  single  observation  invalided  a  general  belief  based  on  centuries  of  observations. 
Therefore, a “black swan” has been used to characterise an entirely unexpected event – an 
outlier  –  that  has  a  major  impact,  and  whose  occurrence  only  becomes  predictable  with 
hindsight. It may reflect some of the limitations of human nature that we tend to concentrate 
on  things  that  we  already  know  and  sometimes  fail  to  consider  the  things  that  we  do  not 
know.4
Undervalued risks, a priori assumptions and opacity 
III.  
Coming back to the current financial situation, the root cause of the crisis was the overall and 
massive  undervaluation  of  risk  across  markets,  financial  institutions  and  countries.  This 
derived  from  two  main  factors.  First,  the  probability  of  certain  events  was  misjudged.  This 
means that these events were considered highly improbable, if not “impossible”. Second, the 
impact of an increase in fundamental uncertainty at the systemic level on the distribution of 
returns  across  asset  classes  was  largely  neglected.  Such  a  fundamental  increase  of 
uncertainty  is  what  we  observed  with  the  massive  shock  to  global  confidence  in  mid-
September.  
With  this  in  mind,  a  useful  −  albeit  not  the  only  −  way  to  characterise  recent  events  is  to 
employ  the  concept  of  non-measurable  risk,  or  “Knightian”  uncertainty.5,6  The  economist 
Frank Knight originally developed the distinction between risks, to which probabilities can be 
assigned;  and  uncertainty,  for  which  even  these  probabilities  are  unknown.  In  the  last  two 
decades  this  distinction  has  been  used  again  in  formalising  economic  choices  under  so-
called “uncertainty” aversion.7  
Many episodes of financial instability over the last decades were characterised by a sharp 
increase in general “uncertainty”. The reaction of investors is to suddenly assign very high 
                                                 
3   For  a  detailed  analysis  of  the  sequence  of  events  which  led  to  the  financial  turmoil,  see  N.  Cassola,  M. 
Drehmann, P. Hartmann, M. Lo Duca and M. Scheicher, “A research perspective on the propagation of the 
credit market,” ECB Research Bulletin, June 2008 and ECB FSR, December 2008. 
4   See N. N. Taleb, The Black Swan: The Impact of the Highly Improbable, 2007. See also J. B. Taylor and J. C. 
Williams,  “A  black  swan  in  the  money  market”,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  San  Francisco,  Working  Paper 
series, April 2008. 
5   F. H. Knight, Risk, uncertainty and profit, 1921. 
6   For  other  characterisations  of  system  risk,  see  O.  De  Bandt  and  P.  Hartmann,  “Systemic  risk:  A  survey,” 
published in: Financial Crisis, Contagion and the Lender of Last Resort: A Book of Readings, ed. by C.A.E. 
Goodhart and G. Illing, Oxford University Press, January 2002. 
7   See  I.  Gilboa  and  D.  Schmeidler,  “Maxmin  expected  utility  theory  with  non-unique  prior,”  Journal  of 
Mathematical Economics, 18, 1989. 
2 
 BIS Review 139/2008
probabilities  to  events  they  deemed  very  unlikely  before.  They  concentrate  on  “bad” 
outcomes and worst-case scenarios and show a strong preference for safety and liquidity. 
This may be an important explanation for the very pronounced “flight to quality”, which we 
often observe during episodes of financial turbulences.8  
Both  the  underpricing  of  the  unit  of  risk  and  the  underestimation  of  the  quantity  of  risk 
contributed  to  the  emergence  of  the  crisis.  Inadequate  assumptions  were  made  about  the 
distribution of returns to highly complex, new financial securities. This implied that the unit of 
risk  was  generally  underpriced.  Moreover,  some  large  financial  institutions  showed  a 
massive concentration of risk, suggesting that risk management systems failed to identify the 
quantity of risk that financial institutions were accumulating. These same systems also failed 
to assess the systemic consequences arising from a global loss of confidence. 
Underpricing of a unit of risk 
The structure of global markets is changing fast, and we need to model future default and 
risk profiles of new products with a short history. Statistical models using the recent past to 
estimate the parameters of the probability distributions turned out to be little helpful. Market 
participants used evaluation models that did not account properly for an additional dimension 
to risk. The distribution of returns depends on which “state of nature” prevails, for example if 
we are in normal market times or in crisis times. Very small changes in beliefs can translate 
into large changes in behaviour, which in turns have large effects on markets.9  
One  of  the most  important  elements  contributing  to  the  underpricing  of  risk  was  the  sheer 
complexity of structured financial products, which even sophisticated investors were not able 
to assess properly. Hence prices reflected only in part fundamentals, while the credibility of 
the issuer and the “willingness to purchase” of the buyer played an equally important role in 
the pricing of these products.  
The  general  compression  of  spreads  and  risk  premia  in  global  financial  markets  also 
suggests that investors’ preferences were characterised by comparatively low levels of risk 
aversion.  This,  in  turn,  further  inflated  flawed  valuations  based  on  very  favourable 
expectations of future returns. 
There are two additional elements that played a role in the underpricing of risk: first, the large 
ex  ante  excess  of  savings  over  investment,  which  was  one  of  the  consequences  of  the 
bursting of the internet bubble and of the Asian crisis. The phenomenon became even more 
important due to the oil and commodity price shocks, which triggered an additional ex ante 
excess of forced savings in the global economy. A second factor, closely correlated to the 
innovation in financial markets, has been the very powerful process of leveraging that has 
characterised  global  financial  institutions  in  all  different  constituencies.  This  has  included 
regulated and listed commercial and investment banks, private equity firms, hedge funds and 
all types of highly leveraged entities.  
Under appreciation of the quantity of risk 
In addition to the underpricing of the unit of risk, also the sheer quantitative accumulation of 
risk was underestimated, at the level of institutions as well as at the level of the system.  
It is still debated to which degree the “Great Moderation” that had started in the mid-1980s 
and was observed until the middle of last year, and that consisted of a remarkable reduction 
of volatilities in the real economy, has influenced the overall assessment of the quantity of 
                                                 
8   See  in  particular  R.  J.  Caballero  and  A.  Krishnamurthy,  “Collective  risk  management  in  a  flight  to  quality 
episode”, Journal of Finance, October 2008. 
9   See M. O’Hara, “Liquidity and financial market stability”, National Bank of Belgium WP No 55, May 2004. 
BIS Review 139/2008 
 3
risk  in  a  large  array  of  asset  markets  during  this  period.  The  correlation  between  the 
reduction of volatilities and the magnitude of risk taking is there, but the direction and even 
the existence of a possible causality, remains an open question.10  
Amongst  other  factors  there  was  also  a  considerable  lack  of  transparency  about  the 
allocation  of  risks  across  financial  intermediaries,  in  particular  in  new  and  often  highly 
leveraged,  players.  The  nature  of  the  business  of  certain  financial  intermediaries  relied 
almost  exclusively  on  the  roll-over  of  short-term  debt  to  finance  longer-term  assets.  The 
ability of these players to stand the consequences of a significant market correction turned 
out to be greatly overstated. To make things worse, these consequences were intensified by 
the  high  leverage  and  the  parcelling  of  risk.  When  the  crisis  occurred,  the  general  loss  of 
confidence and the large number of linkages among financial institutions resulted in a quick 
and powerful transmission of “fears”.11
Main factors to be addressed 
IV.  
Let me now look ahead to long-term solutions, which in my view need to start by addressing 
three important factors.  
First,  there  has  been  considerable  short-termism,  i.e.  an  excessive  focus  on  near-term 
returns.  Modern  financial  systems  have  favoured  instruments  and  intermediaries  that 
promise  large  returns  in  the  short-term.  Such  short-termism  can  naturally  lead  to  a 
misjudgement  of  the  underlying  risk,  as  investors  are  less  attentive  to  low  probability 
outcomes.  Short-termism  can  also  result  in  a  higher  accumulation  of  risks  since  high  risk-
taking  typically  boosts  short-term  returns  on  relatively  thin  levels  of  capital.  Finally,  it  can 
exacerbate the impact of conflicts of interest and perverse incentives that exist both at the 
top and at lower management levels.12  
This environment creates the conditions for the widely observed herding behaviour, in which 
risk  controls  easily  become  a  secondary  issue.  Banks  that  are  achieving  high  returns  put 
considerable pressure on their peers to do the same: “As long as the music is playing, you 
have  got  to  get  up  and  dance”,  has  become  a  famous  quote  in  the crisis.13  But  when  the 
music stops, it’s impossible for everybody to carry on dancing. 
It is interesting to note that some of these problems had already surfaced in the aftermath of 
the  corporate  scandals  of  2003.  In  particular,  the  presence  of  conflicts  of  interest  and 
perverse incentives related to flawed compensation practices and to the provision of services 
with conflicting aims (especially by rating agencies).14 Thus, the existence of these problems 
was  well-known,  and  policy  responses  were  put  in  place  to  address  them.  Hence,  one 
question that remains open is: did we underestimate the consequences of not acting more 
forcefully and more quickly? 
The second main factor concerns transparency. It is striking that despite all the regulatory 
advances  and  progress  in  information  technology,  the  financial  system  that  has  emerged 
over the last decade has been characterised by a lack of transparency in certain securities 
                                                 
10   See  J.-C.  Trichet,  “Risks  and  the  Macro-Economy”,  Keynote  address  at  the  conference  The  ECB  and  Its 
Watchers, Frankfurt am Main, 5 September 2008. 
11   See C. Borio, “The financial turmoil of 2007-?: a preliminary assessment and some policy considerations,” BIS 
WP No 251, March 2008. 
12   See  A.  K.  Kashiap,  R.  G.  Rajan  and  J.  C.  Stein,  “Rethinking  capital  regulation,”  September  2008,  paper 
prepared for the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City symposium. 
13   Financial Times, 10 July 2007, quote by C. Prince, former CEO of Citigroup. 
14   See A. Maddaloni and D. Pain, “Corporate ‘excesses’ and financial market dynamics”, ECB Occasional Paper 
No 17, July 2004. 
4 
 BIS Review 139/2008
markets  and  intermediaries.  Regulated  markets,  characterised  by  standardised  products, 
and a broad base of investors, with access to information and legal protection, generally offer 
better-quality information. However, the markets for structured products work largely over the 
counter,  and  a  large  part  of  the  financial  sector  is  unregulated.  This  implies  that  a  fair 
evaluation of the instruments and of the counterparty risk is extremely difficult, not only for 
supervisors  and  institutions  concerned  with  financial  stability  but  also  for  the  market 
participants themselves.  
More standardised securities exchanged on regulated markets would make it easier to price 
these instruments, as investors could rely on public information and on the observations of 
traded prices. At the same time, it would help policy makers and regulators to understand 
where the risks are located and thus monitor the accumulation of imbalances. 
Finally,  the  third  factor  I  want  to  mention  is  the  excessive  pro-cyclicality  of  the  financial 
system. We need to introduce a framework to dampen this phenomenon. There seems to be 
an  inherent  tendency  for  financial  systems  to  cause  periods  of  booms,  by  building  up 
imbalances,  and  then  to  go  through  busts  –  the  rapid  and  disorderly  unwinding  of  these 
same imbalances. The challenge is to preserve an efficient financial system as an engine for 
economic  growth  and  at  the  same  time  to  ensure  its  stability.15  Despite  centuries  of 
experience and observations of financial crises, it seems to be very difficult to strike the right 
balance and address this pro-cyclicality. 
In this context, it seems to me that central banks have a “franchise” in assuming this role. 
They do not have vested interests and can provide for “stability” in the long term.  
Conclusion  
V.  
Let me bring this address to a close with some suggested elements for actions to improve 
significantly the resilience of financial systems to adverse shocks. Resilience is a key word 
and concept to guide us in the future.  
First, we need to counter mechanisms leading to herding behaviour and establish the right 
incentives  for  achieving  a  balance  between  short-term  and  long-term  investors  and 
intermediaries.  Second,  we  need  to  address  the  lack  of  transparency.  Financial  regulators 
need to tighten up requirements in certain segments of the markets and strengthen reporting 
requirements for formerly unregulated institutions. Third, in order to address the “excessive” 
procyclicality  of  the  financial  systems,  we  need  to  address  the  mechanisms  that  intensify 
fluctuations.  For  example,  capital  regulations  and  provisioning  rules  as  developed  by  the 
Basel  Committee  of  Banking  Supervision  need  to  restrain  excessive  risk-taking  in  upturns 
and  discourage  excessive  conservatism  when  credit  to  firms  and  households  is  most 
needed. 
What is the role of various authorities in this context? As we have seen, central banks were 
the very first among the authorities to react when in August 2007 the threat to liquidity in the 
financial  system  emerged.  The  resolute  action  of  central  banks  constituted  a  “first  line  of 
defence” against the systemic liquidity threat. Almost the entire set of advanced economies 
and  their  financial  systems  were  affected  from  the  very  beginning  of  the  turmoil.  In  this 
context, there is one message that is particularly important for me in my reflections on the 
past 15 months. This is my wholehearted appreciation of the very intimate cooperation that 
we have been able to set up among central banks worldwide. We have been working virtually 
as a “global system of central banks”, corresponding to the virtually global nature of today’s 
financial  system.  Not  only  have  we  maintained  the  continuous  flow  of  information  and 
                                                 
15   See P. Hartmann, F. Heider, E. Papaioannou and M. Lo Duca, “The role of financial markets and innovation in 
productivity and growth in Europe”, ECB Occasional Paper No 72, September 2007 and the special feature 
“Financial development: concepts and measures” in the report Financial Integration in Europe, April 2008. 
BIS Review 139/2008 
 5
exchange of assessments of developments, but we have also established a set of common 
actions  that  would  have  been  unthinkable  even  one  year  ago.  As  one  example  amongst 
many,  I  would  like  to  mention  the  fact  that  the  ECB  has  been  providing  with  euro-
denominated  collateral  US  dollar  liquidity  to  the  European  counterparties  through  swap 
arrangements  with  the  Federal  Reserve  that  have  no  precedent.  This  action  reflects,  as 
much as all the other common actions, the intimate level of trust and cooperation within the 
community  of  central  banks  and,  in  particular  with  the  Federal  Reserve,  whose  value  has 
been priceless.  
I  have  mentioned  the  exceptional  liquidity  support  by  central  banks  as  the  “first  line  of 
defence”. A necessary “second line of defence” against the systemic solvency threat had to 
be set up by governments on both sides of the Atlantic. It would have been unthinkable a 
year ago that in a number of advanced countries, governments would earmark double-digit 
percentages  of  their  annual  GDP  to  guarantee  exposures  and  recapitalise  their  banking 
sectors. Here, too, we have seen indispensable and resolute action.  
After having set up the previous two lines of defence, a third step is now needed in order to 
improve very significantly medium and long-term confidence. In this context, the credibility of 
the reforms to improve resilience of the global financial system as well as the stability of the 
global economy is of the essence. We will see the benefits of the reforms not only in a long-
term perspective, but already today, because confidence today, and therefore the success of 
the decisions already taken by central banks and governments, depends on the quality and 
credibility  of  the  ambitious  reform  exercise  that  has  started  a  few  months  ago  and  that  is 
presently deepening with the recent and future meetings of the G20.  
In  my  remarks  I  have  concentrated  on  the  financial  aspects  of  the  turmoil,  which  are  very 
much in the domain of the Financial Stability Forum. The Financial Stability Forum, whose 
task  is  to  elaborate  international  supervisory  and  regulatory  policies  and  standards,  has 
drawn  the  first  set  of  lessons  from  the  turmoil  along  the  lines  I  have  described  above. 
Deepening its work and implementing it is now of the essence to establish an appropriate 
and  effective  reform  of  the  global  financial  system.  The  IMF  participates  in  this  work  and 
provides relevant inputs as a member of the FSF.  
There is also a very important role for the IMF itself in its assessment of macro-financial risks 
and  systemic  vulnerabilities,  and  in  its  surveillance  of  macroeconomic  policies.  Credible 
stability in the long run requires macroeconomic policies that have a medium-term orientation 
and  are  stability-oriented.  Pro-cyclicality  can  stem  not  only  from  unsatisfactory  regulatory 
policies  in  the  financial  sphere,  but  also  from  macroeconomic  policies,  where  it  is  equally 
undesirable.  In  a  global  context,  there  is  hence  a  need  to  significantly  strengthen  IMF 
surveillance  over  economies 
IMF’s  multilateral 
consultation with key partners is a process that can be built upon in this context. In a long-
term perspective, greater discipline in the global economy is needed to foster stability and 
help balance short-term and long-term prosperity more appropriately.  
Thank you for your attention. 
that  are  systemically  relevant.  The 
6 
 BIS Review 139/2008
