Fundanga: Islamic banking – building partnerships for development 
Opening remarks by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, to the Islamic 
Banking Conference “Building partnerships for development”, Lusaka, 20 October 2008. 
 The Guest Speaker, Mr. Ahmad Zaini Bin Othman 
Chief Executive Officers of Banks and Non bank financial institutions; 
Distinguished invited guests; 
Colleagues; 
Ladies and gentlemen; 
On behalf of the Bank of Zambia and indeed on my own behalf, I would like to extend a very 
warm  welcome  to  you  all  to  this  important  conference  on  Islamic  Banking.  To  our  Guest 
Speaker, Mr Ahmed Zaini Othman, I wish to extend a special welcome to you to Zambia and 
in particular to Lusaka, the capital city. Like the rest of Zambia, Lusaka is a city of tranquility 
with an easygoing African charm. The city is not short of interesting sites and places to visit. I 
therefore urge you to find time or indeed stay an extra day or more to sample this special 
menu that Lusaka offers. 
I also wish to extend my sincere thanks to Standard Chartered Bank Zambia Plc, the Islamic 
Council  of  Zambia  and  the  Eastern  Province  Chamber  of  Commerce  and  Industry  for 
graciously accepting to make presentations at this conference. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  the  Bank  of  Zambia  is  honoured  and  delighted  to  host  the  first 
Islamic  Banking  Conference  in  Zambia  that  begins  today,  the  20th  and  ends  on  21st 
October, 2008. 
This  Conference  on  Islamic  Banking  could  not  have  come  at  a  more  opportune  time  than 
now, when the financial sector in the country is called upon to widen financial inclusiveness. 
Banks and Non-Bank Financial Institutions are being encouraged to increase availability of, 
and access to financial services to the population through the design of new and affordable 
products. It is through conferences and fora of this nature, among other events, that Bank of 
Zambia  endeavours  to  disseminate  information  and  share  experiences  with  stakeholders 
about the importance of developing the financial sector. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  The  last  few  decades  have  witnessed  a  rapid  growth  in  Islamic 
banking  both  in  terms  of  size  and  the  number  of  players.  Islamic  banking  is  currently 
practiced  in  more  than  50  countries  worldwide.  In  some  countries  only  Islamic  banking  is 
allowed while in others Islamic banking coexists with conventional banking. Islamic banking 
is not limited to Islamic countries. In August 2004, for instance, the Islamic Bank of Britain 
became  the  first  bank  licensed  by  a  non-Muslim  country  to  engage  in  Islamic  banking. 
According to recent industry estimates, Islamic banking is set to grow at an annual rate of 
15%. The increased trade between the sub-Saharan region and Islamic nations in the Middle 
East only reinforces our view that partnerships among the corporate players between the two 
regions will foster more development. 
The  Government  of  the  Republic  of  Zambia  (GRZ)  recognizes  that  the  limited  access  to 
financial  services  and  low  number  of  products  available  to  the  different  sectors  of  the 
economy  has  hindered  the  development  potential  of  Zambia’s  economy.  There  is  need 
therefore, to revitalize the financial sector so that it meets the challenges of accelerated and 
sustained investments in key sectors of the economy. 
Recent  developments  in  the  financial  sector  world-wide  offer  some  encouragement  that 
working together could extend the range and reach of financial services that are available to 
our people. Still a lot remains to be done to extend financial services to the majority of our 
people  and  foster  ongoing  sustainability  of  our  financial  institutions.  It  is  against  this 
BIS Review 131/2008 
 1
In 
this  regard, 
background that Bank of Zambia found it necessary to hold this Conference to deliberate on 
the  topical  concept  of  Islamic  Banking  under  the  theme  “Building  Partnerships  for 
Development”. The main objectives of this conference are to get a general understanding of 
the  operations  of  Islamic  Banking  and  to  share  views  on  promoting  partnership  for 
development  through  Islamic  Banking,  draw  lessons,  and  recommend  strategies  for 
implementing Islamic Banking in Zambia in order to improve access to financial services. 
The rapid growth of Islamic Banking raises a series of important questions, such as whether 
Islamic Banking should be regulated differently from conventional banking. Because modern 
Islamic  Banking  is  relatively  new  to  most  countries  rules  for  financial  accounting,  bank 
governance,  and  lending  standards  are  continually  evolving  as  business  practices  are 
refined. However, a basic understanding of the concept of Islamic banking should provide a 
basis for determining an appropriate regulatory framework for Islamic banking. 
Of particular importance to Zambia is an arrangement where borrowers can borrow without 
paying interest. Lending rates are very high in this country, thus making borrowing for capital 
investments  prohibitive.  This  is  one  issue  we  have  been  grappling  with  for  a  long  time. 
Therefore,  an  arrangement  where  borrowers  can  access  funds  for  investments  without 
paying interest, offered by Islamic Banking is worth exploring. 
Mr. Chairman, over the past two years, we have noted with delight that financial institutions 
in Zambia are beginning to rise to the challenge by broadening the scope of their financial 
services  beyond  the  traditional  customers  to  include  previously  unbanked  segments  of 
society. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  need  to  foster  an  enabling  environment  cannot  be  over-
emphasized. 
to  ensure  stable 
macroeconomic policies and development of appropriate financial sector regulations that will 
facilitate financial inclusion. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  the  introduction  of  Islamic  banking  would  come  with  its  own 
challenges. For us at Bank of Zambia, this entails further strengthening of our supervisory 
capacity.  We  would  welcome  this challenge  and  hope  to  rise  to  the  occasion  by  providing 
adequate supervisory infrastructure and an environment for conducting good business. 
In  recognition  of  the  rapid  spread  of  the  concept  of  Islamic  banking  worldwide,  Bank  of 
Zambia undertook a survey to determine the extent of the knowledge and demand for Islamic 
Banking  among  banks  as  a  way  of  enhancing  the  regulatory  preparedness.  Significant 
findings were that the extent of the existing knowledge on, and demand for Islamic Banking 
in Zambia is quite limited and that currently none of the banks offer Islamic Banking services. 
The results also indicated that 80% of the respondents intend to introduce Islamic banking 
products in the near future. Further, most banks had received enquiries from their clients on 
Islamic banking products. 
I have no doubt that this conference is very timely and that it provides a unique opportunity 
for stakeholders in the financial sector to share knowledge and experiences on how best to 
promote financial diversity and inclusiveness to all sectors of the economy by introducing and 
incorporating Islamic banking. 
Distinguished  delegates,  On  behalf  of  Bank  of  Zambia,  I  would  like  to  thank  our  various 
presenters and panelists for accepting to help facilitate our deliberations over the next two 
days. I therefore, would like to appeal to all delegates to engage fully in these discussions 
and make the most of the wealth of knowledge generated in the house. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, It is my pleasure and privilege to welcome you to the Islamic Banking 
Conference and officially open the Conference. 
the  Bank  of  Zambia  will  continue 
2 
 BIS Review 131/2008
