Yves Mersch: Productivity in the financial services sector 
Opening remarks by Mr Yves Mersch, Governor of the Central Bank of Luxembourg, at the 
BCL-SUERF  Conference  on  “Productivity  in  the  Financial  Services  Sector”,  Luxembourg, 
11-12 November 2008. 
 It  is  my  pleasure  to  welcome  you  on  behalf  of  the  Banque  centrale  du  Luxembourg.  You 
probably  know  that  ours  is  a  relatively  young  institution  and  hat  we  are  hosting  this 
conference  as  part  of  the  celebrations  for  our  10th  anniversary.  You  are  here  to  discuss 
productivity in financial services, and you re probably aware that tomorrow evening (following 
the  end  of  this  conference)  here  will  be  a  High-Level  Panel  where  three  senior  central 
bankers will provide heir perspective on the challenges for monetary policy represented by 
financial  sector  growth  and  productivity.  We  hope  this  will  give  you  a  chance  to  see  how 
some of the issues raised in your research are implemented in practice and also how new 
issues  appear  in  the  policy  context  requiring  further  study.  In  any  case,  you  are  warmly 
invited  and  I  hope  at  least  some  of  you  will  be  able  to  stay  with  s  for  this  interesting 
discussion. 
The subject today is productivity in the financial sector, and as a central banker, I o not need 
to remind you that this sector is going through what are sometimes called “interesting times”. 
During  the  recent  financial  turmoil,  central  banks  responded  to  short-term  tensions  and 
contributed to stabilising conditions for borrowers and lenders. The focus until now has been 
on liquidity and financial stability issues; however, as light appears at the end of the tunnel, 
policymakers are asking themselves how to avoid repeating the same mistakes next time. An 
overhaul  of  the  regulatory  framework  seems  inevitable  and  in  this  context,  it  is  crucial  to 
understand the structural issues in the sector behind the short-term volatility. This is why I 
believe  that  careful  study  of  financial  sector  productivity  is  required  to  improve  our 
understanding of the current situation and to shape our long-term response to recent events. 
I  will  organise  my  remarks  around  three  inter-related  questions:  First,  to  measure 
productivity, how should we measure the level of production in financial services? Second, 
what  do  existing  measures  of  financial  sector  productivity  tell  us  about  its  sources  of 
productivity growth? Finally, I will attempt to identify which aspects of productivity in financial 
services have been given new urgency by recent events. 
Let  me  begin  with  the  measurement  of  financial  services  output.  Not  long  ago,  national 
accounts  methodology  underwent  a  significant  improvement  in  evaluating  and  allocating 
financial  services  indirectly  measured  (FISIM).  The  new  methodology  is  based  on  the 
observation  that  depositors  are  usually  paid  an  interest  flow  that  is  below  the  risk-free 
reference rate. The difference represents the value of depositor services produced by banks, 
in  the  form  of  safekeeping,  bookkeeping  and  payment  services.  On  the  other  hand, 
borrowers almost always pay an interest flow above the risk-free reference rate. In this case, 
the  difference  represents  the  value  of  borrower  services  provided  by  banks  in  the  form  of 
credit-rating  and  monitoring.  Using  a  reference  rate  to  split  banks’  interest  margin  into 
depositor  and  borrower  services  makes  it  possible  to  allocate  the  consumption  of  these 
services to households and firms, thus distinguishing between financial services destined for 
intermediate and for final consumption. For Luxembourg in particular, this change to national 
accounts  methodology  was  important  because  our  financial  services  industry  primarily 
serves  the  export  market,  so  the  previous  practice  of  allocating  all  such  production  to 
intermediate consumption by a fictitious sector was particularly implausible. 
While national accounts methodology has been much improved by this change, some open 
questions still remain. In particular, what is the appropriate reference rate? For the average 
depositor,  it  may  be  true  that  something  close  to  the  risk-free  rate  could  be  earned  by 
BIS Review 137/2008 
 1
forgoing the services attached to a bank account and instead investing in the money market. 
However,  for  the  average  borrower  it  is  not  reasonable  to  assume  that  funds  would  be 
available at the risk-free rate by issuing securities instead of approaching a bank for a loan. 
Term-mismatch between savers and borrowers and informational asymmetries explain why 
the financial intermediation services provided by banks are so important for the operation of 
market  economies.  This  suggests  that  to  measure  borrower  services  accurately  the 
appropriate reference rate must take account of the term-structure and the risk profile f the 
resulting bank assets. I am glad to see from the program that several papers presented in 
this conference will address these issues. 
Another  open  question  is  how  to  measure  prices  in  financial  services.  Value  added  in  the 
financial intermediation has grown faster than real GDP in the euro area, but it has retained a 
constant share in nominal terms. This suggests that prices have been rising more slowly in 
this part of the economy. In Luxembourg we could be tempted to congratulate ourselves for 
specialising in an industry with above average real growth and below average price inflation. 
But  is  this  really  the  case  or  is  it  an  artefact  of  how  prices  are  measured  in  financial 
intermediation? When banks double the value of the assets and liabilities on their balance 
sheet, this does not necessarily double the number of transactions, or the amount of labour 
or  physical  capital  required  to  produce  the  necessary  services.  This  observation  seems  to 
undermine the justification for deflating asset values using a general price index such as the 
GDP deflator or the consumer price index. Furthermore, the recent fall in asset prices and 
the de-leveraging process under way may lead to some surprising results in the breakdown 
of financial services into prices and quantities. 
Let me turn to my second set of remarks, concerning existing measures of productivity in the 
financial  sector  and  what  they  tell  us  about  its  sources.  Perhaps  the  most  natural  starting 
point is the measurement of scale economies, an issue on which academic researchers have 
long  provided  advice  for  competition  policy.  Empirical  evidence  on  returns  to  scale  in  the 
banking industry has sometimes suggested that larger institutions benefit from greater cost 
efficiency.  However,  studies  of  mergers  and  acquisitions  have  often  failed  to  find  such 
improvements. I think it is important to improve methods in this area for at least two reasons. 
First,  increasing  European  financial  market  integration  is  likely  to  raise  the  size  of  the 
average  bank.  Central  banks  often  repeat  that  the  European  financial  services  industry  is 
excessively  fragmented.  Increasing  integration  should  allow  a  more  efficient  provision  of 
financial  services,  improving  the  allocation  of  capital  to  investments  with  better  risk-return 
profiles  and  therefore  raising  the  potential  for  economic  growth.  Second,  the  recent 
depressed value of financial equity and public intervention in the banking sector to rescue 
distressed institutions will probably accelerate the process of mergers and acquisitions as the 
outlook recovers. Thus the existence and extent of scale economies remain timely questions 
for research and policy. 
Scale economies are only one source of productivity growth. What used to be called scope 
economies are improvements in efficiency obtained by altering the mix of outputs or the mix 
of inputs. In academic research, these have proven even more difficult to measure than scale 
economies. However, I  would encourage you to think about these issues in light of recent 
events. The demise of the investment bank suggests a return to universal banking, with large 
groups taking over specialised financial institutions. Such a development may be motivated 
by  a  need  to  improve  risk  management,  but  it  could  also  bring  benefits  in  terms  of  an 
improved mix of different financial outputs that are jointly produced. 
Finally, an additional source of productivity growth is efficiency change, meaning the extent 
to  which  individual  banks  move  towards  (or  away  from)  the  best-practice  frontier.  Again, 
looking  at  the  conference  programme,  I  notice  a  couple  of  papers  that  ask  whether  past 
trends towards deregulation or the creation of a single market in Europe have encouraged 
convergence towards a best-practice frontier. Unfortunately, a common result in the literature 
is  that  there  is  convergence  towards  average  efficiency  levels  rather  than  convergence 
towards the best efficiency levels. This suggests that some isolated financial institutions may 
2 
 BIS Review 137/2008
be pushing the frontier forward while the majority are falling steadily behind (a failure of the 
catching-up hypothesis). It is hard to interpret this result: is it good news because it means 
that technology is improving rapidly? Or is it a sign that even banks with low efficiency can 
survive, meaning that there is little incentive to adopt innovations? One may speculate that 
the answers depend on how one defines the best-practice frontier and whether it is valid to 
assume  that  the  same  technology  is  available  to  all  institutions.  It  is  common  to  link  the 
efficiency of individual banks to environmental variables, the quality of management, wage 
dispersion,  or  information  technology  investment.  Such  an  approach  may  help  to  identify 
unrealistic assumptions concerning the availability of a common technology. 
I have come to the third part of my remarks. Following the recent financial turmoil, what are 
the priorities in the study of productivity in financial services? 
I have already mentioned that the recent wave of restructuring is likely to increase the size of 
the average bank. As I have said, this means we need better tools to measure not only scale 
economies  but  also  scope  economies,  as  activities  that  were  once  performed  by  separate 
institutions are brought under a single roof. On the issue of optimal size, public interventions 
have prompted some recent commentators to observe that while some banks are “too big to 
fail”  others  may  be  “too  big  to  save”.  It  is  not  clear  that  there  is  such  a  trade-off  between 
scale economies and financial stability. Rather, the “too big to fail” label stresses the need for 
better  international  co-operation  in  regulation  and  supervision,  an  objective  that  should  by 
now  be  familiar  but  that  has  takes  on  greater  urgency  as  the  international  links  in  the 
financial industry become more apparent. 
Another aspect of financial productivity that merits closer scrutiny is the treatment of risk. I 
am  not  going  to  add  to  the  discussion  of  “black  swans”  and  the  impact  of  rare  events  on 
Value-at-Risk models used by traders (and regulators). Instead, I am referring to the more 
“mundane” issues raised in my previous remarks. In terms of measuring bank output, interest 
flows usually include a risk premium that will generally be more important when measuring 
borrower services produced by a bank. Therefore, the appropriate reference rates should be 
chosen  to  more  closely  match  the  risk  characteristics  of  a  bank’s  loan  portfolio.  Failure  to 
allow  for  risk  will  lead  to  an  overstatement  of  bank  output  that  will  distort  productivity 
measures. It is therefore important to consider banks’ risk when studying their efficiency or 
productivity  and  I  am  pleased  to  see  that  several  papers  on  the  conference  programme 
address these issues. 
Closely related to banks risk profile is their degree of output diversification, which is likely to 
increase  as  specialised  financial  institutions  seek  safety  in  larger  and  more  diversified 
groups.  In  principle,  diversification  lowers  risk,  but  it  may  also  lead  to  cost  savings  when 
jointly producing several outputs. Greater output diversification is a likely concomitant of the 
increase in average bank size that will accompany consolidation in the banking sector. By 
now, academic research generally recognises that banks must be modelled as multi-output 
firms,  but  more  work  is  needed  on  the  measurement  of  the  costs  and  benefits  of  joint 
production. 
Finally, on the priorities for research emerging from the financial turmoil, I would like to leave 
you with an open question: The bursting of asset price bubbles is likely to lead to a decline in 
balance  sheet  values  and  a  fall  in  productivity.  Is  this  a  problem  of  measuring  prices  or 
measuring productivity? I realise that this is a very difficult question as even central bankers 
have  a  hard  time  distinguishing  bubbles  from  the  fundamental  level  of  prices.  However, 
recent events have focussed our attention on the real consequences of assuming that asset 
prices are always at equilibrium. If we are going to discuss productivity in financial services, 
we need some indication of how far our measures will be distorted by asset price bubbles. 
In  conclusion,  I  am  pleased  to  see  you  here  in  Luxembourg,  where  the  financial  services 
industry is such an important part of our national economy. It only remains to me to wish you 
a fruitful discussion and an enjoyable visit to our country. 
BIS Review 137/2008 
 3
