Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Recent market developments – impact on the 
Philippine banking and finance sector 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas), at the Joint Membership Meeting of MART, TOAP, ACI and 
IHAP, Makati City, 3 October 2008. 
 Distinguished  officers  and  members  of  the  Money  Market  Association  of  the  Philippines 
(MART),  Trust  Officers  Association  of  the  Philippines  (TOAP),  Association  Cambiste 
Internationale  (ACI)  Philippines,  the  Financial  Markets  Association,  Investment  House 
Association  of  the  Philippines  (IHAP),  esteemed  guests,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  good 
evening. 
Thank  you  for  inviting  me  to  be  your  guest  speaker  at  tonight’s  joint  general  membership 
meeting. It’s always good to engage the prime movers of the country’s financial markets in 
an open discussion such as this. But especially during these times of great financial turmoil 
in  major  markets  overseas.  I  would  certainly  welcome  the  questions  and  your  comments 
during  the  open  forum  after  my  brief  talk.  As  you  are  well  aware,  the  BSP’s  approach  to 
supervision and reform has always been consultative.  
About the same time last year, if you recall, I was also your guest speaker at your general 
membership  meeting.  At  that  time,  I  spoke  about  the  increase  in  global  liquidity  and  the 
temptations that it introduced. I alluded to the changing nature of financial risk and how in 
this era of financial globalization, risks have transcended national borders. I also said that the 
international rules of the game are changing. 
Ah...  the  time  we  live  in  is  indeed  interesting,  isn’t  it?  The  rules  of  the  game  are  further 
evolving. This time around, there seems to be a crunch in global dollar liquidity as the US 
market  has  rapidly  de-leveraged.  And  events  are  showing  that  the  magnitude  of  financial 
risks  that  have  crossed  national  borders  has  been  beyond  most  market  participants’  and 
regulators’  expectations.  Stunningly,  we  are  witnessing  rapid  turnover  in  some  of  the 
marquee names in the global financial stage.  
In  fact,  the  market  developments  are  moving  so  fast  that  the  observations  that  I  will  be 
sharing with you tonight are not the same as those that I would have shared with you, had I 
delivered my talk on Tuesday as was originally scheduled.  
But I want to assure all of you here tonight, that my overarching message remains the same 
– that is,  
• 
First, our financial system is fundamentally sound and relatively insulated given its 
more largely domestic orientation,  
Second,  our  exposure  to  the  troubled  foreign  financial  institutions  is  minimal  and 
quite manageable from a capital and liquidity standpoint, and  
Third,  our  past  investments  in  banking  and  other  financial  reforms  have  helped 
shield us from catastrophic fallouts that the other jurisdictions have seen.  
  How did I come to these conclusions? Let me quickly run through the following points with 
you:  a)  What  has  just  happened?  b)  How’s  our  banking  system  faring?  c)  Is  our  macro 
stability sustainable? d) What are the BSP’s thrusts going forward?  
BIS Review 129/2008 
 1
Recent market developments  
I.  
We are all in the market, although coming from different perspectives, so I won’t delve too 
much  into  the  details  of  the  events  since  mid-September.  We  have  all  witnessed  that  our 
domestic  markets  have  followed,  albeit  somewhat  mutedly,  the  movements  in  the  global 
financial markets. What is interesting to note, however, is that our markets’ reactions have at 
times merely been “knee-jerk”. On quite a few days over the last 2 weeks, we saw the peso 
and the stock market, for instance, recovering most of any day’s trading losses by the close 
of the day’s trading session.  
What I would like to highlight with you, is this – “The rules of the game are changing.”  
1) 
Financial markets have become very closely interrelated allowing for contagion to be 
easier and speedier;  
The financial transactions that we thought would diversify risk may be the very same 
ones that have led to unhealthy risk concentrations;  
Information is most critical, when you are least mindful of it ; and  
As much as many would not want to believe it, regulation and markets must coexist 
– the trick is to craft good regulations that would allow markets to work.  
2) 
3) 
4) 
Financial integration has allowed the movement across borders not only of goods but also of 
funds. The funds market has indeed become global. Yield-seeking by investors as well as 
capital raising activities of users of funds ceased to be confined to their own borders because 
of globalization. So called "securitization structures” have made it easier to transfer traditional 
on-books  risks  of  banks  to  off-books  accounts,  therefore  freeing  up  capital  which  allowed 
banks  to  lend  more.  “Structured  products”  have  also  allowed  the  enhancing  of  yield  on 
traditional  investment  instruments.  With  these  financial  innovations,  the  objectives  of  the 
investors and the users of funds were therefore seemingly “happily married”. But alas, the 
party has abruptly ended and the music has stopped playing. 
In the flurry of these financial innovations, the value of transparency seemed to have been 
understated  or  even  casually  brushed  aside.  And  as  the  market  in  the  US  was  largely 
deregulated, the market grew larger and larger.  
Some  are  predicting  that  what  we  may  see,  as  an  aftermath  of  this  turmoil,  is  a  highly 
concentrated  and  increasingly  regulated  financial  system  in  the  major  economies.  Policy 
makers  and  regulators  in  emerging  markets,  including  in  the  Philippines,  will  then  have  to 
evaluate their own market structures to see how they can best position themselves in this 
changing environment.  
The Philippine banking system  
II.  
Against the backdrop of recent events, how have our banks fared?  
You have heard me say that our banks’ collective exposure to the failed Lehman Brothers 
was 0.3-0.4 percent of the banking system’s total assets. We hope that there will be no other 
Lehman’s type problems down the road, and this seems to be a fair hope given that US and 
even  European  authorities  have  now  boldly  stepped  in  to  rescue  the  other  large  and 
potentially systemic financial institutions in their jurisdictions. Nonetheless, our latest survey 
of banks shows the exposure of Philippine banks to potentially “at risk” international financial 
institutions is only around 1 percent of total assets at most. And this level of exposure by a 
few banks is definitely well within the ability of these banks to absorb should they become 
actual losses given their strong capital base and liquidity.  
Our  monitoring  of  banks’  activities  continues  to  reveal  no  abnormal  actions  by  or  against 
banks.  In  addition,  the  interbank  market  continues  to  function  in  an  orderly  manner  given 
fairly stressed global conditions. Where we have seen some “friction” is in the swap market, 
2 
 BIS Review 129/2008
possibly in step with tightness in global dollar liquidity. But as I understand it, that has abated 
in the last couple of trading days.  
Ladies and gentlemen, our banking system remains fundamentally sound. Capital is still well 
above  both  the  BSP  10%  minimum  prudential  requirement  and  the  BIS  standard  of  8%. 
Asset quality is as close to the lowest level seen since the Asian Crisis as it has ever been. 
Return on equity has also been improving. And there is ample liquidity system-wide. 
This  stable  banking  system  has  been  critical  in  underpinning  a  stable  macroeconomic 
environment. And sustained stability in our macroeconomic environment in the last few years 
has  also  avoided  the  build  up  of  dangerous  imbalances  that  could  have  led  our  banking 
system astray. 
Macroeconomic stability  
III.  
Now, a question that may be in your minds is this – Is the macroeconomic stability that we 
have  so  far  enjoyed  in  danger,  given  the  global  financial  turmoil  further  threatening  world 
economic growth?  
You  can’t  have  a  more  direct  question  than  that,  can  you?  Well,  I  will  also  try  to  be  as 
forthright. As you aware, we have lowered our growth expectations to a range of 4.4 to 4.9 
percent. I believe that given the unfolding environment, such a range would still be decent.  
On inflation, our base scenario for a hump-shaped inflation path remains. The inflation peak 
may be nearing, if we haven’t yet seen it. After that, we see some leveling off, then entry into 
single digit territory by Q1 2009. Now, if the downtrend in global oil and non-oil commodity 
prices is sustained, we should see the leveling off period shorter, and inflation being within 
the target range before the end of 2009.  
We  are  cognizant  that  the  global  slowdown  could  further  weaken  our  exports  but  possibly 
tempered  by  lower  oil  prices  and  other  commodity  imports.  Remittances  actually  are  very 
strong and above forecasts so far, but they may also be eventually affected. Prolonged risk 
aversion could also change the direction of capital flows. However, we are also keenly aware 
that the global economies are not all slowing down at the same rate. In addition, not all the 
economies  are  seen  to  grind  to  a  halt.  There  will  continue  to  be  opportunities  for  growth. 
There  will  always  be  value  investors,  given  all  the  liquidity  that  will  have  been  shored  up 
because  of  the  ensuing  “clean  up”  in  the  financial  turmoil.  We  are  thus  expectant  that 
markets such as the Middle East and China will be resilient. We see these markets as taking 
up  much  of  the  slack  that  will  be  created  by  the  slowdown  in  the  US  and  Europe.  We 
therefore still consider our $2 billion BOP surplus target this year as reasonable and doable.  
Given all these and as we sustain the reform effort, I believe our macroeconomy stands an 
excellent chance of maintaining its stable course.  
BSP thrusts going forward  
IV.  
What can you expect from the BSP going forward? We will remain focused on our mandate 
of  price  stability.  We  believe  that  inflation  at  manageable  levels  is  essential  to  ensuring 
sustainable economic growth.  
We will maintain our policy of a market-determined exchange rate, with official action only to 
keep volatilities at bay. We will stick to the policies that have allowed us to sustain a strong 
external position.  
We will continue to review our banking reform agenda. The banking system strength that we 
have seen thus far has been made possible by the reforms that we have put in place. We will 
continue  to  enhance  risk  management  standards,  improve  corporate  governance  and 
accelerate compliance with Basel 2 principles.  
BIS Review 129/2008 
 3
The recent events in the financial markets highlight the critical importance of efficient price 
discovery, transparency and investor protection. In line with this, our issuance of regulations 
aimed  at  further  broadening  the  array  of  financial  products  available  in  the  market  will 
continue to include a review of existing rules to ensure that appropriate risk disclosure and 
client suitability procedures are in place for new risk-taking activities.  
In  addition,  the  BSP  will  continue  to  work  together  with  the  private  sector  and  other 
government  agencies  to  further  enhance  both  the  infrastructure  and  the  regulatory 
framework for capital market transactions to further promote efficiency in trading, settlement 
and delivery of government securities. 
Finally, we will pursue our legislative agenda. As you must be aware, the Credit Information 
System Act and the Personal Equity and Retirement Account Act have both recently been 
approved.  These  are  two  very  important  pieces  of  legislation,  particularly  as  we  face  the 
challenges brought about the current financial turmoil. The CISA will help address the lack of 
comprehensive  and  credible  credit-related  information.  This  will  in  turn  improve  access  to 
credit  and  reduce  its  cost.  PERA,  on  the  other  hand,  is  expected  to  promote  voluntary 
savings and therewith provide a new base for stepping up capital market development. It is 
also expected to be complementary to our public pension system. 
The BSP will continue to work with Congress on key legislation that would further enhance 
protection  for  investors,  improve  BSP’s  oversight  capabilities  and  minimize  costs  of 
resolutions.  
Concluding remarks 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  challenges  that  we  face  are  enormous.  Although  much  has 
already been revealed in terms of the problem areas of the global financial market turmoil, 
we are very much aware that more could be forthcoming.  
I said earlier, “the rules of the game are changing”. Fortunately, at the UAAP, the rules have 
not  changed,  the  best  still  prevails.  I  can  almost  hear  some  of  you  say  underneath  your 
breaths – if indeed that is the case, then we should “throw the playbook out the window.” My 
advice  to  all  of  you  –  instead  of  doing  that,  be  watchful.  At  this  critical  point,  it  is  more 
important that we remain focused on the strategy and the  reform agenda that have so far 
allowed us to be resilient.  
On the part of the BSP, we will remain vigilant in our assessment of developments. We will 
ensure that we are flexible to promptly and decisively take action when necessary. We will be 
forthright in our communication to our stakeholders.  
To steer the market from a further and deeper impact of this turmoil, the BSP continues to 
look to the active cooperation and support of all of you in the market. As they say, we are in 
this game together. I take note of the passionate and unwavering support pledged here by all 
the  associations  present  tonight.  In  order  for  all  of  us  to  finish  the  course  we  laid  out,  we 
must work together as a team.  
Magandang gabi po sa inyo, at maraming salamat. Mabuhay tayong lahat! 
4 
 BIS Review 129/2008
