Ardian Fullani: Achievements and challenges of the Albanian banking 
system  
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  the  reception  for  the 
bankers  and  representatives  of  banks  operating  in  Albania,  organized  by  the  Albanian 
Association of Banks, on the occasion of the closing year 2008, Tirana, 18 December 2008. 
 Dear Chairman of the Albanian Association of Banks, 
Dear managers of the Albanian banking system, 
Thanking  you  for  this  invitation,  I  avail  myself  of  this  opportunity  to  provide  some 
considerations of the path we have been through during 2008 and the challenges ahead us. 
What we have been through during this fall sounds unreal and somewhat unbelievable. Many 
taboos have overturned and the list of news enlarges day after day, including also schemes 
of financial mega-fraud.  
I commenced my speech this way so as not to overlook this unusual global event, to provide 
an  outline  of  the  general  economic  and  financial  setting  surrounding  our  environment  and 
above  all,  to  underline  an  immense  truth:  that  the  Albanian  banking  system  has  shown 
admirable resilience and that the immunity shown has not only been a matter of luck.  
The year 2008 has been an intensive year of ceaseless changes, at the centre of which were 
the  safeguard  and  consolidation  of  macroeconomic  stability  at  home  and  the  banking 
system’s financial stability.  
Taking a quick glance at the Albanian economy over the present years, I can state that it has 
maintained the projected growth for year 2008, under stable consumer prices and domestic 
currency exchange rate. Monetary policy has been throughout the year 2008 cautious and 
has kept the key policy rate unchanged at 6.25 percent. In addition, fiscal policy has been 
characterized by the collection of budget revenues beyond the Government’s projections and 
by the concentration of expenditures in mainly infrastructure-related projects. As in the recent 
years, the banking system has sustained the economic activity and consumer demand with 
loans, hence providing numerous incentives for a stable economic growth.  
The  positive  performance  of  the  economy  and  of  certain  economic  sectors  –  in  particular 
trade  and  construction  –  has  been  propelled  by  the  positive  rates  of  domestic  demand  at 
home. Lending has maintained its high annual growth rates of 42 percent. As a share of GDP 
and the system’s assets, loans have recorded further growth to 36 percent and 41 percent, 
respectively. Businesses were the main banking loans’ users, accounting for 66 percent of 
loan  portfolio  growth.  This  positive  performance  was  associated  with  a  favourable 
macroeconomic  and  financial  setting.  During  the  second  half  of  the  year,  the  CPI  has 
recorded an annual drop to 2.6 percent in November. In addition, other inflation measures, 
such  as  core  inflation,  traded  and  non-traded  inflation,  attest  to  the  downward  intensity  of 
inflationary pressures  at  home.  The  inflationary  expectations  of  the  economic  agents  have 
also provided their contribution to this stability. According to our surveys they are anchored to 
around  3  per  cent.  These  developments  attest  to  the  fact  that  monetary  policy  and  the 
strengthening of supervisory measures by the Bank of Albania have proved to be effective in 
containing  the  inflationary  pressures.  Taking  into  account  the  central  bank’s  role  and 
objective,  I  would  like  to  underline  that  our  commitment  and  success  in  preserving  price 
stability  has  been  mirrored  in  the  anchoring  of  the  inflationary  expectations  close  to  our  3 
percent target.  
The banking system’s performance for the present year proves to be positive. In the early 
year 2008, credit registry started to operate. Its establishment represents a key innovation of 
BIS Review 163/2008 
 1
the  financial  infrastructure  in  Albania.  We  all  attest  to  the  fact  that  by  putting  the  credit 
registry into operation, we have contributed to: 
• 
Having  basic  understanding  of  credibility  of  the  borrower  and  avoiding  careless 
borrowers; 
Reducing a bank's cost in collecting information on borrowers; 
Promoting increased borrower discipline; 
Identifying all borrower liabilities and providing such information to lenders; and 
Improving  the  banking  industry  database,  through  developing  the  borrower  loan 
history. 
According to the latest data, the banking system appears to be lucrative. Return on 
assets for the entire year 2008 is expected to be 1.17 percent, while return on equity 
14.7 percent. During the present year, banks have expanded their investments while 
augmenting  their  capital  on  the  other  hand.  Capital  adequacy  accounts  for  17.5 
percent of total assets and off-balance sheet items classified by risk. The liquidity 
situation  of  the  banking  system  for  year  2008  is  presented  as  good.  Despite  the 
downward  trend  shown  in  the  recent  years  (owing  to  the  high  credit growth  rate), 
liquid  assets  to  total  assets  in  the  system  account  for  about  46  percent,  which  is 
considered  as  being  satisfactory.  The  main  resource  of  funds  in  the  system  – 
customer deposits – have been ever-increasingly consolidating their upward trend, 
mirroring public confidence in the Albanian banking system. As of end October, total 
deposits in the system amounted to 665.9 billion leks, up by 5.7 percent compared 
to end-year 2007. 
Following  the  open  forum  this  spring,  the  Supervisory  Council  paved  the  way  to 
approving a package of new regulations, which aim at harmonizing the regulatory 
and supervisory framework with the best international practices.  
In  accordance  with  the  new  banking  law,  new  criteria  have  been  established  for 
measuring,  supervising  and 
to  a 
person/customer  or  a  group  of  related  persons/customers  or  having  a  special 
relationship  with  the  bank,  aiming  at  managing  the  risk  stemming  from  the 
concentrated exposure to them.  
The  strengthening  of  internal  control  in  banks  and  branches  of  foreign  banks  has 
been  another  focus  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  during  the  present  year.  The  new 
regulation  considers  internal  control  as  part  of  bank’s  accountable  governance.  It 
provides  the  platform  for  establishing  an  efficient  internal  control  system  as  key 
factor in the banks and branches of foreign banks’ governance and management.  
Special  attention  has  been  also  paid  to  the  transparency  related  to  banking  and 
financial products and services. The regulation harmonizes the requirements on the 
way  and  mode  on  providing  information  to  customers  on  banking  products  and 
services, on the publication of effective interest rates on deposits and loans, on the 
method  of  calculating  the  effective  interest  rate  on  loans,  on  the  constituent 
elements to be specified in loan and deposit contract, on the marketing of products 
and  services,  on  keeping  the  customer’s  data  confidentiality,  on  dealing  with  the 
customer’s complaints and on the establishment of specific structures to deal with 
these complaints.  
Part  of  this  new  package  has  also  been  the  standardization  of  the  required 
information that banks and branches of foreign banks have to make public, related 
to  the  bank’s  main  activity,  its  organization  and  management,  its  financial 
performance,  its  financial  situation,  the  risk  management  and  the  accounting 
policies.  
reporting  of  bank’s 
large  exposures 
BIS Review 163/2008
 2 
 In light of the international situation and in order to better diversify the risk stemming 
from the concentration in banks’ investments in the international financial markets, 
the  Supervisory  Council  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  amended  the  regulation  on  the 
management  of  risk  from  banks’  large  exposures,  aiming  at  reducing  large 
exposures’ threshold.  
Enhancing  the  efficiency  of  the  financial  market  and  of  the  money  market  in 
particular,  has  also  been  at  the  central  bank’s  focus.  During  the  year  2008  was 
approved  the  regulation  on  the  master  repurchase  agreement,  hence  providing  a 
new instrument which reduces risk in borrowing transactions between banks.  
After this short outline of our performance, of the Bank of Albania and of the banking 
system, it comes natural to claim that we have acted rightly by taking a number of 
preventive measures that have helped us absorb the negative effects of the latest 
events.  
Dear bankers,  
Year  2008  is  leaving  and  a  new  year  is  coming  now.  Like  the  majority  of  various 
world economies, even our country is in front of many uncertainties. I would not like 
to overlook the domestic factors, but however, what is currently considered as the 
hottest  issue,  has  to  do  with  the  overall  global  environment.  For  a  long  time  from 
now, various agencies, and national and international institutions have forecasted a 
year  of  world  contracted  overall  production.  It  would  be  utopian,  and  to  a  certain 
extent a lack of prudence, if we think that our economy would be slightly or not at all 
affected  by  global  crisis.  Though  Albania  is  a  small  economy,  it  is  open,  with 
numerous relations for exchanging goods and financial funds.  
I have emphasized in my public presentations that all the actors should be prepared 
for harder days. In light of this I would like to notify you of a number of statements, 
findings or actions that we (I mean the Bank of Albania and the banking system) are 
going to carry out in the coming months.  
1. 
Based  on  the  latest  analysis  of  the  country’s  economic  and  financial 
developments and on inflation forecasts for two forthcoming years, I would 
like to emphasise that there is a good anchoring of inflationary expectations 
around  the  Bank  of  Albania’s  3  percent  target.  Latest  developments  and 
information  suggest  that  risks  balance  to  future  inflation  is  shifted  to 
downward trend, creating space for manoeuvring in the near future. 
Based on recent empirical studies of the Bank of Albania, it comes out that 
the  relation  of  credit  to  economy  with  the  country’s  economic  growth  is 
positive  and  relatively  strong.  So,  the  credit  growth  leads  to  maintaining 
current paces of the country’s economic activity. In the recent years credit 
to economy has eclipsed the contribution of the public sector to generating 
and  using  financial  funds,  also  based  on  a  long  process  of  the  country’s 
fiscal consolidation. This process of more effective usage of funds impacts 
on  increasing  the  efficiency  and  the  economic  growth.  A  contraction  of 
credit  to  economy  carries  over  the  risk  of  reverse  action,  of  eclipsing  the 
credit  to  economy  contribution  from  the  public  sector’s  spending.  In  this 
sense, being aware of all the difficulties ahead, I would insist once more on 
my request to you to continue to keep credit to economy paces. 
Further to my previous requests, I would once again require from you to be 
more active in the money market, in the interbank market and in securities 
market.  The  Bank  of  Albania  has  repeated  time  and  again  that  we  will 
satisfy  all  the  financial  market  liquidity  needs,  but  on  the  other  hand  we 
require  from  you  to  be  more  independent  from  your  headquarters,  in  the 
policies  you  apply  with  relation  to  domestic  financial  market,  in  terms  of 
2. 
3. 
BIS Review 163/2008 
 3
investments portfolio. You are licensed and operating in Albania, therefore, 
you have under your  management the Albanian citizens’ savings and the 
essential task of every banking system is the financial intermediation in the 
country  they  are  operating.  The  Bank  of  Albania  will  insist  for  the  fastest 
implementation of repurchase agreements in the transactions you carry out 
in  the  interbank  market.  The  Bank  of  Albania  makes  use  of  a  systematic 
approach  in  its  dealing with  and  operating  in  the  interbank market,  which 
necessarily requires an efficient liquidity re-allocation among banks. Such a 
thing  is  carried  out  by  applying  repurchase  agreement,  thus  preventing 
credit  risk.  In  the  meantime,  the  Bank  of  Albania  is  completing  the 
regulation  on  DVP  (delivery  versus  payment),  which  will  simultaneously 
bring  about  even  the  settlement  risk  prevention.  This  constitutes  another 
step in terms of financial infrastructure improvement for an efficient banking 
market.  
The  Bank  of  Albania  is  also  looking  into  some  other  measures  to  better 
precede  the  optimal  functioning  of  the  banking  system.  Under  more 
concrete  terms,  the  Bank  of  Albania  will  require  that  the  dividends 
materialised  over  2008  be  destined  to  increase  the  capital  of  banks  you 
manage. I have constantly pointed out that our system is well-capitalised, 
but  however  under  current  conditions  I  regard  its  further  increase  as  a 
prudential measure. 
One  of  the  strategic  goals  for  the  central  bank’s  objectives  is  the 
strengthening  of  its  institutional  independence  and  credibility,  being  a 
central and accountable institution for the mission entitled by law. One of 
the  factors  impacting  directly  and  indirectly  on  the  strengthening  of  this 
independence  is  also  the  fulfilment  and  improvement  of  the  Bank  of 
Albania’s legal framework in line with contemporary standards. To this end, 
we are working under three main directions: 
4. 
5. 
Drafting  the  Law  “On  Payment  System  in  the  Republic  of  Albania”  is  included  in 
short-term priorities that the Republic of Albania, through the Bank of Albania, has 
undertaken  in  view  of  the  obligations  deriving  from  the  SAA,  the  European 
Partnership, as well as in short-term and medium-term priorities required under the 
National Plan for the Implementation of the SAA. This draft law aims at: 
- 
- 
Strengthening the system’s institutional framework; 
Enhancing  legal  framework  transparency  through  tasks  clarification  of 
participants in the system; 
Stipulating  a  complete  regime  for  licensing  and  supervising  the  whole 
relevant systems. 
 Alterations in the legal framework of the Bank of Albania will be also associated with 
effective regulatory framework improvement, having banking supervision regulations 
on focus. 
6. 
The Bank of Albania, starting from this year-end, will launch into circulation 
the new banknote with the face value of 2000 leks, while the whole existing 
series has been re-printed. I would like to highlight that the whole series of 
the  re-printed  banknotes  and  of  the  denomination  2000  leks  is  equipped 
with most modern security elements. In the meantime I avail myself of the 
opportunity  to  clarify  to  the  public  that  the  new  denomination  is  an 
adjustment  of  the  current  structure,  filling  in  a  large  gap  between  both 
existing denominations of a higher nominal value.  
BIS Review 163/2008
  4 
 2009  will  be  a  difficult  year,  and  therefore  everyone  should  take  appropriate  measures  to 
correctly realise and interpret his role with professionalism. To maintain the dynamics of the 
country’s steady development toward full European convergence, the banking system must 
further perfect its infrastructure. I would regard the improvement of customer service and the 
increase of public education and communication as sound foundations of this infrastructure. 
All the above-stated, along with technology investments, would enable a higher transparency 
to  clients  and  more  competitive  service  costs.  This  would  lead  to  improved  image  to  the 
public, enhancing the public confidence in the banking system.  
Dear bankers, 
Allow  me  to  conclude  my  speech  by  emphasising  once  again  the  great  importance  the 
moment imposes to us. Wherever we are, inside the country or abroad, we must regard the 
challenge of overcoming this crisis as a patriotic task, which requires commitment and a high 
moral, social and political awareness.  
Thanking you once again for the invitation, I avail myself of the opportunity to wish you happy 
year-end celebrations. 
BIS Review 163/2008 
 5
