Njuguna Ndung’u: FIRST in development 
Address  by  Prof  Njuguna  Ndung’u,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya,  at  the  FIRST 
Consultative Group Meeting, Nairobi, 24 November 2008. 
 Chair, Governing Council of the FIRST Initiative; 
Distinguished members of the Council here present; 
Management and staff of the FIRST Initiative Program Management Unit; 
Distinguished guests; 
Meeting participants; 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
I  am  pleased  to  be  here  this  morning  at  the  opening  of  the  FIRST  Initiative  Consultative 
Group meeting. My thanks go to the Governing Council and the Program Manager for the 
kind  invitation.  Allow  me  also  to  thank  FIRST  Initiative  for  choosing  to  host  both  the 
Governing and Consultative Group meetings in Nairobi famed as “the Green City in the Sun”. 
I would also wish to welcome you all to Nairobi and hope that you will extend your stay to 
enjoy the varied and scenic delights that Kenya offers. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  This  is  indeed  a  “watershed”  meeting  that  comes  after  the 
completion  of  the  first  four  year  mandate  of  FIRST  Initiative.  I  am  informed  that  FIRST 
Initiative  began  its  operations  in  2002  with  a  five  year  mandate  that  was  successfully 
completed in 2007. The mandate was to provide Technical Assistance to support growth and 
poverty  reduction  in  low  and  middle  income  countries  by  promoting  a  financial  sector  that 
was stable, deep and diversified. This is indeed a noble objective and it is therefore gratifying 
to note that FIRST will now enter a second phase of operations to run to the end of 2012. 
Role and significance of FIRST in development 
FIRST mission to deliver flexible, top-quality technical assistance related to financial sector is 
welcomed in the region where the role of the financial sector is recognized as an engine for 
development. Most of you in this room can remember vividly the days of financial repression 
when government legal restrictions prevented financial intermediaries in the economy from 
functioning  at  their  full  capacity.  The  regulations  generally  included  interest  rate  ceilings, 
compulsory  credit  allocation,  and  high  reserve  requirements.  The  development  philosophy 
has shifted away from direction and control. Governments of developing countries have now 
realized the great potential of the financial sector in fostering development. The formation of 
FIRST  as  an  institution  was  to  help  developing  countries  tap  the  potential  support  to  the 
development of the financial sector. 
The fact that FIRST initiatives always come in after Financial Sector Assessment Program 
(FSAP) and other assessment have been undertaken by the IMF and the World Bank signals 
to governments of developing countries that our partners not only perform a “health check” of 
our  financial  system  but  they  also  offer  “health  solutions”  after  a  prognosis  has  been 
identified. 
Many  of  the  projects  financed  by  FIRST  initiative  have  helped  countries  tighten  their 
adherence to international standards and codes for the financial sector. In doing so, I belief in 
the assertions that FIRST has helped developing countries achieve part of their development 
goals of building an efficient, inclusive and transparent financial system. The fact that FIRST 
works closely with the recipient institutions to prioritize technical assistance activities that are 
consistent  with  the  recipient  country  plans  is  a  great  plus.  It  re-defines  development 
partnership of donors and recipient countries. 
BIS Review 146/2008 
 1
I  note  with  great  pleasure  FIRST  model  of  doing  business.  It  encourages  recipient 
governments to identify their financial sector problems, prioritizes them, and then supports 
viable solutions. It also pools the efforts of several development agencies, leveraging their 
expertise  and  reducing  duplication.  Often,  FIRST  takes  on  targeted  projects  and  once 
completed,  FIRST  disseminates  the  results  to  boost  their  impact  and  catalyze  long-term 
support from both development partners and recipient governments. 
In Kenya the Vision 2030 has identified that the problems of high interest rate spreads and 
limited access. The focus then is how to reduce these spreads, raise access and deepen the 
financial  sector.  The  level  of  solutions  require  policy  reforms  that  alleviate  market, 
institutional  and  political  barriers  to  competition.  The  Vision  2030  has  identified  areas  in 
which policy reforms can have a major impact in reducing such barriers and thus increasing 
the effectiveness and competitiveness of financial intermediation. 
Here  in  Kenya,  I  would  like  to  acknowledge  an  initiative  such  as  FinAccess  initiated  and 
partly  funded  by  FIRST  which  has  given  us  the  survey  information  which  has  become  an 
integral  part  of  financial  market  processes  and  analyses.  The  results  have  helped  us 
understand  some  of  the  issues  in  the  financial  sector  and  have  provided  us  a  better 
understanding  on  how  to  develop  the  sector.  There  is  an  increasing  body  of  evidence  to 
support the view that financial sector development contributes to both economic growth and 
poverty reduction by affording people greater access to finance. 
Going forward 
Going forward, I have noted with satisfaction that FIRST will seek to strengthen the causal 
links  between  its  technical  assistance  and  the  contributions  of  deep,  orderly  financial 
systems  to  economic  growth,  poverty  reduction,  and  social  equity.  FIRST  will  do  this  by 
increasing  its  emphasis  on  achieving  market  development  outcomes,  and  filling  gaps  in 
domestic financial markets. It will also continue to give priority to supporting governments in 
lower-income countries in developing action plans geared toward these outcomes. 
Such a move is welcomed in the region where there has been a very strong upward trend in 
diversification of economic activities among rural households over the decade. One robust 
finding  of  the  rural  panel  analysis  is  the  importance  of  access  to  credit  as  a  correlate  of 
escaping  from  poverty.  In  Kenya  for  example,  most  (70  percent  of)  Kenyans  do  not  have 
access to any form of credit. For those who do access loans, there is significant disparity in 
average  amounts  –  with  non-poor  households  borrowing  42  percent  above  the  average 
amount, and poor households 77 percent below; the advantage for urban households is even 
larger, whereas female headed are way below average (World Bank 2008). The question is 
whether we have adequate financial vehicles for each of these diverse house-holds. 
Financial stability and development are a crucial prerequisite and a facilitator of reforms in 
other  sectors,  including  private  sector  development,  infrastructure,  housing,  and  social 
policies. Financial sector development is vitally linked to growth and poverty reduction. Well-
functioning  financial  systems  channel  funds  to  productive  uses  essential  for  a  country’s 
transformation. 
Financial services 
In Kenya, we have identified that a well-functioning financial system is critical to accelerating 
economic growth. That is, a vibrant and globally competitive financial sector will drive high 
levels of savings and finance Kenya’s investment need. 
According to the Financial Access Survey 2007, by FSD Kenya, the banking sector serves 
only  19  per  cent  of  Kenya’s  bankable  population  with  8  per  cent  being  served  by  other 
financial services providers such as MFIs and SACCOs. 38 per cent are totally excluded and 
35 per cent rely on informal financial services providers. The evidence is also that access to 
2 
 BIS Review 146/2008
financial services outside the main cities still remains limited. The introduction of MFI’s, the 
SACCO’s and CRBs will produce the best financial infrastructure to reach all segments of the 
economy and information flow to help them function properly. 
For Kenya to achieve its aspirations of Vision 2030, the levels of investment will require a 
continuous  increase  in  the  level  of  national  savings  to  sustain  economic  growth.  In  this 
regard,  financial  sector  reform  measures  will  be  implemented  and  more  savings  products 
developed to support the requisite national savings. 
To do so I intend to suggest areas where support of FIRST initiative will be most welcomed 
in Kenya’s case, but also applies to most countries in SSA: 
• 
that  govern  all 
the  regulators  with 
Enhance the role of the Government in the financial sector to provide a legal, 
regulatory, and supervisory framework that promotes soundness and competition in 
the sector. More support for the review, amendment and drafting of financial sector 
laws  and  regulations 
the  objective  of 
strengthening their effectiveness. 
Reduce the existing deficiencies in the clearing and settlement mechanisms in 
national payment systems. The modernization of the national payment system has 
included,  among  other  things,  the  introduction  of  Real  Time  Gross  Settlement 
(RTGS) and the Kenya Electronic Payments and Settlement System (KEPSS) to all 
participants. But now require enhancement to ensure overall adoption. 
Increasing  access  to  credit.  The  major  impediments  to  growth  in  developing 
countries especially in SSA is the insufficient access to credit for large segments of 
the  population  and  enterprises,  especially  micro,  small  and  medium  sized  ones. 
Areas  which  FIRST  can  support  include:  improvements  in  the  operation  of  the 
government registries including: assistance to the Companies Register to enable the 
Registry  clear  the  backlog  in  filing  and  allow  for  speedy  and  accurate  information 
sharing  of  corporate  information  and  data;  improvements  in  the  land  registration 
system  through  digitizing  land  records;  establishment  of  a  legal  and  regulatory 
framework  for  the  operation  of  a  credit  reference  bureau  that  would  facilitate  the 
much needed information flow among the credit granting institutions. 
Improve the financial legal environment. The legal system in the region currently 
faces major challenges in supporting effective financial intermediation. Furthermore, 
the  drafting,  implementation  and  application  of  the  legislative  and  regulatory 
reforms, require strong capacity in the judiciary and in the legislative and executive 
offices charged with legislative drafting and law revision. 
Clear  and  effective  laws  backed  by  a  strong  and  credible  judiciary  are  an 
essential  element  in  creating  an  environment  that  is  conducive  to  business  and 
financial activity. Enforcement of contracts in the financial sector is a major signaling 
mechanism 
innovation 
intermediation. 
Develop  a  financial  sector  that  reflect  the  economic  structures  of  the  country  and 
avoid  temptations  of  one  size  fits  all.  Most  SSA  are  characterized  by  formal  and 
informal  finance.  The  process  of  formalization  requires  understanding  of  the 
economic structures. 
financial  sector  development  and 
that  helps 
the 
     Conclusion 
In  conclusion,  I  realize  that  the  issues  for  discussion  during  this  meeting  are  vital  to  the 
financial sector at this crucial time when the world is seeking solutions to the global financial 
crisis; the Central Bank of Kenya and the Ministry of Finance are interested and also party to 
the  issues  being  discussed  here.  The  financial  sector  reform  agenda  is  now  even  more 
BIS Review 146/2008 
 3
urgent in the wake of the ongoing global financial crisis. I am informed that you spent a good 
part of yesterday discussing the crisis and I am sure that you came up with useful proposals 
that you will be sharing. It is inevitable that there will be fundamental changes to the global 
financial  architecture  and  institutions  that  govern  it.  This  will  pose  a  greater  challenge  to 
developing countries that are already resource constrained and yet need to quickly embrace 
these changes. Again, partners such as FIRST Initiative will be called upon to quickly deploy 
technical assistance to client countries. 
Targeted  technical  assistance  in  the  financial  sector  will  support  governments’  effort  to 
deepen  a  market  based  economy  which  contributes  to  a  sustainable  fiscal  position  and 
improved allocation of resources. Broad-based financial and legal sector reforms will directly 
contribute  to  improving  equity  and  reducing  poverty  through  expanding  access  to  financial 
services.  Poverty  is  sustained  by  exclusion  in  the  market.  The  poor  benefit  from  financial 
services  by  providing  a  safe  haven  for  their  savings.  The  route  to  savings  together  with 
investment  opportunities  that  promise  returns  is  the  road  to  enhance  poverty  reduction. 
These  objectives  will  be  achieved  through  provision  of  technical  expertise  and  building 
capacity  to  implement  our  countries’  financial  sector  and  legal  sector  reforms  whenever 
required. 
I  therefore  look  forward  to  the  output  of  today’s  discussions  that  should  enable  FIRST  to 
meet and exceed the monumental expectations from client countries in its second phase of 
operations. 
On that note, it is my honour and pleasure to declare the FIRST Consultative Group Meeting 
officially open and to wish you fruitful deliberations. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 146/2008
