Glenn Stevens: Australia, New Zealand and the international economy 
Address  by  Mr  Glenn  Stevens,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to  the  Trans-
Tasman Business Circle Business Luncheon, Sydney, 21 October 2008. 
I thank Clare Noone for very able assistance in preparing this address. 
 In Les Carlyon’s Gallipoli, a conversation is recounted in which a Turkish soldier is said to 
have asked some New Zealand prisoners why it was that they had come so far, voluntarily, 
to fight a war in Europe. They apparently replied that they had expected it to be rather like 
playing  a  game  of  rugby.  It  is  not  recorded  how  Australians  answered  the  same  question 
(perhaps they could not decide which code of football was most apt). But they certainly also 
went in a spirit of optimism.  
That optimism was soon a casualty of war. Optimism seems also to have been a casualty of 
recent financial events abroad, as outcomes have been rather unlike what the sophisticated 
modern set of institutions and markets were supposed to have delivered.  
Many have observed that the world faces the most serious international financial crisis since 
the  1930s.  The  world  has,  of  course,  experienced  many  crises,  of  various  kinds  over  the 
decades, not least the one to which the ANZACs responded. These were often, in terms of 
potential and actual human misery, far more perilous than today’s financial dislocation.  
Nonetheless,  the  situation  is  very  serious.  It  is  up  to  policy-makers  and  private  market 
participants to put the system back together, without the excesses that built up over the past 
years, so that it can serve its proper function: facilitating trade and genuine investment flows, 
in the process supporting economic growth. 
For this audience, I had intended to talk about the Australian and New Zealand economies – 
noting  some  of  their  similarities  and  differences,  and  common  interests.  Given  the 
circumstances,  I  will  touch  briefly  on  those  issues,  and  then  devote  some  time  as  well  to 
talking about our shared interests in getting the global financial system back into shape. 
Australia and New Zealand 
It is stating the obvious that the two countries have a lot in common, dating back at least to 
James Cook.  We  share  the  British  system  of  laws  and  custom,  the  historical  relative 
geographical  isolation  from  “old”  Europe,  an  increasing  orientation  towards  Asia,  and 
generally an outward-looking mentality reflecting small economic size. Notwithstanding that 
Australia’s GDP is seven times that of New Zealand, we still see ourselves as small. 
There is a significant amount of grass-roots integration between the two countries which has 
occurred fairly naturally. Apart from the relative ease of population flows – which facilitates 
labour  mobility –  one  is  struck  by  the  number  of  Australia-New  Zealand  Associations  and 
Societies of one kind or another. Try an on-line search of the words “Australia, New Zealand, 
association and society” to see what I mean. 
The  industry  structures  of  the  two  economies  differ  somewhat,  reflecting  natural  resource 
endowments (Table 1). Australia has more mining, but less manufacturing and farming, as a 
share  of  GDP,  than  New  Zealand.  But  on  the  whole,  the  differences  are  perhaps  not  as 
striking as the similarities.  
BIS Review 127/2008 
 1
  Manufacturing 
Mining 
Table 1: Economic Structure 
Percentage share of GDP, 2007/08 
Australia New Zealand  
Agriculture, forestry and fishing 
Total of above 
 Finance, property and business services 
Health, education and community services* 
Wholesale and retail trade** 
 Construction 
Utilities and transport 
Government administration and defence 
Communication services 
 Other 
10.1
6.8
2.3
19.2
19.4
13.4
12.3
6.8
6.8
3.8
2.7
15.5
 
14.1 
1.2 
5.8 
21.1 
 20.9 
11.9 
15.4 
 4.6 
6.5 
4.6 
6.1 
 8.8 
 * includes cultural, recreational and personal services 
** includes accommodation, restaurants, cafes and bars 
Note: Data are not strictly comparable as industry value-added in Australia is measured 
at basic prices and in New Zealand at producers’ prices 
Sources: ABS; Statistics New Zealand 
 
The  two  countries  do  a  good  deal  of  bilateral  trade,  helped  by  the  Australia  New  Zealand 
Closer Economic Relations Trade Agreement (CER) of 1983,1 and Australia is easily New 
Zealand’s largest trading partner. Interestingly enough, though, while growth in trans-Tasman 
trade  has  been  faster  than  growth  in  trade  with  Japan,  the  United  Kingdom  or  the  United 
States, traditionally big trading partners, it is not especially fast. The most striking thing is that 
growth in trade with China and other east Asian economies has been much faster for both 
                                                 
1   Further information on the Australia New Zealand Closer Economic Relations Trade Agreement is available at: 
http://www.austrade.gov.au/ANZCERTA/default.aspx. 
2 
 BIS Review 127/2008
countries than growth in trade with each other, despite the CER. I am neither arguing that the 
CER  restrains  trade  nor  that  it  might  not  be  amenable  to  improvement  to  facilitate  further 
trade.  I  simply  observe  that  the  massive  increase  in  the  prominence  of  Asia  in  the  global 
economy over the past 25 years provided both countries with opportunities. We are both able 
to take those opportunities because of the open approach we have taken to trade generally.2  
Both  economies  have  a  high  export  rate  of  commodities –  relatively  more  minerals  for 
Australia  and  more  agricultural  products  for  New  Zealand.  Not  surprisingly  therefore,  both 
countries have had very significant changes in our terms of trade over the past several years. 
New Zealand is a more open economy than Australia, so a rise in the terms of trade of any 
given percentage has a larger effect on incomes there. But the sheer magnitude of the terms 
of  trade  gain  for  Australia  means  that  the  gain  in  real  domestic  income  over  the  past  five 
years was roughly double the size of the impact in New Zealand. In both cases, the terms of 
trade look like they are now starting to moderate. 
The two countries share structural policy features:  
• 
floating currencies and central banks with a medium-term, flexible inflation-targeting 
approach  to  monetary  policy.  New  Zealand  was,  along  with  Canada,  a  pioneer  of 
inflation targeting; and  
a history of governments, of varying political persuasions, which have maintained a 
general  commitment 
the  past 
to  market-opening, 
generation, including financial liberalisation.  
liberalising  policies  over 
 The two countries also share the same major banking groups, with the large four Australian 
banks  having  New  Zealand  subsidiaries  and  branches.  The  operations  of  these  entities 
account for 90 per cent of the market for bank deposits and loans in New Zealand. 
For that reason, Australia and New Zealand have a common interest in sound functioning of 
the international financial system being restored. Our financial systems, like those of most 
countries these days, are connected to global markets and our large financial institutions are 
active  in  international  markets.  So  there  are  impacts  on  our  systems  of  the  extreme 
dislocation in international markets, even though the Australian banks have strong balance 
sheets  with  good  asset  quality.  Moreover,  these  same  disturbances  are  in  the  process  of 
slowing  down  major  economies  and  hence  global  growth,  which  obviously  will  have  some 
impact on our own economies.  
It is time therefore that I turned to say something about those issues. 
Recent events  
The genesis of the problems – the search for yield in a lengthy period of low global interest 
rates,  the  associated  disregard  for  growing  risk,  structural  flaws  in  the  “originate  and 
distribute” model of financing, the deterioration in lending standards – have been discussed 
at length over the past year. For today, it suffices to say that a lot of new risk was created 
and, far from being widely dispersed, a good deal of it ended up on the balance sheets of the 
most leveraged parts of the international financial system – banks and investment banks. 
The  problems  of  counterparty  risk  aversion  and  reluctance  to  lend  at  term –  that  is,  a 
breakdown  in  trust –  first  erupted  in  August  last  year.  Term  borrowing  rates  rose  sharply 
                                                 
2   Some  research  results  imply  that  Australia  and  New  Zealand  both  do  significantly  more  international  trade 
than  would  be  implied  by  empirical  models  of  international  trade.  See  Guttman,  S  and  A.  Richards  (2006), 
“Trade  Openness:  An  Australian  Perspective”,  Australian  Economic  Papers,  45(3),  pp. 188-203.  Those 
authors also note that our two economies are the most “economically remote” countries in the world, in terms 
of average distance to potential trading partners. However, that relative disadvantage is falling somewhat with 
the growth of Asia relative to the economies of the North Atlantic. 
BIS Review 127/2008 
 3
relative  to  overnight  rates.  This  intensified  through  to  the  end  of  each  calendar  quarter  as 
bank  accounting  dates  approached,  and  lessened  thereafter.  This  cycle  was  repeated 
several  times  through  to  the  middle  of  2008.  While  that  was  going  on,  a  number  of  major 
international  institutions  accepted  write-downs  of  their  exposures  to  US  mortgages,  which 
were often via complex structured products whose prices proved to be very volatile – when 
they could be measured at all. They simultaneously sought new capital, though as fast as 
they received it, capital was being burned up in losses. 
Things  proceeded  in  this  way  for  over  a  year,  without  getting  noticeably  worse,  but  not 
getting  noticeably  better.  Then  during  the  months  of  September and  October 2008,  in  a 
sequence  of  events  historians  will  study  at  length  for  decades  ahead,  the  international 
financial landscape changed dramatically. In the space of six weeks: 
• 
the remaining four large American investment banks disappeared – into bankruptcy, 
merger or by taking a banking licence, which gets them closer to the support of the 
Federal Reserve;  
one  of  the  world’s  largest  insurance  companies,  hit  by  a  wave  of  margin  calls  on 
credit default insurance contracts it had written, had to take a loan from the Federal 
Reserve and is effectively in public ownership;  
the largest participants in the US mortgage market, which had always been seen as 
implicitly government guaranteed, were explicitly nationalised;  
the US Treasury brought forward a plan to purchase assets from lenders’ balance 
sheets for a sum of up to 5 per cent of US GDP. A version of this plan was approved 
on the second attempt, after several anxious days in which confidence was further 
eroded;  
a  number  of  European  banks  faced  failure,  including  some  quite  large  ones,  and 
needed government support or were nationalised; and  
governments in a number of countries felt the need to guarantee some or all of the 
deposit obligations of their banks.  
     While  this  was  occurring,  global  markets  for  equities,  currencies  and  commodities  saw 
extraordinary price movements, while yields on  many short-term government securities fell 
sharply.  Volatility  in  daily  prices  increased  significantly.  Interbank  and  commercial  paper 
markets, which had already been under pressure, effectively closed in a number of countries. 
(It is worth noting that most key markets in Australia have continued to function through this 
period, even if under some pressure.) The extreme counterparty risk aversion in markets saw 
the shortage of US dollar liquidity in the European and Asian time zone worsen seriously, to 
the  point  that  the  effective  cost  of  borrowing  US dollars  via  swap  in  the  Asian  time  zone 
reached well into double digits in mid September, and on some days the market was, for all 
intents and purposes, not available. 
The  fall  in  commodity  prices  brought  pressure  to  some  emerging  market  countries,  which 
saw  falls  in  currencies  and  share  prices,  and  which  in  some  cases  closed  share  markets. 
Since  late  September,  many  currencies  have  come  under  downward  pressure  against 
currencies  like  the  yen,  which  was  a  favoured  funding  currency  for  various  positions  in 
higher-yielding currencies. The Australian dollar fell particularly sharply, in part because of 
the  changes  in  interest  rate  expectations  and  commodity  prices,  and  partly  because  its 
relatively liquid market sees it used by many managers as a device to change quickly their 
exposures to some other currencies and commodity-based strategies. 
In summary, what appeared for the preceding year to be a serious, but containable, problem 
of liquidity and concerns over creditworthiness turned suddenly into a very fast-moving crisis 
of  confidence  in  key  players  in  the  international  financial  system,  where  questions  of 
solvency came much more to the fore. It has presented financiers, and policy-makers, with 
the most difficult set of challenges of its kind for generations. 
4 
 BIS Review 127/2008
What should be done? 
The question, then, is how to restore confidence and stability to these important markets and 
institutions. 
The first thing is to continue to provide liquidity. This requires central banks to expand their 
balance  sheets  if  necessary,  so  that  the  private  financial  sector  can  continue  to  fund  its 
existing asset book for the time being, and so that the broader process of de-leveraging can 
be accommodated with as little disruption as possible. 
Central banks have stepped up their liquidity efforts in a major way, with a number of them 
providing much more in the way of own-currency funding against a wider range of collateral. 
But the most visible impact is on the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet, where assets have 
nearly doubled in the past six weeks as a result of increases in the Fed’s various facilities. An 
increase in swap lines with other central banks, which allows the supply of dollar liquidity in 
Asian and European time zones, has been one large contributor to the expansion (and the 
RBA  has  participated  in  these  lines).  The  most  recent  development  has  seen  this  liquidity 
operate  on  tap  in  several  major  countries –  at  a  fixed  price,  in  any  amount  market 
participants require, for terms extending out to three months. As a result, there is a now a 
huge amount of US dollar liquidity in the system. 
But while liquidity provision helps, it can, at best, ameliorate the impact of counterparty risk. It 
cannot eliminate it. The second thing that is needed is a restoration of confidence in the key 
financial institutions. 
Because the lack of confidence is, ultimately, about solvency, re-capitalisation of the relevant 
institutions is required. The lesson of past banking crises, moreover, is that when there are 
really  serious  problems  in  private  balance  sheets,  capital  may  be  available  in  sufficient 
quantity only from the public purse. This should of course come with appropriate conditions – 
private shareholders should absorb the losses from past problems, governments that put in 
new  capital  should  share  in  the  upside  and  guarantees  that  are  offered  should  be  priced. 
Governments should plan to divest their holdings in banks in due course. 
The  UK Government’s  plan  announced  a  couple  of  weeks  ago,  which  seems  to  have 
become  something  of  a  template  for  these  sorts  of  intervention,  appears  to  have  the  key 
elements needed to restore health to the key international institutions.  
It increases further the supply of liquidity for the short term. It also provides for an increase in 
the  capital  of  key  UK  institutions,  from  the  public  sector  if  needed,  via  the  government 
underwriting  capital  raising.  And  it  provides  some  confidence  for  term  funding  markets  by 
offering a guarantee of the debt obligations of the relevant banks for a period of time. This 
guarantee is not free to the banks – they will pay for it on commercial terms, which in the 
current environment are unlikely to be cheap. The intention is not to subsidise the price of 
borrowing  but,  by  promoting  confidence  of  repayment,  to  allow  the  market  to  find  an 
appropriate price, which of late it has had trouble doing. 
The  Australian  response  has  taken  careful  note  of  the  elements  of  this  plan  which  are 
pertinent to our situation. The RBA’s liquidity facilities had already been further expanded, to 
allow our counterparties to bring to us internally securitised mortgages as collateral, to get 
funding for out to a year. This is available at market prices every day. The additional eligible 
collateral  available  to  the  Australian  system  as  a  result  of  the  most  recent  changes  can 
support over $50 billion of additional liquidity (after allowing for haircuts), if needed. 
The Australian Government has announced a general guarantee of deposits, as a precaution 
to  allay  any  public  anxiety  over  security  of  their  savings.  It  has  also  decided  to  offer  to 
guarantee wholesale debt obligations of Australian authorised deposit-takers and authorised 
Australian  subsidiaries  of  foreign  banks,  on  commercial  terms.  This  will  ensure  that 
Australian institutions, some of which are among the highest rated of the world’s banks, are 
able  to  retain  adequate  access  to  term  funding  in  an  environment  where  banks  of  other 
countries are able, in effect, to use the rating of their governments when borrowing. Steps in 
BIS Review 127/2008 
 5
these  directions,  in  the context  of what  other countries  were  doing, were  sensible  and  the 
Reserve Bank supported them. As is also the case in other countries, the design features of 
the  various  guarantees  will  be  important.  Little  detail  is  available  from  other  countries  yet. 
Meanwhile, the Reserve Bank is working with our colleagues in the Treasury on the details of 
the Australian arrangements, including on how to maintain continued healthy functioning of 
Australia’s short-term money markets. 
The  element  of  the  UK  plan  Australia  has  not  sought  to  emulate  is  public  underwriting  of 
capital  injections.  The  Australian  banks  have  strong  capital  positions  and  profits,  so  they 
should be able to approach the market on normal commercial terms if they desire additional 
capital. 
Where to from here? 
At moments like this, it is hazardous to make predictions. However, it seems to me that the 
key  elements  of  dealing  with  the  root  issues  in  the  crisis  are  starting  to  come  into  place. 
Policy-makers in the major countries do “get it”. The plans are not precisely uniform across 
countries – that is never achievable anyway – but we can, I think, see the shape of a broad 
common outline. It addresses the issues of liquidity, capital and confidence. There is much 
more work to be done yet on the design details, and one area in which further international 
co-operation would be helpful is in the area of making these various guarantee arrangements 
broadly consistent. But the world is, it seems to me, getting on to a better path. As a result, 
the likelihood of a global catastrophe has in fact declined over the past couple of weeks. 
The question of the appropriate macroeconomic policy settings to help economies through 
this  period  will  also  be  receiving  attention  around  the  world.  In  those  countries  where 
previous settings have been prudent, and where inflation prospects permit, policies can be 
eased  to  counteract  some  of  the  contractionary  forces  set  in  train  by  the  deterioration  in 
global growth prospects resulting from the credit turmoil. Central banks in major countries, 
recognising  weaker  demand  and  the  likelihood  of  easing  pressures  on  prices,  reduced 
interest rates in October. 
In  Australia,  the  Reserve  Bank  made  a  substantial  cut  to  the  cash  rate  at  its  October 
meeting,  bringing  forward  reductions  that  might  ordinarily  have  taken  place  over  several 
months.  CPI  inflation  is  likely  to  remain  high  in  the  period  immediately  ahead,  and 
yesterday’s PPI data illustrate the concerns that the Bank has long expressed about inflation. 
But looking forward to next year, forces seem now to be building that will start to dampen 
pressures on prices – even though we won’t have evidence for that for a good six months. 
The Board sought, as always, to respond to the medium-term outlook for prices, not just the 
current data. 
The Australian Government has made a significant change to the fiscal stance which will flow 
through the demand side of the economy during the summer. The decline in the Australian 
dollar  by  about  20 per  cent  against  a  trade-weighted  basket  also  amounts  to  a  significant 
change  for  the  trade-exposed  sectors  of  the  economy,  though  at  the  cost  of  some 
temporarily  higher  price  rises.  These  changes  will  act  to  lessen  the  extent  of  the  likely 
slowdown in Australia’s economy, even as global forces work the other way. 
The Reserve Bank will publish its next update on the economic outlook on 10 November, so I 
will not say any more about that today. I shall finish with the question of what trends will be of 
importance beyond that horizon. 
As I have said before, the emergence of China is not complete and has many years to run. 
Right now, China’s economy is slowing. This is a reminder that China’s economy has cycles, 
like economies everywhere. But even if it slows a lot, it will pick up again in due course and 
will probably grow pretty strongly, on average, over many years. 
6 
 BIS Review 127/2008
In countries like Australia, perhaps the long period of household debt build-up is now giving 
way to a period in which balance sheets will see some consolidation. If so, household credit 
growth will not be as fast as it was for the past decade and a half. Perhaps we will need also 
to  get  better  at  turning  borrowing  for  housing  into  more  dwellings  rather  than  just  higher 
house prices. 
Perhaps the finance sector globally will return to fulfilling something more like its historical 
role of being “the handmaiden of industry”, with a bit less in the way of exotic innovation of its 
own. In such a world, a renewed focus on the processes in the real economy which generate 
growth in productivity could also be apt. In the case of Australia at least, it is now hard to 
avoid  the  conclusion  that  underlying  growth  in  productivity  has  slowed  over  the  past  five 
years, compared with what was seen through most of the 1990s and the early part of this 
decade. Of course, these things are notoriously hard to measure and there will be various 
opinions about the extent of the slowing, why it occurred and what might be done about it. 
Nonetheless,  once  the  immediate  crisis  has  passed,  that  might  be  a  conversation  worth 
having. 
BIS Review 127/2008 
 7
