Ben S Bernanke: Stabilizing the financial markets and the economy 
Speech  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve System, at the Economic Club of New York, New York, 15 October 2008. 
 Good  afternoon.  I  am  pleased  once  again  to  share  a  meal  and  some  thoughts  with  the 
Economic Club of New York. I will focus today on the economic and financial challenges we 
face and why I believe we are well positioned to move forward. The problems now evident in 
the  markets  and  in  the  economy  are  large  and  complex,  but,  in  my  judgment,  our 
government now has the tools it needs to confront and solve them. Our strategy will continue 
to evolve and be refined as we adapt to new developments and the inevitable setbacks. But 
we  will  not  stand  down  until  we  have  achieved  our  goals  of  repairing  and  reforming  our 
financial system and restoring prosperity.  
The crisis we face in the financial markets has many novel aspects, largely arising from the 
complexity  and  sophistication  of  today's  financial  institutions  and  instruments  and  the 
remarkable  degree  of  global  financial  integration  that  allows  financial  shocks  to  be 
transmitted  around  the  world  at  the  speed  of  light.  However,  as  a  long-time  student  of 
banking and financial crises, I can attest that the current situation also has much in common 
with past experiences. As in all past crises, at the root of the problem is a loss of confidence 
by investors and the public in the strength of key financial institutions and markets. The crisis 
will end when comprehensive responses by political and financial leaders restore that trust, 
bringing investors back into the market and allowing the normal business of extending credit 
to households and firms to resume. In that regard, we are, in one respect at least, better off 
than those who dealt with earlier financial crises: Generally, during past crises, broad-based 
government  engagement  came  late,  usually  at  a  point  at  which  most  financial  institutions 
were  insolvent  or  nearly  so.  Waiting  too  long  to  respond  has  usually  led  to  much  greater 
direct costs of the intervention itself and, more importantly, magnified the painful effects of 
financial  turmoil  on  households  and  businesses.  That  is  not  the  situation  we  face  today. 
Fortunately,  the  Congress  and  the  Administration  have  acted  at  a  time  when  the  great 
majority  of  financial  institutions,  though  stressed  by  highly  volatile  and  difficult  market 
conditions, remain strong and capable of fulfilling their critical function of providing new credit 
for  our  economy.  This  prompt  and  decisive  action  by  our  political  leaders  will  allow  us  to 
restore more normal market functioning much more quickly and at lower ultimate cost than 
would otherwise have been the case. Moreover, we are seeing not just a national response 
but a global response to the crisis, commensurate with its global nature. 
This financial crisis has been with us for more than a year. It was sparked by the end of the 
U.S.  housing  boom,  which  revealed  the  weaknesses  and  excesses  that  had  occurred  in 
subprime  mortgage  lending.  However,  as  subsequent  events  have  demonstrated,  the 
problem was much broader than subprime lending. Large inflows of capital into the United 
States and other countries stimulated a reaching for yield, an underpricing of risk, excessive 
leverage, and the development of complex and opaque financial instruments that seemed to 
work  well  during  the  credit  boom  but  have  been  shown  to  be  fragile  under  stress.  The 
unwinding  of  these  developments,  including  a  sharp  deleveraging  and  a  headlong  retreat 
from credit risk, led to highly strained conditions in financial markets and a tightening of credit 
that has hamstrung economic growth. 
The Federal Reserve responded to these developments in two broad ways. First, following 
classic  tenets  of  central  banking,  the  Fed  has  provided  large  amounts  of  liquidity  to  the 
financial  system  to  cushion  the  effects  of  tight  conditions  in  short-term  funding  markets. 
Second, to reduce the downside risks to growth emanating from the tightening of credit, the 
Fed, in a series of moves that began last September, has significantly lowered its target for 
the  federal  funds  rate.  Indeed,  last  week,  in  an  unprecedented  joint  action  with  five  other 
BIS Review 124/2008 
 1
major central banks and in response to the adverse implications of the deepening crisis for 
the economic outlook, the Federal Reserve again eased the stance of monetary policy. We 
will continue to use all the tools at our disposal to improve market functioning and liquidity, to 
reduce  pressures  in  key  credit  and  funding  markets,  and  to  complement  the  steps  the 
Treasury and foreign governments will be taking to strengthen the financial system. 
Notwithstanding  our  efforts  and  those  of  other  policymakers,  the  financial  crisis  intensified 
over the summer as mortgage-related assets deteriorated further, economic growth slowed, 
and  uncertainty  about  the  financial  and  economic  outlook  increased.  As  investors  and 
creditors lost confidence in the ability of certain firms to meet their obligations, their access to 
capital markets as well as to short-term funding markets became increasingly impaired, and 
their  stock  prices  fell  sharply.  Prominent  companies  that  experienced  this  dynamic  most 
acutely  included  the  government-sponsored  enterprises  (GSEs)  Fannie  Mae  and  Freddie 
Mac,  the  investment  bank  Lehman  Brothers,  and  the  insurance  company  American 
International Group (AIG). 
The Federal Reserve believes that, whenever possible, the difficulties experienced by firms 
in financial distress should be addressed through private-sector arrangements – for example, 
by raising new equity capital, as many firms have done; by negotiations leading to a merger 
or acquisition; or by an orderly wind-down. Government assistance should be provided with 
the  greatest  reluctance  and  only  when  the  stability  of  the  financial  system,  and  thus  the 
health of the broader economy, is at risk. In those cases when financial stability is broadly 
threatened, however, intervention to protect the public interest is not only justified but must 
be undertaken forcefully and without hesitation. 
Fannie  Mae  and  Freddie  Mac  present  cases  in  point.  To  avoid  unacceptably  large 
dislocations in the mortgage markets, the financial sector, and the economy as a whole, the 
Federal  Housing  Finance  Agency  put  Fannie  and  Freddie  into  conservatorship,  and  the 
Treasury, drawing on authorities recently granted by the Congress, made financial support 
available.  The  government's  actions  appear  to  have  stabilized  the  GSEs,  although,  like 
virtually all other firms, they are experiencing effects of the current crisis. We have already 
seen  benefits  of  their  stabilization  in  the  form  of  lower  mortgage  rates,  which  will help  the 
housing market.  
The difficulties at Lehman and AIG raised different issues. Like the GSEs, both companies 
were  large,  complex,  and  deeply  embedded  in  our  financial  system.  In  both  cases,  the 
Treasury  and 
the  Federal  Reserve  sought  private-sector  solutions,  but  none  was 
forthcoming. A public-sector solution for Lehman proved infeasible, as the firm could not post 
sufficient  collateral  to  provide  reasonable  assurance  that  a  loan  from  the  Federal  Reserve 
would be repaid, and the Treasury did not have the authority to absorb billions of dollars of 
expected losses to facilitate Lehman's acquisition by another firm. Consequently, little could 
be  done  except  to  attempt  to  ameliorate  the  effects  of  Lehman's  failure  on  the  financial 
system.  Importantly,  the  financial  rescue  legislation,  which  I  will  discuss  later,  will  give  us 
better choices. In the future, the Treasury will have greater resources available to prevent the 
failure  of  a  financial  institution  when  such  a  failure  would  pose  unacceptable  risks  to  the 
financial  system  as  a  whole.  The  Federal  Reserve  will  work  closely  and  actively  with  the 
Treasury and other authorities to minimize systemic risk. 
In  the  case  of  AIG,  the  Federal  Reserve  and  the  Treasury  judged  that  a  disorderly  failure 
would  have  severely  threatened  global  financial  stability  and  the  performance  of  the  U.S. 
economy.  We  also  judged  that  emergency  Federal  Reserve  credit  to  AIG  would  be 
adequately secured by AIG's assets. To protect U.S. taxpayers and to mitigate the possibility 
that lending to AIG would encourage inappropriate risk-taking by financial firms in the future, 
the Federal Reserve ensured that the terms of the credit extended to AIG imposed significant 
costs and constraints on the firm's owners, managers, and creditors. 
AIG's difficulties and Lehman's failure, along with growing concerns about the U.S. economy 
and  other  economies,  contributed  to  extraordinarily  turbulent  conditions  in  global  financial 
2 
 BIS Review 124/2008
markets in recent weeks. Equity prices fell sharply. Withdrawals from prime money market 
mutual funds led them to reduce their holdings of commercial paper – an important source of 
financing  for  the  nation's  nonfinancial  businesses  as  well  as  for  many  financial  firms.  The 
cost of short-term credit, where such credit has been available, jumped for virtually all firms, 
and  liquidity  dried  up  in  many  markets.  By  restricting  flows  of  credit  to  households, 
businesses,  and  state  and  local  governments,  the  turmoil  in  financial  markets  and  the 
funding pressures on financial firms pose a significant threat to economic growth. 
The Treasury and the Fed have taken a range of actions to address financial problems. To 
address  illiquidity  and  impaired  functioning  in  commercial  paper  markets,  the  Treasury 
implemented  a  temporary  guarantee  program  for  balances  held  in  money  market  mutual 
funds  to  help  stem  the  outflows  from  these  funds.  The  Federal  Reserve  put  in  place  a 
temporary  lending  facility  that  provides  financing  for  banks  to  purchase  high-quality  asset-
backed  commercial  paper  from  money  market  funds,  thus  reducing  their  need  to  sell  the 
commercial paper into already distressed markets. Moreover, we soon will implement a new, 
temporary  Commercial  Paper  Funding  Facility  that  will  provide  a  backstop  to  commercial 
paper markets by purchasing highly rated commercial paper directly from issuers at a term of 
three months when those markets are illiquid. 
To  address  ongoing  problems  in  interbank  funding  markets,  the  Federal  Reserve  has 
significantly  increased  the  quantity  of  term  funds  it  auctions  to  banks  and  accommodated 
heightened demands for temporary funding from banks and primary dealers. Also, to try to 
mitigate dollar funding pressures worldwide, we have greatly expanded reciprocal currency 
arrangements (so-called swap agreements) with other central banks. Indeed, this week we 
agreed  to  extend  unlimited  dollar  funding  to  the  European  Central  Bank,  the  Bank  of 
England, the Bank of Japan, and the Swiss National Bank. These agreements enable foreign 
central  banks  to  provide  dollars  to  financial  institutions  in  their  jurisdictions,  which  helps 
improve  the  functioning  of  dollar  funding  markets  globally  and  relieve  pressures  on  U.S. 
funding markets. It bears noting that these arrangements carry no risk to the U.S. taxpayer, 
as  our  loans  are  to  the  foreign  central  banks  themselves,  who  take  responsibility  for  the 
extension of dollar credit within their jurisdictions. 
The  expansion  of  Federal  Reserve  lending  is  helping  financial  firms  cope  with  reduced 
access to their usual sources of funding and thus is supporting their lending to nonfinancial 
firms  and  households.  Nonetheless,  the  intensification  of  the  financial  crisis  over  the  past 
month or so made clear that a more powerful, comprehensive approach involving the fiscal 
authorities  was  needed  to  address  these  problems  more  effectively.  On  that  basis,  the 
Administration,  with  the  support  of  the  Federal  Reserve,  asked  the  Congress  for  a  new 
program aimed at stabilizing our financial markets. The resulting legislation, the Emergency 
Economic  Stabilization  Act,  provides  important  new  tools  for  addressing  the  distress  in 
financial markets and thus mitigating the risks to the economy. The act allows Treasury to 
buy troubled assets, to provide guarantees, and to inject capital to strengthen the balance 
sheets  of  financial  institutions.  The  act  also  raises  the  limit  on  deposit  insurance  from 
$100,000 to $250,000 per account, effectively immediately.  
The  Troubled  Asset  Relief  Program  (TARP)  authorized  by  the  legislation  will  allow  the 
Treasury,  under  the  supervision  of  an  oversight  board  that  I  will  head,  to  undertake  two 
highly  complementary  activities.  First,  the  Treasury  will  use  the  TARP  funds  to  help 
recapitalize  our  banking  system  by  purchasing  non-voting  equity  in  financial  institutions. 
Details of this program were announced yesterday. Initially, the Treasury will dedicate $250 
billion toward purchases of preferred shares in banks and thrifts of all sizes. The program is 
voluntary and designed both to encourage participation by healthy institutions and to make it 
attractive for private capital to come in along with public capital. We look to strong institutions 
to participate in this capital program, because today even strong institutions are reluctant to 
expand their balance sheets to extend credit; with fresh capital, that constraint will be eased. 
The  terms  offered  under  the  TARP  include  the  acquisition  by  the  Treasury  of  warrants  to 
ensure  that  taxpayers  receive  a  share  of  the  upside  as  the  financial  system  recovers. 
BIS Review 124/2008 
 3
Moreover,  as  required  by  the  legislation,  institutions  that  receive  capital  will  have  to  meet 
certain standards regarding executive compensation practices.  
Second,  the  Treasury  will  use  some  of  the  resources  provided  under  the  bill  to  purchase 
troubled assets from banks and other financial institutions, in most cases using market-based 
mechanisms.  Mortgage-related  assets,  including  mortgage-backed  securities  and  whole 
loans,  will  be  the  focus  of  the  program,  although  the  law  permits  flexibility  in  the  types  of 
assets  purchased  as  needed  to  promote  financial  stability.  Removing  these  assets  from 
private balance sheets should increase liquidity and promote price discovery in the markets 
for these assets, thereby reducing investor uncertainty about the current value and prospects 
of financial institutions. Unclogging the markets for mortgage-related assets should put banks 
and other institutions in a better position to raise capital from the private sector and increase 
the willingness of counterparties to engage. With time, the provision of equity capital to the 
banking system and the purchase of troubled assets will help credit flow more freely, thus 
supporting economic growth. 
These measures will lead to a much stronger financial system over time, but steps are also 
necessary  to  address  the  immediate  problem  of  lack  of  trust  and  confidence.  Accordingly, 
also announced yesterday was a plan by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) 
to  provide  a  broad  range  of  guarantees  of  the  liabilities  of  FDIC-insured  depository 
institutions,  including  their  associated  holding  companies.  The  guarantee  covers  all  newly 
issued senior unsecured debt, including commercial paper and interbank funding, and it will 
also  cover  all  funds  held  in  non-interest-bearing  transactions  accounts,  such  as  payroll 
accounts. This broad guarantee will be effectively immediately, and fees for coverage will be 
waived for 30 days. After the 30-day grace period, banks may continue to participate in the 
guarantee program by paying reasonable fees. 
I would like to stress once again that the taxpayers' interests were very much in our minds 
and  those  of  the  Congress  when  these  programs  were  designed.  The  costs  of  the  FDIC 
guarantee are expected to be covered by fees and assessments on the banking system, not 
by  the  taxpayer.  In  the  case  of  the  TARP  program,  the  funds  allocated  are  not  simple 
expenditures, but rather acquisitions of assets or equity positions, which the Treasury will be 
able to sell or redeem down the road. Indeed, it is possible that taxpayers could turn a profit 
from the program, although, given the great uncertainties, no assurances can be provided. 
Moreover, the program is subject to extensive controls and to oversight by several bodies. 
The larger point, though, is that the economic benefit of these programs to taxpayers will not 
be determined primarily by the financial return to TARP funds, but rather by the impact of the 
program  on  the  financial  markets  and  the  economy.  If  the  TARP,  together  with  the  other 
measures  that  have  been  taken,  is  successful  in  promoting  financial  stability  and, 
consequently, in supporting stronger economic growth and job creation, it will have proved 
itself a very good investment indeed, to everyone's benefit.  
Stabilization  of  the  financial  markets  is  a  critical  first  step,  but  even  if  they  stabilize  as  we 
hope they will, broader economic recovery will not happen right away. Economic activity had 
been  decelerating  even  before  the  recent  intensification  of  the  crisis.  The  housing  market 
continues to be a primary source of weakness in the real economy as well as in the financial 
markets, and we have seen marked slowdowns in consumer spending, business investment, 
and  the  labor  market.  Credit  markets  will  take  some  time  to  unfreeze.  And  with  the 
economies of our trading partners slowing, our export sales, which have been a source of 
strength, very probably will slow as well. These restraining influences on economic activity, 
however,  will be offset somewhat by the favorable effects of lower prices for oil and other 
commodities on household purchasing power. Ultimately, the trajectory of economic activity 
beyond the next few quarters will depend greatly on the extent to which financial and credit 
markets return to more normal functioning.  
Inflation has been elevated recently, reflecting the steep increases in the prices of oil, other 
commodities, and imports that occurred earlier this year, as well as some pass-through by 
4 
 BIS Review 124/2008
firms  of  their  higher  costs  of  production.  However,  expected  inflation,  as  measured  by 
consumer surveys and inflation-indexed Treasury securities, has held steady or eased, and 
prices  of  imports  now  appear  to  be  decelerating.  These  developments,  together  with  the 
recent declines in prices of oil and other commodities as well as the likelihood that economic 
activity will fall short of potential for a time, should lead to rates of inflation more consistent 
with price stability. 
This past weekend, the finance ministers and central bank governors of the Group of Seven 
industrialized  countries  met  in  Washington.  We  committed  to  work  together  to  stabilize 
financial  markets  and  restore  the  flow  of  credit  to  support  global  economic  growth.  We 
agreed to use all available tools to prevent failures that pose systemic risk. We affirmed we 
will  ensure  our  deposit  insurance  programs  instill  confidence  in  the  safety  of  savings.  We 
agreed  to  ensure  that  our  banks  and  other  major  financial  intermediaries,  as  needed,  can 
raise capital from public as well as private sources. We further agreed that we would take all 
necessary steps to unfreeze interbank and money markets, and that we will act to restart the 
secondary markets for mortgages and other securitized assets. Finally, we recognized that 
we should take these actions in ways that protect taxpayers and avoid potentially damaging 
effects on other countries. I believe that these are the right principles for action, and I see the 
steps announced by our government yesterday as fully consistent with them. 
I  have  laid  out  for  you  today  an  extraordinary  series  of  actions  taken  by  policymakers 
throughout  our  government  and  around  the  globe.  Americans  can  be  confident  that  every 
resource  is  being  brought  to  bear  to  address  the  current  crisis:  historical  understanding, 
technical  expertise,  economic  analysis,  financial  insight,  and  political  leadership.  I  am  not 
suggesting the way forward will be easy, but I strongly believe that we now have the tools we 
need to respond with the necessary force to these challenges. Although much work remains 
and more difficulties surely lie ahead, I remain confident that the American economy, with its 
great intrinsic vitality and aided by the measures now available, will emerge from this period 
with renewed vigor. 
BIS Review 124/2008 
 5
