Nils Bernstein: Denmark’s economy against the background of the 
financial sector crisis 
Speech  by  Mr  Nils  Bernstein,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Denmark,  at  the  Annual 
Meeting of the Danish Bankers Association, Copenhagen, 8 December 2008. 
 Thank you for inviting me to speak today. I will try to look forward.  
First I would like to talk about the economy. For the first time since World War II, there are 
widespread concerns that the industrialised world will see a fall in output next year. Large 
parts of the global economy are in – or heading for – a recession. Naturally, Denmark is not 
unaffected by this situation, as we export one third of all our output. Moreover, consumers 
are  tightening  their  purse  strings.  Widespread  talk  about  a  crisis,  tough  times  and  falling 
housing prices affect the propensity to buy.  
It is a bit of a paradox. On the one hand it may seem sensible for us as individual consumers 
to  show  restraint  and  save  a  little  "for  a  rainy  day",  but  on  the  other  hand  this  sensible 
behaviour may be negative for the economy overall. Pessimism can be self-fulfilling if we all 
look on the dark side. There is no reason to do so. Actually, next year most households will 
see  a  sizeable  increase  in  their  real  disposable  incomes  due  to  sustained  high  wage 
increases and lower taxes. At the same time, inflation is expected to be lower.  
We expect zero growth and rising unemployment next year, but nevertheless, it is important 
to  remember  that  Denmark  goes  into  recession  from  a  situation  with  low  unemployment, 
extensive labour shortages and relatively high wage increases. Many comparable countries 
are in a very different situation. In the USA and many euro area member states, the economy 
is reversing at a time when unemployment is considerably higher. This difference is essential 
in terms of the economic-policy approach chosen. The fact that Denmark has not launched 
packages of fiscal stimulants, as many other countries have, reflects responsible economic 
policy – not the opposite.  
When will the tide turn again? When will we see renewed progress? Most forecasters believe 
that the global economy will turn sometime during 2009. In Denmark's case we may have to 
wait until 2010. But let me emphasise that such estimates are subject to exceptionally high 
uncertainty.  
So far, there are no indications that the current real economic development in Denmark can 
be labelled a "crisis" – provided that we act sensibly. Let us save the word "crisis" for a time 
when we are really in trouble. 
The financial sector, on the other hand, is in a crisis. A combination of external problems and 
self-inflicted plagues has landed the financial sector in a situation where financial stability is 
at risk.  
Looking ahead, when we discuss how to avoid a repetition of this untenable situation, it is 
important  to  remember  what  caused  it.  Not  least  the  banks'  deposit  deficits  have  made  it 
necessary for the central government to step in and guarantee deposits and loans to the tune 
of kr. 4,200 billion. The business model increasingly applied by banks since the millennium 
rollover is not viable in its present form.  
The  crisis  will  affect  the  future  structure  and  regulation  of  the  financial  sector.  It  is  yet  too 
early to draw detailed conclusions, the causes must be analysed first. However, there is no 
doubt  that  the  capital-to-risk  requirements  imposed  on  the  financial  institutions  will  be 
tightened.  New  transparency  requirements  will  be  imposed  on  financial  institutions,  and 
BIS Review 154/2008 
 1
liquidity  management  will,  undoubtedly,  also  be  tightened  in  the  future.  And  these 
requirements will not be voluntary. The weaknesses in the system will not simply pass over. 
We need to do something about the underlying factors that have landed us in this pickle!  
At Danmarks Nationalbank we will consider how we can contribute better to strengthening 
financial stability in future. In this respect, we believe that we must work more closely with the 
Danish  Financial  Supervisory  Authority,  so  that  we  together  gain  optimum  insight  into  the 
risks  of  the  banks  and  address  weaknesses  in  a  timely  manner.  We  need  to  go  on  the 
offensive. In my opinion, the last six months have disclosed a need for more direct regulatory 
control of banking activities.  
In  the  very  short  term  a  new  banking  package  is  being  discussed,  which  is  to  inject  new 
capital  into  the  banking  sector.  The  background  is  concerns  as  to  whether  the  banks  are 
currently able to fulfil their necessary role in society as intermediaries between savers and 
creditworthy borrowers.  
So far, the central government's guarantee for all deposits with and unsecured claims against 
the banks has created a good foundation for the banks once again to obtain financing in the 
national and international financial markets.  
However, what started off mainly as a liquidity crisis could turn into a genuine credit crisis.  
The  turmoil  in  the  international  financial  markets  will  make  it  all  but  impossible  for  many 
banks to attract new capital. At the same time, there are many indications that Danish banks 
will need extra capital in the near future, as losses mount.  
If  nothing  else  is  done, the  banks will  go  on  the  defensive  and  cut  their  activities,  thereby 
reducing  the  balance-sheet  total  to  meet  the  capital  requirements.  Even  creditworthy 
customers will find it difficult to obtain financing for sound projects.  
At the end of 2007, the excess solvency of the banking sector as a whole was around kr. 90 
billion. This would be sufficient to cover aggregate losses amounting to just over 3 per cent of 
all  lending  and  guarantees.  Losses  of  that  magnitude  are  not  unrealistic  if  we  look  at 
previous periods of recession.  
In  addition,  part  of  the  banks'  subordinated  loan  capital  matures  in  2009  and  2010  – 
approximately kr. 10 billion in each of these years.  
Furthermore, the crisis comes in the wake of a period of unusually large increases in lending 
by banks. In Denmark, the banks' lending amounted to almost 9 times their equity capital at 
the end of 2007. The same ratio in 2003 was almost 7, which was also the average for the 
preceding 30 years. If new capital is not attracted, a return to that gearing ratio requires a 25 
per cent reduction in lending. 
This pattern is not unique to Denmark, but is seen in many countries. In a situation where 
banks cannot raise new capital in the markets, many countries have chosen to inject capital 
into  the  banking  sector  by  launching  government  rescue  packages.  This  is  in  accordance 
with the conclusion of the European Council summit on 15 and 16 October, reaffirming the 
Council's  commitment  that  in  all  circumstances  the  necessary  measures  will  be  taken  to 
preserve the stability of the financial system, inter alia by providing the financial institutions 
with capital resources so that they can continue to finance the economy properly.  
Overall, EU recapitalisation totals 280 billion euro.  
The effect of various national capital injections has been that the core capital of international 
banks has increased from around 9 per cent to around 11 per cent. You could say that the 
international benchmark for banks' core capital has risen.  
Against that background, Danmarks Nationalbank believes that it is necessary for Denmark 
to introduce a temporary facility to supplement the capital that can be raised in the private 
market, so that well-run Danish banks gain access to temporary financing on conditions that 
2 
 BIS Review 154/2008
resemble those in the market as closely as possible. This has been done in other countries, 
and it should be done in good time, before it becomes obvious to everyone that it is required.  
But there is time to consider e.g. the criteria and conditions to be applied. The facility should 
be in place early in the new year. In this way we will be able to contribute to a stable financial 
system in a period when the usual channels are closed.  
As  I  said,  the  aim  is  to  avoid  an  actual  credit crunch  in  Denmark,  i.e.  a  situation in  which 
even  creditworthy  borrowers  –  households  and  businesses  –  are  refused  loans,  with  a 
negative impact on the real economy. 
A capital injection must ensure that banks have sound buffers. In the opinion of Danmarks 
Nationalbank we need to aim for a higher core capital ratio so that losses can be absorbed. 
This initiative will not solve all problems, but it may prevent further negative effects on the 
economy.  As  you  know,  the  Danish  Contingency  Association  and  the  government  have 
already promised to cover all losses on lending to banks. A capital injection would reduce 
such losses and would thus serve as damage control.  
On top of the financial crisis, we were hit by  severe currency unrest in October  – the first 
such incident for more than 10 years. The unrest was not due to factors in the real economy 
and shows that when a global financial crisis occurs, a price must be paid for not adopting 
the euro. The currency unrest led to a considerable outflow of capital in a very short time, 
resulting in falling foreign-exchange reserve and a significant widening of the yield spread to 
the euro area.  
Monetary policy interest rates in Denmark are solely aimed at supporting the fixed-exchange-
rate policy; a policy that has served Denmark well. It is based on the experience from the 70s 
and early 80s. If the yield spread to the anchor currency is to narrow, further private capital 
imports are required. 
With these words I would like to say “thank you” for our good and productive cooperation in 
2008 to the Danish Bankers Association – its members, its Chairman, its Executive Board 
and its employees. 
BIS Review 154/2008 
 3
