Jean-Claude Trichet: The changing role of communication 
Introductory remarks by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at 
a  dinner  with  members  of  the  “Internationaler  Club  Frankfurter  Wirtschaftsjournalisten”, 
Frankfurt am Main, 15 December 2008. 
 Ladies and gentlemen,  
A very warm welcome to all of you and thank you very much for your invitation to this club 
evening. I am happy to see many familiar faces in the audience tonight. 
Communication is a very important issue for all times. Being here in Frankfurt I am thinking of 
the very profound remark by Goethe: “Niemand würde in Gesellschaften viel sprechen, wenn 
er  sich  bewuβt  wäre,  wie  oft  er  die  anderen  missversteht“.  Nevertheless  let  me  be  bold 
enough to share with you some thoughts on communication and central banks. 
Communication  is  a  key  element  for  central  banks  to  enhance  the  effectiveness, 
predictability  and  credibility  of  their  monetary  policy  decisions.  It  becomes  even  more 
important in difficult times, when the economic outlook darkens and confidence weakens.  
It seems to me that central banks have improved their communication significantly in good 
times – and also in bad times – while some years ago communication was almost seen as a 
breach of their professional code. Why this change? 
Why did central banks decide to become transparent? 
Prior to the 1990s, central banks were very much working on the assumption that monetary 
policy effectiveness is greatest when the central bank systematically surprises the markets. 
The old belief was based on the notion that a central bank would measure the success of its 
actions  by  the  extent  to  which  economic  activity  could  be  raised  and  maintained  above 
potential. If rational individuals already expect a certain change, they adjust their behaviour 
to that expectation. And that means that a monetary policy change would have no effect.  
In  the  past  fifteen  years,  however,  two  important  developments  changed  the  theory  and 
practice  of  central  banking.  First,  the  assumption  that  successful  monetary  policy  acts  by 
surprises  and  is  made  by  a  sequence  of  isolated  steps  has  been  the  subject  of  thorough 
theoretical scrutiny and is now close to oblivion.  
It became clear that policy-making by surprises and isolated steps will bear no lasting effect 
on  the  economy  once  the  public  recognises  the  intentions  that  motivate  the  monetary 
authority. A monetary policy strategy made of isolated actions with the intention of boosting 
output  above  potential  is  bound  to  lose  effectiveness  because  the  short-term  inflationary 
impact of that policy soon becomes embedded in price and wage expectations. Output and 
employment react in the very short-run, but in the medium term the economy suffers from a 
permanently higher inflation.  
The  drive  toward  central  bank  independence  provided  an  additional  encouragement  for 
transparency.  Today  an  overwhelming  majority  of  central  banks  across  the  globe  is 
independent.  The  political  and  functional  independence  of  central  banks  has  been  an 
important milestone in the way towards separating the authority to tax and spend from the 
power  to  control  credit  conditions.  This  separation  has  been  the  critical  factor  behind  the 
BIS Review 160/2008 
 1
general decline in inflation that we have observed over the past decades.1 But independence 
makes democratic accountability by the monetary authority all the more important.  
Many central banks have gone well beyond strict legal requirements in their pronouncements 
and communications than imposed by statutory accountability duties. The question is: Why? 
The reason rests on a simple though powerful insight: transparency renders monetary policy 
more  effective.  In  a  world  in  which  policy-making  by  surprises  has  lost  purpose,  wide 
knowledge of the central bank’s preferences and objectives can only serve as a coordination 
device  for  private  beliefs.  Anchoring  expectations  around  the  objectives  of  policy  help 
coordinate  the  reactions  of  economic  behaviours  to  the  macroeconomic  shocks  along  the 
appropriate path of adjustment that the central bank wants the economy to follow. 
Many  central  banks  have  therefore  started  to  communicate  their  firm  commitment  to  a 
nominal anchor, through the announcement of a precise definition of price stability. In many 
cases,  central  banks  have  gone  further  and  spelled  out  a  more  general  monetary  policy 
strategy, and the analytical framework that is used by policy makers to assess the risks to 
the achievement of the central bank’s objectives.  
A growing body of empirical evidence supports the assumption that transparent quantitative 
objectives and communication about the strategy reinforces monetary policy. For instance, a 
recent  ECB  study  has  shown  that,  following  the  introduction  of  a  quantitative  definition  of 
price  stability,  inflation  persistence  has  considerably  diminished  in  the  euro  area,  in 
Switzerland and in five inflation-targeting countries.2 While a large component of the switch 
in expectations formation is due to the genuine regime change, the exceptional speed of the 
adjustment would not have been possible without extensive communication about the onset 
of a new regime. 
Communication in difficult times 
Central bank communication – if supported by an established strategy – might well be a quiet 
and uneventful activity.  
In difficult times, however, when the economic outlook darkens exceptionally and confidence 
falters,  communication  becomes  even  more  important  to  explain  how  the  central  bank 
intends to gear its policy. We have, on the one hand, the need to take and communicate swift 
action in implementing the appropriate monetary policy and in refinancing commercial banks. 
On the other hand, we need to communicate clearly the adherence of the central bank to the 
long-term  objectives  of  policy  and  the  way  it  intends  to  steer  the  policy  course  back  to  a 
normal path once the abnormal circumstances and risks have subsided.  
Communication in difficult times is inherently challenging for all central banks. However, it is 
facilitated by two fundamental components of the ECB’s monetary policy strategy.  
The first is the quantification of a price stability objective. This grants a very significant level 
of predictability. The monetary policy easing that we enacted in the last two months – on a 
scale that is unprecedented in such a short period of time – was motivated by a sharp easing 
of inflation pressures looking into the future. The fact that markets could predict our moves 
with a fair degree of precision – despite the exceptional cloud of uncertainty that surrounds 
economic  projections  in  present  conditions  –  is  a  proof  that  our  main  mode  of 
                                                 
1   See,  for  example,  Alesina,  A.  and  L.  Summers  (1993),  'Central  bank  independence  and  macroeconomic 
performance: some comparative evidence', Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 25, No. 2, May. 
2   Benati,  L.  (2008),  “Investigating  inflation  persistence  across  monetary  regimes”,  Quarterly  Journal  of 
Economics, 123:3, August 2008, 1005-1060. For instance, estimates of the inflation persistence in the euro 
area  fell  by  around  two-thirds  from  the  period  before  (until  the  Bretton  Woods  arrangement)  and  after  the 
launch of EMU. 
2 
 BIS Review 160/2008
communication,  via  disclosure  of  the  economic  outlook  as  we  perceive  it,  is  effective  and 
robust to extreme occurrences.  
The  second  component  of  the  strategy  which  helps  in  times  when  expectations  become 
disoriented  is  what  we  have  called  the  “separation  principle”.  In  view  of  safeguarding  its 
credibility  and  firmly  anchoring  long-term  inflation  expectations,  it  is  crucial  that  the 
Governing  Council  sets  the  appropriate  monetary  policy  stance  on  the  basis  of  no  other 
considerations than the delivery of price stability in the medium term. Once the appropriate 
level of the key interest rates has been set, the Executive Board of the ECB implements its 
monetary policy stance so that the effects of its interest rate decisions are transmitted to the 
financial markets and the real economy effectively. In this sense, the ECB had to act swiftly 
and decisively to avoid that tensions in the money market would spill-over to other markets 
and adversely affect the real economy.  
So  we  had  to  clearly  convey  two  complementary  messages.  One  was  that  the  ECB  was 
determined – from the onset of the financial crises in August 2007 – to ensure the orderly 
functioning  of  the  euro  area  inter-bank  money  market  by  offering  supplementary  liquidity-
providing refinancing operations or – more recently – by widening the collateral framework to 
facilitate the provision of liquidity to merchant banks and to engage in unlimited provision of 
liquidity  for  all  our  refinancing  operations  at  a  fixed  rate.  The  other  message  which  is 
fundamental was to raise the public’s awareness that the exceptional interventions aimed to 
alleviate  the  tensions  in  the  money  market  would  not  compromise  the  longer-term 
achievement of price stability in line with our definition less than 2%, but close to 2%.  
Conclusions 
Let me conclude. The fundamental changes in central bank communication have helped to 
enhance the effectiveness, predictability and credibility of monetary policy and have notably 
contributed to lowering both inflation rates and volatility in the real economy. For its part, the 
ECB  has  established  a  practise  of  making  its  policy  transparent  and  in  setting  new 
benchmarks  in  the  area  of  central  banking  communication.  That  being  said,  on  each 
occasion, a central bank has to carefully assess the relevance, clarity and timeliness of the 
information.  Transparency 
ingredient  of  an  effective  monetary  policy. 
Communication  is  an  ongoing  challenge  and  effective  communication  will  always  be 
characterised by a degree of flexibility and adaptability in order to respond swiftly to a rapidly 
changing economic environment.  
Thank you very much for your attention.  
is  a  key 
BIS Review 160/2008 
 3
