Christian Noyer: The macroeconomy and financial systems in normal 
times and in times of stress 
Speech  by  Mr  Christian  Noyer,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France,  at  a  conference,  jointly 
organised by the Bank of France and the Deutsche Bundesbank, Chantilly, 9 June 2009. 
 Introduction 
Ladies and Gentlemen, Dear Colleagues 
It is my great pleasure to address such a distinguish audience to day.  
As  you  may  know,  this  is  the  second  time  the  Banque  de  France  and  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank have jointly organised such a conference. It is held every two years, alternating 
between Germany and France. The fact that an event of this nature is co-sponsored by the 
two institutions sends a strong signal to the research community. It also clearly illustrates the 
importance of research in today’s monetary policy making, given the interplay, which is not 
always  fully  understood,  between  financial  markets  and  the  real  economy.  The  top  quality 
work that has been done in this conference will be of great help for policy making. 
Normal times and times of stress 
Over  the  recent  months,  thanks  to  the  joint  actions  of  governments  and  central  banks, 
markets have shown gradual signs of improvement. Yet, the functioning of the markets has 
not been fully restored. At the current juncture, one key challenge is to restore confidence in 
a context where players are still confronted with numerous sources of uncertainty: uncertain 
exposure vis-à-vis counterparties, uncertain valuation regarding financial assets or financial 
risks. In such a context, what should we do to return to normality? 
Economic theory provides a set of conditions to be fulfilled for a market to function efficiently: 
full  information,  enforceable  property  rights  and  contracts,  absence  of  externalities  just  to 
mention  the  most  important  ones.  In  times  of  stress,  these  conditions are  not  fulfilled.  But 
they are hardly met in normal times either. Moving from one situation, to the other, does not 
necessarily  involve  a  huge  economic  shock.  Small  changes  in  economic  sentiment  or 
“animal spirit” may bring financial markets to a point of near collapse.  
The past ten years are a striking case in point. The development of securitisation was initially 
perceived  as  improving  welfare  through  better  risk  management  and  allocation.  Overall,  it 
was seen as a move towards more complete and efficient markets.  
The  crisis  has  shown  that  this  was  not  necessarily  the  case:  the  process  was  plagued  by 
information asymmetries and moral hazard, and created high risk concentration on a limited 
number of counterparties, It also lead to the build-up of financial imbalances which proved 
unsustainable. In those conditions, a minor change may suffice to trigger a financial market 
collapse. It is difficult to rationalise such an outcome unless it is the result of some kind of 
coordination between economic agents on a bad equilibrium. Some contributions presented 
here  mentioned  strategic  complementarities,  an  explanation  which  cannot  be  completely 
ruled out. Indeed, it seems that the driving force behind the massive securitisation era was, 
for most participants, regulatory arbitrage.  
Therefore, it comes as no surprise that the main policy response has focused on regulation. 
Indeed,  there  is  a  widespread  consensus  that  the  cause  of  the  current  financial  meltdown 
stems  from  the  failure  or  even  the  absence  of  regulation  in  important  segments  of  the 
financial system. But it may also have implications for monetary policy, to which I turn now. 
BIS Review 74/2009 
 1
Some implications for monetary policy 
Central banks have been on the frontline since the crisis unfolded in the summer of 2007. A 
dramatic change occurred however after the collapse of Lehman Brothers where we had the 
sentiment  that  we  were  moving  into  uncharted  territories:  spreads  reached  unprecedented 
levels both on the money and credit markets, leading to a worsening of financing conditions 
across  industrialised  countries.  Without  action  some  important  parts  of  the  transmission 
mechanisms would have been significantly impaired.  
In such a context, major central banks embarked on unconventional policies by: 
• 
• 
Increasing central bank liquidity; 
Influencing risk premia on private financial and credit instruments. Such policies are 
referred to as credit easing policies;  
Pre-committing to conducting very low interest rate policies for as long as necessary 
in countries where the interest rate has already reached its lower bound.  
 All these policies are set out as temporary policies and deemed to be used in times of stress 
only. It is obviously too early to gauge their overall impact. So far, they have been effective 
with regard to market confidence, and have contributed to a significant reduction in various 
credit  risk  premia.  One  channel  relies  on  portfolio  composition  effects.  I  know  that  some 
contributions presented here made that point in a very sophisticated framework, i.e. positive 
feedback effects may be generated through the greater liquidity of investing entrepreneurs. 
Obviously,  the  soundness  of  the  financial  system  is  critical  to  the  success  of  these 
unconventional policies.  
These policies must be viewed as state contingent policies: they are conditional on the state 
of  the  economy.  A  significant  part  of  the  intervention  is  short-term  oriented,  as  the 
acquisitions focus on short-maturity assets. Furthermore, the assets purchased are usually of 
very  good  quality.  In  most  cases,  and  in  particular  in  the  Eurosystem,  the  increase  in  the 
monetary  base  is  determined  endogenously  by  the  banking  system,  motivated  by  banks’ 
preference for liquidity and thus by the state of stress of the banking system. Finally, these 
measures tend to address aggregate risks.  
These unconventional measures would automatically unwind, as improvements in inter-bank 
and credit markets would reduce the need to use these facilities. Financial market indicators, 
risk  premia  components  and  their  determinants  as  well  as  monetary  indicators  (inflation 
expectations in addition to monetary and credit developments) should be taken into account 
to carry out the assessment. 
Some implications for financial stability 
This  crisis  has  triggered  a  debate  regarding  possible  tools to  be  developed  to  prevent  the 
build up of financial imbalances and design countercyclical regulatory policies. 
Some papers presented during this conference made such a point, calling for a new macro-
prudential  approach  and  proposing  measures  of  systemic  risks  that  capture  risk  spillovers 
and tail risk correlations. I am of course very sympathetic to this approach and I also think 
that such measures should form the basis of any macro-prudential regulation. 
The  general  principle  of  this  macro-prudential  regulation  is  straightforward:  it  consists  in 
ensuring  that  supervision  manages  to  limit  risks  for  the  stability  not  only  of  a  particular 
institution, but also of the entire financial system. Its implementation is however a bit more 
complex and raises several policy issues: first, there are questions on how to calibrate these 
macro-prudential  instruments  so  as  to  address  common  exposures  across  financial 
institutions and the contribution of each institution to system-wide risk; a second issue is how 
to dampen the inherent procyclicality of the financial system; a third issue is the respective 
importance  of  rule-based  approaches  versus  more  discretionary  tools.  Finally,  questions 
2 
 BIS Review 74/2009
remain  regarding  the  institutional  set-up,  in  particular  as  to  which  institutions  should  be 
involved in the process and make the decisions. These issues are currently being debated in 
various  circles  and  the  recently-published  de  Larosière  report  made  some  substantial 
proposals regarding the institutional set-up. I will not elaborate on all these issues but simply 
touch on a couple of them. 
The most important features of a macro-prudential approach is that it treats aggregate risks 
as endogenous and considers possible feedback effects between the real economy and the 
soundness of financial institutions. Its ultimate objective is to prevent costly recessions such 
as  the  one  we  are  currently  experiencing.  Consequently,  its  implementation  must  be 
grounded on some welfare analysis. This is an area in which further research is required. It is 
very  important  that  the  implementation  of  this  macro-prudential  approach  finds  the  right 
balance  between  efficiency  and  stability  in  the  financial  sector,  It  should  therefore  be 
constructed so as to act directly on the incentive to take risk and the rewards provided by risk 
taking. 
Should central banks be involved in? Clearly, they should play a pivotal role: they are a major 
player  during  financial  and  liquidity  crises.  They  are  well  equipped  to  assess  cyclical 
positions and they have a strong incentive since the efficacy of their monetary policy relies 
on the smooth functioning of the transmission mechanism. On the other hand, they are not 
alone  in  caring  about  financial  stability  and  their  primary  mandate,  which  is  price  stability, 
does not always necessarily coincide with financial stability. 
As  a  conclusion,  I  would  like  to  thank  your  very  much  for  you  attention  and  for  your  kind 
participation and thank once again the organisers and the teams involved in the preparation 
of this conference. 
BIS Review 74/2009 
 3
