José Manuel González-Páramo: Fiscal policy and the financial crisis – 
the need for an effective exit strategy 
Speech  by  Mr  José  Manuel  González-Páramo,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
European Central Bank, at the CFS conference “The ECB and its Watchers XI”, Frankfurt am 
Main, 4 September 2009. 
 Introduction 
The  economic  and  financial  landscape  has  changed  dramatically  since  the  last  ECB 
Watchers Conference. Until a year ago, the front line in the fight against the financial market 
turmoil had been manned largely by central banks. Then, in the space of a month:  
• 
• 
• 
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac were taken into public ownership; 
Merrill Lynch was taken over by Bank of America; 
the Federal Reserve extended an  extraordinary loan to AIG in return  for a majority 
stake;  
and Lehman Brothers filed for bankruptcy. 
• 
The financial turmoil became a financial crisis. The US Treasury unveiled a proposal to buy 
up to 700 billion US dollars of illiquid mortgage-based assets. And on this side of the Atlantic, 
a wave of government interventions to stabilise the financial system and support the broader 
economy was set in motion.  
The need for policy actions 
In September 2008, money markets around the world had come to a standstill. Banks had 
stopped lending to each other. Central banks had become the main source of refinancing for 
the banking system. Given the situation, the top priority was to restore more orderly market 
conditions as soon as possible in order to limit the damage to the real economy. To this end, 
in addition to the unconventional measures taken by central banks, vast public funds have 
been  made  available  to  guarantee  bank  lending,  to  recapitalise  troubled  banks  and  to 
purchase impaired assets.  
To  what  extent  have  these  actions  been  successful?  A  useful  measure  of  money  market 
tensions  is  the  spread  between  unsecured  and  secured  money  market  rates.  In  the  euro 
area, for the three-month maturity, this spread rose from below 10 basis points before the 
onset of the turmoil to 180 basis points at the height of the crisis in autumn 2008. Since then, 
it  has  declined  to  around  40  basis  points.  This  is  still  an  elevated  level,  but  nonetheless 
indicates significant progress towards restoring stable money market conditions. And while 
credit conditions in the euro area have weakened significantly over the past 12 months, there 
has been no collapse in bank lending to the non-financial private sector.  
Even so, economic activity has contracted more sharply than at any time since the Second 
World War. In the euro area, output contracted on a cumulated basis by more than 4% over 
the  third  quarter  of  2008  and  the  first  quarter  of  2009,  driven  mainly  by  a  sharp  fall  in 
investment and net exports. The latest data indicates a stabilisation in economic activity for 
the euro area as a whole in the second quarter of 2009. And most forecasters now expect a 
modest recovery in the course of 2010.  
But if central banks and governments had not acted as they have done over the past year, 
the financial crisis would have been even more intense and the recession would have been 
deeper.  
BIS Review 103/2009 
 1
The fiscal costs of the crisis 
As things stand now, the fiscal costs of the economic and financial crisis are expected to be 
considerable. In 2007, euro area general government borrowing amounted to around half a 
percent  of  GDP.  In  its  Spring  2009  forecast,  the  European  Commission  projected  that 
government borrowing in the euro area would rise to 5.3% of GDP this year and 6.5% next 
year. The euro area government debt ratio, which stood at 66% in 2007, is projected to rise 
to 84% in 2010. 13 out of 16 euro area governments are projected to breach the 3% of GDP 
deficit reference value of the Maastricht Treaty. And all are at risk of doing so next year.  
These  figures  reflect  the  impact  on  public  finances  of  the  contraction  in  economic  activity. 
They  also  reflect  the  costs  of  discretionary  fiscal  stimulus  measures  adopted  in  many 
countries. But the cost of providing public support to the financial sector is only reflected to a 
very limited extent in these projections.  
According to information collected within the Eurosystem, the impact of public interventions 
on euro area government debt, as recorded in the national accounts this year, is likely to be 
something in the order of 3% of GDP. And the impact on the euro area government deficit is 
likely  to  be  negligible.  But  the  scale  of  government  support  to  the  financial  sector  is  far 
greater than these figures suggest. According to the European Commission, as of the end of 
March  2009,  the  amount  of  funds  made  available  under  approved  measures  amounted  to 
around 35% of euro area GDP. Of this amount, around 11% of GDP has already been turned 
into effective support, in terms of actual recapitalisations, asset purchases and so on.  
The  difference  between  the  total  amount  of  funds  made  available  and  the  impact  actually 
recorded  in  government  deficit  and  debt  statistics  reflects  the  considerable  uncertainty 
regarding  the  true  fiscal  costs  of  the  bank  rescue  packages.  Roughly  speaking,  in  cases 
where governments actually issue debt to finance a loan or an asset purchase, there is an 
immediate impact on government debt in the official statistics. But no impact on the deficit 
will be recorded unless or until there is clear evidence that the interest on the loan or the 
price paid for the asset does not reflect market conditions.  
In cases where a privately owned special entity is established to provide loans or purchase 
assets,  there  may  be  no  immediate  impact  on  the  government  accounts,  even  if  the  debt 
issued by this entity is backed by a government guarantee. Only if and when this guarantee 
is called will the corresponding amount be recorded as government spending. At the current 
juncture, it is impossible to assess the amount of the guarantees that will be called or what 
the final scale of the losses will be. As Eurostat put it, the cost of the public support to banks 
is a large cloud on the horizon, but at the moment we do not know how much it is going to 
rain!  
The fiscal exit strategy 
Faced with the prospect of large deficits in the coming years and uncertainty regarding the 
final costs of bank rescue packages, the priority for fiscal policy must be to set out a clear 
and credible plan for restoring order to the public finances over the  medium term.  Just as 
central  banks  are  mulling  their  exit  strategy  from  non-standard  monetary  policy  measures, 
governments need to develop their exit strategy too. 
 In this respect, the first hurdle to overcome is to be honest and transparent about the scale of 
the  problem.  As  I  already  mentioned,  much  of  the  support  given  by  governments  to  the 
banking sector will not be reflected, for the time being, in the government accounts. But this 
does not mean it can be overlooked. Eurostat has announced that it intends to establish a 
supplementary reporting table to collect data on guarantees, liquidity support measures, and 
the operations of special purpose entities relating to the financial crisis. This reporting must 
be taken seriously. Public authorities cannot call on banks to be more transparent about the 
2 
 BIS Review 103/2009
scale of their liabilities, if they exploit statistical conventions themselves to keep debt off of 
their balance sheets.  
Beyond  this,  there  is  a  risk  that  the  increase  in  government  borrowing  during  the  crisis  is 
viewed  as  being  purely  the  consequence  of  the  operation  of  the  automatic  stabilisers  and 
fiscal  stimulus  packages.  Cyclical  effects  should  cancel  out  over  time.  Stimulus  measures 
are supposed to be largely temporary. So once the crisis is over and the stimulus measures 
unwind, we should be more or less back where we started.  
This is wishful thinking. The sharp contraction in economic activity brings with it a permanent 
output loss. This is reflected in significant downward revisions to estimates of potential output 
and  potential  output  growth.  These  revisions  imply  a  reassessment  of  the  spending  that 
governments  can  afford  given  a  lower  structural  level  of  tax  receipts.  The  European 
Commission’s estimate is that the “cyclical component” of the euro area government deficit 
will amount to about 1.4% of GDP this year and 1.9% next year. This is less than one third of 
the overall projected deficit!  
Assuming  that  fiscal  stimulus  measures  can  be  easily  unwound  may  also  prove  a  little 
optimistic. Even if a tax cut or a subsidy is announced as temporary, this does not mean that 
cancelling  it  will  be  less  unpopular.  And  even  when  stimulus  measures  are  unwound,  the 
resulting impact on the deficit will be limited. Even net of stimulus measures, the projected 
structural deficit for the euro area would still be almost 4% of GDP in 2010 according to the 
European Commission.  
The most reasonable assumption is that, for the most part, the sizeable government deficits 
that are likely to build up this year and next will not be self-correcting. Instead, they will need 
to be corrected through policy actions.  
 The  challenge  for  fiscal  policy  at  this  juncture  is  to  appropriately  calibrate  the  timing  and 
speed of this adjustment. In this respect, we should not forget that fiscal policies in EMU do 
not operate in a vacuum. Governments are bound by their obligations under the Treaty and 
the Stability and Growth Pact. All the more so now, as monetary authorities consider their 
exit  strategy  from  the  crisis,  it  is  essential  that  fiscal  policies  are  conducted  within  a 
predictable, medium-term oriented framework.  
The  Treaty  and  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  provide  for  a  degree  of  flexibility  under  the 
current,  special  circumstances.  The  European  Commission  has  expressed  its  view  that 
Member States incurring excessive deficits due to the crisis should be allowed to implement 
corrective action in a time frame consistent with the recovery of the economy. But this should 
not lead to corrective action being unduly delayed. Fiscal adjustment needs to start with and 
not  later  than  the  economic  recovery.  And  when  more  normal  economic  conditions  return, 
consolidation efforts will need to be substantial.  
Just how substantial these efforts need to be can be illustrated by way of a simple, numerical 
example. Let us assume that the current projections of the European Commission until 2010 
turn out to be correct. Let us assume that from 2011 onwards annual output growth is equal 
to 2¼ percent. This might be considered a generous assumption. And let us also assume 
that  government  revenues  keep  pace  with  economic  activity  so  that  the  revenue  ratio  is 
unchanged.  Under  such  assumptions,  a  complete  freeze  on  government  spending  would 
reduce the euro area government deficit by around 1% of GDP each year, bringing it close to 
balance no sooner than 2016. A more timely fiscal adjustment would require the adoption of 
corrective measures already in 2010, absolute spending cuts in real terms or additional tax 
increases.  
BIS Review 103/2009 
 3
Concluding remarks 
To  conclude,  the  scale  of  the  challenge  for  fiscal  policy  is  considerable.  Over  the  past  12 
months,  governments,  like  central  banks,  have  taken  unprecedented  action  to  restore 
stability to the financial system and to tackle the largest recession in post-war history. This 
action was largely justified. But most governments will come out of this crisis with the highest 
debt levels, as a proportion of GDP, ever to have been experienced in modern history. And 
this at a time, lest we forget, when the fiscal burden associated with population ageing looms 
ever larger over the horizon. If confidence in future stability is to be ensured, now is the time 
to set out an effective fiscal exit strategy. 
4 
 BIS Review 103/2009
