Duvvuri Subbarao: Reserve Bank of India – reflections on its evolution 
Address  by  Dr  Duvvuri  Subbarao,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  to  staff  at  the 
Platinum Jubilee Celebrations, Mumbai, 2 April 2009. 
 Dear Colleagues, 
As the Reserve Bank of India enters its 75th year, today marks a momentous milestone in 
the history of this great institution. I am indeed delighted and privileged to be speaking to all 
of you, members of the RBI family, on this historic occasion. 
Marking the 75th birthday is a time for joy and celebration. It is also an to how each of us in 
the  RBI  family  can  make  a  positive  difference  occasion  for  introspection  –  an  occasion  to 
reflect on the evolution of the Reserve Bank, to look back on the road we traversed, and look 
ahead to the life of every Indian, every day. 
75 years is a long time from a human perspective; yet 75 years is a relatively short time in 
the life span of an institution. Even so, the past 74 years have marked a historic journey for 
the Reserve Bank as it evolved from relatively modest origins to come to be acknowledged 
today as one of the most professional and responsive public policy institutions in the country. 
This is an enviable reputation, and for this we are in debt to the past Governors and Deputy 
Governors,  past  members  of  the  Board  and  past  staff  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India.  As 
today's RBI family, it is both our challenge and our obligation to build on this reputation, and 
rededicate ourselves to the task of furthering the objectives of the RBI.  
Mahatma Gandhi put the test for every action very aptly. He said that the question we must 
ask ourselves is, "how is what I plan to do going to improve the life of the poorest person?". I 
want  to  paraphrase  that  question  for  today's  context.  All  of  us  in  the  RBI  family  must  ask 
ourselves,  "how  can  I  do  my  job  better  so  that  I  can  make  a  positive  difference  to  the 
country?" 
The Reserve Bank has a rich history going back to pre-independence days. The question of 
a  central  banking  institution  for  India  had  been  under  examination  both  by  Royal 
Commissions  and  by 
the  Hilton-Young  Commission 
recommended in 1926 that India’s financial structure should be completed by the creation of 
a  central  bank.  The  report  of 
included  a 
comprehensive memorandum by John Maynard Keynes, one of its members, proposing that 
the three Presidency Banks should be merged into one central bank. This led to a legislation, 
introduced in January 1927, to set up the Reserve Bank of India. However, it was not until 
seven years later, in March 1934, that the enactment came through. Thus began the exciting 
and glorious journey of our Bank on 1st April 1935.  
The Reserve Bank of India was first established as a shareholders’ bank. Subsequently, it 
was  nationalized  in  1949.  As  India  became  independent  in  1947,  RBI's  “tryst  with  nation 
building”  ran  parallel  to  the  nation's  “tryst  with  destiny”.  The  year  1949  also  marked  the 
enactment  of  the  Banking  Regulation  Act  which  mandated  a  comprehensive  and  formal 
structure of bank regulation and supervision in India. 
For the first two decades of India's independence, banking was largely concentrated in our 
cities and major towns. The rural areas were largely left behind. This was a lacuna as the 
potential  of  rural  savings  remained  unexploited,  and  rural  credit  needs  remained  unmet. 
These were also the years when banking had become the centre of political attention.  
The  1960s  were  difficult  years  for  the  country  from  an  economic  perspective.  India  had 
fought a war with China in 1962, and soon thereafter with Pakistan in 1965. The country also 
went  through  three  very  bad  years  of  monsoon.  The  country’s  financial  position  became 
extremely  poor  and  the  currency  had  to  be  devalued  in  1966.  Economic  distress  started 
the  Chamberlain  Commission  of  1914 
the  Legislature 
long  before 
BIS Review 42/2009 
 1
in  designing  and 
for  agricultural  and 
implementing  policies 
growing as evidenced by rising prices, scarcity of essential commodities and services, low 
growth and widespread unemployment. It was in the backdrop of this scenario that the Union 
Finance Minister of the time advocated social control over commercial banks.  
Even as a consensus on social control was emerging, in a swift and unexpected move, 14 
major  commercial  banks  were  nationalized  in  July  1969.  This  decision,  justified  as  being 
necessary  for  growth  and  poverty  reduction,  was  arguably  the  most  important  economic 
decision by the Government since Independence till that date. Nationalization led to sharp 
expansion of the banking network and impressive penetration into rural areas.  
The  Reserve  Bank  evolved  in  parallel  with  these  socio  economic  developments.  It  took  a 
leading  role 
industrial 
development and for laying the foundations for financial markets. Some of today’s premier 
development  and  market  institutions  such  as  the  National  Bank  for  Agriculture  and  Rural 
Development (NABARD), the Industrial Development Bank of India (IDBI) and the Unit Trust 
of India (UTI) had their beginnings as specialized departments and divisions within the RBI.  
The  context  and  circumstances  that  culminated  in  the  path-breaking  economic  reforms  of 
1991  are  by  now  standard  fare.  The  programme  of  “opening  up”  launched  under  the 
leadership  of  the  then  Finance  Minister,  and  the  present  Prime  Minister,  Dr.  Manmohan 
Singh – who, incidentally, was also Governor of the Reserve Bank of India – catapulted India 
into a major emerging economy. Today, India is the fourth largest economy in the world in 
purchasing power parity (PPP) terms and the second-fastest in terms of growth. It is a tribute 
to the resilience of the Indian economy that even in the midst of the deep recession that the 
world is going through today, India remains a growing economy. Our growth, no doubt, has 
moderated but this moderation is modest compared to the convulsions almost everywhere 
else in the world.  
Most importantly, over the years, the mandate of the RBI has expanded encompassing both 
its  regulatory  and  developmental  responsibilities.  Today,  we  are  a  large  and  complex 
organisation  compared  to  most  other  central  banks  in  the  world.  The  various  departments 
that  have  made  up  the  Bank  through  these  years  have  reflected  the  diverse  financial  and 
economic functions associated with the process of economic development and the growth of 
the financial sector. When we started in 1935, there were just three departments, namely the 
Banking Department, the Issue Department and the Agricultural Credit Department. Today, 
we have 26 departments in the Central Office, have 26 regional and field offices across the 
country, four subsidiaries (BRB Note Mudran Press Ltd., DICGC, NABARD and NHB,) and a 
staff of over 20,000 employees. 
The preamble to the Reserve Bank of India Act lays down the purpose of establishing RBI as 
“to  regulate  issue  of  Bank  notes,  to  keep  the  reserves  with  a  view  to  securing  monetary 
stability in India and generally to operate the currency and credit system of the country to its 
advantage”. As you will note, this is a broad and flexible mandate. Today, we perform several 
important functions. We are the monetary authority, and regulator and supervisor for banks 
and non-banking financial companies. We are the issuer of currency and the debt manager 
for the central and state governments. Besides, we manage the country’s foreign exchange 
reserves, manage the capital account of the Balance of payments, and design and operate 
payment  systems.  We  also  operate  a  grievance  redressal  scheme  for  bank  customers 
through  the  Banking  Ombudsmen  and  formulate  policies  for  treating  customers  fairly. 
Importantly, the RBI has had a decisive influence in shaping and implementing every major 
economic  policy  in  the  monetary  and  financial  sectors.  The  developmental  role  of  the  RBI 
has  expanded  too.  Among  our  major  endeavours  today  are  financial  inclusion  and  the 
strengthening  of  the  credit  delivery  mechanisms  for  agriculture,  and  small  and  micro-
enterprises, specially in the rural areas. 
With India emerging as a key player in the global growth story, RBI’s role and responsibilities 
too have increasingly acquired an international dimension. Today RBI is an active participant 
in several important international institutions that seek to promote more effective regulatory 
2 
 BIS Review 42/2009
structures  and  financial  and  systemic  stability.  We  have  for  sometime  now  been 
shareholders of the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) and member of the Committee 
on  Global  Financial  System,  the  Markets  Committee,  and  the  International  Liaison  Group 
under  the  aegis  of  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  (BCBS),  and  are  now 
becoming active members of the Financial Stability Forum and the BCBS.  
The large and diverse responsibilities of the Bank demand vastly different resources in terms 
of infrastructure and human competencies. In fact, as our mandate has evolved and grown, 
our  resources  and  the  organization  of  these  resources  too  have  undergone  significant 
changes. The Bank recognizes that our employees are our main assets and that the efficacy 
of an institution is fundamentally dependent not just on the sum total of its individual human 
capital, but on how effectively it is able to draw out the best from its talent pool. It has been 
our  constant  endeavour  to  create  a  work  environment  where  we  can  deliver  our  services 
efficiently, discharge our functions competently and enjoy a wholesome work-life balance.  
As  I  had  mentioned  to  you  in  my  New  Year  Message,  today  the  economy  is  facing  an 
extraordinary challenge. The global recession, a fall-out of the unprecedented financial crisis, 
is the most serious economic problem that the world has faced in the post-War era. Contrary 
to earlier hopes, it is now clear that the downturn will be deeper and the recovery longer than 
we had earlier anticipated. The Reserve Bank has played, and will continue to play, a leading 
role in managing the crisis and minimizing the pain of adjustment. This affords the RBI both a 
challenge  and  an  opportunity.  A  challenge  because  a  lot  is  expected  of  us;  and  an 
opportunity because it gives us a chance to demonstrate that we can rise to the occasion, 
think out of the box, lead from the front and act swiftly and effectively.  
In the course of the next one month, we will be working out a detailed plan for marking the 
Platinum Jubilee of the Reserve Bank of India. There will be events of celebration, but I am 
anxious that this must go beyond mere discrete events of celebration. The Platinum Jubilee 
must  launch  a  series  of  initiatives  and  activities  that  make  the  Reserve  Bank  a  more 
responsive, relevant, professional and effective public policy institution and remind each of 
us how we can serve the institution, and thereby the country, better. In short, our goal must 
be to make a difference. 
In conclusion, on the occasion of this Platinum Jubilee, I wish you and your families all the 
very best of health, happiness and fulfillment. 
BIS Review 42/2009 
 3
