José Manuel González-Páramo: National Accounts for monetary policy 
making – reflections on the use of the Euro Area Accounts in the light of 
the financial crisis 
Contribution by Mr José Manuel González-Páramo, Member of the Executive Board of the 
European  Central  Bank,  to  the  Eurostat  conference  national  account  2009  “Reading  the 
present to prepare the future”, Session 2: Awakening from the financial and economic crisis 
Brussels, 16 September 2009. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen,1 
It is just over two years ago that Commissioner Almunia and I spoke at the launch of the joint 
compilation of the integrated euro area accounts by Eurostat and the ECB. Only a couple of 
months  later  financial  turmoil  broke  and  turned  into  arguably  the  biggest  financial  and 
economic crisis since the Great Depression. 
In my remarks, let me first share a few thoughts on why I believe the Euro Area Accounts are 
planted on particularly fertile grounds in the aftermath of the crisis. In my view, this has to do 
with  new  challenges  arising  after  the  crisis,  as  well  as  a  noticeable  shift  in  the  intellectual 
climate.  Indeed,  the  Euro  Area  Accounts  underwent  a  baptism  of  fire,  but  they  are  now 
growing up at a time, when fewer and fewer people need convincing that they provide critical 
information and a useful framework to underpin policy-making. 
Second,  I  will  briefly  provide  some  examples  where  the  accounts  have  already  played  a 
useful  role  in  our  policy  making  during  the  financial  crisis.  Perhaps  unsurprisingly,  I  will 
mainly focus on the financial side of the accounts. 
Third,  I  will  argue  how  an  expanded  use  of  the  accounts  over  time  fits  in  well  within  the 
ECB’s broad-based approach to monetary policy, in the context of enhancing our monetary 
analysis and enriching our economic analysis. No doubt, in the future we shall also explore 
the role that a flow-of-funds approach and the interaction of sectoral balance sheets can play 
in  helping  us  think  about  systemic  risk  and  macro-prudential  issues  as  the  ECB  assumes 
responsibility in these fields. 
Finally, I will close with a few remarks on statistical challenges ahead for further improvement 
of the accounts. 
The EAA and the crisis fallout 
The  last  two  years  have  been  a  gruelling  time  for  policy-makers.  They  have  also  been  a 
humbling  experience  for  the  economics  profession  as  a  whole,  and,  no  doubt,  also  a 
challenge for statisticians and national accountants.  
Why has no-one seen this coming? This is a pertinent question. 
It needs to be recalled that central bankers have time and again raised their voices to warn 
on fragilities and underpricing of risks, but they could not turn a tide of opinion. And some of 
us have pointed to excessive growth in money and credit, which others considered quite out 
of step with the tune of the time. 
                                                 
1  
I am very grateful to Bernhard Winkler and Andreas Hertkorn for their valuable contributions. 
BIS Review 108/2009 
 1
In addition, there have been a few economists, who spent their time looking deeply into the 
intricacies of the national accounts, before pronouncing themselves on the future course of 
events. Their simple message was: what cannot go on forever has to reverse.  
How is it that these economists-accountants appear to have managed to read the writing on 
the wall? It has been recently argued that they got there by looking at the flow-of-funds and 
balance sheets.2 Accounting identities are very useful reminders that things have to add up. 
Assets have to be matched by liabilities, expanding debt on balance sheets leads to rising 
payment  flows,  in  a  closed  system  any  one  sector  will  only  make  outsized  profits  at  the 
expense  of  other  sectors,  the  relationship  between  finance  and  the  real  economy  cannot 
remain out of kilter for long … and so on and so forth. 
I don’t think the accounts by themselves give us a superior crystal ball to gauge the future. 
However, I do believe that the accounts – even if they cannot give all the answers – will be 
increasingly  useful  in  helping  economists  to  address  the  right  questions,  which  will  be  no 
mean achievement. 
Some  economists,  like  Paul  Krugman  and  Barry  Eichengreen,  have  argued  that  the  crisis 
has  shown  that  the  last  30  years  of  macroeconomics  have,  at  best,  been  useless  and,  at 
worst, harmful. I don’t quite agree with such a harsh verdict. It is certainly the case, though, 
that  key  elements  for  understanding  the  financial  crisis,  such  as  the  role  of  financial 
intermediaries, the impact of balance sheets and leverage, the possibility of default and the 
disruption  of  markets,  have  hardly  been  on  the  map  in  the  prevailing  class  of  mainstream 
models. Against this background the euro area accounts can be useful as a comprehensive 
data source and by shaping “systemic” thinking in three dimensions: 
First,  the  accounts  provide  a  detailed  articulation  of  the  economy  in  terms  of  institutional 
sectors and, importantly, the interaction across sectors. Over the last 30 years the prevailing 
macroeconomic paradigm has conceived of macroeconomics as tracing out the implications 
of the optimizing intertemporal behaviour of a rational representative agent. Much like in the 
1930s, the crisis has powerfully driven home the point that macroeconomic outcomes are the 
result of the behaviour and interaction of heterogeneous agents in the economy, with scope 
for co-ordination failure, multiple equilibria or – disequilibria. 
Second, the integrated sector accounts bring together data on the financial and non-financial 
side  within  a  unified  framework,  which  provides  an  enhanced  basis  for  the  analysis  of 
interaction between financial and real variables as well as interrelations across institutional 
sectors.  Looking  at  the  flow-of-funds  and  the  evolution  of  financial  balance  sheets  in 
conjunction  with  savings,  investment  and  consumption  decisions  more  closely  can  help  to 
better understand feedback loops between financial quantities and the real economy. 
Third, the accounts are already immensely valuable as an organizing device and consistent 
framework which co-determines what we see and shapes how we see things.  
At a deep level one can invoke Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle (Unschärfe-Relation”) of 
particle physics, which establishes that there is no reality independent of measurement. This 
underscores the responsibility of the integrity and independence of statisticians and national 
accountants – although they will never be independent of prior theory – in furnishing the lens 
through  which  reality  is  perceived.  Indeed,  we  know  from  history  that  the  development  of 
national accounts is inextricably linked to advances in economic and monetary theory. This 
applies  to  the  compilation  of  National  Income  and  Production  Accounts  in  the  US  to  give 
expression  to  the  new-born  discipline  of  macroeconomics  after  the  Keynesian  revolution. 
This  also  applies  to  the  first  flow-of-funds  tables,  initially  referred  to  as  “money  flows”, 
compiled by Copeland at the Federal Reserve in the immediate post-war period. It is also no 
                                                 
2   See the recent survey by Bezemer (2009). 
2 
 BIS Review 108/2009
co-incidence  that  Irving  Fisher,  the  father  of  the  debt  deflation  hypothesis,  was  both  an 
eminent economist and a first-rate statistician. 
More prosaically, the accounts provide a comprehensive map of what we know, and – even 
more importantly – what we don’t know. To give one example, as the financial crisis broke, 
the ECB was in the very fortunate position to have excellent and timely data on bank balance 
sheets at its disposal, regularly analysed as part of the ECB’s ongoing monetary analysis. 
Much less was known about other financial intermediaries (OFI), which have remained at a 
smaller  scale  in  the  European  context,  and  insurance  corporations  and  pension  funds 
(ICPF). However, within the financial accounts both the OFI and ICPF subsectors were firmly 
part  of  the  picture  in  the  context  of  our  monetary  analysis  even  in  the  absence  of  more 
detailed primary sources.3 
Following the identification of important gaps, improved primary statistics will indeed soon be 
coming  on  stream  in  the  context  of  ECB  regulations  on  financial  vehicle  corporations, 
investment  funds  and  enhanced  information  on  securitisation  activities  by  banks.  I  should 
stress that these gaps were identified as important priorities well before the outbreak of the 
financial crisis.  
Some of the most insightful work on the origins and evolution of the financial crisis has been 
based  on  flow-of-funds  data.  For  example,  back  in  November  2006  at  the  ECB’s  Central 
Banking  Conference  on  the  role  of  money,  H.S.  Shin  pointed  to  the  leverage  targeting 
behaviour by U.S. broker dealers (investment banks) as a crucial pro-cyclical element in the 
credit and asset boom at the time. Subsequently, in a string of papers he has highlighted the 
interaction of sectoral flows and balance sheets, as available from the flow-of-funds, in the 
propagation of the subprime crisis through financial intermediaries and feedback loops to the 
wider  economy  (see  Adrian  and  Shin,  2008a,  2008b,  and  Shin,  2009),  with  important 
implications  also  for  the  design  of  financial  regulation  as  suggested  in  this  year’s  Geneva 
report (Brunnermeier et al., 2009).  
It  is  now  widely  argued  that  the  Japanese  experience  of  deflation  during  the  1990s,  was 
driven by protracted balance sheet adjustment by firms and the financial sector in the wake 
of the prior bubble in asset markets (Koo, 2008, Hattori et al., 2009), much reminding us of 
Irving Fisher’s debt deflation analysis of the Great Depression. In today’s situation again, the 
health of non-financial and financial sector balance sheets is at the centre of attention as a 
possible constraint on borrowing and lending as well as agents’ capacity to spend. 
Looking  at  the  flow-of-funds  in  conjunction  with  the  international  investment  positions  light 
can also be shed on the international dimension of the crisis. Brender and Pisani (2009) have 
argued  that  the  appetite  for  borrowing  by  U.S.  households  had  its  counterpart  in  excess 
savings  elsewhere,  which  resulted  in  a  concomitant  rise  in  the  supply  of  and  demand  for 
securitised products globally. In the case of Asia excess savings was mainly channelled into 
US government bonds and agency debt as a result of exchange rate interventions with the 
public  sector  acting  as  intermediary  in  the  presence  of  less  developed  and  less  open 
domestic financial markets. Securitised products were quite eagerly snapped up elsewhere, 
as we know, mainly remaining on the balance sheets of financial intermediaries, at least until 
the public sector had to step in as this episode of international risk sharing – or rather risk 
concentration – ended in tears. 
                                                 
3   See e.g. Moutot et al. (2007). 
BIS Review 108/2009 
 3
The use of EAA during the financial crisis  
As I have argued at the beginning of my talk, the euro area accounts may have seen the light 
of day at the best possible moment, as the financial crisis broke, which boosted the demand 
for this kind of data. 
At the same time, in other respects it might have been the worst possible moment. In a crisis, 
attention  is  naturally  focused  on  the  latest  data.  By  the  time  the  EAA  arrive,  with  a  lag 
currently of around four months, the situation may have already changed dramatically. Thus 
the headline “news” content is limited in relation to complementing the monetary data, which 
comes  out  within  a  month,  and  with  respect  to  euro  area  GDP  and  national  account  data 
available at national level. 
Moreover,  as  a  relatively  new  dataset,  it  is  not  "tried  and  tested”  and,  for  now,  the 
comparability  with  other  data  remains  limited  in  some  dimensions.  The  accounts  are 
presented in nominal terms and as four-quarter-sums, in the absence of a split into prices 
and volumes and lacking seasonal adjustment for the time being. Other issues relate to the 
degree to which the principle of market valuation (rather than book values) can be applied 
across the accounts and the degree to which sectoral information consolidates intra-sectoral 
flows and balance sheets in practice. 
Finally, the balancing of the accounts between the financial side and the non-financial side 
under the joint responsibility of Eurostat and the ECB truly represents a challenge of historic 
dimension.  The  remaining  discrepancies  for  the  household  and  non-financial  corporations 
sectors provide a measure of additional efforts needed in reconciling the accounts. As I have 
stressed before, the national accounts are useful not only as a framework for putting together 
what we know, but also for identifying what we do not yet know and for pointing to gaps and 
inconsistencies in the primary data. Much of this is work in progress. 
With these caveats in mind let me nevertheless give you just a few examples where the Euro 
Area Accounts have already come into play at the ECB during the crisis complementing and 
enriching our monetary and economic analysis.4  
First  and  foremost,  the  euro  area’s  financial  structure  was  a  key  element  in  shaping  the 
ECB’s choice of non-standard measures. Our pre-dominantly bank-based system of financial 
intermediation in the euro area made it natural to concentrate efforts on easing the strains in 
the banking sector via the provision of liquidity and adapting our collateral requirements in 
our refinancing operations and to target an instrument, as is the case for covered bonds, that 
plays a significant role in securing longer-term funding for the banking sector. Information on 
financial structure was based, inter alia, on the Euro Area Accounts, such as the observation 
that banks accounted for around 70% of financing provided to non-financial corporations in 
the euro area over the period 2004-2008, while the figure was only around 20% in the case 
of the United States (see ECB Monthly Bulletin, April 2009). 
Second, information on financial investment of the money holding sectors complements the 
analysis of portfolio behaviour in the context of our monetary analysis. Of particular interest 
has  been  to  look  into  possible  portfolio  shifts  from  risky  assets  into  money  holdings  by 
households, as had been the case in the wake of the bursting of the equity bubble and period 
of heightened uncertainty after 9/11.  
Third,  on  the  part  of  non-financial  corporations  the  monetary  data  showed  a  decline  in 
deposits, as companies drew down their liquidity buffers initially in the wake of the collapse of 
Lehman, while more recently deposit growth has picked up again. On the basis of the data 
                                                 
4   For an overview of flow-of-funds analysis at the ECB prior to the introduction of the integrated accounts and 
prior to the financial crisis see Be Duc and Le Breton, 2009; for an introduction to the EAA see ECB Monthly 
Bulletin, 2007, and since May 2009 a regular Box on EAA releases at quarterly frequency in the ECB Monthly 
Bulletin. 
4 
 BIS Review 108/2009
available from the EAA until Q1 2009 the broad picture of a drawing down of liquid assets 
can be confirmed, when including debt securities and mutual fund shares in the picture. At 
the  same  time  on  the  financing  side,  the  broader  perspective  of  the  EAA  suggests  that 
corporations may have been partly able to buffer the impact of the financial crisis in the form 
of  reduced  cash  flow  (and  thus  less  internal  financing)  and  more  difficult  access  to  bank 
lending by greater recourse to market based funding, as corporate bond issuance picked up 
markedly, as well as recourse to inter-company loans (estimated on the basis of the EAA). In 
addition, trade credit extended between non-financial corporations suffered but still appeared 
to decline less than GDP. 
Fourth, the regular macro-economic projection exercises include financial projections, which 
trace  out  the  evolution  of  transactions  and  sectoral  balance  sheets  consistent  with  the 
assumptions and growth and inflation profile provided by the real projections. Typically most 
attention is focused on the household and non-financial corporations sectors and the outlook 
for loan developments, indebtedness and debt service burden. Financial asset flows are also 
included (making use of accounting identities to enforce consistency within the system) and, 
in particular, developments in household net worth can have a bearing on macroeconomic 
developments  via  wealth  effects  on  consumption.  While  derived  to  be  consistent  with  the 
baseline, the financial projections can be used to assess potential risks to the projection of 
real variables stemming from financial developments. 
Fifth, various balance sheet indicators / leverage ratios and estimates of debt service burden 
based on the EAA are also regularly analysed in the ECB’s Financial Stability Reviews and 
more recently a risk-adjusted flow-of-funds model has been introduced as a tool to assess 
interlinkages  between  sectoral  balance  sheets  and  default  risks  (see  Financial  Stability 
Review, June 2009). 
The potential use of EAA for cross-checking  
Much of what I have said, including the examples on the emerging use of the accounts at the 
ECB, point to the accounts as a suitable platform to link – some may say: bridge – analysis 
conducted under the two pillars of the ECB’s approach. Indeed developing tools for cross-
checking  on  the  basis  of  the  flow-of-funds  and  the  encompassing  and  comprehensive 
framework  of  the  EAA  has  been  included  as  a  means  of  enhancing  monetary  analysis, 
alongside  cross-checking  based  on  dynamic  structural  general  equilibrium  models  that 
include financial frictions for scenario analysis.5  
Analysis  based  on  the  financial  accounts  can,  on  the  one  hand,  complement  and  enrich 
monetary  analysis  based  on  MFI  balance  sheets  in  the  context  of  considering  portfolio 
behaviour and financing decisions across a broader set of financial instruments and across a 
wider  spectrum  of  financial  intermediation  channels.  On  the  other  hand,  analysing  the 
interaction of financial transactions and balance sheets with the behaviour of real variables 
and  asset  prices  can  contribute  to  economic  analysis,  drawing  on  the  consistent  sectoral 
framework of the integrated Euro Area Accounts. 
The challenge remains to underpin and exploit the richness of the accounts by corresponding 
efforts  in  terms  of  modelling.  There have  been  previous  attempts  at  modelling  the  flow-of-
funds.  On  the  theoretical  side,  the  sectoral  balance  sheet  approach  by  Tobin  (1969), 
Brainard  and  Tobin  (1968)  and  others  in  the  late  1960s  remains  the  natural  conceptual 
framework for examining portfolio choice and the interaction with savings behaviour and the 
real  economy.  However,  attempts  to  incorporate  asset  demands  and  balance  sheets  into 
fully-fledged  large  scale  econometric  models  have  faced  recurrent  set-backs  over  recent 
                                                 
5   See J. Stark “Enhancing the monetary analysis”, speech at the conference “The ECB and its watchers IX”, 
Frankfurt 7 September 2007 (http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2007/html/sp070907_1.en.html). 
BIS Review 108/2009 
 5
decades. At the same time, a new generation of DSGE models could, in principle, also be 
extended to incorporate the interaction of multiple sectors and portfolio behaviour. 
On the empirical side, VAR approaches can be a suitable way to establish stylized facts on 
how  flow-of-funds  variables  interact  with  macroeconomic  variables  in  the  monetary  policy 
transmission.  Obviously,  diverse  financial  structures  and  the  impact  of  financial  innovation 
are likely to affect relationships over time. 
In  terms  of  the  practical  use  of  the  accounts,  I  do  see  a  promising  future  ahead  after  the 
tsunami of the financial crisis. Among the broader lesson that we have learned: Two pillars 
are  better  than  one  pillar  in  underpinning  a  broad-based  approach  to  monetary  policy-
making.  This  leaves  ample  scope  for  looking  at  facts  and  figures,  digging  deeper  into  the 
data jungle. National accounts remind us that a map is needed to put all the data together. 
Further enhancements to the Euro Area Accounts 
These  insights  show  the  wisdom  of  past  efforts  to  build  up  Monetary  Union  Financial 
Accounts  (MUFA)  for  the  euro  area  and  to  pursue,  jointly  with  Eurostat,  the  goal  of  fully 
fledged integrated Euro Area Accounts. I may also add that this major progress facilitated the 
comparison  of  financial  and  economic  developments  between  the  euro  area  and  other 
economic  areas.  In  particular  comparisons  with  the  US  and  UK,  where  companies  and 
households have relied more on financing from outside the banking sector, benefited from 
the  availability  of  complete  financial  accounts  encompassing  all  financial  instruments  and 
institutional sectors. The joint work of Eurostat and the ECB on the integration of financial 
and non-financial accounts by institutional sector has become an important benchmark in the 
global statistical community.  
At  the  same  time,  the  current  financial  crisis  and  economic  recession  has  made  some 
shortcomings in the availability of euro area macro data for monetary and economic analysis 
even more evident. In order to better monitor the transfer of risks, the Eurosystem is already 
compiling a complete counterpart sector breakdown for deposits and loans within the EAA 
and this will be enhanced in the future by counterpart sector information for security holdings.  
It is essential that the accounts become available with a time lag of 90 days and that they 
can be linked to the main macro aggregates in a consistent and transparent manner. This 
would allow a more detailed economic analysis as well as a more thorough cross-checking 
with  the  financial  transactions  and  balance  sheets.  To  this  aim,  by  mid  2010  the  central 
banks  of  the  Eurosystem  will  start  reducing  the  transmission  time  lag  of  their  input  for 
financial accounts by one month, from 110 days to 80 days. Moreover, the transmission of 
the national non-financial sector accounts to Eurostat, which has currently a time lag of 90 
days, needs to be further reduced by about 10 days, in order to enable the compilation of 
fully consistent Euro Area Accounts at t+90 days. In this context, I also look forward to the 
elimination of the last statistical discrepancies in these accounts, concerning the households’ 
and non-financial corporations sector.  
I would also like to outline two additional important areas for further improvements: (1) the 
timely  availability  of  seasonal  adjusted,  price  and  volume  change  data;  and  (2)  the 
integration of non-financial assets’ balance sheets into the Euro Area Accounts.  
In order to properly assess the latest quarterly developments the EAA need to be seasonally 
adjusted  and  price  and  volume  data,  starting  with  consumption  and  capital  formation  by 
institutional  sector,  needs  to  be  made  available.  In  addition,  real  income  and  saving 
estimates should be made available.  
Furthermore, the links between households’ wealth and consumption discussed earlier can 
only be properly understood if all household wealth components are covered. According to 
the  estimates  published  separately  by  the  ECB  since  2006,  around  2/3  of  euro  area 
households’ wealth is held in housing, while net financial wealth comprises around 1/3. For 
6 
 BIS Review 108/2009
that reason, I am happy to announce that the EAA will incorporate non-financial estimates 
from 2010 onwards. To achieve an even more complete picture, these accounts may in the 
future also provide information on the distribution of income and wealth items across euro 
area household groups based on the Eurosystem household surveys conducted, under the 
auspices of the ECB.  
While I have focused so far on the use of Euro Area Accounts for monetary and economic 
analysis, they are also key to financial stability analysis, in particular when aiming to identify 
the risks and vulnerabilities in the various sectors of the economy and in the markets and 
infrastructures that link these sectors together. A new European Systemic Risk Board will be 
set up and will be in charge of identifying macro-prudential risks in the European Union. The 
euro  area  accounts  with  the  improvements  foreseen  and  extended  to  cover  the  European 
Union as a whole, will undoubtedly also be of great relevance to the work of the Board.  
To conclude, a lot has happened in the two years ago since Commissioner Almunia and I 
spoke  at  the  launch  of  the  regular  simultaneous  compilation  of  euro  area  accounts  by 
Eurostat and the ECB, which is still a unique cooperation world-wide. I would like to thank 
him for this invaluable support and trust that we will both witness the further elaboration and 
intensified usage of this crucial tool for European economic, financial and monetary policy-
making. 
References 
Adrian,  T.  and  H.S.  Shin  (2008a),  “Liquidity  and  leverage”,  Federal  Reserve  bank  of  New 
York Staff Report No. 328. 
Adrian, T. and H.S. Shin (2008b), “Financial intermediaries, financial stability and monetary 
policy",  Proceedings  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City  Symposium  at  Jackson 
Hole, 2008. 
Be Duc, L. and G. Le Breton (2009), “Flow-of-Funds analysis at the ECB – framework and 
applications, Occasional Paper No. 105, European Central Bank. 
Brender,  A.  and  F.  Pisani  (2009),  Globalised  finance  and  its  collapse,  Dexia  Asset 
Management, Belgium. 
Bezemer,  D.  (2009),  "No  one  saw  this  coming:  understanding  financial  crisis  through 
accounting models”, MPRA Paper No. 15892, Munich, June 2009.  
Brainard, W. and J. Tobin (1968), “Pitfalls in financial model-building”, American Economic 
Review, vol. 58, 99-122. 
Brunnermeier,  M.,  Crockett,  A.,  Goodhart,  C.,  Persaud,  A.D.  and  H.S.  Shin  (2009),  “The 
fundamental principles of financial regulation”, Geneva Report on the World Economy, ICMB 
and CEPR. 
ECB Monthly Bulletin (2007), “The introduction of quarterly sectoral accounts statistics for the 
euro area”, November, European Central Bank. 
ECB  Monthly  Bulletin  (2009),  “The  external  financing  of  households  and  non-financial 
corporations: a comparison of the euro area and the United States”, April, European Central 
Bank. 
Financial  Stability  Review  (2009),  Special  feature  on  “Balance  sheet  contagion  and  the 
transmission of risk in the euro area financial system”, June, European Central Bank. 
Hattori, M., Shin, H.S. and W. Takahashi (2009), "A financial system perspective on Japan’s 
experience in the late 1980s”, IMES Discussion Paper 2009-E-19, Bank of Japan. 
Koo, R. (2008), The Holy Grail of Macroeconomics: Lessons from Japan’s Great Recession, 
John Wiley & Sons, Singapore. 
BIS Review 108/2009 
 7
Moutot, Ph. et al. (2007), “The role of other financial intermediaries in monetary and credit 
developments in the euro area", Occasional Paper No. 75, European Central Bank. 
Shin, H.S. (2009), “Securitisation and financial stability”, Economic Journal, vol. 119 (March), 
309-332.  
Tobin,  James  (1969),  "A  General  Equilibrium  Approach  to  Monetary  Theory",  Journal  of 
15-29 
Money, 
(http://ideas.repec.org/a/mcb/jmoncb/v1y1969i1p15-29.html). 
Banking 
Credit 
1(1), 
and 
vol. 
8 
 BIS Review 108/2009
