Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Banking on governance for growth and stability 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas),  at  the  Rural  Bankers  Association  of  the  Philippines  (RBAP) 
2009 National Annual Convention, Manila, 15 May 2009. 
 Ladies and gentlemen of the Rural Bankers Association of the Philippines led by Mr. Tomas 
Gomez  IV,  outgoing  President,  and  Mr.  Omar  Andaya,  incoming  President  of  RBAP, 
supporters and advocates of our rural banking sector, colleagues from the Bangko Sentral, 
special guests, members of media, ladies and gentlemen, good morning.  
We at the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas join you in celebrating 56 years of rural banking in the 
Philippines. This is 56 years of partnership with local communities in invigorating countryside 
development – a fruitful partnership that has seen our rural communities grow and develop 
alongside rural banks.  
Indeed, key indicators for the rural banking sector show steady growth even in the midst of 
the global financial crisis and the closure of a number of rural banks engaged in unsafe and 
unsound banking practices.  
Among  others,  the  operating  network  of  rural  banks  continues  to  increase.  As  of  end 
December 2008, the network of rural and cooperative rural banks, consisting of head offices 
and branches, was at 2,148, higher than 2,133 in 2007. While there was a net decline in the 
number of head offices from 727 to 703 as a result of closures and mergers, this was more 
than  offset  by  the  increase  in  the  number  of  branches.  The  net  effect  is  a  larger  network 
capable of delivering banking services directly to a wider market. 
In  addition,  rural  banks  are  exhibiting  greater  innovation  and  dynamism  by  seizing 
opportunities presented by technology. The industry enhanced its banking services delivery 
with the installation of more Automated Teller Machines (ATMs): from only 83 in 2007 to 113 
as  of  end  December  2008.  A  number  of  rural  banks  have  also  ventured  into  electronic 
banking to beef up delivery of financial services: the number of rural banks offering e-banking 
services such as cash cards and mobile banking have increased to 47 in 2008, from only 
5 banks in 2005.  
It is important to note that the increasingly broader and deeper reach of rural banks, comes 
at a time when bank deposits in all but one of the regions were on the rise. Consolidated 
deposits of 6 million savers with rural banks as of end December 2008 reached more than 
P 107 Billion, allowing the rural banking sector to provide more loans for agriculture as well 
as  micro,  small  and  medium  enterprises.  Our  figures  indicate  that  nearly  half  of  the  rural 
banks’ total loan portfolio of P106.6 billion in December 2008 went to agri-gra loans. 
I am also pleased to note that loans granted by rural banks in 2008 went up in 13 of our 17 
regions.  
The business of rural banking has likewise been profitable with net income after tax at more 
than P 3 Billion in 2008, slightly higher than the 2007 level.  
A clear indicator of the rural banking sector’s strength is its strong capital position: its capital 
adequacy  ratio  at  13.8%  as  of  September  2008  remains  well  above  the  BSP’s  mandatory 
standard of 10%. Of course, your CAR remains a bit lower than that for our thrift banks and 
universal/commercial banks. Still, 13.8% CAR of rural banks compares well with the overall 
CAR of the banking sector in Malaysia with at 12.6% and Korea with 11.2%.  
BIS Review 63/2009 
 1
And so, ladies and gentlemen, let us celebrate the continued growth and development of the 
Philippine rural banking sector with a long round of applause!  
Nevertheless, these positive indicators must not lull us into a false sense of complacency. 
The  rural  banking  industry  achieved  these  by  maintaining  business  discipline.  And  clearly, 
rural banks stand to perform even better if all members of RBAP will work on having even 
stronger capital positions, become more vigilant in managing liquidity and credit risks, and 
faithfully adhere to the good governance tenets of fairness, accountability and transparency.  
I am happy to know therefore that we are on the same page, so to speak, as your convention 
theme this year is “Banking on Governance.”  
As declared by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), good 
corporate governance is key not only to the integrity of corporations, financial institutions and 
markets  it  is  also  central  to  the  health  and  stability  of  our  economies.  Further,  an  OECD 
study released this year entitled “Corporate Governance Lessons from the Financial Crisis” 
concluded that to an important extent, the current financial crisis can be attributed to failures 
and weaknesses in corporate governance arrangements.  
The choice of governance as the central theme for your convention is therefore timely as it is 
compelling.  I  take  this  as  a  message  of  the  deep  commitment  of  rural  banks  to  good 
governance  principles,  strong  capital  buildup,  and  better  liquidity  and  risk  management. 
Surely, if you walk your talk, rural banks will continue on a growth track.  
Indeed, we can learn a lot from the current global financial turmoil and economic downturn. 
While it has become evident that no economy is immune from its effects, we are also seeing 
that economies that had the political will to pursue much-needed reforms and built up buffers 
are more likely to fare better than others.  
Among  others,  the  Philippines  is  in  a  relatively  better  position  today  in  terms  of  growth 
prospects  compared  to  many  other  economies,  including  advanced  economies.  Our 
resiliency springs from the continuous implementation of reforms calibrated to strengthen our 
banks, our financial system and our economy.  
Thus, while other countries have sunk in recession, our domestic economy still expanded at 
a respectable 4.6% growth rate in 2008. The outlook for this year remains positive, although 
at a markedly slower pace. In fact, some analysts believe the Philippines will be one of only 
three or four countries in Asia that will grow this year.  
A  key  factor  that  could  sustain  the  country’s  growth  is  the  strength  of  domestic  demand. 
Personal consumption, which accounts for more than two-thirds of the Philippine economy, 
has  been  historically  firm,  with  private  spending  resilient  across  business  cycles.  As  you 
know, the Bangko Sentral’s monetary policy, as measured by recent benchmark policy rates, 
is supportive of sustained growth.  
Easing inflation also provides a welcome boost to households’ purchasing power. Inflation as 
of April this year was at 4.8%, down from 6.4% in March. Our forecast for average inflation 
this year is projected at 3.4%, which is well within our inflation target range of 2.5-4.5%.  
In  addition,  our  remittance  figures  are  holding  up.  Remittances  coursed  through  banks 
reached  a  record  high  US$1.47  billion  in  March  2009,  representing  a  3.1%  year-on-year 
growth. This brought the cumulative remittances in the first quarter to US$4.1 billion, or an 
annual growth of 2.7 percent. 
Remittances are expected to be resilient as workers with permanent resident status continue 
to  rise;  this  suggests  a  welcome  shift  from  yearly  contract  renewals  to  more  long-term 
employment. Based on actual data for January-February, the deployment of both skilled and 
professional  workers  has  remained  on  the  uptrend,  generating  with  it  higher  consolidated 
earnings for overseas Filipinos. And while there have been reported layoffs, the numbers are 
quite small compared to the total number of overseas Filipinos.  
2 
 BIS Review 63/2009
We  also  expect  further  growth  for  the  business  process  outsourcing  sector  in  2009  as 
recession in the global economy is seen to encourage outsourcing to streamline costs.  
This scenario should challenge our rural banks to work better on growing your business and 
clientele so that you can capture a bigger share of our expanding economy, particularly in the 
resilient countryside.  
How, then, should rural banks move forward?  
In our view, it is critical for rural banks not to waver in their resolve to pursue reforms that 
would  ensure  strength  and  stability  of  your  banks.  In  this  context,  your  banks’  risk 
infrastructure  is  a  key  component  that  will  allow  you  to  identify  and  act  on  risks  that  may 
arise; credit risks and liquidity risks are particularly important.  
In  the  case  of  risks,  a  proactive  approach  is  preferable  over  remedial  management.  For 
instance,  credit  risk  can  be  mitigated  by  generating  high  quality  information  and  acting 
prudently based on this information. On the other hand, it is important in managing liquidity 
risk  to  strike  the  appropriate  balance  between  actively  deploying  funds  through  loans  and 
investments and in retaining enough of a defensive position so that liquidity is available when 
the need arises. Again, this poses its own challenges for rural banks because of the narrower 
exposures from focused lending to a local community.  
Another important aspect is your commitment to maintain strong capital positions not simply 
for  compliance  but  for  prudent  control  of  leverage.  Management  should  ensure  that  your 
banks  have  sufficient  buffer  whenever  risks  turn  into  losses,  through  careful  allocation  of 
scarce  capital  to  alternative  exposures.  While  we  will  not  dictate  your  allocation,  your 
adherence  to  maintain  capital  adequacy  above  our  regulatory  floor  rate  of  10%  reflects 
commitment toward prudential control and financial governance. 
On our part, we at the Bangko Sentral will continue with banking reforms that will encourage 
improvement of capital positions and broaden the avenues for better risk management. We 
will  move  forward  with  the  implementation  of  consolidated  and  risk-based  supervision;  the 
enhancement of corporate governance and disclosure standards; and fostering transparency 
in financial reporting. If you recall, these initiatives which we have vigorously implemented in 
recent years are instrumental in instilling order and depth in the banking system ahead of the 
onset of the global financial crisis.  
The Bangko Sentral will also maintain its policy approach of enabling banks, particularly rural 
banks, to increase the scale and scope of their operations. This is a win-win strategy: first, it 
will enhance your banks’ bottom lines and, second, it will support Bangko Sentral’s inclusive 
banking policy to reach out to the unbanked and those who remain unserved by the financial 
sector.  
This is the rationale behind Bangko Sentral’s liberalization of bank branching; receptiveness 
to  product  and  technological  innovations  in  banking  services;  and  approval  of  a  broader 
range of services for rural banks such as FCDUs and investments in ATMs to provide more 
services and products to their clients.  
The recent issuance of the E-money Circular (Circular 649) is another significant step toward 
inclusive financial services. This Circular provides the regulatory framework for the electronic 
money business, promotes innovations in fund transfer mechanisms, and paves the way for 
competitive  growth  in  the  industry.  To  build  on  this  clear  framework  for  electronic  money 
facility, we are reviewing regulations for third party agent networks to ensure the success, 
efficacy,  safety,  and  soundness  of  the  system.  Here,  we  envision  a  vast  network  of  retail 
agents that will provide broad access to financial services even to the previously unbanked.  
I see rural banks playing a significant role in this very exciting development. Apart from your 
branches, other banking offices, and ATMs, you will be able to leverage this vast network of 
outlets  to  deliver  your  financial  services  to  a  broader  market.  This  is  one  area  we  should 
BIS Review 63/2009 
 3
consciously develop together. Once fully developed, this system should be a cost-effective 
and efficient channel to serve the many bankable yet unbanked Filipinos.  
Indeed,  the  future  holds  much  promise  and  opportunities  for  rural  banks.  With  our 
coordinated  efforts  and  joint  commitment  to  good  governance,  integrity  and  stability,  rural 
banks are certain to take a competitive and strategic place as effective channels for a truly 
inclusive financial system and catalysts for sustaining balanced growth and development in 
the countryside.  
Again,  my  congratulations  to  the  distinguished  ladies  and  gentlemen  of  our  rural  banking 
sector. United under RBAP, may you continue to grow and develop as efficient empowering 
channels  for  enhancing  economic  activities  and  improving  the  quality  of  life  in  the 
countryside.  
Mabuhay ang ating mga rural banks! Mabuhay ang Pilipinas!  
Maraming salamat po sa inyong lahat. 
4 
 BIS Review 63/2009
