W A Wijewardena: Auditing the key policy functions of a central bank – 
views from the top  
Keynote  address  by  Mr  W  A  Wijewardena,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Sri 
Lanka,  at  the  Seminar  on  “Effective  Internal  Audit  for  Central  Banks”,  Windsor,  UK, 
30 April 2009.  
The views expressed in this paper are those of the author and should not be construed as those representing the 
Central Bank of Sri Lanka. 
 The primary objective of a central bank is to stabilise the value of its currency and continue to 
maintain that stability to facilitate long term economic growth. There could be other ancillary 
objectives assigned to a central bank, such as providing liquidity to the government to bridge 
its  revenue  and  expenditure  flows  or  refinancing  banks’  loans  to  priority  sectors.  But  the 
primary objective of a central bank takes precedence over any such ancillary objective and, if 
there is a conflict between the two, a central bank should always give priority to its primary 
objective1.  This  is  because  the  success  or  failure  of  a  central  bank  is  gauged  by  its 
attainment of the primary objective and not the ancillary objectives. Even if a central bank 
has done well in realising its ancillary objectives, but failed in the primary objective, then, that 
central bank is deemed to have failed in its operations. Hence, the key policy functions of a 
central bank should perforce be geared towards the attainment of its primary objective and 
all systems, within and outside, should be aligned to ensure it. 
It is, therefore, necessary to review and monitor the working of the key policy functions of a 
central  bank  continuously  in  order  to  diagnose  the  impending  risks  and  take  appropriate 
prescriptive  measures.  This  function  requires  a  special  type  of  auditing  of  the  key  policy 
functions of a central bank. 
The irresponsible use of a central bank’s discretionary powers  
Central banks are privileged institutions in the sense that they can acquire assets by creating 
liabilities  at  their  own  discretion.  No  other  organisation  enjoys  that  kind  of  a  discretionary 
power. If others are desirous of acquiring assets by assuming liabilities (in other words, by 
borrowing  from  others),  they  have  to  go  along  a  tedious  path.  They  have  to  do  so  by 
establishing  their  creditworthiness  before  prospective  lenders  and  after  complying  with 
tedious  legal  and  market-established  procedures.  The  lenders  too  would  lend  them  not 
because of being subject to any compulsion, but upon their free will, having assessed the 
risk and the profitability of the transaction involved. But, central banks could acquire assets 
just  by  making  book  entries.  They  could  issue  currency  and  get  others  to  part  with  their 
assets in exchange for that currency. All that happens in a central bank’s balance sheet is 
the  creation  of  a  liability  item  in  the  form  of  “currency  liability”  and  an  asset  item 
representing the asset the bank has acquired. This would make both assets and liabilities to 
rise  simultaneously.  This  extraordinary  power  is  being  enjoyed  by  a  central  bank  due  its 
functioning as the monetary authority of a country. However, the community has given such 
a  power  to  a  central  bank  with  a  non-violable  obligation  attached  to  that  power:  the 
responsible use of the discretionary power vested with it. 
There  are  two  reasons  why  a  central  bank  should  use  its  discretionary  power  of  issuing 
currency responsibly.  
                                                 
1   This is valid even when the financial system stability has been made either a core objective or an ancillary 
objective of a central bank.  
BIS Review 58/2009 
 1
First, the issue of currency over and above the needs of the society will expand the nominal 
aggregate demand creating an excess demand for goods and services. Since the aggregate 
supply is inflexible to meet this demand in the short run, the excess demand will put pressure 
for prices to rise. If this continues year after year, it generates inflation, reducing the wealth of 
people in real terms and creating a series of adverse consequences that hinder the long term 
growth. 
Second,  in  an  open  economy  which  most  countries  have  today,  the  rise  in  the  aggregate 
demand could partly be met out of imports. Unless the country makes a surplus in its current 
account, the payment for imports has to be made either through capital inflows (both debt 
capital and non-debt capital) or running down the existing foreign reserves. Both  generate 
long  term  balance  of  payments  problems  and  exert  pressure  on  the  exchange  rate  to 
depreciate. 
Thus, the irresponsible use of the discretionary power of a central bank to acquire assets by 
creating  a  currency  liability  will  lead  to  a  depreciation  of  both  the  domestic  value  of  its 
currency (domestic inflation) and the external value of its currency (continuous depreciation 
of the exchange rate). However, the fall in the external value of the currency is linked to, and 
preceded by, a fall in the domestic value. In other words, depreciating exchange rates are an 
effect and not the cause of domestic inflation. Hence, the continuous domestic inflation is a 
sign of a central bank’s failing to fulfil its primary obligation to the community.  
The new role of auditors of a central bank 
The central bank auditors, both internal and external, have for long confined themselves to 
the financial type of auditing of the operations of a central bank. The objective of this auditing 
is to identify whether a central bank has complied with the set-financial rules and procedures, 
whether  there  are  irregularities  or  malpractices  in  payments  or  recording  transactions  or 
whether frauds have taken place in the operations of a central bank. Internal auditors report 
on these aspects to the top management of a central bank, while the external auditors do so 
to alert both the management and the legislators. Such compliance auditing is necessary and 
useful, but not sufficient to gauge the risks faced by a central bank and, accordingly, to take 
early prescriptive measures. 
A  central  bank  may  operate  quite  perfectly  with  regard  to  its  internal  procedures  and 
systems. The accounts of a central bank may have been prepared having compliance to the 
best accounting standards. The external auditors may have given an unqualified certification 
to a central bank’s financial statements. In the eyes of the public, a central bank may have 
been  projected  as  a  model  institution  to  be  emulated  by  others.  Yet,  all  these  salutary 
features which pertain to a central bank’s past or current actions may hide the major risks it 
may  be  facing  with  regard  to  its  future  operations.  It  is  the  duty  of  the  auditors  to  dig  out 
these  risk  aspects  and  alert  the  management  and,  if  necessary,  the  legislators,  before  it 
becomes too late to take any prescriptive measures. 
This poses a daunting challenge to the auditors of a central bank. A central bank, with its 
unrestrained  resources,  may  have  staffed  itself  with  the  best  technical  talents  in  the  main 
field of its operations. Auditors are now required to assess their work and make judgments 
about  the  adequacy  and  the  consequences  of  such  work.  In  doing  so,  they  should  exert 
utmost  care  not  to  make  wrong  or  spurious  judgements  and  give  false  alarms  about  an 
impending catastrophe in a central bank. To do their job effectively, auditors should be more 
knowledgeable  of  the  technical  side  of  the  operations  of  a  central  bank  than  its  internal 
technical staff. Moreover, they should arm themselves with knowledge of how other central 
banks  are  operating,  how  some  central  banks  had  got  into  difficulties  due  to  irresponsible 
behaviour and the emerging global best practices of central banking. Hence, it is a continuing 
learning  and  knowledge  enhancement  process  for  auditors  of  a  central  bank.  By  any 
measure, this is not a simple challenge. 
2 
 BIS Review 58/2009
It is only with this superior knowledge base that auditors acquire the capability of making a 
proper risk assessment of a central bank and play their new role as a “risk-alerter” to the 
management and legislators. This requirement equally applies to both internal and external 
auditors of a central bank. 
The major risks faced by a central bank 
The  policy  failure  risk,  (that  is,  the  inability  to  maintain  the  stability  of  the  value  of  the 
currency  on  a  continuous  basis)  and  the  associated  reputation  risk  (that  is,  the  public  no 
longer trusts the central bank and its action) of a central bank are well known. But, a lesser 
known risk of a central bank is the “insolvency risk” which could loom over a central bank 
with or without the presence of the policy failure risk. In other words, a central bank can run 
the risk of being insolvent, even when it has been successful in maintaining the stability in 
the value of its currency. 
The insolvency risk of a central bank is less obvious, because of the very nature of a central 
bank. A central bank, even if its capital is negative and its currency liability is not matched by 
an equivalent value of foreign assets or valuable domestic assets, could still continue to be in 
business unlike a private organisation. In the case of a private organisation, if the net-worth 
is  negative,  it  has  to  be  re-capitalised  as  an  urgent  need.  If  it  does  not  happen,  it  cannot 
operate as a going concern and has to be liquidated on the ground of insolvency. However, a 
central bank can still operate with a negative net-worth, by continuing to issue currency as 
long as the members of the public are willing to accept such currency in exchange for the 
assets  held  by  them.  It  could,  in  these  circumstances,  defer  and  hide  the  need  for  re-
capitalising itself and continue to be in operation.  
The  fact  that  the  insolvency  of  a  central  bank  is  not  known  to  the  outside  world  does  not 
mean that a central bank is without problems. A central bank’s operations are smooth and 
faultless, if its expenses are funded out of net interest income it earns on its foreign reserves 
or its domestic asset portfolio. But, if it has to meet its day to day expenses only by issuing 
currency, that is, by exchanging reserve money, its capital base gets further eroded reducing 
its ability to back the currency it has issued. Its continuous reliance on inflationary financing 
in this manner for running its affairs will ultimately render it a victim of its own irresponsible 
behaviour.  
When a central bank has to be re-capitalised by the government by using tax payers’ money, 
the bank would run a further risk. That risk is the loss of its independence. The legislators 
who now get an opportunity to scrutinise the bank’s affairs may be tempted to tighten their 
control  over  the  bank,  because,  in  their  opinion,  the  bank  has  failed  due  to  the  laxity  of 
controls. The corollary would be for the central bank to lose the budget independence and, 
as  a  consequence  of  that  loss,  the  policy  independence  as  well.  One  cannot  blame 
legislators or tax payers for demanding for greater control over the affairs of a central bank, 
because it is their scarce resources which are now used to re-capitalise a central bank. Since 
such scarce resources have better alternative uses, the temptation on the part of legislators 
to punish an errant central bank by tightening controls is unavoidable. But, for a central bank 
to conduct its policy actions properly, the budget independence is a must and if it does not 
have the budget independence, it cannot exercise the policy independence as well.  
What are the early signs of insolvency of a central bank?  
A central bank becomes insolvent when its capital is eroded to the extent that its net-worth 
turns negative. A central bank reaches such a catastrophic situation when it makes mounting 
losses year after year due to its engagement in imprudent financial transactions. 
A central bank can always finance itself (and also the government) by inflating the economy. 
However, it also spawns the danger of a central bank getting trapped in an ever expanding 
BIS Review 58/2009 
 3
spiral  of  inflationary  financing,  if  it  does  not  pursue  an  inflation-fighting  policy  consistently. 
Economists have found that central banks, acting at the instance of their governments, have 
incentives  to  reverse  the  tight  monetary  policy  after  they  have  made  some  gains  in 
controlling inflation. This is known as the “time-inconsistency problem”2 or the “prisoner’s 
dilemma”3 faced by a central bank.  
In the time-inconsistency problem, there is an unceasing battle between a central bank and 
the public for fooling each other. A central bank, in response to public’s outcry against the 
high inflation, may pursue a tight monetary policy to lower the inflation rate. However, once 
the inflation rate falls and the public’s outcry subsides, it no longer has the incentive to follow 
the same tight policy. Accordingly, in order to raise its expenditure levels (or alternatively, to 
provide  more  funding  to  the  government),  it  may  go  back  on  its  tight  monetary  policy  and 
reflate the economy so as to extract real resources from the public. It, therefore, tries to fool 
the  people  by  generating  inflation  without  their  knowledge.  However,  the  public  are  also 
smart and aware that the central bank would reverse the course of its policy by inflating the 
economy after it has made small gains. This mistrust of the public about the policy actions of 
a central bank is well revealed by the exceedingly high inflation expectations they normally 
form about the future trends in inflation. Consequently, they also try to fool the central bank 
by asking for higher wages, if they are employees, or higher future contract prices, if they are 
producers,  than  the  normal  wage  or  contract  price  levels  permissible  under  the  now  low 
inflation rate. This battle between the central bank and the people will trap the economy in a 
high  inflation-high  wage  spiral  making  it  a  self-defeating  enterprise  for  both  the  central 
bank and the public. 
The high inflation in the economy now exerts pressure on the exchange rate to depreciate. 
Both the central bank and the government may harbour a false view in them that allowing the 
exchange rate to depreciate is equivalent to publicly accepting the failure of their actions, it 
would further raise the cost of living and it would worsen the budgetary outcome by raising 
the  interest  cost  on  the  government’s  external  debt.  This  false  view  may  force  the 
government to defend the exchange rate at the expense of the loss of foreign reserves of the 
central  bank.  At  this  stage,  the  auditors  should  notice  a  change  in  the  composition  of  the 
assets  of  a  central  bank:  a  decline  in  the  foreign  assets  and  an  increase  in  the  domestic 
assets mainly in the form of lending to the government. 
The  change  in  the  asset  structure  of  a  central  bank  leads  to  a  series  of  unfavourable 
outcomes that raises the risk of insolvency of a central bank. 
First, there will be a change in the composition of the income of a central bank. The foreign 
income will fall and the domestic interest income will rise. 
Second,  the  decline  in  the  foreign  assets  will  force  a  central  bank  to  borrow  abroad  on  a 
short term basis, raising its foreign liabilities and interest out-payments. 
Third, if the government is still bent on keeping the fixed exchange rate, even the borrowed 
funds  would  be  used  to  defend  the  exchange  rate,  converting  the  net  foreign  assets  of  a 
central bank to a net foreign liability position.  
Fourth,  the  defence  of  the  exchange  rate  will  create  a  liquidity  shortage  in  the  domestic 
money markets. The central bank may recoup the liquidity by expanding its domestic assets 
by  lending  to  commercial  banks  and  also  to  the  government  which  is now  unable  to  raise 
funds from the market due to the liquidity shortage. 
                                                 
2   Finn  Kydland  and  Edward  Prescott  in  their  1977  paper  introduced  this  problem  See,  “Rules  rather  than 
discretion: The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans” Journal of Political Economy, 85: 473-92 
3   Alex  Cukierman  has  chosen  to  call  the  problem  “Prisoner’s  Dilemma”.  See,  Central  Banking  Strategy: 
Credibility and Independence (1992), MIT Press, p 17-8. 
4 
 BIS Review 58/2009
Fifth, to pay interest on foreign loans and repay the principal, a central bank may be forced to 
make further foreign borrowings. This will enlarge the net foreign liability position and cause 
the interest payments to surpass the interest earnings. The losses so made will continue to 
mount, gradually eroding a central bank’s capital base. 
The end result will be the conversion of a central bank’s net-worth from positive to negative. 
At that stage, a central bank will become technically insolvent. It actually becomes insolvent 
when it is unable to make further foreign borrowing and the domestic high inflation makes it 
impossible for it to fund itself by further issuing currency. 
It  is  the  duty  of  the  auditors  to  be  vigilant  on  the  emergence  of  these  signs  and  alert  the 
management and legislators in time. 
The actual insolvency of a central bank: the case of the Central Bank of the 
Philippines4
The  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines  (CBP)  became  insolvent  in  late  1980s  and  had  to  be 
liquidated  in  1993.  The  events  that  led  to  its  insolvency  are  an  exact  replay  of  the  story 
outlined above5. 
According to the data published by the CBP6, it incurred losses from 1983 to 1990 year after 
year, making the total cumulative losses for the period equal to 144 billion Pesos. There were 
three sources of losses: losses arising from the foreign exchange swap arrangements which 
CBP entered with domestic banks; losses which CBP had to bear on account of providing 
forward cover for exchange risk involved in international borrowings of domestic corporations 
and interest rate losses arising from higher out-payments on foreign loans and central bank’s 
own securities than domestic interest earnings. 
The swap arrangement was a mechanism used by the CBP to boost its dwindling foreign 
reserves.  When  CBP  lost  its  ability  borrow  abroad  due  to  the  continuously  experienced 
balance of payments deficits and CBP’s refusal to allow the currency to depreciate, it got the 
state banks and private corporations to borrow abroad under a guarantee by the government 
and swapped Pesos for the foreign currency loan proceeds. In the process, CBP assumed 
the exchange rate risk at the time the swap was reversed. Though this provided a temporary 
relief to CBP in the form of an augmentation of gross foreign reserves and a higher import 
cover  adequacy,  it  forced  CBP  to  take  a  huge  loss  amounting  to  31  billion  Pesos  during 
1983-90  on  account  of  exchange  rate  risks.  At  the  same  time,  the  use  of  the  foreign 
exchange balances so acquired for defending the currency led to an undue reserve risk by 
converting the foreign assets to a net negative position and forcing CBP to borrow abroad to 
settle its liabilities. 
The forward cover was provided by CBP to local corporations, especially the oil corporation, 
by guaranteeing the exchange rate when they borrowed abroad in the wake of the balance of 
payments crisis. When CBP had to relax its grip on the exchange rate from time to time due 
to  the  non-availability  of  reserves,  the  forward  covers  given  by  CBP  resulted  in  massive 
losses. The total of such losses for the period 1983-90 amounted to 20 billion Pesos.  
                                                 
4   There have been a number of central banks which had become insolvent due to the erosion of capital. For a 
survey,  see,  Kazuo  Ueda,  “The  role  of  Capital  for  Central  Banks”,  The  text  of  Speech  delivered  at  Japan 
Society of Monetary Economics on 25 Oct 2003. www.boj.or.jp. 
5   A  lucid  description  of  the  events  that  led  to  CBP’s  insolvency  is  given  by  Mario  B  Lamberte  in  Central 
Banking  in  the  Philippines:  Then,  Now  and  the  Future  Discussion  Paper  Series  2002-10,  Philippine 
Institute of Development Studies. 
6   Various annual reports of the Central Bank of the Philippines. The author is grateful to Deputy Governor of 
BSP, Diwa C Guinigundo, for making available those annual reports and other literature on the liquidation of 
the CBP. 
BIS Review 58/2009 
 5
As mentioned above, the net foreign assets of CBP became negative from 1981 onwards 
due to the depletion of reserves and the increase in foreign borrowings. They were negative 
by 4 billion Pesos in 1981. But, the negative position progressively increased thereafter rising 
to a peak of 141 billion Pesos in 1990 and recording at an annual average level of 101 billion 
Pesos  during  1982-90.  The  result  was  the  payment  of  interest  surpassing  significantly  the 
interest receipts. The total such losses amounted to 91 billion Pesos for the period 1983-90.  
The net outcome of all these adverse developments was the decline in the net-worth of CBP 
to a dismal level of 2.6 billion by June, 1993 as against a total outside liability level of 605 
billion  Pesos  and  a  domestic  asset  creation  of  440  billion  Pesos.  The  capital  funds  as  a 
percent of domestic assets fell to an insignificant level of just 0.5% indicating that the entirety 
of the currency issue (monetary liability) had been backed by worthless domestic assets. By 
end 1993, the foreign exchange liabilities of CBP amounted to US$ 11.4 billion or 35% of the 
Philippine’s GDP7. 
Thus, CBP became insolvent and had to be liquidated in July, 1993. A new central bank by 
the name of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas or BSP was set up under the patronage of the 
World Bank and the Export-Import Bank of Japan8. Arrangements were made to repay the 
liabilities of the old central bank in 25 years9. 
The issue at hand is how the oncoming signs of insolvency of CBP were not noticed by its 
auditors. The growing distress of CBP due to the wrong policy of defending the exchange 
rate at the expense of losing foreign reserves, accumulation of losses in CBP, rising foreign 
borrowings  through  unsustainable  swaps  and  the  depletion  of  net-worth  of  CBP  were 
obvious to the auditors as early as 1985. It was simply the sad story of one mistake leading 
to another mistake and that mistake leading to a further mistake and so on. Once a policy 
making  body  gets  entangled  in  an  “enmeshed  policy  paradox”  of  this  nature,  it  is 
impossible  to  escape  the  paradox  without  outside  support.  Had  the  first  mistake,  that  is, 
defending  the  exchange  rate  at  the  cost  of  losing  the  reserves,  were  not  committed,  CBP 
would  not  have  driven  itself  to  insolvency.  But,  the  auditors  who  were  confined  only  to  a 
compliance audit did not read the signs of impending risk build-up in CBP. Had the central 
bank management and the legislators been alerted at that time, CBP could have been saved 
from liquidation. But, the auditors failed to make that alert, because at that time,  the audit 
programmes were confined to a simple financial compliance audit only. 
What the auditors should look for 
Since  a  central  bank  is  a  systemically  important  institution  in  an  economy,  the  auditors  of 
central banks should take extra care when the accounts of central banks are audited. The old 
maxim relating to the role of auditors is relevant here: “an auditor is a watchdog and not a 
blood hound”. Accordingly, auditors are required to keep vigil on central banking activities 
and  alert  the  relevant  parties  when  there  are  signs  of  risks  emerging.  The  central  bank 
management and the legislators should take serious note of such alerts and take appropriate 
corrective and protective measures. 
What are the signs of distress that auditors should look for?  
First of all, a sign immediately visible would be the change in the structure of the assets of a 
central bank from foreign assets to domestic assets. The depletion of foreign reserves drives 
a central bank to a future risky situation. It will have to borrow abroad from foreign sources in 
                                                 
7   As reported by The New York Times, June 14, 1993. 
8  
9   Ma.  Cyd  Tuano-Amador,  “Central  Banking  in  the  Philippines  since  1993”,  in  Money  and  Banking  in  the 
Ibid. 
Philippines, BSP, 2003, p 210 
6 
 BIS Review 58/2009
order to fund the immediate foreign exchange requirements raising both the income risks and 
foreign reserve risks. 
The next sign will be the depletion of the capital base. In the current paper money systems 
with no backing of gold or foreign currency holdings, capital funds in a central bank serves to 
back the domestic asset creation. If the capital funds which are non-monetary liabilities are 
equal  to  the  domestic  assets  (a  hundred  percent  cover),  then  all  monetary  liabilities  are 
backed by gross foreign assets similar to a currency board. Therefore, the auditors should 
look  for  the  ratio  of  capital  funds  to  domestic  assets  and  if  the  ratio  is  above  100%,  they 
could be complacent. However, the risk factor emerges if the ratio falls. The auditors should 
alert the central bank management and come to arrangement with it, to prevent its further 
depletion.  If  the  ratio  falls  closer  to  15%,  the  level  prescribed  in  many  central  bank 
legislations  as  the  minimum  requirement,  the  auditors  should  issue  a  red  alert  to  central 
bank  managements.  When  the  ratio  falls  below  15%,  then,  it  is  a  matter  of  national 
emergency and urgent measures need be introduced to re-capitalise a central bank. 
The third sign is the actual losses made by central banks due to larger out-payments.  
The fourth sign is the necessity for issuing currency to finance a central bank’s affairs, since 
it amounts to inflating the economy to meet a central bank’s expenses.  
Conclusion 
The auditors of a modern central bank should play a different role today. That role requires 
them  to  be  vigilant  over  the  emerging  risks  in  a  central  bank  and  alert  all  the  concerned 
parties, management of a central bank and the legislators, so that early corrective measures 
could be taken to mitigate the risks. Since auditors are governed by the “principle of public 
trust”, they would be liable for criminal negligence if a central bank becomes insolvent and 
auditors have not given early warning about it. To play this role effectively, auditors should 
endeavour to acquire the knowledge necessary for them to assess the work of a central bank 
and make judgments about the adequacy of that work. They should place themselves on a 
continuous  learning  programme  so  as  to  acquire  not  only  the  technical  skills,  but  also  the 
current global best practices relating to central banking. The central bank management on 
their part should heed to the warnings issued by auditors and make the necessary internal 
adjustments promptly.  
BIS Review 58/2009 
 7
