Anselmo L S Teng: Establishing a platform for financial cooperation and 
promotion of economic and commercial interaction 
Speech  by  Mr  Anselmo  L  S  Teng,  Chairman  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of  Macao,  at  the 
Conference of Central Banks and Regulatory Authorities of Portuguese Speaking Territories, 
Macao, 6 April 2009. 
 Dear Delegates, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Good Morning! 
Allow  me  to  propose  a vote  of  thanks,  on  behalf  of  the  Board  of  Director  of  the  Monetary 
Authority  of  Macao  (AMCM),  to  our  counterparts  who  attend  this  conference  today.  At  the 
same time, I would like to extend our warm welcome to all distinguished guests, friends of 
the financial industry. I would also express my gratitude to the Commercial Attachés of our 
country’s embassies in Lusophone countries. 
In the wake of the New Year, the financial tsunami which erupted in September last year still 
lingered  in  the  international  financial  markets.  Intermittently,  worrisome  news  gave  rise  to 
uneasiness and undermined confidence. The government and market participants of markets 
where the financial crisis erupted endeavoured to carry out measures to salvage and impart 
confidence. However, this financial impact, which devastated the globe, has already inflicted 
deep and extensive negative damages to the financial system. It has brought great and long 
term negative effect to the overall economy. 
As  financial  regulators,  we  realize  that  the  eruption  of  financial  tsunami  has  posed  a  few 
soul-searching issues. However, in the face of an issue of such generality, it may not be the 
most effective and correct solution if we rely on one’s own adjustment and conclusion. We 
believe  that  if  we  want  to  adopt  effective  measures  with  a  view  to  stabilizing  the  financial 
system and rebuilding confidence of consumers, we need to seek international participation 
and  cooperation,  including  enhancing  communication  and  cooperation  between  financial 
regulators. 
Promoting international financial regulatory cooperation mechanism is pivotal when the world 
economy  is  at  its  development  stage.  And  it  will  become  a  measure  which  carries  special 
connotation when there is fluctuation and mutation in the world financial system. We in fact 
have  one  common  objective;  protecting  the  lawful  rights  of  consumers,  maintaining  the 
stability  and  security  of  financial  system,  facilitating  orderly  development  of  the  overall 
economy.  When  the  operation  of  the  market  calls  for  appropriate  fine  tuning,  when  its 
business  requires  more  effective  supervision,  when  its  structure  requires  reasonable 
consolidation, it will be the responsibility of the regulators to implement appropriate policies 
and measures which will be commensurate with the expectation of the community. 
On  25  September  2006,  an  “Economic  and  Trade  Cooperation  Plan”  was  passed  in  a 
ministerial level meeting of the Economic and Commercial Cooperation Forum of China and 
Portuguese Speaking Countries held in Macao. The delegates were ministers responsible for 
economic and commercial affairs of 7 Portuguese speaking countries and China. 
The  ministers  reviewed  the  development  since  the  inception  of  the  Forum.  They  actively 
appraised the economic and commercial results achieved under the framework of the action 
plan. At the same time new economic and commercial activities beneficial to implementation 
of  new  development  within  the  realm  of  cooperation  were  incorporated  in  the  newly 
formulated  action  plan.  The  delegates  agreed  to  promote  the  endeavour  of  financial 
institutions of the member states with a view to locating source of fund for items of common 
interest  within  the  framework.  The  feasibility  of  establishing  a  financial  cooperation 
mechanism under the Forum was mulled. 
BIS Review 45/2009 
 1
Financial  cooperation  and  economic  and  commercial  communication  between  China  and 
Portuguese speaking countries has a long cordial relationship, which is of much importance 
in  the  co-coordinated  development.  Based  on  existing  foundation,  we  can  expect  a 
sustainable relationship in cooperation. At this particular juncture, when global economy is 
sinking into recession or stagnation, the impetus to jump start economy appears the more 
precious. China and Brazil are renowned to be members of the BRIC. They have delegates 
present  in  this  conference.  Together  with  representatives  of  other  Portuguese  speaking 
countries  which  have  tremendous  economic  development  potential,  the  delegates  will 
exchange  candid  dialogues  with  a  view  to  enhancing  financial  cooperation  to  promote 
economic  and  commercial  flow.  We  believe,  we  can  reinforce  our  cooperation  through  all 
these beneficial and constructive communications. 
Taking  into  account  its  constraint  of  natural  resources  and  its  geographical  location,  the 
MSAR  has  been  assiduously  developing  tertiary  industry,  particularly  tourism  and  services 
industry.  Simultaneously,  the  Government  has  put  forward  a  policy  measure  to  build  up 
Macao to become a regional service platform, which includes the function of service platform 
for  economic  and  commercial  cooperation  between  China  and  Portuguese  speaking 
countries. In fulfilling its duties, AMCM proactively encourages the financial sector to explore 
the market, make acquaintance with counterparts, seek commercial opportunity and strive to 
score a reasonable return on capital. Therefore it has organized many times representatives 
of the financial sector for overseas visits, which cover markets with development potential. 
The visits have enabled the delegates to understand the development of financial markets 
overseas, befriend with merchants and counterparts, establish cordial linkage. I think many 
delegates  here  have  had  the  experience  of  receiving  your  Macao  counterparts.  I  am  sure 
such mutual visits and communications have forged a long lasting memory in our minds. 
Thanks  to  the  candid  introduction  by  various  central  banks  and  regulatory  authorities,  the 
auspices of the diplomats of our country and the active participation of representatives of our 
financial  institutions,  the  overseas  visits  organized  by  AMCM  have  achieved  the  desired 
results. The visits have brought recognition of the fine results of our financial sector and laid 
a  solid  foundation  for  exploring  overseas  markets,  business  liaison  and  cooperation.  From 
the  regulator’s  point  of  view,  the  visits  have  enhanced  the  effectiveness  and  quality  of 
supervision,  strengthened  mutual  working  relationship  via  the  signing  of  memoranda  of 
understanding with regulatory authorities of Portuguese speaking countries. In a way, these 
visits have facilitated the internationalization of the financial supervision of the MSAR. 
I take this opportunity to introduce to you ladies and gentlemen how AMCM encourages the 
local financial sector to strengthen their overseas networking. I hope you can share my view 
in this respect. A regulator should be true to its job by assiduously fulfilling its supervisory 
duties. At the same time, it should think beyond this by considering the needs and position of 
market  operators.  More  importantly,  when  the  market  is  battered  or  disturbed  by  unstable 
factors, the regulator should exert more efforts to safeguard market stability and lawful rights 
of  consumers,  manage  and  dispel  the  adverse  effects  by  identifying  and  eliminating  the 
source  of  the  problem  in  a  timely  manner,  support  the  restructuring  of  a  healthy  market 
environment. To put it in a nutshell, a regulator should fine tune its policy and maintain order 
in the market in a positive and active manner to ensure the normal operation of the market 
and systemic security. 
In  view  of  above,  AMCM  has  been  adopting  a  proactive  manner  in  response  to  China’s 
proposal  in  the  Forum’s  ministerial  meeting  to  establish  a  mechanism  for  closer  financial 
cooperation, which will no doubt realize the objective of improving the standard of living of 
people in the areas involved through more aggressive economic and commercial activities. 
The objectives raised by the Forum carry special meaning, they are viable and feasible. As 
pointed  out  by  Mr.  Francis  Tam,  Secretary  for  Economy  and  Finance,  the  economic  and 
commercial  cooperation  between  China  and  Lusophone  countries  is  complementary  and 
necessary. Enhanced cooperation will be of mutual benefit through maximization of utility in 
2 
 BIS Review 45/2009
deploying resources, which will increase productivity and is conducive to raising quality of life 
of people in the area involved. 
As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  headquarters  of  Portuguese  capital  banks  operating  in  the  MSAR 
have  long  connections with  Portuguese  speaking  countries.  They  have  been  utilizing  such 
historical and social connections to build up business network in these developing countries. 
They arrange financing facilities for local governments and enterprises of all sizes in addition 
to syndicated loan arrangements. As a result, they are already quite versatile in this respect. 
On the other hand, a Chinese capital bank operating in Macao has in the past years been 
actively exploring financial business in certain Portuguese speaking countries in Africa and 
has  been  quite  successful  in  building  up  concrete  business  cooperation  through  local 
Portuguese  counterparts.  Although  these  are  all  at  rudimentary  stage,  it  carries  very 
important  connotation.  We  should  be  more  affirmative  in  this  respect  and  hope  that  more 
local financial institutions will follow suit. Greater achievements are contemplated. 
The financial institutions operating in the MSAR should make use of such an opportunity to 
extend  business  network  to  these  Portuguese  speaking  countries  in  an  orderly  manner. 
Simultaneously,  market  participants  should  adopt  a  modern  business  mentality  and  take 
positive  action  to  understand  and  get  familiar  with  the  markets  of  Portuguese  speaking 
countries.  We  are  glad  to  see  more  different  forms  of  cooperation,  such  as  establishing 
exchange  of  market  information  with  the  local  financial  institutions  operating  in  the  private 
sector of Portuguese speaking countries, or organizing more syndicated financing facilities, 
or even forming a partnership via crossholding of equity. Starting from cooperation between 
governments, we can extend practical cooperation to privately run financial institutions which 
will no doubt create a locomotive effect in establishing a holistic and multi-level cooperation 
network. 
Today, we are facing the threat of economic recession arising from systemic risks in certain 
credit  markets.  One  thing  for  sure,  countries  involved  in  the  process  of  globalization  must 
have  felt  the  pinch.  However,  we  should  never  put  the  blame  on  economic  globalization, 
which  lies  in  the  course  of  history  and  is  an  issue  which  carries  positive  connotation. 
Therefore, strengthening regional cooperation via different methodologies, enhancing cross-
border cooperation, reinforcing cooperation between countries which use the same language 
are conducive to the facilitation of economic globalization. As long as we endeavour, we can 
achieve, via a synchronized cooperation mechanism, the most efficient allocation of resource 
so that the target of improving the living standard of the general public can be realized. 
Coming  back  to  the  main  theme  of  this  conference,  our  target  is  to  promote  financial, 
economic  and  commercial  interaction  through  the  establishment  of  a  platform  for  financial 
services. It goes without saying that the financial sector will much benefit in taking part in this 
function. The ultimate goal however is to improve the well being of the general public through 
economic and commercial interaction. In my visits to many Portuguese speaking countries, I 
have  had  the  chance  to  converse  with  officials  of  their  regulatory  authorities.  Some 
Lusophone countries in Africa have experienced unstable political scenarios for quite some 
time. They are however endowed with the essential factors for development. The domestic 
officials are eager to improve the well being of their people. The responsible persons of the 
financial  regulatory  authorities  are  especially  displaying  such  fervour.  They  realize  their 
burdens and missions. I have been highly impressed by their ardent attitude in learning from 
the experience of other organizations. 
In  the  new  millennium,  all  nations  have  been  making  use  of  the  relatively  stable  political 
environment to formulate economic development policies. The end results may be different 
due  to  their  indigenous  conditions.  However,  we  have  witnessed  that  many  people  have 
been lifted from the abyss of poverty, while some have become quite well off. In the process, 
the financial industry has been wholeheartedly providing support and deployment to nurture 
stable economic development. The objective of improving economic situation is to satisfy the 
demand of the general public. Financial development serves the economy, while economic 
BIS Review 45/2009 
 3
industrial  diversification 
development satisfies the demand of the general public. The establishment of a platform for 
the financial development contemplated by the MSAR Government is meant to jump start the 
local  economy,  promote  appropriate 
to  ensure  sustainable 
development  of  the  economy.  Through  the  structuring  of  a  financial  services  platform, 
economy  and  trade  can  progress  steadily  which  will  create  a  stable,  secure  and  healthy 
market  economy.  Our  delegates  come  from  public  and  financial  sectors  of  Portuguese 
speaking countries in 4 continents. We may not share the same background historically and 
socially, but we share the same language system and we adopt similar legal system. We can 
share our experience in the course of our different developments. We communicate, attempt 
to converge our views but retain our inclusiveness with a view to realizing closer cooperation. 
Our conference today denotes that we basically share the idea of a common topic, around 
which we positively and proactively offer our opinions and proposals. We have taken a major 
step forward by offering a candid attitude to promote and realize a common objective. 
Before  I  conclude,  please  allow  me  again  to  propose  a  vote  of  thanks  to  guests  and 
delegates who have come a long way from home to attend this conference hosted by AMCM. 
Simultaneously,  I  would  like  to  express  our  warmest  gratitude  to  the  delegates  for  their 
candid and frank opinions. On the other hand, there may be deficiencies in organizing this 
event  due  to  various  constraints.  In  this  respect,  your  opinions  and  tolerance  are  most 
appreciated. I would like to take this opportunity to wish you good health and a pleasant stay 
in Macao. More importantly, I hope Macao will impart to you a fine and long lasting memory. 
Thank you! 
4 
 BIS Review 45/2009
