Charles Bean: The economic outlook 
Remarks  by  Mr  Charles  Bean,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  at  the  National 
Farmers’ Union Conference, Birmingham, 16 February 2009. 
 The weather is at the forefront of farmers’ minds but rarely crosses that of a central banker 
except  when,  as  two  weeks  ago,  a  dump  of  snow  brings  London  to  a  standstill.  But 
economists’ lack of interest in the weather was not always the case. William Stanley Jevons, 
one of the great Victorian economists, thought sunspot activity was the key to understanding 
economic  cycles.  Sunspots  affected  the  weather,  which  in  turn  determined  crop  yields, 
demand  and  output  in  what  was  still  a  largely  rural  economy.  No  one  takes  this  theory  of 
cycles  literally.  But  it  is  a  useful  metaphor  for  the  way  unforeseen  shocks  can  switch  an 
economy from one path to another. Today, the global and British economies have suffered 
such a shock, though one that is man-made in origin rather than extra-terrestrial. 
The  origins  of  the  crisis  lie  in  the  balmy  economic  weather  prevailing  in  the  decade  or  so 
before mid-2007. Growth was steady and inflation low and stable in the United Kingdom and 
other  advanced  economies,  while  rapid  development  in  China,  India  and  other  emerging 
market economies was lifting millions out of poverty. Economic stability boosted confidence 
and  encouraged  an  expansion  of  credit.  Moreover,  high  levels  of  savings  in  some  Asian 
economies, coupled with loose US monetary policy, drove global real interest rates unusually 
low.  This  mix  of  exaggerated  confidence  and  low  real  interest  rates  encouraged  investors 
into riskier assets and banks into riskier lending, epitomised by the US sub-prime housing 
market. That was compounded by a lack of incentive for care in extending loans, if they were 
then packaged up and sold on to others.  
In August 2007, the economic weather turned distinctly autumnal. Falling US house prices 
and rising sub-prime defaults led to nervousness about the value of assets backed by those 
mortgages. Moreover, losses associated with sub-prime loans began appearing in places no-
one had anticipated, revealing how opaque many financial instruments were. The markets for 
these assets closed and their prices plummeted, putting pressure on the balance sheets of 
the  financial  institutions  holding  them,  while  wholesale  funding  dried  up.  And  the  wide 
dispersal  of  the  suspect  assets  meant  these  balance  sheet  pressures  were  quickly 
transmitted  internationally.  In  the  United  Kingdom,  banks  became  increasingly  cautious  in 
lending,  adding  to  downward  pressure  on  housing  and  commercial  property  prices,  and 
slowing  growth.  But  at  that  stage,  it  was  still  possible  to  envisage  a  relatively  modest 
slowdown, with financial intermediaries making the necessary balance sheet adjustments in 
an orderly fashion.  
However, the turmoil in credit markets was not the only factor the Bank’s Monetary Policy 
Committee had to contend with. Oil prices, already high at the start of 2008, hit $147 a barrel 
in July, while a broad range of other commodity prices rose sharply. That reflected continuing 
strong  demand  growth  in  the  emerging  market  economies  coming  up  against  inelastic 
supply, augmented in the case of some foodstuffs by the development of bio-fuels and poor 
harvests. Of course, you have experienced many of these developments at first hand. This 
time last year, DEFRA’s measure of farm-gate prices had risen by 25% over the preceding 
twelve months, while the Economist food index had increased by around 55%.  
For much of last year, the MPC sought to balance these two forces: the turmoil in financial 
markets,  pushing  down  on  growth  and  inflation;  and  the  rise  in  commodity  prices,  also 
pushing  down  on  growth,  but  up  on  inflation.  The  latter  proved  to  be  the  dominant  force 
through the first part of the year, pushing CPI inflation up to 5.2%, well above our 2% target. 
Then,  in  September,  an  economic  winter  of  unusual  severity  arrived.  The  global  economy 
experienced the equivalent of Jevons’ sunspot – the collapse of Lehman Brothers. Investors 
BIS Review 19/2009 
 1
had assumed the US authorities would never allow a bank the size of Lehman’s to fail. The 
resulting  shock  fatally  undermined  confidence  in  a  number  of  similar  institutions.  You  will 
remember  the  period  in  early  October  when  bank  share  prices  fell  precipitously  and  a 
number  of  financial  institutions  around  the  world  were  rescued  or  closed.  The  financial 
system was only saved from total seizure through the prompt and internationally co-ordinated 
action  of  the  authorities  to  inject  extra  capital  into  the  banks,  guarantee  their  funding  and 
boost the provision of liquidity. 
Around  the  same  time,  the  confidence  of  businesses  and  households,  already  weak, 
collapsed. Many businesses told us the same story – that orders “fell off a cliff” in September 
and  October.  That  story  was  repeated  around  the  world,  and  is  evident  in  the  surveys  of 
business activity (see Chart 1) and more recently in the first estimates for growth in the final 
quarter of last year. The global economy is now in the throes of a sharp and synchronised 
downturn.  
Banks  have  responded  to  the  loss  of  confidence  in  the  financial  markets,  and  the 
deterioration in economic prospects more generally, by tightening the terms and availability 
of  credit  so  as  to  bolster  their  weakened  balance  sheets.  That  threatens  to  generate  an 
adverse feedback loop: the worse the outlook becomes, the lower the chance of a loan being 
repaid  and  the  more  cautious  the  banks  become  about  extending  new  loans,  making  the 
outlook yet bleaker. We hear many stories of businesses finding credit harder to get, though I 
understand  that  a  recent  NFU  survey  found  that  farmers’  relationships  with  their  bankers 
remained fairly good. 
The  only  bright  spot  –  at  least  for  most  of  us,  if  not  for  you  –  has  been  the  collapse  in 
commodity prices as the slowdown spread to the emerging market economies. Oil is back to 
$45 a barrel (see Chart 2), while the Economist food index has fallen by over 30% (in dollar 
terms). 
Last week, we published our latest Inflation Report, laying out our current assessment of the 
outlook.  It  does  not  make  for  pleasant  reading.  Global  demand  fell  sharply  in  the  fourth 
quarter of 2008 and most forecasters expect a contraction in the advanced economies this 
year  and  negligible  overall  growth  (see  Chart  3).  Here  in  the  United  Kingdom,  GDP  is 
estimated to have fallen by 1.5% in 2008 Q4. Business surveys point to a similar contraction 
in  the  first  quarter  of  2009.  Household  spending  is  declining.  Investment  intentions  have 
fallen sharply. Credit availability has continued to worsen. And the four-quarter rate of growth 
of overall money spending in the economy has fallen to its lowest since 1959 (Chart 4). A 
sharp contraction in activity, both here and abroad, is already baked into the cake for the first 
half of this year. 
But there are grounds for thinking that conditions may start to improve later in the year, as 
there  is  a  substantial  economic  stimulus  already  in  the  pipeline.  First,  since  October,  the 
MPC  has  cut  Bank  Rate  by  four  percentage  points  to  1%,  the  lowest  level  in  the  Bank’s 
315-year history. The dysfunctional credit markets mean that a given reduction in Bank Rate 
has less impact on the economy than in normal times. Even so, it still represents a powerful 
stimulus, which will take much of this year to work through. Of course, since interest rates 
cannot  fall  below  zero,  we  are  running  out  of  room  for  further  cuts.  But  it  must  not  be 
forgotten  that  even  if  Bank  Rate  remains  where  it  is,  the  recent  cuts  in  Bank  Rate  will 
continue  to  provide  a  building  boost  to  demand  through  this  year  and  beyond  –  we  don’t 
have to keep on cutting rates in order to provide a stimulus. 
Second,  in  November,  the  Government  announced  a  temporary  cut  in  VAT  and  an 
acceleration of spending on public investment projects, which should help support demand in 
the near term. 
Third,  and  most  importantly,  to  supplement  the  measures  taken  last  October,  the 
Government  has  launched  a  five-point  plan  to  ensure  an  adequate  supply  of  credit  to 
households  and  business.  This  comprises  measures:  to  reduce  uncertainty  about  the 
adequacy of bank capital by capping the losses on their holdings of risky assets; to facilitate 
2 
 BIS Review 19/2009
bank funding through the attachment of state guarantees; to boost the availability of funds to 
business  through  direct  purchases  of  company  debt;  to  raise  the  availability  of  mortgage 
finance to households by halting the running down of Northern Rock’s mortgage book; and, 
finally, to establish a concordat with the banks under which they will maintain an adequate 
flow of credit to the real economy. 
The Asset Purchase Facility, operated by the Bank for the Government, will purchase up to 
£50 billion worth of commercial paper, corporate bonds and similar securities, with the aim of 
increasing the liquidity of these instruments, reducing the cost of capital to businesses and 
stimulating  increased  debt  issuance.  As  we  estimate  that  illiquidity  presently  accounts  for 
getting  on  for  half  of  the  5½  percentage  points  interest  rate  spread  of  investment-grade 
corporate bonds over government debt, these actions, if successful, could have a powerful 
impact on the cost and availability of funds to corporate borrowers. The first purchase under 
this facility was made last Friday.  
In the first instance, purchases are to be financed by government borrowing. But, subject to 
the  agreement  of  the  Chancellor,  this  facility  can  also  be  used  by  the  Monetary  Policy 
Committee  to  undertake  further  easing  of  monetary  policy  in  pursuit  of  the  inflation  target. 
That is likely to prove useful now that Bank Rate is nearing its floor. In that case, purchases 
would be financed by the creation of so-called central bank money – effectively IOUs drawn 
on the Bank of England. At such point, we might also want to expand the range of assets 
purchased  under  the  scheme  to  include  government  debt.  The  purpose  of  these  actions 
would  be  twofold:  to  push  down  the  yields  on  a  wider  range  of  assets  than  usual;  and  to 
increase  the  supply  of  broad  money  (bank  deposits  plus  banks'  own  reserves)  in  the 
economy. Both should help to boost nominal spending.  
Some parts of the press have described this as “printing money”, linking it with the spectre of 
hyperinflation  and  national  bankruptcy.  Now  it  is  true  that  some  –  often  corrupt  – 
governments have resorted to “printing money” in order to finance their spending when taxes 
are hard to gather. But if the Monetary Policy Committee chooses to finance asset purchases 
through  the  issuance  of  central  bank  money,  it  will  not  be  to  finance  the  Government’s 
budget deficit. Rather, the aim will be to push up the rates of growth of the supply of money 
and  credit  –  which  have  slowed  sharply  (see  Chart  5)  –  to  levels  consistent  with  steady 
growth  in  overall  nominal  spending  in  the  economy  of  around  5%,  consistent  with  the 
achievement of the 2% inflation target.  
Bank  Rate  cuts,  fiscal  policy  easing  and  measures  to  support  the  banking  system  should 
together provide considerable stimulus to the economy as the year progresses, as will the fall 
in commodity prices. Other countries have taken similar actions, which should bolster activity 
overseas  and  thus  the  demand  for  our  exports.  In  addition,  the  trade-weighted  value  of 
sterling has fallen by almost a quarter since the middle of last year. That should encourage a 
switch  in  demand  at  home  and  abroad  in  favour  of  UK-produced  goods  and  services  and 
raise the profitability of exporting. Consequently, it will facilitate the necessary re-balancing of 
the  British  economy  away  from  consumption  and  help  to  close  the  UK’s  current  account 
deficit. 
So even if the near term looks bleak, there is reason to expect an improvement as we move 
into  the  latter  part  of  the  year.  Chart  6  shows  our  latest  projection  for  four-quarter  GDP 
growth, assuming that Bank Rate follows the path expected by the markets. The most likely 
path is represented by the darkest green band. In this scenario, output continues to contract 
in  the  near  term,  as  the  weakening  labour  market  and  increased  uncertainty  weigh  on 
consumption, businesses run down inventories and reduce investment, and the weakness in 
world demand inhibits exports. But activity gradually recovers in 2010, reflecting the strength 
of the policy stimulus and the substantial boost from the lower level of sterling. However, it is 
possible that efforts to restore the banking system may take longer to bear fruit, and that the 
adoption of protectionist measures abroad as the downturn deepens may slow the recovery. 
BIS Review 19/2009 
 3
Consequently  the  risks  are  heavily  weighted  to  the  downside,  with  roughly  a  three  in  four 
chance of growth turning out weaker than in the central case. 
Our  associated  projection  for  CPI  inflation  is  shown  in  Chart  7.  In  the  most  likely  path  – 
represented by the deep red line – inflation continues to fall from its current value of 3.1%, 
falling below the 2% target in the spring, reflecting the impact of the Government’s VAT cut 
and the fall in energy prices. The subsequent path is somewhat uneven as the VAT cut is 
reversed next January, but the broad picture is for inflation to continue to run well below the 
target in the medium term, as the downward pressure from the substantial margin of spare 
capacity outweighs the waning impact on import and consumer prices of the lower level of 
sterling. So the Monetary Policy Committee will probably need to take further action to return 
inflation to the target in the medium term. That is a discussion we will no doubt have at future 
meetings.  
Before  finishing,  I  want  briefly  to  reflect  on  what  this  crisis  means  for  the  UK’s 
macroeconomic  policy  framework.  For  16  years,  the  inflation  targeting  framework  worked 
pretty  well,  delivering  steady  growth  and  low  and  stable  inflation.  In  particular,  the  United 
Kingdom managed to come through the Asia/LTCM crisis of 1997-8 and the aftermath of the 
dot-com  bust  in  2001-3  relatively  unscathed.  But  plainly  it  hasn’t  prevented  things  coming 
unstuck now. What has gone wrong? 
This recession is rather different from its three large post-war predecessors, each of which 
was associated with policy actions to curtail an inflationary boom that had got out of hand. 
On this occasion, the boom was not in the market for goods and services, as the data on 
growth,  unemployment  and  inflation  bear  witness.  Rather  it  was  associated  with  a  debt-
driven boom in asset prices, including property. But the bust has not been confined to asset 
markets and has instead infected the real economy of businesses and jobs. 
In part, the problem stems from a failure of imagination. A number of bodies identified the 
vulnerabilities that were building up as a result of the accumulation of debt. Indeed, in 2006 
our  own  Financial  Stability  Report  highlighted  many  of  the  risks  which  have  subsequently 
crystallised.  And  we  debated  these  vulnerabilities  at  meetings  of  the  Monetary  Policy 
Committee  on  various  occasions.  But  no-one  really  foresaw  the  virulence  with  which  the 
crisis would unfold and the route it would take.  
But even if we had, would it have made sense to have tried to curtail the accumulation of 
debt  by  holding  Bank  Rate  at  a  substantially  higher  level,  particularly  during  the  2004-7 
period?  Aside  from  the  fact  that  this  would  probably  not  have  shielded  us  from  a  severe 
downturn – countries around the world that did not experience rapid credit expansion have 
still  slowed  sharply  –  it  would  just  have  implied  markedly  slower  growth  and  higher 
unemployment  at  an  earlier  stage.  Is  that  the  price  we  want  to  pay  to  curtail  excessive 
exuberance in the financial sector? My answer would be an unequivocal No. Instead, with 
two  objectives  –  macroeconomic  stability  and  systemic  financial  stability  –  we  need  to 
complement Bank Rate with another tool that is more directly focussed on the source of the 
problem. 
That tool is so-called macro-prudential regulation, under which banks and other systemically 
important financial institutions would be subject to balance sheet constraints that reflect the 
vulnerabilities to the economy that may be building. This could be, for instance, by making 
banks build up extra capital buffers or reserves in the good times, which can then be drawn 
on when times turn bad so obviating the need to cut back sharply on their lending. In this 
way,  the  real  economy  can  be  protected  from  the  financial  excesses  that  seem  prone  to 
recur. Central banks and banking supervisors are presently working to identify the best way 
to provide this missing bit of the toolbox. 
Last Saturday, I attended the meeting of G8 finance ministers and central bank governors in 
Rome. Their determination to take whatever further policy actions was necessary to restore 
their economies to health was evident. Right now, we may look to be in for a long and hard 
economic winter. But, just as the chills of winter each year give way to the promise of spring, 
4 
 BIS Review 19/2009
you  can  be  equally  sure  that  the  current  recession  will  eventually  come  to  an  end  and 
economic spring will arrive. 
 
Chart 1 Business surveys of output in selected 
countries
 Chart 2  Oil prices
  BIS Review 19/2009 
 5
Chart 3 Consensus forecasts for world GDP growth 
in 2009
 Chart 4 Nominal demand
 6 
   BIS Review 19/2009
Chart 5 Broad money and credit
 Chart 6  GDP projection based on market interest rate 
expectations
  BIS Review 19/2009 
 7
Chart 7 CPI inflation projection based on market interest rate 
expectations
 8 
 BIS Review 19/2009
