T T Mboweni: The implications of the global crisis for South Africa and 
policy responses  
Address  by  Mr  T  T  Mboweni,  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  to  the  Road 
Freight Association Convention, Vanderbijlpark, 19 May 2009.  
 Introduction  
1.  
1.1 The world is in the midst of the most severe slowdown since the Great Depression of the 
late  1920s.  We  have  seen  negative  growth  rates  in  many  countries,  developing  and 
industrialised, and world trade has declined dramatically. However, there are tentative signs 
that the global economy may be responding to the co-ordinated monetary and fiscal policy 
stimuli and that the worst of the contraction may be behind us. Nevertheless the recovery is 
likely to be slow and protracted. Unfortunately the integrated nature of the global economy 
means  that  South  Africa  has  not  been  spared,  and  our  future  growth  prospects  are 
dependent to an important degree on global developments.  
1.2  The  domestic  slowdown  has  had  a  direct  impact  on  the  road  freight  industry,  which 
moves  in  excess  of  80  per  cent  of  the  total  load  freight  in  South  Africa.  The  road  freight 
industry  has  grown  in  importance  over  recent  years  in  an  environment  of  relatively  high 
economic growth and static rail freight tonnages. According to a recent CSIR report1, in 2007 
road transport accounted for 87 per cent of tons transported in South Africa. It goes without 
saying that if domestic output declines, the impact on the road freight transport sector could 
be significant.  
Global economic developments 
2.  
2.1 Some of the recent developments in the global economy have been quite dramatic. In the 
fourth quarter of 2008, the so-called advanced economies experienced a contraction of 7,5 
per  cent in GDP,  with  the  United  States  economy  contracting  by  6,2  per  cent  (quarter-on-
quarter  annualised),  and  by  6,1  per  cent  in  the  first  quarter  of  2009.  The  UK  economy 
contracted  by  6,1  per  cent  and  7,4  per  cent  in  the  same  quarters  respectively.  Our  other 
major  trading  partners  fared  no  better.  In  the  fourth  quarter  of  2008,  Japan  contracted  by 
12,1 per cent, the euro area by 6,3 per cent, and within the euro area, Germany contracted 
by  8,2  per  cent.  Developing  and  emerging  market  economies  were  also  part  of  the 
synchronised downturn, contracting by 4 per cent. While China managed to grow by 1,4 per 
cent in that quarter, the Indian economy experienced zero growth. Taiwan, South Korea and 
Thailand  experienced  quarter-on-quarter  annualised  contractions  in  excess  of  20  per  cent, 
while contractions were also experienced in eastern and central Europe and Latin America.  
2.2  The  outlook  for  the  global  economy  in  2009  remains  gloomy,  with  the  IMF,  the  World 
Bank and the OECD all forecasting negative growth for the year as a whole. The discussions 
at  the  recent  IMF  meetings  confirmed  a  negative  outlook,  although  demand  stimuli  and 
natural  stabilisers  are  expected  to  start  having  an  impact  later  in  the  year,  and  there  are 
tentative signs that this may be the case.  
2.3 The pace of the downturn has been confounding the forecasters, and there have been 
continuous and large downward revisions of growth forecasts during the past few  months. 
According  to  the  latest  IMF  forecasts,  the  world  economy,  which  grew  by  3,2  per  cent  in 
2008, is now expected to contract by 1,3 per cent in 2009. In January, the forecast for 2009 
                                                 
1   The Fifth Annual State of Logistics Survey for South Africa, CSIR, 2008. 
BIS Review 66/2009 
 1
was for the world economy to grow by 0,5 per cent. The so-called advanced economies are 
expected to contract by 3,8 per cent this year, while emerging market and developing country 
growth is forecast to be 1,6 per cent. Africa is expected to experience growth of 2 per cent. A 
modest recovery is forecast for 2010: the advanced economies are expected to experience 
zero  growth  compared  to  emerging  market  and  developing  economies  growth  of  4,0  per 
cent.  
2.4 The impact on world trade from these events has been pronounced, and the World Trade 
Organisation predicted that the volume of global merchandise trade would contract by 9 per 
cent this year, compared to an annual average growth rate in trade in excess of 6 per cent 
since 1990. In an environment of weak demand and lack of trade finance, international trade 
will continue to suffer. The motor industry has been particularly hard hit as demand continues 
to decline globally. Japanese motor vehicle exports declined by almost 50 per cent year-on-
year  in  February,  while  global  exports  of  motor  vehicles  declined  by  64  per  cent  in  that 
month.  Not  surprisingly,  protectionist  tendencies  have  emerged,  with  some  countries 
providing subsidies and discriminatory procurement provisions in national stimulus packages.  
2.5 Also of relevance to the South African economy has been the sharp decline in commodity 
prices. Fortunately, gold prices have remained relatively firm. The gold price declined from a 
high of around US$1000 per ounce in March 2008 to around US$712 in November, but is 
currently  trading  above  US920  per  ounce.  However  other  commodities  have  not  fared  as 
well. From a high of US$2250 per ounce in March 2008, platinum prices declined to US$771 
per  ounce,  before  recovering  to  current  levels  of  around  US$1130  per  ounce.  Aluminium 
prices reached levels in excess of US$3300 per ton in July 2008, but by February 2009 the 
price had declined to below US$1300 per ton and currently around levels of US$1540 per 
ton.  Similar  trends  are  evident  in  the  behaviour  of  other  commodity  prices.  Of  course,  oil 
price developments have benefited us. Having reached levels of almost US$150 per barrel in 
July  last  year,  international  oil  prices  declined  to  below  US$35  per  barrel,  and  are  now  at 
levels around US$57 per barrel. Commodity prices in general are likely to remain subdued in 
line with global growth  
2.6 The turmoil on the international financial markets has also impacted on the destination 
and  size  of  capital  flows.  Not  surprisingly,  capital  flows  to  the  developing  and  emerging 
market economies have declined, with the International Institute of Finance expecting flows 
to emerging markets to decline from over US$900 billion in 2007 to around US$165 billion in 
2009. This has implications for exchange rates and the financing of current account deficits 
in  these  countries,  at  a  time  when  export  markets  are  under  pressure.  Capital  is  in  fact 
flowing back to the US, the source of the current crisis. We are told that this is a “flight to 
quality” or “risk aversion”. An irony indeed.  
that 
The implications for the South African economy  
the  South  African  economy  would  be  affected  by 
3.  
3.1  Given  South  Africa’s  close  trade  and  financial  links  with  the  global  economy,  it  is  not 
surprising 
these  adverse 
developments. After 4 years of GDP growth around or in excess of 5 per cent, the growth 
rate declined to 3,1 per cent in 2008, with a contraction of 1,8 per cent in the fourth quarter. 
Current indications are that the negative trend continued in the first quarter of this year. The 
high  frequency  data  indicate  that  the  manufacturing  sector  in  particular  remains  under 
pressure: recent data from Statistics South Africa show that manufacturing output in the first 
quarter  of  2009  declined  by  6,8  per  cent  relative  to  the  previous  quarter,  while  mining 
production declined by 12,8 per cent over the same period. The utilisation of manufacturing 
productive capacity declined to its lowest level in ten years. Quarter-on-quarter declines were 
also seen in retail and wholesale trade sales, while motor vehicle domestic sales and exports 
also continued to contract significantly.  
3.2 The impact on employment was also felt in the final quarter of 2008 when employment 
levels decreased for the first time in almost four year. Employment declined by 0,7 per cent, 
2 
 BIS Review 66/2009
with  the  private  sector  shedding  over  45,000  jobs.  Most  of  the  forward-looking  confidence 
indices indicate that a turnaround cannot be expected until at least later in this year.  
3.3  These  developments  are  also  reflected  in  the  financial  markets.  In  particular,  house 
prices  have  been  stagnant  or  falling,  and  the  stock  exchange  has  lost  about  a  third  of  its 
value  since  September  last  year.  Although  exports  have  been  affected,  imports  have  also 
declined  in  the  wake  of  weak  demand  and  lower  international  oil  prices,  resulting  in  a 
moderation of the current account deficit in the fourth quarter of 2009 to 5,8 per cent of GDP. 
Despite lower capital inflows, we were still able to finance the deficit on the current account. 
In line with other emerging economies, the rand exchange rate has been relatively volatile 
over this turbulent period, although it has recovered significantly since the lows seen in late 
2008.  
3.4 While it seems clear that the first quarter of this year was also one of negative growth, 
the general view is that the worst is probably behind us and that things may start to improve 
slowly in the coming months. The latest consensus surveys indicate that growth is expected 
to be low but positive in the final two quarters of this year, and to recover to around 2,7 per 
cent next year.  
Policy responses  
4.  
4.1 There has been a multi-faceted global response to the crisis. As was noted in the G-20 
London Summit Statement of 2 April 2009, “a global crisis requires a global solution”. The 
G-20 countries pledged “to do whatever is necessary to restore confidence, growth, and jobs; 
repair the financial system to restore lending; strengthen financial regulation to rebuild trust; 
and  fund  and  reform  our  international  financial  institutions  to  overcome  this  crisis  and  to 
prevent  future  ones”  These  are  noble  and  correct  sentiments,  but  it  is  the  implementation 
that counts. A few comments on some of these themes may be in order.  
4.2 Firstly, there is no doubt that for the crisis to be resolved, countries with banks exposed 
to the toxic assets will have to clean up their banking systems. These toxic assets will have 
to be taken off the balance sheets, the banks recapitalised and sufficient trust built up so that 
banks can start lending again. There is no easy solution for achieving this, and no simple 
blueprint. Countries will differ as to how they tackle this problem. But as long as banks are 
unwilling  to  lend,  and  demand  remains  subdued,  the  recovery  cannot  happen.  The  recent 
stress-tests conducted on US banks indicated that while banks still remain under pressure 
and some require further recapitalisation, the worst of the bad news may be behind us.  
4.3  Fortunately  our  banking  system  is  still  allowing  credit  to  flow,  although  much  stricter 
lending criteria are being applied by banks. But unlike in Europe and the US, our interbank 
market is working normally, the capital adequacy ratios are strong, and no bank has had to 
approach  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank  for  any  extraordinary  assistance.  Although 
exchange controls irritate many, in this case the existence of these controls, in conjunction 
with appropriate supervision of the banks, spared us the need to have to find ways to bail out 
and recapitalise our banks.  
4.4 Secondly, there has to be an improvement in banking regulations and supervision. Those 
elements of the financial system that have been able to avoid regulation must be brought into 
the  regulatory  net,  and  ways  must  be  sought  to  ensure  that  regulation  does  not  promote 
procyclical behaviour on the part of the banks. But we have to be mindful of the danger of 
over-regulation. There is always the danger that a crisis can spur excessive regulation and 
stifle  the  ability  of  banks  to  operate  normally  in  the  future.  A  fine  balance  will  have  to  be 
achieved  between  the  dangers  of  over-regulation  and  allowing  banks  to  undertake  normal 
lending operations. We are likely to see a return to the more traditionally type of banking for 
some time.  
4.5  Third,  there  have  to  be  appropriate  policy  responses  to  restore  growth.  The  G-20 
statement underlined the need for continued concerted and exceptional monetary and fiscal 
BIS Review 66/2009 
 3
policy  stimuli.  With  respect  to  monetary  policy,  in  many  countries,  despite  the  low  policy 
rates,  banks  are  charging  much  higher  spreads  over  the  policy  rates  because  of  higher 
perceived risks. At the same time, households are trying to repair their balance sheets which 
have  been  adversely  affected  by  declines  in  house  and  equity  prices.  In  other  words,  the 
monetary  transmission  mechanisms  are  impaired,  and  what  usually  works  in  a  relatively 
predicable way under normal circumstances, may not work in the same way under current 
abnormal  circumstances.  The  further  danger  we  face  is  that  as  the  balance  sheets  of  the 
central  banks  expand  rapidly,  down  the  line  there  may  be  inflationary  pressures.  Central 
banks will have to be ready to absorb this excess liquidity, but without killing off the recovery.  
4.6 The G-20 recognises that even within the framework of a co-ordinated response, local 
conditions will shape the nature of the response of individual countries. While many countries 
responded with substantial interest rate reductions, these responses were carried out in the 
context  of  very  low  inflation  in  many  instances,  and  the  need  to  provide  liquidity  to  ailing 
banking sectors. While the response of the South African Reserve Bank may appear to be 
less strong than in many other countries, it should be borne in mind that we started out with a 
relatively  high  inflation  rate  and  a  relatively  healthy  banking  system.  We  are  seeing  a 
slowdown in the rate of inflation and, although it is relatively sticky, we still expect to be back 
within the target over the medium term. This has allowed for a 350 basis point reduction in 
the repurchase rate to date. A continuation of this slowdown of inflation, in part a result of the 
widening output gap, may allow for further monetary easing.  
4.7 As part of stimulus packages, many countries have focused on increasing expenditure on 
infrastructure. This cannot happen overnight. We have been fortunate that our infrastructural 
expenditure  programme  has  been  accelerating  for  the  past  few  years,  and  has  therefore 
come on stream at a time when it is most needed. This has been most fortuitous. Anyone 
travelling on our national roads will have been frustrated by the inconvenience of the scale of 
the  road  upgrades,  but  we  have  to  remember  the  positive  side:  that  this  infrastructural 
expenditure is helping to underpin domestic expenditure. Furthermore, such expenditure will 
help  to  increase  the  potential  output  of  the  economy  over  time,  and  therefore  raise  the 
sustainable long term growth rate. According to National Treasury estimates, public sector 
infrastructure expenditure is expected to average 9,7 percent of GDP over the coming three 
fiscal years, compared to 4,5 per cent in the 2005/6 fiscal year. During the current fiscal year, 
total expenditure by the SA National Roads Agency Ltd (SANRAL) on roads is estimated at 
R19,6  billion,  compared  to  R2,2  billion  in  2005/06.  I  am  sure  your  truck  drivers  will  be 
pleased when all this construction is completed.  
4.8  It  is  also  important  to  appreciate  that  monetary  and  fiscal  policies  have  to  be 
supplemented  with  other  policies  and  structural  reforms.  In  times  of  crisis,  people  tend  to 
forget about longer term structural reforms and focus on the immediate crisis. But it is the 
structural reforms that will be important to get economies going again. For example industrial 
policies which can supplement other policy initiatives.  
Conclusion  
5.  
5.1 The G-20 proposals contain many important elements that will go a long way to help with 
the global recovery. However the proof will be in the implementation. Recovery programmes, 
particularly  those  which  involve  coordination  between  countries  can  take  a  while  to 
implement, let alone show results. We also need to ensure that the measures undertaken to 
ensure the recovery do not sow the seeds of future crises. There are likely to be a number of 
false dawns on the long road to recovery, but hopefully we are on that road.  
Thank you very much.  
4 
 BIS Review 66/2009
