Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Preparing for what lies ahead 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas), at the 1st Membership Meeting of the Year of the Rotary Club 
(Manila Polo Club), Manila, 8 January 2009. 
 RCM  President  Romeo  Batino,  Monetary  Board  Member  Rtn.  Raul  Boncan,  Esteemed 
members of the Rotary Club of Manila, Friends from the media, Ladies and gentlemen, good 
afternoon. 
Thank you once again for this opportunity to address the Rotarians on your first Membership 
Meeting  of  the  year.  If  I  am  not  mistaken,  this  is  the  fourth  year  I  am  doing  this  as  BSP 
governor. Time flies, doesn’t it? And taking a quick sweep of this room, it doesn’t seem like 
many of you have added on another year! (I don’t want to soil my welcome mat at the Rotary 
Club) 
Every year is different, but each year always brings with it renewed hope. The conclusion of 
one and the beginning of a new year is often a time to reflect – on the events of the year just 
past and the expectations for the year that is upon us.  
You  may  have  read  the  headlines  yesterday,  which  quoted  me  as  describing  2009  as  a 
critical year. Yes I believe 2009 is critical. To ensure we are prepared for what lies ahead.  
2008 was a challenging year. It saw the ideal convergence of low inflation and high growth, 
that characterized our 2007, get dissipated by high oil prices and the spread of the subprime 
market woes from the US to global financial markets, with marquee financial names falling 
one by one. It also was witness to major economies, including the US; Germany and Italy in 
Europe; Japan, Singapore and Hongkong in Asia descending into recession.  
Forecasts for world growth from the private sector as well as multilateral agencies continue 
to be reviewed and revised downward as more information becomes available.  
When I say 2009 is critical – it is not to create fear. But quite the opposite. I want you to be 
hopeful.  You  hold  among  your  membership  many  of  the  most  prominent  in  business  and 
industry. To many of you, darkness is not darkness for its sake, but rather the absence of 
light.  Because  many  among  you  have  developed  the  “killer  instincts”,  when  the  dark  gets 
bleaker, you see opportunities. Therefore, I encourage you to be the light so darkness will be 
dispersed. I encourage you further to create more opportunities that will sustain the light.  
Many  pundits  say  that  the  worst  is  yet  to  come  in  the  local  and  international  financial 
markets. I say, no one knows how much deeper or how much longer this downturn will be. 
So there will continue to be challenges. But I want to add, this won’t go on forever. What we 
need to do now is to make the best of what we can at this time, try to ease some of the “pain” 
currently experienced, build up safeguards, and prepare for the eventual upturn.  
This  is  why  I  say  2009  is  critical.  Our  actions  and  policies  this  year  will  help  define  how 
prepared  we  would  be  when  the  upturn  does  come  about.  Several  relatively  optimistic 
analysts forecast a recovery among the major economies could occur as soon as 18 months. 
So, depending on when you begin to count, and because time does fly, the upturn could be 
just around the corner! 
We ended 2008 on a much sounder footing than most in the region. Philippine growth for the 
first 3 quarters of 2008 stood at 4.6 percent, quite respectable compared to our ASEAN-5 
neighbors. Inflation was on an uptrend and elevated due mainly to highly volatile oil and non-
oil  commodity  prices.  We  take  comfort,  however,  in  that  this  trend  was  not  unique  to  the 
Philippines. At an average inflation for the year of 9.3%, this still compares favorably against 
ASEAN-5 range of 5.5 to 10.3%. Also, inflation has started to recede faster than expected.  
BIS Review 2/2008 
 1
We  found  ourselves  better-situated  than  others  at  the  end  of  2008  precisely  because  we 
came  into  that  downturn  prepared  and  with  buffers,  including  a  forward-looking  monetary 
policy framework; a healthier reserves level for insurance; and a sound banking system.  
2008 – what buffers have we stored?  
Let me quickly run through these buffers with some detail.  
First of all, the resilience of domestic demand. In previous crises, it was internal activity that 
kept  the  economy  going.  Last  year,  real  growth  was  broad-based.  The  major  domestic 
sectors,  including  agriculture,  industry,  and  services,  provided  positive  contributions  to 
growth. In addition, government spending for infrastructure as well as private consumption 
supported by steady remittances helped sustain domestic demand.  
Second, the discipline of inflation targeting has helped us focus on our primary mandate of 
price stability. That we were able to maintain inflation at manageable levels helped to create 
a calmer environment that sustained domestic business.  
Third, because we kept to our policy of a market-determined exchange rate, the peso broadly 
maintained its competitiveness against a basket of currencies of our major trading partners 
and competitor countries Although it lost much of the gains of 2007 as the country wasn’t 
spared  from  the  heightened  risk  aversion  towards  emerging  markets,  the  peso’s  fall  was 
nevertheless  in  line  with  the  movement  of  other  currencies  in  the  region,  which  also  fell 
against the US dollar.  
Fourth, with an appropriate FX regulatory environment and a natural pool of talent, we were 
able to attract FX investments particularly in the BPO sector. Remittances also kept flowing. 
These allowed us to continue to build our Gross International Reserves to comfortable levels, 
above  international  benchmark  levels,  and  therewith  continue  to  register  a  surplus  in  the 
BOP.  
Fifth, the banking reforms we had put in place during earlier years have caused the banking 
system  to  be  only  minimally  exposed  to  the  troubled  global  financial  institutions  and  thus 
remain sound. In addition, the inherent conservatism and the domestic orientation of banks, 
as well as the BSP’s phased-in approach to embracing financial innovation helped to keep 
our  exposure  to  the  global  financial  turmoil  limited.  Our  banks  continue  to  be  capitalized 
above the BIS standard and BSP regulatory requirement; bank balance sheets are at their 
strongest since the 1997 Asian financial crisis; and assets continue to grow.  
Sixth, through the series of reforms instituted, our monetary and regulatory frameworks have 
become  more  flexible.  These  now  allow  us  to  quickly  respond  to  changes  in  our  working 
environment. For instance, at the time when there was perceived tightness in liquidity and 
some friction in distribution of both peso and dollar funds at the height of the uncertainty from 
the global financial turmoil, the BSP was able to expeditiously adopt measures to address 
these  market  concerns.  Among  the  measures  put  in  place  to  address  peso  and  dollar 
liquidity were a) the relaxation of valuation and collateral requirements for the existing peso 
repurchase facility, b) the creation of a new dollar repurchase facility and c) the doubling of 
the budget for e-rediscounting. In the meantime, to address distribution issues, the BSP a) 
reduced reserve requirements on bank deposits by 2 percentage points and b) maintained a 
presence in spot and swap FX markets. In addition, to address temporary concerns due to 
the  difficulty 
the 
reclassification of certain debt holdings of banks from their trading accounts to their held-to-
maturity accounts.  
Seventh,  we  have  put  a  premium  on  communication  strategy.  At  all  times,  but  particularly 
during a period of uncertainty, accurate and timely information is vital. The BSP heightened 
its  consultation  with  stakeholders  by  holding  more  frequent  dialogues  and  conducting 
periodic surveys to capture consumer and business sentiments. We realize that having an 
in  valuation  of  emerging  market  debt  assets, 
the  BSP  allowed 
2 
 BIS Review 2/2008
open  two-way  communication  makes  for  more  effective,  efficient  and  responsive  policy 
making.  
Seven is a “complete” number as they say, so I will end my list here. Let me summarize by 
saying  the  BSP  has  endeavored  to  create  and  maintain  an  environment  supportive  of  our 
objectives of stable prices and sustainable long-term growth. 
2009 – what’s in store?  
With these buffers in place but at the same time mindful of the challenges that are still upon 
us,  how  must  we  be  in  2009  so  we  could  limit  the  adverse  impact  of  the  crisis  and  be 
prepared for the expected upturn?  
Just like the eagle on a prey, we need to sharpen our senses – we need to be sensitive to 
the  signals  around  us  –  sights  sounds  and  scents.  We  need  to  be  aware  not  only  of  our 
immediate  surrounding  but  also  of  what  may  lie  around.  We  need  to  not  only  be  present-
thinking but forward-looking also. You can’t be complacent. You need to be prescient.  
I  do  not  particularly  espouse  the  Darwinian  theory.  But  Mr.  Darwin  may  have  been  on  to 
something when he said, “that which will survive is the species which is most adaptable to 
change.” (Please pardon literary freedom for my paraphrase).  
I declared earlier that we ended 2008 fairly unscathed from the global financial turmoil, but 
real  risks  are  still  lurking.  Further  uncertainty  in  the  global  financial  markets;  recessionary 
trends that could spread to regions beyond the developed world; and volatilities in commodity 
prices, particularly oil.  
Policy thrusts for 2009 
How shall we translate into policies for 2009 both the need to be anticipatory (like the eagle) 
and adaptable to change (as Dr. Darwin posited)? Let me quickly run by some specifics:  
Monetary policy in 2009 will continue to focus on our primary mandate of price stability. As 
inflation  risks  moderate,  the  BSP  will  carefully  consider  opportunities  for  monetary  policy 
easing  amidst  potential  tightening  financial  conditions.  We  will  also  continue  to  ensure 
appropriate  levels  of  market  liquidity  to  maintain  the  efficient  functioning  of  the  financial 
markets. Through this, we hope to provide the necessary conditions that will allow economic 
growth to continue. We will at the same time endeavor to keep inflation at manageable levels 
as this creates the environment for sustainable long-term growth.  
The BSP’s external sector policy will remain focused on ensuring our external vulnerabilities 
are limited. We expect to continue to post a surplus in our BOP, mainly still due to steady OF 
remittances and receipts from the BPO sector. This will give us the opportunity to further beef 
up reserves for insurance. We will continue to pursue a market-determined exchange rate to 
allow  us  to  maintain  external  competitiveness.  We  will  also  engage  in  policies  that  would 
sustain a manageable external debt profile.  
Banking  sector  policies  will  continue  to  reinforce  the  banking  system’s  soundness.  Most 
analyses point to the lack of regulation as one of the root causes of the US subprime market 
crisis, it is tempting therefore to swing to the other extreme of over regulation. I don’t believe 
BSP would move towards that direction, given our gradualist and consultative approach to 
regulation.  Instead  what  I  believe  may  occur  is  a  move  towards  greater  accountability 
coupled  with  greater  granularity  of  regulation.  I  have  always  believed  that  markets  and 
regulation can and must co-exist. The trick is to craft regulation that would make the markets 
work.  
We will therefore remain committed to sustaining key financial and banking sector reforms 
that  would  lead  to  greater  efficiency,  risk  management,  stronger  capital  base,  improved 
BIS Review 2/2008 
 3
disclosure practices and transparency, and enhanced corporate governance standards in the 
banking system.  
Realizing  that  the  current  crisis  has  taken  on  a  global  nature,  we  will  further  strengthen 
engagements with regional peers to share information, discuss emerging developments, and 
pool resources, if necessary even foreign exchange reserves. It’s interesting that the current 
financial  turmoil  took  on  a  turn  for  the  better  once  the  major  economies  began  to  act  in 
concert. Confidence had been quickly eroding until then. The coordinated and cooperative 
policies, that were put in place by the US and European central banks and finance ministries 
beginning  October  last  year,  helped  to  restore  some  traction  in  the  markets  and 
subsequently  improve  market  confidence  not  only  towards  the  major  economies,  but  also 
towards emerging markets.  
Conclusion  
2008 was a difficult year, to say the least. The global economies reached some highs and 
lows not seen in over a hundred years.  
Philosopher George Santayana, who I just found out traces some historical associations to 
the Philippines, said “Those who do not remember the past are condemned to repeat it.”  
The Philippines is not a newbie in terms of crisis, we have faced quite a number of those in 
the  past.  Each  crisis  we  encountered  was  unique  in  its  roots  and  causes.  But  we  have 
learned from each, every time. It’s too early to make prescriptions, given that much is still to 
unfold. But as I end today’s remarks, I’d like to share some themes we may pick up even at 
this stage from this current crisis. I take these from our own acronym – BSP. Some of you 
may have read this from a previous interview but I thought it would be appropriate for this 
audience. I repeat it hear with some slight modification.  
B – Be prepared, keep your tools sharp (Review cost structures, enhance product offerings) 
S – Stay alert to spot opportunities (Consider trends and structural changes, enlarge market 
scope, do research) 
P – Push ahead! 
As I scan this audience, I see a wealth of experience that covers the breadth and depth of 
the crises the Philippines has gone through in the last three decades. So I know, what I have 
just shared as lessons with you is not news to you.  
The BSP is doing its part to limit the impact of the crisis and to anticipate the upturn, but we 
cannot  do  this  alone.  We  need  the  full  support  and  cooperation  of  the  private  sector  and 
those among your ranks to make us and the whole nation ready for that upturn.  
Let us preserve what we have stored in 2008 and, together, let us build further on these in 
2009.  
Thank you for the opportunity to share these thoughts with you.  
I wish you and your loved ones all the best possible for 2009! 
4 
 BIS Review 2/2008
