Caleb M Fundanga: Improving financial inclusion in Zambia 
Remarks by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the Celpay Mobile 
Banking Conference, Lusaka, 16-17 September 2009. 
 The Chairman of the Board, Celpay Zambia, Dr Jacob Mwanza; 
The Chief executive Officer, Celpay International, Mr L. Muchenje; 
Chief Executive Officers and Representatives of Banks and Financial Institutions present; 
Distinguished Invited Guests and Resource Persons; 
Members of the Press; 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
I  wish  to  express  my  gratitude  to  Celpay  Zambia  Limited  and  in  particular  to  Dr  Jacob 
Mwanza, the Chairman of the Board, for inviting me to speak at this important conference. I 
am informed that the conference aims to pave the way for the future of mobile banking in the 
quest to improve financial inclusion in our country. 
Mr  Chairman,  the  need  to  promote  wider  access  to  financial  services  through  innovative 
products  by  financial  institutions  and  other  market  players  cannot  be  overemphasized. 
Financial  services  are  a  critical  tool  to  ensure  that  entrepreneurs  step  onto  the  economic 
growth  ladder  and  create  a  brighter  future  by  tapping  their  own  creativity  in  income 
generating  activities.  The  provision  of  financial  services  to  the  majority  of  our  people 
especially the small and micro entrepreneurs who are financially excluded is a key element in 
alleviating poverty in the country. Improved access to financial services enables availability of 
funds  for  investment  in  income  generating  activities  that  ensure  that  the  public  lay  a 
foundation  for  better  standards  of  living.  Indeed  financial  services  are  instrumental  for 
broader  human  development,  as  people  invest  in  themselves  and  seek  protection  from 
external shocks. 
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen, as you are no doubt aware, the results arising from the 
2005  FinScope  demand  side  study  which  aimed  at  measuring  access,  usage,  perceptions 
and the demand patterns on financial services offered in Zambia were not encouraging. The 
findings of the study indicated that only 33.7% of the adult population was financially served. 
This  entailed  that  66.3%  of  the  Zambian  population  were financially  excluded  or  not  using 
banks or other financial institutions. Furthermore, the supply side study conducted in 2007 
also highlighted a number of weaknesses in the financial sector including, limited outreach of 
banks and financial institutions to the general populace, high spreads between deposit and 
lending rates, excessive collateral requirements and poorly managed cost structures which 
contribute to limiting outreach. 
As  a  consequence  of  the  low  levels  of  access  to  financial  services,  the  Bank  of  Zambia 
adopted financial inclusiveness as one of its strategic objectives to ensure improved levels of 
access  for  all.  In  this  regard,  it  is  gratifying  to  note  that  following  the  survey,  commercial 
banks and other non-bank financial institutions including Celpay have increasingly become 
receptive  to  the  calls  for  increased provision  of  financial services.  A  number  of  banks  and 
financial  services  providers  have  increased  their  branch  networks,  lending  to  small  and 
medium-sized enterprises have been increased while financial products specifically designed 
to meet the financing needs of the lower end of the market in both rural and peri-urban areas 
have  been  introduced.  One  such  product  that  banks  and  other  institutions  in  the 
telecommunication  sector  have  strived  to  promote  in  order  to  increase  inclusion  is  mobile 
banking. 
As you are no doubt aware, Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen, mobile banking represents 
a significantly cheaper alternative to conventional branch based banking as it allows financial 
institutions  and  other  commercial  players  to  offer  financial  services  outside  the  traditional 
BIS Review 111/2009 
 1
that  most  of 
the  operators  are 
local  companies.  However, 
brick  and  mortar  bank  concept.  Mobile  banking  uses  channels  such  as  retail  agents  and 
mobile phones to increase financial outreach to the un-banked communities. Mobile banking 
has  revolutionalised  banking  worldwide  and  I  am  glad  to  note  that  Zambia  is  playing  a 
leading role in the development of the mobile banking industry in the SADC region. As you 
may  be  aware,  there  are  three  operational  mobile  payments  companies  that  have 
successfully penetrated the market in the past seven years. While a number of banks now 
offer mobile banking solutions. 
The  British  Broadcasting  Corporation  (BBC)  website  recently  carried  an  article  wherein,  it 
was acknowledged that Africa has the fastest growing mobile banking market in the world. 
The  significance  of  the  article  was  not  only  the  growth  of  the  industry  but  the 
acknowledgement 
in 
acknowledging  this  growth  and  the  important  contribution  of  mobile  banking  to  extending 
financial services to the poor, consumer protection should be taken as an integral component 
of any business model that is developed. To this end, the Bank of Zambia working with other 
key stakeholders such as the Communications Authority will play its role in ensuring that the 
provision of an enabling regulatory environment is carefully balanced with the need to protect 
consumers. 
Mr.  Chairman,  the  Celpay  conference  on  mobile  banking  could  not  have  come  at  a  more 
opportune time when the country is facing numerous challenges arising from the impact of 
the recent financial and economic crisis. Due to the underperformance of various sectors of 
the  economy  during  the  period  of  the  crisis,  provision  of  financial  services  was  somehow 
curtailed while non-performing loans has been on the rise. In order to ameliorate the effects 
of  this  downturn  and  further  improve  financial  inclusion,  it  is  imperative  to  develop  cost 
effective  innovative  products  such  as  mobile  banking.  It  is  therefore  expected  that  this 
conference will come up with solutions that will enhance the extension of banking services to 
the poor and at affordable rates. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, recent statistics on telecommunications indicate that there are about 
three million subscribers across the three mobile networks  currently licensed to operate in 
Zambia.  This  extensive  coverage  obviously  offers  a  great  opportunity  to  enhance  the 
standards of living of our people. As we embrace mobile banking, the primary objective of 
Zambia’s mobile banking framework should be to empower the millions of citizens who do 
not have access to conventional banking. The essential spirit of mobile banking should be 
financial inclusion. In this regard, facilitating mobile banking will contribute to the distribution 
of resources to productive activities such as farming as well as directing resources to areas 
where there are most needed. In addition the policy framework should be flexible enough to 
allow the industry players to explore various business models. 
To  this  end  the  National  Payment  Systems  Act  of  2007  has  provided  a  platform  for 
businesses involved in mobile banking and money transmission to be designated. The need 
for  effective  regulation  to  ensure  a  stable  financial  sector  and  protection  of  consumers  is 
vital. Nevertheless, regulation should facilitate and not impede development and must create 
an  optimal,  dynamic  and  agile  banking  environment.  As  Regulators  we  must  therefore  be 
open minded to new market solutions while the developers need to constantly engage the 
regulator in their product development. In stressing the need for effective regulation, I must 
emphasise the need for providers to observe the mandate and requirements of their licences. 
Mobile  services  providers  must  not  perform  banking  services  as  this  is  the  domain  of 
licensed banks. 
Finally,  I  also  wish  to  stress  that  mobile  service  providers  and  mobile  banking  solutions 
developers need to have in place robust business continuity plans that will ensure minimum 
disruption to services in the event of disasters. It is not unusual for one to be turned away at 
customers counters on account of the lack of basic facilities due to for instance power failure 
or  link  failure  when  these  can  be  mitigated  where  there  are  proper  contingency  plans  in 
2 
 BIS Review 111/2009
place. The Bank of Zambia will therefore ensure that sound business continuity plans are in 
place when evaluating new applications. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, as we develop these well meaning products, I wish to appeal to the 
service  providers  to  ensure  that  investment  in  such  infrastructure  is  complemented  by 
investment  in  financial  literacy.  We  need  to  ensure  that  we  are  providing  individuals  and 
communities  with  the  level  of  financial  education  needed  to  grasp  both  the  benefits  and 
pitfalls  of  their  easier  access  to  financial  services.  This  will  in  part  minimize  the  risks 
associated with such innovative products as people will only make better judgments about 
their financial affairs if they understand the risks and returns associated with the product and 
services at their disposal. It is also apparent that financial illiteracy is more costly as people 
who make poor financial decisions will inevitably end up with a far lower standard of living 
than was otherwise achievable. 
Mr.  Chairman,  I  wish  to  conclude  by  applauding  Celpay’s  initiative  to  host  the  first  ever 
mobile conference in Zambia. The deliberations and recommendations of this conference will 
be keenly followed as the need to leverage access to financial services through the mobile 
phone is of paramount importance. Mobile banking will lead to increased outreach, increased 
efficiency and productivity as well as increased returns for businesses. Let me once again 
assure you, Mr. Chairman that, the Bank of Zambia is committed to providing an enabling 
environment through appropriate regulation for banks and financial businesses that wish to 
promote financial inclusion. We appreciate the Mobile Banking initiative by Celpay Zambia 
Limited and look forward to greater investment in financial inclusion in our beloved country. 
I thank you. 
BIS Review 111/2009 
 3
