Papali’I T Scanlan: Preventing money laundering and financing of 
terrorism in Samoa 
Speech by Mr Papali’I T Scanlan, Governor of the Central Bank of Samoa, at the Anti-Money 
Laundering  and  Countering  Terrorist  Financing  Activities  Workshop 
for  Non-Profit 
Organizations in Samoa, Apia, 13 May 2009. 
 Dear Colleagues, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Good Morning. 
At  the  outset,  I  would  like  to  welcome  all  of  you  to  this  Anti  Money  Laundering  and 
Countering  Terrorist  Financing  Activities  workshop,  which  is  specifically  designed  for  Non-
Profit Organizations (or NPOs). 
Thank you for accepting our invitation, and especially for sparing the time to be with us this 
morning. 
The  main  objective  of  this  one  day  workshop  is  to  promote  and  enhance  your  individual 
Organization’s awareness and understanding of the important aspects involved in fighting the 
offences of money laundering and the financing of terrorism in Samoa. 
I understand that there are more than four hundred (400) NPOs registered with the Ministry 
of Commerce, Industry and Labor (MCIL). However, we have adopted a selective approach 
with the assistance of MCIL in identifying yourselves, as being the important entities to kick 
start this “Awareness Raising Program.” 
On that note, I would like to thank the MCIL for the support provided to the Central Bank in 
coordinating this important event. 
Let me also thank several representatives of the various Government Ministries who are here 
with  us  today.  We  appreciate  your  accepting  of  our  request  to  share  with  the  participants 
your  knowledge  and  experience  in  this  field  of  your  Ministry’s  work,  which  reflects  your 
regulatory  role  towards  preventing  and/or  detecting  criminals  offences,  including  money 
laundering. 
This is the first Workshop of its kind on this important topic, with emphasis on the role of the 
NPOs to detect and prevent the offences of money laundering or terrorist financing activities. 
Money  laundering  and  the  financing  of  terrorists  are  problems  that  should  concern  us  all. 
They are not problems for only the Government and the law enforcement agencies to worry 
about.  Rather,  the  public  sector,  the  business  community,  the  private  sector  and  even 
ordinary citizens must play a role in combating these illegal activities. 
This Workshop is therefore opportune, as it covers one of the important sectors, other than 
financial  institutions.  I  am  referring  of  course  to  yourselves,  the  Non-profit  Organization 
Sector. 
Non-profit organization sector 
There is a strong belief internationally that the non-profit organizations sector is one of the 
more  vulnerable  sectors,  which  criminals  would  try  and  exploit  to  conduct  their  illegal 
activities without attracting much attention. 
And,  some  of  the  reasons  for  such  vulnerability  relate  to  generally  weak  management 
structures  and  the  lack  of  regulatory  supervision  over  NPOs  operation.  Many  jurisdictions 
BIS Review 85/2009 
 1
have  relatively  low  institutional  capacity  to  monitor  NPOs  and  detect  their  being  used  for 
money laundering and by terrorist. 
Some jurisdictions even indicate their unwillingness to impose a regulatory requirement on 
this  Sector.  In  any  case,  there  are  several  key  questions  that  need  answers  to  properly 
identify NPOs and their activities in a country. These questions include: 
i) 
ii) 
iii) 
iv) 
v) 
vi) 
vii) 
So  it  is  fair  to  say  that  there  are  major  challenges  and  practical  issues  that  need  careful 
consideration when the issue of money laundering and terrorist financing is discussed from 
the perspective of NPOs. 
What is an NPOs sector ? 
How many NPOs are in operation? 
What types are they (religious, cultural, educational, sports). 
What activities do they perform? 
Are there registration requirements and record keeping requirements for NPOs? 
Are there reporting requirements? 
Are there mechanisms to verify funds are spent as advertised and planned? 
The global concern 
Let me now briefly highlight some of the concerns that have emerged globally in the area of 
money laundering and terrorist financing. 
The goal of a large number of criminal acts is to generate a profit for the individual or group 
that carry out these acts. Money laundering is the processing of these criminal proceeds to 
disguise their illegal origin. This process is of critical importance, as it enables the criminal to 
enjoy these profits without jeopardizing their source. 
Illegal arms sales, smuggling and the activities of organized crime, including, for example, 
drug trafficking, human trafficking and prostitution rings, can generate huge amounts of cash. 
Embezzlement,  bribery  and  computer  fraud  schemes  can  also  produce  large  profits  and 
create the incentive to “legitimize” the ill-gotten gains through money laundering. 
When a criminal activity generates substantial profits, the individual or group involved must 
find  a  way  to  control  the  funds  without  attracting  attention  to  the  underlying  activity  or  the 
persons  involved.  Criminals  do  this  by  disguising  the  sources,  changing  the  forms  of  the 
funds, or moving the said funds to a place where they are less likely to attract attention. 
In response to mounting concern over money laundering, the Financial Action Task Force on 
money laundering (FATF) was established by the G-7 Summit in Paris in 1989 to develop a 
coordinated  international  response.  One  of  the  first  task  of  the  FATF  was  to  develop 
Recommendations, (40 in all, plus 9 Special Recommendations) which set out the measures 
national governments should take to implement effective anti-money laundering programs. 
The  FATF  works  closely  with  other  international  bodies  involved  in  fight  against  money 
laundering. And, one of those international organizations is the Asia Pacific Group on Money 
Laundering (the APG) in which Samoa is a member. 
The APG was officially established as an autonomous regional anti-money laundering body 
in February 1997 for Asia and the Pacific region at the Fourth Asia/Pacific Money Laundering 
Symposium  in  Bangkok,  Thailand.  This  was  the  culmination  of  a  process  of  “awareness 
raising” in the Asia Pacific region initiated by the FATF as part of its global strategy. 
To  date,  the  APG  has  39  member  countries  and  a  number  of  international  and  regional 
observers, including the United Nations, the IMF and the World Bank. 
2 
 BIS Review 85/2009
As  a  member  of  the  APG,  Samoa  is  required  to  undertake  a  domestic  review  of  its  NPO 
sector  to  determine  the  degree  of  vulnerability  to  money  laundering  and  terrorist  financing 
activities. 
I should stress that this workshop is part and parcel of such a review. 
Under  the  conditions  of  membership,  all  APG  members  have  committed  to  implement  the 
FATF Forty Recommendations and Nine Special Recommendations. 
Special Recommendation VIII relates to non-profit organizations. 
SRVIII calls on all countries to “review the adequacy of laws and regulations that relate to 
entities  that  can  be  abused  for  money  laundering  and  financing  of  terrorism.  Non-profit 
organizations  are  particularly  vulnerable  and  countries  should  ensure  that  they  cannot  be 
misused: 
i) 
ii) 
by terrorist organizations posing as legitimate entities; 
to  exploit  legitimate  entities  as  conduits  for  terrorist  financing,  including  for  the 
purpose of escaping asset freezing measures; and 
to conceal or obscure the illegal diversion of funds intended for legitimate purposes to 
terrorist organizations.” 
iii) 
What is the scale of the problem? 
By  its  very  nature,  money  laundering  occurs  outside  of  the  normal  range  of  economic 
statistics.  Nevertheless,  as  with  other  aspects  of  underground  economic  activity,  rough 
estimates have been put forward to give some sense of the scale to the problem. 
The International Monetary Fund (IMF), for example, has stated that the aggregate size of 
money  laundering  in  the  world  could  be  somewhere  between  two  to  five  percent  of  the 
world’s  Gross  Domestic  Products  (GDP).  And  using  latest  statistics,  these  percentages 
would indicate that money laundering range between 2 to 3 Trillion US Dollars. 
The program 
A  quick  look  at  today’s  Workshop  agenda  indicates  that  you  have  an  intensive  program 
ahead of you. You will be covering a lot of important details such as; what money laundering 
is,  the  methods  that  criminals  apply  to  hide  their  proceeds  of  crime,  what  effects  money 
laundering could have on economic development, the connection with society at large and 
efforts Government is doing to combat money laundering. 
So,  I  do  not  intent  to  dwell  too  much  in  those  details.  But  suffice  to  say  that  Samoa  is 
committed  to  fight  the  offence  of  money  laundering  and  countering  terrorist  financing 
activities that might occur on our shores. We will prosecute criminals that intent to use our 
financial system to hide their ill-gotten proceeds. 
Legislative framework 
Samoa  passed  its  Money  Laundering  Prevention  Act  in  2000.  This  Act  was  however 
repealed and replaced by the Money Laundering Prevention Act 2007. The latter legislation 
provides  a  more  comprehensive  legislative  framework  for  the  Samoa  Money  Laundering 
Prevention  Authority  (MLPA)  to  actively  investigate  any  suspicious  transactions  that  are 
alleged  to  involve  money  laundering.  The  Suppression  and  Prevention  of  Terrorism  Act 
2002, contains provisions for countering terrorist financing activities. 
In addition to the above legislations, Parliament has also passed the Proceeds of Crime Act 
2007  and  Mutual  Assistance  in  Criminal  Matters  Act  2007.  These  two  legislation  provides 
BIS Review 85/2009 
 3
explicit and appropriate powers for our law enforcement agencies to conduct investigation, 
obtain relevant evidence for prosecution, share and exchange information with the relevant 
law enforcement agencies (both local and overseas), as well as provide mutual assistance to 
other jurisdictions on criminal matters. 
We  have  established  a  Money  Laundering  Prevention  Task  Force  which  comprises  of  the 
Attorney  General,  the  CEOs  of  the  Ministry  of  Revenue,  the  Prime  Minister’s  Office,  the 
Samoa  International  Finance  Authority,  the  Ministry  of  Police  and  myself  as  Head  of  the 
Money Laundering Prevention Authority. 
We have also established a Financial Intelligence Unit (FIU) within the Financial Institutions 
Department  of  the  Central  Bank,  directly  responsible  for  coordinating  and  undertaking  the 
implementation of our AML/CFT regime. Our FIU has powers under the Money Laundering 
Prevention Act 2007 to receive and analyse all Suspicious Transaction Reports (STRs) from 
all financial institutions or any person(s) suspicious of money laundering offence in Samoa. 
Get rich-quick operators in the region 
I want to talk briefly about the so called “get rich-quick schemes” that have emerged recently 
in the Pacific Region. 
Pacific  Island  Countries,  including  Samoa,  recognize  the  critical  role  that  domestic  and 
overseas private investors as well as the inflow of capital, knowledge and technology have 
played and will continue to play in the development of the region. 
Genuine investors are of course welcomed. But, in recent years, there appears to have been 
an  increase  in  the  number  of  operators  of  dubious  financial  background  who  move  from 
country  to  country  taking  advantage  of  gullible  governments  and  private  individuals  and 
entities. Their intention is to defraud governments and people by convincing them to accept 
and/or invest in get-rich-quick projects that are later proven to be just pure scams. 
I  should  mention  that  we  have  come  across  a  wide  range  of  scams  in  the  past,  some  of 
which  have  been  repeated  in  several  countries  by  different  or  most  probably,  the  same 
operators. In the event, sharing of information about such experiences would benefit us all in 
our efforts to protect our financial system, not to mention our people, from such abuses. 
The features of scams touted around the Pacific are mostly similar, except a few cosmetic 
variations  in  some  cases.  Usually,  substantial  benefits  are  promised  by  the  get-rich-quick 
operators in return for payments made by the victims or some contingent liabilities accepted 
by Governments and private individuals up front. 
Let me state some examples for your reference: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
(The last two on the list have come up quite often through the internet and email messages. ) 
Letters of Guarantee 
A loan for Indigenous Development 
A loan to a private company 
Sale of Passports 
The Nigerian Scam 
Lottery winnings 
Capacity building 
Let me end with a word on capacity building. 
4 
 BIS Review 85/2009
We can have the best laws to combat money laundering, the best system to prosecute the 
offenders  but  if  we  lack  the  human  capacity  to  implement  them,  then  our  efforts will  be  in 
vain. Hence, building local capacity must therefore be at the forefront of our efforts. 
The same concern applies to NPOs. That is, building capacities within the structures of our 
NPOs  to  be  able  to  identify  suspicious  transactions  and  reporting  them  to  the  Money 
Laundering  Prevention  Authority  (MLPA)  is  an  important  feature  of  Samoa’s  anti-money 
laundering and countering terrorist financing activities regime. 
I  understand  that  the  MCIL  may  need  to  incorporate  in  its  existing  legislation  some 
requirements for NPOs to comply with anti-money laundering measures and requirements. 
Some key requirements would include proper customer identification. 
That  is,  the  NPOs  must  have  a  good  understanding  of  who  their  customers  are  and  their 
sources of funds as well as the purpose of conducting financial transactions through or with 
them. Another important requirement relate to the proper keeping of books and records that 
would assist any investigation that may involve information or records of NPOs. 
Conclusion 
In  concluding,  I  should  reiterate  that  it  is  everyone’s  responsibility  to  do  something  about 
protecting Samoa from the offence of money laundering and terrorist financing activities. 
And,  although  one  of  Government’s  principal  and  ongoing  task  is  to  increase  public 
awareness,  there  is  still  a  lack  of  common  knowledge  within  the  public  domain  of  what 
constitutes a money laundering offence. 
Indeed, such is further complicated by the fact that this invisible crime operates on the fringe 
of society, acting as a bridge between the underworld and the rest. 
Hence, we need a collaborative approach to work together to overcome such challenges that 
could damage the image and reputation of Samoa’s financial system, as well as the good 
standing of NPOs in the country. 
I  now  have  the  pleasure  of  officially  opening  this  Anti-Money  Laundering  and  Countering 
Terrorist Financing Activities Workshop. 
BIS Review 85/2009 
 5
