Bandid Nijathaworn: Financial developments and the Thai banking sector 
Keynote address by Dr Bandid Nijathaworn, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the 
Third Euromoney Thailand Investment Forum, Bangkok, 10 June 2009.  
 Thank you and Good morning 
First let me thank Euromoney for the invitation. It is an honour to be speaking to you today. 
For the last few years that I have been coming to this forum to speak, I find the session to be 
very useful as it provides an excellent opportunity for us at the Bank of Thailand to interact 
and share our views with investors on Thailand’s current issues, including our policies. So, it 
is a pleasure to be here this morning. 
My  topic  today  is  about  financial  developments  and  the  Thai  banking  sector.  Given  the 
limitations of time, I want to focus my remark today on two issues. The first is the short-term 
issue about the current economic and financial conditions, and the policy response that we 
have had in trying to strengthen the process of recovery. Next, I will speak on the medium-
term issue of financial sector reform, beginning with how we see the new or the post-crisis 
financial landscape emerging and our plan to respond to these changes in the context of our 
financial sector Master Plan. 
First, the current conditions. 
Latest economic data in Thailand continues to show deterioration in economic activities as 
evidenced  by  the  estimated  decline  of  7.1  percent  in  this  year’s  first  quarter  GDP  growth. 
However,  most  recently,  while  the  overall  domestic  activities  remain  weak,  more  positive 
signs on the real sector are emerging, especially in the monthly April data that show greater 
stabilization in the pace of contraction on a month-on-month basis, of exports, manufacturing 
output,  capacity  utilization,  and  private  consumption,  as  well  as  a  narrowing  of  the  trade 
surplus.  
On the financial front, recent rally in equity prices is also positive. The rally, which is largely 
liquidity  driven,  is  indicative  of  two  developments  that  are  taking  place  in  our  financial 
markets at this time: first, the resurgence of capital inflows linked to the return of risk appetite 
globally;  and  second,  the  search  for  yield  by  Thai  savers,  on  account  of  the  low  nominal 
deposit  rates,  which  sees  savings  shifting  away  from  bank  deposits  to  other  instruments. 
Hence, the latest round of deposit rates increase by banks can be seen as a response to this 
development. 
On liquidity, at this time, liquidity in the Thai banking system remains ample. Loan-to-deposit 
ratio, including B/E, was at 83.9 percent in April. Bank credit continues to grow on a year-on-
year basis, but fell by 2.7 percent since December last year. The decline largely reflects the 
fall  in  corporate  loan  demand  on  account  of  the  slowing  economy.  Consumer  credit  and 
mortgage  loans,  on  the  other  hand,  continue  to  register  positive  growth,  and  this  has 
provided an important underpinning for consumer spending thus far. Inflation, on the other 
hand,  continues  its  downtrend  in  May,  and  although  we  see  inflation  numbers  turning 
negative, the current uptick in commodities and asset prices, together with signs of greater 
stabilization in the real sector, help lessen the concern regarding deflation risk. 
Against this background, the Monetary Policy Committee in its meeting on May 20th held the 
view that monetary policy has been substantially eased and the current policy rate at 1.25 
percent  remains  supportive  of  the  economy.  Two  implications  must  be  drawn  from  this 
decision.  First,  given  the  low  policy  rate  and  the  ample  availability  of  liquidity,  more  gains 
could be made by ensuring that, at the current policy rate, the benefits of past rate reductions 
are  passed  on  more  fully  to  consumers  and  the  private  sector  through  corresponding 
adjustments in the banking system’s interest rates. The second implication is that, while the 
BIS Review 76/2009 
 1
emerging signs of stabilization are positive and are consistent with the developments on a 
worldwide basis, they must be treated with caution given that the current state of the global 
economy  and  financial  markets  are  still  far  from  normal.  Hence,  the  MPC  will  continue  to 
monitor closely the uncertainty surrounding both domestic and external economic conditions, 
and stand ready to implement appropriate monetary policy to support economic recovery in 
the period ahead. 
Turning now to the banking sector. The Thai banking sector was able to weather the impact 
of the global financial crisis with a relatively strong initial position. These strengths are found 
in the sector’s strong capital base, its limited exposure to subprime-related and other toxic 
assets, and its low reliance on external funding. As a result, the impact of the crisis on the 
Thai banking system so far has been limited. The Thai banking system is resilient with good 
fundamentals, and continues to function normally to support the economy. 
In the last two quarters, despite the consecutive negative GDP growths, the performance of 
the Thai banking sector remains satisfactory. The sector continues to see profits in the last 
two quarters, while the increase in the non-performing loans has not been large. This robust 
performance  reflects  a  number  of  common  responses  that  have  been  undertaken  by  the 
banks  to  manage  the  increase  in  credit  and  market  risks.  The  responses  include  parring 
down  of  investment  in  foreign  assets,  lowering  the  loan  growth  target  in  line  with  the 
economy,  strengthening  risk  management  and  credit  standards,  paying  close  attention  to 
liquidity,  and  acting  early  to  assist  clients  to  adjust  to  the  impact  of  the  shock.  These 
measures have helped banks to contain credit risk, and so far we have seen the gross NPL 
ratio rising slightly to 5.5 percent in March from 5.3 percent in December. 
As  for  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  our  approach  to  bank  supervision  during  this  time  of  global 
stress is to ensure that the banking system is healthy, and the system continues to operate 
fully to support the economy with good risk management and adequate capital. So far, this is 
very much the picture we are seeing. At end of March, the BIS ratio for capital adequacy for 
Thai banking system is 14.9 percent, of which the level for tier-one capital is 11.8 percent. 
On  the  issue  of  credit  extension,  to  ensure  adequate  flows  of  credit  to  the  economy,  our 
approach  has  been  to  rely  on  market  mechanism  by  encouraging  greater  competition 
amongst  banks  with  regard  to  interest  rates  adjustment  through  a  process  of  close 
consultation and dialogue. The recent round of bank’s lending rate adjustment following the 
last MPC meeting is a case in point. In addition, to help banks better manage the increased 
credit  risk,  a  credit  guarantee  scheme  backed  by  government  funding  has  been  set  up  to 
promote SME lending by banks. Also, to help resolve problems related to bank lending, the 
Bank  of  Thailand  has  set  up  a  customer-call  center  to  look  into  problems  related  to  loans 
application and approval between customers and banks.  
Going  forward,  the  slowing  economy  will  continue  to  put  pressure  on  the  asset  quality  of 
banks. Therefore, managing credit risk will continue to be an overriding focus of Thai banks 
this year. To do this effectively, banks need to have in place both a strong capital base and a 
good  risk  management  system,  both  of  which  have  been  strengthened  significantly  in  the 
past years in line with Basel II and international best practices. Therefore, this should enable 
our banks to manage risk adequately going forward while supporting the economy. 
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  second  topic  which  is  the  medium-term  issue  of  financial  sector 
reform. Although the Thai financial sector has proven resilient amidst the global crisis, reform 
of our financial sector needs to continue to ensure that the sector is well positioned to fully 
support the economy, in terms of efficiency and diversity of products. In addition, the current 
crisis will definitely bring about important changes in the global financial landscape, as well 
as  in  the  regulatory  approach  to  bank  regulation  and  supervision.  This  means  the  reform 
process must help position the financial sector to adapt to the emerging financial landscape, 
while contributing to increasing efficiency and the robustness of the financial system. 
On this issue, key trends that we can expect to see in the emerging financial landscape will 
include, on the demand side, consumers becoming more risk averse and having preference 
2 
 BIS Review 76/2009
for  local  institutions  and  for  simplicity  of  transactions  and  instruments,  while  demanding 
greater accountability and transparency. On the banking side, business models of banks will 
become more conservative, relying less on wholesale funding and on the use of leverage, 
while giving greater importance to risk management and higher liquidity buffer. And on the 
regulatory  front,  more  emphasis  will  definitely  be  on  surveillance  with  focus  on  systemic 
stability, and the roles of systemically important financial institutions including the non-bank. 
These  changes  are  the  key  essentials  that  will  define  the  emerging  financial  landscape  to 
which we will need to adjust. 
To ensure that Thailand reaps the benefits of the changing landscape and is in the position 
to mobilize resources for investment and support economic growth, the Bank of Thailand is 
set  to  launch  the  second  phase  of  our  financial  sector  Master  Plan  this  year  to  further 
enhance efficiency, robustness, and competitiveness of the Thai banking system.  
Our  Financial  Master  Plan  Phase  II  aims  to  promote  financial  system  efficiency  so  that 
financial institutions can perform their functions more efficiently, becoming more competitive, 
with  increased  financial  access  to  the  public.  The  plan  essentially  comprises  three  pillars. 
The  first  pillar  is  to  improve  the  regulatory  environment  and  to  reduce  the  unnecessary 
regulatory and legacy costs. The focus in this pillar will be on streamlining regulation, and on 
promoting measures and incentives to deal with legacy NPA and NPL, without compromising 
prudential oversight or good risk management.  
The  second  pillar  is  to  enhance  efficiency  by  injecting  more  competition  into  the  financial 
system. The focus will be on financial liberalization, increasing competition from the current 
and new players, and promoting greater financial access. The latter will give importance to 
expanding the retail banking businesses and promoting new microfinance business models 
and players.  
And  the  third  pillar  is  to  substantially  improve  the  economy’s  financial  infrastructure  in  the 
areas of risk management, credit information system, legal reform, information technology, 
and upgrading the quality of human resource. Such infrastructure is crucial for banks so that 
they can attain greater efficiency and more effective risk management at a lower cost. 
I will not have time today to dwell on the details of the plan, let me just say that the plan is 
now complete and is currently being considered by the finance ministry, and is scheduled to 
come into effect this year. It is our hope that this continuing momentum of reform will help 
expand the competitiveness and the growth of the Thai financial sector and the economy in 
the years to come. 
I probably have used up my allotted time. Again, I want to thank Euromoney for the invitation. 
It has been a pleasure and thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 76/2009 
 3
