Marion Williams: Sustainable effective regulatory systems 
Address by Dr Marion Williams, Governor of the Central Bank of Barbados, at the Meeting of 
Shadow GN 20091, Rome, 6-7 May 2009.  
 Introduction 
The presentation examines some critical areas in the development of sustainable effective 
regulatory systems, in the light of the G20, Group of Thirty on Financial reform and the recent 
IMF Report on Global Financial Stability. The presentation does not deal with a level of detail 
at  which  measures  must  be  implemented  but  adds  some  important  dimensions  for 
consideration  in  their  implementation:  nor  does  the  presentation  focus  on  all  possible 
measures to ensure sustainable regulatory systems. It accepts that many of the measures 
already  in  place  are  well  thought  through  and  focuses  on  some  of  important  areas  which 
need to be addressed or further modified. Though it analyses the issues in the context of the 
major financial markets it takes an emerging markets perspective on many of the issues and 
where  there  is  a  differential  impact  for  emerging  markets,  tries  to  evaluate  the  different 
impact of the implementation of some of these measures on emerging markets. 
Background to the financial crisis 
It was clear that regulatory systems failed in the lead up to the financial crisis. Part of the 
problem was insufficient oversight, over-reliance on the market, weak underwriting standards 
and  complex  and  opaque  financial  products,  inappropriate  incentive  systems,  insufficient 
regulation, but generally a lack of clarity about who should intervene and what measures the 
intervenor ought to take. In addition regulation had not kept up with the internationalization of 
transactions  and  with  the  increasing  complexity  in  financial  markets,  nor  was  there  clarity 
about  which  financial  markets  should  be  regulated  and  which,  if  any,  should  be  self 
regulatory. 
Some tenets of sustainable regulatory systems 
In  a  rapidly  changing  financial  environment,  it  is  clear  that  regulatory  systems  must  be 
dynamic and flexible bur must still avoid loopholes where financial institutions can circumvent 
regulation and benefit from regulatory arbitrage. At the same time regulation must not stifle 
innovation.  The  challenge  will  be  therefore  to  develop  systems  that  are  flexible  and 
comprehensive without being onerous.  
At the same time regulatory systems must be effective in the sense that they must identify 
the key reporting factors, factors that are important for measuring the stability of the entity 
and the level of risk to which it is exposed and its future viability in stressed scenarios, as 
well  as  the  impact  on  the  stability  of  the  system.  Speed  of  response,  given  the  level  of 
                                                 
1   Shadow  Gn  2009  is  a  meeting  of  a  group  of  international  experts  and  policy  makers  which  is  part  of  the 
International  Policy  Dialogue  on  International  Governance  Issues,  a  private  sector  funded  organization 
operating under the auspices of Columbia University. The meeting of 6th and 7th May was held in Rome in 
partnership with Luiss University, Italy. 
BIS Review 63/2009 
 1
technological advancement will also be important. On-line real time reporting should be the 
objective, so as to avoid regulators learning about crises after the fact. 
Common themes identified 
The  need  for  national  authorities  to  take  a  greater  role  in  regulation  while  at  the  same 
emphasizing  the  importance  of  international  cooperation  has  been  one  of  the  frequently 
repeated messages coming out of the financial crisis. Another has been the need to mitigate 
pro-cyclicality, the need for reform of the International Financial Institutions and the need to 
strengthen the macro prudential role of the IMF. A greater level of consolidated supervision 
and the need to include insurance companies, broker-dealers and bank holding companies in 
the  supervisory  framework  where  this  is  not  yet  the  case,  were  also  emphasized  in  most 
reports on the crisis. Maintenance of liquidity under stress conditions and the need for review 
of accounting standards, particularly the mark-to-criteria were other areas identified by may 
studies. There are however a few areas which need to be further examined and developed. 
Bailouts and rescue packages and implications for regulation 
Many studies have identified the critical regulatory weaknesses in the operation of the major 
financial  institutions  and  more  importantly  authorities  have  taken  steps  to  correct  the 
immediate  problems  at  the  operational  level.  Rescue  packages  have  helped  to  encourage 
the return of stability to the system, are intended to urge the opening of the credit markets, 
and slow the widening global recession which has been a consequence of the collapse of the 
financial systems in US and Europe, with consequential effects around the world. While this 
is critical, it is important and urgent to improve regulatory oversight and to ensure that the 
remedial measures are both appropriate and implementable. Rescue packages will help the 
immediate  problem  but  they  are  not  preventative  going  forward.  In  addition,  it is  important 
that financial institutions do not start to expect to be rescued and that there does not develop 
a  danger  of  their  failing  to  take  corrective  action  on  their  own  without  reliance  on  the 
regulator or the monetary authority. 
Speed in putting corrective regulatory measures in place 
Issues such as the large size of mega financial institutions and adequate capitalization in the 
financial industry remain matters which need to be addressed as a matter of urgency. While 
these matters have been flagged, actual corrective measures have not been put in place with 
a  long  term  perspective,  but  have  been  mostly  stop-gap  measures.  Perhaps,  part  of  the 
problem of the slow response of the credit providers and suppliers of funds is that, bailouts 
notwithstanding, suppliers are aware that the corrective aspect of the matter has not moved 
far beyond problem identification. 
Indeed,  while  there  has  been  a  fair  degree  of  consensus  on  problem  identification,  the 
authorities  have  not  approached  the  matter  of  remediation  of  the  regulatory  and  oversight 
issues with the same immediacy as they have the bailouts. There seems to be the view that 
this can be done in a more leisurely fashion. However, market participants may not be of this 
view, hence the reluctance to open the credit markets. 
Lender of last resort facilities – how wide should it extend? 
Investment banks have been the most significant players in the international credit markets 
but the issue of lender of last resort facilities to the non banks and insurance companies in 
post crisis situation needs also to be addressed. It is not clear that crisis-related lender of last 
resort facilities are intended to become a statutory right. Will the involvement in the US of 
Government  and  of  the  Fed  as  providers  of  liquidity  become  a  continuing  source  of  funds 
2 
 BIS Review 63/2009
availability going forward? What lessons are there here for other central banks. And will the 
face of central banking change in the light of these expectations? What are the conflict of 
interest  implications  of  such  involvement,  and  what  are  the  implications  for  risk–taking?  In 
many of the situations of involvement of the regulatory authority, the problem can arise also 
of an appropriate exit strategy. This should be identified early. 
The cost of financial crisis and who bears it 
At the global level, seriously affected developing countries and emerging markets who can 
least accommodate the global recession which has resulted from the failure of several major 
financial  institutions,  are  looking  at  ways  to  pass  on  some  of  the  business  costs  of  these 
collapses and near collapses away from their countries and institutions, but find that there is 
no  scope  for  so  doing,  as  they  remain  price  takers  in  the  credit  markets,  in  a  situation 
worsened  by  unavailability  of  financing.  It  is  important  that  these  costs  be  shared  by  the 
creators of these difficulties. This introduces moral obligation problems whose solutions are 
difficult to pinpoint. It is noted that while additional borrowing on flexible terms from the IMF is 
appreciated  many  emerging  markets  are  highly  indebted  and  therefore  require  grants  and 
not financing. This is so even for middle-income countries which have no fiscal space. 
Reform of the incentive system 
Perverse incentive systems in the industry have been identified as areas in need of review. 
There has been much debate about the size of compensation and incentive systems but not 
sufficient analysis of the manner in which this can be reconfigured to reduce risk assumption 
over  the  medium  term  by  originating  firms.  In  addition,  the  need  to  restrict  the  ability  to 
securitize risks away on to the portfolio of others may require some time frame for holding of 
the asset prior to securitizing and distribution. Indeed, there is a view in some quarters that 
the originator should be required to retain some portion of the asset to maturity. How much 
damage  this  would  do  in  discouraging  innovation  in  the  industry  remains  to  be  assessed. 
Overall, risk assessment techniques and the ability to transfer poor risks on to the books of 
other  unsuspecting  investors  must  be  corrected,  particularly  given  the  role  played  by  the 
credit  rating  agencies  in  failing  to  alert  investors  to  these  risks.  Indeed,  should  finance 
specialists be compensated in ways which relate to sales? Or is there a moral hazard here. 
Review of Basel II in light of the financial crisis 
The proposed Basel II regulations pertaining to self assessment via the Advanced Internal 
Ratings Based Approach, in light of the failure of banks in the US and Europe to properly self 
assess,  must  be  seriously  questioned.  This  will  involve  also  a  review  of  the  important 
proposed role for rating agencies in the Standardized Approach of Basel II, given their failure 
to provide early warning signals with respect to lack of awareness of the imminence of the 
financial crisis.  
The use of risk mitigation techniques 
The  role  and  the  prominence  given  to  risk  mitigation  techniques  and  the  fact  that  risk 
mitigation is only as reliable as the skills of the risk mitigator and the strength of the entity 
which  assumes  the  insurance  will  need  to  be  addressed.  Interlinkages  between  insurance 
and banking in the presence of credit default insurance must be regulated or the danger of 
double jeopardy will be repeated where the two activities are too interlinked. In this regard, a 
relevant question is: should there be stricter guidelines for risk mitigators and should credit 
default insurance be more strictly supervised and should such paper should be allowed to be 
bought by banks whether or not the credit insured is their own? 
BIS Review 63/2009 
 3
Should there be limits on size? 
The  issue  of  “too  big  to  fail”  has  been  a  mantra  frequently  heard  over  the  past  several 
months  in  explanation  of  the  need  for  bailouts.  However,  the  US  economy  has  anti-trust 
legislation. It may be useful to re-examine this with a view to developing special laws for the 
banking  industry,  in  order  to  deal  with  mega  banks  at  levels  which  minimize  the  risk  of 
becoming too big to fail. This could reduce the profitability and scale economies of banks, so 
the  benefits  and  costs  of  these  approaches  require  analysis  and  careful  study.  Another 
option is to increase capital requirements progressively when companies get too large. There 
would be a need for a clear definition of “too big”. Should this be defined in terms of market 
share or the limit on the ability to be bailed out? 
Developing wider norms for cross-border supervision 
The status of cross-border supervision needs to be fine-tuned. To what extent do regulators 
share  responsibility  for  cross-border  supervision  of  financial  entities  in  situations  where 
bailout  funds  come  from  the  national  treasury  of  particular  countries;  and  who  has 
responsibilities for overseas branches? Splitting responsibilities for providing liquidity is one 
aspect  of  the  problem,  since  liquidity  is  intended  to  be  temporary  and  will  be  repaid,  but 
bailouts tend to be permanent and one-way. This introduces the issue of the extent to which 
the  manner  in  which  subsidiary  legislation  is  written  should  take  precedence  over  the 
obligation for ensuring shared financial stability not only in the country of headquarters but in 
the country where branches are located. It might appear that some international protocol may 
be required to clarify the rights and obligations of the parties. 
A single regulator? Complexity versus collaboration 
The role of a single regulator and the separation of regulation of the banking system from the 
central banks monetary role has always been a point of difference among central banks. It 
would  be  useful  to  review  the  stability  of  the  financial  systems  in  various  countries  to 
evaluate which system has had fewer regulatory problems? (Those where the central bank is 
regulator and those where it is not.) There is evidence that some cases of separation did not 
work out very well. Is there likely to be a trend back to the status quo before separation? It is 
sometimes argued that each area of regulation is becoming increasingly specialized and a 
general  knowledge  is  no  longer  what  is  required.  Is  it  reasonable  for  a  single  regulator  to 
have  the  depth  required  in  each  field?  Yet  there  is  undoubtedly  need  for  regulatory 
collaboration given the increasing inter-relatedness of financial transactions. How is this best 
achieved?  It  may  be  possible  to  have  regulatory  collaboration  and  in  depth  expertise  in 
specialist areas with out having a single regulator. Rules of collaboration would need to be 
worked out to make this work. 
International oversight: the scope 
A very important response of the G20 was the establishment of the Financial Stability Board, 
an institution with wider representation than the Financial Stability Forum. In this regard there 
is a question of the scope of the Board. There is an interesting issue which begins to emerge 
from  the  first  correspondence  coming  from  the  Financial  Stability  Board  which  gives  the 
impression that their mandate includes the cross-border activities of firms. It seems important 
to  clarify  whether  theirs is  a  mandate  which  extends  beyond  banks  to  the  wider  corporate 
world.  It  is  however  true  that  globalized  mega-corporations  can  become  weak  links  in  an 
increasingly  interconnected  world,  and  that  the  same  kinds  of  issues  that  arose  in  global 
banks could arise in global corporations in the real sector. This leads to the question of cross 
border  flows  and  the  authority  to  deal  with  these  issues.  It  is  not  clear  how  the  Financial 
4 
 BIS Review 63/2009
Stability Board will move from problem identification to implementation of recommendations 
without being given greater authority. 
A greater role for emerging markets: the asymmetry between cost and control 
The  emphasis  in  the  regulatory  world  has  been  on  the  systemically  important  countries. 
However,  the  example  of  the  last  six  months  has  shown  that  though  it  was  the  most 
systemically important country which created the problem, it affected the entire world. This is 
vindication of the argument that developing countries should have a bigger voice in setting 
supervisory standards, because when they fail, developing countries are seriously affected 
even  though  they  had  no  part  in  the  construction.  Gradual  steps  are  being  made  in 
recognition of these facts and more is expected. However, it brings us back to the question of 
legitimacy, voice, representation and ensuring compliance. 
Is disintermediation increasing? 
There  are  small  signs  that  the  post  crisis  period  has  been  seeing  an  increased  level  of 
disintermediation where brokers are bringing the larger borrowers and lenders together and 
where traditional banking arrangements are being avoided. It would seem that this has even 
greater risks than the institutional approach, since at least they were guidelines and provisos, 
whereas in private party contracts, the parties are just covered by the law of contract and 
other  very  generalized  rules  governing  setting  and  fulfillment  of  obligations.  This  must  be 
watched. 
Over-regulation as a possible over-reaction 
One concern coming out of the collapse of the financial system in US and Europe is that just 
as  in  the  post  Enron  situation,  there  was  a  perceived  over-reaction  in  the  form  of  the 
Sarbanes Oxley legislation, that very shortly there could be an over-reaction in the financial 
regulatory  domain,  and  that  this  could  have  adverse  implications  for  financial  liberalization 
and financial innovation. It will be important that we learn from that experience and that the 
right balance be struck. 
Regional regulatory organisations 
The suggestion coming out of the Turner Report for the development of regional regulators 
seems to be a useful one. The development of colleges of regulators is another option for 
achieving collaboration but the issue of national sovereignty and regional authority will need 
to be addressed. 
These points expand on, or are additional to those made in the G20 report. In general, the 
problem identification process has gone well. There is clearly a great deal of work to be done 
to  ensure  that  oversight  systems  in  the  financial  sector  are  repaired  to  the  extent  where 
financial  crises  such  as  this  does  not  re-occur.  The  experience  of  this  crisis  however  has 
underscored the need to redefine what is “systemically important” more in terms of the inter-
related nature and international nature of transactions and not merely in terms of size of the 
entity.  But  it  has  also  emphasized  that  because  of  public  resource  constraints,  something 
needs to be done to prevent entities from becoming “too big to fail”. 
BIS Review 63/2009 
 5
