Chea Chanto: Opening remarks at the BIS Advanced Reserve 
Management workshop 
Opening remarks by H.E. Chea Chanto, Governor of the National Bank of Cambodia, at the 
Advanced Reserve Management Workshop, Siem Reap, 21 April 2009. 
 Mr. Eli Remolona, Chief Representative, BIS Asian Office,  
Mrs. Miranda Tam, Deputy Chief Representative, BIS Asian Office,  
Mr. Jean-Pierre Matt, Head of Financial Analysis of BIS Head Office,  
Distinguished guests, Ladies and Gentlemen,  
- 
- 
- 
- 
Good morning! 
Today, I have the great pleasure and honor to be invited to deliver some opening remarks for 
the  BIS  workshop  on  Advanced  Reserve  Management.  This  is  the  first  time  that  the  BIS 
organize such a workshop in Cambodia and I hope there will be more opportunities to join 
together in the future.  
Taking  this  opportunity,  I  would  like  to  express  my  warmest  welcome  to  the  BIS  resource 
speakers from BIS Head Office and BIS Asian Office and central bank participants from the 
Asia and Pacific region to this workshop as well as to Cambodia. I sincerely appreciate the 
BIS for their selection of the ancient capital city of Angkor in Siem Reap province as the site 
for this workshop.  
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen,  
Let me share with you a brief outline of Cambodia’s economic development in recent years. 
Cambodia is considered a small open economy, one which realized average GDP growth of 
about 10% from 2005 to 2008 and gradually increased the level of international reserves to a 
level which can ensure 3.8 months of imports. The financial system in Cambodia, which is 
dominated by the banking sector, is considered strong. This is reflected in figures from the 
end of 2007 which show that total banking assets increased by 53.6%, bank deposits rose by 
59.4%, and loans to the private sector went up by 52%.  
However, with the global financial crisis that has affected most of the continents, Cambodia’s 
total banking assets declined a bit in the last quarter of 2008 and the economy is expected to 
have very little growth in 2009.  
The  National  Bank  of Cambodia  still  manages  its  reserves  in  a  conservative  manner,  with 
principle  strategies  prioritized  by:  first,  safety;  second,  liquidity;  and  third,  returns.  This 
conservative strategy is appropriate in light of the current financial turmoil. But with gradual 
increases of reserves, one’s portfolio should be well diversified and reserve managers should 
have a solid risk management and analytical skills. Therefore, capacity building needs to be 
continuously strengthened. BIS is the best counterpart in capacity building for central banks, 
especially for the National Bank of Cambodia. Every year BIS provides on-site training to our 
reserve managers and I hope the BIS continue providing this kind of training and cooperation 
in the future.  
Distinguishes guests, ladies and gentlemen,  
I  believe  that  the  selected  topics  for  this  workshop  are  crucial  and  match  with  the  current 
global  financial  crisis.  I  hope  this  workshop  will  produce  fruitful  discussions  and  provide  a 
platform  for  reserve  managers  to  receive  good  lessons  while  exploring  best  practices  in 
setting the policy framework for the investment and management of reserves.  
BIS Review 51/2009 
 1
In  addition,  I  believe  that  this  BIS  workshop  will  also  provide  all  of  you  the  opportunity  to 
discover Angkor, to visit interesting places and to get to know about Cambodian people and 
their culture.  
Last  but  not  least,  let  me  wish  you  an  active,  productive  and  successful  discussion.  The 
National Bank of Cambodia is very pleased with the current cooperation with the BIS.  
I wish you all good luck. Please have a pleasant stay in our ancient capital city of Siem Reap, 
Angkor.  
Thank you! 
2 
 BIS Review 51/2009
