Duvvuri Subbarao: India – managing the impact of the global financial 
crisis 
Speech  by  Dr  Duvvuri  Subbarao,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
Confederation  of  Indian  Industry's  National  Conference  and  Annual  Session  2009,  New 
Delhi, 26 March 2009. 
 Introduction 
Less than a year ago, much of what has happened in the Indian economy since last October 
would have been hard to anticipate. I recall, around this time last year, the most frequently 
asked questions (FAQs) were, what are the factors that put India on a high growth trajectory 
and what can we do to remain there? Today, the FAQ is, when and how do we get back on 
to the high growth trajectory? The sharp turn around in the FAQs summarizes in a nutshell 
the impact of the global financial crisis on India. 
Global outlook 
The  global  economic  outlook  deteriorated  sharply  over  the  last  quarter.  In  a  sign  of  the 
ferocity of the down turn, the IMF marked down, yet again, its estimate for global growth in 
2009 to a range of (-)1.0 to (-)0.5 per cent, the first global contraction in 60 years. With all the 
advanced  economies  –  the  United  States,  Europe  and  Japan  –  having  firmly  gone  into 
recession, the  contagion  of  the  crisis  from  the  financial sector  to  the  real  sector  has  been 
unforgiving  and  total.  Recent  evidence  suggests  that  contractionary  forces  are  strong: 
demand has slumped, production is plunging, job losses are rising and credit markets remain 
in seizure. Most worryingly, world trade – the main channel through which the downturn will 
get  transmitted  on  the  way  forward  –  is  projected  to  contract  by  2.8  per  cent  in  2009,  the 
fastest pace of shrinkage in the last 80 years. 
Policy  making  around  the  world  is  in  clearly  uncharted  territory.  Governments  and  central 
banks  across  countries  have  responded  to  the  crisis  through  big,  aggressive  and 
unconventional  measures.  There  is  a  contentious  debate  on  whether  these  measures  are 
adequate and appropriate, and when, if at all, they will start to show results. There has also 
been a separate debate on how abandoning the rule book, driven by the tyranny of the short-
term, is compromising medium-term sustainability. What is clearly beyond debate though is 
that  this  Great  Recession  of  2008/09  is  going  to  be  deeper  and  the  recovery  longer  than 
earlier thought. 
Decoupling hypothesis and emerging economies 
Contrary to the “decoupling hypothesis”, emerging economies too have been hit by the crisis. 
The decoupling hypothesis, which was intellectually fashionable even as late as a year ago, 
held that even if advanced economies went into a downturn, emerging economies will remain 
unscathed  because  of  their  substantial  foreign  exchange  reserves,  improved  policy 
framework,  robust  corporate  balance  sheets  and  relatively  healthy  banking  sector.  In  a 
rapidly globalizing world, the “decoupling hypothesis” was never totally persuasive. Given the 
evidence  of  the  last  few  months  –  capital  flow  reversals,  sharp  widening  of  spreads  on 
sovereign  and  corporate  debt  and  abrupt  currency  depreciations  –  the  “decoupling 
hypothesis” stands invalidated. Reinforcing the notion that in a globalized world no country 
can be an island, growth prospects of emerging economies have been undermined by the 
cascading financial crisis with, of course, considerable variation across countries. 
BIS Review 39/2009 
 1
Questions to be addressed 
India too has been impacted by the crisis, and by much more than we had earlier thought. 
Against this background, what I propose to do is to address the following questions:  
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
The answers to the above three questions form the basis for the fourth, and perhaps more 
important question. 
(iv) 
Why has India been hit by the crisis?  
How has India been hit by the crisis? 
How have we responded to the challenge? 
What is the outlook for India? 
Why has India been hit by the crisis? 
The ferocity with which the global crisis hit India dismayed many. And this dismay stems from 
two analytical strands.  
The  first  analytic  goes  something  like  this.  The  Indian  banking  system  has  had  no  direct 
exposure to the sub-prime mortgage assets or to the failed institutions. It has very limited off-
balance  sheet  activities or  securitized  assets. In  fact,  our  banks  continue  to  remain  sound 
and healthy. So, the enigma is how can India be caught up in a crisis when it has nothing 
much to do with any of the maladies that are at the core of the crisis.  
The second reason for dismay is that India's recent growth has been driven predominantly by 
domestic  consumption  and  domestic  investment.  External  demand,  as  measured  by 
merchandize exports, accounts for less than 15 per cent of our GDP. The question then is, 
even if there is a global downturn, why should India be affected when its reliance on external 
demand is so limited?  
The answer to both the above causes of dismay lies in globalization. Let me explain. First, 
India's integration into the world economy over the last decade has been remarkably rapid. 
Integration into the world implies more than just exports. Going by the common measure of 
globalization,  India's  two-way  trade  (merchandize  exports  plus  imports),  as  a  proportion  of 
GDP, increased from 21.2 per cent in 1997-98, the year of the Asian crisis, to 34.7 per cent 
in 2007-08.  
Second,  India's  financial  integration  with  the  world  has  been  as  deep  as  India's  trade 
globalization, if not deeper. If we take an expanded measure of globalization, that is the ratio 
of total external transactions (gross current account flows plus gross capital flows) to GDP, 
this ratio has more than doubled from 46.8 per cent in 1997-98 to 117.4 per cent in 2007-08.  
Importantly, the Indian corporate sector's access to external funding has markedly increased 
in the last five years. Some numbers will help illustrate the point. In the five-year period 2003-
08, the share of corporate investment in India's GDP rose by 9 percentage points. Corporate 
savings  financed  a  little  more  than  half  of  this,  but  a  significant  portion  of  the  balance 
financing  came  from  external  sources.  While  funds  were  available  domestically,  foreign 
funding was perceived to be less expensive than domestic financing. On the other hand, in a 
global  market  awash  with  liquidity  and  on  the  promise  of  India's  growth  potential,  foreign 
investors  and  lenders  were  willing  to  take  risks  and  finance  investment  in  India.  Last  year 
(2007/08), for example, India received capital inflows amounting to over 9 per cent of GDP 
as against a current account deficit in the balance of payments of just 1.5 per cent of GDP. 
These  capital  flows,  in  excess  of  the  current  account  deficit,  evidence  the  importance  of 
external financing to the corporates and the depth of India's financial integration.  
So, the reason India has been hit by the crisis, despite mitigating factors, is clearly India's 
rapid and growing integration into the global economy. 
2 
 BIS Review 39/2009
How has India been hit by the crisis? 
The  contagion  of  the  crisis  has  spread  to  India  through  all  the  channels  –  the  financial 
channel, the real channel, and importantly, as happens in all financial crises, the confidence 
channel.  
Let  us  first  look  at  the  financial  channel.  India's  financial  markets  –  equity  market,  money 
market,  forex  market  and  credit  market  –  had  all  come  under  pressure  from  a  number  of 
directions. First, as a consequence of the global liquidity squeeze, Indian corporates found 
their  overseas  financing  drying  up,  forcing  corporates  to  shift  their  credit  demand  to  the 
domestic banking sector. Also, in their search for substitute financing, corporates withdrew 
their investments in domestic money market mutual funds (MFs); consequently, non-banking 
financial companies (NBFCs) where the MFs had invested a significant portion of their funds 
came  under  redemption  pressure.  This  substitution  of  overseas  financing  by  domestic 
financing brought both money markets and credit markets under pressure. Second, the forex 
market  came  under  pressure  because  of  reversal  of  capital  flows  as  part  of  the  global 
deleveraging  process.  Simultaneously,  corporates  were  converting  the  funds  raised  locally 
into  foreign  currency  to  meet  their  external  obligations.  Both  these  factors  put  downward 
pressure on the rupee. Third, the Reserve Bank's intervention in the forex market to manage 
the volatility in the rupee further added to liquidity tightening.  
Now  let  me  turn  to  the  real  channel.  Here,  the  transmission  of  the  global  cues  to  the 
domestic  economy  has  been  quite  straight  forward  –  through  the  slump  in  demand  for 
exports. The United States, European Union and the Middle East, which account for three 
quarters  of  India's  goods  and  services  trade,  are  in  a  synchronized  down  turn.  Services 
export growth is also likely to slow in the near term as the recession deepens and financial 
services  firms  –  traditionally  large  users  of  outsourcing  services  –  are  restructured. 
Remittances from migrant workers too are likely to slow as the Middle East adjusts to lower 
crude prices and advanced economies go into a recession. 
Beyond  the  financial  and  real  channels  of  transmission  as  above,  the  crisis  also  spread 
through the confidence channel. In sharp contrast to global financial markets, which went into 
a seizure on account of a crisis of confidence, Indian financial markets continued to function 
in  an  orderly  manner.  Furthermore,  our  banks  have  continued  to  lend.  However,  the 
tightened global liquidity situation in the period immediately following the Lehman failure in 
mid-September 2008, coming as it did on top of a turn in the credit cycle, increased the risk 
aversion of the financial system and made some banks cautious about lending.  
The  purport  of  the  above  explanation  is to  show  how,  despite  not  being  part  of  the  global 
financial sector problem, India has been affected by the crisis through the adverse feedback 
loops between external shocks and domestic vulnerabilities.  
How have we responded to the challenge?  
Let me now turn to how we responded to the crisis. The failure of Lehman Brothers in mid-
September 2008 was followed in quick succession by several other large financial institutions 
coming  under  severe  stress.  This  made  financial  markets  around  the  world  uncertain  and 
unsettled. This contagion, as I explained above, spread to emerging economies, and to India 
too. Both the government and the Reserve Bank of India responded to the challenge in close 
coordination  and  consultation.  The  main  plank  of  the  government  response  was  fiscal 
stimulus while the Reserve Bank's action comprised monetary accommodation and counter 
cyclical regulatory measures.  
Monetary policy response 
The Reserve Bank's policy response was aimed at containing the contagion from the outside 
–  to  keep  the  domestic  money  and  credit  markets  functioning  normally  and  see  that  the 
BIS Review 39/2009 
 3
liquidity stress did not trigger solvency cascades. In particular, we targeted three objectives: 
first, to maintain a comfortable rupee liquidity position; second, to augment foreign exchange 
liquidity; and third, to maintain a policy framework that would keep credit delivery on track so 
as  to  arrest  the  moderation  in  growth.  This  marked  a  reversal  of  Reserve  Bank's  policy 
stance  from  monetary  tightening  in  response  to  heightened  inflationary  pressures  of  the 
previous  period  to  monetary  easing  in  response  to  easing  inflationary  pressures  and 
moderation in growth in the current cycle. Our measures to meet the above objectives came 
in  several  policy  packages  starting  mid-September  2008,  on  occasion  in  response  to 
unanticipated  global  developments,  and  at  other  times  in  anticipation  of  the  impact  of 
potential global developments on the Indian markets.  
Our policy packages included, like in the case of other central banks, both conventional and 
unconventional  measures.  On  the  conventional  side,  we  reduced  the  policy  interest  rates 
aggressively and rapidly, reduced the quantum of bank reserves impounded by the central 
bank and expanded and liberalized the refinance facilities for export credit. Measures aimed 
at managing forex liquidity included an upward adjustment of the interest rate ceiling on the 
foreign  currency  deposits  by  non-resident  Indians,  substantially  relaxing  the  external 
commercial  borrowings  (ECB)  regime  for  corporates,  and  allowing  non-banking  financial 
companies and housing finance companies access to foreign borrowing. 
The  important  among  the  many  unconventional  measures  taken  by  the  Reserve  Bank  of 
India are a rupee-dollar swap facility for Indian banks to give them comfort in managing their 
short-term  foreign  funding  requirements,  an  exclusive  refinance  window  as  also  a  special 
purpose vehicle for supporting non-banking financial companies, and expanding the lendable 
resources  available  to  apex  finance  institutions  for  refinancing  credit  extended  to  small 
industries, housing and exports. Reflecting the rapid turn of events that could impair assets 
down the line, we reversed the counter – cyclical regulatory measures introduced in 2006.  
Government's fiscal stimulus 
Over the last five years, both the central and state governments in India have made a serious 
efforts to reverse the fiscal excesses of the past. At the heart of these efforts was the Fiscal 
Responsibility and Budget Management (FRBM) Act which mandated a calibrated road map 
towards fiscal sustainability.  
The  depth  and  extraordinary  impact  of  this  crisis,  however,  clearly  indicated  the  need  for 
counter cyclical public spending. Accordingly, the central government invoked the emergency 
provisions of the FRBM Act to seek relaxation from the fiscal targets and launched two fiscal 
stimulus  packages  in  December  2008  and  January  2009.  These  fiscal  stimulus  packages, 
together  amounting  to  about  3  per  cent  of  GDP,  included  additional  public  spending, 
government  guaranteed  funds  for  infrastructure  spending,  cuts  in  indirect  taxes,  expanded 
guarantee  cover  for  credit  to  micro  and  small  enterprises,  and  additional  support  to 
exporters. These stimulus packages came on top of an already announced expanded safety-
net for rural poor, a farm loan waiver package and salary increases for government staff, all 
of which too should stimulate demand.  
Impact of monetary measures 
Taken together, the measures put in place since mid-September 2008 have ensured that the 
Indian financial markets continue to function in an orderly manner. The cumulative amount of 
primary liquidity potentially available to the financial system through these measures is about 
Rs.390,000  crore  or  7  per  cent  of  GDP.  This  sizeable  easing  has  ensured  a  comfortable 
liquidity  position  starting  mid-November  2008  as  evidenced  by  a  number  of  indicators 
including  the  weighted  average  call  money  rate,  the  overnight  money  market  rate  and  the 
yield on the 10-year benchmark government security. Taking the signal from the policy rate 
cut, many of the big banks have reduced their benchmark prime lending rates. Bank credit 
4 
 BIS Review 39/2009
has expanded too, but slower than last year. However, Reserve Bank’s rough calculations 
show that the overall flow of resources to the commercial sector is less than what it was last 
year.  This  is  because,  even  though  bank  credit  has  expanded,  it  has  not  fully  offset  the 
decline in non-bank flow of resources to the commercial sector. 
Evaluating the response 
In evaluating the response to the crisis, it is important to remember that although the origins 
of  the  crisis  are  common  around  the  world,  the  crisis  has  impacted  different  economies 
differently. Importantly, in advanced economies where it originated, the crisis spread from the 
financial  sector  to  the  real  sector.  In  emerging  economies,  the  transmission  of  external 
shocks  to  domestic  vulnerabilities  has  typically  been  from  the  real  sector  to  the  financial 
sector.  
Countries  have  accordingly  responded  to  the  crisis  depending  on  their  specific  country 
circumstances.  Thus,  even  as  policy  responses  across  countries  are  broadly  similar,  their 
precise  design,  quantum,  sequencing  and  timing  have  varied.  In  particular,  while  policy 
responses  in  advanced  economies  have  had  to  contend  with  both  the  unfolding  financial 
crisis and deepening recession, in India, our response has been predominantly driven by the 
need to arrest moderation in economic growth.  
What is the outlook for India?  
The  outlook  for  India  going  forward  is  mixed.  There  is  clear  evidence  of  economic  activity 
slowing down. Real GDP growth has moderated modestly in the first and second quarters of 
2008/09,  and  sharply  in  the  third  quarter.  The  services  sector,  which  has  been  our  prime 
growth  engine  for  the  last  five  years,  is  slowing,  mainly  in  construction,  transport  and 
communication, trade, hotels and restaurants sub-sectors. For the first time in seven years, 
exports  have  declined  in  absolute  terms  for  four  months  in  a  row  during  October  2008  – 
January  2009.  Recent  data  indicate  that  the  demand  for  bank  credit  is  slackening  despite 
comfortable liquidity in the system. Dampened demand has dented corporate margins while 
the  uncertainty  surrounding  the  crisis  has  affected  business  confidence.  The  index  of 
industrial  production  has  shown  negative  growth  for  two  recent  months  and  investment 
demand is decelerating. All these factors suggest that growth will moderate more than we 
had earlier thought.  
In  addressing  the  fall  out  of  the  crisis,  India  has  several  advantages.  Some  of  these  are 
recent developments. Most notably, headline inflation, as measured by the wholesale price 
index, has fallen sharply though consumer price inflation is yet to moderate. Clearly, falling 
commodity  prices  have  been  the  key  drivers  behind  the  disinflation;  however,  some 
contribution has also come from slowing domestic demand. The decline in inflation should 
revive and support consumption demand and reduce input costs for corporates. Furthermore, 
the  decline  in  global  crude  prices  and  naphtha  prices,  if  sustained,  will  reduce  the  size  of 
subsidies to oil and fertilizer companies, opening up fiscal space for infrastructure spending. 
From the external sector perspective, it is projected that imports will shrink more than exports 
keeping the current account deficit modest. 
There are also several structural factors that have come to India's aid. First, notwithstanding 
the  severity  and  multiplicity  of  the  adverse  shocks,  India's  financial  markets  have  shown 
admirable  resilience.  This  is  in  large  part  because  India's  banking  system  remains  sound, 
healthy, well capitalized and prudently regulated. Second, our comfortable reserve position 
provides  confidence  to  overseas  investors.  Third,  since  a  large  majority  of  Indians  do  not 
participate in equity and asset markets, the negative impact of the wealth loss effect that is 
plaguing  the  advanced  economies  should  be  quite  muted.  Consequently,  consumption 
demand  should  hold  up  well.  Fourth,  because  of  India's  mandated  priority  sector  lending, 
institutional  credit  for  agriculture  has  remained  unaffected.  The  farm  loan  waiver  package 
BIS Review 39/2009 
 5
implemented by the Government should further insulate the agriculture sector from the crisis. 
Finally, over the years, India has built an extensive network of social safety-net programmes, 
including  the  flagship  rural  employment  guarantee  programme.  These  uniquely  Indian 
versions  of  automatic  stabilizers  should  protect  the  poor  from  the  extreme  impact  of  the 
global crisis.  
RBI's policy stance 
Going forward, the Reserve Bank's policy stance will continue to be to maintain comfortable 
rupee and forex liquidity positions. There are indications that pressures on mutual funds have 
eased  and  that  NBFCs  too  are  making  the  necessary  adjustments  to  balance  their  assets 
and  liabilities.  Despite  the  contraction  in  export  demand,  we  will  be  able  to  manage  our 
balance of payments. It is the Reserve Bank's expectation that commercial banks will take 
the signal from the policy rates reduction to adjust their deposit and lending rates in order to 
keep credit flowing to productive sectors. In particular, the special refinance windows opened 
by the Reserve Bank for the MSME (micro, small and medium enterprises) sector, housing 
sector and export sector should see credit flowing to these sectors. Also the SPV set up for 
extending  assistance  to  NBFCs  should  ease  the  financing  constraints  of  NBFCs.  The 
government's fiscal stimulus should be able to supplement these efforts from both supply and 
demand sides. 
When the turn around comes 
Over the last five years, India clocked an unprecedented nine per cent growth, driven largely 
by domestic consumption and investment even as the share of net exports has been rising. 
This was no accident or happenstance. True, the benign global environment, easy liquidity 
and  low  interest  rates  helped,  but  at  the  heart  of  India's  growth  were  a  growing 
entrepreneurial  spirit,  rise  in  productivity  and  increasing  savings.  These  fundamental 
strengths  continue  to  be  in  place.  Nevertheless,  the  global  crisis  will  dent  India's  growth 
trajectory as investments and exports slow. Clearly, there is a period of painful adjustment 
ahead of us. However, once the global economy begins to recover, India's turn around will be 
sharper and swifter, backed by our strong fundamentals and the untapped growth potential. 
Meanwhile, the challenge for the government and the RBI is to manage the adjustment with 
as little pain as possible. 
6 
 BIS Review 39/2009
