Ben S Bernanke: Brief remarks – the Fed’s efforts with respect to 
diversity 
Speech  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve  System,  at  the  Congressional  Black  Caucus  Foundation's  Annual  Legislative 
Conference, Washington DC, 25 September 2009. 
 Good  morning.  Thank  you  for  the  opportunity  to  speak  during  the  Congressional  Black 
Caucus Foundation's Annual Legislative Conference. Congresswoman Waters, I appreciate 
the invitation and your leadership in this area. Let me make a few brief comments about the 
Federal  Reserve's  efforts  with  respect  to  diversity,  and  I  look  forward  to  our  dialogue 
afterward.  
As  you  know,  in  response  to  the  financial  crisis  that  began  more  than  two  years  ago,  the 
Federal Reserve has introduced various programs to improve the functioning of key financial 
markets, with the goal of helping to restore the flow of credit that our economy needs. Usage 
of many of these programs has been winding down as markets improve, but one program for 
which an ongoing need still clearly exists is the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility, 
or  TALF.  This  program,  which  was  implemented  this  year,  has  helped  restart  the 
securitization markets for various types of consumer and small business credit. Securitization 
markets  are  an  important  source  of  credit,  and  their  virtual  shutdown during  the crisis  has 
reduced  credit  availability  for  many  borrowers.  Since  its  inception,  the  TALF  has  indirectly 
financed  nearly  3  million  loans  to  households  (excluding  credit  card  loans)  and  nearly 
400,000 loans to small businesses. 
Investors  participate  in  the  TALF  by  receiving  loans  from  the  Federal  Reserve  to  finance 
purchases of asset-backed securities. TALF was designed from the start to be available to a 
diverse set of participants: TALF loans to purchase asset-backed securities are available to 
virtually  any  U.S.-domiciled  firm,  and  firms  can  participate  with  investments  as  low  as 
$500,000. There have been 121 borrowers so far, including investors of all sizes. 
Since  TALF  is  open  to  all  investment  firms,  we  needed  agents  to  work  with  potential 
borrowers. In March, I participated in the TARP/TALF Access Summit that you organized. At 
that summit, we heard that a more diverse set of TALF agents would help bring in a more 
diverse set of TALF borrowers. Acting on that good suggestion, we recently announced the 
inclusion  of  four  new  TALF  agents,  selected  to  increase  the  diversity  of  TALF  borrowers. 
Three of the four are owned by African Americans. We expect the new TALF agents to begin 
operation in November. 
In the area of procurement, the Federal Reserve uses various methods to reach women- and 
minority-owned contractors. We hold vendor fairs in Washington to publicize opportunities. 
For  example,  on  September  2,  representatives  of  approximately  60  companies  talked  to 
Board staff about contracting possibilities. We are a member of the National Minority Supplier 
Development  Council,  and  we  regularly  attend  national  and  local  vendor  fairs  and 
conferences (including several this year) to share information on how to do business with the 
Board.  Our  procurement  staff  works  with  Board  operating  divisions  in  all  phases  of  the 
contracting  process.  In  addition,  our  procurement  policies  require  that  nearly  all  contracts 
include  a  subcontracting  plan  that  describes  the  vendor's  commitment  to  provide  small 
and/or  minority-  and  women-owned  companies  the  maximum  practicable  opportunity  to 
participate 
in  contract  performance.  The  Board's  chief  acquisition  officer  oversees 
compliance  with  the  Board's  procurement  policies  and  procedures,  working  with  staff 
responsible for outreach to women- and minority-owned companies. 
Finally, I would also like to mention briefly the Partnership for Progress, a Federal Reserve 
initiative  launched  last  year  in  recognition  of  the  importance  of  healthy  minority-owned 
BIS Review 116/2009 
 1
depository institutions to many communities in this country. This initiative supports minority-
owned  depository  institutions  through  outreach  and  technical  assistance  and  by  training 
examiners  to  better  understand  some  of  the  unique  challenges  faced  by  minority-owned 
institutions. 
The Federal Reserve System remains committed to diversity and inclusion in our programs 
and  activities,  and  I  appreciate  the  opportunity  to  have  this  dialogue. Again,  thank  you  for 
inviting me today. 
2 
 BIS Review 116/2009
