Svein Gjedrem: The conduct of monetary policy 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Svein  Gjedrem,  Governor  of  Norges  Bank  (Central  Bank  of 
Norway), at the hearing before the Standing Committee on Finance and Economic Affairs of 
the Storting (Norwegian parliament), Oslo, 14 May 2009. 
Please note that the text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation. The statement is based on Norges 
Bank’s Annual Report for 2008, Monetary Policy Report 1/2009 and the Executive Board’s assessments in the 
period to the monetary policy meeting on 6 May. 
 I  would  like  to  thank  the  Chairman  of  the  Committee  for  this  opportunity  to  report  on 
monetary policy in connection with the Storting’s deliberations on the Government’s Credit 
Report. My statement is based on Norges Bank’s Annual Report, but is also updated based 
on the Executive Board’s assessments in the period to the previous monetary policy meeting 
and  new  information  received  to  date.  I  also  refer  to  this  year’s  report  from  Norges  Bank 
Watch, a group of experts that evaluates Norges Bank’s conduct of monetary policy.  
Monetary  policy  in  Norway  is  oriented  towards  maintaining  low  and  stable  inflation.  The 
operational target is annual consumer price inflation of close to 2.5 per cent over time. The 
inflation target is an anchor for inflation expectations in the foreign exchange market, for the 
social partners in connection with wage settlements and for those setting prices for goods 
and services. In recent years, average inflation has been fairly close to, but somewhat lower 
than, the target of 2.5 per cent.  
Consumer price inflation peaked in October 2008, and has since receded. In April this year, 
CPI inflation was 2.9 per cent. Inflation measured by the CPI varies somewhat from month to 
month,  primarily  reflecting  wide  fluctuations  in  energy  prices,  but  also  other  temporary 
disturbances amplify the variations.  
CPIXE inflation shows developments in the consumer price index adjusted for tax changes 
and excluding temporary changes in energy prices. This indicator provides a better picture of 
underlying inflation. By this measure, underlying inflation peaked at 3 per cent last autumn. 
Underlying inflation has since slowed somewhat and was 2.7 per cent in April.  
Interest  rates  increase  in  favourable  periods  when  inflation  is  expected  to  rise  and  when 
growth and inflation recede. The interest rate is a rough instrument that we can use to keep 
inflation  in  check  over  time  and  thereby  contribute  to  smoothing  fluctuations  in  output  and 
employment. We have seen that when the interest rate is increased to curb the rise in prices 
for goods and services, interest rate-setting also contributes to stabilising asset prices. The 
task of steering inflation is in itself a demanding one. The instrument at our disposable must 
not be overburdened by too many tasks.  
There  is  a  division  of  responsibility  for  economic  policy.  Wage  formation  and  economic 
structures  and  incentives  lay  the  basis  for  how  efficiently  labour  and  other  real  economic 
resources are used in the long term. Monetary policy steers inflation in the medium and long 
term and can in addition contribute to smoothing fluctuations in output and employment. The 
central government budget – growth in government expenditure – influences the real krone 
exchange rate and the size of the internationally exposed sector in the long term. The fiscal 
rule  –  the  fiscal  policy  guidelines  –  enhances  the  predictability  of  petroleum  revenue 
spending in the Norwegian economy even when the budget from one year to the next is used 
to stabilise economic developments and even when the automatic stabilisers are allowed to 
operate. A fairly steady phasing-in of petroleum revenues over time curbs the impact on the 
krone and reduces the risk of abrupt and sizeable structural shifts between the international 
exposed  and  sheltered  sectors.  In  this  way,  the  framework  contributes  to  more  stable 
expectations concerning, among other things, developments in the krone exchange rate and 
competitiveness.  
BIS Review 60/2009 
 1
The  krone  floats  and  fluctuates  somewhat,  and  has  shown  a  tendency  to  appreciate  in 
favourable times and fall in value in response to negative shocks. Nonetheless, budgetary 
policy  and  the  petroleum  fund  mechanism  contribute  to  stability  in  the  krone.  This  can  be 
seen  clearly  when  comparing  movements  in  the  krone  in  recent  years  with  currencies  of 
other open economies with substantial exports of raw materials, such as Australia and New 
Zealand.  
The economic turnaround in Norway occurred just over a year ago. House prices had started 
to fall, growth in consumption subsequently came to a halt and housing starts declined. Up to 
autumn  2008,  it  appeared  that  capacity  utilisation  in  the  Norwegian  economy  would  most 
likely decline to a normal level, inflation would stabilise around 2½ per cent and the key rate 
ahead could be held at what we consider to be a normal level – between 5 and 6 per cent. 
But the outlook was regarded as uncertain. Commodity prices rose and pushed up inflation in 
many countries. At the same time, wage growth in Norway had become high and productivity 
growth  was  slowing.  On  the  other  hand,  the  financial  turbulence,  if  it  gained  momentum, 
could have a severe impact on the global economy and our exports. 
In September 2008, the turbulence in financial markets erupted into a full-blown global crisis. 
The failure of Lehman Brothers on 15 September last year triggered a confidence crisis in 
financial markets.  
The  turnaround  hit  hard,  with  synchronised  effects  on  virtually  all  financial  and  goods  and 
services markets, not only in the US but also in Europe, Asia, Latin America and Oceania.  
The crisis abroad rapidly fed through to the Norwegian economy. Our banks and the flow of 
credit and funds are tightly interwoven with foreign markets. Banks’ foreign funding became 
expensive  and  almost  dried  up.  In  response,  banks  increased  interest  rates  on  loans  to 
businesses and households, and they tightened the lending tap.   
As autumn progressed, an increasing number of business sector segments were feeling the 
impact  of  contraction.  In  August  2008,  manufacturing  enterprises  in  our  regional  network 
reported  that  they  expected  growth  to  remain  high.  In  November,  they  described  the 
turnaround as a “heart attack”. 
Government  authorities  worldwide  have  taken  comprehensive  measures  designed  to 
improve banks’ liquidity and solidity, boost demand for goods and services and restore the 
smooth  functioning  of  credit  markets.  In  several  countries,  central  bank  benchmark  rates 
have been set at close to zero.  
In Norway, a series of measures have also been implemented to mitigate the impact of the 
financial crisis. Norges Bank has supplied more liquidity to banks and eased the collateral 
requirements  for  loans.  We  have  provided  liquidity  at  longer  maturities,  introduced  foreign 
exchange  swaps  involving  both  the  US  dollar  and  the  euro  in  order  to  supply  Norwegian 
krone  liquidity,  and  loaned  US  dollars  to  Norwegian  banks,  which  we  ourselves  procured 
from  the  Federal  Reserve.  Norges  Bank’s  key  policy  rate  has  been  reduced  by  4.25 
percentage  points  to  1.5  per  cent  since  15  October  2008.  To  facilitate  banks’  access  to 
funding, the government has provided banks with access to liquid government securities in 
exchange for covered bonds issued by mortgage companies. Moreover, the government has 
increased loans and guarantees for Norwegian exports and raised state bank lending quotas. 
At  the  same  time,  Folketrygdfondet  has  increased  its  bond  purchases.  In  order  to  bolster 
banks’ solidity, the government plans to supply risk capital to Norwegian banks through the 
Norwegian State Finance Fund. To restrain the decline in activity in the Norwegian economy, 
central government expenditure will be increased by 10 per cent this year.  
Pursuant to Chapter 1, § 3 of the Act on Norges Bank and the Monetary System, “the Bank 
shall inform the ministry when, in the opinion of the Bank, there is a need for measures to be 
taken by others than the Bank in the field of monetary, credit or foreign exchange policy”.  
2 
 BIS Review 60/2009
On  the  basis  of  this  provision,  Norges  Bank,  in  a  letter  of  6  October  to  the  Ministry  of 
Finance, took the initiative to establish a swap arrangement. In a letter of 18 December, we 
also proposed measures to strengthen banks’ solidity.  
The chart shows events and the measures and proposals at the initiative of Norges Bank. A 
critical period was the end of September and the beginning of October with the collapse of 
the  investment  bank  Lehman  Brothers,  the  savings  bank  Washington  Mutual  and  the 
insurance company AIG.  
The extensive measures that have been implemented have worked.  
The difference between Norges Bank’s key rate and the money market rate – the premium – 
has narrowed, but is still higher than prior to the crisis. The flow of interbank liquidity appears 
to  have  been  restored  to  some  extent,  but  the  money  market  is  still  segmented  and  the 
central bank an important meeting place.  
Even if premiums in the money market and credit market have been high and volatile, the 
changes in central bank key rates have fed through to money market rates. Money market 
rates, which were higher than 8 per cent for a period, are now around 2½ per cent. Bank 
lending rates have also been reduced markedly.   
Monetary policy has influenced the level of economic activity through the real interest rate. 
The  real  interest  rate  is  equal  to  the  key  interest  rate  plus  a  risk  premium  less  expected 
inflation.  
The anchoring of inflation expectations enables changes in the key rate to have an impact. In 
some  countries,  there  are  prospects  that  inflation  will  approach  zero. This  causes  the  real 
interest rate to remain high even though the key rate is reduced. In small countries where 
confidence in stable inflation is lacking, the authorities have had to increase the key interest 
rate substantially to prevent an uncontrolled currency depreciation. This amplifies the effects 
on production.  
Lower inflation abroad and lower capacity utilisation in the Norwegian economy will have a 
dampening impact on inflation ahead. There are prospects that inflation will remain below 2.5 
per cent for a period. It is therefore appropriate to set the interest rate at a low level so that 
inflation  does  not  fall  too  far  below  the  target,  and  to  prevent  inflation  expectations  from 
losing  their anchor.  It  is  also  appropriate  to  set  the  interest  rate  at  a  low  level  to  curb  the 
decline in activity.  
We  have  already  lowered  the  interest  rate  substantially.  In  the  time  ahead,  we  will  take  a 
more  gradual  approach  in  order  to  assess  the  impact  of  the  measures  that  have  already 
been introduced. If developments move in line with our projections, the key interest rate may 
be reduced to 1 per cent in the latter half of this year.  
However,  the  projections  are  uncertain.  An  economic  turnaround  may  occur  faster  than 
expected. The low interest rate level may lead to a situation where saving in Norway does 
not pick up as expected or that the krone depreciates markedly. In that case, the key rate 
may  be  set  higher  than  projected  at  this  time.  On  the  other  hand,  there  is  a  risk  that  the 
downturn  in  Norway  will  be  more  pronounced  and  longer,  or  that  krone  appreciates 
markedly. In that case, a stronger use of instruments may be appropriate.  
The  downturn  abroad  and  the  unusual  conditions  in  the  credit  market  will  mark  the 
Norwegian economy for a period ahead. Mainland GDP is projected to decline by 1 per cent 
between 2008 ad 2009. 
Unemployment has increased since autumn 2008, but is still low. Unemployment is projected 
to continue to rise to the end of the year and into next year. Pay increases are moderate as a 
result of weaker corporate profitability, rising unemployment and lower inflation. Wage growth 
will show a considerable decline between 2008 and 2009.  
BIS Review 60/2009 
 3
Households have a dimmer view of the future than earlier, but the pessimism is no longer 
intensifying. This influences private consumption. Housing investment has also declined over 
a period, but house prices now seem to have stabilised, and perhaps started to rise again.  
Household saving is now rising rapidly from a negative level.  
Banks’  willingness  to  lend  to  households  has  stabilised  after  the  tightening  last  autumn. 
However, they are still tightening lending to enterprises.  Banks are increasing their margins 
and fees, and require higher equity capital levels of corporate loan applicants. 
At the same time, funding in the securities market is expensive. The Government Bond Fund 
facilitates funding primarily for enterprises with a moderate or high credit rating.  
As a result of extensive official measures the banks now have fairly good access to short-
term  and  medium-term  funding.  Norges  Bank  has  supplied  ample  short-term  liquidity  to 
banks.  Loans  with  longer  maturities  have  been  widely  used,  and  an  increasing  number  of 
banks are participating in the credit swap arrangement. 
We  see  here  an  overview  of  various  banks’  and  mortgage  companies’  use  of  this 
arrangement as a percentage of their total assets. So far, there are 15 banks and mortgage 
companies participating in the arrangement. Several participants report that the credit swap 
arrangement is a good source of funding in today’s market. The government receives, which 
is reasonable, compensation for making Treasury notes available. The rate has been in the 
order of a half per cent.  
With a large volume of Treasury notes in circulation, we see the possibility of the formation of 
an interbank market for loans in NOK, where government securities are used as collateral. In 
the event, this would provide the Norwegian money market with greater insulation from the 
shifting weather conditions in the US dollar market. We are not there yet.  
Banks’  equity  capital  accounts  for  6  per  cent  of  total  assets.  This  is  low  from  a  historical 
perspective,  but  not  compared  with  banks  in  other  countries.  Banks  are  procyclical.  They 
amplify business fluctuations. During an expansion, loan losses are low and bank earnings 
increase due to higher turnover. Capital is readily available. During a downturn, bank losses 
increase, and earnings and access to equity capital may deteriorate, forcing banks to tighten 
lending.  
Norwegian banks need more capital in the period ahead to enable them to absorb expected 
and  any  unexpected  losses  and  to  satisfy  tighter  counterparty  capital  requirements.  The 
government’s  offer  to  supply  core  capital  through  the  Government  Finance  Fund  will  now 
allow  banks  to  improve  their  financial  strength  without  rationing  credit.  There  must  be  no 
doubt that the banks have the capital they need.  
The measures I have discussed have been implemented to lessen the effects of the financial 
crisis. Another question is which lessons we can draw. The authorities in many countries are 
now working towards increasing the robustness of financial markets. Four points stand out.  
First,  for  a  given  risk  assessment,  banks  must  be  subject  to  higher  equity  capital 
requirements. Banks calculate their capital requirements based on internal risk models. The 
models capture historical loan performance. The capital requirements are determined by the 
degree of credit risk exposure as derived from this historical performance. One drawback is 
that the historical basis for the models, and hence for the risk assessments, is too limited. 
Banks must not be able to reduce capital below a minimum level even if they extend loans 
that, according to the models, seemingly involve low risk. 
Second, regulation must to a lesser extent contribute to amplifying cyclical fluctuations. With 
losses now rising, as a result of the abrupt and pronounced turnaround, banks must increase 
equity  capital.  Consequently,  the  rules  governing  capital  requirements  amplify  cyclical 
fluctuations. The rules must therefore require banks to build up strong capital buffers over 
and  above  the  minimum  requirement  in  normal  times.  Then  the  banks  would  not  have  to 
4 
 BIS Review 60/2009
increase  capital  when  a  turnaround  occurs,  but  on  the  contrary  be  able  to  absorb  losses. 
This will counteract the need for banks to ration credit in adverse periods. 
Many  Norwegian  banks  do  not  have  sufficient  buffers  today  to  safeguard  their  own,  their 
shareholders’ or the economy’s best interests. 
Third, banks’ funding methods make them vulnerable. Earlier, the two main sources of bank 
funding in Norway were retail and wholesale deposits. In recent years, banks have borrowed 
heavily in both domestic and foreign markets. During the crisis, this proved to involve high 
liquidity risk for banks. In the future, in regulations and in practice, deposits must again take 
precedence  as  the  largest  funding  source  for  banks.  We  also  anticipate  that  bonds 
collateralised  by  high  quality  mortgages  will  become 
important.  The  credit  swap 
arrangements can be seen as building a bridge to such a market. 
Fourth, government authorities may be reluctant to apply stricter requirements to domestic 
banks, fearing that their competitiveness may weaken. Such a drift in regulation towards a – 
too  low  –  minimum  level  is  important  to  avoid.  For  Norway,  it  is  essential  that  rules  are 
applied both strictly and equally in the Nordic countries.  
Allow me to conclude. 
The world economy is these days in the deepest recession in the post-war period, in spite of 
the  strong  use  of  various  measures.  Most  markets  and  countries,  including  Norway,  have 
been hit by the crisis.  
Norges  Bank  has  set  the  interest  rate  at  a  low  level  to  curb  the  decline  in  activity  and 
counteract an excessive fall in inflation. 
In  accordance  with  its  mandate,  Norges  Bank  has  given  weight  to  anchoring  and 
strengthening  expectations  that  inflation  will  be  low  and  stable  ahead.  This  enhances  the 
effectiveness of monetary policy.  
Thank you for the opportunity to present these opening remarks. 
  5
BIS Review 60/2009 
     6 
 BIS Review 60/2009
    BIS Review 60/2009 
 7
    8 
 BIS Review 60/2009
  BIS Review 60/2009 
  9
    10 
 BIS Review 60/2009
    BIS Review 60/2009 
 11
    12 
 BIS Review 60/2009
    BIS Review 60/2009 
 13
    14 
 BIS Review 60/2009
    BIS Review 60/2009 
 15
  16 
 BIS Review 60/2009
