Mark Carney: Bank of Canada’s perspective on the current state of the 
domestic and global economies 
Opening statement by Mr Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the House of 
Commons Standing Committee on Finance, Ottawa, 10 February 2009.  
 Good morning. Paul and I are pleased to appear before this committee to discuss the Bank 
of Canada's perspective on the current state of the domestic and global economies. 
Let  me  state  at  the  outset  that  the  speed  and  synchronized  nature  of  the  recent  global 
downturn has resulted in a heightened degree of uncertainty, which is evident in the diverse 
views on the outlook. Indeed, it is safe to say that the degree of uncertainty – the range of 
possible outcomes – is greater than the range of point forecasts. It is in this environment that 
considerable  policy  actions  are  being  taken  globally:  the  provision  of  liquidity  to  stabilize 
global financial markets, the write-down of assets and the re-capitalization of institutions, and 
macroeconomic  policy  measures  to  boost  aggregate  demand.  A  considered  and  coherent 
perspective on the likely success of these policies importantly shapes our view of the outlook 
for the global and Canadian economies. 
Global outlook – sudden, synchronized, and deep recession 
The  outlook  for  the  global  economy  has  deteriorated  significantly  in  recent  months.  What 
began last autumn as a relatively controlled slowdown has become a sudden, synchronized, 
and  deep  global  recession.  The  proximate  cause  was  the  intensification  of  the  global 
financial crisis owing to both the failures of several prominent global financial institutions and 
the  growing  realization  that  this  was  a  solvency  crisis  rather  than  a  liquidity  crisis.  The 
recession that originated in the United States is now spreading globally through confidence, 
financial, and trade channels. 
In the process, the inevitable correction of unsustainably large current account imbalances in 
several major economies is now under way. For example, we project that the U.S. current 
account  deficit  will  narrow  to  3  per  cent  of  GDP  in  2009,  about  half  its  size  in  2006.  The 
sustainable rebalancing of global domestic demand from deficit countries such as the United 
States and the United Kingdom towards surplus countries such as China and Germany will 
take some time and is likely to dampen the pace of global growth during that period. 
In  the  Bank's  January  Monetary  Policy  Report  Update,  we  projected  that  global  economic 
growth will be tepid this year – just 1.1 per cent – before rebounding mildly to a below-trend 
rate  of  3.7  per  cent  in  2010.  As  part  of  that  projection,  we  expect  that  the  eventual  U.S. 
recovery will be much slower than usual. For example, we project that it will take two and half 
years from the onset of the recession for U.S. GDP to return to its pre-recession level. This 
sluggishness reflects the lingering effects of the crisis on the U.S. financial system and the 
slow  recovery  of  domestic  consumption  owing  to  the  magnitude  of  wealth  effects  and  the 
deterioration in the labour market.  
Reflecting  the  seriousness  of  the  shock,  the  global  macroeconomic  policy  response  has 
been  unprecedented.  In  the  wake  of  the  intensification  of  the  crisis,  monetary  policy  rates 
have  been  substantially  and  rapidly  reduced  in  most  major  economies.  Fiscal  policy 
initiatives have also been robust, with the world well on its way to spending an average of 
more than 2 per cent of global GDP in discretionary fiscal measures. These measures will 
replace some of the lost private demand and – equally importantly – create a window for the 
necessary rebalancing of global growth. Simultaneous fiscal action is not only more powerful 
than  measures  taken  in  isolation,  but  also  has  the  potential  to  provide  some  support  for 
BIS Review 14/2009 
 1
commodity prices. Given typical lags, the effects of these monetary and fiscal policies will be 
felt increasingly over the course of this year and 2010.  
Canadian outlook – sharp recession and milder-than-usual recovery 
The global downturn and declining demand for our exports will make this a very difficult year 
for Canada's economy. We are now in recession with GDP projected to fall by 1.2 per cent 
this year. The first half of the year will be particularly challenging with sharp falls in activity 
and  increases  in  unemployment.  Unfortunately,  last  Friday's  employment  report  is  broadly 
consistent  with  our  outlook.  The  14  per  cent  drop  in  our  terms  of  trade  since  July  will 
translate into a significant reduction in Canadian incomes and thus in our ability to sustain 
real  domestic  spending  in  the  economy.  Losses  by  Canadians  on  their  financial  holdings, 
either  directly  or  via  their  pension  funds,  and  concerns  about  the  employment  outlook  will 
also restrain domestic consumption this year. Uncertainty about the economic outlook and 
strained financial conditions should lead to declines in investment spending this year. 
In our base-case projection, real GDP is expected to rebound in 2010, growing by 3.8 per 
cent.  Though  seemingly  impressive  when  viewed  from  the  depths  of  a  recession,  such  a 
recovery is actually more muted than usual. The recovery should be supported by: 
• 
• 
the timeliness and scale of our monetary policy response;  
our  relatively  well-functioning  financial  system  and  the  gradual  improvements  in 
financial conditions in Canada next year;  
the past depreciation of the Canadian dollar;  
stimulative fiscal policy measures;  
the rebound in external demand in 2010, particularly in emerging markets, and the 
associated firming of commodity prices;  
the strengths of Canadian household, business, and bank balance sheets; and  
the end of the stock adjustments in Canadian and U.S. residential housing.  
• 
• 
A wider output gap and modest decreases in housing prices should cause core CPI inflation 
to ease through 2009, bottoming out at 1.1 per cent in the fourth quarter. Total CPI inflation is 
expected to dip below zero for two quarters in 2009, reflecting year-on-year drops in energy 
prices. The Bank views the possibility of deflation in Canada as remote.  
Indeed, with inflation expectations well anchored, total and core inflation should return to the 
2  per  cent  target  in  the  first  half  of  2011  as  the  economy  moves  back  to  its  production 
potential. Of course, global developments pose significant upside and downside risks to the 
inflation projection. The Bank judges that these risks are roughly balanced. 
 Uncertainty and the need for policy action  
As I noted at the outset, in the current environment the Bank's projections – and those of all 
forecasters – are subject to an unusually high degree of uncertainty.  
As  we  have  consistently  emphasized,  stabilization  of  the  global  financial  system  is  a 
precondition  for  economic  recovery  globally  and  in  Canada.  To  that  end,  throughout  the 
world,  policy-makers  have  acted  aggressively  and  creatively.  Central  banks  have  provided 
unprecedented liquidity to keep the financial system functioning. Last October, extraordinary 
steps  were  taken  by  all  G-7  countries  to  prevent  systemic  collapse  and  to  promote  the 
effective functioning of money and credit markets.  
The task is far from complete. Decisions taken in the coming weeks in the United States and 
in other major economies to isolate toxic assets in order to create a core of "good" banks will 
2 
 BIS Review 14/2009
be  critical.  In  addition,  G-20  countries  need  to  act  in  concert  to  improve  domestic  and 
international regulatory frameworks.  In this regard, measures to improve transparency and 
integrity,  to  implement  a  macro-prudential  approach  to  regulation,  and  to  adequately 
resource the IMF are vital. 
If these national and multilateral measures are not timely, bold, and well-executed, Canada's 
economic recovery will be both attenuated and delayed. The reality is that the financial crisis 
and subsequent recession originated beyond our borders and the necessary triggers for a 
sustainable recovery must be found there as well. Canada has much to offer to these efforts, 
which is why the Bank is working closely and tirelessly with our international colleagues.  
At home, the Bank has acted decisively. We have eased monetary policy by 350 basis points 
since December 2007, including 250 basis points since the start of October. In doing so, we 
cut  rates  deeper  and  sooner  than  most  other  major  central  banks.  With  the  strains  in  our 
financial  system  considerably  less  than  elsewhere,  monetary  conditions  have  eased 
significantly in Canada since the start of the crisis. In fact, we are entering this recession with 
negative real interest rates – an unprecedented situation. In time, this will have a powerful 
impact on economic activity and inflation. 
Guided  by  Canada's  inflation-targeting  framework,  we  will  continue  to  monitor  carefully 
economic and financial developments in judging to what extent further monetary stimulus will 
be  required  to  achieve  the  2  per  cent  target  over  the  medium  term.  The  Bank  retains 
considerable policy flexibility, which we will use if required. 
In challenging times such as these, people, rightly, look to a few constants: to institutions that 
they can rely upon and to certain expectations that will be met. Canadians can rely on the 
Bank  of  Canada  to  fulfill  its  mandate;  they  can  expect  inflation  to  be  low,  stable,  and 
predictable.  The  relentless  focus  of  monetary  policy  on  inflation  control  is  essential  in  this 
time of financial crisis and global recession and remains the best contribution that monetary 
policy can make to the economic and financial welfare of Canada. 
BIS Review 14/2009 
 3
