Caleb M Fundanga: Increasing access to financial services in Zambia  
Remarks by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the foundation stone 
laying ceremony of the new Stanbic Bank Premises, Lusaka, 10 July 2009. 
 Mr. Ben Kruger, Deputy Group Chief Executive of the Standard Bank Group; 
Mr. Clive Tasker, Chief Executive Officer of Standard Bank Africa; 
Ms Pindie Nyando ro, Regional Managing Director; 
Mrs. Nikki Twomey, Director Brand Marketing at Standard Bank; 
Chairman of the Stanbic Bank Board, Mr. Larry Kalala; 
Directors of the Stanbic Bank Board; 
Managing Director, Stanbic Bank Mr. Joseph Chikolwa; 
Management and staff of Stanbic Bank; 
Representative from the Construction Company, Barnett’s and Farmers House Plc; Mr. 
Roger Miller 
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen. 
I am honoured and thankful for the invitation to officiate at this important Foundation Stone 
Laying Ceremony of the new Stanbic Head Office premises. 
Distinguished  Ladies  and  Gentlemen;  allow  me  to  begin  by  commending  Stanbic  Bank 
Zambia Limited for the important role it continues to play in the financial sector in Zambia. 
Since, 1992 when Stanbic Bank was established in Zambia, the bank has grown to be one of 
the biggest players in the market. As at 31 May 2009, the bank accounted for about 14% of 
the  banking  sector’s  total  assets,  while  its  deposit  base  accounted  for  15%  of  total  sector 
deposits. More importantly, the bank’s loan portfolio accounted for 15% of the total loans in 
the  sector.  The  Bank  has  also  strived  to  increase  its  customer  base  as  well  as  provide 
convenient  banking  services  by  increasing  its  branches  and  agencies  to  13  and  ATM 
machines to 44 at end June 2009. 
Chairperson,  I  have  stated  at  various  fora  that  it  is  important  for  banks  in  Zambia  to  take 
initiatives  which  support  growth  and  development  of  our  economy.  I  am  glad  to  note  that 
Stanbic  Bank  Zambia  Limited  has  embarked  on  this  project  of  constructing  a  new  Head 
Office  at  a  bigger  site  and  away  from  the  Central  Business  District  or  town  center.  This 
reflects the bank’s growth and rising demand for convenient facilities. I must congratulate the 
management of the bank for their relentless efforts to facilitate its journey towards providing 
efficient and convenient banking services to a fast growing market. I must however, warn that 
the journey entails more challenges and responsibilities including the challenges of adoption 
of new technology and the responsibilities of serving a growing number of customers which 
must be addressed. I have no doubt you will rise to the occasion and deliver. 
As you are no doubt aware, congestion and inadequate parking space along Cairo Road has 
posed serious challenges for all banks whose head quarters are located in the city centre. 
The decision by Stanbic Zambia Limited to relocate to this very convenient area is a positive 
development as it will go a long way not only in decongesting Cairo Road but also in making 
it easier for Stanbic to service its cherished customers. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, you will also note that this investment is being made at a time when 
the Zambian economy is facing some major challenges arising from the spill-over effects of 
the ongoing global economic crisis. It is therefore our expectations that it will have a positive 
impact on the economy due to the evident backward and forward linkages that infrastructure 
development of this nature have on various sectors of the economy. 
This investment has also come at a time when new banks are entering the Zambian market. 
It is our expectation that the repositioning by the bank is one way of ensuring that there is 
healthy  competition  in  the  banking  industry.  It  has  always  been  the  view  of  the  Bank  of 
BIS Review 88/2009 
 1
Zambia  that  competition  is  the  major  way  by  which  the  quality  of  products  and  customer 
services  for  the  banking  public  as  well  as  competitive  pricing  of  banking  products  can  be 
achieved. 
Chairperson, let me also take this opportunity to reiterate my concern regarding the general 
cost of banking services in Zambia. It is my hope that as your bank continues with these well 
meaning initiatives, it will also be looking into ways and means of making the cost of banking 
services  to  the  general  public  more  affordable.  I  wish  to  therefore  reiterate  our  appeal  to 
banking  service  providers  that  include  Stanbic  Bank  Zambia  Limited,  to  make  some 
meaningful efforts in addressing the high cost of banking services. 
This  will  go  a  long  way  in  enabling  your  customers  not  only  access  affordable  funds  to 
finance their investment activities, but also make it easier for them to pay back their loans 
and  on  time.  The  key  intermediation  role  of  the  banking  sector  in  providing  finances  will 
remain compromised if the costs of banking remain high. 
Distinguished  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  as  already  mentioned,  Zambia  is  currently  going 
through  challenging  times  when  commodity  prices  remain  subdued  as  result  of  uncertain 
demand for our main export product, copper. The visible effects of the economic global crisis 
have been volatilities in the exchange rate and job losses in the mining sector. The Second 
round  effects,  if  not  managed  properly,  could  have  devastating  effects  in  our  banking 
industry, especially through some notable deterioration in the personal loans category of the 
banks’ loan book. It is my expectation that Stanbic Bank Zambia Limited and other banks’ will 
enhance prudence in their lending activities and strengthen their risk management systems 
as a way of minimising further deterioration of the banking industry’s loan portfolio. 
It is also my firm belief that banks will continue to conduct safe and sound practices even 
under challenging times and therefore help to mitigate the risks that the financial system is 
currently  facing  from  the  adverse  developments  in  the  global  economy  and  the  global 
financial system in particular. 
Chairperson, in conclusion, I wish to take note of the commendable step that Stanbic Bank 
Zambia Limited has taken to build its own offices here in Zambia after a long presence in the 
country. I am hopeful that this initiative will create a more expansive and customer-friendly 
environment for your customers. I congratulate you for this milestone. 
I thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 88/2009
