José De Gregorio: Macroeconomics, economists and the crisis  
Speech  by  Mr  José  De  Gregorio,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Chile,  at  the  Annual 
Meeting of the Society for the Chilean Economy (SECHI), Antofagasta, 4 September 2009. 
I thank Luis Felipe Céspedes, Eduardo Engel, Pablo García and Mariana García for valuable comments. 
 This is certainly a great opportunity to speak about a subject that has triggered more than a 
few reflections in me recently, and that was probably best said by Queen Elizabeth’s famous 
question, made when she was visiting the London School of Economics last year: Why did 
nobody notice it? As someone who has dedicated his professional life to academic activities 
and policy making, the question is surely unsettling. 
The  current  global  financial  crisis  and  recession,  whose  depth  is  unprecedented  in  recent 
decades,  has  cast  doubts  about  the  work  of  macroeconomists,  the  usefulness  of  their 
theories,  and  their  capacity  to  anticipate  and  deal  with  crises.  These  are  the  issues  I  will 
discuss today. 
Macroeconomics 
Over  the  past  few  decades,  macroeconomic  theory  has  evolved,  on  the  one  hand,  as  a 
discipline whose purpose is solving problems similar to engineering, and, on the other hand, 
whose  purpose  is  to  explain  phenomena  embodied  in  economic  reality,  similar  to  science 
(Mankiw,  2006).  In  fact,  macroeconomics  was  created  to  solve  the  problems  of  the  Great 
Depression.  In  its  beginnings,  it  was  devoted  to  building  large  models  to  evaluate 
macroeconomic policies in the tradition of engineering. It is only in recent decades that its 
focus has drifted toward its scientific dimension. 
In any case, I prefer to think of economics as being closer to medical sciences (Harberger, 
1993),  as  it  diagnoses,  analyzes  evidence  and  proposes  treatments.  It  is  different  from 
physics  because  physics  does  not  deliver  prescriptions,  at  least  not  directly.  Hence  the 
importance  of  the  interaction  between  science  and  practice.  Economics  has  an  additional 
complication, as it is a social science trying to explain human behavior. 
The  emphasis  put  on  rigor  and  solid  theoretical  fundamentals  has  been  a  positive 
development,  because  making  policy  recommendations  requires  a  good  and  accurate 
diagnosis of reality. Like in the past, we could have extensive, complex models, with many 
sectoral  interrelations,  based  on  statistical  estimations  and  calibrations.  But  if  the  models 
aren’t  conceptually  well-formulated  and  are  based  only  on  statistical  patterns,  their 
usefulness  is  limited.  This  was  the  great  contribution  to  economics  by  the  rational 
expectations revolution and, in the policy field, by the Lucas critique. Only preferences and 
technology are invariant to policies, while the resulting behavior of agents is not; therefore, 
policies  will 
that  specify  both  preferences  and 
technologies.1 Nonetheless, the current crisis has revealed that models are limited to deal 
with all complexities of the real world. However, I believe that reduced-form models, with all 
the caveats regarding their potential misuse, can still help in the design of policy, particularly 
ideally  be  evaluated  with  models 
                                                 
1   This must be interpreted  with caution, because productivity,  which is part of technology, depends on policy 
changes, especially over the long term. The central point in Lucas’s critique is that one must specify the core 
characteristics  of  the  economy  being  studied  and  not  base  the  research  on  relationships  that  change  with 
policies. 
BIS Review 112/2009 
 1
when  more  rigorous  and,  especially,  more  realistic  models  are  not  available.2  For  this 
reason, there is always a tension between rigor, realism and flexibility. 
The tendency to base our models on ever more rigorous grounds has also had undesired 
effects. The incentives of younger academics – the very ones who are supposed to push the 
borders of knowledge, and who must publish or perish – limit their capabilities for innovation. 
The  required  rigor  ends  up  necessarily  threatening  realism.  Nobody  expects  a  model  to 
explain completely the economic reality, but the problem is that it can overlook elements that 
are crucial to understanding and preventing disasters like the one we face today. It may be 
more rewarding from an academic standpoint to write an equilibrium model explaining some 
particular phenomenon, than trying to formulate a model that formalizes all of the distortions 
of said phenomenon. It is harder and less rewarding for an academic to formulate distortions 
–  of  which  the  real  world  has  plenty  –  than  to  use  tidy  competitive  models  to  explain 
important stylized facts with a minimum of new ingredients. 
Scientific advances and models help us think about and interpret the world; they provide us a 
way to think about specific problems, but their scope is limited. We must avoid the temptation 
of  thinking  that  a  theoretical  simplification  is  a  full  description  of  reality.  But  we  must  also 
avoid  the  other  extreme,  which  totally  dismisses  what  theory  teaches  because  “reality  is 
much  more  complex”.  This  is  true,  but  it  does  not  imply  that  all  we  have  learned  is  just  a 
theoretical  exercise  without  practical  use  in  reality.  Models  must  be  taken  realistically, 
recognizing that they capture at most a small portion of reality. 
As for the future, the current crisis will certainly provide material for many research studies 
that will try to figure out what failed and how to avoid making the same mistakes again. Still, I 
think  it  will  be  difficult  to  develop  simple,  manageable  models  that  can  make  substantive 
progress in having a complete description of reality. Some interesting efforts will most likely 
be made, but it will not be easy for them to become part of the heart of macroeconomics, 
since they will be necessarily complex. Many of the models we currently have available are 
not  only  mathematically  sophisticated,  but  their  results  are  obtained  by  computer-based 
calibrations whose essential mechanisms lack transparency when it comes to revealing how 
they arrive at their results. Hence, it is difficult to assess their consistency. We have often 
come across complicated models where an apparently innocuous condition ends up being 
the determinant of the results.  
Complexity also jeopardizes the capacity to move from scientific research to economic policy 
proposals.  For  academic  ideas  to  be  useful  in  economic  policy,  they  must  be  persuasive. 
Perhaps  that  was  the  virtue  of  the  IS-LM  model  that  was  used  for  many  years  in 
macroeconomic policy discussions, or of Solow’s growth model that to this day remains the 
cornerstone of economic growth research. Fortunately, this is not a time where prescriptions 
are  taken  by  policy  makers  without  scrutiny  –  and  are  later  labeled  as  orthodox  –  and 
therefore, the capacity to intuitively explain a result is essential.  
The bulk of theoretical research will continue to proceed in areas where its results have a 
good  chance  of  being  published,  often  at  the  expense  of  realism.  It  may  not  be  very 
profitable  from  the  academic  point  of  view  to  incorporate  elements  of  irrational  behavior, 
confidence crises or other anomalies into general equilibrium models that are used in policy 
design. Nor is it easy to include elements of political economy, in particular the influence of 
interest groups, which in the US financial system are relevant to understanding the evolution 
of regulation and the causes of the crisis. 
                                                 
2 
In the case of the Central Bank of Chile, two models are mainly used to forecast, both within the tradition of 
forward looking rational-expectations models. One is built with many econometrically estimated reduced-form 
equations  (MEP,  see  Central  Bank  of  Chile,  2003),  while  the  other  is  a  general  equilibrium  intertemporal 
model (MAS, see Medina and Soto, 2007, for an application). Although the latter has stronger fundamentals, 
its calibration is less flexible in the analysis of short-term dynamics. 
2 
 BIS Review 112/2009
Emphasis  will  undoubtedly  be  placed  on  the  capacity  of  researchers  to  explain  complex 
phenomena,  but  their  studies  will  be  as  realistic  as  the  degrees  of  complexity  will  allow. 
Therefore,  it  is  important  to  insist:  models  are  only  a  part  of  the  reality  that  allows  us  to 
organize our ideas before diagnosing and prescribing. The arguments’ logic and a good deal 
of judgment are also critical when it comes to making economic policy decisions. 
General equilibrium models and finance 
There  are  two  categories  of  models  that  are  commonly  used  in  macroeconomics  and  that 
require  some  specific  references,  namely  the  Real  Business  Cycle  model  (RBC)  and  the 
New  Keynesian  model  (NKM).  Both  share  the  characteristic  of  being  general  equilibrium 
intertemporal  models  with  complete  markets  and  rational  expectations.3  Under  the  RBC 
model in its more traditional versions, the economy is fully flexible and there is no role for 
macroeconomic policies, whereas under the NKM there are sticky prices that result in money 
not  being  neutral,  which  assigns  a  role  to  monetary  policy.  These  provide  the  conceptual 
basis for the formulation of inflation-target regimes. 
It is important to place both types of models in their right dimension. The strategy of RBC 
models  is  to  try  to  replicate  economic  fluctuations  in  the  simplest,  least  distorted  model 
possible.  It  originated  in  the  attempt  to  use  the  neoclassical  growth  model  to  explain  the 
business  cycle  as  a  result  of  productivity  shocks,  which  is  surely  an  interesting  effort  with 
theoretical  consistency.  These  are  very  elegant  models,  but  the  difficulty  of  solving  them 
analytically  results  in  having  to  solve  them  using  calibrations.  As  a  result,  there  are  often 
doubts regarding the values of the parameters, which in general are unobservable. To the 
extent that these models are free of distortions, there is no role for active monetary policies, 
since  economic  fluctuations  are  socially  optimal.  Certainly  this  is  an  attractive  theoretical 
proposition,  but  it  is  absurd  to  think  that  this  is  how  the  world  works.  It  will  be  difficult  to 
explain the financial collapse with this type of model, because it has no frictions and provides 
very limited policy implications.  
The New Keynesian model features no realistic frictions in financial markets either, at least to 
generate problems as severe as the current ones, so it has nothing to say about the origins 
of the crisis.4 These models are widely used in central banks to calibrate the monetary policy 
that  is  consistent  with  an  inflation  target.5  In  that  sense,  they  are  a  very  useful  tool  for 
establishing  well-specified,  well-estimated  transmission  mechanisms,  but  they  are  certainly 
limited, and it is unrealistic to believe that they can provide a full description of the economy. 
Economies  are  exposed  to  many  shocks  that  cause  deviations  –  sometimes  significant 
deviations – from projection scenarios. However, they help to understand alternative courses 
of  action  of  monetary  policy  after  the  shocks  have  hit.  Actually,  the  much  praised 
aggressiveness  in  interest  rate  cuts  around  the  world,  to  unprecedented  levels  in  many 
cases, is largely justified by the sharp drop in inflationary pressures. It is likely that, without 
the commitment to bringing inflation back up to normal rates, monetary policy actions could 
have  attained  only  part  of  the  expansion.  This  is  a  practical  demonstration  of  a  wrong 
criticism  on  inflation-targeting  central  banks,  which  is  that they  are  not  concerned with  the 
level  of  activity.  Drops  in  activity  and  downward  pressures  on  costs  are  the  factors  that 
opened room for monetary policy, avoiding to repeat the mistakes made in the 1930s. This is 
                                                 
3   Due to these similarities, Goodfriend and King (1997) call these general equilibrium models with price rigidities 
the New Neoclassical Synthesis. 
4   Significant  effort  to  add  financial  frictions,  particularly  the  financial  accelerator  that  amplifies  the  cycle,  was 
made  by  Bernanke  et  al.  (1999).  See  also  Christiano  et  al.  (2007).  Although  these  models  do  analyze  the 
financial channel throughout the cycle, they do not originate a financial meltdown like the one observed last 
year. 
5   For a detailed introduction, see Galí and Gertler (2007). 
BIS Review 112/2009 
 3
then 
inflationary, 
the  problem  been 
why  the  NKM  will  remain  useful,  while  a  different  type  of  model  will  have  to  be  found  to 
address the issue of financial stability, together with extensions that are yet to be formalized. 
This  brings  me  to  the  theory  of  finance.  If  there  ever  was  one  discipline  that  should  have 
anticipated the vulnerabilities that were building up in financial markets, it was finance. Had 
the  origin  of 
the  problem  would  have  been 
macroeconomics,  but  the  origin  was  financial.  The  origin  of  the  crisis  is  closely  related  to 
financial innovation and the creation of instruments that should have diversified risks. Low 
interest rates, search for yields and a monetary policy that promised to rescue after severe 
falls  in  asset  prices  prompted  the  creation  of  a  housing  bubble.6  Enormous  efforts  were 
made  to  price  many  extremely  complex  financial  instruments,  but  even  those  academic 
efforts  failed  to  build  valuation  models  that  realistically  considered  the  instruments’ 
insolvency  probabilities.  No  evidence  is  necessary  to  assert  that  these  methods  failed 
because  of  an  extreme  event  that  struck  everything.  These  failures  were  exacerbated  by 
severe liquidity shortages and widespread panic in the markets.7
Broadly speaking, the theory of finance has two branches: asset price theory and corporate 
finance theory. It is paradoxical that while asset price theories, and their application to the 
real world, are based on the existence of complete markets and full arbitrage (consider, for 
example,  CAPM),  corporate  finance  theories  that  explain  firms’  financial  decisions  are 
essentially dominated by information asymmetries and are plagued by frictions from principal 
(owner)-agent (executives) problems. This dichotomy will have to be corrected over time to 
ensure that more realistic models of how financial markets work become available, models 
which will shed more light on economic policy recommendations. 
Crisis prevention 
As for the current crisis, one pending issue is whether it could have been anticipated. Once 
again the question arises: “Where was the profession, its academics and authorities, such 
that it failed to foresee the severity of the problem?” It is tautological to say that crises are 
unpredictable,  or  else  they  would  never  occur.  History  is  plagued  with  crises.  Moreover, 
crises have become more frequent in recent decades as compared with the Bretton Woods 
period,  although  their  severity  and  duration  have  not  changed  significantly  (Bordo  et  al., 
2001). 
Important efforts have been made to identify early warning indicators that could anticipate a 
crisis  (Berg  et  al.,  2004).  The  recent  episode  clearly  shows  that  they  have  not  been  very 
successful,  to  say  the  least.  In  the  current  crisis  it  is  hard  to  find  clear  regularities  with 
respect  to  early  warning  indicators  (Rose  and  Spiegel,  2009).  Furthermore,  in  small,  open 
economies, these crises can be triggered by external events on which policy makers have no 
control. 
Crises  are  very  costly,  but  are  also  the  result  of  innovation  and  risk  taking,  which  are 
important for progress. Obviously we must try to avoid them, especially their propagation and 
amplification, with good economic policies that cushion the impact of a large global crisis, but 
certainly  they  cannot  be  eliminated  altogether.  In  the  extreme,  to  prevent  global  financial 
crisis,  the  economy  would  have  to  be  totally  isolated  from  the  world,  forbid  risk-taking 
completely,  and  close  financial  markets  altogether.  Naturally  this  is  not  the  best  way  to 
progress. Making an analogy with car accidents, the best way to avoid them would be to ban 
                                                 
6   De  Gregorio  (2009)  argues  that  low  interest  rates  are  not  responsible  for  the  bubbles  or  for  the  financial 
meltdown,  because  a  number  of  countries  had  neither  bubbles  nor  financial  instability  (e.g.,  Canada  and 
Chile), while others had housing bubbles but their financial system was much more resilient (e.g., Spain). 
It  should  be  noted  that  there  were  some  important  warnings  of  the  risks  that  were  being  incubated.  Worth 
singling out is the work by Raghu Rajan presented in Jackson Hole in 2005 (Rajan, 2006). 
7  
4 
 BIS Review 112/2009
the existence of cars. However, it seems more reasonable to build safer cars, buckle up and 
drive prudently.  
Crises will continue to happen, but the proper way to act is to strengthen the financial system 
and  macroeconomic  policies,  in  order  to  minimize  their  consequences  and  probability  of 
occurrence.  
We must not remain in the notion that a crisis cannot be prevented and thus there is nothing 
we can do about it. Going back to the car analogy, the fact that accidents will always happen 
does  not  mean  that  we  must  allow  driving  at  any  speed  and  with  no  regulation.  Quite  the 
contrary, we know that crises are especially severe when they affect the financial system, so 
it is reasonable to improve regulatory mechanisms, particularly to allow financial innovation 
while keeping vulnerability under control.  
Meanwhile,  it  is  necessary  to  continue  devoting  efforts  to  the  detection  of  early  alerts, 
although, as I have already pointed out, unambiguous indicators are impossible to find. But 
there are symptoms of fragility, very common in emerging economies. High and persistent 
current-account  deficits,  misaligned  exchange  rates,  currency  mismatches  in  the  financial 
and  corporate  sectors,  excessive  increases  in  the  prices  of  assets  and  credit,  all  signal  a 
potential problem, although they do not result necessarily in a crisis.8 Therefore, a look at the 
indicators  is  not  enough,  it  is  important  to  put  them  together  to  detect  fragilities.  This  is 
precisely what we try to do in our financial stability reports, which allow us to gain an overall 
vision of vulnerabilities, although, once again, it does not provide a final verdict. Finally, new 
financial  realities  require  new  sets  of  information  to  examine,  or  to  compile  when  not 
available.9
Crisis management 
That this is the worst financial crisis since the Great Depression nobody disputes. Moreover, 
the  initial  shock  on  the  global  economy  does  not  differ  much  from  the  one  that  hit  in  the 
1930s.  There  are  many  similarities  in  the  initial  conditions  and  effects  of  the  two 
(Eichengreen  and  O’Rourke,  2009;  IMF,  2009).  Worth  noting  are  the  initial  fall  in 
manufacturing output and trade, the collapse of stock prices and credit, and the increase in 
bond spreads. In their origins there was also the same rapid expansion in credit and financial 
innovation  that  increased  the  leverage  of  financial  intermediaries.  These  remarkable 
similarities in the first months of this crisis were alarming.  
However, both differ in the subsequent evolution of the global economy.10 Between 1930 and 
1932,  world  activity  (measured  at  PPP)  dropped  by  an  average  of  4.8%.  In  particular,  the 
U.S. experienced an average annual fall of 9.9%. The current situation is very different, and 
while the pace of the recovery is yet to be seen, forecasts for the three-year period 2009-
2011  point  at  the  world  economy  growing  by  an  average  of  2.1%  per  year,  0.8%  for  the 
U.S.11 In the 1930s, U.S. unemployment soared to 25%, much higher than the 10% projected 
this time. Also, the world faced a severe deflation in the early 1930s, in some cases sinking 
                                                 
8   Although  the  evidence  shows  that  financial  development  is  good  for  economic  growth,  excessive  credit 
expansion  can  exacerbate  a  crisis,  as  happened  during  the  debt  crisis  in  Latin  America  (De  Gregorio  and 
Guidotti, 1995). 
9   One example is the new households’ financial survey of the Central Bank of Chile, which seeks to strengthen 
the analysis of a sector that is becoming ever more important in our financial system. 
10   Evidence provided by Eichengreen and O’Rourke (2009) shows that the first few months of the current crisis 
are  pretty  similar  to  the  Great  Depression,  although  in  recent  months  they  seem  to  diverge,  because  the 
current episode has begun to show signs of recovery while in the Great Depression the fall continued. 
11   For the 1930s, the data come from Maddison (2009), while current growth projections come from Consensus 
Forecast and investment banks. 
BIS Review 112/2009 
 5
below -10%. We do not see that today, and while inflation has fallen dramatically around the 
world, it remains far from the levels seen during the Great Depression. 
Another  aspect  making  a  big  difference  is  the  performance  of  emerging  economies.  Latin 
America, excluding Chile, posted an average annual fall of 4.2% between 1930 and 1932, 
while  Chile,  where  the  crisis  compounded  with  the  downfall  of  the  nitrate  industry,  fell  an 
average of 17.6%. For the three-year period 2009-2011, private forecasts indicate that Latin 
America  will  grow  by  an  average  of  1.2%,  while  Chile  will  grow  by  2.1%.  These  are  just 
projections, not definitive figures, but data released so far this year indicates that the effects 
of the crisis, although far from negligible, are much milder than they were in the 1930s. This 
is an encouraging fact. Usually, whenever developed countries go into a recession, its effects 
are  amplified  into  our  region.  That  has  not  been  the  case  this  time;  on  the  contrary,  our 
region today is outperforming the developed economies. 
That the current crisis did not turn into a Great Depression proves that lessons have been 
learned. Economies are much stronger, and also the policies applied have gone in the proper 
direction of mitigating the tremendous financial shock of last year.  
For  one  thing,  the  task  of  stabilizing  the  financial  system  was  assumed  decisively,  which 
prevented its collapse. Uncertainties remain, but are more focused and less dramatic than at 
the end of last year. Also, the lessons of Friedman and Schwartz (1963) on monetary policy 
and  the  role  of  central  banks  as  lenders  of  last  resort,  of  Keynes  (1935)  on  the  role  of 
expansionary  policies,  and  of  Bernanke  (1983)  on  the  role  of  the  financial  channel  for  the 
transmission  of  policy  actions,  have  been  essential  in  policy  decisions  adopted  since  the 
onset  of  the  current  crisis.  Many  subsequent  studies  have  shed  additional  light  on  the 
characteristics of good policies and have provided the base for the aggressive monetary and 
fiscal policies that have been applied around the world, and should also illustrate the way in 
which the stimulus must be withdrawn.  
Finally, the use of the gold standard accounted largely for the depth of the Great Depression 
(Bernanke  and  James,  1991;  Eichengreen,  1992).  Moreover,  in  the  midst  of  the  crisis  in 
1931, the U.S. raised the interest rate to defend the dollar parity, aggravating the crisis and 
causing deflationary pressures. 
In  Latin  America,  thanks  to  lessons  learned  from  mistakes  of  the  past,  it  has  been 
understood  that  macroeconomic  stability,  in  both  monetary  and  fiscal  terms,  foreign 
exchange flexibility, and a well regulated financial system are crucial to mitigate the effects of 
external scenarios as adverse as this one. 
This reflects major progress in economic policy, which has benefited from important practical 
lessons and advances in research following the debt crisis.  
Final remarks 
There will be plenty of time to continue analyzing where was the profession such that it did 
not warn of the magnitude of the crisis. As I have discussed here, this is a multifaceted issue 
that  must  consider  crisis  predictability,  management,  and  the  role  of  research  in  providing 
rigorous frameworks – albeit incomplete ones – with which to analyze reality.  
Nonetheless,  that  macroeconomic  theory  has  failed  is  an  overstatement.  In  particular,  the 
comparatively  better  performance  of  emerging  economies  –  with  the  exception  of  a  few 
cases such as Eastern Europe that remind us of our mistakes of the past – demonstrate that 
economic  research  has  taught  us  something.  In  particular,  the  majority  of  macroeconomic 
policies  have  sought  not  to  replicate  past  mistakes.  Now  it  is  necessary  to  analyze  more 
carefully  the  role  of  financial  markets,  their  virtues  and,  of  utmost  importance,  their 
vulnerabilities. 
This crisis is an admonishment to professional arrogance. We must recognize that the real 
world  is  much  more  complex  than  what  our  models  can  explain.  This  is  why  so-called 
6 
 BIS Review 112/2009
professional  orthodoxy  is  discredited.  However,  we  must  also  avoid  the  arrogance  that 
comes  from  ignorance,  which  leads  to  abandoning  all  we  have  learned  about  the 
fundamentals of good macroeconomic policies.  
References 
Berg,  A.,  E.  Borensztein  and  C.  Pattillo  (2004),  “Assessing  Early  Warning  Systems,”  IMF 
Working Paper, 04/52. 
Bernanke,  B.  (1983),  “Nonmonetary  Effects  of  the  Financial  Crisis  in  Propagation  of  the 
Great Depression,” American Economic Review 73(3): 257-76. 
Bernanke, B. and H. James (1991), “The Gold Standard, Deflation, and Financial Crisis in 
the Great Depression: An International Comparison,” in G. Hubbard (ed.), Financial Markets 
and Financial Crisis, Chicago: Chicago University Press. 
Bernanke, B., M. Gertler and S. Gilchrist (1999), “The financial accelerator in a quantitative 
business  cycle  framework,”  in  J.B.  Taylor  and  M.  Woodford  (eds.),  Handbook  of 
Macroeconomics, Vol. 1C. North Holland, Amsterdam: 1341-93. 
Bordo,  M.,  B.  Eichengreen,  D.  Klingebiel  and  M.S.  Martinez-Peria  (2001),  “Is  the  Crisis 
Problem Growing More Severe,” Economic Policy 16(32): 51-82. 
Central Bank of Chile (2003), Modelos macroeconómicos y proyecciones del Banco Central 
de Chile 2003. 
Christiano L., R. Motto and M. Rostagno (2007), “Shocks, Structures or Monetary Policies? 
The Euro Area and US after 2001,” NBER Working Paper N°13521. 
De  Gregorio,  J.  (2009),  “Chile  frente  a  la  Recesión  Mundial  del  2009,”  Estudios  Públicos 
113(summer): 5-26. 
De  Gregorio,  J.  and  P.  Guidotti  (1995),  “Financial  Development  and  Economic  Growth,” 
World Development 23(3): 433-48. 
Eichengreen,  B.  (1992),  Golden  fetters:  The  Gold  Standard  and  the  Great  Depression, 
Oxford University Press. 
Eichengreen,  B.  and  K.H.  O’Rourke  (2009),  “A  Tale  of  Two  Depressions,”  upcoming 
summarized updated version in http://www.voxeu.org. 
Friedman, M. and A. Schwartz (1963), A Monetary History of the United States, 1867-1960, 
Princeton: Princeton University Press – National Bureau of Economic Research. 
Galí, J. and M. Gertler, (2007), “Macroeconomic Modeling for Monetary Policy Evaluation,” 
Journal of Economic Perspectives 21(4): 25-45. 
Goodfriend,  M.  and  R.  King  (1997),  “The  New  Neoclassical  Synthesis  and  the  Role  of 
Monetary Policy,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, MIT Press. 
Harberger,  A.  (1993),  “The  Search  for  Relevance  in  Economics,”  American  Economic 
Review, papers and proceedings 83(2): 1-16. 
IMF  (2009),  World  Economic  Outlook,  Box.  3.1,  April,  Washington  D.C.:  International 
Monetary Fund. 
Keynes, J.M. (1935), The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money, Cambridge: 
Harcourt, Brace and Company. 
Maddison,  A.  (2009),  Historical  Statistics  on  World  Population,  GDP  and  Per  capita  GDP, 
1-2006 AD, updated March 2009 in http://www.ggdc.net/maddison. 
Mankiw, N.G. (2006), “The Macroeconomist as Scientist and Engineer,” Journal of Economic 
Perspectives 20(4): 29-46. 
BIS Review 112/2009 
 7
Medina,  J.P.  and  C.  Soto  (2007),  “The  Chilean  Business  Cycles  through  the  Lens  of  a 
Stochastic General Equilibrium Model,” Working Paper N°457, Central Bank of Chile. 
Rajan, R. (2006), “Has Financial Development Made the World Riskier?,” in The Greenspan 
Era:  Lessons  for  the  Future,  Proceedings  of  the  Jackson  Hole  Symposium  2005,  Federal 
Reserve Bank of Kansas City. 
Rose,  A.  and  M.  Spiegel,  (2009),  “Cross-Country  Causes  and  Consequences  of  the  2008 
Crisis: Early Warning,” CEPR Discussion Paper N°7354. 
8 
 BIS Review 112/2009
