Svein Gjedrem: The outlook for the Norwegian economy and monetary 
policy assessments 
Speech  by  Mr  Svein  Gjedrem,  Governor  of  Norges  Bank  (Central  Bank  of  Norway),  at  a 
presentation of the Monetary Policy Report 1/09 at Goldman Sachs, London, 26 March 2009. 
The address is based on the assessments presented at Norges Bank’s press conference following the Executive 
Board’s monetary policy meeting on 25 March, Monetary Policy Report 1/09 and on previous speeches. Please 
note that the text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation. 
 Introduction 
Norges  Bank’s  Executive  Board  decided  yesterday  to  reduce  its  key  policy  rate  by  0.50 
percentage  point  to  2.00  per  cent.  The  Monetary  Policy  Report,  published  yesterday, 
indicates that the key policy rate should be gradually reduced further to a level of around 1 
per cent in the second half of 2009.  
Financial crisis but active public measures 
In September 2008, the turbulence in financial markets erupted into a full-blown global crisis. 
Global economic growth was already slowing, but the situation has deteriorated in the past 
few  months  of  2008.  The  turnaround  hit  hard,  with  synchronised  effects  on  virtually  all 
financial and goods and services markets, not only in the US but also in Europe, Asia, Latin 
America  and  Oceania.  We  are  now  in  the  deepest  downturn  in  OECD  countries  in  the 
postwar period. GDP in the OECD area as a whole is expected to fall in 2009 for the first 
time since the Second World War.  
The prospects for the world economy are now even weaker than we anticipated at the end of 
2008.  International  trade  is  contracting  markedly,  and  it  will  take  time  before  growth 
rebounds. Our projections for growth among our trading partners have been revised down to 
-3 per cent in 2009 and ¾ per cent in 2010. Moreover, the Norwegian economy seems to be 
contracting more sharply than projected around the monetary policy meeting in December.  
BIS Review 37/2009 
  1
 
A wide range of instruments is being used in Norway to counteract the effects of the financial 
crisis. In order to curb the fall in activity, government expenditure will be increased by over 10 
per cent this year. 
Norges Bank’s bank lending survey shows that banks have been tightening credit standards 
substantially,  particularly  for  corporate  loans.  To  boost  the  credit  market  a  separate 
government fund1 will buy private bonds.  
The government has also provided loans and guarantees for exports and expanded lending 
limits  for  the Norwegian State  Housing Bank  and  other  special  vehicles  for  government 
financing.2  
Norwegian Banks’ equity capital makes up only 6 per cent of their assets, which is low from a 
historic  perspective,  but  not  low  compared  with  banks  in  other  countries.3  At  present,  our 
banks are financially sound, but they need to strengthen their core capital in order to be able 
to supply credit as normal. The authorities offer risk capital to the banks, including core Tier 1 
capital without voting right through a newly established State Finance Fund.  
 
Banks  have  become  more  vulnerable  to  distortions  in  the  credit  markets.  Historically,  our 
banks primarily obtained funds through deposits by households and enterprises.4 In recent 
                                                  
1   Folketrygdfondet will manage the new Government Bond Fund. 
2   The  Government  has  increased  the  capital  of  Kommunalbanken  Norway  (the  local  government  funding 
agency),  it  has  increased  the  scope  of  GIEK  (the  central  government  export  credit  agency)  and  Innovation 
Norway, and has offered state loans to Eksportfinans Norway (the credit institution for export financing). 
3   Figures for banks’ equity capital before 1918 are based on: Jan Tore Klovland (2007): “A reconstruction of the 
balance  sheets  of  savings  banks  in  Norway  1822-1875”  and  “A  reconstruction  of  the  balance  sheets  of 
commercial  banks  in  Norway1848-1900”  in  Øyvind  Eitrheim,  Jan  Tore  Klovland  and  Jan  F.  Qvigstad  (Ed.) 
(2007): “Historical Monetary Statistics for Norway – Part II” Norges Bank’s Occasional Papers, No. 38, Oslo. 
Statistics Norway is the source for figures from 1919 to 1995. Norges Bank is the source for figures from 1996. 
4   Figures are taken from the sources in footnote 3 and Hege Imset Matre, H. I. (1992): Norske forretningsbanker 
1848-1990: En tilbakeføring av forretningsstatistikken (Norwegian commercial banks 1848-1990). Report No 
41 from the research programme Det nye pengesamfunnet. 
2 
 BIS Review 37/2009
years,  banks  have  borrowed  in  both  domestic  and  foreign  markets.  When  credit  markets 
dried up, this proved to involve high liquidity risk for banks.  
  To facilitate the funding of banks operating in Norway, a swap arrangement was established 
allowing  banks  to  exchange  covered  bonds  for  government  securities  for  up  to  NOK  350 
billion. A number of banks have made use of this facility, so far in an amount totaling NOK 80 
billion.  The  arrangement  provides  banks  with  Treasury  bills.  Banks  have  used  these  as 
collateral for loans, sold them or kept them as liquidity reserves.  
Norges  Bank  has  also  expanded  its  use  of  its  ordinary  instruments.  We  have  supplied 
additional liquidity through our loan facilities and made arrangements for banks to furnish a 
greater  range  of  securities  as  collateral  for  the  loans.  We  have  also  provided  loans  with 
longer-than-usual  maturities.  The  longest  maturities  have  been  two-  and  three-year  loans, 
which have been geared to small banks.  
Norges  Bank  has  also  supplied  Norwegian  kroner  through  currency  swaps  and  offered 
USD loans  to  Norwegian  banks.  Norges  Bank  entered  into  a  swap  agreement  with  the 
Federal Reserve, authorising a loan of up to USD 15 billion. 
The measures have been effective. Money market rates, which for a period were above 8 per 
cent, are now approximately 3½ per cent. In this period Norges Bank reduced the key policy 
rate  by  3.75  percentage  points  to  2  per  cent  on  25  March.  Banks’  lending  rates  have 
decreased considerably. Credit flows have improved, but access to credit is still difficult for 
enterprises. Money market premiums have fallen. In the first quarter of 2009, premiums on 
three-month  interest  rates  in  Norway  stood  at  1.2  percentage  points.  Norwegian  money 
market premiums are expected to edge down ahead in line with premiums in global markets. 
BIS Review 37/2009 
 3
The  global  downturn  led  to  a  marked  fall  in  prices  for  oil  and  other  commodities  through 
autumn 2008. Oil prices have for a period now hovered around USD 45 per barrel. Oil futures 
prices have fallen and indicate an oil price of around USD 55 per barrel in 2010.  
 Other  commodity  prices  that  are  important  for  the  Norwegian  economy  have  also  fallen 
sharply. Metal prices are particularly sensitive to cyclical developments. Futures prices for a 
selection  of  raw  materials  indicate  unchanged  or  moderately  rising  prices  in  the  next  few 
years. Many countries that have been hit by the economic setback will see an improvement 
in their terms of trade and growth in their disposable income.  
 4 
 BIS Review 37/2009
  
The current downturn followed a period of very high global and domestic economic growth, 
supported by favorable trading conditions. Few countries benefited more than Norway from 
the economic upturn, which drove up prices for oil, gas and other export commodities. At the 
same  time,  an  increasing  number  of  cheap  consumer  goods  were  imported  from  new  EU 
countries and from Asia. Norway’s real disposable income increased by  more than 40 per 
cent from 2002 to 2008, more than that of any other western country. But our terms of trade 
are  now  deteriorating.  Some  of  the  gains  of  the  past  few  years  have  dissipated,  and  our 
disposable income might fall by close to 10 per cent in 2009.  
 
In periods of substantial uncertainty, investors will seek to repatriate investments in foreign 
currency.  The  fragility  of  the  Norwegian  krone  was  illustrated  when  investors  fled  the 
currencies  of  small  countries,  and  the  krone  weakened  considerably.  When  speculators 
withdrew, daily fluctuations increased and hedging against exchange rate volatility became 
 BIS Review 37/2009 
 5
more  expensive.  The  krone  fell  to  a  record-low  level  in  December  last  year,  but  has 
appreciated since then.  
 
Consumer  price  inflation  reached  a  peak  in  October  of  2008,  and  has  slowed  markedly 
thereafter  and  was  2.5 per  cent in February.  Underlying  inflation  is still  above  the  inflation 
target, and stood at approximately 3 per cent in February. 
Even though inflation has been falling, the rise in prices has been somewhat sharper than 
expected recently, particularly for imported consumer goods. The depreciation of the krone 
last  autumn  has  probably  fed  through  to  prices  more  rapidly  than  usual.  Nevertheless, 
looking forward inflation will abate.  
  
Norges Bank has over a number of years focused on anchoring inflation expectations around 
 6 
 BIS Review 37/2009
the  target  of  close  to  2.5  per  cent  over  time  and  given  weight  to  predictability,  with  a 
recognizable response pattern.  
 
The downturn has not affected long-term inflation expectations to any great extent. According 
to  an  expectations  survey,  inflation  expectations  five  years  ahead  among  experts  in  the 
financial industry, the social partners and academia were virtually unchanged from the fourth 
quarter of 2008 to the first quarter of 2009. 
   
An indicator of inflation expectations in financial markets can be derived from the long-term 
forward  rate  differential  between  Norway  and  the  euro  area.  Because  of  a  higher  inflation 
target  in  our  country,  this  differential  will  normally  be  around  ½-1  percentage  point, 
depending on risk premiums in the bond market. The differential has been in this range in 
recent years, but has fluctuated somewhat since last autumn.  
 BIS Review 37/2009 
 7
  
After a prolonged upturn both output and employment are falling in Norway. The turnaround 
had already occurred just over a year ago, but in the period to autumn last year, it appeared 
that capacity utilisation would gradually decrease to a normal level. As the global economic 
outlook deteriorated, it became clear that the slowdown in our economy would occur more 
rapidly  and  be  more  pronounced  than  envisaged  earlier.  In  November,  regional  network 
contacts  reported  an  abrupt  and  marked  turnaround  in  activity.  They  now  report  that  the 
labour  supply  is  no  longer  a  constraint  on  production.  The  enterprises  in  the  network  are 
expecting output and employment to fall further over the next six months.  
 
Unemployment  has  increased  since  autumn  last  year,  but  is  still  at  historical  low  levels. 
Unemployment is projected to rise to 4 3/4 per cent at the end of the year. Wage growth is 
expected  to  come  down  this  year  from  a  high  level  in  2008.  Lower  corporate  profitability, 
 8 
 BIS Review 37/2009
rising unemployment and lower consumer price inflation will probably result in low negotiated 
pay increases this year.  
 
The export sector has been particularly hard hit by the global downturn. Traditional exports 
have fallen markedly since autumn last year. A contraction in the world economy will result in 
a  substantial  decline  in  Norwegian  exports  ahead.  Moreover,  due  to  the  marked  fall  in 
commodity prices, export prices are now very low.  
   
Expensive  and  reduced  access  to  credit,  high  interest  expenses  and  uncertainty  about 
developments ahead amplified the downturn towards the end of 2008. Private consumption 
fell  markedly,  the  decline  in  housing  investment  accelerated  and  mainland  business 
investment started to fall. The downturn in the world economy and the abnormal conditions in 
 BIS Review 37/2009 
 9
financial markets are expected to continue to mark the Norwegian economy ahead. Mainland 
GDP is projected to contract by 1 per cent between 2008 and 2009. 
 
Norwegian government finances are sound with substantial net wealth, although the surplus 
will  be  reduced  by  the  fall  in  oil  prices.  The  automatic  stabilisers  in  the  national  budget 
together with discretionary fiscal policy will stimulate the mainland economy by the equivalent 
of 5 per cent of GDP from 2008 to 2009.  
Fiscal policy is assumed to become less expansionary between 2010 and 2012. Government 
oil  revenue  spending  is  expected  to  be  brought  back  into  line  with  the  fiscal  rule  when 
cyclical conditions eventually normalise.  
  
We assume that prospects for higher unemployment, a fall in house prices and a high level 
of debt will induce households to build up financial buffers and reduce debt. The saving ratio 
 10 
 BIS Review 37/2009
is expected to increase considerably. Net lending is projected to be positive this year after 
being negative since 2004. As household borrowing has been considerable in recent years, 
deleveraging in the household sector is important to long-term stability in the economy. 
The outlook ahead, and monetary policy assessments 
  In  Norway,  inflation  will  be  curbed  by  lower  capacity  utilisation.  The  marked  increase  in 
unemployment now envisaged will result in lower pay increases this year and next. 
Prospects of weaker growth and lower inflation imply a lower interest rate than presented in 
the interest rate projection from our last forecast in December. There is also a risk that the 
global downturn will be deeper and more prolonged than expected. If this proves to be the 
case, growth in the Norwegian economy will not pick up as quickly and inflation will fall more 
sharply  than  we  currently  assume.  The  objective  of  avoiding  a  pronounced  downturn 
indicates in isolation that the interest rate should be rapidly reduced to a low level. 
On the other hand, we have already made substantial reductions in the key policy rate. With 
a low interest rate, households may save less and the turnaround may occur more rapidly 
than  we  assume.  This  indicates  in  isolation  that  changes  in  the  interest  rate  should  be 
gradual or that further interest rate cuts should be put on hold.  
Overall, the outlook and balance of risks suggest that the key policy rate should be gradually 
reduced further to a level of around 1 per cent in the second half of 2009. This is about one 
percentage point lower than in Norges Bank’s forecast from 17 December last year. 
With the low interest rate added to the government fiscal measures, our analysis indicates 
that growth in the economy will be positive from the second half of this year. Growth will be 
driven by a rise in private consumption as a result of a low key policy rate, growth in real 
wages  and  higher  government  transfers.  Activity  in  the  economy  will  be  underpinned  by 
strong  growth  in  government  spending.  The  projections  are  based  on  the  assumption  that 
Norges  Bank’s  interest  rate  changes  will  translate  into  lower  lending  rates  for  households 
and  businesses.  At  the  same  time, tighter  credit  standards  in  banks  are  making  monetary 
policy somewhat less effective than normal.  
BIS Review 37/2009 
 11
Inflation is projected to fall below 2 per cent in 2010, before gradually moving up towards the 
target towards the end of the projection period as the output gap gradually closes. There is a 
risk that the structural changes brought about by the crisis may result in persistently lower 
productivity growth. 
It appears that inflation will remain considerably lower in the years ahead than we expected 
in December. Both the objective of stabilising inflation around the target and the objective of 
ensuring stable developments in the real economy suggest that the interest rate should be 
low. 
 Interest rate setting can also be assessed using simple monetary policy rules that prescribe 
an  interest  rate  path  based  on  actual  inflation  and  output.  The  calculations  are  based  on 
projections for inflation and output in the current Monetary Policy Report. The different rules 
yield somewhat divergent results, but all of them indicate a decline in the interest rate. Rules 
do not capture possible restrictions in the supply of credit that may affect the monetary policy 
transmission mechanism.  
 12 
 BIS Review 37/2009
  Norges Bank has estimated a simple interest rate rule based on the Bank’s previous interest 
rate setting.5 The rule includes developments in inflation, wage growth, mainland GDP and 
central bank key rates abroad. The interest rate in the previous period is also important. The 
key rate is now below the lower end of the interval projected. Norges Bank has given weight 
to staving off particularly adverse outcomes and therefore brought forward the decrease in 
the key policy rate last autumn. 
 The  projections  for  the  key  rate,  inflation,  output  and  other  variables  are  based  on  our 
assessment of the economic situation and our perception of the functioning of the economy 
and  monetary  policy.  If  economic  developments  are  broadly  in  line  with  our  projections, 
                                                  
5   See Staff Memo 2008/3 from Norges Bank. 
BIS Review 37/2009 
 13
economic agents can expect that the interest rate path will also be approximately in line with 
that projected. On the other hand, the interest rate path may shift if the economic prospects 
change, or if the effect of interest rate changes on inflation, output and employment differs 
from that assumed. 
In the Monetary Policy Report, we present two alternative scenarios where demand is higher 
or lower than presented in the baseline scenario. 
The  yellow  lines  in  the  chart  illustrate  a  scenario  where  growth  in  private  consumption  is 
stronger  than  expected  and  the  turnaround  occurs  more  rapidly.  In  this  scenario,  interest 
rates may decrease to a lesser extent and move up more quickly.  
The red lines in the chart illustrate a scenario where the global downturn is deeper and more 
prolonged, with more pronounced effects than assumed. It will then be appropriate to set a 
lower  interest  rate  in  order  to  stimulate  the  economy  and  thereby  prevent  inflation  from 
becoming too low.  
The primary effect of a key rate close to zero will probably come via a weaker krone. It will 
then be appropriate to consider instruments other than the interest rate.  
Monetary policy normally operates by lowering key rates to reduce the real interest rate when 
expected inflation and market risk premiums are stable in the short term. When the key rate 
moves close to its lower bound, the real interest rate can still be influenced through key rate 
expectations, 
inflation  expectations.  The 
expectations channel will be particularly important if the current key rate cannot be further 
reduced.  
For Norges Bank, the expectations channel is an established part of monetary policy in that 
we provide forecasts for the key policy rate. 
influencing  risk  premiums  and  anchoring 
 To sum up, it is useful to decompose the factors behind the change in the interest rate path 
since 17 December 2008. The interest rate forecast in the Monetary Policy Report is lower 
than the forecast published in December last year.  
The  outlook  for  global  growth  has  deteriorated  further.  The  slowdown  in  the  Norwegian 
economy  appears  to  be  more  pronounced  than  expected  in  December.  Lower  global  and 
domestic demand would suggest a lower key policy rate than projected in December.  
Our inflation forecast, along with the stronger krone and lower key rate expectations abroad 
also suggests a lower key policy rate than projected at that time. 
14 
 BIS Review 37/2009
  
Let me conclude. 
Monetary  policy  cannot  fine-tune  developments  in  the  economy,  but  it  can  mitigate  the 
largest effects when the economy is exposed to shocks. Overall, the outlook and the balance 
of risks suggest that the key rate should be gradually reduced further. The key policy rate 
should be in the interval 1-2 per cent in the period to the publication of the next Monetary 
Policy  Report  on  17  June  2009,  unless  the  Norwegian  economy  is  exposed  to  new  major 
shocks.  
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 37/2009 
 15
