Ben S Bernanke: Federal Reserve policies to ease credit and their 
implications for the Fed's balance sheet 
Speech  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve  System,  at  the  National  Press  Club  Luncheon,  National  Press  Club,  Washington 
DC, 18 February 2009.  
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website. 
 We  live  in  extraordinarily  challenging  times  for  the  global  economy  and  for  economic 
policymakers,  not  least  for  central  banks  such  as  the  Federal  Reserve.  As  you  know,  the 
recent economic statistics have been dismal, with many economies, including ours, having 
fallen into recession. And behind those statistics, we must never forget, are millions of people 
struggling  with  lost  jobs,  lost  homes,  and  lost  confidence  in  their  economic  future.  In 
examples  that  resonate  with  me  personally,  the  unemployment  rate  in  the  small  town  in 
South  Carolina  where  I  grew  up  has  risen  to  14  percent,  and  I  learned  the  other  day  that 
what had once been my family home was recently put through foreclosure.  
Traditionally  the  most  conservative  of  institutions,  central  banks  around  the  world  have 
responded to this unprecedented crisis with force and innovation. In the United States, the 
Federal Reserve has done, and will continue to do, everything possible within the limits of its 
authority  to  assist  in  restoring  our  nation  to  financial  stability  and  economic  prosperity  as 
quickly as possible. Policy innovation has been necessary because conventional monetary 
policies,  which  focus  on  influencing  short-term  interest  rates,  have  proven  insufficient  to 
overcome the effects of the financial crisis on credit conditions and the broader economy. To 
further  ease  financial  conditions,  beyond  what  can  be  attained  by  reducing  short-term 
interest rates, the Federal Reserve has taken additional steps to improve the functioning of 
credit markets and to increase the supply of credit to households and businesses – a policy 
strategy  that  I  have  called  "credit  easing."  In  the  first  portion  of  my  remarks,  I  will  briefly 
outline  the  three  principal  approaches  to  easing  credit  that  we  have  undertaken,  over  and 
above cutting the short-term interest rate, and assess their effectiveness to date. 
Each  of  these  policy  approaches  involves  the  provision  of  credit  or  the  purchase  of  debt 
securities by the Federal Reserve, which collectively have resulted in a substantial expansion 
in  the  size  of  the  Federal  Reserve's  balance  sheet.  The  second  portion  of  my  remarks 
addresses  some  issues  raised  by  the  changes  in  the  size  of  the  Fed's  balance  sheet.  In 
particular, I will discuss how the size of the balance sheet affects the ability of the Federal 
Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC),  the  body  that  sets  monetary  policy,  to  foster  maximum 
sustainable  employment  and  price  stability,  as  well  as  the  steps  that  are  being  taken  to 
manage the balance sheet appropriately. 
Finally, the expansion of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet has raised some concerns – 
and led to some misconceptions – about the credit risk being taken by the Fed. I will address 
the issue of credit risk today. And I would also like to talk about steps that the Fed is taking to 
improve the transparency of its programs to the public, consistent with our obligations in a 
democracy. 
Federal Reserve policy during the crisis 
The  Federal  Reserve  has  responded  forcefully  to  the  crisis  since  its  emergence  in  the 
summer of 2007. The FOMC began to ease monetary policy in September 2007, reducing 
the  target  for  the  federal  funds  rate,  its  policy  instrument,  by  50  basis  points,  or  1/2 
percentage  point.  As  indications  of  economic  weakness  proliferated,  the  Committee 
BIS Review 19/2009 
 1
continued to respond, bringing down its target for the federal funds rate by a cumulative 325 
basis points by the spring of 2008. In historical comparison, this policy response stands out 
as exceptionally rapid and proactive. 
Monetary easing helped support employment and incomes during the first year of the crisis. 
Unfortunately,  the  intensification  of  financial  turbulence  last  fall  led  to  further  significant 
deterioration in the economic outlook. The Committee responded by cutting the target for the 
federal  funds  rate  an  additional  100  basis  points  in  October,  with  half  of  that  reduction 
coming as part of an unprecedented coordinated interest rate cut by six major central banks 
on October 8. In December, the Committee reduced its target further, setting a range of 0 to 
25 basis points for the target federal funds rate. 
The Fed's monetary easing has been reflected in significant declines in a number of lending 
rates, especially shorter-term rates, thus offsetting to some degree the effects of the financial 
turmoil on the cost of credit. However, that offset has been incomplete, as widening credit 
spreads,  more-restrictive  lending  standards,  and  credit  market  dysfunction  have  worked 
against the monetary easing and led to tighter financial conditions overall. Thus, in addition 
to easing monetary policy, the Federal Reserve has made use of a range of additional tools 
to ease credit conditions and support the broader economy. 
These additional components of the Fed's toolkit can be divided into three sets. The first set 
is closely tied to the central bank's traditional role of provider of short-term liquidity to sound 
financial  institutions.  Over  the  course  of  the  crisis,  the  Fed  has  taken  a  number  of 
extraordinary actions to ensure that financial institutions have adequate access to short-term 
credit. In fulfilling its traditional lending function, the Federal Reserve enhances the stability 
of our financial system, increases the willingness of financial institutions to extend credit, and 
helps to ease conditions in interbank lending markets, thereby reducing the overall cost of 
capital to banks. In addition, some interest rates, including the rates on some adjustable-rate 
mortgages,  are  tied  contractually  to  key  interbank  rates,  such  as  the  London  interbank 
offered rate (Libor). To the extent that the provision of ample liquidity to banks reduces Libor, 
other borrowers will also see their payments decline. 
Because  interbank  markets  are  global  in  scope,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  also  approved 
temporary  bilateral  liquidity  agreements  with  14  foreign  central  banks.  These  so-called 
currency swap facilities have allowed these central banks to acquire dollars from the Federal 
Reserve that they may lend to financial institutions in their own jurisdictions. The purpose of 
these swaps is to ease conditions in dollar funding markets globally. Improvements in global 
interbank markets, in turn, promote greater stability in other markets, such as money markets 
and foreign exchange markets. 
Although the provision of ample liquidity by the central bank to financial institutions is a time-
tested  approach  to  reducing  financial  strains,  it  is  no  panacea.  Today,  concerns  about 
capital, asset quality, and credit risk continue to limit the willingness of many intermediaries 
to extend credit, notwithstanding the access of these firms to central bank liquidity. Moreover, 
lending  to  financial  institutions  does  not  directly  address  instability  or  declining  liquidity  in 
critical  nonbank  markets,  such  as  the  commercial  paper  market  or  the  market  for  asset-
backed  securities,  which  under  normal  circumstances  are  major  sources  of  credit  for  U.S. 
households and firms. 
To address these issues, the Federal Reserve has developed a second set of policy tools, 
which  involve  the  provision  of  liquidity  directly  to  borrowers  and  investors  in  key  credit 
markets. Notably, we have introduced facilities to purchase highly rated commercial paper at 
a term of three months and to provide backup liquidity for money market mutual funds. The 
purpose of these facilities is to serve, once again in classic central bank fashion, as backstop 
liquidity  provider,  in  these  cases  to  institutions  and  markets  that  were  destabilized  by  the 
rapid  withdrawal  of  funds  by  short-term  creditors  and  investors.  In  addition,  the  Federal 
Reserve  and  the  Treasury  have  jointly  announced  a  facility  –  expected  to  be  operational 
shortly – that will lend against AAA-rated asset-backed securities collateralized by recently 
2 
 BIS Review 19/2009
originated student loans, auto loans, credit card loans, and loans guaranteed by the Small 
Business Administration. Last week, in conjunction with the Treasury, we announced that we 
were  prepared  to  expand  significantly  this  facility,  known  as  the  Term  Asset-Backed 
Securities  Loan  Facility,  or  TALF,  to  encompass  other  types  of  newly  issued  AAA-rated 
asset-backed  securities,  such  as  commercial  mortgage-backed  securities  and  private-label 
mortgage-backed securities, as well. If this program works as planned, it should lead to lower 
rates and greater availability of consumer, business, and mortgage credit. 
The  Federal  Reserve's  third  set  of  tools  for  supporting  the  functioning  of  credit  markets 
involves the purchase of longer-term securities for the Fed's portfolio. For example, we are 
purchasing up to $100 billion in the debt of government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs) and 
up to $500 billion in mortgage-backed securities guaranteed by federal agencies by midyear.  
The Federal Reserve is engaged in continuous assessment of the effectiveness of its credit-
related tools, and we have generally been encouraged by the market responses. Our lending 
to financial institutions has helped to relax the severe liquidity strains experienced by many 
firms and has been associated with improvements in interbank lending markets; for example, 
we believe that liquidity provision by the Fed and other central banks is a principal reason 
that  liquidity  pressures  around  the  end  of  the  year  –  often  a  period  of  heightened  liquidity 
strains  –  were  relatively  modest.  Libor  has  fallen  sharply  as  well.  Our  commercial  paper 
facility  has  helped  to  stabilize  that  market,  lowering  rates  significantly  and  allowing  high-
quality  firms  access  to  financing  at  terms  longer  than  a  few  days.  Together  with  other 
government programs, our actions to stabilize the money market mutual fund industry have 
also  shown  some  success,  as  the  sharp  withdrawals  from  funds  seen  in  September  have 
given  way  to  modest  inflows.  And  rates  on  30-year  conforming  fixed-rate  mortgages  have 
fallen nearly 1 percentage point since we announced the program to purchase GSE-related 
securities.  Thus,  taken  together,  these  policies  appear  to  give  the  Federal  Reserve  some 
scope  to  affect  credit  conditions  and  economic  performance,  notwithstanding  that  the 
conventional tool of monetary policy, the federal funds rate, is nearly as low as it can go. 
The Federal Reserve's policies and its balance sheet 
The  various  credit-related  policies  I  have  described  have  implications  for  the  Federal 
Reserve's balance sheet. In the remainder of my remarks I will discuss those implications as 
well as some related issues. 
The  three  sets  of  policy  tools  I  have  focused  on  today  –  lending  to  financial  institutions, 
providing  liquidity  directly  to  key  credit  markets,  and  buying  longer-term  securities  –  each 
represents a use of the asset side of the Fed's balance sheet. Specifically, loans that the Fed 
extends – either to financial institutions, through the discount window and related facilities, or 
to other borrowers in programs like our commercial paper facility – are recorded as assets on 
our balance sheet, as are securities acquired in the open market, such as the GSE securities 
we are purchasing. The Fed's assets also include about $500 billion of Treasury securities. 
About 5 percent of our balance sheet, or $100 billion, consists of assets we acquired in the 
government interventions to prevent the failures of Bear Stearns and American International 
Group  (AIG).  I  won't  say  much  about  those  interventions  today,  except  to  note  that  the 
failures of those companies would have posed enormous risks to the stability of our financial 
system  and  economy.  Because  the  United  States  has  no  well-specified  set  of  rules  for 
dealing  with  the  potential  failure  of  systemically  critical  nondepository  financial  institutions, 
we believed that the best of the bad options available was to work with the Treasury to take 
the  actions  we  did  to  avoid  those  collapses.  The  liability  side  of  the  Federal  Reserve's 
balance sheet is relatively simple, consisting primarily of currency issuance (Federal Reserve 
notes) and reserves held by the banking system on deposit with the Federal Reserve. 
The various credit-related policies I have described today all act to increase the size of both 
the  asset  and  liability  sides  of  the  Federal  Reserve's  balance  sheet.  For  example,  the 
purchase  of  $1  billion  of  GSE  securities,  paid  for  by  crediting  the  deposit  account  of  the 
BIS Review 19/2009 
 3
seller's bank at the Federal Reserve, increases the Fed's balance sheet by $1 billion, with 
the  acquired  securities  appearing  as  an  asset,  and  the  seller's  bank's  deposit  at  the  Fed 
being the offsetting liability. The quantitative impact of our credit actions on the balance sheet 
has been large; its size has nearly doubled over the past year, to just under $2 trillion. 
Some  observers  have  expressed  the  concern  that,  by  expanding  its  balance  sheet,  the 
Federal  Reserve  will  ultimately  stoke  inflation.  The  Fed's  lending  activities  have  indeed 
resulted in a large increase in the reserves held by banks and thus in the narrowest definition 
of the money supply, the monetary base.1 However, banks are choosing to leave the great 
bulk of their excess reserves idle, in most cases on deposit with the Fed. Consequently, the 
rates of growth of broader monetary aggregates, such as M1 and M2, have been much lower 
than  that  of  the  monetary  base.2  At  this  point,  with  global  economic  activity  weak  and 
commodity  prices at low levels, we see little risk of unacceptably high inflation in the near 
term; indeed, we expect inflation to be quite low for some time. 
However, at some point, when credit markets and the economy have begun to recover, the 
Federal Reserve will have to moderate growth in the money supply and begin to raise the 
federal funds rate. To reduce policy accommodation, the Fed will have to unwind some of its 
credit-easing programs and allow its balance sheet to shrink. To some extent, this unwinding 
will happen automatically, as improvements in credit markets should reduce the need to use 
Fed facilities. Indeed, where possible, we have tried to set lending rates and other terms at 
levels  that  are  likely  to  be  increasingly  unattractive  to  borrowers  as  financial  conditions 
normalize. In addition, some programs – those authorized under the Federal Reserve's so-
called  13(3)  authority,  which  requires  a  finding  that  conditions  in  financial  markets  are 
"unusual and exigent" – will, by law, have to be phased out once credit market conditions 
substantially normalize. However, the principal factor determining the timing and pace of that 
process will be the Federal Reserve's assessment of the condition of credit markets and the 
prospects for the economy. 
A  significant  shrinking  of  the  balance  sheet  can  be  accomplished  relatively  quickly,  as  a 
substantial portion of the assets that the Federal Reserve holds – including loans to financial 
institutions,  temporary  central  bank  liquidity  swaps,  and  purchases  of  commercial  paper  – 
are short-term in nature and can simply be allowed to run off as the various programs and 
facilities are scaled back or shut down. As the size of the balance sheet and the quantity of 
excess  reserves  in  the  system  decline,  the  Federal  Reserve  will  be  able  to  return  to  its 
traditional  means  of  making  monetary  policy  –  namely,  by  setting  a  target  for  the  federal 
funds rate. 
Importantly,  the  management  of  the  Federal  Reserve's  balance  sheet  and  the  conduct  of 
monetary policy in the future will be made easier by the recent congressional action to give 
the Fed the authority to pay interest on bank reserves. Because banks should be unwilling to 
lend reserves at a rate lower than they can receive from the Fed, the interest rate the Fed 
pays on bank reserves should help to set a floor on the overnight interest rate. Moreover, 
other  tools  are  available  or  can  be  developed  to  improve  control  of  the  federal  funds  rate 
during the exit stage. For example, the Treasury could resume its recent practice of issuing 
supplementary financing bills and placing the funds with the Federal Reserve; the issuance 
of  these  bills  effectively  drains  reserves  from  the  banking  system,  thereby  improving 
monetary control. As we consider new programs or the expansion of old ones, the Federal 
                                                 
1   The monetary base is the sum of currency in circulation and bank reserves. 
2   M1 consists of currency, traveler's checks, demand deposits, and other checkable deposits. M2 consists of 
M1  plus  savings  deposits,  small-denomination  time  deposits,  and  balances  in  retail  money  market  mutual 
funds.  M2  has  grown  more  rapidly  than  normal  in  recent  months,  at  about  a  15  percent  annual  rate  on  a 
quarterly  average  basis  in  the  fourth  quarter.  We  attribute  this  increase  primarily  to  investors'  demand  for 
greater safety, which has led them to increase their holdings of government-guaranteed bank deposits. We 
expect growth in M2 to slow considerably in 2009, barring a similar shift in portfolio preferences. 
4 
 BIS Review 19/2009
Reserve  will  carefully  weigh  the  implications  for  the  exit  strategy.  And  we  will  take  all 
necessary actions to ensure that the unwinding of our programs is accomplished smoothly 
and in a timely way, consistent with meeting our obligation to foster maximum employment 
and price stability. 
Credit risk and transparency 
Two other frequently asked questions about the Federal Reserve's balance sheet are: First, 
how  much  credit  risk  is  the  Fed  taking  in  its  lending  activities?  And,  second,  is  the  Fed 
informing the public adequately about these activities? 
To address the first question, for the great bulk of Fed lending, the credit risks are extremely 
low.  The  provision  of  short-term  credit  to  financial  institutions  –  our  traditional  function  – 
exposes  the  Federal  Reserve  to  minimal  credit  risk,  as  the  loans  we  make  to  financial 
institutions  are  generally  short-term,  overcollateralized,  and  made  with  recourse  to  the 
borrowing firm. In the case of the liquidity swaps, the foreign central banks are responsible 
for  repaying  the  Federal  Reserve,  not  the  financial  institutions  that  ultimately  receive  the 
funds, and the Fed receives an equivalent amount of foreign currency in exchange for the 
dollars  it  provides  foreign  central  banks.  The  Treasury  stands  behind  the  debt  and  other 
securities issued by the GSEs. 
Our special lending programs have also been set up to minimize our credit risk. The largest 
program, the commercial paper funding facility, accepts only the most highly rated paper. It 
also  charges  borrowers  a  premium,  which  is  set  aside  against  possible  losses.  And  the 
TALF, the facility that will lend against securities backed by consumer and small business 
loans, is a joint Federal Reserve-Treasury program, as I mentioned, and capital provided by 
the Treasury will help insulate the Federal Reserve from credit losses. 
The  transactions  we  undertook  to  prevent  the  systemically  destabilizing  failures  of  Bear 
Stearns and AIG, which, as I noted, make up about 5 percent of our balance sheet, carry 
more risk than our traditional activities. But we intend, over time, to sell the assets acquired 
in  those  transactions  in  a  way  that  maximizes  the  return  to  taxpayers,  and  we  expect  to 
recover  the  credit  we  have  extended.  Moreover,  in  assessing  the  financial  risks  of  those 
transactions, once again one must also consider the very grave risks our nation would have 
incurred had public policy makers not acted in those instances. 
Finally,  I  should  remind  you  that  all  the  Federal  Reserve's  assets  pay  interest,  and  the 
expansion of our balance sheet thereby implies increased interest income, income that will 
accrue to the benefit of the federal budget. From the point of view of the federal government, 
the  Federal  Reserve's  activities  do  not  imply  greater  expenditure  or  indebtedness.  To  the 
contrary, the Federal Reserve's interest earnings have always been, and will continue to be, 
a significant source of income for the Treasury. 
On the second question, transparency, I firmly believe that central banks should provide as 
much  information  as  possible,  both  for  reasons  of  democratic  accountability  and  because 
many of our policies are likely to be more effective if they are well understood by the markets 
and the public. During my time at the Federal Reserve, the FOMC has taken important steps 
to increase the transparency of monetary policy, such as moving up the publication of the 
minutes of policy meetings and adopting the practice of providing projections of the evolution 
of the economy at longer horizons and four times per year rather than twice. 
Later today, with the release of the minutes of the most recent FOMC meeting, we will be 
making  an  additional  significant  enhancement  in  Federal  Reserve  communications:  To 
supplement the current economic projections by governors and Reserve Bank presidents for 
the  next  three  years,  we  will  also  publish  their  projections  of  the  longer-term  values  (at  a 
horizon  of,  for  example,  five  to  six  years)  of  output  growth,  unemployment,  and  inflation, 
under the assumptions of appropriate monetary policy and the absence of new shocks to the 
economy. These longer-term projections will inform the public of the Committee participants' 
BIS Review 19/2009 
 5
estimates  of  the  rate  of  growth  of  output  and  the  unemployment  rate  that  appear  to  be 
sustainable in the long run in the United States, taking into account important influences such 
as  the  trend  growth  rates  of  productivity  and  the  labor  force,  improvements  in  worker 
education  and  skills,  the  efficiency  of  the  labor  market  at  matching  workers  and  jobs, 
government  policies  affecting  technological  development  or  the  labor  market,  and  other 
factors.  The  longer-term  projections  of  inflation  may  be  interpreted,  in  turn,  as  the  rate  of 
inflation that FOMC participants see as most consistent with the dual mandate given to it by 
the Congress – that is, the rate of inflation that promotes maximum sustainable employment 
while  also  delivering  reasonable  price  stability.  This  further  extension  of  the  quarterly 
projections should provide the public a clearer picture of FOMC participants' policy strategy 
for  promoting  maximum  employment  and  price  stability  over  time.  Also,  increased  clarity 
about  the  FOMC's  views  regarding  longer-term  inflation  should  help  to  better  stabilize  the 
public's inflation expectations, thus contributing to keeping actual inflation from rising too high 
or falling too low. 
Likewise, the Federal Reserve is committed to keeping the Congress and the public informed 
about  its  lending  programs  and  balance  sheet.  For  example,  we  continue  to  add  to  the 
information shown in the Fed's H.4.1 statistical release, which provides weekly detail on the 
balance  sheet  and  the  amounts  outstanding  for  each  of  the  Federal  Reserve's  lending 
facilities.  Extensive  additional  information  about  each  of  the  Federal  Reserve's  lending 
programs is available online.3 The Fed also provides bimonthly reports to the Congress on 
each  of  its  programs  that  rely  on  the  section  13(3)  authorities.  Generally,  our  disclosure 
policies  are  consistent  with  the  current  best  practices  of  major  central  banks  around  the 
world.  In  addition,  the  Federal  Reserve's  internal  controls  and  management  practices  are 
closely monitored by an independent inspector general, outside private-sector auditors, and 
internal  management  and  operations  divisions,  and  through  periodic  reviews  by  the 
Government Accountability Office.  
All that said, recent developments have understandably led to a substantial increase in the 
public's  interest  in  the  Fed's  balance  sheet  and  programs.  For  this  reason,  we  at  the  Fed 
have  begun  a  thorough  review  of  our  disclosure  policies  and  the  effectiveness  of  our 
communication. Today I would like to mention two initiatives. 
First,  to  improve  public  access  to  information  concerning  Fed  policies  and  programs,  in 
coming  days  we  will  unveil  a  new  website  that  will  bring  together  in  a  systematic  and 
comprehensive  way  the  full  range  of  information  that  the  Federal  Reserve  already  makes 
available, supplemented by explanations, discussions, and analyses. 
Second, at my request, Board Vice Chairman Donald Kohn is leading a committee that will 
review  our  current  publications  and  disclosure  policies  relating  to  the  Fed's  balance  sheet 
and lending policies. The presumption of the committee will be that the public has a right to 
know,  and  that  the  nondisclosure  of  information  must  be  affirmatively  justified  by  clearly 
articulated criteria for confidentiality, based on factors such as reasonable claims to privacy, 
the  confidentiality  of  supervisory  information,  and  the  need  to  ensure  the  effectiveness  of 
policy. 
Conclusion 
Extraordinary  times  call  for  extraordinary  measures.  Responding  to  the  very  difficult 
economic and financial challenges we face, the Federal Reserve has gone beyond traditional 
monetary  policy  making  to  develop  new  policy  tools  to  address  the  dysfunctions  in  the 
                                                 
3   For  links  and  references,  see  Ben  S.  Bernanke  (2009),  "Federal  Reserve  Programs  to  Strengthen  Credit 
Markets  and  the  Economy,"  testimony  before  the  Committee  on  Financial  Services,  U.S.  House  of 
Representatives, February 10. 
6 
 BIS Review 19/2009
nation's credit markets. We have done so in a responsible way: The credit risk associated 
with our nontraditional policies is exceptionally low, and, by carefully monitoring our balance 
sheet  and  developing  tools  to  drain  bank  reserves  as  needed,  we  will  ensure  that  policy 
accommodation can be reversed at the appropriate time to avoid risks of future inflation. 
We provide a great deal of information about our lending programs and our balance sheet to 
the Congress and the public. But, as I have discussed today, we will do more on this front, 
both  expanding  the  information  we  provide  and  improving  how  we  communicate  that 
information.  Increased  transparency  is  the  best  way  to  demonstrate  that  the  Federal 
Reserve's nontraditional policies are well conceived, well managed, and produce substantial 
public benefit. 
BIS Review 19/2009 
 7
