Kiyohiko G Nishimura: Recent economic and financial developments and 
the conduct of monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Kiyohiko G Nishimura, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at a Meeting 
with Business Leaders, Tochigi, 29 January 2009. 
 Introduction 
The Bank of Japan regularly holds a meeting of this kind in various regions where a member 
of the Policy Board explains developments in Japan's economy and the thinking behind the 
conduct  of  monetary  policy,  and  exchanges  opinions  with  business  leaders  in  the  region. 
Today, I am much honored to have my first opportunity to visit Tochigi Prefecture and speak 
before business leaders here. 
I  understand  that  our  staff  in  the  Research  and  Statistics  Department  and  the  Financial 
Systems and Bank Examination Department visit you frequently to collect information on the 
economic and financial situation of the region. The information is very valuable for accurately 
understanding  Japan's  economic  and  financial  situation  as  well  as  for  formulating  the 
conduct  of  monetary  policy.  I  would  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  thank  you  for  your 
cooperation. 
Today,  I  would  first  like  to  explain  the  Bank's  view  on  Japan's  economic  and  financial 
situation and our thinking behind the conduct of monetary policy. 
The  Bank  publishes  semiannually,  in  April  and  October,  a  document  called  Outlook  for 
Economic Activity and Prices, which explains the Bank's economic outlook and its thinking 
behind  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  and  three  months  after  its  publication,  in  July  and 
January, mid-term assessments of the projections are conducted. We just conducted a mid-
term  assessment  at  the  Monetary  Policy  Meeting  (MPM)  held  last  week,  and  revised  the 
projected growth rates and inflation rates significantly downward. To explain the reasons for 
this downward revision, I must begin by discussing the financial crises in the United States 
and  Western  Europe  as  well  as  the  deceleration  in  overseas  economies,  which  are  major 
factors responsible for the deterioration in Japan's economic conditions. Then I would like to 
proceed  to  Japan's  financial  conditions,  the  current  situation  of  and  outlook  for  Japan's 
economy, and the Bank's policy responses. 
I.  
The U.S. and Western European financial crises and the deceleration in 
overseas economies 
The turmoil in global financial markets stemming from the subprime mortgage problem in the 
United States was exacerbated by the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers in September 2008. 
The  turmoil  has  advanced  to  become  a  financial  crisis  where  not  only  U.S.  but  Western 
European  financial  institutions  either  failed  or  faced  severe  difficulties.  Currently,  the 
influence  of  the  financial  crisis  is  spreading  to  emerging  economies  in  regions  such  as 
Central  and  Eastern  Europe  and  Latin  America.  As  a  result,  economic  conditions  are 
deteriorating  globally:  emerging  economies  that  had  continued  to  show  high  growth  are 
experiencing  a  decline  in  exports  reflecting  the  deterioration  in  the  U.S.  and  Western 
European  economies,  and  the  impact  of  the  financial  crisis  is  taking  its  toll  on  internal 
demand in emerging economies, leading to a clear deceleration in economic activity. Another 
distinctive feature of the current deceleration is the speed with which financial crises spread 
and economic conditions deteriorate. Since the world economy has never experienced such 
sudden changes before, this is further increasing future uncertainty and has led to a further 
deterioration in economic conditions. 
BIS Review 11/2009 
 1
in 
through 
increased  speed  of 
transactions,  reductions 
The largest factor contributing to this rapid and simultaneous deterioration in world economic 
conditions is the progress of globalization in financial and economic activity. The widespread 
use  and  popularization  of  advanced  technology  in  information  and  communications  have 
supported  globalization 
the 
interregional  information  gap,  and  a  global  network  of  transactions.  Paradoxically,  one 
cannot  deny  that  once  financial  transactions  and  economic  activity  supported  by  these 
advanced  information  and  communications  technologies  decrease,  this  causes  a  sudden 
unwinding. 
With respect to financial activity, financial institutions around the world are currently utilizing 
these advanced information and communications technologies to carry out a large volume of 
cross-border  financial  transactions  and  invest  in  a  variety  of  financial  assets.  The  direct 
causes of the U.S. subprime loan problem leading to balance-sheet constraints and failures 
of Western European financial institutions were their large investment in securitized products 
backed by U.S. subprime mortgage loans and their commitment to provide backstop liquidity, 
just as in the case of U.S. institutions. While the deterioration of economic conditions in the 
United  States  and  Western  Europe  and  the  increase  in  bad  assets  were  gradually 
proceeding, Lehman Brothers went bankrupt, triggering a sharp decline of confidence in U.S. 
and European financial institutions, which are mutually involved in a web of complex trade, 
and this led to a chain of failures and poor performance of financial institutions in the United 
States  and  Western  Europe.  In  addition,  these  financial  institutions  had  an  important  role 
channeling funds to emerging economies in regions such as Central and Eastern Europe and 
in  Latin  America.  With  the  outbreak  of  financial  crises  in  the  United  States  and  Western 
Europe,  these  institutions  suddenly  scaled  back  their  exposures  to  emerging  economies, 
creating problems for these economies too. 
With  respect  to  economic  activity,  the  progress  of  globalization  increased  the  role  of 
emerging economies not only as production bases for the leading economies but also as a 
huge  market  for  the  latter's  own  products.  Given  this  increased  presence  in  the  global 
marketplace,  emerging  economies  are  now  faced  with  a  marked  decrease  in  internal 
demand due to declining exports reflecting a downturn in the U.S. and Western European 
economies  and  downward  pressure  from  the  financial  side  as  a  consequence  of  financial 
crises in the United States and Western Europe. With the widespread use and popularization 
of advanced information and communications technologies, these developments are taking 
place  at  a  speed  not  imaginable  in  the  past.  As  a  manager  of  a  manufacturing  firm  has 
stated, "Demand has evaporated in a market where, until recently, supply could not keep up 
with the increase in demand." With the clear deceleration in growth of emerging economies, 
exports to them from the United States and Western Europe are decreasing, adding further 
downward pressure on economic activity there. And this is causing in turn a further decline in 
exports  from  emerging  economies,  subsequently  decreasing  internal  demand  in  these 
economies. Currently, there are two adverse feedback loops operating globally and leading 
to a sharp deterioration in world economic conditions: one where a decrease in production, 
income, and expenditure takes place in a spiral with a decrease in exports as a starting point, 
and  another  where  negative  developments  in  financial  and  economic  activity  mutually 
reinforce each other. 
Confronted  with  a  sharp  global  deterioration  in  financial  and  economic  conditions, 
governments  and  central  banks  have  taken  various  measures.  To  alleviate  the  economic 
downturn,  considerable  monetary  easing  and  fiscal  stimulus  have  been  enacted  in  many 
countries.  To  alleviate  the  financial  crisis,  central  banks  in  various  countries  are  providing 
funds not only in their own currency but in U.S. dollars as a concerted action. Governments 
are placing troubled financial institutions under their control, injecting public funds, expanding 
their deposit insurance schemes, and insuring the liabilities of financial institutions. 
In spite of these successive expeditious measures taken by governments and central banks, 
there are still uncertainties as to how the financial crises in the United States and Western 
Europe will be resolved and how the world economy will recover. With the adverse feedback 
2 
 BIS Review 11/2009
loop  operating  between  financial  and  economic  activity,  losses  incurred  by  financial 
institutions  and  the  amounts  of  capital  that  need  to  be  raised  tend  to  increase  as  time 
passes,  and  it  is  not  clear  whether  the  actions  taken  so  far  are  sufficient  to  deal  with  the 
problem.  For  the  financial  system  to  regain  stability,  the  amount  of  losses  that  financial 
institutions will incur needs to be clarified and the institutions need to be sure that the amount 
of capital they hold is enough to cover these losses. Since it is not clear that these conditions 
are  met,  a  high  level  of  uncertainty  remains  regarding  how  the  financial  crises  will  be 
resolved. 
With  regard  to  the  recovery  of  the  world  economy,  a  turning  point  will  arrive  when 
adjustments  in  asset  prices  proceed  in  major  economies,  recovery  in  total  demand  is 
foreseen, and pressures acting to depress economic activity from the financial side dissipate 
with  the  progress  in  stabilizing  the  financial  system.  Although  we  expect  these  signs  of 
recovery to emerge by the latter half of this fiscal year, the timing of recovery in the world 
economy remains highly uncertain since it is unclear how financial crises will be resolved. 
Financial conditions 
II.  
Japan's economy, until recently, was not burdened by excesses in production capacity and 
labor,  and  the  financial  system  remained  relatively  stable.  Therefore,  it  was  thought  to  be 
resilient against supply and demand shocks as long as they remained local. However, with 
multiple  shocks  hitting  the  world  economy  like  tidal  waves  since  last  autumn,  Japan's 
economic  conditions  have  deteriorated  sharply.  In  the  last  several  years,  Japan  has 
developed  a  growth  mechanism  based  on  increases  in  global  demand  –  especially  for 
automobiles  and  capital  equipment  –  but  decreases  in  exports  of  these  goods,  due  to  a 
sharp  deterioration  in  world  economic  conditions,  have  led  to  a  substantial  decline  in 
production, income, and labor. The  decline was also augmented by increased tightness in 
Japan's financial conditions. 
With  regard  to  firms'  funding  costs,  while  bank  lending  rates  have  decreased  somewhat 
owing in part to the reductions in the policy interest rate, credit spreads on CP and corporate 
bonds  remain  elevated  reflecting  strong  risk  aversion  worldwide  among  investors.  As  a 
result, funding costs of firms as a whole have remained mostly unchanged. With regard to 
the amount of funds available, the amount outstanding of CP and corporate bonds issued is 
currently substantially less than a year ago due to the deterioration in issuing conditions, and 
demand  for  bank  lending  is  rising  sharply  due  to  firms'  strong  desire  for  ample  liquidity  to 
hoard  in  view  of  increased  future  uncertainty.  Financial  institutions,  while  examining 
borrowers'  creditworthiness  and  past  business  relations  with  them,  have  been  attentive  to 
these funding needs. In addition, an increasing number of financial institutions are utilizing 
the emergency guarantee scheme introduced by the government to provide lending to small 
firms  with  growing  funding  needs  due  to  deterioration  in  their  business  conditions.  Bank 
lending, therefore, rose through the end of last year to exceed, in November and December, 
the  highest  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  recorded  since  the  publication  of  such  statistics 
began. 
With  stock  prices  remaining  low  and  economic  conditions  deteriorating  sharply,  financial 
institutions are becoming increasingly conscious of future rises in credit costs as well as their 
capital  constraints.  This  is  further  worsening  the  severity  of  financial  institutions'  lending 
attitudes. Also in the area of trade credits, small firms are facing tighter settlement conditions. 
With the tightening of financial conditions and the decline in corporate profits, an increasing 
number of firms are indicating that their funding conditions are severe, and are scaling down 
their fixed investment plans. In this sense, an adverse feedback loop between economic and 
financial activity is starting to operate in Japan. 
In addition to the state of the financial crises in the United States and Western Europe and 
the degree of recovery in the world economy, the appropriateness of the level of capital held 
BIS Review 11/2009 
 3
by Japanese financial institutions will also be important in judging how financial conditions 
will change and whether the adverse feedback loop between financial and economic activity 
will intensify. 
In Japan, bank lending accounts for the majority of corporate funding. Banks also serve an 
important  role  in  direct  financing,  since  they  underwrite  a  large  proportion  of  CP  and 
corporate  bonds  issued  by  firms.  Therefore,  the  amount  of  risk  that  banks  can  assume 
becomes  an  important  issue.  In  other  words,  given  that  banks'  capacity  to  take  on  risk  is 
determined by the level of capital they hold, whether that level is sufficient has an important 
bearing on developments in corporate financing. 
This could be conceptually summarized as follows. Even if the business condition of banks 
deteriorates  and  losses  expand,  the  financial  intermediary  function  of  banks  will  not  be 
harmed  as  long  as  losses  can  be  sufficiently  absorbed  by  capital.  In  other  words,  capital 
serves  as  a  buffer  in  the  financial  intermediary  function.  If,  however,  the  ratio  of  losses  to 
capital  exceeds  a  certain  critical  point,  there  is  a  possibility  that  the  financial  intermediary 
function will become significantly impaired; in other words, the relationship between the scale 
of  capital  and  the  financial  intermediary  function  is  nonlinear.  This  was  observed  after  the 
economic bubble burst in Japan. For several years, the workings of the financial intermediary 
function  did  not  become  an  issue,  although  increases  in  nonperforming  loans  were 
recognized  as  a  big  problem.  However,  in  the  latter  half  of  the  1990s,  a  credit  crunch 
materialized where lending could not be increased due to capital constraints. 
With regard to the current situation of the financial system in Japan, the level of capital held 
by financial institutions, or their capital strength, remains adequate on the whole. This is very 
different  from  the  situation  in  the  United  States  and  Western  Europe,  where  large-scale 
capital injection of public funds into a wide range of financial institutions became necessary. 
Also,  the  situation  in  Japan  is  currently  quite  different  from  that  in  a  credit  crunch,  where 
financial  intermediation  becomes  largely  dysfunctional.  Having  said  this,  global  financial 
markets still remain under significant strain and this is gradually affecting Japanese financial 
institutions  as  well  as  their  financial  intermediary  function  through  declines  in  stock  prices 
and  increases  in  credit  costs,  although  the  degree  may  differ  with  the  institution.  This 
reinforces the argument for strengthening the capital base of financial institutions and is the 
background  against  which  an  institutional  framework  embodied  in  the  Act  on  Special 
Measures for Strengthening Financial Functions is being prepared. The Bank will be closely 
monitoring  the  capital  conditions  of  financial  institutions  and  developments  in  the  financial 
intermediary function. 
Outlook for Japan's economy 
III. 
I will now turn to the outlook for Japan's economy. As I said earlier, economic conditions in 
Japan have deteriorated significantly due to a  substantial decrease in exports, reflecting a 
slowdown  in  overseas  economies  and  the  resultant  adverse  effects  on  domestic  demand, 
and also to tighter financial conditions, and they are likely to continue deteriorating for the 
time being. 
Uncertainty about the prospects for Japan's economy continues to be extremely high, but the 
Bank's baseline scenario is that the economy will start recovering as global financial markets 
regain stability and overseas economies move out of their deceleration phase. The timing of 
recovery, however, is likely to be no sooner than the latter half of fiscal 2009. Based on the 
interim assessment made at the MPM held on January 21 and 22, 2009, the growth rate of 
real  GDP  on  a  fiscal-year  basis  is  projected  to  be  negative  for  two  consecutive  years, 
recording minus 1.8 percent in fiscal 2008 and minus 2.0 percent in fiscal 2009. The growth 
rate is unlikely to recover to its potential until fiscal 2010. 
The outlook for Japan's economy relies heavily on the recovery of overseas economies, the 
stability  of  global  financial  markets,  firms'  medium-  to  long-term  growth  expectations,  and 
4 
 BIS Review 11/2009
financial conditions in Japan. Depending on developments in financial conditions worldwide, 
overseas  economies,  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations,  or  Japanese  financial 
conditions, growth rates may turn out lower than expected. 
With regard to inflation, the consumer price index (CPI) inflation rate, which had been around 
0 percent since around 2003, rose at a rapid pace from around the end of 2007 reflecting 
increases in the prices of petroleum products and food due to the surge in commodity prices, 
and  reached  2.4  percent  last  summer.  Thereafter,  it  began  to  decline  at  a  rapid  pace 
reflecting  a  significant  drop  in  commodity  prices,  and  recorded  1.0  percent  in  November 
2008. Looking ahead, it is expected to continue its sharp downtrend and turn negative due to 
increasing slackness in domestic supply and demand conditions in addition to the declines in 
the prices of petroleum products and the stabilization of food prices. The CPI inflation rate is 
projected  to  record  a  decline  of  around  1  percent  in  fiscal  2009.  Thereafter,  the  rate  of 
decline  is  expected  to  diminish  gradually  through  fiscal  2010  as  the  economy  returns  to  a 
sustainable growth path. 
Given that the CPI inflation rate will likely remain negative through fiscal 2010, one question 
that  may  be  raised  is  whether  this  decline  in  prices  will  lead  to  a  deflationary  spiral  –  a 
situation in which a decline in prices induces a further decline, thereby accelerating the pace 
of decline and at the same time adversely affecting economic activity. If households expect 
wide-ranging price declines, they will reduce consumption, and this in turn will accelerate the 
decrease in demand. If firms expect their competitors to reduce prices on a broad range of 
products,  they  have  no  choice  but  to  reduce  their  prices,  and  this  may  decrease  firms' 
profitability further. However, the most important factor in assessing whether a deflationary 
spiral will materialize is not the short-term inflation expectations, which have been affected by 
the  rapid  changes  in  commodity  prices,  but  developments  in  the  medium-  to  long-term 
inflation  expectations  of  households  and  firms.  During  the  last  twelve  months,  they  have 
remained mostly unchanged, little affected by last year's rise or the recent rapid decline in 
the inflation rate. If the inflation rate remains negative for a protracted period, however, there 
is  a  risk  of  a  gradual  decline  in  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations.  Future 
developments in medium- to long-term inflation expectations should therefore continue to be 
monitored closely. 
Conduct of monetary policy 
IV.  
Next, I will talk about the Bank's conduct of monetary policy. 
As I said earlier, economic conditions in Japan have deteriorated significantly. In response to 
the economic situation and its weaker prospects, the Bank reduced its policy interest rate to 
0.3 percent from 0.5 percent at the end of October 2008, and reduced it again to 0.1 percent 
in  December.  To  produce  maximal  effects  of  reductions  in  the  policy  interest  rate,  it  is  a 
necessary  precondition  that  markets  function  in  a  stable  and  smooth  manner.  From  this 
viewpoint, the Bank has been taking various policy actions. The first is to ensure stability in 
money  markets  by  providing  liquidity.  In  addition  to  the  substantial  provision  of  liquidity  in 
yen, the Bank has been providing liquidity in U.S. dollars without limitation on the amount, as 
long  as  it  is  within  the  value  of  collateral,  under  an  internationally  coordinated  framework. 
Furthermore,  in  December  2008  the  Bank  increased  its  outright  purchases  of  Japanese 
government bonds (JGBs) from 14.4 trillion yen per year to 16.8 trillion yen per year. In order 
to  supply  funds  more  smoothly,  provision  of  longer-term  funds  is  desirable  rather  than 
providing short-term funds through frequent operations. Hence, the Bank decided to increase 
its outright purchases of JGBs, which provide longer-term funds. 
The second policy action comprises measures to facilitate corporate financing. Since last fall, 
when financial conditions began to tighten, the Bank has been taking various measures with 
a view to making it easier for firms to obtain funds. 
BIS Review 11/2009 
 5
The  Bank  has  for  some  time  been  conducting  purchases  of  CP  under  repurchase 
agreements, and these have been significantly increased in terms of frequency and size to 
support  the  better  functioning  of  the  CP  market.  In  addition,  with  a  view  to  facilitating 
corporate  financing  during  the  run-up  to  the  calendar  and  fiscal  year-ends,  the  range  of 
corporate bonds and loans on deeds accepted as eligible collateral was expanded in early 
December  2008  and  it  was  decided,  as  a  temporary  measure,  to  include  BBB-rated 
corporate bonds and loans on deeds in eligible collateral. Furthermore, a decision was made 
to  introduce  a  special  operation  to  facilitate  corporate  financing,  starting  in  early  January. 
This special operation enables financial institutions to obtain funds over the fiscal year-end 
with no explicit ceiling on the total funds available, although the maximum loan available to 
an individual financial institution will not exceed the value of the corporate debt it has pledged 
as collateral. In addition, the interest rate on these funds is set lower than the corresponding 
market interest rates. With these measures, the Bank is aiming to support, in terms of the 
availability and cost of funds, the lending activity of financial institutions and transactions on 
the CP and corporate bond markets. 
In addition, given that the environment surrounding corporate financing had deteriorated and 
the tightness in corporate financing might increase further during the run-up to the end of the 
fiscal year, the Bank decided, in mid-December 2008, to introduce outright purchases of CP 
from  financial  institutions,  and  to  investigate  additional  measures.  However,  since  these 
measures involve taking on the credit risks of individual firms, they represent an exceptional 
step  for  a  central  bank,  and  when  taking  such  a  step,  a  central  bank  should  of  course 
implement measures that have maximal effects in terms of facilitating corporate financing. At 
the same time, however, it should also consider possible actions to be taken should losses 
occur,  so  that  the  Bank's  financial  health  and  confidence  in  the  currency  and  in  monetary 
policy  are  not  impaired.  After  close  investigation  of  the  present  environment  surrounding 
corporate  financing  and  careful  examination  of  the  range  of  CP  to  be  accepted  under  this 
exceptional  measure  and  the  measure's  duration,  the  Bank  decided,  at  the  MPM  held  on 
January  21  and  22,  2009,  to  introduce  outright  purchases  of  CP  and  asset-backed  CP 
(ABCP)  for  a  total  outstanding  amount  not  exceeding  3  trillion  yen  until  the  end  of  March 
2009. If the Bank purchases CP from financial institutions, this gives them additional capacity 
to accept more CP, which would improve the functioning of the CP market, or to increase 
lending,  including  that  to  small  firms.  The  underlying  assets  of  ABCP  are  mainly  credit 
receivables,  loans,  and  bills,  and  the  Bank's  outright  purchases  of  ABCP  are  therefore 
expected to contribute to facilitating corporate financing, especially among small firms. The 
Bank also decided to accept, when providing funds to financial institutions, bonds, such as 
J-REIT  bonds,  issued  by  real  estate  investment  corporations  as  collateral.  Through  this 
measure,  the  Bank  expects  the  market  liquidity  of  these  products  to  increase,  leading  to 
better functioning of the real estate securitization market. 
In addition to the measures just described, the Bank decided to examine practical ways to 
introduce  outright  purchases  of  corporate  bonds.  Corporate  bonds  are  debts  with  longer 
maturities than CP, and thus outright purchases by a central bank involve taking on the credit 
risks of individual firms for a longer term than in the case of CP. In order to prevent outright 
purchases  of  corporate  bonds  from  adversely  affecting  long-term  resource  allocation  in 
individual firms and avoid prolonging markets' dependence on the central bank as a buyer, a 
central  bank  should  only  purchase  corporate  bonds  with  a  short  residual  maturity  and 
purchase them from financial institutions that are counterparties of the central bank instead 
of purchasing directly from the issuers. Bearing these factors in mind, the Bank intends to 
purchase corporate bonds with a residual maturity of up to one year, and will decide on the 
specifics of this measure as swiftly as possible after careful examination. 
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  to  deal  with  increasing  demand  for  funds  during  the  run-up  to  the 
calendar and fiscal year-ends, the Bank has been providing substantial liquidity to stabilize 
financial  markets.  And  to  deal  with  tighter  conditions  in  corporate  financing,  the  Bank 
implemented  various  measures,  including  the  introduction  of  a  new  operation,  to  facilitate 
6 
 BIS Review 11/2009
corporate  funding,  and  to  exert  influence  upon  the  formation  of  longer-term  interest  rates, 
which  are  the  actual  interest  rates  that  apply  when  funds  are  acquired.  The  Bank  will 
continue to carefully assess economic and financial conditions and do its utmost as a central 
bank by introducing the monetary policy measures that it judges most effective. 
Closing remarks: toward a new path of growth for Japan's economy 
You  may  have  the  impression  that  newspaper  articles  and  television  news  and  even  my 
speech  today  communicate  nothing  but  the  severity  of  the  current  economic  and  financial 
conditions. In a situation like the current one, where changes in global financial markets and 
in overseas economies come flooding in all at once like tidal waves, one tends to lose sight 
of the broad picture and focus only on recent events. In closing, therefore, I would like to give 
my brief overview of the current situation. 
As I mentioned at the beginning of my speech, innovation in information and communications 
technology made great strides from the latter half of the 20th century through the early 21st 
century,  and  globalization  progressed  based  on  the  rapid  entry  of  a  growing  number  of 
emerging economies into the world of market economies made possible by these advances. 
As  a  result,  the  supply  of  goods  increased  due  to  the  added  production  in  regions  newly 
integrated in the world of market economies, and at the same time, economic development in 
these regions increased demand for goods and financial assets. This generated increased 
business  opportunities  in  the  markets  for  goods  and  financial  assets,  and  accelerated  the 
growth  of  the  world  economy.  However,  such  an  environment  is  likely  to  invite  an 
accumulation  of  various  excesses  and  imbalances.  Thus,  the  situation  we  are  currently 
facing  can  be  explained  as  a  sudden  reversal  of  a  rapid  growth  process  that  depended 
heavily on excesses and imbalances. 
Looking back, while overseas economies had been increasing their growth rates by taking 
advantage of globalization, Japan's economy was still suffering from the aftereffects of the 
bubble  economy  of  the  1980s.  Japanese  industries,  with  the  exception  of  exporting 
industries,  were  not  able  to  benefit  from  the  growth  mechanism  based  on  the  progress  of 
globalization.  This  means,  however,  that  excesses  and  imbalances  inherent  in  Japan's 
economy  are  small  relative  to  those  of  the  economies  that  fully  enjoyed  the  benefits  of 
globalization, and they require only moderate adjustments. If Japan can redefine its area of 
comparative  advantage  and  implement  measures  to  strengthen  these  areas,  Japan's 
economy is likely to show its true worth when overseas economies return to a recovery path. 
There are two requirements for this to be realized. First, Japan should protect and strengthen 
the areas where it has an advantage. Japan has an edge in manufacturing in a broad sense, 
especially  where  coordination  is  necessary.  For  example,  in  the  process  of  producing  an 
automobile, parts makers and the assembler discuss various ideas and techniques to make 
improvements.  The  quality  of  the  final  product  is  thus  improved  and  at  the  same  time 
productivity is increased to reduce costs. Demanding that parts makers reduce costs without 
providing  any  support  in  increasing  productivity  would  just  be  forcing  them  to  bear  an 
additional  burden.  This  is  not  the  way  Japanese  manufacturers  increase  the  value  of 
products. Increasing the value of products is important in non-manufacturing industries too. 
For  example,  I  was  informed  by  a  retailer  that,  with  a  slight  change  of  focus  in  its  sales 
strategy, it came up with the idea of selling goods that were easy for the elderly to use and 
that  these  became  big  sellers.  This  made  me  realize  the  importance  of  going  back  to  the 
basic idea that value is created by a continuous accumulation of improvements. I believe that 
such strenuous efforts will be rewarded when the world economy returns to a recovery path. 
Second, Japan should directly confront and tackle current problems. Although the problems 
are  numerous,  it  can  be  said  that  this  is  due  to  the  fact  that  Japan  is  one  of  the  world's 
leading  economies.  Solving  the  problems  will  bring  about  technological  innovation that  will 
give Japan's manufacturing industry a more prominent place in the world economy. Japan 
has an aging population, and there must be a need for innovative new products that turn this 
BIS Review 11/2009 
 7
to advantage, such as automobiles with increased safety so that the elderly, with decreased 
physical  functioning,  can  drive  them  safely  and  easily.  Japan  also  faces  environmental 
problems such as global warming as well as water and air pollution. Technological innovation 
that  contributes  to  solving  these  problems  will  definitely  help  to  increase  Japanese  firms' 
competitiveness. 
Tochigi  Prefecture  has  a  history  of  achievement  in  manufacturing,  and  the  prefecture's 
strength  in  manufacturing  has  been  supporting  an  expansion  into  a  wide  range  of  fields. 
Many firms in the prefecture have the top market share in Japan in technologically advanced 
products, for example, medical and optical equipment, and I am aware of efforts to further 
develop and strengthen these fields through cooperation between industry, government, and 
academia. I hope that these efforts will bear fruit, and lead to a recovery of Japan's economy 
and positive new developments in the future. 
The  Bank  is  determined  to  support  these  movements  through  appropriate  conduct  of 
monetary policy. 
Thank you very much for your kind attention. 
8 
 BIS Review 11/2009
