Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Opportunities and collaboration in Islamic finance 
Address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the Malaysia-
UK Islamic Finance Forum, Kuala Lumpur, 8 July 2009. 
 It is my pleasure to be here today to address the Malaysia-United Kingdom Islamic Finance 
Forum  organised  in  collaboration  with  the  Commonwealth  Business  Council.  Allow  me  to 
take this opportunity to welcome The Right Honorouble Lord Mayor and distinguished guests 
from  the  United  Kingdom  today  that  are  joining  this  dialogue  with  the  Malaysian  financial 
community  to  discuss  the  opportunities  and  areas  of  collaboration  in  Islamic  finance  –  an 
important  potential  avenue  for  strengthening  financial  and  economic  linkages  not  only 
between our economies but with other parts of the world.  
A  global  shift  is  currently  taking  place  in  the  international  environment  that  is  dramatically 
altering the configuration of the global economy. It is resulting in an increasingly multi-polar 
world. In this new phase of globalisation, the concentration of economic power will become 
more dispersed. Strengthening strategic economic and financial linkages across jurisdictions 
will become a key feature in this environment. It is very much Malaysia's intention to be part 
of  this  new  future  as  we  consciously  build  our  capacity  to  enhance  our  international 
economic and financial linkages.  
Building effective partnership between UK and Malaysia  
The United Kingdom and Malaysia has one of the oldest relationships. This relationship has 
been  dynamic,  evolving  in  the  rapidly  changing  international  environment.  The  strong  and 
close bond has continued to evolve in the areas of trade, investment, education and finance.  
While the bilateral trade in goods between the United Kingdom and Malaysia only accounts 
for  1.4%  of  our  total  trade,  Malaysia's  bilateral  trade  in  services  with  Britain  accounts  for 
6.3% of our trade in services in 2008. While the balance of trade is in our favour, the balance 
in the services account is in the favour of the United Kingdom amounting to RM2.3 billion. In 
the area of mobility of people between our two countries, there continues to be a significant 
two-way flow relating to employment, education and tourism. Tourists from Britain represent 
the largest group of visitors from the European market. In the area of education, there are a 
great  number  of  Malaysian  students  studying  in  the  United  Kingdom.  This  has  been 
reinforced  by  the  twinning  programmes.  In  addition,  British  education  for  Malaysians  has 
been strengthened by the branch campuses in Malaysia. 
More recently, the relationship building has extended into the area of Islamic finance. This 
relationship was cemented with the signing of a Memorandum of Understanding between the 
UK Trade and Investment and Bank Negara Malaysia.  
The  early  development  of  Islamic  finance  was  very  much  domestic-centric.  This  recent 
decade has seen the internationalization of Islamic finance. This has increased the potential 
for  strategic  partnerships  between  international  financial  centres  that  will  bring  with  it 
mutually reinforcing benefits. 
Malaysia has developed a comprehensive Islamic finance industry founded on a strong legal 
and  regulatory  framework,  with  a  diversified  number  of  Islamic  banking  and  takaful 
institutions and a well-developed Islamic money and capital market. Today, Islamic financial 
assets comprise 17 per cent of the total assets of the banking system in Malaysia and the 
daily  average  volume  transacted  in  our  Islamic  money  market  is  RM6  billion.  The  sukuk 
market which has been expanding at an average annual rate of 22%, now accounts for more 
than 50% of our bond market.  
BIS Review 86/2009 
 1
With  this  financial  infrastructure  in  place,  Malaysia  has  recently  intensified  its  pace  of 
liberalisation.  In  April,  the  government  announced  further  liberalisation  measures  that 
included new licences to be offered in Islamic banking and takaful. More specifically, up to 
two new mega Islamic banking licences will be issued to foreign players with minimum paid 
up  capital  of  USD1  billion  to  enhance  global  interlinkages  and  leverage  on  global 
developments in Islamic finance. Existing domestic Islamic banks that wish to scale up their 
operations  and  expand  into  global  markets  are  also  given  greater  flexibility  to  enter  into 
strategic partnerships with foreign players to raise their capitalization to USD1 billion with a 
higher foreign equity limit of up to 70%.  
In addition, up to two new family takaful licences will be issued in 2009 to players that can 
offer  significant  value  propositions  to  Malaysia  to  spur  the  development  of  the  takaful 
industry. Takaful companies will also be given the flexibility to enter into strategic tie-ups with 
foreign  partners  through  higher  foreign  equity  limit  of  up  to  70%,  to  further  strengthen 
resilience and competitiveness. In addition, international Islamic financial institutions can be 
established to offer the full range of Islamic financial services to residents and non-residents 
in international currencies.  
Another further measure announced is the liberalization of legal profession to allow up to five 
top international law firms with expertise in international Islamic finance to offer legal services 
in international Islamic finance in Malaysia.  
Internationalisation of Islamic finance  
Several factors are important in sustaining the internationalisation of Islamic finance.  
Firstly, is the development of international Islamic financial markets to enhance the liquidity 
of  the  instruments  and  the  risk  management  capacity  of  the  players.  This  is  important  to 
promoting the efficient functioning of the markets and thus facilitate cross border capital flows 
thereby strengthening global financial integration. However, it can be observed that in most 
jurisdictions that have Islamic financial institutions, Islamic money and capital markets remain 
relatively  less  developed.  Consequently,  Islamic  banking  institutions  face  the  challenge  in 
their day to day management of cash, arising from the lack of a comprehensive Islamic inter-
bank  market  with  highly  rated  short-term  tradable  instruments.  Without  access  to  such  a 
market,  it  is  difficult  for  these  institutions  to  manage  their  short-term  liquidity  needs  in  an 
efficient and effective manner. This would in turn require them to maintain a larger amount of 
liquidity compared to their conventional counterparts. In Malaysia , such markets exist and 
have been key to facilitating liquidity management.  
Coordinated  initiatives  across  jurisdictions  can  be  taken  to  foster  the  development  of  an 
efficient and vibrant international Islamic financial market. The IFSB Task Force on Liquidity 
Management reflects a concerted effort to explore measures needed to develop the liquidity 
management 
institutions. 
Notwithstanding  the  effort  by  the  Task  Force  to  look  into  the  pertinent  issues,  Islamic 
financial institutions are encouraged to promote innovation in the development of a broader 
range  of  Islamic  financial  market  instruments.  These  include  instruments  with  equity 
ownership  features,  Islamic  asset-backed  securities,  the  inclusion  of  permissible  forms  of 
credit enhancements as well as Shariah-compliant risk mitigating instruments.  
It  is  also  essential  that  there  should  be  sufficient  availability  of  liquidity  to  support  the 
intermediation  of  funds  in  the  Islamic  financial  system.  Central  banks  must  therefore  have 
sufficient Islamic financial instruments at their disposal to manage the liquidity conditions in 
the Islamic financial system.  
Secondly,  is  the  international  cooperation  to  ensure  financial  stability  of  the  international 
Islamic  financial  system.  This  will  also  involve  partnerships  between  international  financial 
centres in promoting financial stability. A robust and effective regulation and supervision 
of Islamic financial institutions is key to preserving financial stability. The current ongoing 
infrastructure  and 
framework 
financial 
Islamic 
the 
for 
2 
 BIS Review 86/2009
global financial and economic crisis has highlighted the structural weaknesses in the global 
financial  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework.  Co-operation  between  regulators  across 
jurisdictions  is  vital  in  containing  potential  systemic  risks  that  have  extended  beyond  the 
national and regional boundaries.  
In the case of Islamic finance, a rigorous and well developed legal, regulatory and Shariah 
framework is being put in place. Such a regulatory framework also needs to govern market 
practices  by  the  Islamic  financial  institutions.  This  will  involve  the  implementation  of  the 
prudential  standards  that  have  been  issued  by  the  Islamic  Financial  Services  Board,  the 
IFSB. The IFSB also has an important role in the harmonisation of prudential standards, in 
addition  to  contributing  towards  the  consistent  development  of  Islamic  finance  across 
different jurisdictions. Several parts of the world, including Malaysia , have implemented the 
prudential  standards  issued  by  the  IFSB.  These  prudential  standards  which  have  been 
designed to take into account the unique features specific to Islamic finance will contribute 
towards  ensuring  its  soundness  and  stability.  British  financial  regulators  are  therefore 
encouraged to be members of the IFSB.  
Early  this  year,  the  IFSB  in  collaboration  with  the  Islamic  Development  Bank  (IDB) 
established a task force on Islamic Finance and Global Financial Stability. The task force is 
responsible  to  examine  the  resilience  of  Islamic  finance  in  the  current  challenging  global 
financial environment and to examine further the building blocks that need to be put in place 
to  develop  the  international  financial  architecture  to  strengthen  further  the  resilience  of 
Islamic  finance.  The  task  force  will  provide  recommendations  including  on  developing  the 
framework  for  prevention  and  management  of  crisis  taking  into  account  the  lessons  for 
reform of the international financial system.  
Thirdly, and importantly is that international integration of Islamic finance would be facilitated 
by the mutual recognition of financial standards and products across jurisdictions. In 
the area of Shariah, there has already been the progressive convergence of Shariah views 
and  rulings,  and  the  mutual  recognition  of  financial  standards  and  products  across 
jurisdictions.  As  this  continues  to  occur,  it  would  be  a  major  driver  towards  greater 
international financial integration. This convergence and harmonisation is taking place with 
the greater engagement among the regulators, practitioners and scholars in Islamic finance 
across jurisdictions. 
To promote greater mutual recognition of products, Bank Negara Malaysia has embarked on 
the  initiative  to  develop  the  Shariah  Parameters  to  promote  more  consistent  application  of 
Islamic financial contracts. This initiative aims to determine the essential features of Islamic 
financial  products  derived  from  underlying  key  Shariah  principles.  This  is  also  to  provide 
greater  clarity  to  the  international  community  thereby  facilitating  greater  cross  border 
transactions.  An  International  Shariah  Research  Academy  for  Islamic  Finance  (ISRA)  has 
also been established in 2008 to promote greater engagement among Shariah scholars from 
around  the  world  and  to  undertake  research  activities  and  contribute  towards  a  greater 
understanding  and  international  convergence.  In  this  respect,  we  welcome  relevant  British 
institutions to collaborate with I SRA to advance this endeavour. 
Development  of  human  capital  in  Islamic  finance  is  also  important  to  ensure  an  adequate 
supply  of  talent  pool  of  experts  and  high  calibre  professionals.  The  investment  in  human 
capital development is therefore crucial to support the global development of Islamic financial 
services  industry.  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  is  committed  towards  promoting  human  capital 
development.  Dedicated  ancillary  institutions  such  as  INCEIF,  IBFIM  and  ISRA  have  been 
established  to  focus  on  training,  education  and  research.  There  has  also  been  a  higher 
degree of strategic alliance with British education and training institutions with our Malaysian 
institutions to advance the talent development for the Islamic financial services industry. In 
this  respect,  I  am  pleased  to  note  that  we  will  today  witness  the  signing  of  a  number  of 
strategic  collaboration  between  leading  British  institutions  and  Malaysian  education  and 
training institutions.  
BIS Review 86/2009 
 3
Let  me  conclude  my  remarks.  The  increasing  awareness  and  appreciation  of  the  inherent 
strengths  of  Islamic  finance  and  its  tremendous  potential  for  advancement  have  ignited 
interests amongst the global financial community to venture into this new sphere of finance. 
Taking advantage of the increasing role of Islamic finance in bringing together different parts 
of the world with surplus funds in search of investment opportunities, with those that have 
financing  needs,  will  increase  these  mutually  reinforcing  prospects.  We  look  forward  to 
London's participation in this new financial evolution. 
4 
 BIS Review 86/2009
