Ben S Bernanke: The financial crisis and community banking 
Speech  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve System, at the Independent Community Bankers of America's National Convention 
and Techworld, Phoenix, Arizona, 20 March 2009. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website. 
 When I addressed this convention three years ago, with all of five weeks under my belt as 
Chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, I opened my remarks with three observations: that 
community  banks  played  a  critical  role  in  the  U.S.  economy,  that  community  banks  were 
generally doing well, and that community banks faced a changing business environment that 
posed important challenges. I am struck that all three observations, at least to some degree, 
still hold true today. Community banks continue to play a critical role in our economy and, in 
many cases, have an opportunity to step in and make sound profitable loans, where some 
competitors  have  pulled  back.  Relatively  speaking  at  least,  community  banks  are  doing 
better as a group than other segments of our financial system, but at the same time they are 
far  from  immune  to  current  conditions.  And,  surely,  it  is  still  true  that  the  business 
environment poses important challenges to community banks.  
In fact, I think it is safe to say that few of us in the convention hall three years ago envisioned 
the financial and economic environment we now confront. Envisioning the conditions we will 
face three years from now is equally difficult, but it is my hope and expectation that those 
conditions will be significantly brighter. This morning, I'd like to spend some time reviewing 
the Federal Reserve's response to the financial crisis of the past 18 months, as well as the 
current challenges – and opportunities – facing community banks. In addition, I'll discuss two 
important  steps  that  policymakers  can  and  should  take  to  improve  the  financial  regulatory 
system that likely are of particular interest to you. The first step is the need to address the 
very real problem caused by institutions that are too big – or too interconnected – to fail in a 
disorderly manner. The second involves ways of making the system less procyclical, so that 
the  financial  system  is  less  susceptible  to  exuberant  booms  and  disastrous  busts.  In 
discussing the road back to financial stability and economic prosperity, I want to leave you 
with the idea that, yes, this is indeed a time of challenge for community bankers, as it is for 
all Americans, but it also is a time of opportunity.  
Federal Reserve actions to address the financial crisis 
The depth and complexity of the strains that have gripped financial markets and institutions 
since the summer of 2007 have led the Federal Reserve to take innovative and extraordinary 
actions aimed at restoring stability to markets and supporting the flow of credit to businesses 
and households.  
Most  directly,  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC)  has  eased  monetary  policy 
aggressively. From the second half of 2007 to the spring of 2008, the Committee reduced its 
target  for  the  federal  funds  rate  from  5-1/4  percent  to  2  percent.  And,  as  the  financial 
turbulence  intensified  last  fall  and  the  economic  outlook  deteriorated,  the  Committee 
responded by cutting the target for the federal funds rate to near zero by the end of last year. 
As  a  result,  a  number  of  interest  rates,  especially  shorter-term  rates,  have  declined 
significantly, offsetting, at least to some degree, the effects of the financial turmoil on the cost 
of  credit.  However,  as  community  bankers  are  no  doubt  aware,  that  offset  has  been 
incomplete. Widening  credit  spreads,  more-restrictive  lending  standards,  and  credit  market 
dysfunction  are  working  against  the  monetary  easing  and  leading  to  tighter  financial 
BIS Review 34/2009 
 1
conditions overall. To address these problems, the Federal Reserve has employed a range 
of additional tools. 
These tools can be divided into three sets. The first set is closely tied to the central bank's 
traditional  role  of  provider  of  short-term  liquidity  to  sound  financial  institutions.  Over  the 
course of the crisis, the Fed has sought to ensure that financial institutions – including banks 
of all sizes as well as primary dealers – have had adequate access to short-term credit.1 We 
substantially reduced the spread of the primary credit rate over the target federal funds rate 
and increased the maximum maturity of primary credit loans to 90 days; we have also been 
conducting regular auctions of discount window credit for terms of up to 84 days. In fulfilling 
this  traditional  lending  function,  we  have  helped  ease  conditions  in  interbank  funding 
markets, thus increasing the willingness of banks to extend loans and thereby easing credit 
conditions for the households and businesses that depend on banks.  
Despite our provision of liquidity to banks and broker-dealers, a number of critical nonbank 
financial markets – such as the commercial paper market and the market for asset-backed 
securities  –  deteriorated  significantly.  Under  normal  circumstances,  these  markets  are 
important  sources  of  credit  for  American  businesses  and  their  customers.  Thus,  we 
developed a second set of policy tools to provide liquidity directly to borrowers and investors 
in  key  credit  markets.  Notably,  we  have  introduced  facilities  to  purchase  highly  rated 
commercial paper at a term of three months and to provide backup liquidity for money market 
mutual funds.  
In  addition,  the  Federal  Reserve  and  the  Treasury  have  jointly  established  a  facility  –  the 
Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility, or TALF – that lends against AAA-rated asset-
backed securities collateralized by recently originated student loans, auto loans, credit card 
loans,  and  loans  guaranteed  by  the  Small  Business  Administration.  This  program  just  got 
under  way;  the  first  subscription  for  funding  under  the  program  was  completed  yesterday, 
with  the  funds  to  be  disbursed  next  week.  Over  time,  we  expect  to  expand  this  facility  to 
include loans against other types of newly issued AAA-rated asset-backed securities, such 
as  commercial  mortgage-backed  securities  and  private-label  residential  mortgage-backed 
securities. If this program works as planned, it should make new consumer, business, and 
mortgage loans more available, at lower cost.  
The  Federal  Reserve's  third  set  of  tools  for  supporting  the  credit  markets  involves  the 
purchase of longer-term securities for the Fed's portfolio. As we announced this week, we 
are purchasing up to $300 billion in Treasury debt, $200 billion of the debt of government-
sponsored  enterprises  (GSEs),  and  up  to  $1.25  trillion  of  mortgage-backed  securities 
guaranteed by the GSEs and federal agencies this year. These purchases are intended to 
improve  conditions  in  private  credit  markets.  In  particular,  they  are  helping  to  reduce  the 
interest  rates  that  the  GSEs  require  on  the  mortgages  that  they  purchase  or  securitize, 
thereby  lowering  the  rate  at  which  lenders,  including  community  banks,  can  fund  new 
mortgages.  
The Federal Reserve continuously assesses the effectiveness of its credit-related tools. So 
far, we have generally been encouraged by the market responses, including the decline in 
mortgage  interest  rates  I  mentioned.  In  addition,  our  commercial  paper  facility  has  helped 
American businesses finance their payrolls and other operational obligations by significantly 
lowering rates on the paper and opening access to financing at terms longer than a few days. 
Our  actions  to  stabilize  the  money  market  mutual  fund  industry,  together  with  other 
government programs, have also shown some success – the sharp withdrawals from funds 
in September on balance have given way to modest inflows. 
                                                 
1   Primary dealers are broker-dealers that trade in U.S. government securities with the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New  York.  The  New  York  Fed's  Open  Market  Desk  engages  in  trades  on  behalf  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
System to implement monetary policy. 
2 
 BIS Review 34/2009
These  credit-easing  programs,  along  with  actions  taken  by  the  Treasury  and  other 
government  entities,  are  crucial  determinants  of  the  timing  and  strength  of  the  economic 
recovery.  However,  although  low  interest  rates  and  ongoing  fiscal  stimulus  will  help,  we 
cannot  have  a  vigorous  economic  recovery  unless  we  succeed  in  restoring  a  reasonable 
degree of financial stability. 
Conditions and outlook for community banks 
As  you  well  know,  community  banks  have  been  adversely  affected  by  the  turmoil  in  the 
financial system. As a group, community banks – which I define to include commercial banks 
with  assets  of  $1  billion  or  less  –  have  seen  their  financial  performance  and  condition 
deteriorate substantially since the middle of 2007. Nevertheless, as I will discuss, the longer-
term outlook for community banks is positive in light of their unique competitive advantages.  
Looking first at current conditions, higher loan loss provisions and significant realized losses 
on investment securities – related in many cases to impairment of Fannie Mae and Freddie 
Mac  equity  holdings  –  substantially  eroded  the  profitability  of  community  banks  in  2008. 
Community banks reported net income of just $4.6 billion, less than one-half of the level of 
2007. In the fourth quarter, almost one in every three community banks reported a loss, and 
overall they reported a small net loss of about $150 million. Community banks entered the 
crisis with strong capital, and, despite weakening earnings, the vast majority – well over 95 
percent  –  remained  well  capitalized  at  year-end  2008  under  Prompt  Corrective  Action 
standards. Nevertheless, the ratio of nonperforming assets to total assets rose to its highest 
level  since  1992  as  residential  mortgage  and  construction  loans  continued  to  deteriorate. 
And  given  the  near-term  economic  outlook,  loan  quality  at  many  community  banks  may 
decline further.  
I know that bankers – including community bankers – have expressed concern over some of 
the  "mixed  messages"  they  perceive  are  coming  from  the  federal  banking  agencies  in  the 
current  environment  –  particularly  admonitions  to  continue  lending  at  the  same  time  that 
institutions are being urged to maintain adequate capital and prudent lending standards. We 
are  sensitive  to  this  issue,  which  is  why  last  November  the  agencies  jointly  issued  the 
"Interagency  Statement  on  Meeting  the  Needs  of  Creditworthy  Borrowers."2  In  that 
statement,  we  noted  that  continuing  to  lend  in  this  environment  is  not  inconsistent  with 
maintaining  good  risk  management  and  high  underwriting  standards.  For  example,  we 
emphasized  that,  while  rectifying  past  shortcomings  in  underwriting  standards  and  other 
aspects of risk management, banks can and should continue to provide loans to creditworthy 
customers.  We  have  directed  our  examiners  to  be  mindful  of  the  procyclical  effects  of 
excessive  credit  tightening  and  to  encourage  banks  to  make  economically  viable  loans, 
provided such lending is based on realistic asset valuations and a balanced assessment of 
borrowers' repayment capacities. Across the Federal Reserve System, we have implemented 
training and outreach to underscore that direction.  
In recent years, I and others from the Federal Reserve have underscored the importance of 
community banks to the U.S. financial system and economy. I continue to believe that firmly. 
Community banks serve businesses and consumers throughout the country, in both rural and 
urban areas. They are a leading provider of credit to small businesses, a key source of job 
creation in this country.  
In  the  decades  leading  up  to  the  current  crisis,  the  nature  of  lending  had  changed 
dramatically, with greater industry consolidation, increased economies of scale and scope, 
                                                 
2   Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System,  Federal  Deposit  Insurance  Corporation,  Office  of  the 
Comptroller of the Currency, and Office of Thrift Supervision (2008), "Interagency Statement on Meeting the 
Needs of Creditworthy Borrowers," joint press release, November 12. 
BIS Review 34/2009 
 3
and a larger portion of credit being supplied by nonbanks. While such changes challenged 
community  bankers,  your  institutions  have  remained  vitally  important.  Indeed,  during  the 
current crisis, some data show recent increases in loan and deposit balances at community 
banks, while such balances are generally flat or even decreasing at the largest banks.  
The various efforts that the Federal Reserve has taken to provide backup liquidity to financial 
firms and to improve the functioning of financial markets have, I believe, helped all segments 
of  the  financial  system,  including  the  community  banking  sector,  and  the  economy  more 
generally. Helping community banks also helps the local communities that they serve. One 
important way that community banks may assist their communities is by working with at-risk 
homeowners to avoid preventable foreclosures. Foreclosures can result in clusters of vacant 
properties, which in turn can foster crime, stretch municipal resources at a time of weakening 
revenue, and lead to lower house prices throughout the neighborhood. These are some of 
the  reasons  why  the  Federal  Reserve,  along  with  the  other  U.S.  banking  agencies,  has 
encouraged banks to participate in the Making Home Affordable loan modification program 
established by the Treasury. 
While continuing challenges remain, opportunities also exist for community banks. In some 
instances, community banks are able to step in at crucial moments when local businesses or 
consumers have been unable to find credit elsewhere. Indeed, as some banks have chosen 
to cut back on lending to conserve capital and liquidity, community banks in strong financial 
condition  may  find  that  they  can  gain  creditworthy  customers  even  in  today's  economic 
environment. Such community banks also may find opportunities to reclaim customers and 
business  from  nonbank  lenders  who  have  drawn  back  as  the  securitization  markets  have 
encountered  difficulties.  Community  banks  are  able  to  respond  promptly  in  such  cases 
because  of  their  in-depth  knowledge  of  their  markets,  their  locally  focused  management 
teams  and  boards,  and  their  commitment  to  tailoring  unique  credit  products  for  individual 
borrowers and businesses.  
Addressing the "Too Big to Fail" problem  
Many of you likely are frustrated, and rightfully so, by the impact that the financial crisis and 
economic downturn has had on your banks, as well as on the reputation of bankers more 
generally.  You  may  well  have  built  your  reputations  and  institutions  through  responsible 
lending and community-focused operations, but nonetheless, you now find yourselves facing 
higher deposit insurance assessments and increasing public skepticism about the behavior 
of  bankers  –  outcomes  that  you  perceive  were  largely  caused  by  the  actions  of  larger 
financial  institutions.  Many  of  you  managed  your  businesses  prudently  and  shunned  more 
exotic instruments and activities. And many of your customers – households and businesses 
– avoided excesses and are able to meet their financial commitments on a timely basis. 
No doubt this frustration has been heightened by the problems caused by financial firms that 
are too big or too interconnected to fail. Indeed, the too-big-to-fail issue has emerged as an 
enormous problem, both for policymakers and for financial institutions generally. Creditors of 
a firm perceived as too big to fail have less incentive to monitor and restrict the firm's risk-
taking  through  adjustments  to  the  price  at  which  they  lend  money  to  the  firm.  If  left 
unaddressed, this weakening of market discipline creates an unlevel playing field for smaller 
institutions,  which  may  not  be  able  to  raise  funds  as  cheaply,  even  if  their  individual  risk 
profiles are better, or at least no worse, than those of their larger competitors. The erosion in 
market discipline distorts market behavior and can give firms an incentive to grow – either 
internally or through acquisitions – in order to be perceived as too big to fail. 
Government rescues to prevent the failure of major financial institutions also have required 
large amounts of public resources. These actions have involved extremely unpleasant and 
difficult  choices,  but  given  the  interconnected  nature  of  our  financial  system  and  the 
potentially  devastating  effects  on  confidence,  financial  markets,  and  the  broader  economy 
that  would  likely  arise  from  the  disorderly  failure  of  a  major  financial  firm  in  the  current 
4 
 BIS Review 34/2009
environment,  I  do  not  think  we  have  had  a  realistic  alternative  to  preventing  such  failures. 
That said, these episodes have shown clearly that the problem of too-big-to-fail is extremely 
serious.  To  address  this  issue,  which  should  be  a  top  priority  for  financial  reform, 
policymakers will need to act on several fronts. 
First, supervisors – as we are already doing – must vigorously address the weaknesses at 
major  financial  institutions  with  regard  to  capital  adequacy,  liquidity  management,  and  risk 
management. Firms whose failure would pose a systemic risk must receive especially close 
supervisory oversight and be held to the highest prudential standards. Aside from its direct 
benefits  for  the  safety  and  soundness  of  these  large  institutions,  such  an  approach  also 
would help offset financial firms' incentive to grow until they are perceived to be too big to fail.  
Second,  supervisors  must  pay  close  attention  to  compensation  practices  that  can  create 
mismatches between the rewards and risks borne by institutions or their managers. As the 
Federal  Reserve  and  other  banking  agencies  have  noted,  poorly  designed  compensation 
policies  can  create  perverse  incentives  that  can  ultimately  jeopardize  the  health  of  the 
banking organization. Management compensation policies should be aligned with the long-
term  prudential  interests  of  the  institution,  be  tied  to  the  risks  being  borne  by  the 
organization,  provide  appropriate  incentives  for  safe  and sound  behavior,  and  avoid  short-
term payments for transactions with long-term horizons.3  
Third, as the recent financial crisis has highlighted, risks to the financial system may arise not 
only in the banking sector, but also from financial firms that traditionally have been outside 
the  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  applied  to  banking  organizations.  Under  federal 
law, all banking organizations – regardless of size – are subject to consolidated supervision 
for safety and soundness purposes. At a minimum, policymakers must ensure that a similar 
statutory framework is put in place for all systemically important financial firms organized as 
holding  companies.  The  agencies  responsible  for  implementing  this  framework  also  must 
vigorously exercise their authority to help ensure the safety and soundness of nonbank firms 
whose failure could threaten the stability of the financial system. Broad-based application of 
the principle of consolidated supervision would also serve to eliminate gaps in oversight that 
would otherwise allow risk-taking to migrate from more-regulated to less-regulated sectors. 
Fourth,  continued  strong  and  concerted  efforts  are  needed  to  improve  the  financial 
infrastructure – or "plumbing" – that supports the trading, payments, clearing, and settlement 
activities  that  are  so  critical  to  the  functioning  of  the  financial  system.  I  have  described 
elsewhere  the  various  steps  that  the  Federal  Reserve  is  taking  in  coordination  with  other 
supervisors and market participants to improve the resiliency of over-the-counter derivative 
markets and the market for triparty repurchase agreements.4 Improvements in these areas 
should  reduce  the  likelihood  that  the  failure  of  any  individual  institution  would  have 
substantial spillover effects on other financial institutions or the broader markets, and thereby 
make it less likely that the government would need to intervene.  
Finally, an important element of addressing the too-big-to-fail problem is the development of 
an improved resolution regime in the United States that permits the orderly resolution of a 
systemically important nonbank financial firm. We have such a regime for insured depository 
institutions,  but  it  is  clear  we  need  something  similar  for  systemically  important  nonbank 
financial entities. Improved resolution procedures for these firms would help reduce the too-
big-to-fail problem by giving the government the option of safely winding down a systemically 
important firm rather than keeping it operating.  
                                                 
3   See "Interagency Statement," note 2. 
4   Ben  S.  Bernanke  (2009),  "Financial  Reform  to  Address  Systemic  Risk,"  speech  delivered  at  the  Council  of 
Foreign Relations, Washington, D.C., March 10. 
BIS Review 34/2009 
 5
Reducing procyclicality in the financial system 
In the current environment, financial institutions of all sizes are trying to meet the needs of 
creditworthy  borrowers  while  at  the  same  time  maintaining  sufficient  capital  and  other 
resources  to  weather  the  ongoing  crisis.  Capital  rules,  accounting  policies,  and  other 
regulatory standards should not make this job even more difficult by encouraging excessively 
procyclical  behavior  by  financial  institutions  –  that  is,  behavior  that  causes  financial 
institutions to tighten credit in downturns and ease credit in booms more than is justified by 
changes in the creditworthiness of borrowers. 
No one questions the underlying objectives of capital rules and accounting standards, which 
are  to  ensure  the  safety  and  soundness  of  financial  institutions  and  to  accurately  and 
transparently  disclose  an  institution's  financial  condition,  respectively.  However,  some 
aspects of existing capital rules and accounting standards may unduly magnify the ups and 
downs in the financial system and the economy. For example, the capital rules require banks 
to  maintain  capital  ratios  that  meet  or  exceed  fixed  minimum  standards.  Because  banks 
typically  find  raising  capital  to  be  difficult  in  economic  downturns  or  periods  of  financial 
stress, their best means of boosting regulatory capital ratios during difficult periods may be to 
reduce new lending, perhaps more so than is justified by the credit environment. Moreover, 
as many institutions and auditors will attest, determining the appropriate valuation of illiquid 
or  idiosyncratic  assets  can  be  very  challenging,  especially  in  highly  strained  market 
conditions. The economic downturn also has renewed the debate concerning the appropriate 
levels of loan loss reserves over the cycle.  
Institutions  themselves  often  try  to  offset  the  potential  for  procyclicality  in  capital  levels  by 
maintaining strong capital buffers to absorb swings in regulatory capital requirements. This 
type of action is in line with supervisory expectations that call for banking organizations to be 
able to assess their overall capital needs and hold capital commensurate with their individual 
risk  profiles  –  beyond  complying  with  minimum  regulatory  capital  requirements.  Most 
community bankers understand this point. Your institutions generally hold capital in excess of 
minimum regulatory requirements – sometimes well in excess.  
Nonetheless, the issues surrounding procyclicality are not easy, and their consideration will 
require a careful balancing of important public policy interests. Policymakers should review 
existing  capital  rules  and  accounting  standards  to  determine  whether  these  rules  and 
standards  could  be  modified  to  reduce  their  potential  to  have  unduly  procyclical  effects 
without weakening their ability to achieve their fundamental objectives. I'm pleased to note 
that the Basel Committee and the Financial Stability Forum already have work under way to 
address  excessive  procyclicality  in  capital  regulations,  and  that  the  Financial  Accounting 
Standards  Board  is  issuing  new  guidance  that  relates  to  market-to-market  accounting  in 
inactive markets and other-than-temporary impairments. 
Conclusion 
I  want  to  conclude  by  encouraging  you  as  community  bankers  to  operate  prudently  in  the 
current  environment,  but  not  to  let  fear  drive  your  decisions.  You  should  all  continue  to 
exercise good risk management – including strong underwriting for individual exposures and 
proper  management  of  credit  concentrations  in your  portfolios.  You  should  also  be  certain 
that  any  deterioration  in  asset  quality  and  borrowers'  conditions  are  accurately  identified, 
measured, and managed. And you should take steps to maintain a strong financial condition 
with sufficient capital and liquidity levels as preparation for any future economic and financial 
uncertainty.  By  doing  so,  you  can  ensure  that  your  institutions  can  continue  to  provide  a 
steady  and  consistent  source  of  credit  to  businesses  and  borrowers  for  years  to  come.  If 
community banks are prudent but opportunistic in extending credit to strong borrowers, they 
will help the economy recover while benefiting from that recovery themselves. 
6 
 BIS Review 34/2009
