Mervyn King: Finance – a return from risk 
Speech by Mr Mervyn King, Governor of the Bank of England, to the Worshipful Company of 
International Bankers, London, 17 March 2009. 
Master, Sheriff, My Lords, Alderman, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
 Introduction 
The financial turmoil that began in August 2007 led to a financial panic in September 2008 
and  now  to  a  severe  worldwide  economic  downturn.  It  is  fair  to  describe  the  events  that 
followed the failure of Lehman Brothers as the Panic of 2008 because of the almost complete 
collapse of confidence in financial institutions and the flight of funding that ensued. Perhaps 
we  had  forgotten  that  such  panics  and  banking  crises  have  occurred  with  depressing 
regularity in the financial systems of market economies. But the history of the City is in large 
part the history of banking crises. 
The  measures  that  central  banks  took,  and  continue  to  take,  to  restore  confidence  in  the 
banking system were extreme and on an extraordinary scale – the Bank of England has lent 
hundreds of billions of pounds to the banking system. But they were not unprecedented – it 
has happened many times before in crises over the years. So I want tonight to reflect on why 
we seem to find it so difficult to learn from experience. 
But even when set against that historical background, the extraordinarily sudden, severe and 
simultaneous  downturn  of  activity  and  trade  in  every  corner  of  the  world  economy  last 
autumn is remarkable. A collapse of confidence in the coffee houses of Lombard Street was 
one thing; a collapse of confidence in the world economy is quite another. 
An examination of these parallels will, I hope, help to throw light on three questions. First, 
does the nature of financial risk explain the frequency of crises and what does it imply for the 
design of banking regulation? Second, what are the lessons from the crisis for central banks 
in their pursuit of both monetary and financial stability? And, third and most urgently, how do 
we find our way out of the present crisis? 
The nature of financial risk and its implications for the regulation of banks 
There is no shortage of proposals for reform of bank regulation from official groups, such as 
the  Financial  Stability  Forum,  and  unofficial  groups,  such  as  the  G  30,  chaired  by  Paul 
Volcker  and  the  Geneva  Forum.  Since  the  excessive  risk-taking  of  recent  years  has  now 
given  way  to  an  extraordinary  degree  of  risk  aversion,  there  is  no  hurry  to  choose  among 
them.  Whatever  exuberance  –  rational  or  irrational  –  existed  has  been  destroyed  by  the 
crisis. So we have time to reflect before we decide on the shape of a new regulatory system. 
Another  reason  for  reflection  is  that  recent  years  have  seen  a  natural  experiment.  Some 
regulatory  systems  were  light  touch,  others  heavy  touch,  and  yet  others  placed  both 
ownership and regulation of banks in the public sector. Yet they all failed to some degree to 
prevent the accumulation of risks that finally produced the crisis. So it is unlikely that there is 
a simple answer. 
Any plan for reform should take into account the nature of financial risk. Why were so many 
people misled for so long? And was there an inherent weakness in the structure of modern 
banking? 
Banks  are  dangerous  institutions.  They  borrow  short  and  lend  long.  They  create  liabilities 
which  promise  to  be  liquid  and  hold  few  liquid  assets  themselves.  That  though  is  hugely 
BIS Review 32/2009 
 1
valuable for the rest of the economy. Household savings can be channelled to finance illiquid 
investment projects while providing access to liquidity for those savers who may need it. 
But given how risky banks are, it should not be surprising that from time to time they get into 
trouble.  And  they  have  done  so  regularly  since  banking  began.  Confidence  in  a  bank  can 
disappear  quickly  making  it  vulnerable  to  a  destructive  bank  run.  If  a  large  number  of 
depositors want liquidity at the same time, banks are forced into early liquidation of assets – 
lowering their value. And, of course, if banks make sufficient unwise loans to borrowers who 
do not repay, then that can threaten solvency as well. 
Banks can of course take their own actions to ensure that investor confidence is maintained. 
For example, a visible source of liquidity helps. In the panic of 1906, the founder of what is 
now the Bank of America displayed his gold reserves on the street and offered to convert 
deposits into gold, creating confidence in his bank at a time when many others failed. Forty 
years ago, the clearing banks in London held around 30% of their assets in short-term liquid 
instruments. Today that liquid assets ratio is about 1%. For the major UK banks, almost 25% 
of customer loans are now funded by short-term borrowing in wholesale markets. At the turn 
of the new century it was close to zero. This was the distinctive feature of the contemporary 
British model of banking. Distinctive it may have been; sensible it was not. HBoS and RBS 
paid the price as the availability of this funding dried up, and not one of the building societies 
that de-mutualised in the 1980s and 1990s in order to expand beyond the constraints of their 
deposit base has survived as an independent entity. 
Banks  have  changed.  They  have  encouraged  the  expansion  of  proprietary  trading,  the 
funding of long-term assets in short-term wholesale markets, a rapid expansion of balance 
sheets  and  a  marked  rise  in  leverage.  Commercial  banks  followed  the  path  of  investment 
banks.  Balance  sheet  size  and  high  leverage  were  seen  as  the  key  to  obtaining  funds  at 
lowest cost. The total assets held by the world’s largest banks roughly doubled in the five 
years to the end of 2008, and leverage in UK banks rose on average by two-thirds. The bulk 
of credit growth in the economy as a whole was taking place within the financial sector. And 
the complexity of the products being created made it hard to evaluate the underlying risks. 
Why  did  banks  change  so  much  and  take  risks  which  eventually  led  to  some  spectacular 
downfalls? Ultimately, the main factor was an inability to perceive the true nature of the risks 
involved. In this they were not alone. 
John  Maynard  Keynes  took  pains  to  distinguish  between  risk,  where  probabilities  or 
frequencies could be calculated, and uncertainty, where there is no scientific basis on which 
to form any probability estimates. Keynes went on, in an article published in 1937, to spell 
out exactly how we tend to behave in the face of such ignorance. It explains a great deal of 
recent behaviour in financial markets. Keynes argued that uncertainty affects our behaviour 
in three ways: 
“(1)  We  assume  that  the  present  is  a  much  more  serviceable  guide  to  the  future  than  a 
candid examination of past experience would show it to have been hitherto. In other words 
we  largely  ignore  the  prospect  of  future  changes  about  the  actual  character  of  which  we 
know nothing. 
(2) We assume that the existing state of opinion as expressed in prices and the character of 
existing output is based on a correct summing up of future prospects, so that we can accept 
it as such unless and until something new and relevant comes into the picture. 
(3) Knowing that our own individual judgement is worthless, we endeavour to fall back on the 
judgement of the rest of the world which is perhaps better informed. That is, we endeavour to 
conform  to  the  behaviour  of  the  majority  or  the  average.  The  psychology  of  a  society  of 
individuals each of whom is endeavouring to copy the others leads to what we may strictly 
term a conventional judgement”. 
This suggests that it is very hard to take a truly independent view – especially a contrarian 
one  that  recognises  the  possibility  that  improbable  but  conceivable  events  could  result  in 
2 
 BIS Review 32/2009
large losses. In other words, the sheer difficulty of forecasting the future makes it hard for 
contrarian  investors  without  substantial  net  worth  to  survive  in  the  market.  As  a  result  the 
market  is  vulnerable  to  “sudden  and  violent  changes”.  As  Keynes  put  it,  “the  forces  of 
disillusion may suddenly impose a new conventional basis of valuation. … At all times the 
vague panic fears and equally vague and unreasoned hopes are not really lulled, and lie but 
a little way below the surface”. So a conventional wisdom that leads to a speculative mania, 
can quickly collapse as sentiment turns on its head. 
But  a  speculative  mania  is  not  the  product  solely  of  the  creative  imagination  of  financial 
engineers.  It  requires  the  willing  collaboration  of  gullible  investors,  who  may  not  fully 
appreciate  the  risks  that  they  are  taking.  Take  a  simple  example  of  an  investment  that 
provides a long, regular stream of profits interspersed with occasional large losses, such that 
on  average  you  would  expect  it  to  have  the  same  return  as  a  safe  investment  –  not  an 
unreasonable characterisation it would now appear of many of the investment strategies of 
recent years. Over short time periods, where it is unlikely that disaster will strike, it is more 
likely than not that investors will come out ahead, with a high return. But over long periods, 
where the risk that disaster will strike at some point is higher, it is likely that the overall return 
will be worse than the safe investment. And, because charges are often structured so that 
investment managers receive more of the upside from risky behaviour than they share in the 
downside, they have an incentive to promote the risky investment strategy. That, allied to a 
massive increase in the complexity of financial products and instruments in recent years, has 
meant  that  investors  have,  perhaps  unwittingly,  aided  an  enormous  increase  in  the  risks 
being run in the financial system. 
Given these problems, it seems to me that regulation should aim to be simple and robust. 
Overly  complex  measures  of  risk  and  capital  adequacy  are  rarely  robust  to  developments 
that  are  easy  neither  to  anticipate  nor  calibrate.  And  robust  rules  for  regulation  will  of 
necessity need to be simple or supervisors will be lost in a morass of unnecessary detail. 
For the same reasons we should not expect too much of regulation. Conventional judgment 
is a safe haven for bankers and regulators alike. It is not easy to persuade people, especially 
those who are earning vast sums as a result, that what looks successful in the short run is 
actually highly risky in the long run. 
As in monetary policy, it is unlikely that prudential supervision can be implemented as a set 
of  rules  to  be  applied  mechanically.  Nevertheless,  to  rely  solely  on  the  discretionary 
judgment of individual bankers and regulators is asking too much of human capabilities. This 
suggests  that  the  principle  of  constrained  discretion,  applied  so  successfully  in  monetary 
policy, needs to be applied to banking regulation. That is not to say that a similar institutional 
apparatus  would  be  appropriate,  but  we  need  to  build  into  the  system  some  simple  and 
robust impediments to excessive risk-taking that can be monitored. And we must ensure that 
an institutional memory is maintained so that the lessons from the crisis are not forgotten and 
those impediments to excessive risk-taking are not swept away once memories of the crisis 
recede. 
The design of those impediments should be based on an explicit identification of the market 
failures  that  regulation  can  hope  to  correct.  Such  market  failures  seem  to  relate  to  two 
dimensions of banking – the “cross-section” and the “time-series” aspects of behaviour. The 
former  reflects  the  extreme  interconnectedness  of  banks.  Each  individual  institution  can 
appear  relatively  safe  while  the  links  between  them  mean  that  the  system  as  a  whole  is 
vulnerable. Any shock could lead banks to fail through a domino effect. The superstructure of 
complex transactions within the financial sector (in derivatives for example) greatly increased 
this interconnectedness. 
The time-series aspect is the pro-cyclical behaviour of risk-taking in the financial system that 
I described earlier. Optimism feeds on itself until the occasional setback changes the mood 
to  one  of  pessimism.  And  individuals  are  reluctant  to  accept  that  success  may  not  be  the 
BIS Review 32/2009 
 3
result of superior wisdom, which should naturally be reflected in compensation, but the short-
run outcome of a risky strategy. 
To deal with the “cross-section” problems we need to reduce the exposure of the system to 
domino  effects.  For  some,  especially  over-the-counter,  markets  this  could  be  achieved  by 
increasing the role of central counterparty clearing houses. Much good work on this is going 
on, led by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. But a clearing house should not be an 
excuse  for  allowing  flawed  financial  instruments,  such  as  many  of  the  mortgage-backed 
securities, to be treated as high quality assets. 
We also need to improve the regulation of the liquidity of banks. After the crisis began, the 
most striking feature of the regulatory system, as embodied in the Basel arrangements and 
implemented in the UK, was the absence of any effective regulation of liquidity. The FSA is 
acting to remedy the situation, and the Bank is in active discussion with FSA about how such 
regulation should best be implemented. 
More  attention  has  been  paid  to  the  “time-series”  dimension  where  there  is  now  a  clear 
international consensus among the members of the Financial Stability Forum and the Basel 
Committee  that  some  form  of  counter-cyclical  prudential  supervision  is  required.  The 
principle has been established. 
To  correct  these  types  of  market  failure  will  require  a  system  of  regulation  that  effectively 
marries the “top down” assessment of the risks to the system as a whole to the “bottom up” 
supervision of individual institutions. The present system has not delivered that. 
A  lot  of  detailed  work  needs  to  be  done  to  convert  these  general  principles  into  concrete 
implementation.  How  would  the  interaction  between  the  “cross-section”  and  “time-series” 
risks  be  taken  into  account?  Would  the  framework  take  the  form  of  an  addition  to  capital 
requirements as a function of the degree of maturity mismatch, leverage or the rate at which 
the balance sheet was expanding? Or would there be a limit on leverage ratios? How would 
leverage and maturity mismatch embedded in the assets side of the balance sheet be taken 
into account? And how would the framework be implemented for banks whose assets and 
liabilities  span  jurisdictions?  Can  we  define  a  group  of  institutions  that  are  systemically 
significant?  In  the  present  crisis  most  institutions  are  deemed  to  be  potentially  systemic 
because  of  the  impact  of  the  failure  of  any  of  them  on  creditor  confidence.  If  most  banks 
appear systemic in a crisis won’t countries want to require foreign banks to be subsidiaries 
not branches? And, more fundamentally, should there be a Glass-Steagall type of provision 
to prevent retail deposits from being used to fund investment banking activities? There are 
good arguments in favour – to separate the utility functions of a retail bank taking household 
deposits and running the payments system from the casino trading of an investment bank, 
and  good  arguments  against  –  the  difficulty  of  maintaining  a  credible  boundary  between 
those institutions that are eligible to receive government support and those that are not. We 
need a public and informed debate on the merits of the arguments. 
We also should reflect on the fact that the belief that the authorities will step in when risks 
materialise encourages risk taking and means that risk-adjusted returns to financial activity 
are too high. The experience of unsustainably high returns in normal times interspersed by 
regular crises has been repeated across countries and over time. So if banks are to bear the 
true cost of the risks they take, changes need to be made to the environment in which banks 
operate. 
All these are important issues. While committing at international level to broad principles on 
regulatory reform, such as extending the net to all highly leveraged institutions and making 
capital requirements counter-cyclical, there is time to think through carefully the best way to 
implement them, and it is important that we take it. 
Many of these questions about the future of the regulatory structure will be discussed in the 
Turner  review  to  be  launched  tomorrow.  The  Bank  awaits  the  Review  with  interest.  It  will 
wish to take time to reflect carefully on the Report before expressing a view. 
4 
 BIS Review 32/2009
Given what has happened there is now international support for developing a counter-cyclical 
toolkit for the prudential supervision of banks. But let us be clear what such tools would have 
entailed had they operated in the past. They would have imposed constraints on the growth 
and profitability of bank balance sheets. They would have been seen as a tax on the success 
of the investment banking community and the City of London more generally. And that would 
have taken place at a time when virtually the entire weight of opinion, not only in this country 
but also abroad, was in favour of the expansion of financial services. Indeed, just before the 
financial turmoil broke out in the summer of 2007, there was a debate in New York about the 
need to follow London’s example of unfettered markets if they were not to lose ground. 
What are the lessons for central banks? 
With  the  passage  of  the  new  Banking  Act  last  month,  the  Bank  of  England  now  has  two 
objectives enshrined in statute: monetary stability and financial stability. Events of the past 
six months show that there are limits to what can be achieved in respect of either objective. 
No policy framework can, or should be expected to, stabilise output when demand in the rest 
of the world suddenly and simultaneously “falls off a cliff”, to use the expression heard so 
often in recent months. Even the safety valve of a floating exchange rate cannot insulate an 
economy from its trading partners. World trade fell by around 5% in the final quarter of 2008. 
54  of  the  56  nations  for  which  data  are  available  for  the  fourth  quarter  registered  falls  in 
industrial output. 7 of those suffered double digit declines. For many years trade has been 
the  route  to  faster  growth.  Now  trade  is  leading  the  world  down  as  the  economies  most 
adversely affected by the current downturn are those most dependent on exports, such as 
Japan and some of the other Asian economies, not those with the worst banking problems. 
Sharp changes in sentiment, confidence, animal spirits – whatever words you care to use – 
are capable of wreaking havoc on the world and our own economy. 
I shall turn later to our immediate response to the crisis. I want first, however, to ask whether 
central banks have the right instruments and the right policy frameworks to deal with a world 
in which some of the biggest risks are of the type I have discussed earlier, namely events 
which occur very infrequently but when they do so have large adverse effects; events such 
as those through which we are living. In other words, was our framework suitable for a world 
of stability but inadequate for preventing or responding to large adverse shocks? 
In particular, should central banks continue to use their single monetary policy instrument – 
in  our  case  Bank  Rate,  supplemented  when  necessary  by  unconventional  operations  –  to 
aim solely at price stability, or should they aim also at wider financial stability objectives, as 
some have suggested? For over fifteen years Bank Rate has been set to meet an inflation 
target. And it was very successful in achieving that objective until commodity prices pushed 
up  inflation  in  2007.  Since  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  was  established,  the  average 
inflation  rate  has  been  only  0.1  percentage  points  away  from  the  target.  The  strategy  of 
inflation targeting ensured that the MPC maintained a balance between overall demand and 
supply in the economy. 
We  could,  of  course,  have  pursued  a  different  policy.  We  could  have  set  interest  rates 
consistently at a higher level in order to lower the growth of domestic demand below the rate 
at  which  inflation  was  stable  and  close  to  the  target.  In  the  words  of  my  predecessor,  we 
could have rejected the approach of accepting “unbalanced growth rather than no growth”. 
But  to  argue  that  Bank  Rate  should  have  been  set  to  achieve  not  price  stability  but  other 
objectives  would  have  meant  accepting  rising unemployment  and  falling  inflation.  And  that 
would  not  have  altered  long-term  interest  rates  in  world  capital  markets  and  “irrational 
exuberance” in financial markets in the US and elsewhere. If we want to slow the growth of 
the financial sector balance sheet, and most of the expansion of credit in recent years was 
within  the  financial  sector,  we  can  surely  do  better  than  raising  Bank  Rate  to  a  level  that 
undermines the real economy and our commitment to the inflation target. 
BIS Review 32/2009 
 5
As Chairman Bernanke rightly emphasised last week, one of the causes of the crisis was the 
impact  of  the  growing  current  account  imbalances  on  financial  intermediation  in  the  main 
deficit  countries,  the  US  and  the  UK.  The  large  and  persistent  inflows  of  capital  lowered 
market  interest  rates  to  extremely  low  levels  and  encouraged  the  “search  for  yield”.  In 
response, the financial services industry rediscovered the time-honoured way of raising rates 
of return – increasing leverage and taking more risk while finding ways of making the degree 
of  risk  less  transparent.  The  crisis  resulted  from  the  interaction  between  the  “micro” 
behaviour  of  banks  and  other  institutions  in  creating  new  financial  assets  and  the  “macro” 
economic strategies pursued by the world’s major countries. If we are to make crises less 
likely in future we will need to concentrate on policies covering these interactions. 
The size to which the current account imbalances were allowed to grow reflected the fact that 
the international monetary system, such as it is, placed no pressures on surplus countries 
and  that  the  main  debtor  country  issued  the  world’s  reserve  currency.  Year  after  year 
international  meetings  expressed  surprise,  and  indeed  concern,  that  the  imbalances 
continued  to  accumulate,  but  in  the  absence  of  a  correction  the  theme  became  a  worn 
groove in discussions and interest waned. The more forcefully the warnings were expressed, 
the  more  they  were  ignored,  precisely  because  each  country  appeared  able  on  its  own  to 
achieve price stability and steady growth despite the continued build-up of the imbalances. 
The consequences of this are now evident: a severe global downturn affecting virtually every 
country in the world. In a world of imbalances it is just as dangerous to rely too heavily on 
foreign  demand  for  goods  and  services  as  it  is  to  rely  excessively  on  foreign  borrowing. 
Surely now no country can be indifferent to the objective of improving the consistency of our 
macroeconomic  strategies.  So  I  hope  that  the  debate  about  the  need  for  symmetric 
obligations on  surplus and  debtor  countries  alike  will  move  on  from  previous  unsuccessful 
dialogues stretching back to the Bretton Woods conference in 1944. 
Turning  to  the  “micro”  cause  of  the  crisis,  a  root  cause  was  a  degree  of  over  optimism  in 
financial  markets.  History,  whether  the  run  up  to  the  1929  stock  market  crash  or  more 
recently in the dotcom mania, suggests that only very substantial rises in short-term interest 
rates will bring to an end the excessive speculation, and that such rises bring about the very 
recession which the policy is designed to avert. 
What is needed is an additional instrument, or possibly a set of instruments, to provide the 
authorities with the ability to control the growth of the financial sector and its interactions with 
the wider economy. A set of counter-cyclical policy instruments is the right response to the 
dilemma of trying to use Bank Rate to control both inflation and excessive expansion of the 
financial  sector.  It  provides  the  “top-down”  judgement  for  prudential  supervision  that  I 
described earlier, but detailed work is needed to flesh out that general principle. 
How should we deal with the present crisis? 
I have spoken so far about the long-term lessons of the crisis for the structure of banking and 
its  regulation.  But  the  immediate  need  is  to  deal  with  the  extraordinarily  steep  and 
simultaneous downturn in so many economies around the world, and to stabilise the banking 
system  in  those  countries  where  it  has  failed.  That  should  be  the  main  priority  at  the 
forthcoming G20 Summit. 
There  are  three  parts  to  the  required  policy  response.  First,  there  is  an  urgent  need  for  a 
collective commitment by all the countries in the G20 to restore confidence. Second, in those 
countries where the banking system has failed, there must be a credible promise that banks 
will  be  restructured  and  recapitalised  so  that  they  can  resume  their  normal  functions  and 
support the flow of credit to their own and other economies. Third, we need to identify and 
explain a coherent exit strategy through which all of the unprecedented official policy actions 
can be unwound and which provides a bridge back to stability. 
6 
 BIS Review 32/2009
A joint commitment to a macroeconomic stimulus – the division between monetary and fiscal 
measures is a matter for individual countries to determine – is required to ensure a growth of 
nominal demand sufficient to reverse the extraordinarily steep and simultaneous downturn in 
output around the world. Much has already been done. But the measures need to add up to 
a collective determination to support an adequate level of money spending, and will need to 
include  actions  to  help  poorer  countries  borrow  either  from  the  IMF  or  on  world  capital 
markets. 
Without  that  collective  commitment,  countries  may  neglect  the  beneficial  effects  that  their 
policy  actions  can  have  on  other  countries,  resulting  in  an  excessively  cautious  approach. 
The G20 summit in London in two  weeks time  offers an opportunity and a challenge. The 
occasions on which the words and actions of policy-makers really matter are probably fewer 
than many of us care to admit. But this is one of them. And I was encouraged by an unusual 
sense of determination at the G20 Ministerial Meeting at the weekend to show a collective 
commitment to deal with our problems. 
In  the  UK  we  are  already  taking  unprecedented  action  to  boost  nominal  spending.  The 
Government announced a temporary fiscal stimulus in the Pre-Budget Report in November. 
Bank  Rate  has  been  reduced  by  4½  percentage  points  in  the  past  six  months.  And  this 
month the Bank began a series of asset purchases aimed at boosting the supply of money in 
the economy directly. In due course, this will act to expand money spending. In its entire 300 
year history, the Bank of England has never acted so swiftly or extensively in response to an 
economic downturn. 
The  second  aspect  of  the  required  policy  response  is  effective  stabilisation  of  the  banking 
system.  The  experience  of  those  countries  that  have  most  successfully  resolved  banking 
problems,  such  as  Sweden  in  the  early  1990s,  suggests  that  that  will  require  uncertainty 
about the values of some of the more opaque assets on bank balance sheets to be dispelled. 
It will take many months to audit forensically the true state of those balance sheets and for 
some  of 
the  meantime 
governments have to stabilise the banking system by reassuring creditors in order to prevent 
the risk of either retail or wholesale runs of the kind we saw in the Panic of 2008. They have 
to subscribe sufficient equity capital – plain ordinary equity – in order to underpin the capital 
position of banks in the event of future losses. Although there are different ways to do this 
(splitting banks, insuring pools of assets), they all have in common a commitment to provide 
contingent  capital  to  banks  so  that  core  equity  capital  does  not  fall  below  some  minimum 
ratio  and so  creditors  are  protected.  It  follows  that  governments  must  be  prepared  to  hold 
whatever proportion of equity capital turns out to be necessary. 
The final part of the policy response relates to the longer term. There needs to be a clear exit 
route  by  which  the  extraordinary  level  of  official  financial  support  will  be  unwound  as 
conditions return to normal. And there needs to be a credible commitment to implement the 
longer  term  reforms.  For  monetary  policy,  the  inflation  target  provides  a  natural  guide  to 
when, and by how much, the extraordinary degree of policy stimulus should be withdrawn. In 
particular, the outlook for inflation will determine when and by how much asset purchases are 
in due course reversed and the timing of a return of interest rates to more normal levels. For 
fiscal policy, there needs to be a credible plan for consolidation of deficits and debt in the 
future contingent on the state of the economy. And in terms of support to the banking sector, 
governments  should  signal  their  commitment  to  return  banks  to  the  private  sector  once 
balance  sheets  have  been  restructured.  In  the  UK  that  will  be  underpinned  by  UKFI 
formulating an explicit mechanism through which the Government’s shares can in due course 
be sold back to the private sector. 
There will also, eventually, need to be a way to scale back the extraordinary levels of liquidity 
support  provided  by  central  banks  during  the  crisis.  The  Bank  of  England  has  lent,  and 
continues  to  lend,  over  £300  billion  pounds  through  our  repo  operations  and  the  Special 
Liquidity Scheme. And a backstop of further liquidity support is still available if the system 
the  underlying  macroeconomic  uncertainty 
to  dissipate. 
In 
BIS Review 32/2009 
 7
requires  it  through  our  discount  window.  The  Federal  Reserve  has  lent  more  than  $900 
billion dollars, and the ECB around €700bn. Relative to GDP, the balance sheet of the three 
central  banks  has  broadly  doubled  during  the  crisis.  But  in  providing  this  support,  central 
banks  cannot  offer  long-term  funding  and  should  not  offer  support  against  assets  that  are 
unlikely to have a viable future in the absence of official intervention. At some point central 
bank balance sheets will need to contract. 
Finally, although I have stressed the need to take time to think through carefully the long run 
reforms  required,  we  need  to  commit  now,  while  the  political  will  exists,  to  a  process  for 
decisions  on  long-term  reforms  in  key  areas  such  as  bank  regulation,  reform  of  the 
international monetary system and the governance of international financial institutions. 
Conclusions 
Why did no one see this crisis coming? In fact, most of the underlying causes of the crisis 
attracted  attention  from  economists,  central  banks,  international  financial  institutions  and 
regulators. But the difficulty of overcoming coordination or collective action problems meant 
that  nothing  was  done.  Banks  felt  that  they  had  to  keep  on  dancing  while  the  music  was 
playing. Regulators could never prove that the risks they identified would crystallize, and the 
“top down” and “bottom up” dimensions of prudential supervision were not married. Central 
banks and the IMF discussed the imbalances for so long that some came to believe that they 
were crying wolf. And no one country could prevent the world wide increase in asset prices. 
Christopher Fildes’ law of the financial cycle says that “disasters happen when the last man 
who can remember what happened last time has retired”. Periods of euphoria and panics in 
the financial system are inherent features of a market economy. They are the cost we pay for 
the benefits of a market economy – long-run increases in our standard of living which other 
systems have failed to deliver. After another twenty years or so, memories of the Panic of 
2008 will have faded, and the regulations put in place in its wake will no doubt be seen as 
old-fashioned, inhibiting of the potential of the City, and as ripe to be swept away as was the 
Glass-Steagall separation of commercial and investment banking in the United States a few 
years ago. 
A  lesson  of  history  is  that  few  generations  have  been  able  to  avoid  a  repetition  of  earlier 
banking crises. The essential problem is that we can no more bind our successors than our 
predecessors were able to bind us. Rare events, even when dramatic at the time, lose their 
power  to  shape  policy  as  memory  recedes.  The  role  of  institutions  is  to  retain  a  collective 
memory and to resist the temptations of the present. That is one of the most important roles 
of a central bank. It is accepted as such in the domain of monetary policy. And there is an 
equivalent role in financial stability. 
The  introduction  of  simple  and  robust  policy  tools  into  a  regulatory  regime  based  on  the 
exercise  of  constrained  discretion  would  make  it  easier  to  resist  overly  rapid  expansion  of 
financial institutions. In particular, the authorities should maintain a clear focus on the issues 
that matter when the worst occurs – liquidity and leverage. It should be intrusive, in the sense 
of knowing what is going on, but not bureaucratic. A system in which it is easier for a large 
bank  to  expand  and  then  destroy  its  balance  sheet  than  for  an  individual  to  open  a  bank 
account has lost focus. That is not the fault of regulators, but a reflection of the pressures 
and incentives they have faced – from all of us. 
As a Kennedy Scholar at Harvard, I have always treasured Harold Macmillan’s words in his 
tribute to John F Kennedy. He was, said Macmillan, a man “whose eyes were on the horizon 
but whose feet were on the ground". In re-designing the regulatory framework we certainly 
need to keep our feet on the ground, and we should also keep our eyes on the horizon, both 
ahead of and behind us. 
More urgent, however, is the immediate task of generating an economic recovery. Most of us 
come  from  the  generation  that  grew  up  believing  that  mass  unemployment  and  world 
8 
 BIS Review 32/2009
recession were things of the past, relevant to the history books but not the textbooks. That 
assumption is under threat. We must rise to the challenge. 
BIS Review 32/2009 
 9
