Ignazio Visco: The financial crisis and economists’ forecasts 
Commencement address by Mr Ignazio Visco, Deputy Director General of the Bank of Italy, 
to the students of the Master in Public Economics at the Faculty of Economics, La Sapienza 
University, Rome, 4 March 2009.  
While  I  alone  am  responsible  for  the  views  put  forward  in  this  paper,  I  wish  to  thank  Fabio  Busetti,  Michele 
Caivano, Eugenio Gaiotti, Alberto Locarno, Sergio Nicoletti Altimari, Patrizio Pagano, Fabio Panetta and Stefano 
Siviero for discussions on its various parts and for their practical assistance. 
The  original  speech,  which  contains  various  links  to  the  documents  mentioned,  can  be  found  on  the  Bank  of 
Italy’s website.  
 Introduction 
1.  
It is perhaps early to draw lessons from the crisis that has hit the global economy. The crisis 
appears  severe  and  widespread,  its  effects  far-reaching  and  long-lasting.  Measures  of 
various  kinds  have  been  taken  or  are  in  the  process  of  being  taken  regarding  monetary 
policy,  the  use  of  public  resources  and  the  revision  of  rules  and  institutions  on  which  the 
proper functioning of the markets and the operation of financial intermediaries depend. The 
present  is  undoubtedly  a  period  of  maximum  efforts  on  the  part  of  economic  policy  and 
overall political action, efforts that are directly proportional to the seriousness of the crisis. 
But this is also a moment in which the interpretative models used in analyzing our economies 
start being reconsidered and attempts are being made at identifying the reasons underlying 
the  failures  of  markets,  economic  policies  and  economists’  forecasts.  Besides,  this  is  also 
necessary in order to better define interventions – global, substantial, focused and lasting – 
aimed at overcoming the crisis and, as far as possible, preventing, with the design of new 
rules,  new  institutions  and  new  policies,  such  serious  instability  from  occurring  again.  If 
overcoming  the  crisis  will  be  arduous  and  complex,  the  process  of  revising  the  theoretical 
and quantitative frameworks of analysis, and the domestic and supranational guidelines and 
instruments of economic and financial policy will be equally difficult and laborious. 
To  begin,  one  can  and  certainly  must  ask  how  seriously  economic  analysis,  together  with 
forecasting models, has failed, but also why economic policy, in its various forms, has been 
so late to respond to the alarms of economists’ analyses and forecasts. This is the subject I 
should  like  to  address  briefly  in  what  follows,  while  anticipating  an  obvious  answer:  if 
economic  policy  bears  serious  responsibilities,  economic  analysis  and  forecasting  models 
have also shown important limitations that must be addressed. 
Origins of the crisis and the economists’ diagnosis 
2.  
Until  two  years  ago  the  world  economy  had  known  an  exceptionally  long  period  of  rapid 
expansion,  with  much  smaller  GDP  growth  rate  fluctuations  than  in  preceding  periods, 
accompanied by low and stable inflation in practically all the main areas of the globe. Thanks 
also  to  the  high  economic  growth  rates  of  large  emerging  countries,  consensus  forecasts 
were for continuing and relatively stable growth. That confidence was gradually eroded by 
the  events  that  occurred  between  the  summer  of  2007  and  the  autumn  of  last  year  and 
collapsed  rapidly  in  the  last  few  months,  giving  way  to  a  pronounced  and  generalized 
increase in the volatility of markets and economic activity and widespread uncertainty about 
the future.  
As  is  well  known,  the  first  signs  of  the  crisis  we  are  passing  through  were  the  difficulties 
encountered by intermediaries that had invested massively in “structured” financial products, 
linked to the performance of mortgage loans (and hence of the prices of the underlying real 
estate) granted in the United States to borrowers with low credit ratings (so-called subprime 
borrowers). The crisis spread rapidly to other segments of the financial market and, in the 
BIS Review 49/2009 
 1
last  few  months,  to  the  real  economy.  The  seat  of  infection  was  set  in  fact  in  a  broader 
context  of  fragility  of  the  international  financial  and  economic  system.  The  problems  that 
emerged  in  2007  in  the  markets  of  structured  products  linked  to  subprime  mortgages 
triggered  the  crisis,  but  the  conditions  for  it  to  take  hold  and  spread  rapidly  had  gradually 
accumulated  over  time.  The  pre-existent  elements  of  fragility  and  potential  instability  had 
already been partly identified and indicated as possible sources of danger. 
technological  and 
Economic, demographic and technological changes 
Great  changes  have  taken  place  in  the  last  twenty  years,  in  terms  of  the  integration  of 
economies  and  markets,  demographic  movements  and 
financial 
innovation. The growth in world trade of goods and services was extremely rapid, as was that 
in foreign direct investment. The emerging  Asian economies now account for more than a 
quarter  of  world  exports,  twice  the  level  in  1990.  In  little  more  than  a  decade,  direct 
investment rose from 10 per cent of world GDP in 1995 to 25 per cent, with the advanced 
and  emerging  economies  recording  similar  increases.  Financial  integration  increased 
remarkably: in 2007 the ratio of foreign financial assets and liabilities to GDP was equal to 
300  per  cent  in  the  advanced  economies,  compared  with  140  per  cent  in  1995,  when  the 
prevailing expectations were for rapid growth in both the emerging and developing countries, 
in  conjunction  with  the  progressive  removal  of  the  constraints  on  the  mobility  of  capital. 
Globalization  has  obviously  brought  a  large  increase  in  countries’  interdependence  and 
accordingly in the probability of cross-border transmission of real and financial shocks. At the 
same time the greater risk diversification associated with the increase in the global exposure 
of  financial  portfolios  should  have  produced,  at  least  in  principle,  a  smaller  exposure  to 
perturbations of a local nature. 
As regards demography, the very rapid population growth in the developing economies has 
begun  to  be  matched  by  a  progressive  ageing  of  the  population  in  the  industrial countries 
and in some of the large emerging economies as well (especially China). The increase in life 
expectancy has gone hand in hand with the reduction in births, causing a sharp rise in old-
age dependency ratios (of the elderly in relation to the population of working age), which is 
set to continue in the coming decades. This has led to a downward trend for public pensions 
and  an  increase  in  supplementary  pension  schemes  offered  by  pension  funds,  insurance 
companies and other institutional investors. In the meantime households’ direct exposure to 
financial  risk  has  grown:  in  2008  in  the  three  largest  euro-area  countries  the  proportion  of 
households’  financial  assets  administered  by  these  intermediaries  has  reached  about  one 
third, up by about 10 percentage points since 1995. 
Lastly,  the  development  of  new  information  and  communication  technologies  has  had  a 
growing  impact  on  every  sector  of  the  economy,  and  society  in  general.  This  has  had 
important effects on productivity and economic growth, and on all the building blocks of the 
financial system, from payment system infrastructure to intermediaries, and from markets to 
investment 
the  securitization  of  banks’  assets  expanded 
considerably,  together  with  the  supply  of  so-called  structured  financial  instruments  (ABSs, 
CDOs,  etc.)  whose  valuation  is  generally  rather  complex.  The  traditional  model  of  credit 
intermediation  thus  gave  way,  especially  in  the  United  States,  to  a  system  in  which  loans 
granted  were  rapidly  transformed  into  other  financial  products  having  these  loans  as 
collateral  and  sold  on  the  market:  the  so-called  originate-to-distribute  model.  These 
instruments – intended in principle to reduce risk, by redistributing it among a multitude of 
investors, free up capital and hence boost banks’ ability to lend – helped to finance the “new 
economy”,  in  parallel  with  the  spread  of  new  technologies. At  the  same  time  they  made  it 
possible  to reduce  the  cost  of  loans,  above  all  as  a  result  of  the  compression  of illiquidity 
premiums. 
The complexity of structured instruments was coupled, however, with a lack of transparency, 
in particular as regards their valuation (in which a crucial role was played by rating agencies, 
without any particular control by regulatory authorities or information providers), by means of 
In  particular, 
instruments. 
2 
 BIS Review 49/2009
statistical models and often carried out on the basis of incomplete and insufficient data. We 
can  now  say  –  unfortunately  well  into  the  financial  crisis  –  that  opportunistic  behaviour  by 
managers, fueled by a distorted system of incentives, especially with reference to executive 
compensation,  led  to  the  creation  of  unnecessarily  complex  and  opaque  financial  assets, 
with  the  effect  of  preventing  a  correct  assessment  of  creditworthiness  and  often  causing 
excessive risk-taking. 
The unsustainable growth of external imbalances 
In this context more and more in recent years the model of growth of the world economy was 
based on a growing imbalance between a steadily declining US saving rate (negative for the 
household sector) and highly positive rates for China and other emerging countries (as well 
as Japan). This led to large external deficits for the United States and huge surpluses for the 
rapidly  growing  countries,  which  served  to  finance  the  twin  (budget  and  external  current 
account) deficits of the United States. This was soon recognized since the unsustainability of 
growing  current  account  imbalances  was  evident,  even  though  variations  in  the  value  of 
financial  assets  and  liabilities  contributed  to  reducing  the  explosive  expansion  of  the 
country’s net external position (Figure 1). The risks associated with such a growth model, in 
which the rapid expansion of the world’s largest economy was financed with capital from the 
rest of the world, including, somewhat paradoxically, emerging and developing countries, had 
been stressed repeatedly and from many sides, although there was no lack of less alarmed 
observers and analyses suggesting that what appeared to be fundamental imbalances in the 
external accounts were the result of sustainable developments. At all events, the analyses 
produced by government and international institutions regularly pointed to the possibility that 
those  imbalances  might  give  rise  to  rapid  and  disorderly  adjustments,  with  sudden 
realignments of the external value of the dollar and abrupt falls in US domestic demand, as 
the main threat to stable growth of the world economy. 
In the end, the financial crisis was not provoked by a flight from the dollar but by the slump in 
the  US  housing  market  and  the  consequent  depreciation  of  structured  financial  products. 
This  initial  spark  found  ideal  tinder  in  the  general  vulnerability,  and  the  crisis  spread  like 
wildfire,  encountering  no  particular  obstacles.  For  that  matter,  the  US  trade  deficit  was 
nothing  but  the  counter-item  to  the  insufficiency  of  saving,  above  all  by  American 
households,  over-indebted  and  holding  assets  consisting  largely  of  long-overvalued  real 
estate that was itself used as collateral for financial derivatives. The sharp drop in demand in 
the  United  States  is  apparently  being  accompanied  by  an  effective  adjustment  of  these 
disequilibria,  an  exceedingly  abrupt  correction  imposed  by  the  crisis.  However,  for  this 
adjustment to be carried through and the imbalances definitively rectified, there must be an 
expansion of final demand, consumer demand in particular, in the countries that are running 
large external current account surpluses. It is too early to conclude that this will actually be 
the  outcome  of  the  measures  now  being  taken,  but  economic  analysis  had  correctly 
discerned the dangers of the disequilibria and the inevitability of an adjustment – the longer 
postponed, the more traumatic. 
Although  they  were  discussed  in  a  number  of  forums  for  international  coordination,  the 
corrective measures needed to remedy matters were never undertaken resolutely enough. 
The  increase  in  final  demand  led  by  the  US  expansion  was  accompanied  by  the 
extraordinarily  rapid  growth  of  economic  activity  and  exports  in  the  large  emerging 
economies  (accentuated  by  policies  that  impeded  exchange  rate  adjustments)  and 
unprecedented strains in the markets for raw materials. In recent years, given the low price 
elasticity  of  energy  demand  and  supply,  this  resulted  in  an  equally  extraordinary  rise  in 
energy prices and the steady increase in the trade surplus of oil-producing countries (Figure 
1). This was an additional factor of global payments disequilibria and a source of finance for 
final demand in the United States. 
BIS Review 49/2009 
 3
Monetary policy and financial and real asset prices 
In the absence of worrisome inflationary tensions, for over a decade monetary policies were 
kept very expansive. Low nominal and real interest rates ushered in not only the long period 
of  exceptionally  rapid  and  stable  growth  of  global  output  but  also  a  powerful  expansion  of 
monetary and credit aggregates. This was accompanied by a sharp increase in the liquidity 
of markets, which in its turn was connected with financial innovation and the strong growth of 
such  institutional  investors  as  pension  funds  and  hedge  funds.  The  upshot  was  a  large, 
across-the-board reduction in risk premiums, which fell to extremely low levels by historical 
standards,  in  all  markets  (shares,  corporate  bonds,  real  estate).  The  most  benevolent 
interpretations saw this as evidence that the world economy had entered a new phase, the 
“Great  Moderation,”  marked  by  rapid  growth  without  significant  fluctuations  and  by  orderly 
price movements, anchored to low average levels of inflation. The advent of that phase, it 
was  argued,  was  the  result  of  economic  policies  effectively  oriented  to  macroeconomic 
stability,  and  in  particular  of  monetary  policies  credibly  directed  to  containing  inflationary 
pressures and preserving the value of money. The result, ran the argument, was a stable, 
certain outlook, conditions propitious to private initiative and hence to economic growth. 
This interpretation (based on “good policy”, the standard term used in the literature, as well 
as  on  the  supposed  effects  of  positive  structural  changes  with  the  spread  of  new 
technologies)  was  disputed  by  other  analysts.  These  asserted  that  the  protracted,  orderly 
growth  and  modest  fluctuations  was  actually  the  product  of  exceptionally  favourable 
circumstances, in particular the absence of the sort of violent, repeated, adverse shocks that 
had marked previous periods (“good luck”). Sooner or later, they argued, in an environment 
that in a number of ways had not changed radically from the previous decades, this largely 
expansive monetary policy, by encouraging and in practice financing high risk-taking, would 
bring about the conditions for abrupt corrections as soon as risk perception and propensity 
changed. This danger was signalled by a good many observers, and starting in 2004 there 
were particular warnings that too casual an attitude towards risk-taking might be followed by 
a disorderly, traumatic reaction in the opposite direction. In the light of events, the optimistic 
interpretation of world economic trends in recent decades was clearly indulgent. While there 
is  no  denying  the  contribution  of  good  policy,  and  especially  its  impact  on  medium-term 
inflation expectations, it is now evident that it would probably have been wiser to take greater 
precautions against the possibility of an erroneous, falsely reassuring reading of events. 
On  a  number  of  occasions  the  fall  in  risk  premiums  pushed  bond,  stock  and  real-estate 
prices up to levels that were clearly unjustified by the fundamentals. The consensus view, in 
the 
targeting”  (which  authoritative 
commentators have used, broadly, also to describe the policy of the Federal Reserve), is that 
monetary policymakers need not worry about countering speculative bubbles in asset prices. 
What matters is that they take them into account in their forecasts of the variables that are 
factors  in  determining  the  general  level  of  prices,  such  as  inflation  expectations  and  the 
deviation  of  final  demand  from  the  “potential”  level  of  economic  activity  (i.e.  that 
corresponding  to  full  use  of  productive  resources).  The  sole  tool  at  policymakers’  disposal 
(the interest rate) should accordingly be deployed in order to attain just one objective, namely 
flexibly preserving the value of money, since it cannot aim simultaneously at curbing the rise 
in the prices of financial and real assets. Obviously, in memory of lessons from long ago, in 
order to avoid the depressive effects of the bursting of an asset bubble monetary policy must 
react swiftly to cut interest rates and expand liquidity. 
Actually, the impact of asset prices on the spending and investment decisions of households 
and  firms  also  depends  on  their  relative  indebtedness,  and  all  the  more  so  insofar  as  the 
latter depends on the collateral represented by their capital goods (for households, mostly 
residential  property).  This  applies  above  all  to  the  anglo-saxon  economies,  and  it  is  a 
potential factor of non-linear amplification of the effects of changes in real and financial asset 
values. In this case monetary policy, even under flexible inflation targeting, could be called 
on  directly  to  counter  very  large  variations  in  those  prices,  especially  considering  that  a 
framework  generally  known  as  “flexible 
inflation 
4 
 BIS Review 49/2009
tightening of bank credit becomes more likely as the level of indebtedness increases. In the 
long run, holding policy interest rates steady while share or house prices are soaring, in a 
context of heavy and growing household and corporate debt, could further fuel a speculative 
bubble that will eventually burst, at a potentially very severe cost to the economy as a whole. 
Yet  this,  in  practice,  was  the  policy  followed  for  decades  by  the  Fed  and  the  Bank  of 
England,  vis-à-vis  both  the  stock  market  boom  of  the  late  1990s  (Figures  2,  3)  and  the 
housing boom (Figures 4, 5, 6). Admittedly, in the former case this benign neglect during the 
boom and the drastic lowering of interest rates during the subsequent market downswing had 
relatively  limited  consequences  (especially  by  contrast  with  Japan’s  disheartening  “lost 
decade”  of  deflation  starting  in  the  early  1990s).  The  case  of  house  prices,  however,  is 
seemingly quite different. On the one hand the rise in prices, though strong and sustained 
(likely exceeding the levels justified by fundamentals), was probably less “explosive” in the 
United States than in some other countries, such as the United Kingdom and Sweden (but 
also  Spain  and  the  Netherlands)  when  gauged  by  the  Federal  Housing  Finance  Agency 
index (but equally so if measured by the Case-Shiller index).1 On the other hand, however, 
the  devastating  repercussions  on  US  financial  markets  and  intermediaries  (transmitted 
worldwide through structured financial products) stemmed precisely from the interaction with 
the levels of debt of American households, spurred by the possibility that rising house prices 
offered for mortgage equity withdrawal. In many cases their debt came to exceed their home 
equity. 
In this way, the expansion of liquidity and so of credit was accompanied by the ratcheting up 
of  financial  leverage,  prompted  among  other  things  by  the  emergence  of  new  business 
models. In his re-examination of the Depression in 1933, Irving Fisher noted: “Easy money is 
the great cause of overborrowing. When an investor thinks he can make over 100 per cent 
per  annum  by  borrowing  at  6  per  cent,  he  will  be  tempted  to  borrow,  and  to  invest  or 
speculate with borrowed money. This was a prime cause leading to the over-indebtedness of 
1929. 
investment 
opportunities, and so caused big debts” (Fisher, 1933, p. 348; emphasis added). In Fisher’s 
view, that is, depressions stem from excessive debt exposures (inevitably accompanied, one 
might  add,  by  excessive  risk-taking);  sooner  or  later,  a  correction  is  inevitable.  Once  the 
correction  gets  under  way,  the  impellent  necessity  of  rapidly  reducing  excessive  leverage 
exacerbates the fall in asset prices, which is the more violent, the larger the original bubble. 
And the price collapse, in turn, amplifies financial leverage, making the de-leveraging all the 
more painful. This danger had long been known to economists. 
improvements  created  wonderful 
Inventions  and 
technological 
From economists’ diagnosis to pre-crisis policies  
3.  
If economic analysis had effectively pointed out some of the looming dangers, the potential 
sources  of  infection  and  the  mechanisms  of  propagation,  then  why  was  economic  policy 
action  for  so  long  hesitant,  sluggish,  lacking  in  international  coordination?  To  some  extent 
this may have been due to the generic nature of the alarms sounded by economists, their 
failure to pinpoint the origins and course of development of the crisis, or the very reiteration 
of warnings when their fears did not materialize, giving policymakers the idea that the risks 
were vague and remote. But we can also find causes not only in connection with economic 
analysis but also within the policy decision-making process itself. 
In the first place, until the crisis was full-blown and the spectre was raised of dramatic, dire 
developments in the financial markets, there was a lack of international coordination and an 
inability to take measures to counter the increasingly rapid build-up of balance-of-payments 
                                                 
1   The Case-Shiller index is narrower in geographical coverage than the FHFA index, includes a wider variety of 
houses  (among  them,  homes  bought  with  subprime  mortgages),  and  excludes  the  changes  in  prices 
estimated at the time of renegotiation. 
BIS Review 49/2009 
 5
disequilibria  and  the  effects  of  a  disproportionate  rise  in  international  liquidity.  There  was 
undoubtedly awareness of the paradox of industrialized countries being increasingly financed 
by the current account surpluses of developing countries. It was clear that for an unusually 
long  time  this  had  determined  particularly  low  levels  of  interest  rates  and  volatility  in  the 
prices  of  financial  instruments.  And  with  US  monetary  policy  maintaining  an  expansionary 
stance  (too)  long  after  the  brief  recession  of  2001-02,  this  had  transmitted  to  the  Chinese 
economy, given the prevailing exchange rate system, an impetus whose signs could be seen 
globally  in  the  spiralling  prices  of  raw  materials.  All  of  this  was  discussed  repeatedly  at 
academic  conferences,  central  bank  workshops,  international  consultations  and  official 
meetings  of  ministers  and  central  bank  governors.  But  only  the  sense  of  extreme  urgency 
that spread last autumn following the failure of Lehman Brothers made it possible to begin to 
shape a coordinated response. In the future, it will be necessary to intensify efforts in this 
direction,  including  by  finding  appropriate  ways  of  translating  into  action,  in  more  binding 
forms,  the  interventions  decided  by  the  institutions  responsible  for  overseeing  the 
international economy.  
The  reassuring,  understandable  belief  that  a  new  world  had  emerged  –  one  of  Great 
Moderation – perhaps also led to overestimation of the economy’s ability to absorb shocks. 
This  belief  was  reinforced  by  the  apparent  ease  and  limited  costs  with  which  the  global 
economy overcame the difficulties that loomed large at times in the course of recent years, 
from the financial crises of the countries of South-East Asia and Russia to the collapse of 
LTCM,  the  deflation  of  the  stock  market  bubble  in  2000-01  and  the  shock  caused  by  the 
terrorist attacks of 11 September 2001. In particular, the bursting of the so-called dot-com 
bubble  had  seemed  to  be  controlled  with  ease;  given  the  seriousness  of  the  concerns 
expressed  beforehand  and  looking  back  on  the  modest  scale  of  the  damage  and  the 
remarkable  effectiveness  of  the  countermeasures  adopted,  the  conclusion  was  drawn  that 
the evolution of that crisis had confirmed both the advent of the Great Moderation and the 
merits of good policy.   
However, as already observed, there was much debate then, and there still is today, about 
whether  monetary  policy  should  not  pay  more  attention  to  financial  and  real  asset  price 
trends and to the pro-cyclical growth of credit and leverage, and in some instances respond 
decisively  to  seemingly  “excessive”  movements.  Aside  from  the  difficulty  of  defining  what 
excessive  means  in  practice,  it  is  certainly  useful  to  examine  the  factors  that  determine 
particularly large swings in these prices, just as it is necessary to shed light on the factors 
that  tend  to  threaten  financial  stability  and  disproportionately  amplify  cyclical  fluctuations. 
Many of these factors probably originate not so much in behaviour as in rules and incentives 
existing in the markets. In the case, for example, of the mortgage loans that triggered the 
current  crisis  due  to  excessive  borrowing,  two  factors  surely  played  a  crucial  role:  (1)  the 
assumption  that  the  continuous  rise  in  house  prices  would  lower  the  amount  of  debt  in 
relation  to  the  value  of  the  underlying  asset  over  time,  and  (2)  the  possibility  of  obtaining 
mortgages with loan-to-value ratios of 100 per cent and more. In these cases, and as has 
long been acknowledged (for example, with reference to the sharp rise in house prices in the 
United Kingdom recorded in the early 2000s), it is obvious that it is necessary to resort not so 
much to monetary policy but to prudential instruments, with limits on the value of collateral 
that can be used in taking out a loan. The question is why steps of this kind were not taken, 
quite  apart  from  the  failure  to  use  monetary  policy  (naturally  as  a  possible  second-best 
instrument).  
In  the  same  way,  it  is  legitimate  to  wonder  whether  confidence  in  the  ability  of  financial 
markets to regulate themselves was not excessive. What role was played, in particular, by 
the  waiving  of  stricter  supervision  in  many  sectors  of  financial  intermediation?  This,  even 
disregarding  the  strength  of  lobbies  and  instances  of  excessive  proximity  between  the 
supervisors and the supervised. In any event, it is clear that the consequences of a change 
of  trend  in  the  perception  and  concentration  of  risks  were  seriously  underestimated, 
notwithstanding the many analyses and signals that had become available in recent years. 
6 
 BIS Review 49/2009
Excessive deregulation of the financial sphere was also accompanied, as recalled earlier, by 
an unprecedented development of financial innovation. There was an enormous increase in 
the supply of complex instruments for hedging risk, structured products often very difficult to 
value if not using mathematical-statistical techniques whose application presupposed at least 
three  conditions:  (1)  the  availability  of  the  basic  information  necessary  to  determine  the 
quality of the products (securities or loans) underlying these instruments (in other words, the 
likelihood of the loans and bonds being honoured); (2) the validity, essentially over time and 
in the real world, of the arbitrage principle; and (3) a sufficiently high degree of liquidity in the 
markets. It is certainly open to doubt whether much thought was given to the soundness of 
these basic hypotheses, either by the regulators or by bankers and investors.  
Much  remains  to  be  done  then,  in  the  process  of  reviewing  the  rules  and  institutions 
responsible – including at supranational level – for the proper functioning of the markets, the 
prudent  management  of  financial  intermediaries  and  the  valuation  of  investment  and  risk-
hedging  instruments.  The  path  of  economic  and  financial  development  of  the  modern 
economies  is,  however,  littered  with  episodes  of  excess,  speculative  bubbles  and  failures 
linked to highly imprudent if not criminal practices. If, on one level, the challenge lies in not 
falling  into  the  opposite  excess  of  exaggerated  and  obsessive  regulation  (bearing  in  mind 
that the hedging of risk, when properly identified and where possible, is right and proper), on 
another level I believe we must be aware of our position between the rock of market failures 
and the whirlpool of policy failures. The thesis I find most convincing is that the area where 
most errors were made, precisely because there was enough evidence at a macroeconomic 
level  to  act  in  time,  was  in  the  lack  (beyond  the  declarations  and  press  releases  at  G7 
meetings), of sufficiently decisive policy reactions to the external imbalances that began to 
expand  rapidly  from  the  second  half  of  the  1990s.  Essentially  these  disequilibria  reflected 
continuous  and  sustained  growth  in  final  demand,  especially  consumption  demand,  in  the 
leading  economic  region  of  the  planet,  financed  by  over-borrowing,  primarily  from  abroad; 
growth, in short, without the accumulation of savings.  
To conclude on policies and to support my previous point, I believe that aside from a logical 
interpretation  of  what  provoked  the  current  crisis,  it  is  useful  to  propose  a  chronological 
reconstruction  of  the  sequence  of  events  that  have  marked  the  last  ten  to  fifteen  years.  I 
propose the following summary, which admittedly is perhaps a little too USA-centric: 
1. 
The  revolution  in  the  new  information  and  communication  technologies  halted  the 
progressive  decline  of  productivity  growth  in  the  United  States,  which  returned  to 
markedly high rates of expansion in the second half of the 1990s. 
During the same period, following the financial crises that hit the countries of South-
East  Asia  and  Russia  (1997-98)  and  the  collapse  of  LTCM  (autumn  1998),  the 
Federal  Reserve’s  policy  remained  essentially  accommodating,  with  a  strong 
expansion of liquidity also to counter the so-called millennium bug. 
The “new economy” euphoria, beyond being compatible with objective interpretations 
of  the  increases  in  productivity  linked  to  the  introduction  and  spread  of  the  new 
technologies, was reflected in US household consumption, with a rapid rise in debt 
and  a  sustained  decline  in savings,  but  with  financial  positions  basically  in  balance 
thanks to the increase in net wealth due to capital gains, in part the result of soaring 
share prices during the dot-com bubble. 
The powerful expansion in US final demand and imports was gradually accompanied 
by growth in the exports and output of the major emerging economies such as China 
and India, which had previously lagged behind, and an upwards trend in US inflation, 
dealt with by a tightening of monetary policy at the beginning of 2000.  
Monetary  tightening  ended  by  bursting,  late,  the  dot-com  bubble  in  2000-01.  The 
recessionary  effects  of  this  were  compounded  by  those  of  the  severe  shock  of  the 
September 2001 terrorist attacks. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
BIS Review 49/2009 
 7
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
Amid fears of recession and deflationary conditions of the kind that had prevailed in 
the  previous  decade  in  Japan,  the  Federal  Reserve’s  response  was  again  very 
accommodating. A drastic reduction in interest rates was accompanied by a strongly 
expansionary  budgetary  policy,  which  remained  in  place  also  in  relation  to  the  war 
operations in the Middle East. 
Monetary  policy  also  remained  expansionary  for  a  long  time,  facilitating  a  return  to 
sustained growth in household consumption, not countering the trend towards a zero 
saving  rate,  and  giving  free  rein  to  financial  innovation,  in  conditions  of  abundant 
liquidity,  especially  with  the  repackaging  in  2004-06  of  mortgages  –  in  a  context  of 
constantly  rising  house  prices  –  into  structured  products  that  opened  up  new 
investment possibilities to banks.  
The growing US current account deficit was accompanied by ever-larger surpluses in 
emerging  countries  and  Japan,  with  a  significant  build-up  of  official  reserves,  in  a 
context  of  a  relatively  sluggish  rise  in  domestic  consumption  demand  and  saving 
rates  even  higher  than  the  nonetheless  elevated  rates  of  investment.  The  oil-
producing countries also recorded sharply higher trade surpluses, reflecting the rise 
in oil prices due to the expansion of global demand. 
The  increase  in  international  liquidity  connected  with  the  growing  payments 
imbalances and the Fed’s accommodating monetary policy – which contributed, given 
the  limited  flexibility  of  emerging  countries’  currencies  and  the  Chinese  renminbi  in 
particular, to the global economic expansion – led to a prolonged period, from 2004 to 
2007, of low price volatility in financial markets and low nominal yields. This was also 
due  to  the  large  volume  of  investment  in  fixed  income  securities  by  international 
investors and countries that had accumulated high levels of reserves by running large 
and rising current account surpluses. 
The upshot was the search by investors – including international banks and banks of 
other  countries  and  financial  vehicles  they  controlled  –  for  investments  with  higher 
risk-return  profiles  and  the  attendant  supply  of  structured  financial  instruments 
backed  mainly,  although  not  exclusively,  by  home  mortgages  granted  with  loan-to-
value  ratios  exceeding  even  100  per  cent  on  the  false  premise  that  house  prices 
could only increase. 
The strong expansion of global demand engendered inflationary pressures, to which 
the  monetary  policy  authorities  responded,  in  part  with  a  view  to  countering  the 
possible impact on domestic prices of the expansion-driven increases in oil and raw 
material prices. The rise in interest rates was followed by the progressive deflation of 
the  real-estate  bubble,  which  had  a  domino  effect,  particularly  on  the  structured 
products created using subprime mortgages, with their higher default risk. 
In the summer of 2007 this triggered the financial crisis, which, despite central banks’ 
prompt  and  massive  response,  has  gradually  turned  into  a  global  crisis  affecting 
whole industries and economies. 
In this context, a crucial role was played by financial regulation that was behind the curve, 
indeed entirely absent from some market segments. Speculative behaviour in the markets, 
the growth in leverage and the various kinds of pro-cyclicality operating at institutional level 
as well as in the decisions of market participants amplified the centrifugal tendencies. At the 
root,  however,  there  remain  the  large  trade  and  current  account  imbalances  that  the 
countries participating in the global economy built up unchecked. 
Aspects of the forecasting failure 
4.  
Macroeconomic forecasts – whether produced by private-sector analysts or by national and 
international  research  and  policy  institutions  –  are  generally  made  using  econometric 
8 
 BIS Review 49/2009
statistical  models  estimated  on  “time  series”,  data  referring  to  the  past  behaviour  of 
economic,  financial  and  demographic  variables  that,  on  the  basis  of  theory  or  statistical 
experience, are considered relevant for determining the variables of interest. In addition to 
the  constraints  suggested  by  their  underlying  theory,  the  different  models  incorporate  to  a 
varying  degree  the  role  of  institutions,  the  rules  prevailing  in  markets  and  the  means  and 
procedures of economic policy intervention. Although econometric model specifications often 
take into account the non-linearities that derive from accounting constraints, the fundamental 
non-linearities connected with genuine regime changes and that “are not found in the data” 
have  to  be  addressed  in  an  essentially  discretionary  manner.  Forecasts  are  therefore 
conditional  exercises  conducted  for  given  initial  conditions  of  the  endogenous  variables 
“explained” by the model (the data observed at the time the forecast is made), “exogenous” 
variables  (whose  behaviour  is  considered  to  be  basically  independent  of  that  of  the 
endogenous  variables),  assumptions  involving  future  policies  and  interventions  taken  to 
compensate for the basic “linearity” of the approaches used. Examining their performance, 
we find that errors in forecasting aggregates such as GDP tend to be relatively small, even if 
not negligible, and to grow with the forecasting horizon. This is shown with reference to Italy 
in Figure 7, which compares the average errors of several forecasters for the period 1999-
2007.  
Nevertheless, there is no doubt that forecasts were late to consider the consequences of the 
financial  crisis  for  economic  growth.  In  the  early  months  of  2008,  when  strains  in  the 
interbank  markets  had  already  persisted  for  six  months  and  were  gradually  spreading  to 
other segments, the professional forecasters surveyed by Consensus Economics indicated 
on average that in 2009 GDP would grow by close to 3 per cent in the United States, 2 per 
cent in the euro area and 1.5 per cent in Italy. In the course of 2008, as negative signals 
repeatedly  came  in  and  the  state  of  the  world  economy  worsened  systematically,  the 
estimates were revised downwards, but only very slowly until the autumn; as late as October 
(the month following the failure of Lehman Brothers), forecasters expected that GDP would 
expand, even if only modestly, in the United States, the euro area and Italy. Now, at the end 
of February 2009 and more than a year and a half since the outbreak of the crisis, GDP is 
expected to contract in 2009 by approximately  2 per cent in all three of those economies. 
Within  the  span  of  one  year,  the  GDP  growth  forecasts  were  revised  downwards  by 
4-5 percentage points. These are adjustments of exceptional magnitude (Figures 8 and 9).  
Looking back at the last 18 months, with the benefit of hindsight we see that the forecast-
adjustment process was unable to keep pace with events, culpably endorsing, with obstinate 
short-sightedness until a few months ago, the view there would be a short and relatively mild 
economic slowdown.  
Forecasting models have experienced episodes of acute difficulty in the past, especially in 
the  presence  of  large  and  unprecedented  shocks.  Indeed,  the  effort  to  overcome  the 
shortcomings that those episodes had revealed has been one of the main factors driving the 
development of forecasting instruments; aspects and mechanisms that had previously been 
neglected  and  whose  importance  was  unexpectedly  revealed  have  been  gradually 
incorporated into successive generations of macroeconomic models. Furthermore, because 
forecasters  are  aware  that  all  forecasting  instruments  are  necessarily  based  on  an 
incomplete  and  provisional  knowledge  of  a  continuously  changing  world,  they  have  long 
recognized the advisability of adopting an approach based on a multiplicity of cross-checks. 
This  constitutes  a  form  of  self-protection  against  the  risk  that  the  theoretical  paradigms 
underlying the approximation of reality implicit in a model may prove particularly inadequate 
in certain situations. In addition, employing a battery of different instruments – from the grand 
econometric models in the tradition of Klein, Ando and Modigliani to the dynamic stochastic 
general equilibrium (DSGE) models, and including primarily statistical models such as vector 
autoregression (VAR) systems – makes it possible to filter and interpret more effectively the 
great  mass  of  partial  and  fragmentary  or  even  contradictory  data  that  gradually  become 
available.  
BIS Review 49/2009 
 9
However, to quote Herbert Simon: “Good predictions have two requisites that are often hard 
to  come  by.  First,  they  require  either  a  theoretical  understanding  of  the  phenomena  to  be 
predicted, as a basis for the prediction model, or phenomena that are sufficiently regular that 
they can simply be extrapolated. Since the latter condition is seldom satisfied by data about 
human affairs (or even about the weather), our predictions will generally be only as good as 
our theories” (Simon 1981, p. 170).  
In effect, for a long time this crisis incubated in an environment that was beyond the ken of 
macroeconomic models and characterized by widespread opacity as to the actual soundness 
of  the  markets  and  individual  participants.  It  was  known  that  banks’  were  holding  toxic 
assets, but the total amount was unknown, let alone the distribution among intermediaries. 
Although macroeconomic repercussions appeared inevitable, it became possible to assess 
them more precisely only after the scale of the banking system’s difficulties became clear in 
the autumn of 2008, generating widespread panic and sudden, generalized increases in risk 
aversion. The global contours of the crisis also have only become clear relatively recently. At 
first  the  general  view,  with  due  exceptions,  was  that  the  crisis  might  be  confined  almost 
exclusively  to  the  US  domestic  sphere  and  that  the  emerging  economies  might  remain 
relatively immune (the so-called decoupling hypothesis, long considered plausible by some 
observers). Only of late has it become completely evident that this is not happening and that 
the whole world economy is deteriorating badly.  
Nevertheless, the failure to anticipate the evolution of the crisis under way is undeniable. In 
my opinion, it primarily reflected limitations and shortcomings in three aspects of modeling 
and forecasting. In the first place, when there are exceptional developments that constitute a 
discontinuity with the past, the statistical regularity Simon was referring to no longer obtains. 
The models, estimated on data plainly belonging to a different population than that involved 
in  the  forecast,  cease  providing  a  reliable  representation  of  the  way  the  economy  works, 
often without even producing indications serving to identify the adjustments that could lessen 
the deficiencies. Secondly, in the utilization of forecasts and even more in the way they are 
remembered,  attention  inevitably  focuses  on  the  numerical  value  (with  its  misleading 
appearance  of  precision)  assigned  to  the  result  deemed  most  likely  (the  so-called  point 
estimation),  while  the  remarks  concerning  the  forecasting  uncertainty,  the  risks  implied  by 
scenarios other than the central scenario, which are nonetheless part of a systematic kit of 
forecasting  analyses,  are  disregarded  or  at  least  rapidly  forgotten.  Lastly,  the  current 
generation  of  models  of  the  economy  has  proved  deficient  above  all  in  representing  the 
aspects that are most important in the transmission of the current crisis, those involving the 
interrelations between financial markets and the real economy.  
Regularity and discontinuity 
As to the first of the three shortcomings I mention, economic systems constantly evolve and 
transform  themselves  under  the  influence  of:  changes  in  institutional  arrangements, 
legislative provisions and market regulation; the introduction of new technological paradigms; 
and  the  revised  objectives,  strategies  and  methods  of  operation  of  policy-makers.  The 
changes in the framework in which economic agents (consumers and businesses) make their 
decisions in turn lead to changes in their behaviour. When there is marked discontinuity with 
the past, such changes may be far-reaching and the past cease to provide a reliable guide. 
Models, by definition, reflect historical experience in the values of their parameters – which 
are estimated for behavioural relations and calibrated for institutional mechanisms – and are 
therefore reliable when it is “business as usual”, that is, as long as the system they describe 
is not subjected to unaccustomed pressure. However, in this case it can be argued that their 
contribution to making right decisions is limited. On the other hand, they become unreliable 
precisely  when,  following  signs  of  structural  discontinuity,  the  need  to  predict  the  future  is 
most urgent and the benefits of correct forecasting greatest,: yet that very discontinuity casts 
doubt on the use of models for fundamentally mechanical extrapolation. 
10 
 BIS Review 49/2009
To a large extent the inability of models to cope with changes in the systems they describe is 
due to the way in which economic phenomena are represented, that is, using statistical and 
econometric  techniques  designed  to  reproduce,  from  a  necessarily  small  number  of 
parameters, relations that are sufficiently stable over time. Anomalous observations that do 
not  fit  the  main  mechanisms  at  work  in  the  historical  period  used  for  the  econometric 
estimate are frequently put aside: their information content is neutralized and therefore the 
model  cannot  take  account  of  them.  And  yet  those  very  deviations  from  the  norm  could 
provide precious information about the economy’s behaviour in conditions other than those 
usually  prevailing.  On  the  other  hand,  episodic  observation  of  exceptional  phenomena  is 
inadequate  to  capture  the  often  complex  inter-relations  between  economic  variables;  it  is 
only  by  building  up  a  sufficient  number  of  observations  that  we  can  obtain  a  statistically 
reliable  estimate  of  a  model’s  parameters.  This  limitation  reflects  a  more  general 
characteristic  of  quantitative  analysis  of  economic  phenomena:  the  difficulty  of  making 
statistical inferences from data that are not the result of experiments designed and controlled 
by the researcher. Exceptional conditions cannot be re-created at will, in the laboratory, for 
cognitive  purposes;  our  experience  will  always  be  limited,  partial  and  episodic.  We  must 
therefore  make  use  of  information  outside  the  model,  refer  where  possible  to  historical 
experience, and intervene on the basis of theory and good sense. 
Another  obstacle  to  detecting  the  emergence  of  stability  problems,  and  thus  to  taking 
corrective measures, is the nature of economic information, which is fragmentary, available 
with varying lags, and often characterized by a marked degree of approximation, which will 
eventually be reduced, possibly much later. Without accurate, timely and reliable information 
about  what  is  actually  happening,  an  episode  of  structural  discontinuity  may  not  be 
recognised  as  such  until  long  after  it  first  appears.  These  considerations  do  not  imply, 
however, that structural forecasting models (i.e. models in which the relations are not just a 
statistical reflection of the interaction between variables but are a quantitative representation, 
albeit approximate, of behavioural mechanisms) become completely unusable after a (real or 
apparent) break in their constituent relations. 
Anomalies in the relations between variables can only be recognised (and counter-measures 
taken,  adapting  and  updating  available  instruments  or  creating  new  ones)  if  we  have  an 
instrument  that  can  reliably  represent  such  relations  in  “normal”  conditions.  Indeed  this  is 
already a very important signalling role. Structural models also allow us to trace the web of 
causal  links  between  particular  variables  of  interest.  Thus,  they  do  not  just  signal  the 
appearance of discontinuities, they also help to identify which specific behavioural relation in 
the causal chain described by the models has changed with respect to the past. We can thus 
circumscribe the area affected by discontinuity, identify the nature of that discontinuity more 
easily and rapidly, and focus efforts to overcome it more effectively. 
Finally, once the type of discontinuity has been identified, the actual structure of the model 
may  help  to  assess  the  consequences  for  forecasting  by  exploiting  other  relations  which 
remain valid. In the present crisis not all the behavioural relations of the models currently in 
use have been affected to the same extent. The ones that remain generally reliable could 
perhaps, pending more systematic and radical solutions, suggest how to correct the answers 
obtained  instead  with  the  relations  that  have  the  greatest  difficulty  adapting  to  the  new 
situation.  In  particular,  it  is  worth  trying  to  separate  the  forecasting  errors,  or  revisions  of 
forecasts, into their main determining factors: assumptions regarding policies (notably fiscal 
policies, but also market expectations regarding monetary policy); exogenous variables (for 
example,  assumptions  about  the  evolution  of  oil  prices  or  the  trend  of  world  demand,  on 
which, despite possible differences of opinion, the Bank of Italy, like the other national central 
banks, can only adhere to the evaluations agreed within the Eurosystem); and the changes 
in “initial conditions” underlined by Simon (see Figures 10 and 11). 
To assess the importance of the initial conditions we may look at Figure 12, which shows the 
forecast for GDP growth in the Bank of Italy’s January 2009 Economic Bulletin. As may be 
recalled, it showed a decline of 2 per cent in 2009 and a return to growth of 0.5 per cent in 
BIS Review 49/2009 
 11
2010. The pull exerted by the exceptionally negative estimate for the fourth quarter of 2008 
had  a  considerable  effect  in  this  respect.  In  reality,  Italian  National  Statistical  Institute’s 
figures for the quarter were even more negative, reflecting the underestimation in the model 
of  the  performance  of  world  demand.  Simply  taking  “mechanical”  account  of  this  and 
maintaining the gradual but constant exit from the crisis implicit in January’s projections, we 
move from a 2 to a 2.6 per cent contraction in GDP for this year. 
The key to tackling the problems created by discontinuity must lie in a better understanding 
of its nature and so in developing and specifying models in which the relations are based on 
parameters  that  remain  stable  in  the  long  term.  Research  must  therefore  aim  to  identify 
sufficiently  fundamental  and  reasonably  dependable  mechanisms  that  do  not  change  over 
time.  
Communicating and exploiting forecasts 
One  area  that  has  shown  evident  shortcomings  in  the  present  crisis  lies  between  the 
production  of  forecasts  and  their  utilization:  end  users  (policy-makers,  professional 
forecasters and the public at large) focus on the numbers summarizing the central or “basic” 
scenario (i.e. the one judged most likely), even though the products of forecasting are often 
more complex and include an evaluation of the size and direction of the risks surrounding the 
specific estimate. Such an evaluation usually consists in reporting the results of projections 
based on alternative hypotheses, thought to be less likely but nonetheless worth examining, 
particularly  considering  the  often  high  macroeconomic  cost  if  they  were  to  come  about, 
however unlikely. Virtually all forecasts of recent years have systematically indicated a risk 
that economic performance might not be as good as outlined in the central projection and 
that the feared downward adjustments to demand and output might be sudden and dramatic. 
These  dangers  were  ascribed  above  all  to  the  unsustainable  global  imbalances  and  their 
tendency  to  be  absorbed  suddenly,  entailing  sharp  fluctuations  in  output  in  the  main 
economic areas and their reciprocal exchange rates. 
When  repeated  warnings  are  issued  about  dangers  that  never  seem  to  materialize,  it  is 
almost inevitable that they will eventually be ignored. The consequences of this very natural 
response may be particularly serious and disruptive, however: the long build-up of tension 
often culminates in an explosion, which will be all the more violent and dramatic the later it 
occurs.  Perhaps  the  lesson  to  be  learnt  from  recent  experience  is  that  a  forecast  should 
always  be  given  and  taken  in  its  entirety:  so,  not  only  the  central  figure,  but  also  the 
evaluations  of  the  main  risks,  their  size  and  the  likelihood  of  their  realization.  When  the 
dangers associated with alternative scenarios are extremely serious, even if not particularly 
likely, it may be better to adopt less than optimal policies with respect to the case in which 
the  central  forecast  is  realized,  but  ones  that  will  safeguard  against  the  occurrence  of 
extreme events. When all is quiet, it may be unfortunate to have to renounce, as insurance 
as it were, part of the benefits of possibly more appropriate actions. But the crisis episodes 
remind us that the cost of not preparing for the worst may be very high. This means that not 
only must users of forecasts look more closely at the risk analysis, but that forecasters must 
learn to communicate their message with more determination and force, adapting their alarm 
signals to suit. 
Non-linear interaction between financial and real variables 
The crisis emerged in correspondence with a particularly weak and underdeveloped problem 
area in the macroeconomic models in use: the point of interaction between financial variables 
and the real sector. Simon’s observation regarding the correspondence between a model’s 
predictive  capacity  and  the  quality  of  the  theory  it  contained  is  particularly  relevant  here. 
What is more, a critical re-examination of history suggests that financial crises – especially 
when, as at present, they have such a violent impact on the banking sector – have generally 
had  profound  and  particularly  long-lasting  consequences  for  the  real  economy.  While  it  is 
12 
 BIS Review 49/2009
reasonable to think that the influence of macroeconomic variables (prices, demand, output) 
on  financial  variables  is  captured  sufficiently  by  the  available  forecasting  tools,  our 
understanding  of  the  reverse  effect  is  much  more  limited,  indeed  inadequate.  In  fact,  the 
impact of financial on macroeconomic variables (i.e. the situation in the present crisis) is only 
crudely represented in many models. 
Translating  tensions  in  the  interbank  markets  and  banks’  funding  problems  into  an 
assessment of their presumed impact on corporate investment and household consumption 
decisions is no easy task given our current state of knowledge. Those who have attempted to 
quantify the effects of a crisis have immediately run up against the obvious limitations of the 
available tools: there is no way (or still only a very rudimentary way) to represent the links 
between loan rationing and changes in the value of assets that can be used as collateral on 
the one hand, and the real economic variables on the other. This problem can be addressed 
by adapting the tools we have, of necessity on an ad hoc basis, and this is what has been 
done to produce the forecast given in Figure 12, in which account is taken of the rapid loss of 
confidence  following  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers.  In  particular,  it  is  posited  that 
intermediaries’ greater fundraising costs may be reflected in an increase in average lending 
rates  that  is  greater  than  that  defined  only  as  a  function  of  policy  rates  and  obtained  by 
estimating the relation between financial operators’ risk exposure gauged by the increase in 
bond  spreads  and  household  and  business  funding  costs.  The  effect  of  credit  supply-side 
tensions, such as those emerging from qualitative information derived from the Bank Lending 
Survey, was taken into account by an equation associating a synthetic index constructed on 
the  basis  of  the  survey  results  with  the  forecasting  errors  of  the  equation  explaining  the 
evolution of investments in machinery and equipment.  
Obviously, recourse to ad hoc adjustments like this, even if they are necessary and possible 
using econometric models such as those considered here, cannot be the definitive answer. 
Many researchers both in research centres and in policy-making institutions have sought to 
overcome these limitations; and the efforts will multiply in the years to come. Above all there 
is  an  urgent  need  to  improve  our  understanding  of  how  the  evolving  macroeconomic 
framework may influence the stability of the financial system and the state of health of banks, 
especially  in  the  presence  of  extreme  events.  Periodic  evaluations  of  this  kind  have  been 
conducted for years now, some as part of projects coordinated by international organisations; 
these checks also need to be made more systematic, more intense and more robust. But the 
serious  difficulties  encountered  by  econometric  models  in  forecasting  the  effects  of  the 
financial crisis may necessitate a review of some of the theoretical paradigms related to the 
role  of  risk  and  uncertainty  in  agents’  decision-making,  and  not  only  as  regards  financial 
decisions, in particular at times of marked deviations from normal conditions. Obviously this 
may  require  discussing  very  complex  problems,  such  as  the  possibility  of  making  use,  to 
gauge  the  probability  of  a  credit  crunch  (with  its  non-linear  effects  on  investment  and 
production), of the credit market data themselves. 
Concluding remarks on models and forecasts 
5.  
The large and, worse, growing imbalances in current payments, the excessively low saving 
rates,  the  over-indebtedness  of  households  in  America  and  other  countries,  and  the 
prolonged and overly buoyant growth of the world economy signalled the unsustainability of 
global market conditions and a risk of recession that could not be ignored even in the euro 
area,  where  the  external  payments  are  in  balance  and  monetary  conditions  are  stable. 
However,  the  severity  of  the  ensuing  crisis  has  gone  far  beyond  the  forecasts  and  its 
behaviour has highlighted vast information gaps, particularly as regards the workings of the 
financial structures and interactions between finance and the economy. Although there has 
been  no  lack  of  deeply  pessimistic,  and  in  some  cases  quite  accurate,  forecasts  and 
evaluations  regarding  both  the  dynamics  and  the  effects  of  the  crisis  that  began  in  2007, 
almost all of them have been presented – and perhaps it could not have been otherwise – as 
greater  or  lesser  risks  of  deviation  from  a  core  trend  that  is  certainly  negative  but  not 
BIS Review 49/2009 
 13
dramatically  so.  The  economic  policy  response,  though  rapid  in  its  monetary  component, 
wide-ranging in its revision of the rules and governance of financial markets and institutions, 
and  impressive  overall  in  terms  of  present  and  future  budgets  has  nevertheless  not  yet 
succeeded  in  countering  a  steady  loss  of  confidence  that  has  spread  from  the  financial 
sector to the real economy. It is too soon though, not only to evaluate the effects of these 
policies, but even to draw any profound lessons from the features and course of the current 
global crisis. In any event, there is a fairly high risk that we will only emerge from the crisis 
slowly and with a basically modest rate of recovery.  
In general, the effects of economic policy actions are not immediate; on the contrary, they 
often  arrive  a  considerable  time  after  the  decisions  are  taken.  Prudent  policy  choices  can 
only be made on the basis of evaluations of future conditions and trends. Economic policy 
necessarily  requires  models  that  can  produce  reasonably  reliable  forecasts;  that  can 
aggregate and organize large, diverse quantities of data; and that can promptly signal any 
deviation from the behaviour that prevailed in the past. In this regard, I am still convinced that 
an econometric model, if used intelligently and not mechanically, constitutes a precious tool 
for making quantitative evaluations. 
Simply  because  one  forecasting  tool  proves  unreliable,  this  does  not  mean  that  economic 
policy  should  no  longer  make  use  of  models:  there  is  actually  no  practical  alternative  to 
refining those that exist to surmount their shortcomings. This calls for an understanding of 
the  origin  and  nature  of  the  errors  and  then  developing  new  ways  of  interpretation  and 
innovative  techniques,  which  in  turn  will  have  to  be  set  aside  when,  in  the  future, 
unprecedented shocks show the limits of the new generation of models.  
The imperfections of analytical forecasting tools are clear; to some extent the solutions can 
already  be  outlined;  it  is  necessary  that  efforts  along  the  lines  indicated  be  prompt  and 
effective.  Economic  policy  management  cannot  very  long  do  without  reliable  quantitative 
information,  especially  in  troubled  and  uncertain  times;  such  information  can  only  be 
obtained using models that have been adjusted on the basis of past experience. Obviously, 
in  order  to  be  useful  for  economic  policy-making,  these  forecasts,  though  they  may  be 
conditional, must factor in data that are not included in the present models and also allow for 
judgment  based  on  experience  and  theory;  as  I  have  already  said,  they  must  not  be 
“mechanical”. The time has not yet come when we can consider the “economic problem” as a 
“matter for specialists – like dentistry”, as Keynes, in 1930, would have liked. Unfortunately, 
that “splendid” time is still to come, as is amply demonstrated by the present crisis, in which 
economists will manage “to get themselves thought of as humble, competent people, on a 
level with dentists” (Keynes, 1933 p. 373). 
BIS 
Working 
References 
Bean,  C.  2003.  Asset  Prices,  Financial  Imbalances  and  Monetary  Policy:  Are  Inflation 
Targets  Enough?,  BIS  Working  Papers  No.  140,  September  (with  Discussions  by  I.  Visco 
and S. Whadwani, available at http://www.bis.org/publ/work140.pdf?noframes=1). 
Borio,  C.  &  Lowe,  P.  2002.  Asset  prices,  financial  and  monetary  stability:  exploring  the 
nexus, 
at 
No. 
http://www.bis.org/publ/work114.pdf?noframes=1). 
Fisher,  I.  1933.  The  Debt-Deflation  Theory  of  Great  Depressions,  Econometrica,  1,  4, 
October. 
Ferguson,  R. W.,  Hartman,  P.,  Portes,  R.,  &  Panetta,  F.  2007.  International  Financial 
Stability, Geneva Reports on the World Economy, 9, ICMB and CEPR, Geneva. 
Genberg, H., McCauley, R., Park, Y. C., & Persaud, A. 2005. Official Reserves and Currency 
Management:  Myth,  Reality  and  the  Future,  Geneva  Reports  on  the  World  Economy,  7, 
ICMB and CEPR, Geneva. 
(available 
Papers 
114, 
July 
14 
 BIS Review 49/2009
Keynes, J. M. 1933. Economic Possibilities for Our Grandchildren, in Essays in Persuasion, 
MacMillan,  London  (originally  in  Nation  and  Atheneum  and  The  Saturday  Evening  Post, 
1930). 
Obstfeld, M. & Rogoff, K. 2000. Perspectives on OECD Economic Integration: Implications 
for  U.S.  Current  Account  Adjustment  (and  “Commentary”  by  I.  Visco),  in  Global  Economic 
Opportunities  and  Challenges,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City,  Jackson  Hole, 
Wyoming, August (available at http://www.kc.frb.org/publicat/sympos/2000/sym00prg.htm). 
Padoa  Schioppa,  T.  2008.  The  Crisis  in  Perspective:  the  Cost  to  be  Quiet,  International 
Finance, 11, 3, Winter. 
Portes,  R.  2009.  Global  imbalances,  in  Macroeconomic  Stability  and  Financial  Regulation: 
Key  Issues  for  the  G20,  eds.  Dewatripont,  M.,  X.  Freixas  and  R.  Portes,  Vox  ebook. 
(available at http://www.voxeu.org/G20_ebook.pdf).  
Rajan, R. 2005. “Has Financial Development Made the World Riskier?”, in The Greenspan 
Era: Lessons for the Future, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, 
August. (available at http://www.kc.frb.org/publicat/sympos/2005/sym05prg.htm). 
Saccomanni,  F.  2008. Managing  International  Financial  Instability:  National  Tamers  versus 
Global Tigers, Edward Elgar, Cheltenham, UK. 
Simon, H. 1981. The Sciences of the Artificial, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass. 
Siviero  S.  &  Terlizzese,  D.  2000.  La  previsione  macroeconomica:  alcuni  luoghi  comuni  da 
sfatare, Rivista italiana degli economisti, V, 2, agosto. 
Visco,  I.,  1987.  Analisi  quantitativa  e  «guida  all’azione»  di  politica  economica,  Studi  e 
Informazioni, Banca Toscana, 3. 
Visco,  I.  1991.  Politica  economica  ed  econometria:  alcune  riflessioni  critiche,  in  M.  Faliva 
(ed.), Il ruolo dell’econometria nell’ambito delle scienze economiche, Il Mulino, Bologna. 
BIS Review 49/2009 
 15
Figure 1: Cumulative current account balances 
(as a percentage of GDP) 
60
40
20
0
-20
-40
-60
Japan (1)
Oil-exporting 
countries (1) (3)
China (1)
Euro area (1)
United States (2)
United States (1)
1980
1982
1984
1986
1988
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000
2002
2004
2006
Sources: National statistics; IMF, World Economic Outlook 2008; Lane, P. and Milesi-Ferretti, G.M., “The External 
Wealth  of  Nations  Mark  II:  Revised  and  Extended  Estimates  of  Foreign  Assets  and  Liabilities,  1970-2004”, 
Journal of International Economics, no. 73, 2007. 
Notes: (1) Cumulative current account balance starting from 1980. – (2) Net external position. – (3) Includes only 
emerging and developing economies. 
Figure 2: Stock market indices in real terms 
(2000 = 100) 
200
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
1980
Japan
United States
Europe
1982
1984
1986
1988
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
Source: Thomson Financial Datastream. 
16 
 BIS Review 49/2009
  Figure 3: Price/earnings ratio of the US stock market 
(percentages) 
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
1980
average 1980-2008 = 17.4
1982
1984
1986
1988
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
Source: Thomson Financial Datastream. 
 
Figure 4: House prices in real terms (1) 
(quarterly data; 1996 = 100) 
300
250
200
150
100
50
United Kingdom
Sweden
United States (b)
United States (a)
Japan
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
Sources:  Japan:  Ministry  of  Land,  Infrastructure,  Transport  and  Tourism;  United  Kingdom:  Nationwide;  United 
States (a): FHFA and (b) Standard and Poor’s Case-Shiller 10-City Home Price Composite Index; and Sweden: 
Statistics Sweden. 
Note: Deflated using consumer price indices. 
BIS Review 49/2009 
 17
  Figure 5: House prices in real terms (1) 
(annual data; 1996 = 100) 
300
250
200
150
100
50
France (2)
Spain
Netherlands
Italy
Germany
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
Sources: France: INSEE; Germany: Deutsche Bundesbank; Netherlands: Nederlandsche Bank; Spain: Ministerio 
de la Vivienda; and Italy: based on “Il consulente immobiliare” and Istat data. 
Notes: (1) Deflated using consumer price indices. – (2) For 2008, average of the first three quarters. 
Figure 6: Difference between observed and theoretical house prices (1) 
160
150
140
130
120
110
100
90
80
70
60
50
United States
United Kingdom
United Kingdom
2008Q4 +17%
United States 
2008Q4 + 7.5%
1983
1985
1987
1989
1991
1993
1995
1997
1999
2001
2003
2005
2007
Sources: Based on FHFA, Nationwide and national statistics. For the methodology, see Finicelli, A., “House price 
developments  and  fundamentals  in  the  United  States,  Banca  d’Italia,  Questioni  di  Economia  e  Finanza,  no.  7, 
2007. 
18 
 BIS Review 49/2009
  Note: (1) Equilibrium level = 100. The theoretical level of house prices is equal to the ratio of rents to the user 
cost.  The  latter  is  given  by  the  sum  of  interest  payments  on  mortgage  loans,  maintenance  costs  and  property 
taxes, net of the expected increase in house prices. 
Figure 7: Average absolute error in the GDP growth rate in the period 1999-2007: 
comparison between the main forecasters 
(percentage  points;  the  transparent  histogram  refers  to  the  error  made  in  the  forecast  for 
2008) 
 
Forecast current year
Forecast following year
1.15
1.13
0.97
1.00
0.92
PrometeiaConsensus IMF
EC
Bank of 
Italy
0.49
0.43
0.34
0.35
Prometeia ConsensusIMF
EC
0.30
Bank 
of Italy
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
 Note:  Average  of  the  forecasts  made  in  the  spring  and  autumn  of  each  year  by  the  Bank  of  Italy,  Prometeia, 
Consensus Economics, the International Monetary Fund and the European Commission. 
BIS Review 49/2009 
 19
Figure 8: Revision of the GDP growth estimates for 2008: Italy and the euro area 
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
-0.5
-1.0
1.8
1.2
1.5
0.6
1.6
0.4
1.2
0
Italy
Euro area
0.9
-0.5
January 2008
April 2008
July 2008
October 2008
January 2009
 Source: Consensus Economics. 
Note: The GDP growth rate in 2008 for Italy was -1 per cent and for the euro area it was 0.7 per cent. 
Figure 9: Revision of the GDP growth estimates for 2009: Italy and the euro area 
 
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
-0.5
-1.0
-1.5
-2.0
2
1.5
1.7
1.1
1.2
0.8
0.5
0
Italy
Euro area
-1.4
-1.6
January 2008
April 2008
July 2008
October 2008
January 2009
  
Source: Consensus Economics. 
20 
 BIS Review 49/2009
Figure 10: Breakdown of the GDP forecasting error for Italy in 2008 
 
0.4
0.2
0.0
-0.2
-0.4
-0.6
-0.8
-1.0
-1.2
-1.4
Contributions to the error
Forecasting error
0.0
-0.1
-0.3
-0.4
-0.5
World demand
Oil
Exchange rate, interest rates and other hypotheses
Initial conditions
Unexplained part
-1.3
 
Note: Forecast for 2008 published in Banca d’Italia,  Economic Bulletin, no. 49, July  2008. Contributions to the 
forecasting error due to the divergence of the hypotheses regarding the main exogenous variables with respect to 
the actual results and the revisions of the initial conditions. 
Figure 11: Contributions to the revision of the 2009 GDP forecast for Italy 
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
-0.5
-1.0
-1.5
-2.0
-2.5
-3.0
Contributions to the revision
Total revision
0.8
-0.1
-0.5
-1.2
-1.4
World demand
Oil
Exchange rate, interest rates and other hypotheses
Initial conditions
Unexplained part
-2.4
Note: Forecasts for 2009 published in Banca d’Italia, Economic Bulletin, nos. 49, July 2008 and 51, January 2009. 
Contributions to the difference of the GDP growth estimate due to the revision of the hypotheses regarding the 
main exogenous variables and of the initial conditions. 
BIS Review 49/2009 
 21
  Figure 12: Estimates and forecasts of GDP growth rates 
(annualized quarterly and annual data) 
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
-4
-5
-6
-7
1.4
0.5
-0.6
-0.9
-2.0
-2.6
    Bank of Italy Economic Bulletin,  January with 
updated historical data
Bank of Italy Economic Bulletin,  January
Average annual growth (Bank of Italy 
Economic Bulletin,  January with updated 
Average annual growth (Bank of Italy 
Economic Bulletin,  January)
2007
2008
2009
2010
 Sources: Banca d'Italia, Economic Bulletin, no. 51, January 2009 and revisions of national accounts data. 
Note: The GDP growth estimate for 2008 not adjusted for the number of working days is equal to -1 per cent. 
22 
 BIS Review 49/2009
