Jürgen Stark: EMU – weathering the perfect storm 
Speech by Mr Jürgen Stark, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the German-British Chamber of Industry & Commerce, London, 25 June 2009. 
 The economic crisis – where do we stand? 
Let me start by saying that none of my remarks should be interpreted in terms of the future 
course of monetary policy. Indeed, we are in the one-week “purdah period” before the next 
Governing Council meeting. 
The  world  economy  is  facing  its  most  severe  crisis  for  80  years.  But  why  are  we  in  this 
position?  What  have  been  the  driving  forces  behind  the  dynamics  of  the  crisis?  Several 
forces  have  been  at  work:  a  combination  of  macroeconomic  factors  and  significant 
deficiencies in the regulatory and supervisory architecture prepared the ground for this crisis. 
More  specifically,  expansionary  macroeconomic  policies  over  a  protracted  period  of  time 
allowed  financial  imbalances  to  build  up  at  the  global  level  in  the  context  of  globalisation, 
financial liberalisation and a lack of regulation. At the same time, complex financial products 
flourished,  with  investors  on  the  hunt  for  ever  higher  yields  in  the  presence  of  robust 
economic  growth,  low  inflation,  low  interest  rates,  low  default  risk  and  ample  liquidity 
worldwide. In particular, the expectation that this favourable environment would continue for 
some  time  prompted  investors  to  systematically  underprice  risks  in  their  search  for  yields. 
Thus,  instead  of  contributing  to  better  risk  diversification,  these  new  financial  instruments 
simply disguised those risks. 
We were aware of these imbalances. There was no shortage of early warnings. As long ago 
as 2005 the ECB warned of the excessive growth of credit. There were also warnings on the 
other  side  of  the  Atlantic  that  the  US  economy  was  skating  on  thin  ice.1  These  concerns 
regarding  the  lack  of  political  will  to  remedy  this  unsustainable  situation  proved  to  be 
extremely prescient. However, such early warnings went unheeded. 
In  August  2007  the  concerns  that  many  people  had  been  harbouring  for  a  while  were 
abruptly translated into financial turmoil. The problems first emerged in money markets, with 
banks preferring to hoard cash rather than lend to each other because they feared that their 
counterparties  would  not  be  able  to  repay  them.  The  situation  deteriorated  following  the 
collapse of Lehman Brothers last September. The financial turmoil then quickly turned into a 
full-blown  financial  crisis,  with  adverse  effects  on  the  real  economy  and  negative  second-
round  effects  on  the  financial  system.  This  has  led  to  the  most  severe  and  synchronised 
economic downturn since the 1930s. 
The euro area has not been spared. Economic activity has declined sharply since the second 
half of 2008, and the euro area economy has contracted by more than 4% in the last two 
quarters alone. Inflation is at its lowest level since the launch of the euro. However, recent 
business confidence indicators, both within the euro area and at the global level, suggest that 
the pace of the decline in economic activity has slowed somewhat. Most forecasters expect a 
gradual economic recovery both in the euro area and globally in 2010. Inflation is expected to 
remain  very  low  in  the  euro  area.  Risks  of  deflation  in  the  short  to  medium  term  are 
extremely limited. Inflation expectations are firmly anchored in line with our definition of price 
stability.  The  outlook  for  price  developments  over  a  longer  horizon  will  largely  depend  – 
among other factors – on the right timing of the exit from very expansionary macroeconomic 
policies. 
                                                 
1   Paul Volcker, “Economy on thin ice”, Wall Street Journal, 10 April 2005. 
BIS Review 81/2009 
 1
What  we  are  experiencing  is  a  fundamental  correction  of  the  global  imbalances  and 
excesses  of  the  past.  The  world  economy  was  in  an  unsustainable  position,  and  because 
that was allowed to go so far, the correction process will necessarily be painful. 
To  give  you  an  example:  banks  have  suffered  heavy  losses  so  far,  and  total  losses  are 
expected to increase in the coming quarters. Banks’ total writedowns on securities worldwide 
now stand at more than USD 1 trillion, and US banks account for around 60% of this amount. 
Around one-fifth are writedowns by euro area banks, and around one-fifth are writedowns by 
UK and Swiss banks. Projections of future losses are uncertain. Recognising this uncertainty, 
ECB staff forecasts, as published recently in our Financial Stability Review, suggest that euro 
area banks could potentially lose around USD 280 billion between now and the end of 2010, 
largely as a result of their loan exposures. This is substantially lower than IMF staff forecasts. 
While the general approach underlying the ECB’s forecasts is similar to that adopted by the 
IMF,  the  ECB  has  used  data  relating  specifically  to  the  euro  area  for  the  calculation  of 
potential losses on loan exposures. 
However,  this  correction  is  necessary  and  should  allow  economic  conditions  to  eventually 
stabilise and improve. 
The policy response in the euro area 
In  response  to  the  crisis,  policy-makers  across  the  globe  have  taken  extraordinary  and 
unprecedented steps. In particular, the euro area and the EU as a whole have demonstrated 
their ability to act decisively and promptly in difficult circumstances. National measures have 
been coordinated in a pragmatic manner with a view to enhancing their effectiveness through 
mutual reinforcement. 
I am therefore surprised to hear voices here and there arguing that policy-makers in the euro 
area were – or still are – “behind the curve”, have done too little, too late, and ought to have 
learnt more in terms of responsiveness from their colleagues in other parts of the world. 
I do not want to talk about this issue in any detail. As a matter of fact, the epicentre of the 
current crisis lies outside the euro area, and the euro area has not had to deal with the failure 
of a major financial institution or a bank run.  
Let me begin with the response of the Eurosystem, which has fully respected – in terms of 
the allocation of responsibilities – the distinction between monetary policy and fiscal policy. 
Since the very start of the tensions in the euro area money market almost two years ago, the 
ECB has taken forceful, timely and pre-emptive policy action to counter the adverse effects 
of the financial crisis.  
Against the backdrop of rapidly receding inflationary pressures and without compromising on 
our mandate to maintain price stability over the medium term, we have cut the interest rate 
on our main refinancing operations by 325 basis points since last October. That interest rate 
now stands at 1.0%, the lowest level since the launch of the euro.  
In addition to these extraordinary rate cuts, the ECB has adopted a number of non-standard 
measures  allowing  it  to  provide  banks  with  substantial  amounts  of  liquidity  and  thereby 
support the flow of credit to the real economy. I would just like to remind you that in terms of 
financing,  the  banking  system  plays  a  more  important  role  in  the  euro  area  than  in  other 
major  economies.  The  non-standard  measures  we  have  chosen  are  therefore  directed 
mainly  at  banks.  This  means  that  the  Eurosystem’s  response  to  the  crisis  cannot  be 
compared directly with those of other major central banks. We have our own approach. 
More specifically, we have provided the banking system with unlimited amounts of liquidity at 
the main refinancing rate against an expanded list of eligible collateral. Coupled with the fact 
that more or less all financially sound euro area credit institutions are able to participate in 
the Eurosystem’s refinancing operations, this has significantly eased banks’ balance sheet 
constraints, helped to bring down money market rates and, most importantly, prevented the 
2 
 BIS Review 81/2009
emergence  of  a  systemic  crisis.  More  recently,  we  have  introduced  further  non-standard 
measures  to  enhance  our  credit  support  to  the  economy  through  banks.  This  week  we 
performed  our  first  refinancing  operation  with  a  maturity  of  one  year  and,  as  announced 
following the Governing Council meeting earlier this month, in July we will begin purchasing 
€60 billion worth of euro-denominated covered bonds issued in the euro area. 
Overall,  the  measures  adopted  so  far,  which  have  been  unprecedented  in  terms  of  their 
nature, scope and timing, have had a positive, stabilising effect on the economy.  
However, it is obvious that we cannot maintain the current degree of enhanced credit support 
indefinitely.  Macroeconomic  conditions  will  improve,  and  when  they  do,  we  will  make  sure 
that the measures adopted are unwound swiftly and the liquidity provided is absorbed, so as 
to  maintain  price  stability  over  the  medium  term.  As  a  result,  it  is  also  important  that  the 
financial sector does not become dependent on the ECB’s long-term financing. The financial 
sector  itself  has  an  important  role  to  play  when  it  comes  to  restoring  confidence  among 
banks. 
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  fiscal  policy  reaction  to  the  economic  crisis.  It  is  important  to 
distinguish between measures intended to support the banking sector and measures aimed 
at stimulating demand.  
Following the adoption of a concerted European action plan on 12 October last year, euro 
area  governments  announced  national  measures  to  support  the  banking  sector.  These 
measures, which were approved by the national parliaments of euro area countries without 
delay,  consist  of  guarantees  for  interbank  lending,  recapitalisation,  increased  deposit 
insurance  and  asset  support  schemes.  These  steps  were  necessary  and  have  been 
successful in safeguarding the stability of the financial system. 
In  addition  to  this  support,  euro  area  governments  have  also  adopted  substantial  stimulus 
programmes  to  counter  the  negative  impact  that  the  financial  crisis  has  had  on  the  real 
economy.  This  is  in  addition  to  the  automatic  stabilisers, which  are  relatively  strong  in  the 
euro area. The total fiscal support for the euro area economy is estimated by the European 
Commission to be around 4.6% of GDP in 2009 and 2010,2 or around €400 billion. Around 
60% of this is due to the automatic stabilisers. 
Although  it  is  mitigating  the  economic  downturn,  this  extensive  fiscal  stimulus  implies 
significant worsening of public finances. According to the European Commission, 13 of the 
16 countries in the euro area are expected, in both 2009 and 2010, to have budget deficits in 
excess  of  the  reference  value  of  3%  of  GDP  agreed  in  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact. 
Furthermore, the euro area debt ratio is expected to increase to more than 80% of GDP by 
2010, some way above the reference value of 60%. Some countries’ debt ratios will be far in 
excess of 100% of GDP. Even with some fiscal consolidation in 2010 or 2011, the euro area 
debt ratio will continue to rise for several years.  
These numbers are dramatic and their implications are clear. Euro area governments must 
reject  calls  for  further  fiscal  stimulus.  Instead,  they  need  to  focus  on  implementing  the 
measures already adopted as quickly as possible. Increasing deficits even further is likely to 
prove counterproductive, for two main reasons. 
First,  increased  fiscal  deficits  could  fuel  market  concerns  regarding  a  country’s  ability  to 
repay its debt, thereby placing upward pressure on interest rates and leading to worsening 
financing conditions for everyone. We have already seen a number of euro area countries’ 
long-term  government  bond  spreads  widen  substantially  vis-à-vis  Germany,  which 
demonstrates financial markets’ ability to distinguish between countries on the basis of their 
creditworthiness.  Second,  increases  in  budget  deficits  could  raise  concerns  about  an 
                                                 
2   Measured by the change in the general government deficit. 
BIS Review 81/2009 
 3
increased  tax  burden  in  the  future,  leading  consumers  to  save  rather  than  spend  any 
additional income. This would also undermine the effectiveness of any further fiscal stimulus. 
Looking ahead, the main priority for euro area governments must be to devise exit strategies 
that remedy those large fiscal imbalances and reduce governments’ direct involvement in the 
financial  sector.  The  adoption  of  credible  exit  strategies  may  even  make  the  current 
measures more effective, as it will indicate to financial market participants that governments 
are  able  and  willing  to  reverse  unsustainable  policies  and  help  to  limit  the  upward  drift  in 
long-term interest rates. The most credible exit strategy would be for governments to clearly 
demonstrate their commitment to returning to sound fiscal policies, in full compliance with the 
Stability and Growth Pact. The adjustment process should start in principle in 2010 and in 
any case not later than the economic recovery. The efforts should be stepped up in 2011. 
Why has the euro area been so badly affected? 
You  may  wonder  why  the  euro  area  economy  has  been  so  badly  affected  by  the  current 
crisis, given that it originated outside the euro area and the response by euro area policy-
makers  has  been  timely  and  effective.  One  answer  to  this  question  can  be  found  in  the 
structural features of the euro area. The euro area economy is more open than that of the 
United States, for instance. Thus, we cannot expect to escape the negative consequences of 
such a large-scale synchronised global downturn.  
Furthermore, the manufacturing sector is more important in the euro area than in the United 
States, and the manufacturing sector has fared particularly badly in the current crisis. The 
combination of the correction in housing markets, the need for households to increase their 
savings and the problems in short term financing has led to a collapse in demand for durable 
goods  –  particularly  cars.  As  a  result,  countries  with  a  stronger  manufacturing  base  have 
tended to be hit harder by the downturn. Germany is a case in point. 
When we compare ourselves with other regions, we have to remember, for instance, that the 
downturn in the US economy preceded the economic slowdown in the euro area. Thus, it is 
misleading to look only at developments in the past few quarters. In some economic regions, 
moreover, households’ exceptionally low saving rates in the years prior to the crisis and the 
need of rebuilding life-cycle household wealth may mean that the correction process is more 
protracted  than  it  is  in  the  euro  area,  where  we  have  not  seen  the  same  build-up  of 
imbalances.  
The world economy after the crisis 
Let  me  now  try  to  provide  some  thoughts  on  how  the  economic  and  financial  landscape 
might look once we have recovered from the current crisis. This is a very difficult question, 
but it is also a very important one, because any policy decisions and changes we make in the 
wake of this crisis are likely to influence the economic and financial landscape for decades to 
come.  One  example  of  this  is  the  US  Glass-Steagall  Act  of  1933.  It  was  introduced  in 
response  to  the  banking  crisis  of  the  1930s  and  established  clear  barriers  between 
commercial and investment banking. This part of the bill was not repealed until 1999 under 
President Clinton. It is therefore necessary to think a little about the kind of framework we 
would prefer. I would like to make five points in this respect. 
First, the global growth model of the last 15 years has failed. This has been an exceptionally 
long period of strong growth in the world economy, but that growth has been based on large 
and unsustainable global imbalances. As a consequence, the composition of global demand 
must adjust to more sustainable growth, which in the end will probably lead to lower growth 
rates  in  the  years  to  come.  But  I  would  disagree  strongly  with  those  who  claim  that  the 
current crisis has demonstrated the failures of the model of export-led growth. Countries with 
4 
 BIS Review 81/2009
a high degree of openness to trade are of course suffering these days. But at the same time, 
these are the countries that are likely to benefit the most once sustained growth resumes. 
Second,  the  current  crisis  may  dampen  economic  growth  in  the  future  and  lead  to  a 
prolonged reduction in the level of output. This may be driven by slower growth – or even a 
decline  –  in  the  capital  stock.  The  crisis  may  also  have  negative  repercussions  for  labour 
markets. Some sectors are likely to be downsized more permanently, which will mean that 
workers need to acquire new skills and look for new jobs. For instance, it is reasonable to 
assume  that  the  financial  sector,  the  car  industry  and  the  construction  sector  are  likely  to 
shrink.  In  my  view,  the  economies  that  will  suffer  the  most  are  those  where  the  financial 
sector  has  expanded  significantly  in  the  last  20  years  in  connection  with  the  boom  in  the 
housing  sector.  However,  it  is  very  hard  –  impossible,  even  –  to  clearly  predict  growth 
prospects in the longer term. This will depend, among other things, on the level of innovation 
and the degree of market flexibility. 
Third,  the  process  of  globalisation  that  we  have  experienced  in  recent  decades  has  been 
driven by an increase in global trade following the integration of emerging market economies 
into the world economy and the liberalisation of financial markets. However, the increased 
integration of economies across the globe has also been a major factor in the global financial 
turmoil  and  the  highly  synchronised  downturn  that  we  are  currently  experiencing.  There  is 
clearly a risk that the current crisis could lead to an increase in protectionism. Here, I would 
just like to emphasise how important it is that policy-makers remain committed to free trade 
and don’t try to counter the crisis by erecting trade barriers aimed at supporting their own 
industrial sectors. Although they may seem attractive in the short run, protectionist measures 
will  only  exacerbate  the  downturn,  delay  the  recovery  and  reduce  income  potential  for 
everyone.  
Fourth, the government’s role in the economy and the question of what should be left to the 
markets  will  be  key.  The  crisis  has  given  governments  a  more  prominent  role  in  the 
economy. Governments have become heavily involved in the banking sectors of a number of 
countries, and in some countries they have also taken on a significant role in other sectors, 
such as the car industry. 
It is clear that governments must become more actively involved in the regulation of financial 
markets in the future – both at the national level and, even more importantly, at the cross-
border level. We need a more rule-based approach, but the rules should be based on the 
principles  of  market  economics.  At  the  same  time,  we  must  not  jump  to  conclusions.  The 
crisis  we  are  currently  facing  was  caused  not  only  by  market  failures,  but  also,  to  a  large 
extent, by policy failures. 
Besides  the  need  for  improved  regulation  and  oversight  of  financial  markets,  the  case  for 
increased  government  involvement  in  the  economy  is  weak.  Government  intervention 
changes  the  behaviour  of  market  agents  and  leads  to  the  distortion  of  competition.  If  exit 
strategies  are  not  clearly  defined,  governments  risk  becoming  part  of  the  problem,  rather 
than part of the solution. It is particularly important to avoid large budget deficits. Otherwise, 
the recovery will be hampered and we could end up with a whole sequence of crises, rather 
than just the one we are facing now.  
Fifth, the financial system clearly needs a fundamental overhaul. Financial institutions have 
to take a different approach and adopt appropriate incentives. Risk-takers should be liable 
and  not  only  reap  the  rewards  of  their  actions  but  also  bear  responsibility  for  their 
consequences.  We  need  to  strengthen  the  regulation  of  the  financial  system  and,  in 
particular, we must improve the international cooperation between national supervisors of the 
financial  sector.  International  bodies  and  Governments  should  not  lose  momentum  in  their 
efforts to strengthen financial regulation and supervision. 
The financial sector will obviously become smaller, particularly in those economies in which it 
has expanded significantly over the past 20 years. The crisis has already led to substantial 
structural changes in the financial sector and, as discussed, an increase in regulation is not 
BIS Review 81/2009 
 5
only very likely, but also necessary. We also need to consider the size of banks. Evidence 
suggests that banks may have become too big to fail, too complex to be managed and even 
too big to be rescued. 
The simple statement that “if banks are too big to fail, they are probably too big to exist” is a 
reasonable rule. In any case, the post-crisis financial system is likely to be more risk-averse, 
less  leveraged,  less  complex  and  also  less  profitable,  at  least  on  the  basis  of  short-term 
measures of profitability. The prevailing business model will probably place greater emphasis 
on  traditional  banking  activities,  which  tend  to  produce  lower  margins,  but  are  also  more 
robust, less risky and less volatile. In this respect, the crisis may well turn out to be a catalyst 
for a paradigm shift, transforming the global financial landscape for the better.  
Conclusion  
To  conclude,  there  is  no  doubt  that  we  have  enormous  challenges  ahead  of  us  and  the 
Eurosystem faces the toughest test it has ever encountered. But this is also true for other 
economic regions and policy-makers across the globe. The best contribution the ECB can 
make is to remain fully committed to ensuring price stability over the medium term, which is 
our sole mandate. In order to fulfil this mandate, we have been made independent and are 
therefore free from political influence. In this respect, we will remain an anchor of confidence 
and stability in difficult times. 
6 
 BIS Review 81/2009
