Jean-Claude Trichet: The financial crisis and the role of central banks – 
the experience of the ECB 
Keynote address by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the 
international  symposium  marking  the  50th  anniversary  of  Bank  Al-Maghrib,  Marrakech, 
29 May 2009. 
 those  of 
Dear Governor Jouahri, 
Dear Governors, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is an honour and a great pleasure for me to be a speaker at this celebration marking the 
50th anniversary of the Bank Al-Maghrib. I would like to congratulate Governor Jouahri on 
this occasion, and wish him and the staff of the central bank all the best for the future. 
The Eurosystem has a well-established framework for dialogue with the Bank Al-Maghrib, the 
Euro-Mediterranean  Seminar.  This  forum  regularly  brings  together  the  governors  of 
Eurosystem  central  banks  with 
the 
Mediterranean”.  The  Euro-Mediterranean  Seminar  has,  since  its  first  meeting  in  2004  in 
Naples,  strengthened  our  dialogue  by  addressing  various  topics  relevant  to  central  banks 
around the Mediterranean. The Bank Al-Maghrib and Governor Jouahri have contributed to 
this fruitful exchange of views and will no doubt do so at the next meeting in March 2010 in 
Cyprus. In addition, the Bank Al-Maghrib has close bilateral relations with some of the central 
banks in the Eurosystem and in particular with the Banque de France on various aspects of 
technical assistance.  
We are living in a very challenging time. Morocco, like all countries worldwide, has been hit 
by the global crisis. The business cycles of Morocco and the EU are largely synchronised 
and  the  existence  of  various  economic  transmission  channels  such  as  trade,  tourism,  and 
remittances, explain why both the European and Moroccan economies are going through a 
challenging period in the present global context.  
My speech today will focus on the global financial crisis and its roots, on the ECB’s response 
to the crisis and on the role of emerging market economies in the world economy. 
the  “Barcelona  Process:  Union 
for 
The global financial crisis and its roots 
Let me start by briefly highlighting the origins and evolution of the current crisis. Imagine a 
neutral observer who looked at the financial sector about a decade ago and then didn’t look 
at  it  again  until  the  eve  of  the  current  financial  crisis.  He  would  have  found  a  completely 
different financial industry, one which over the past decade has undergone a dramatic shift of 
focus. He would have discovered a financial system that had moved away from its traditional 
role  of  supporting  trade  and  real  investment.  He  would  have  found  a  financial  system  in 
which speculation and financial gambling had run rife. He would have encountered a system 
transformed  –  a  system  no  longer  managing  genuine  economic  risks  but  one  actually 
creating  and  assuming  financial  risks  –  risks  resulting  from  arbitrage  and  intentional 
exposure to asset price changes.  
That  same  observer  would  have  realised  that  financial  liberalisation  and  innovation  had 
made our economies more productive. The securitisation of assets, for example, had great 
potential to diversify economic risks and to manage them efficiently. But it also meant that 
financial  institutions  were  able  to  sell  loans  or  take  them  off  the  balance  sheet,  which 
weakened lenders’ incentives to conduct prudent screening and constant monitoring of credit 
BIS Review 66/2009 
 1
risk.  So  underwriting  standards  and  lending  oversight  declined,  and  contributed  to  the 
excessive credit growth in the second half of the 1990s.  
In sum, the observer would have concluded that the factors that fuelled the credit and asset 
price boom of the past decade also created the conditions for a bust. 
In mid-2007 we started to see the backlash. The start of the financial turmoil was sudden but 
not  unexpected.  The  financial  system  as  it  worked  over  the  past  decade  –  with  its  flawed 
incentives and its overly complex products and with global imbalances as its macroeconomic 
backdrop  –  was  no  longer  sustainable.  The  asset  cycle  turned,  the  weaknesses  were 
exposed and investors suddenly lost confidence. After years of exceptional risk appetite and 
high  profits,  the  pendulum  swung  in  the  opposite  direction,  as  markets  became  extremely 
sensitive to financial risk.  
In  September  last  year,  the  crisis  escalated  sharply.  In  particular,  a  major  financial  player 
collapsed,  which  was  directly  involved  in  about  30  large  payment  and  settlement  systems 
worldwide and had a balance sheet of USD 600 billion. Its failure turned a large-scale crisis 
of confidence into a global financial panic. Financial intermediaries restored liquidity buffers, 
tried to economise on capital and to scale down their balance sheets. They sold assets and 
tightened lending conditions. Banks and other financial institutions drastically reduced their 
exposure  to  the  risks  that  they  had  imprudently  accumulated  during  the  phase  of  financial 
euphoria. Financial intermediation and loans to companies were curtailed in the wake of a 
forceful process of “deleveraging”. 
This was the point when important spillovers of the financial crisis set in. We saw the almost 
immediate spillover from the financial sector to the real economy. The  credit squeeze and 
loss of confidence started to take a toll on the real economy, and a negative feedback loop 
developed  between  the  financial  sector  and  the  real  economy,  and  has  since  become  a 
major feature of economic and financial developments. Almost simultaneously, the crisis that 
originated in the advanced economies spilled over to the emerging market economies. Since 
the fourth quarter of 2008, virtually all economies – both those of the industrialised countries 
and the emerging markets – have faced synchronised business cycles. Since half a year, we 
are facing a highly synchronised global economic downturn. 
The ECB’s response to the financial crisis  
Turning to the ECB’s response to the crisis, let me first insist that none of my remarks should 
be  interpreted  in  terms  of  the  future  course  of  monetary  policy.  I  stick  rigorously  to  what  I 
have said during my last press conference. We are indeed in the one-week “purdah period” 
before the next meeting of the Governing Council.  
Since the start of the financial turmoil, central banks around the globe face unprecedented 
challenges.  We  at  the  ECB  and  other  central  banks  have  reacted  swiftly,  flexibly  and 
decisively.  The  ECB  took  the  lead  with  some  exceptional  decisions  as  early  as  9  August 
2007. We have, since then, modified our operational framework and used an exceptional set 
of non-standard policy tools. These tools, combined with the bold action taken by euro area 
governments over recent months, have played an essential role in preventing a collapse of 
the financial system and in bolstering confidence. 
I  would  like  to  emphasise  that  despite  this  upheaval  and  our  exceptional  measures,  our 
objective  remains  unchanged:  to  preserve  price  stability  over  the  medium  term,  and  that’s 
what  guides  our  policy.  In  so  doing,  we  support  the  conditions  for  financial  and  economic 
stability. The crisis has not changed this objective.  
Interest rates 
As regards interest rates, the ECB’s Governing Council has reacted promptly and decisively 
to the intensification and broadening of the global financial turbulence. We have lowered our 
2 
 BIS Review 66/2009
key interest rate by 325 basis points since October 2008. This is the largest cut ever decided 
over such a short period in Europe. These moves were fully in line with our strategy. The 
upside risks to price stability have indeed receded considerably over that period due to the 
sharp fall in oil and other commodity prices, and the abrupt slowdown in economic activity. 
As price stability is the needle in our compass, we took account of the easing of inflationary 
pressures and lowered interest rates.  
In this context, I would like to underline that since the introduction of the euro in 1999, the 
ECB’s quantitative definition of price stability – an inflation rate of below, but close to, 2% in 
the euro area, over the medium term – has proved to be an invaluable asset. It has guarded 
against  undesirably  high  inflation  and  against  deflation.  Long-term  inflation  expectations  in 
the euro area, whether based on surveys or extracted from financial indicators, have been 
and continue to be firmly anchored at levels consistent with our definition of price stability. 
Inflation expectations have been exceptionally resistant to sudden upward short-term price 
changes, and we have ensured that is also the case with sharply falling inflation. 
Non-standard measures 
In addition to reducing interest rates, we have taken exceptional policy actions in response to 
the crisis – “non-standard” measures related to liquidity management. At the very start of the 
money market stress in August 2007, the ECB reacted within a few hours and temporarily 
provided additional liquidity to banks with immediate liquidity needs. We were in fact the first 
central bank to take non-standard measures. 
When in mid-September 2008 the crisis intensified and interbank trading came to a virtual 
halt, the ECB engaged in a new mode of liquidity provision. We started to provide refinancing 
well above the levels that banks had absorbed to fulfil their reserve requirements in normal 
times. Our approach comprises three main “building blocks”. 
• 
We significantly adapted our regular refinancing operations. We now follow a “fixed 
rate full allotment” tender procedure and have significantly expanded the maturity of 
our operations. Banks have been granted access to essentially unlimited liquidity at 
our  policy  interest  rate  at  maturities  of,  initially,  up  to  six  months.  This  is  an 
exceptional mode of operation. In normal times we auction a given amount of central 
bank credit and let competition between the bidders determine the interest rate. This 
unusual mode of operation implies that we currently act as a surrogate for the market 
in terms of both liquidity allocation and price-setting. 
Our second building block is the long list of assets that we take as collateral. This list 
was already very long before the crisis, but we have extended it even further and now 
accept an even wider range of securities as collateral.  
The first two building blocks offer unlimited refinancing against a very wide range of 
collateral. But they can only reach the financial system if they are coupled with the 
third building block, namely the very large number of counterparties that have always 
been able to take part in our refinancing operations. Even before the financial crisis, 
this number was higher than for the other major central banks. Following the changes 
to our operational framework in October last year, this number rose further. 
  All these non-standard measures have now been supplemented by further exceptional steps 
that the ECB’s Governing Council decided to take at its last meeting on 7 May.  
• 
We will conduct liquidity-providing longer-term refinancing operations with a maturity 
of 12 months. This will further lengthen the maturity at which we provide banks with 
liquidity at fixed rates and full allotment. This move is consistent with the operations 
we have undertaken since October 2008 and it recognises the central role played by 
the banking system in the euro area economy.  
BIS Review 66/2009 
 3
  The  European  Investment  Bank  (EIB)  will  become  an  eligible  counterparty  in  the 
Eurosystem’s  monetary  policy  operations.  Access  to  the  Eurosystem’s  liquidity  is  a 
natural  complement  to  the  EIB’s  financing  initiatives  and  it  will  facilitate  the 
accommodation by the EIB of additional demand for its lending programme.  
Furthermore,  the  Governing  Council  decided  in  principle  that  the  Eurosystem  will 
purchase  euro-denominated  covered  bonds  issued  in  the  euro  area.  We  expect  to 
engage in a programme of around €60 billion that targets an important segment of the 
private securities market, which has been particularly affected by the financial market 
turbulence.  
Our  primary  concern  when  taking  these  decisions  in  recent  months  was  to  maintain  the 
availability of credit for households and companies at accessible rates. I have described that 
as “enhanced credit support”. Furthermore, our very flexible liquidity management ensured 
that solvent banks did not get into difficulties because of liquidity constraints.  
Our  response  to  the  crisis  has  been  carefully  calibrated  to  the  financial  and  economic 
structures  of  the  euro  area.  In  particular,  we  needed  to  bear  in  mind  that  the  euro  area’s 
financial  system  is  predominantly  bank-based.  Take  the  structures  of  private  credit 
outstanding  as  an  example:  recourse  to  banks  makes  up  more  than  70%  of  non-equity 
external finance in the euro area. By comparison, in the US the equivalent proportion is only 
around 30%. This reflects the fact that the US financial system is primarily market-based. In 
the euro area, guaranteeing steady access to credit for households and companies largely 
means preserving the viability of the banking system. Banks play such a dominant role in our 
economy that it was appropriate to focus our non-standard measures on the banking sector. 
This profound contrast in financial and economic structures explains the different responses 
by central banks to the crisis as exemplified by the approaches of the ECB and the Federal 
Reserve System of the US. We rely on different channels as regards the transmission of our 
policy action. But these variations do not reflect conflicting views on fundamental principles 
or  objectives.  On  the  contrary:  given  the  different  structures,  the  approaches  need  to  be 
different  to  achieve  the  same  objective.  Thus,  I  would  strongly  argue  that  central  banks 
around the world are united in purpose.  
As I indicated before, the remarks I just made on the ECB’s response to the crisis did not 
contain any message concerning future monetary policy,  and should not be interpreted as 
containing any such message. 
Emerging markets and Mediterranean economies in the global economy  
Today we are celebrating the 50th anniversary of Bank Al-Maghrib. This is also an occasion 
to  reflect  on  the  role  of  the  Mediterranean  region,  and  on  the  role  of  emerging  market 
economies in general in the global economy.  
The  growing  importance  of  these  economies,  including  those  in  this  area,  has  profound 
implications for the euro area and the rest of the world. I would like to share my thoughts with 
you on this phenomenon.  
The growing role of emerging market economies 
The global financial crisis is slowing the growth of the emerging market economies. Only a 
year  ago,  some  observers  were  still  saying  that  these  economies  were  likely  to  decouple 
from the downturn stemming from the advanced economies. Today it is obvious that this has 
not  happened.  Most  emerging  markets  are  affected  by  the  crisis  through  real  or  financial 
channels.  Many  sectors  have  been  severely  hit  by  the  global  turmoil,  for  instance,  the 
automotive,  textile,  building  and  tourist  industries.  In  addition,  remittances  which,  for  many 
emerging  markets,  are  an  important  source  of  revenue,  are  vulnerable  to  the  downturn  in 
host  countries,  even  though  they  tend  to  be  a  relatively  stable  source  of  income.  It  is  too 
4 
 BIS Review 66/2009
early to say when emerging market economies will bottom out of the global financial crisis, 
but  some  recent  data,  particularly  for  Asia,  are  somewhat  encouraging.  According  to  the 
latest  IMF  forecasts,  world  output  will  shrink  by  1.3%  and  the  advanced  economies  by  no 
less than 3.8%. However, GDP in emerging markets, though lower than in previous years, 
will still grow by 1.6%.  
Despite  the  crisis,  the  long-run  prospects  for  emerging  market  economies  remain  bright. 
Projections  for  long-term  growth,  based  on  demographic  trends  and  models  of  capital 
accumulation and productivity, suggest that the emerging markets are likely to gain in global 
importance. A number of studies found startling results regarding the growth prospects for 
emerging  markets.  According  to  one  study,  Brazil,  Russia,  India  and  China  (the  so-called 
BRIC  economies)  could  account  for  over  half  the  size  of  today’s  six  largest  industrialised 
economies  from  2025  onwards.1  We  have  to  prepare  for  a  very  profound  structural 
rebalancing of world output during the next years.  
The world economy is changing profoundly, as so should its governance. The creation and 
the recent reinforcement of the G20 and the enlargement to the G20 of the Financial Stability 
Board  are  milestones  in  this  respect.  The  rise  of  the  emerging  economies  will  also  be 
reflected in the reforms of the international financial institutions.  
What are the specific implications of the growing role of emerging markets for the euro area? 
The  euro  area  has  close  links  with  emerging  market  economies.  In  trade  terms,  the  euro 
area is actually more open than other major economies. Our exports and imports of goods 
and services account for more than 40% of GDP, significantly more than in the United States 
or in Japan. Emerging markets are important in trade: nine of 20 euro area’s main trading 
partners  are  emerging  economies,  with  a  share  of  more  than  18%  of  exports  and  around 
31% of imports in 2008. The BRICs alone accounted for more than 12% of extra-euro area 
exports and more than 22% of extra-euro area imports in 2008.  
important  place  among 
the  world’s  emerging  markets.  Moreover, 
The growing role of Mediterranean economies 
In the present context, which is very challenging, the Mediterranean region is one of the few 
in  the  world  that  will  continue  to  grow  this  year.  The  countries  in  this  area  have  an 
increasingly 
the 
Mediterranean  economies,  and  particularly  the  Maghreb  countries,  have  close  links  to  the 
euro area. For example, more than 50% of Morocco’s imports and exports are with the euro 
area.  
Within the Mediterranean region, labour and product markets have become more flexible, the 
financial sector is now on a more solid footing and the economy has become more business-
friendly. A continuation of these reforms will help to increase the long-run growth potential of 
the  region.  A  continued  implementation  of  such  reforms  would  lay  the  foundation  for  an 
increase in the long-run growth potential in the region. Central banks and monetary policy 
frameworks are frontrunners in this reform process. In that respect, Morocco is an excellent 
example.  Important  progress  has  been  made  towards  introducing  an  inflation  targeting 
framework, which is the medium-term objective of Bank Al-Maghrib. The bank’s new statutes 
promulgated in February 2006 confirmed its independence in the conduct of monetary policy 
and enshrined price stability as its primary objective mandate.  
As  you  know,  the  Eurosystem  attaches  greatest  importance  to  cooperating  with  central 
banks  of  emerging  market  economies,  including  those  in  the  Mediterranean  region.  The 
ECB,  as  the  central  bank  of  the  world’s  second  largest  integrated  economy,  very  closely 
monitors economic developments in regions nearby, notably the Mediterranean.  
                                                 
1   See Wilson, D. and R. Purushothaman “Dreaming With BRICs: The Path to 2050”, Global Economics Paper 
No. 99, Goldman Sachs, 1 October 2003. 
BIS Review 66/2009 
 5
As I said earlier, we have been working more closely in recent years by holding regular Euro-
Mediterranean Seminars for central banks. And further east, we have established a similar 
seminar with the governors of the Gulf Cooperation Council. The group’s first meeting was 
held in Germany last year.  
Conclusion  
To conclude, I would like to call your attention to the following points. 
To start with, we are, for the first time, putting to the test the soundness and resilience of the 
globalised economy, which has become increasingly integrated over the past fifteen years. 
We  now  have  to  draw,  systematically  and  without  complacency,  the  lessons  of  the  global 
crisis that we are fighting against.  
Secondly, we have a duty. Our duty is to considerably reinforce the resilience of the global 
financial system and the soundness of the real global economy. We should not allow that, a 
few years from now, a new crisis would emerge that would be similar to the current one. That 
would be unforgivable. 
Thirdly, the international community has engaged in drawing all lessons from the crisis. We 
agree on the method, on the role of the G20, on the role of the Financial Stability Board, and 
on  the  role  of  international  financial  institutions,  in  particular  the  crucial  role  of  the 
International Monetary Fund, and also of the Bank for International Settlements, which during 
the past years has shown remarkable lucidity in its analysis. As regards the global financial 
sector, we agree on the broad orientations to follow: to reduce procyclicality, to fight short-
termism, and to impose transparency. 
Fourthly,  we  are  still  today  in  a  very  difficult  and  very  unpredictable  environment.  We 
permanently need to remain alert, and there is no place for complacency. I would have two 
main messages in that regard. As concerns direct government support to the financial sector, 
today’s priority is “rapidity of execution.” Decisions that have already been taken should be 
implemented swiftly. This holds true, in particular, for recapitalisation, as currently only 55% 
of funds earmarked for recapitalisation have been used in the euro area. In crisis times, rapid 
implementation is crucial. As concerns global governance, I insist on the absolute necessity 
to  reinforce  macroeconomic  policy  surveillance  of  systematically  important  countries  and 
economies.  The  IMF  has  to  play  a  fundamental  role  in  such  monitoring,  coupled  with 
responsible and active peer surveillance. 
Finally,  central  banks  have  a  fundamental  role  in  ensuring  monetary  and  financial  stability 
from a long-term perspective. Morocco knows that it can count on the crucial contribution of 
Bank  Al-Maghrib,  whose  fiftieth  anniversary  we  are  celebrating  today.  The  world  economy 
can count on central banks to continue to act as anchors of stability, which are more needed 
than ever. The European Central Bank, for its part, will continue to be an anchor of stability 
and  confidence.  And  I  am  pleased  to  note  the  recent  proposals  by  the  European 
Commission,  in  line  with  the  recommendations  of  the  de  Larosière  report,  to  establish  a 
European Systemic Risk Council under the auspices of the ECB. 
Thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS Review 66/2009
