Ardian Fullani: Recent economic and financial developments in Albania 
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  the  Monetary  Policy 
Statement for the second half of 2008, Tirana, 29 February 2009. 
 World economy and the financial system in particular were severely hit in the second half of 
2008. The crisis which struck the heart of the global financial system was progressively and 
relentlessly transmitted to the economic activity of advanced economies leading some of the 
latter  into  recession.  The  Albanian  economy  has  been  resilient  amid  this  hitting  wave. 
According to the available official data and judging upon a number of indirect indicators, the 
Bank  of  Albania  notes  that  the  economic  activity  throughout  the  year  has  by  and  large 
performed  in  line  with  the  early  2008  projections  both  in  terms  of  economic  growth  and 
preservation  of  macroeconomic  balances.  The  Bank  of  Albania  in  particular  has  met  its 
primary  objective  mandated  by  law,  contributing  to  the  maintenance  of  price  stability. 
Average  annual  inflation  rate  marked  3.4  percent,  which  is  close  to  the  central  bank’s 
objective. 
The recent global-scale developments attest to the further economic downturn. Despite the 
slackening  of  inflationary  pressures  as  a  result  of  the  reduced  demand  and  the  slump  in 
basic commodity prices, the tightening of lending standards and the fall in consumption and 
investment have led to uncertainties related to the duration and intensity of this troublesome 
situation.  Against  this backdrop,  the  facing  of  the  economic  activity  contraction at  a  global 
level remains an open issue. The Euro area economy is already experiencing an economic 
slowdown.  Euro  area  GDP  contracted  in  the  third  quarter  while  the  unemployment  rate 
reached 7.8 percent in November 2008. The U.S. economy showed quite similar features. 
The further contraction of economic activity – owing to the deterioration of financial indicators 
in  the  U.S.  corporate  and  household  balance  sheets,  mirrored  in  lower  consumption 
spending  and  reduced  aggregate  investment  –  drove  the  unemployment  rate  to  reach  7.2 
percent.  Monetary  and  financial  stimuli  managed  by  central  banks  and  the  ministries  of 
finance have helped to bolster confidence and relieve pressure on the financial institutions. 
Against  this  backdrop,  the  “resilience”  shown  by  emerging  countries  is  displaying  the  first 
signs  of  weakening.  In  contrast  to  the  first  half  of  2008,  the  latest  data  attest  to  the 
moderation  of  economic  growth  rates  in  the  majority  of  these  countries.  The  channels 
through  which  the  slowdown  in  advanced  economies  has  affected  the  emerging  countries 
differ depending on their development characteristics. China and India have been severely 
hit by the slowdown in exports; Russia had hard times owing to the slump in raw material 
prices  in  the  global  market,  while  East  European  countries  have  been  impacted  by  the 
tightening of funding conditions on a global level. 
In  contrast  to  many  emerging  countries,  the  Albanian  economy  has  been  sustained  by 
domestic demand, while – although upward – foreign demand in the form of Albanian exports 
has provided a proportionally lower impact over the economic growth. Economic activity at 
home  has  been  almost  entirely  sustained  by  domestic  financial  resources,  while  foreign 
financing  in  the  form  of  credit  lines  or  portfolio  investment  has  been  less  considerable. 
Operating within all the parameters of financial soundness, the Albanian banking system has 
been  dynamic  and  effective  in  channelling  the  savings  towards  the  funding  of  corporate 
production  or  household  consumption.  This  process  has  been  also  facilitated  by  the 
macroeconomic stability which enabled the fall of risk premiums in economy and helped to 
gradually extend the investment horizon. 
These features led the economic activity at home to record adequate growth in the first three 
quarters of 2008, a period which is covered by statistical data. With regard to the last quarter, 
indirect  data  on  economic  activity  –  mainly  financial  ones  –  suggest  a  slight  slowdown  of 
BIS Review 29/2009 
 1
economic activity, however, remaining within the projections for 2008. Manufacturing, where 
construction  continues  to  share  the  main  weight,  provided  the  main  contribution  to  the 
increase  of  turnover  indicator  in  terms  of  volume.  Investment  in  major  road  infrastructure 
projects  and  the  recovery  of  construction  permits  from  the  prolonged  constraints  triggered 
high growth rates in construction activity during this period. In addition, the sector of services 
continues  to  provide  the  primary  contribution  to  economic  growth  at  home.  The  positive 
developments in domestic production have been also evidenced by the increase of economic 
tendency indicator, derived from the business and consumer opinions, and by the increased 
number  in  employed  persons.  In  annual  terms,  unemployment  rate  fell  by  1.5  percent  to 
12.62 percent, being mainly triggered by the increase in the average number of employed 
persons in the private agricultural sector. 
Notwithstanding  the  inflationary  pressures  of  early  2008  –  mainly  triggered  by  supply-side 
shocks – CPI annual inflation was brought back within the Bank of Albania’s target during the 
second half of 2008. In the second half of the same year annual inflation rates stood close to 
the  central  bank’s  target  –  3.0  and  2.5  percent,  respectively,  in  both  quarters.  The 
performance  of  the  inflation  rate  in  the  second  half  mirrored  the  global  effect  of  the  fall  in 
basic commodity prices (mainly foodstuff and oil prices) as well as a more favourable price 
conjuncture  of  goods  and  services  in  the  domestic  market  as  a  result  of  their  demand 
coverage with an ever-growing supply. 
The return of inflation within the targeted band was not only conditioned by the relaxation of 
supply-side shocks but also by the adequate monetary conditions which provided room for 
the  balancing  of  demand  and  supply-side  factors.  Monetary  policy  stance  was  neutral 
throughout 2008 and the key interest rate was kept unchanged at 6.25 percent. In tandem 
with  the  strengthening  of  several  banking  supervision  measures  in  terms  of  credit  risk 
management,  the  monetary  policy  has  led  to  a  more  balanced  credit  growth  and  has 
transmitted  the  appropriate  stimuli  for  consumption  and  savings.  The  adequate  monetary 
policy  and  the  keeping  of  inflation  under  check  by  the  Bank  of  Albania  have  been  also 
reflected  in  the  anchoring  of  economic  agents’  inflationary  expectations  close  to  the  3 
percent  target  of  the  central  bank.  In  absence  of  unexpected  shocks  on  financial  stability, 
inflationary  expectations  or  other  supply-side  factors,  the  balance  of  risks  on  inflation  over 
the period to follow seems to be shifting downward. 
In  this  context,  worth  noting  is  the  contribution  of  fiscal  policy  which  has  ensured  the 
preservation of macroeconomic balances by keeping the budget deficit at adequate levels. 
The carrying out of public spending in line with the budget plan has facilitated the control of 
domestic demand pressures and has bolstered confidence in the country’s macroeconomic 
stability. Budget revenues collected as of end November have met the 11-month plan of the 
Ministry  of Finance  by about  96.4 percent,  while  expenditures  met  92 percent  of  the  plan. 
Following the developments in the first half of 2008, budget performance for the period July 
to November 2008 was characterized by a more active carrying out of expenditure. Budget 
deficit created after the first half of 2008 was mainly financed through foreign resources. 
On the other side, the external sector of the economy continued to be characterized by the 
deepening of current account deficit, which in annual terms, increased by 48 percent in the 
third quarter of 2008 to  about 252 million euros. As a share of GDP it accounted for 13.7 
percent which is about 5 percentage points higher than the same period the previous year. In 
addition to the trade deficit widening, the deepening of current deficit was also triggered by 
the narrowing of the positive balance of revenues and current transfers’ account. Its stability 
is  imperative  to  ensure  Albania’s  financial  stability  and  a  stable  and  long-term  economic 
growth. Therefore, the dynamics in the balance of payments developments remains an area 
which needs constant monitoring by the Bank of Albania. 
Monetary indicators had a stable performance in the second half of 2008, although the end of 
the  period  showed  signs  of  their  downward  growth  rates.  Average  annual  growth  rate  of 
money  supply  was  about  13  percent.  A  small  part  of  deposits  were  withdrawn  from  the 
2 
 BIS Review 29/2009
banking system in the last months of 2008 as a result of depositors’ concerns following the 
vague situation in the global financial system. In relative terms, these withdrawals made up a 
small  share  in  commercial  banks’  balance  sheets  and  did  not  affect  the  banking  system’s 
soundness  indicators  or  impair  its  financial  intermediation  role.  Credit  to  the  private  sector 
continued to provide the main contribution to money growth. In annual terms, credit growth 
fell  during  the  second  half  of  2008  relative  to  the  first  half  the  same  year.  Intermediation 
indicators increased further; the ratio of loan portfolio to deposits and total assets was 63 and 
43  percent,  respectively,  as  of  end  November.  Following  September,  the  structure  of  loan 
portfolio by currency displayed a higher annual growth rate of lek denominated loans. The 
performance of loan portfolio by customer attests to higher annual growth rates of business 
loans  relative  to  household  loans.  In  contrast  to  the  first  half  of  2008,  loan  portfolio  to 
construction  and  trade  shifted  downward  while  loans  to  industry  increased  slightly  in  the 
second half of the year. 
The performance of money markets during the second half of 2008 was conditioned by the 
developments  in  monetary  indicators  and  the  real  economy.  As  experienced  by  many 
countries, the increased vulnerability of banks to liquidity has brought about the reduction in 
the interbank trading volume and upward interest rates on deposits. The coverage ratio of 
Government demand for money has reduced and some risk premiums have increased in the 
last  two  months.  This  performance  brought  about  the  increase  in  Government  securities’ 
interest  rates  and  in  a  few  cases  in  the  loan  interest  rates.  In  response  to  these 
developments, the Bank of Albania intervened in the money market by injecting liquidity at 
different maturity rates. In addition, the central bank changed in November the form of repo 
auctions to auctions with undetermined amounts in order to better satisfy the banks’ needs. 
 Economic  and  financial  developments  have  by  and  large  been  positive  during  2008. 
Economic growth performed in line with the early year projections, while the main indicators 
of macroeconomic and financial stability remain solid. The negative impact of developments 
in  global  economy  was  marginal.  However,  as  in  other  emerging  countries,  the  Albanian 
economy  cannot  remain  immune  for  long  to  the  direct  or  indirect  impact  of  the  global 
economic crisis. The Bank of Albania public statements have constantly noted that the global 
crisis impact over the Albanian economy will largely depend on its intensity and duration. The 
persistence and deepening of the global economy crisis signal that the Albanian economy 
will go through a harder economic environment in 2009, which may call for the solution of 
many issues. 
The slowing remittances and the tightening of financing conditions are the channels exposing 
the Albanian economy the most to shocks in the global economic environment. The expected 
impact of these factors would materialize in a slower economic growth in 2009. We note that 
the economic and financial programs of all economic agents need to reflect and consider this 
prospect. A slower economic growth does not necessarily translate into a crisis in Albania, 
but  rather  as  a  temporary  development  propelled  by  external  factors.  Hence,  promoting 
policies need to be formulated based on this underlying premise. They should at no case be 
designed  to  the  detriment  of  long-term  macroeconomic  stability,  which  represents  one  the 
most treasured assets the Albanian economy has achieved during the transition years. 
The  preservation  of 
long-term  economic 
development  and  under  constant  consideration  in  the  Bank  of  Albania  decision-making 
process. In this context, confidence in the banking system and in its balance sheets would be 
the  most  rational  behaviour  of  any  individual,  business  or  other  agent  in  the  Albanian 
economy.  Global  experience  shows  that  the  mutual  interaction  between  the  real  economy 
and the banking system in terms of savings, use of payment infrastructure and expertise in 
the area of financial counselling and support with funds is a key feature of economies that 
have managed to progress and leave behind the transition countries’ level. 
financial  stability  remains  crucial 
the 
for 
BIS Review 29/2009 
 3
In conclusion, I would like to assure the public that the Bank of Albania remains committed to 
creating the proper premises which boost economic activity at home, without infringing the 
objective of price stability. In addition it will keep working on firming up financial stability in 
the country. The Bank of Albania decisions will be a direct contribution to smoothing out the 
negative effects deriving from the international crisis and they will help to ensure the further 
maintenance of economic and financial balances at home. 
4 
 BIS Review 29/2009
