José De Gregorio: Inflation targeting and financial crises 
Speech by Mr José De Gregorio, Governor of the Central Bank of Chile, at the seminar on 
financial  crises  Seminario  Internacional  de  Crisis  Financieras,  organized  by  Banco  de  la 
República  de  Colombia  and  the  Fondo  de  Garantías  de  Instituciones  Financieras  de 
Colombia, Bogota, 28 May 2009. 
I  thank  the  valuable  comments  and  insights  of  Luis  Felipe  Céspedes,  Pablo  García,  Luis  Opazo  and  Enrique 
Orellana. 
 Thank you so much for this invitation. It is an honor to return after so many years to speak at 
a  conference  organized  by  Banco  de  la  República  and  FOGAFIN.  The  subject  this  time 
around,  Financial  Crises,  is  particularly  timely,  with  the  world  struggling  through  a  crisis 
whose  effects  are  still  difficult  to  predict  and  that  has  propagated  through  the  world  with 
unprecedented strength and synchrony (Figure 1). 
Macroeconomic policies face major challenges in trying to cushion the effects of a crisis. Its 
origin,  magnitude  and  degree  of  propagation  make  stabilizing  the  economy  a  particularly 
complex task. High uncertainty and, in some cases, poor functioning of key aspects such as 
credit  markets,  have  affected  the  monetary  policy  transmission  channels  in  a  number  of 
countries.  
The  current  crisis  is  providing  a  unique  opportunity  to  continue  fostering  the  design  of 
economic  policy  frameworks  that  permit  us  to  react  to  different  shocks  in  the  best  way 
possible while at the same time reducing the vulnerability of our economies. 
The current situation raises many questions, some of which we had already been discussing 
at  the  theoretical  level.  Meanwhile,  it  contributes  the  necessary  evidence  to  dig  into  such 
questions more deeply. Although we must detect the flaws and fix them to prevent episodes 
like  this  to  happen  again,  we  must  also  identify  what  has  operated  properly  and  should 
continue to be part of our macroeconomic and financial policies. In particular, a proposition 
that  permeates  my  presentation  today  is  that  the  current  turmoils  have  shown  the 
advantages of inflation targeting regimes committed credibly with an inflation anchor.  
As the crisis we are going through keeps reminding us, price-level stability must occur hand 
in hand with proper regulation of the financial system. Our region has learned these lessons 
the  hard  way,  after  severe  crises  that  were  created  when  we  lost  sight  of  macroeconomic 
and financial stability.  
In  this  juncture,  the  region  has  withstood  like  never  before  the  effects  of  the  international 
crisis. In the past, when the world got a cold, the region got pneumonia; today it is the other 
way around, our countries suffering just a cold while the developed world is with pneumonia 
(Figure  2).  This  comparatively  good  performance  is  no  reason  for  complacency,  as  in  our 
countries  it  is  more  urgent  to  avoid  large  cycles  that  affect  disproportionately  the  poorest 
members of society, especially those most detached from the social safety nets. 
Today, I intend to address two very important aspects of the discussion about monetary and 
financial policy making. First I want to refer to the origin of this financial crisis and its linkage 
with  monetary  policy.  Some  arguments  point  out  that  the  current  crisis  was  originated  by 
monetary  policy  mistakes,  particularly  in  the  United  States,  where  low  interest  rates  are 
blamed for the housing bubble and subsequent financial meltdown. Some have even claimed 
that inflation targeting regimes are inadequate, because monetary policy should also aim at 
controlling asset price inflation. And this is precisely the second point in my presentation, that 
is, whether interest rates should react to asset price movements or not, and what is the role 
played by the exchange rate.  
BIS Review 68/2009 
 1
To sum up, and insisting on a point I have made before, there are many cases of countries 
that lowered their interest rates substantially without triggering any housing bubbles. There 
are also cases of countries with very low interest rates where home prices soared, but still 
their financial systems did not end up in a financial disaster like they did in some developed 
economies.  
This crisis, or at least the magnitude it has reached, is the result of financial fragility and we, 
in Latin America, are well aware that when a cyclical downturn is combined with a financial 
crisis,  the  impact  is  magnified.  Central  banks  generally  have  two  objectives:  price-level 
stability  and  financial  stability.  Recent  history  reminds  us  that  we  cannot  pursue  both  with 
one single instrument, the interest rate. We also need a regulatory framework that ensures 
financial  stability,  a  feature  that  countries  like  Chile  and  Colombia  have  succeeded  in 
preserving in the actual juncture. 
The causes of the crisis: was it monetary policy or was it financial fragility? 
The argument attributing a leading role in the current crisis to monetary policy claims that low 
interest  rates  combined  with  large  current  account  surpluses  in  emerging  economies, 
particularly  Asian  and  oil-exporting  ones,  created  an  abundance  of  liquidity  that  triggered 
excessive increases in asset prices (bubbles). This was particularly important in the value of 
real estate assets. When the bubble burst, the crisis erupted. Then, this argument claims that 
the  housing  bubble  was  caused  by  monetary  policy,  which  failed  to  act  opportunely  and 
permitted  severe  imbalances  to  accumulate.  Nonetheless,  one  must  bear  in  mind  that 
soaring asset prices do not necessarily end up in a crisis like this one. Closer attention must 
be paid to the financial fragility that accompanied this process, whose main culprit was the 
unrestrained  financial  innovation  that  generated  deep  distortions  that  neither  markets  nor 
regulators were able to predict. 
An  expansionary  monetary  policy  can  undoubtedly  induce  an  excessive  increase  in  the 
prices of assets and credit. The role of monetary policy, in our case carried out through an 
inflation targeting regime, is to smooth the business cycle. Therefore, it is possible to think 
that a very expansionary monetary policy can exacerbate an economic boom. Likewise, such 
a policy will have serious consequences on output once the monetary impulse is withdrawn. 
However,  an  expansionary  monetary  policy  could  not  explain  by  itself  the  severity  of  the 
financial collapse the world is seeing today. 
There are countries where the monetary policy was expansionary, with interest rates at their 
minimum, and no housing bubble occurred. A couple of examples are Canada and Chile, two 
inflation targeters where, consistently with this policy framework, interest rates hit very low 
levels not so different from the Fed Funds rate (Figure 3). Still, housing prices generally did 
not  experience  increases  comparable  with  those  of  other  economies,  and  their  financial 
systems have remained sound. 
Furthermore,  in  some  cases  housing  prices  did  go  up  high,  with  clear  signals  of  a  bubble 
being  formed.  However,  their  financial  systems  made  it  through  and  remained  stable  and, 
despite  the  current  difficulties  including  very  recessive  episodes,  have  avoided  acute 
financial crisis. This is the case with, for example, Australia and Spain.  
Naturally, when facing disproportionate increases in the price of housing, both the level of 
borrowing  and  the  building  boom  associated  with  it  are  symptoms  that  the  downturn  that 
comes with the cycle will be severe. This is because of the deleveraging that households will 
have to undertake and the contraction of the building activity. Still, this need not result in a 
systemic financial crisis. 
In any case, monetary policy can and does help in the creation of bubbles, although not so 
much by the level of the interest rate but by the monetary policy strategy with which financial 
turmoil is dealt with. In the United States, the strategy of turning a blind eye to the period of 
soaring asset prices and then cleaning the mess when it was already there used to be long 
2 
 BIS Review 68/2009
that 
inflation-targeting  policy 
considered  appropriate  (Blinder  and  Reis,  2005).  The  cleansing  consisted  in  cutting  the 
interest  rates  and  granting  all  the  necessary  liquidity  for  the  market  to  continue  operating. 
This  approach  was  first  used  on  the  “Black  Monday”  of  October  1987,  then  with  the 
breakdown  of  Long-Term  Capital  Management  (LTCM)  and  later  with  the  bursting  of  the 
high-tech bubble. In all these occasions, once the asset prices reversed down, there was an 
abrupt  relaxation  of  the  monetary  policy.1  This  implicit  insurance,  popularly  known  as  the 
Greenspan put, certainly makes the creation of bubbles more likely. Sadly, having worked for 
some  earlier  episodes,  it  lost  its  power  with  the  biggest  collapse  in  decades.  A  monetary 
policy strategy that used to provide insurance to speculation in episodes of limited financial 
turbulence proved incapable of confronting a systemic financial crisis. And it is possible that 
the very “risk management” strategy had as a consequence that a great collapse was bound 
to happen sooner or later. 
The final verdict is yet to be seen. This strategy certainly contributed to increase liquidity, but 
low  interest  rates  need  not  result  in  a  financial  crisis  as  I  have  illustrated  with  these  few 
examples.  An 
in  some  circumstances  determines  an 
extraordinary monetary impulse is perfectly compatible with preserving financial stability. 
An overview to the experience of several economies suggests that the culprit of the current 
crisis was related more closely with the functioning of financial systems than with monetary 
policy. One issue that will have to be carefully examined in the future is the cause of the real 
estate boom and the housing crisis, and why it occurred in the United States. At this point it 
is clear that lending standards were excessively lowered. Ellis (2008) shows that in the U.S., 
households had strong motivation to increase their leverage through tax, legal and regulatory 
incentives. 
One  key  element  of  financial  innovation  was  the  creation  of  structured  instruments.  With 
them,  banks  could  reduce  their  individual  risk  levels  and  expand  their  operations  into 
formerly  unexplored  market  segments.  Recent  evidence  proves  that  the  risk  of  these 
instruments  was  wrongly  evaluated  by  rating  agencies  and  by  credit  originators.  Credit 
structuring  also  debilitated  the  central  role  of  banks  in  the  selection  of  their  clients.2 
Securitization did not maintain the incentives for banks to properly screen their customers or 
for  them  to  meet  payments.  The  compensation  structure  was  based  on  the  number  of 
operations rather than on their quality. 
This is a clear example that, if not accompanied by credit risk management measures at the 
individual  level  and  proper  systemic  prudential  regulation  and  supervision,  encouraging 
access to mortgage loans by formerly excluded sectors, a praiseworthy goal without a doubt, 
may  end  up  substantially  weakening  the  financial  positions  of  not  only  the  ones  being 
intended to help in the first place but also the financial system at large.  
Inflation targeting and asset prices 
A corollary of those blaming monetary policy is that, apart from focusing on the variation of 
the prices of goods and services, it should also have asset prices in mind. 
Under inflation targeting regime, increased lending and asset prices can generate demand 
increases  with  repercussions  on  inflationary  perspectives.  This  would  require  a  monetary 
policy  adjustment  to  prevent  a  persistent  rise  in  inflation.  Hence,  in  an  inflation  targeting 
                                                 
1  
Interestingly and, according to Blinder and Reis (2005), using Taylor rules as from the first quarter of 1988, the 
residuals indicate that in all the mentioned episodes the Federal Reserve set the interest rates significantly 
below those prescribed by the rule. 
2   There  is  evidence  for  the  United  States  that  securitization  caused  a  relaxation  of  risk  evaluation  in  the 
subprime  segment  and  increased  the  rate  of  acceptance  of  mortgage  applications  (Loutskina  and  Strahan, 
2006; Keys et al., 2009). 
BIS Review 68/2009 
 3
regime, asset prices and the level of credit aggregates affect the monetary policy decision to 
the extent that they affect the inflation perspectives (Bernanke and Gertler, 1999). 
However, some argue that monetary policy should react directly to asset prices, for example 
by  including  them  in  the  Taylor  rule.  Cecchetti  et  al.  (2000)  are  perhaps  the  best 
representatives of this position, claiming that any inflation-targeting central bank should react 
to asset price misalignments beyond their implications on expected inflation over the policy 
horizon.  
In  my  view,  there  are  three  reasons  why  monetary  policy,  in  general,  should  not  react  to 
asset prices beyond their impact on projected inflation. First, it is not clear that an increase in 
interest  rates  will  be  capable  of  stopping  an  increase  in  asset  prices.  The  required 
adjustments  might  be  so  large  that  they  could  end  up  unnecessarily  generating  high 
unemployment  and  an  unwelcome  drop  in  inflation.  Second,  what  matters  here  is  to 
safeguard the stability of the financial system. An excessive interest rate aiming at controlling 
asset  prices  could  even  trigger  financial  instability,  which  is  precisely  what  it  is  meant  to 
avoid, especially if the increase in asset prices is accompanied by higher financial fragility. 
Finally,  under  inflation  targeting,  any  interest  rate  movements  that  are  inconsistent  with 
inflation converging to the target may undermine the credibility of monetary policy, and we 
know inflation expectations are critical in the functioning of the regime. To apply a policy that 
is inconsistent with the inflation target would end up weakening it as the inflation anchor. This 
is particularly important in the case of emerging economies with a shorter record of monetary 
stability.  
Another reason that has been put forward to not try to affect asset prices through monetary 
policy is simply that it is impossible to determine when prices are significantly misaligned with 
their fundamentals. Cecchetti et al. (2000) point out that asset price misalignment with their 
equilibrium  level  is  what  must  be  incorporated  in  the  monetary  policy  rule.  However,  it  is 
difficult  to  know  with  precision  the  precise  level,  so  it  may  be  impossible  to  manage  the 
degree  of  uncertainty.  Still,  I  believe  it  is  possible  to  know  when  asset  prices  are 
fundamentally  misaligned  in  specific  episodes.  This  takes  me  to  the  role  played  by  the 
exchange rate in monetary policy, something as important as or more important than asset 
prices in emerging economies. 
An inflation-targeting regime, where the policy instrument is the interest rate, must operate 
within  a  context  of  a  flexible  exchange  rate.  This  solves  efficiently  and  unambiguously  the 
well-known  impossible  trinity  problem  and  allows  the  control  of  interest  rates  at  a  level 
consistent  with  the  inflationary  objective.  Adding  an  exchange  rate  objective  weakens  the 
capacity to manage the interest rate and affects the ability to meet the inflation target. 
This is no hindrance for the exchange rate to generally have a significant effect on monetary 
policy decisions, if persistent movements of this variable do affect inflation. In this case, the 
natural  result  is  a  leaning  against  the  wind  behavior.  When  the  interest  rate  appreciates 
substantially, it prompts a fall in inflation, which will result in a reduction in the interest rate 
with subsequent pressures to depreciate. However, one must recognize that these are not 
very significant effects because, in a floating regime, the pass-through coefficient from the 
exchange rate to inflation is limited. It occurs primarily because of the usual transitory nature 
of  exchange  rate  fluctuations,  due  to  changes  in  their  fundamentals  and  their  relationship 
with the stage of the cycle.  
Emerging economies may feel tempted, after a long history of crises caused by exchange 
rate  lags,  to  handle  it  to  keep  it  depreciated,  due  to  fear  of  floating  (Calvo  and  Reinhart, 
2002). Handling the exchange rate is, apart from hardly feasible in the medium to long term, 
risky. In the first place, in less flexible exchange rate regimes, the transmission coefficient to 
inflation  increases,  because  the  level  of  the  exchange  rate  may  become  a  coordinator  of 
price expectations, given the policymakers’ commitment to price stability. This, in turn, feeds 
back to increased pressures to keep the exchange rate stable, thus aggravating the problem. 
Secondly,  a  commitment  of  the  authority  to  exchange  rate  stability  may  create  perverse 
4 
 BIS Review 68/2009
incentives to take financial risks, by artificially lowering the cost of external borrowing. This 
reinforces fear of floating, creating a spiral towards exchange rate rigidity, and deriving in the 
much feared currency mismatches and exchange rate delays that were intended to prevent 
in the first place.  
I am not saying that attention must not be paid to the exchange rate beyond its effects on 
inflation. Excessive deviation from its long-term fundamentals may create problems in terms 
of  resource  allocation  and  the  business  cycle.  The  exchange  rate  should  be  influenced 
through accumulating or reducing reserves. Some conditions must be met, however, in order 
for  this  to  be  effective  and  convenient.  In  the  first  place,  it  must  be  consistent  with  the 
inflation  target,  in  order  for  the  intervention  not  to  threaten  the  credibility  of  the  monetary 
policy.  Secondly,  to  safeguard  monetary  policy  independence,  once  the  intervention  is 
announced  it  must  be  implemented  mechanically.  All  this  shields  the  conduct  of  monetary 
policy,  typically  carried  out  in  regular  pre-established  meetings,  from  the  extraordinary 
decision of buying or not buying foreign currency. In particular, the sterilization of intervention 
decisions  permits  to  preserve  both  the  credibility  and  the  independent  management  of 
monetary policy. Finally, and because of this sterilization requisite, the cost of intervention 
must  be  properly  considered,  because  it  entails  a  quasi-fiscal  component  that  could  be 
significant. 
In  any  case,  to  the  extent  that  the  decision  to  intervene  is  taken  because  of  evident  real 
exchange  rate  misalignments,  the  risk  of  suffering  quasi-fiscal  costs  should  be  limited. 
Intervention  would  occur  within  the  context  of  an  extraordinary  episode  where  the  central 
bank would estimate that there are sufficient elements to evaluate that the current exchange 
rate dynamics are unsustainable and the market is not properly internalizing the long-term 
prospects of the real exchange rate. If there is no evidence of misalignment, and the issue is 
simply about hoarding reserves, the probability of the intervention having any effects on the 
exchange rate is smaller, while the possibility of incurring in quasi-fiscal costs increases.  
The Chilean experience last year was in line with the aforesaid principles. It was done in a 
moment  where  there  was  clear  evidence  of  misalignment  with  respect  to  the  levels 
consistent  with  long-term  fundamentals.  It  was  also  totally  consistent  with  the  inflation 
objective, and started at a moment – April 2008 – in which there were rather benign inflation 
figures that revealed a smaller risk of unwanted inflationary propagation. Towards midyear it 
was even possible to raise the interest rate substantially to tackle an inflation rate that was 
much deviated from the target. This was thanks to the fact that the purchase of dollars was 
being  carried  out  mechanically  and  despite  a  significantly  depreciated  exchange  rate  after 
the intervention. The purchase of foreign currency was concluded prematurely due to global 
tensions in global liquidity in dollars in September of last year. The capacity of the Chilean 
economy to subsequently deal with a significant exchange rate depreciation scenario, with 
monetary  easing  prospects  and  reduced  inflationary  pressures  is  proof  that  there  was  no 
inconsistency between the decision to intervene and the conduct of monetary policy (Figure 
4). 
Intervention can occur only under special circumstances, because it is not easy to assess 
whether the prices of domestic assets are really in a bubble. If the slightest exchange rate 
movement  will  prompt  an  intervention  persistently,  the  market’s  perception  of  this  greater 
stability of the exchange rate may limit the power of monetary policy. For example, fighting 
an  asset  price  bubble,  by  raising  the  interest  rate  while  intervening  at  the  same  time  to 
prevent  a  larger  appreciation,  may  be  counterproductive,  because  the  incentives  for  carry 
trade positions may exacerbate the bubble and the exchange rate appreciation itself.3  
                                                 
3   This may explain the results about exchange rate instability presented in Batini and Nelson (2000), when the 
exchange rate is subject to bubbles which are dealt with via the interest rate. 
BIS Review 68/2009 
 5
Final remarks 
Financial  stability  must  be  preserved  with  an  adequate  regulatory  system.  Agencies  must 
analyze the strength of institutions, while central banks must evaluate the system’s overall 
stability.  Regulators  and  central  banks  must  closely  cooperate  and  work  in  the  effort  of 
maintaining the integrity of the financial system. 
Regulating  specific  institutions  is  not  enough,  because  interconnections  exist  that  could 
derive  in  a  systemic  crisis.  The  current  crisis  proves  that  the  regulatory  scope  must 
encompass every agent with a systemic importance. So a proper macro-prudential regulatory 
system is needed. This is a system still in debate, particularly regarding the instruments that 
must be applied to achieve this function.  
A first set of instruments has to do with capital adequacy. However, this is not enough, and it 
is no trivial to judge the soundness of the financial system by its capital and leverage levels. 
Higher levels of capital will certainly have to be required in the future, particularly as banks 
gradually assume higher levels of risk. Such is the spirit of the Basel II standards, but this 
crisis  has  proved  they  do  are  not  enough.  It  will  be  necessary  to  examine  how  capital 
requirements and accounting norms may have amplified the financial crisis, and what must 
be done to avoid the excessive procyclicality of the banking activity. Fortunately this has not 
been a problem in the financial systems of Colombia, Chile and the rest of the region, where 
regulatory  schemes  worked.  Banks  are  adequately  matched  in  terms  of  currencies,  an 
aspect that used to be the Achilles heel of our banks.  
Central banks must strengthen and perfect the models with which they carry out their stress 
tests.  They  should  take  into  account  the  interconnections  within  the  financial  system  and 
detect vulnerabilities opportunely. We have seen how the U.S. investment banks, insurance 
companies and other non-banking agents of the financial system played a leading role in the 
origin and spread of the crisis, but were not at the heart of the banking supervision network. 
Of the many aspects that may be debated with respect of the financial system, there is one 
that  should  be  singled  out,  especially  to  the  extent  that  banking  systems  of  emerging 
economies  continue  along  the  lines  of  financial  innovation.  It  is  important  to  allow 
securitization,  but  establishing  incentives  for  both  credit  screening  and  monitoring  of 
payments to remain at the banks and that the process of transferring credit risk away from 
individual institutions’ balance sheets does not escape the authority’s eye. The current crisis 
should  not  become  a  hindrance  to  financial  development,  but  a  sign  of  alert  in  favor  of 
prudence and rigor when assessing the innovations. 
Thank you very much. 
References 
Batini,  N.  and  E.  Nelson  (2000),  “When  the  Bubble  Bursts:  Monetary  Policy  Rules  and 
Foreign Exchange Market Behavior,” mimeo, Bank of England. 
Bernanke,  B.  and  M.  Gertler  (1999),  “Monetary  Policy  and  Asset  Price  Volatility,”  in  New 
Challenges for Monetary Policy, Proceedings of the Jackson Hole Symposium 2005, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Kansas City, pp. 77-128.  
Blinder, A. and R. Reis (2005), “Understanding the Greenspan Standard,” in The Greenspan 
Era:  Lessons  for  the  Future,  Proceedings  of  the  Jackson  Hole  Symposium  2005,  Federal 
Reserve Bank of Kansas City, pp. 11-96. 
Calvo, G. and C. Reinhart (2002), “Fear of Floating,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 
107, No. 2, pp. 379-408. 
Cecchetti, S., H. Genberg, J. Lipsky y S. Wadhawani (2000), Asset Prices and Central Bank 
Policy, Geneva Reports on the World Economy No, 2, ICMB and CEPR. 
6 
 BIS Review 68/2009
Ellis,  L.  (2008),  “The  Housing  Meltdown:  Why  Did  It  Happen  in  the  United  States?,”  BIS 
Working Paper No. 259. 
Keys,  B.,  T.  Mukherjee,  A.  Seru  and  V.  Vig  (2009),  “Did  Securitization  Lead  to  Lax 
Screening? Evidence from Subprime Loans,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming in 
Vol. 125, No. 1. 
Loutskina,  E.  and  P.  Strahan  (2006),  “Securitization  and  the  Declining  Impact  of  Bank 
Finance  on  Loan  Supply:  Evidence  from  Mortgage  Acceptance  Rates,”  mimeo,  Darden 
Graduate School, University of Virginia. 
 
 
 
Figure 1
Countries experiencing drops in real GDP in the fourth quarter of 2008 (*)
(percentage of total sample)
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
71
74
77
80
83
86
89
92
95
98
01
04
07
(*) Using the annualized quarterly GDP for a sample of 29 developed and emerging economies. 
Source: Central Bank of Chile.
 BIS Review 68/2009 
 100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
 7
Figure 2
GDP
(annual change, percent)
10
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
70
75
80
Latin America (*)
90
85
World at PPP
95
10
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
00
05
10(f)
Developed ecoomies
(*) Simple average of annual GDP change in Argentina, Brazil, Colombia, Chile, Mexico, Peru and 
Venezuela.
(f) Forecast. 
Source: Central Bank of Chile based on data from investment banks, Consensus Forecasts, and IMF.
  Figure 3
Monetary policy and housing prices
Monetary policy
(percent)
Housing prices
(nominal index, first quarter 2001=100)
10
8
6
4
2
0
00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09
U.S.A.
Chile (*)
Canada
10
8
6
4
2
0
250
200
150
100
50
0
250
200
150
100
50
0
01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09
Australia
Chile
Canada
U.S.A.
Spain
(*) As from August 2001, the monetary policy interest rate is set in nominal terms. Before that, it was 
indexed to the CPI.
Sources: Central Bank of Chile, Bank of Canada, Bloomberg and U.S. Federal Reserve.
 8 
 BIS Review 68/2009
Figure 4
Inflation
(percent)
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
-0.5
-1.0
-1.5
04
05
06
07
08
09
15
10
5
0
-5
-10
-15
CPI (monthly change)
CPI (annual change)
CPI minus foods and energy (annual change)
Sources: Central Bank of Chile and National Statistics Bureau (INE).
  BIS Review 68/2009 
 9
