X P Guma: SARB’s Financial Markets Department 
Welcoming remarks by Dr X P Guma, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, 
at  the  Financial  Markets  Department’s  4th  Annual  Cocktail  Party,  South  African  Reserve 
Bank, Pretoria, 28 July 2009.  
 Introduction  
1.  
Ladies and gentlemen, it is with much pleasure that I welcome you here this evening to the 
Financial Market Department’s fourth annual cocktail function. I thank you for taking time out 
of your busy schedules to be present here this evening.  
Last  year  we  emphasised  the  importance  of  communication  between  central  banks  and 
market participants, highlighting that it was essential for the smooth functioning of markets 
and  in  the  interest  of  financial  stability.  The  events  of  the  past  twelve  months  are  a  good 
example of the importance of communication. In May 2008, the time of our last gathering, it 
would  have  been  difficult  to  imagine  that  a  top  US  investment  institution  such  as  Lehman 
Brothers  would  collapse.  On  15  September  2008,  the  unthinkable  happened  and  Lehman 
Brothers filed for bankruptcy protection. This began a whole chain of events with which all in 
the financial world have had to deal.  
South  Africa  has  been  in  a  very  fortunate  position;  the  domestic  financial  system  has  not 
been  impacted  directly.  Our  banking  system  remains  sound  as  domestic  banks  have  very 
limited exposure to so-called “toxic assets”. Being a small and open economy, however, we 
could not escape the negative effects on the real economy. In the fourth quarter of 2008, the 
South  African  economy  contracted  for  the  first  time  in  a  decade,  officially  entering  a 
recession  in  the  first  quarter  of  2009,  at  the  same  time  recording  the  worst  quarterly 
economic  performance  since  the  1980s.  Domestic  financial  markets  also  suffered  as 
investors became increasingly risk averse. 
Nonetheless, I am not here to discuss economic or financial market developments, as you 
are all too well aware of this. I would, however, like to briefly comment on the happenings in 
the  Financial  Markets  Department  of  the  SARB  over  the  past  year  in  the  midst  of  all  this 
turmoil.  
SARB money market operations  
2.  
Central  banks  around  the  world  injected  significant  amounts  of  liquidity  into  the  money 
markets  as  they  sought  to  avoid  the  worst  outcomes  of  the  crises  on  their  respective 
economies.  To  avoid  a  repetition  of  the  Great  Depression,  central  banks  acted  with  much 
flexibility, speed and urgency. It is perhaps for this reason that we are increasingly hearing 
about the green shoots of economic recovery.  
While everyone may breathe a sigh of relief once a recovery is underway, central banks will 
once again find themselves in a somewhat challenging position, as they now would have to 
concentrate on appropriate exit strategies such that the growth in their balance sheets do not 
pose  a  huge  inflationary  risk.  There  are  also  the  “expectations  effects”,  where  these 
expanding balance sheets may be perceived to signal less commitment to fighting inflation.  
I  am  happy  to  state,  however,  that  in  South  Africa  it  has  been  “business  as  usual”.  The 
Financial  Markets  Department  has  not  had  to  undertake  any  special  liquidity-providing 
transactions in the market. The domestic banking sector and financial markets, especially the 
interbank  market,  continued  to  operate  effectively  during  the  crisis.  There  was  no  upward 
pressure  on  overnight  rates  as  witnessed  in  the  US  and  European  markets.  The  spread 
between the South African Benchmark Overnight Rate on deposits (Sabor) and the Bank’s 
BIS Review 95/2009 
 1
repo  rate  remained  relatively  stable.  This  spread  continued  to  fluctuate  in  its  usual  range, 
with the Sabor remaining below the repo rate.  
The liquidity requirement remained in a range of between R8 billion and R13 billion, in line 
with that prevailing the previous year.  
Typically, the purchases of foreign exchange for purposes of building reserves would be the 
single  biggest  contributor  to  increased  liquidity  in  the  money  market  and  the  SARB  would 
have to drain this liquidity through various open market operations. In the 2008/09 financial 
year, SARB activities in the foreign exchange  market were somewhat muted, however, as 
compared to previous years. This can partly be attributed to the extreme volatility in financial 
markets.  
The SARB and National Treasury continue to cooperate in an effort to reduce the country’s 
external  vulnerability  and  increase  the  level  of  reserves.  The  gross  gold  and  foreign 
exchange reserves declined marginally from USD34,3 billion in April 2008 to USD34,1 billion 
in March 2009. Although the SARB purchased over USD1,5 billion in foreign exchange for 
purposes of increasing the country’s foreign exchange reserves, this was offset by valuation 
adjustments, given that the country’s reserves are denominated in various currencies. The 
SARB did not at any time intervene in the currency markets to influence the level of the rand 
in any way.  
The  international  liquidity  position  increased  marginally,  owing  to  the  SARB’s  decision  to 
reduce its foreign loans. The substantial increase in reserves over recent years, reduced the 
need  to  hold  significant  amounts  of  borrowed  reserves.  Foreign  loans  declined  from  over 
USD1,0 billion in April 2008 to approximately USD650 million in March 2009. Over the past 
few months, gross foreign exchange reserves have increased to levels above USD35 billion, 
largely due to the successful international bond issue which took place in May this year. As 
you are aware, the National Treasury placed part of the proceeds of this issue in a foreign 
deposit account with the SARB which, in future, will be used towards fulfilling government’s 
foreign currency commitments falling due. 
Nonetheless,  the  SARB  increased  its  open  market  operations  during  the  year,  using  the 
traditional sterilisation instruments at its disposal. SARB debentures increased by R9,6 billion 
to  R28,0  billion  at  the  end  of  April  2009.  The  longer-term  reverse  repos  were  mostly 
unchanged around R7,6 billion. Government deposits at the SARB increased by R2,7 billion; 
much of this is related to accrued interest. Liquidity was also drained via an increase in the 
notes  and  coin  in  circulation  of  R4,3  billion  and  an  increase  in  the  cash  reserve  account 
balances of banks of R5,4 billion. To square their end-of-day positions, banks predominantly 
utilised  the  cash  reserve  accounts  and  only  on  a  few  occasions  did  the  SARB  have  to 
conduct  standing  facility  operations.  These  standing  facility  operations,  it  must  be 
emphasized,  were  not  in  any  way  linked  to  stresses  in  the  financial  system;  rather,  they 
arose due to unexpected increases or decreases in notes and coin flows or because it was 
the end of the cash reserve maintenance period.  
The SARB did not effect any changes to the refinancing procedures over the past year, but 
continues  to  engage  with  market  participants  through  the  Money  Market  Liaison  Group 
meetings to discuss issues related to the money markets and SARB operational procedures. 
As  indicated  last  year,  a  number  of  other  fine-tuning  operational  issues,  including  the 
coordination of the maturity dates of the SARB’s open market operations with MPC dates, 
are under consideration but have not yet been finalized.  
One of the most challenging tasks facing us has been accurately to forecast the quantity of 
notes banks will need each day. In an attempt to improve the liquidity estimates provided to 
the market, the SARB plans to use the end-of-day notes and coin figure with a one-day lag in 
its liquidity calculations. This will assist the SARB in calculating much more accurate liquidity 
estimates and thereby also allow for the more efficient management of liquidity: There should 
be  less  cost  and  inconvenience  to  both  you  and  the  SARB.  The  exact  details  of  this 
arrangement are currently being worked out and will be communicated shortly. 
2 
 BIS Review 95/2009
The SARB, on behalf of the National Treasury has conducted a number of special Treasury 
Bill auctions to the value of R8 billion over the past few months. Furthermore, government 
bond issuance has increased, while R58,6 billion of the R153 bond was switched with market 
participants. The remainder of the R153 bond will be split into three legs on 31 August. The 
close relationship which the SARB enjoys with the National Treasury and the market assisted 
in the smooth implementation of these transactions. We anticipate that we will continue to 
enjoy the same level of support going forward.  
SARB reserves management  
3.  
We have heard a lot of talk about the dual responsibility some central banks might have for 
monetary  policy  and  financial  stability.  Less  remarked  upon  is  the  fact  that  many  central 
banks have become large wealth managers, clearly reflected by the International Monetary 
Fund  (IMF)1  data  which  show  that  global  reserves  have  increased  from  just  over  USD1,3 
trillion in 1995 to USD7,0 trillion in the second quarter of 2008 (global reserves declined to 
USD6,5 trillion in the first quarter of 2009). Along with this phenomenal growth in reserves, 
came the challenge of finding means by which to achieve higher returns. Accordingly, some 
central banks slowly moved away from traditional asset classes such as Treasury bills and 
public  sector  bonds  to  more  sophisticated  asset  classes.  Needless  to  say,  recent  market 
volatility  and  credit  concerns  have  exposed  central  banks  to  the  vulnerabilities  and  risks 
which attach to such investment decisions. Therefore, the importance of risk management in 
reserves management has increased exponentially. Managers of foreign exchange reserves 
within  central  banks  have  become  much  more  risk-averse  since  the  global  credit  squeeze 
started, with safe assets being back in favour.  
With just over USD34 billion in net reserves, the management of these remains an important 
function of the SARB. Being relatively new in the world of reserves management, the SARB 
has generally been a conservative manager.  
In line with most other central banks, the SARB tightened its investment guidelines for the 
management of reserves so as to avoid any potential losses. The greater portion of funds is 
invested  in  “AA”  and  “AAA”  rated  instruments  and  with  similar-rated  counterparties.  There 
were no significant currency allocation shifts in the wake of the crisis. However, because the 
country’s foreign exchange reserves are diversified, currency fluctuations have impacted on 
returns as measured in USD.  
The  Strategic  Asset  Allocation  (SAA)  was  reviewed  during  2008/09,  while  the  SARB  also 
embarked on the external fund management review, which is conducted every three years. 
The revised SAA will be implemented later this year, coinciding with the appointment of new 
external fund managers and/or reappointment of some existing ones.  
Other initiatives in the financial markets arena  
4.  
The  hard  work  and  determination  of  the  planning  committee  of  the  Association  Cambiste 
Internationale  (ACI)  –  now  known  as  ACI  The  Financial  Markets  Association  –  is  much  in 
evidence and I am happy to report that the 48th Annual ACI International World Conference 
held in Cape Town in March 2009 was a resounding success. The South African Reserve 
Bank is proud to have been associated with an event of this calibre, the first ACI Conference 
to be hosted on the African continent. 
The SADC financial markets subcommittee is now operational and has met twice in the past 
year.  At  its  most  recent  meeting  in  May  2009,  the  Committee  of  Central  Bank  Governors 
approved the work programme of the subcommittee and in fact the Committee holds its third 
                                                 
1   Currency Composition of Foreign Exchange Reserves (COFER), IMF. 
BIS Review 95/2009 
 3
meeting in Lesotho starting tomorrow. We wish them every success in their efforts at building 
and developing financial markets in Africa.  
Conclusion  
5.  
It has certainly been a very trying year for financial market participants and indeed, central 
banks around the world. We certainly seek evidence of the existence of the “green shoots of 
recovery”.  
I wish to thank you all for the close relationship, we as the central bank, enjoy with you. We 
certainly  value  the  interactions  and  I  trust  that  the  channels  of  communication  will  be 
enhanced further. From our side, we will endeavour to keep you informed of the strategic and 
operational issues with which we are involved.  
I also wish to thank the Financial Markets Department, under the leadership of Roelf, for the 
hard work and determination throughout the year and for making us proud to be associated 
with  the  SARB.  With  them,  it  is  I  think  appropriate  to  congratulate  your  former  colleague, 
Daniel  Mminele,  upon  his  appointment  as  Deputy  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve 
Bank.  
Please enjoy the rest of your evening! 
4 
 BIS Review 95/2009
