Caleb M Fundanga: Strengthening the Zambian financial services 
industry through education 
Speech by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the Zambia Institute of 
Banking and Financial Services 8th Graduation Ceremony, Lusaka, 21 February 2009. 
 • The President, Zambia Institute of Banking and Financial Services, Mr. David Chewe; 
• Distinguished Council members; 
• The Chairman, Bankers Association of Zambia, Mr Saviour Chibiya; 
• Chief executives of Banks and Financial institutions present; 
• Representatives from other Learning institutions; 
• Distinguished Parents; 
• Graduates; 
• Distinguished Invited Guests; 
• Ladies and gentlemen 
It  is  an  honour  and  privilege  for  me  to  officiate  at  this  8th  Graduation  Ceremony  of  the 
Zambia  Institute  of  Banking  and  financial  services.  There  is  nothing  more  pleasing  than 
witnessing young men and women climbing the ladder of success in life. 
Mr President, as we speak, our economy is facing numerous challenges emanating from the 
global  financial  turmoil.  As  you  are  no  doubt  aware,  the  crisis  has  already  resulted  in  a 
reduction  in  commodity  prices  including  that  of  copper  our  main  foreign  exchange  earner. 
The Zambian foreign exchange market has also been adversely affected as is reflected in 
the volatility and weakening of the Kwacha exchange rate in the recent past. The result of all 
this  is  lower  Government  revenues  and  more  expensive  imports  which  would  in  turn 
culminate in higher inflation. 
However, our situation is by no means unique, and both the emerging, and more developed 
economies  have  felt  the  effects  of  what  has  turned  out  to  be  a  global  recession.  The 
challenges presented to our economy in general and the financial sector in particular, brings 
to  the  fore  the  critical  role  that  the  Zambia  Institute  of  Banking  &  Financial  Services  is 
expected  to  play  in  equipping  young  men  and  women  with  the  much  needed  capacity  to 
strengthen  the  financial  services  industry.  We  shall  no  doubt  be  confronted  with  such  and 
many  more  similar  challenges  as  we  strive  to  achieve  economic  growth  and  poverty 
reduction in our country. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, in order to be well prepared for such trying times ahead, we need to 
groom  our  best  talents  to  assume  leadership  positions  in  all  sectors  of  the  economy 
especially in the financial sector. To achieve this vital task of nurturing our future leaders, the 
Government is trying its level best to provide education to all Zambians. However, providing 
support to education for the benefit of all citizens is never an easy task. It is for this reason 
that the Government recently classified Education and Health as economic sectors. 
This entails that private investors are now provided with incentives to invest in the area of 
Education.  This  policy  is  expected  to  provide  the  much  needed  investments  in  institutions 
such  as  the  Zambia  Institute  of  Banking  and  Financial  Services.  Looking  around  in  this 
gathering, I see people who are very well connected to private investors. Therefore wooing 
investment into this institution should not be difficult task. Such investment will go a long way 
in enhancing the quality of graduates this Institution will produce. 
BIS Review 23/2009 
 1
Mr President, it is during times of crisis such as the one we are undergoing that graduates 
should  assist  the  industry  in  coming  up  with  well  researched  constructive  proposals  and 
solutions on how challenges may be addressed within the context of our local environment. 
The prevailing global financial meltdown is in fact an opportunity for the institute to critically 
review its core operations and determine if its flagship education and training programmes as 
well as other learning environment initiatives such as research, consultancy, counselling and 
continuous  professional  development  activities  are  robust  enough  to  adequately  serve  our 
financial services sector, both in times of buoyancy and during periods of turbulence. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  I  am  reliably  informed  that  the  Institute  is  negotiating  strategic 
alliances that will ensure high quality international standard flagship education and training 
programmes for professionals in Zambia’s financial services industry. I am equally pleased to 
note that that the Institute has direct representatio n on two working groups of the Financial 
Sector Development Plan (FSDP) – the Banking Working Group and the Human Resource 
Working Group. I have no doubt the FSDP stands to benefit from more representation from 
the Institute. 
I  urge  you  Mr  President  and  Council  Members,  to  engage  all  the  stakeholders  in  the 
financial  sector  including,  Non-Bank  Financial  Institutions,  Insurance  Companies,  Stock 
brokers and Pension Funds. I have no doubt that with increased support from other financial 
service  providers  and  regulators,  the  institute  will  increase  in  stature  in  human  resource 
capacity-building  aimed  at  developing  a  critical  mass  of  professionally  qualified  and 
competent bankers. 
To  the  graduates,  the  qualifications  in  Banking  and  Finance  you  are  obtaining  today  will 
certainly not make you an instant expert to tackle challenges in the financial services sector. 
It  will  take  hard  work,  determination,  and  a  variety  of  continuing  professional  development 
programmes  for  you  to  be  able  to  begin  to  understand  in  a  comprehensive  manner,  the 
banking industry in its entirety. 
However  as  graduates  from  this  special  Institution,  each  of  you  will  be  given  a  unique 
opportunity to prove yourself. I therefore, urge you to work hard and learn from others around 
you including those with different views from yours. Let me also mention that as graduates 
from the Zambia Institute of Banking and Financial Services, your progress and performance 
will be closely monitored and you will be looked upon as role models. I urge you to set the 
standards  for  others  to  emulate.  I  am  confident  that  all  of  you  will  live  up  to  the  highest 
standards and will not disappoint us. 
I once again congratulate you and your parents, for it is only through their guidance that you 
are  able  to  achieve  what  you  have  today.  I  wish  you  all,  especially  those  graduating  and 
those witnessing the graduation of their loved ones, a joyful and wonderful day. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 23/2009
