Jean-Claude Trichet: The financial crisis and the response of the ECB 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
Ceremony conferring the honorary title of Doctor Honoris Causa at the University of National 
and World Economy, Sofia, 12 June 2009. 
 Ladies and gentlemen,  
It is a great privilege for me to be here in Sofia today to accept an honorary doctorate from 
the  distinguished  University  of  National  and  World  Economy  (UNWE),  Bulgaria’s  most 
respected economics institute. 
To  properly  mark  the  occasion,  I  would  like  to  talk  about  the  global  financial  crisis  and  its 
roots, and the ECB’s response to the crisis.  
The global financial crisis and its roots 
Let me start by briefly highlighting the origins and evolution of the current crisis. Imagine a 
neutral observer who looked at the financial sector about a decade ago and then didn’t look 
at  it  again  until  the  eve  of  the  current  financial  crisis.  He  would  have  found  a  completely 
different financial industry, one which over the past decade has undergone a dramatic shift of 
focus. He would have discovered a financial system that had moved away from its traditional 
role  of  supporting  trade  and  real  investment.  He  would  have  found  a  financial  system  in 
which speculation and financial gambling had run rife. He would have encountered a system 
transformed  –  a  system  no  longer  managing  genuine  economic  risks  but  one  actually 
creating  and  assuming  financial  risks  –  risks  resulting  from  arbitrage  and  intentional 
exposure to asset price changes.  
That  same  observer  would  have  realised  that  financial  liberalisation  and  innovation  had 
made our economies more productive. The securitisation of assets, for example, had great 
potential to diversify economic risks and to manage them efficiently. But it also meant that 
financial  institutions  were  able  to  sell  loans  or  take  them  off  the  balance  sheet,  which 
weakened lenders’ incentives to conduct prudent screening and constant monitoring of credit 
risk.  So  underwriting  standards  and  lending  oversight  declined,  and  contributed  to  the 
excessive credit growth in the second half of the 1990s.  
In sum, the observer would have concluded that the factors that fuelled the credit and asset 
price boom of the past decade also created the conditions for a bust. 
In mid-2007 we started to see the backlash. The start of the financial turmoil was sudden but 
not  unexpected.  The  financial  system  as  it  worked  over  the  past  decade  –  with  its  flawed 
incentives and its overly complex products and with global imbalances as its macroeconomic 
backdrop  –  was  no  longer  sustainable.  The  asset  cycle  turned,  the  weaknesses  were 
exposed and investors suddenly lost confidence. After years of exceptional risk appetite and 
high  profits,  the  pendulum  swung  in  the  opposite  direction,  as  markets  became  extremely 
sensitive to financial risk.  
In September last year, the crisis escalated sharply, turning a large-scale crisis of confidence 
into  a  global  financial  panic.  Financial  intermediaries  restored  liquidity  buffers,  tried  to 
economise  on  capital  and  to  scale  down  their  balance  sheets.  They  sold  assets  and 
tightened lending conditions. Banks and other financial institutions drastically reduced their 
exposure  to  the  risks  that  they  had  imprudently  accumulated  during  the  phase  of  financial 
euphoria. Financial intermediation and loans to companies were curtailed in the wake of a 
forceful process of “deleveraging”. 
BIS Review 74/2009 
 1
This was the point when important spillovers of the financial crisis set in. We saw the almost 
immediate spillover from the financial sector to the real economy. The  credit squeeze and 
loss  of  confidence  started  to  take  a  toll  on  the  real  economy,  and  a  negative  feedback 
developed  between  the  financial  sector  and  the  real  economy,  and  has  since  become  a 
major feature of economic and financial developments. Almost simultaneously, the crisis that 
originated in the advanced economies spilled over to the emerging market economies. Since 
the fourth quarter of 2008, virtually all economies – both those of the industrialised countries 
and the emerging markets – have faced synchronised business cycles in many parts of the 
world.  
The ECB’s response to the financial crisis  
Since the start of the financial turmoil, central banks around the globe face unprecedented 
challenges.  We  at  the  ECB  and  other  central  banks  have  reacted  swiftly,  flexibly  and 
decisively.  The  ECB  took  the  lead  with  some  exceptional  decisions  as  early  as  9  August 
2007. We have, since then, modified our operational framework and used an exceptional set 
of non-standard policy tools. These tools, combined with the bold action taken by euro area 
governments over recent months, have played an essential role in preventing a collapse of 
the financial system and in bolstering confidence. 
I  would  like  to  emphasise  that  despite  this  upheaval  and  our  exceptional  measures,  our 
objective  remains  unchanged:  to  preserve  price  stability  over  the  medium  term,  and  that’s 
what  guides  our  policy.  In  so  doing,  we  support  the  conditions  for  financial  and  economic 
stability. The crisis has not changed this objective.  
Interest rates 
As regards interest rates, the ECB’s Governing Council has reacted promptly and decisively 
to the intensification and broadening of the global financial turbulence. We have lowered our 
key interest rate by 325 basis points since October 2008. This is the largest cut ever decided 
over such a short period in Europe. These moves were fully in line with our strategy. The 
upside risks to price stability have indeed receded considerably over that period due to the 
sharp fall in oil and other commodity prices, and the abrupt slowdown in economic activity. 
As price stability is the needle in our compass, we took account of the easing of inflationary 
pressures and lowered interest rates.  
In this context, I would like to underline that since the introduction of the euro in 1999, the 
ECB’s quantitative definition of price stability – an inflation rate of below, but close to, 2% in 
the euro area, over the medium term – has proved to be an invaluable asset. It has guarded 
against  undesirably  high  inflation  and  against  deflation.  Long-term  inflation  expectations  in 
the euro area, whether based on surveys or extracted from financial indicators, have been 
and continue to be firmly anchored at levels consistent with our definition of price stability. 
Inflation expectations have been exceptionally resistant to sudden upward short-term price 
changes, and we have ensured that is also the case with sharply falling inflation. 
Non-standard measures 
In addition to reducing interest rates, we have taken exceptional policy actions in response to 
the crisis – “non-standard” measures related to liquidity management. At the very start of the 
money market stress in August 2007, the ECB reacted within a few hours and temporarily 
provided additional liquidity to banks with immediate liquidity needs. We were in fact the first 
central bank to take non-standard measures. 
When in mid-September 2008 the crisis intensified and interbank trading came to a virtual 
halt, the ECB engaged in a new mode of liquidity provision. We started to provide refinancing 
2 
 BIS Review 74/2009
    well above the levels that banks had absorbed to fulfil their reserve requirements in normal 
times. Our approach comprises three main “building blocks”. 
• 
We significantly adapted our regular refinancing operations. We now follow a “fixed 
rate full allotment” tender procedure and have significantly expanded the maturity of 
our operations. Banks have been granted access to essentially unlimited liquidity at 
our  policy  interest  rate  at  maturities  of,  initially,  up  to  six  months.  This  is  an 
exceptional mode of operation. In normal times we auction a given amount of central 
bank credit and let competition between the bidders determine the interest rate. This 
unusual  mode  of  operation  implies  that  we  currently  act  as  a  surrogate  for  the 
market in terms of both liquidity allocation and price-setting. 
Our second building block is the long list of assets that we take as collateral. This list 
was already very long before the crisis, but we have extended it even further and 
now accept an even wider range of securities as collateral.  
The first two building blocks offer unlimited refinancing against a very wide range of 
collateral. But they can only reach the financial system if they are coupled with the 
third  building  block,  namely  the  very  large  number  of  counterparties  that  have 
always  been  able  to  take  part  in  our  refinancing  operations.  Even  before  the 
financial  crisis,  this  number  was  higher  than  for  the  other  major  central  banks. 
Following  the  changes  to  our  operational  framework  in  October  last  year,  this 
number rose further. 
All these non-standard measures were supplemented by further exceptional steps that the 
ECB’s Governing Council decided in early May and June this year.  
• 
We  now  conduct  liquidity-providing  longer-term  refinancing  operations  with  a 
maturity  of  12  months.  This  will  further  lengthen  the  maturity  at  which  we  provide 
banks with liquidity at fixed rates and full allotment. This move is consistent with the 
operations  we  have  undertaken  since  October  2008  and  it  recognises  the  central 
role played by the banking system in the euro area economy.  
The  European  Investment  Bank  (EIB)  is  becoming  an  eligible  counterparty  in  the 
Eurosystem’s monetary policy operations. Access to the Eurosystem’s liquidity is a 
natural  complement  to  the  EIB’s  financing  initiatives  and  it  will  facilitate  the 
accommodation by the EIB of additional demand for its lending programme.  
Furthermore,  the  Eurosystem  will  purchase  euro-denominated  covered  bonds 
issued  in  the  euro  area  of  about  €60  billion.  These  purchases  will  target  an 
important  segment  of  the  private  securities  market,  which  has  been  particularly 
affected by the financial market turbulence. We have outlined the specific modalities 
of implementation last week. 
Our  primary  concern  when  taking  these  decisions  in  recent  months  was  to  maintain  the 
availability of credit for households and companies at accessible rates. I have described that 
as “enhanced credit support”. Furthermore, our very flexible liquidity management ensured 
that solvent banks did not get into difficulties because of liquidity constraints.  
Our  response  to  the  crisis  has  been  carefully  calibrated  to  the  financial  and  economic 
structures  of  the  euro  area.  In  particular,  we  needed  to  bear  in  mind  that  the  euro  area’s 
financial  system  is  predominantly  bank-based.  Take  the  structures  of  private  credit 
outstanding  as  an  example:  recourse  to  banks  makes  up  more  than  70%  of  non-equity 
external finance in the euro area. By comparison, in the US the equivalent proportion is only 
around 30%. This reflects the fact that the US financial system is primarily market-based. In 
the euro area, guaranteeing steady access to credit for households and companies largely 
means preserving the viability of the banking system. Banks play such a dominant role in our 
economy that it was appropriate to focus our non-standard measures on the banking sector. 
BIS Review 74/2009 
 3
Conclusion  
To conclude, I would like to call your attention to the following points. 
To start with, we are, for the first time, putting to the test the soundness and resilience of the 
globalised economy, which has become increasingly integrated over the past fifteen years. 
We  now  have  to  draw,  systematically  and  without  complacency,  the  lessons  of  the  global 
crisis that we are fighting against.  
Secondly, we have a duty. Our duty is to considerably reinforce the resilience of the global 
financial system and the soundness of the real global economy. We should not allow that, a 
few years from now, a new crisis would emerge that would be similar to the current one. That 
would be unforgivable. 
Thirdly, the international community has engaged in drawing all lessons from the crisis. We 
agree on the method, on the role of the G20, on the role of the Financial Stability Board, and 
on  the  role  of  international  financial  institutions,  in  particular  the  crucial  role  of  the 
International Monetary Fund, and also of the Bank for International Settlements, which during 
the past years has shown remarkable lucidity in its analysis. As regards the global financial 
sector, we agree on the broad orientations to follow: to reduce procyclicality, to fight short-
termism, and to impose transparency. 
Fourthly,  we  are  still  today  in  a  very  difficult  and  very  unpredictable  environment.  We 
permanently need to remain alert, and there is no place for complacency. I would have two 
main messages in that regard. As concerns direct government support to the financial sector, 
today’s priority is “rapidity of execution.” Decisions that have already been taken should be 
implemented swiftly. This holds true, in particular, for recapitalisation, as currently only about 
55% of funds earmarked for recapitalisation have been used in the euro area. In crisis times, 
rapid  implementation  is  crucial.  As  concerns  global  governance,  I  insist  on  the  absolute 
necessity  to  reinforce  macroeconomic  policy  surveillance  of  systematically  important 
countries  and  economies.  The  IMF  has  to  play  a  fundamental  role  in  such  monitoring, 
coupled with responsible and active peer surveillance. 
Finally,  central  banks  have  a  fundamental  role  in  ensuring  monetary  and  financial  stability 
from a long-term perspective. The world economy can count on central banks to continue to 
act as anchors of stability, which are more needed than ever. The European Central Bank, 
for its part, will continue to be an anchor of stability and confidence.  
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 74/2009
