V K Sharma: The international financial crisis and India – the impact, 
response and outlook 
Address  by  Shri  V  K  Sharma,  Executive  Director  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
Conference on “Doing Business with India”, jointly sponsored by the Confederation of Indian 
Industry and The Indian High Commission, Johannesburg, 23 July 2009.  
 His  Excellency  the  High  Commissioner  of  India  Mr.  Bhatia,  Mr.  Navdeep  Suri,  Consul 
General  of  India,  Mr.  Hari  Bhartia,  Vice-President  of  CII,  Dr.  Guma,  Dy.  Governor,  South 
African  Reserve  Bank,  Mr.  Rudolf  Gouws,  Chief  Economist,  Rand  Merchant  Bank, 
distinguished invitees and delegates,  
First of all I would wish to thank His Excellency the High Commissioner of India for giving me 
the opportunity and privilege to address this distinguished and august audience. Second, I 
must congratulate and compliment the High Commissioner of India and his very passionate 
team as well as the CII for having taken the bold initiative in conceptualizing and organizing 
this conference with a very imaginative theme of “Building partnerships when the chips are 
down.”  
The  current  global  financial  crisis  was  caused  primarily  and  fundamentally  by  extended 
structural  global  macro  economic  imbalances.  These  global  imbalances  were  reflected  in 
current account surpluses of China, Asia and EMEs and current account deficits of the USA, 
in  particular.  These  large  and  persistent  imbalances  represented  “unearned”  prosperity  for 
deficit  reserve  currency  countries  and  “unshared”  prosperity  for  surplus  countries.  Such  a 
global economic order was inherently unsustainable and unstable from the word go. In other 
words,  the  only  sustainable  and  durable  global  economic  growth  model  would  be  where 
growth and prosperity are both “earned” and “shared”. In fact, the whole thing can be likened 
to  cosmic  balance/equilibrium/harmony  where  stars,  suns,  planets,  all  orbit  within  the 
inviolable discipline of their elliptical orbits which do not permit deviant behaviour beyond the 
shortest and the longest distance from the suns and stars of the orbiting planets! Any deviant 
behaviour/conduct,  inconsistent  with  the  cosmic  harmonious  balance  and  equilibrium,  will 
invite  and  inflict  extremely  retributive  backlash;  the  more  severe  and  prolonged  the 
disequilibrium and imbalance, the more wrenching and excruciating will be the resulting pain 
as is currently being experienced. 
In refreshing contrast, India ran modest current account surpluses to modest current account 
deficits with only the latest current account deficit at 2.6% of GDP due to the impact of the 
ongoing  global  recession.  Thus,  in  the  post-economic  reforms  period,  through  its  macro 
economic policies, India demonstrated that it is committed to, and believes in, “earned” and 
“shared” prosperity in our economic relations with the rest of the world through sustainable 
and balanced current account.  
The current global economic recession, the worst since the Great Depression, was caused 
by the apocalyptic global financial melt down and not the other way round which traditionally 
has  so  far  been  the  case,  where  typically  it  was  economic  recession  that  preceded  and 
precipitated financial crises. At the risk of being repetitive, it must be noted that even if global 
imbalances  and  accommodative  monetary  policy  provided  an  enabling  environment  for 
excessive leverage and risk taking, it was still the responsibility of regulators and supervisors 
to have taken appropriate macro-prudential measures, pre-emptively and proactively, rather 
than  reactively.  But  unfortunately  broad  spectrum  and  generic  regulatory  and  supervisory 
failure  worldwide,  especially  in  the  West,  precipitated  the  current  unprecedented  global 
financial  crisis.  This  regulatory  and  supervisory  inertia  to  unprecedented  build  up  of  risk 
globally, typical and characteristic, of the hunky-dory and gung ho financial environment of 
the pre-crisis days, is most graphically epitomized by what Mark Twain said 100 years ago: 
BIS Review 97/2009 
 1
"It ain't what you don't know that gets you into trouble; it is what you know for sure that just 
ain't  so!"  In  refreshing  contrast,  in  India,  we  have  had  remarkable  financial  stability,  not 
fortuitously, but thanks to pre-emptively and pro-actively delivered prudential measures like 
increase  in  risk  weights  for  exposures  to  commercial  real  estate,  capital  market,  venture 
capital  funds  and  systemically  important  non-deposit  accepting  Non  Banking  Finance 
Companies  (NBFCs).  These  pre-crisis  prudential  regulatory  measures  of  Reserve  Bank  of 
India represented what now are famously known as “countercyclical capital measures” and 
have been strongly commended for adoption by various recent Working Groups/Committees 
of international regulators. Indeed, in the aftermath of the global financial crisis and resulting 
economic  recession,  these  countercyclical  capital  measures  have  been  rolled  back  to 
cushion  the  adverse  impact  of  the  crisis  to  considerable  beneficial  effect  to  the  Indian 
economy.  
However, for all the positives about the Indian economy, the fact still remains that in view of 
the growing integration of the Indian economy and the financial system with the rest of the 
world,  it  cannot  be  the  case  that  Indian  economy  should  have  remained  unaffected.  The 
Indian economy was collaterally affected primarily through two channels: the Capital account 
and the Trade account. While India continued to experience substantial net capital inflows, 
the  situation  changed  for  the  worse  in  September/October  2008  in  the  wake  of  Lehman 
Brothers’  bankruptcy,  with  substantial  net  capital  outflows  and  this,  in  combination  with 
widening  trade  account  and  current  account  deficits  resulted  in  the  decline  of  foreign 
exchange reserves of about USD 60 billion, from USD 316 billion in May 2008 to about USD 
255  billion  now.  The  trade  deficit  widened  to  USD  120  billion  (10%  of  GDP)  and  current 
account deficit widened to USD 29 billion (2.6% of GDP).  
flagship  Government  sponsored  schemes. 
Recent fiscal and monetary policy measures 
Because  of  the  integration  with  the  rest  of  the  world,  fall  in  export  demand  for  Indian 
merchandise  and  services,  the  GDP  grew  by  6.7%  in  2008-09  compared  with  an  average 
growth of 9% plus in the previous 3 years. Thus, it will be seen that the Indian economy was 
much less adversely affected, primarily due to being driven by domestic demand which again 
had  a  very  strong  rural  demand  component.  Significantly,  even  now  the  rural  demand 
continues  to  remain  robust,  especially  for  autos,  two  wheelers,  tractors  and  FMCGs.  This 
was  all  made  possible  because  of  public  spending  under  National  Rural  Employment 
Guarantee  Programme,  Rural  Self-Employment  Programme  and  Rural  Road  Construction 
Programme  under 
Indeed,  as  a  critical 
complement  to  this  effort,  financial  inclusion  initiative  driven  by  leveraging  smart  card  and 
bio-metric technology, also played a pivotal role. Besides, going forward, with 400 million odd 
mobile phone subscribers in India, mobile banking has tremendous potential for spreading 
banking  and  financial  services  to  rural  and  semi-urban  areas  and  further  economic 
empowerment of the rural sector.  
Inevitably, the fiscal policy had to respond commensurately and Government delivered three 
fiscal  stimulus  packages,  as  a  result  of  which  the  fiscal  deficit  rose  from  2.7%  of  GDP  in 
2007-08 to 6.2% of GDP in 2008-09 and is projected to rise to 6.8% in 2009-10. But, this is 
not a cause for concern primarily because we need to look at fiscal deficit not in isolation but 
in conjunction with current account deficit. Thus, even though the fiscal deficit is 6.2%, the 
current  account  deficit  at  2.6%  is  below  3%,  a  level  which  is  considered  sustainable.  The 
underlying idea is that current account deficit subsumes fiscal deficit in the sense that high 
fiscal deficit essentially connotes high public sector dis-saving which can be offset by private 
sector  and  house  hold  sector  savings.  It  is  significant  in  this  context  to  note  that  Indian 
economy has been characterized by increasing domestic savings rate financing investment, 
with domestic savings rate reaching a high of about 38% of GDP in financing investment of 
39% of GDP in 2007-08.  
2 
 BIS Review 97/2009
Both  the  Government  and  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  responded  to  the  challenge  in  close 
coordination  and  consultation.  The  main  plank  of  the  government  response  was  fiscal 
stimulus while the Reserve Bank's action comprised monetary accommodation and counter 
cyclical regulatory measures.  
Monetary measures 
The monetary measures have comprised three elements: Monetary easing by cutting policy 
rates,  provision  of  rupee  liquidity,  forex  liquidity  and  ensuring  availability  of  credit  for 
productive purposes. 
Reduction in key policy rates  
• 
The repo rate was reduced by 425 basis points from 9.0 per cent in October 2008 to 
the current rate of 4.75 per cent. Similarly the reverse repo rate was reduced by 275 
basis points from 6.0 per cent to 3.25 per cent. 
Provision of Rupee liquidity 
• 
The  Cash  Reserve  Ratio  (CRR)  was  reduced  from  9%  to  5%  of  Net  Demand  and 
Time Liability (NDTL). The cumulative reduction in the CRR by 400 basis points since 
mid-September 2008 released Rs.1.6 trillion of primary liquidity. ($32 billion) 
Unwinding,  redemption  and  de-sequestering  of  Market  Stabilization  Scheme  (MSS) 
has released primary liquidity of Rs.1.44 trillion. (approx $29 billion) 
Permanent reduction in SLR by 1.0% of NDTL has released Rs.400 billion. ($8 billion) 
An  exclusive  repo  facility  for  supporting  non-banking  financial  companies(NBFCs) 
mutual  funds,  and  housing  finance  companies  to  the  extent  of  Rs.600  billion.  ($12 
billion) 
Special  Purpose  Vehicle  (SPV)  set  up  for  extending  assistance  to  NBFCs  to  the 
extent of Rs.250 billion. ($5 billion) 
Refinance  extended  to  Small  Industries  Development  Bank  of  India  (SIDBI)  ($1.4 
billion), National Housing Bank ($800 million). 
The  actions  of  the  Reserve  Bank  since  mid-September  2008  have  resulted  in 
augmentation of actual/potential liquidity of over Rs.4.69 trillion ($ 93 billion) 
That liquidity is not a constraint is attested to by the fact that on an average, RBI has 
been  absorbing  through  its  Reverse  Repo  window  roughly  USD  25  billion  worth  of 
surplus rupee liquidity in the banking system.  
Provision of forex liquidity and inflow enhancing measures 
• 
US$ swap lines of more than $10 billion for Indian banks with overseas subsidiaries 
and branches available up to March, 2010. 
Re-institution of special market operations to meet the foreign exchange requirement 
of public sector oil marketing companies.  
Prudential limit on overseas borrowing by banks doubled. 
Special refinance facility for EXIM Bank ($1 billion). 
Export credit refinance available to banks from RBI increased 
        BIS Review 97/2009 
 3
   Increasing  interest  rate  ceilings  on  Non  Resident  Indian  deposits  in  rupees  and 
foreign currency. 
Relaxation  of  External  Commercial  Borrowings  (ECB)  norms  –  ceilings  on  interest 
rates raised, end use restrictions which had been put in 2007-08 to deal with large 
inflows relaxed. 
The  above  various  special  refinance  and  other  facilities  have  mostly  remained 
unavailed of, underscoring the fact that lack of funding is not an issue; but they were 
provided preemptively, nevertheless, as a backstop. 
Regulatory measures 
• 
     Risk  weights  and  provisions  in  bank  credit  to  certain  sectors,  such  as  real  estate, 
which had been increased earlier, were rolled back to pre 2005-06 levels. 
To  preserve  productive  value  of  assets  otherwise  viable,  prudential  regulations  for 
restructured  accounts  were  modified  as  a  one-time  measure  for  a  limited  period  of 
time. 
With  regard  to  their  need  to  raise  capital,  NBFCs  were  allowed  to  issue  perpetual 
debt instruments qualifying for capital. 
NBFCs allowed further time of one more year to comply with the increased Capital to 
Risk-Weighted Asset Ratio (CRAR) stipulation of 15 per cent as against the existing 
requirement of 12 per cent. 
Risk weight on banks’ exposures to NBFCs which had been increased earlier, was 
rolled back. 
The  restriction  on  commercial  banks  and  all-India  term  lending  and  refinancing 
institutions  who  were  not  allowed  to  lend  against  or  buy  back  CDs  held  by  mutual 
funds was relaxed in the context of the drying up of liquidity for CDs and CPs. 
Fiscal measures 
• 
Three  fiscal  stimulus  packages  launched  in  December  2008,  January  2009  ,  and 
February 2009 
o 
o 
Tax relief to boost demand  
Increased  expenditure  on  public  projects  to  create  employment  and  public 
assets 
Cost 3.5% of GDP – Rs.1.86 trillion ($37 billion) 
Net borrowing during 2008-09 rose from budgeted Rs.1 trillion ($20 billion) to 
Rs.2.29 trillion ($46 billion) 
Increase  in  fiscal  deficit  from  2.7%  of  GDP  in  2007-08  to  6.2%  of  GDP  in 
2008-09 
Net borrowing during 2009-10 budgeted at Rs.3.97 trillion (approx $80 billion) 
o 
o 
o 
o 
Potential fallout of increased market borrowings and RBI’s response 
o 
The  increased  market  borrowing  programme  of  the  government  has  the 
potential 
interest  rates  with  unintended 
consequences  for  growth  as  well  as  borrowing  cost  for  the  government.  To 
mitigate  this,  RBI  has  been  conducting  Open  Market  Operations  (OMOs). 
to  put  upward  pressure  on 
4 
 BIS Review 97/2009
From mid-February 2009 till date, RBI has purchased government securities 
worth Rs. 765 billion ($15 billion) as part of its open market operations. 
These measures have had the desired effect of lowering deposit and lending rates of banks 
and increased credit flow to the real economy. Besides, recent quarterly figures of corporate 
earnings have been quite healthy and encouraging. Further, India has well developed liquid 
and  efficient  derivative  markets  like  Interest  Rate  Swaps,  Currency  Futures,  OTC  Forward 
Contracts  which  afford  businesses  instruments  to  hedge  their  financial  risks.  Moreover, 
exchange traded Interest Rate Futures are due for launch shortly which will further increase 
the  choices  to  market  participants.  Also,  at  USD  255  billion,  foreign  exchange  reserves 
provide more than adequate comfort. Exchange rate of the rupee is market determined and 
RBI  intervenes  at  the  margin  only  to  contain  excessive  volatility  and  to  ensure  orderly 
conditions in the foreign exchange market. Significantly, Indian foreign exchange market is 
very  deep  and  liquid  as  reflected  in  bid  offer  spreads  which  compare  with  the  major 
international currency pairs such as $-Euro, $-Sterling and $-Yen. In addition, as against the 
net  outflow  of  portfolio  investment  in  2008-09,  net  Foreign  Direct  Investment  (FDI)  was 
substantially  positive  in  2008-09  at  $  18  billion  underscoring  the  confidence  of  foreign 
investors in the growth prospects of the Indian economy. This was the consequence of liberal 
and transparent policy on FDI. Even the Overseas Direct Investment (ODI) policy is also very 
liberal which has resulted in an annual average ODI outflow during the last 3 years of USD 
17 billion. Here again, we can discern the balance that I referred to elsewhere in my speech.  
Last but not the least, the Indian Banking sector is very well regulated and well capitalized 
and has proved resilient to the recent global financial crisis as reflected in the following key 
parameters: 
Total  Assets:  USD  1  trillion,  CRAR:  13.18%,  ROA:  1.03%;  Gross  NPA:  2.41%,  Net  NPA: 
1.12%, NIM: 2.44%, Liquid Assets to Total Assets: 33%.  
I do hope that the low-down that I have given on the current enabling and facilitating policy 
environment in India will appetise businesses both in India and South Africa enough to seize 
the  complementary  and  synergistic  investment  and  trade  opportunities  to  consolidate  and 
enhance  the  bilateral  business  relations  to  the  common  good  of  the  people  of  our  two 
countries. 
With these words, I close my address and wish the conference all success that it deserves. 
Thank you all so very much! 
BIS Review 97/2009 
 5
