Njuguna Ndung’u: Economic and financial developments in Kenya 
Speech by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the Luncheon 
with members of the Eastern Africa Association, Nairobi, 21 January 2009. 
 The Chairman Eastern Africa Association, 
Members, 
Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen; 
Let  me  first  thank  the  Chairman  of  the  Association  for  this  opportunity  to  share  my 
experiences  with  economic  performance,  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  in  2008,  and  the 
perspective for 2009. 
The  experiences  of  the  Central  Bank  have  been  vast  but  I  will  deal  with  economic 
performance and policy directions in three topical areas: 
• 
• 
• 
The Conduct of Monetary Policy and Monetary policy decisions 
Economic growth outlook 
The Global Financial crisis and Kenya’s economic performance  
The conduct of monetary policy in 2008  
liquidity management in the economy; 
inflation upsurge; and 
exchange rate volatility 
A.  
The past year has been a difficult one both from a local and global perspective. For monetary 
policy at the Central Bank of Kenya (CBK), three challenges emerged; 
• 
• 
• 
These  challenges  tended  to  take  monetary  policy  management  to  unfamiliar  territory.  In 
order  to  ensure  price  stability  or  fight  inflation,  the  CBK  relies  on  indirect  instruments  that 
affect liquidity in the economy and so the stock of money, which in turn affects interest rates 
and prices in the desired direction. The debate on what are the targets and what instruments 
to  achieve  the  targets  is  relevant.  Money  supply  growth  was  maintained  within  the  target 
range for most of the months in 2008. 
Liquidity management in the economy 
(i)  
The  role  of  a  modern  central  bank  is  in  general  price  stability,  that  is  to  fight  inflation. 
However, for the Central Bank of Kenya, stability of the financial system is equally important, 
so  is  the  national  payments  and  settlement  system.  The  Bank  implemented  the  first  two 
objectives with varying degrees of success. While inflation was high we also faced downside 
risks to financial stability from the Safaricom IPO. The size and nature of the IPO led to large 
shifts in liquidity, and the unwinding process would no doubt have had longer term impacts 
on  economic  and  financial  variables  if  not  properly  managed.  The  offer  attracted  Ksh231 
billion. 
Liquidity was skewed in favour of a consortium of banks despite the mitigation mechanisms 
put in place by the banking system. The Bank’s approach to this therefore was to mop up 
excess liquidity from the banking sector using the Term Auction Deposit and repos and inject 
liquidity  to  accommodate  the  liquidity  shortfalls  for  banks  outside  the  consortium,  through 
BIS Review 26/2009 
 1
reverse repos. This intermediation function helped to moderate effects on interest rates, and 
thereby ensured financial sector stability. 
The Term Auction Deposit is a new instrument we introduced in May 2008 to support liquidity 
management.  Foreign  exchange  spot  sales  or  purchases  were  also  another  indirect 
instrument used. 
Inflation upsurge 
(ii)  
The post-election disturbances early in 2008 put enormous pressure on supply networks for 
food in most parts of the country. Delayed land preparation and transportation constraints, 
coupled  with  high  cost  of  fertilizer  pushed  overall  inflation  rapidly  from  12.0  percent  in 
December  2007  to  31.5  percent  in  May  2008.  Similarly,  underlying  inflation  rose  from  5.1 
percent  in  January  2008  to  7.2  percent  in  May  2008.  From  the  outset,  it  did  seem  that 
inflation was going out of hand. 
The January 2008 effect has taken longer than we had expected to dissipate with inflation in 
December 2008 at 27.7 percent. International crude oil prices which had peaked in July 2008 
also sustained high inflation but their transmission downward takes a longer period. 
A  number  of  factors  are  also  now  coming  to  the  fore;  weaknesses  in  the  distribution 
mechanisms  of  food  in  many  parts  of  the  country,  high  world  food  and  oil  prices  were 
passing through to domestic food prices. The process to address these issues has started. 
But  from  the  monetary  policy  side,  we  derived  some  measure  of  comfort  in  choosing  to 
manage  liquidity  in  the  short  term  from  the  fact  that  inflation  was  coming  from  supply 
constraints  in  the  economy,  specifically  supply  and  distribution  factors  associated  with  the 
post-election  violence  effects  which  caused  food  prices  to  increase.  Monetary  policy 
decisions are geared towards controlling the component of inflation that is linked to money 
supply and preventing rapid money supply growth – which would ratify high prices from the 
supply constraints. 
In addition, there are changes to inflation computation relating to the basket of goods and 
weights used in major categories of the consumption basket that makes inflation computation 
closer to international standards. 
Exchange rate volatility 
(iii) 
The  foreign  exchange  market  was  turbulent  particularly  from  the  second  half  of  2008 
onwards. The question we asked ourselves is what a small open economy can do in the face 
of  portfolio  capital  flows.  My  works  in  the  past  have  produced  conclusions  which  are 
important even in the practical work at Central Bank. Stock adjustment, changing risk profile 
in the country and arbitrage process all work to warn us to do nothing when portfolio flows 
drive either securities markets or the economy. The shilling appreciated following increased 
capital inflows for the Safaricom IPO and depreciated as investors took profits and exited the 
stock market – a management failure in the IPO process. We have detailed this in the press 
release of the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) of November 2008. We provide Monetary 
Policy  Committee  press  releases  to  share  information  and  even  show  how  to  process  the 
information. 
Monetary policy decisions 
B.  
Inflation continues to be a challenge but expectations are that it will come down to its target 
level in 2009 of 5 percent. It seems likely that there will be some disinflation in the upcoming 
months. The CPI computation has been revised, so is the basket of goods using the 2005/06 
household budget survey. The Government is taking adequate steps to address the supply 
constraints. 
2 
 BIS Review 26/2009
There were indications of a liquidity crunch towards the end of 2008 with short term interest 
rates  moving  upwards.  Money  demand  rises  in  the  festive  season  and  so  we  used  our 
liquidity management tools to increase liquidity in order to stabilize the interest rates in the 
short term and also hope to sustain a low interest rate regime that would support investment 
and growth revival to the pre-crises period. You are aware the MPC reduced the statutory 
cash ratio from 6 percent to 5 percent at the beginning of December. To support this, it also 
lowered  the  Central  Bank  Rate  from  9  percent  to  8.5  percent  to  enhance  liquidity  in  the 
banking system and to nurture the economic recovery process. So far Repo and interbank 
interest rates have declined to 4.8 percent and 5.8 percent respectively. CBK desires to have 
a low, stable interest rate environment that encourages private investment. This will support 
faster economic recovery from the 2008 shocks. 
The Kenya Shilling was volatile and followed global developments; appreciating against the 
US dollar and the Sterling Pound but depreciating against the Euro and the Japanese Yen. 
Against the US dollar, the shilling has lately been oscillating around Ksh78 to the dollar. But 
most  spectacular  were  the  effects  the  dollar  had  on  the  Pound  and  Euro.  Between 
September 2, 2008 and January 12, 2009, the US dollar has appreciated by 7.7 percent and 
16.5 percent against the Euro and Pound respectively. 
There were also “flight-to-safety” concerns in the wake of the global financial crisis as banks 
dumped  asset  backed  securities  and  preferred  US  Bills  and  Bonds.  The  global  liquidity  is 
increasingly being measured in US dollars and so scarcity of the dollar when global banks 
were not lending to each other led to this depreciation and continues to sustain it even today. 
The  road  CBK  took  was  a  bit  bumpy  in  that  it  accepted  to  live  with  some  exchange  rate 
volatility in the hope that they would soon soften once global banks started trading with each 
other. 
The current trend in imports and exports is expected to be sustained in 2009 with the current 
account deficit expected to widen. This deficit will be financed by capital and financial inflows 
as has been the case in the last few years. We are taking a cautious view on private capital 
flows. We will monitor the current account and the deficit to ensure its sustainability. But so 
far, most imports have been inputs and machinery equipment – so signalling firm growth and 
expansion in the future. 
Economic growth 
C.  
The economy was buffeted by internal and external shocks in 2008, thus performing below 
potential throughout the year. During the third quarter of 2008, the Kenya National Bureau of 
Statistics estimates the economy to have expanded by 2.1 percent compared to 6.3 percent 
in the corresponding quarter in 2007. The recovery from the post-election violence has been 
fast  although  agricultural  performance  lags  behind.  The  shortfall  in  tourism  receipts  from 
January  2008  has  also  narrowed  down  and  a  catch  up  is  expected  during  the  next  prime 
season. 
Fiscal side 
The shocks that have taken place in 2008 and continuing food supply constraints have put a 
strain on the budget and a risk of overshooting the fiscal targets. The Government intended 
to borrow Ksh54 billion from the domestic market in the current fiscal year. This, so far has 
not  changed.  The  Government  delayed  issuance  of  the  sovereign  bond  of  about  Ksh34 
billion, to await stability in international financial markets. But the Government in the coming 
weeks  will  float  an  infrastructural  bond  for  Ksh18.5  billion  to  finance  major  infrastructure 
projects. I am encouraging corporates like yours to commit funds for this important bond. 
BIS Review 26/2009 
 3
The global financial crisis 
D.  
Starting as a global financial crisis it is now an economic crisis. For those countries that are 
less integrated in global financial markets, there is need to look at some of the risk factors. 
• 
Capital flows: Short term capital inflows which had increased substantially in 2007 
flattened out in 2008 above US dollars1.1 billion. Short term capital outflows which 
have  been  far  less  substantial  have  increased,  and  we  know  the  dangers  and 
destabilizing effects of these flows. 
Fiscal  risks:  Expenditures  have  been  below  target  due  to  delays  in  implementing 
some projects. There may also be some diversion of expenditure to cater for famine 
relief  and  other  recurrent  expenditures.  However,  with  respect  to  revenue,  the 
Government is on target despite the fact that the benchmark was on the basis of a 
more  optimistic  growth  path.  Current  figures  from  the  Kenya  Revenue  Authority 
(KRA) on the last quarter show tax revenues overshooting their target. 
Export  risks:  Global  growth  is  expected  to  decline  from  2.5  percent  in  2008  to 
1 percent  in  2009.  Although  demand  for  some  of  Kenya’s  exports  is  expected  to 
remain robust, recent trade statistics indicate a slowdown in export volume growth. 
International commodity prices are also expected to decline. However, the impact of 
the global crisis on Kenya’s exports may come from reduced aid flows to regional 
trading partners. 
Remittances:  Remittance  receipts  through  formal  channels  increased  from  US 
dollars574  million  in  2007  to  US  dollars630  million  in  2008  despite  reductions 
beginning May 2008. The decline could persist with reduction in incomes in source 
countries. Remittances are predominantly used for smoothing consumption and for 
investment in real estate. But they are also pro-cyclical and tend to follow events in 
the economy. So their trend may not reveal much. 
Liquidity  risks:  While  global  banks  are  not  lending  to  each  other,  local  banks  are. 
However,  Government  access  to  global  financial  markets  may  be  constrained  by 
weakening of these markets. The postponement of the sovereign bond is a pointer 
to this. The latest upgrade by Fitch rating agency for Kenya is improving the country 
ratings  and  once  global  financial  markets  are  stable,  Kenya’s  entry  will  be 
significant.  But  more  significant  will  be  the  target  enabling  projects  targeted  to  be 
financed by this bond issue. 
On the domestic banking sector, the expectation was that  due to the  global crisis 
and  the  political  crisis  in  2008,  the  banking  system’s  net  non-performing  loans 
(NPLs) would rise. However, net NPLs as a share of total loans have come down 
from  2.9  in  March  2008  to  2.2  in  November  2009.  This  is  due  to  improved 
provisioning and a decline in net NPLs portfolio. 
     The  CBK  is  tracking  these  risks  to  assess  their  likely  impact  on  macroeconomic  stability. 
Nevertheless, the economy is expected to weather first round effects of the global crisis. This 
will be supported by productivity growth from improved business climate and improved policy 
frameworks. In 2009, we expect a modest recovery and a rebound to the growth trajectory in 
the medium term in line with the country’s long term development strategy. 
Our efforts to sustain macroeconomic stability will bear fruit. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, let me thank you for your attention, and invitation to this auspicious 
occasion. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 26/2009
