Stanley Fischer: Bank of Israel’s objectives for 2009 
Address  by  Professor  Stanley  Fischer,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Israel,  at  the  Globes 
Conference 2009, Tel Aviv, 13 May 2009. 
 A  little  over  four  years  ago  I  took up  my  appointment  as  Governor,  an  appointment  which 
was and is a rare privilege and a great honor for me. In about a year my term of office will be 
over. At the beginning of each year I write down for myself the main tasks for that year. The 
tasks for this year are: 
1. 
First, to fulfill the function that a central bank is meant to perform. In other words, to 
formulate  and  implement  a  monetary  policy  that  will  help  achieve  the  economic 
targets.  At  this  time  the  correct  monetary  policy  is  an  expansionary  one  that 
supports  economic  activity  and  an  economic  recovery,  as  long  as  inflation  is 
expected  to  stay  within  the  target  range.  The  policy  we  are  currently  pursuing  is 
expansionary  in  three  aspects:  (i)  The  interest  rate  is  low.  It  is  not  at  its  lowest 
possible level, but is almost there. Research we carried out showed that a further 
reduction  would  be  of  limited  help  to  growth.  (ii)  We  are  buying  foreign  currency. 
These  purchases  have  almost  certainly  helped  growth,  as  we  export  close  to  45 
percent of GDP. Of no less importance is the stability of the foreign currency market. 
We  have  noted  on  more  than  one  occasion  that  despite  the  severe  shocks  in 
markets around the world, our foreign currency market has come through relatively 
unscathed.  The  foreign  currency  market  showed  stability  even  in  exceptional 
circumstances,  such  as  the  resignation  of  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  the 
incapacitation of the Prime Minister. (iii) We are buying government bonds. Despite 
these purchases, our longer-term (ten-year) interest is relatively high. The difference 
between long-term and short-term interest rates in Israel is much greater than those 
in the US and other countries. We are making these purchases to try to lower the 
cost of long-term credit. These three aspects of monetary policy are acting to steer 
the economy towards a recovery. 
I would like to relate to the lag between events in the financial markets and those on 
the real side. If we are asked whether we see a turnaround in the real economy, we 
can  answer  that  some  of  the  data  do  present  a  more  optimistic  picture.  Israel's 
economy  is  facing  a  difficult  period,  but  in  the  Bank  of  Israel  expectations  for  six 
months  hence  are  optimistic.  In  my  two-monthly  meetings  with  other  central  bank 
governors,  we  discuss  the  economic  situation.  In  the  last  meeting,  two  days  ago, 
they started speaking of optimistic signs. We are currently following an expansionary 
monetary policy, but we must be ready to change direction if and when necessary, 
but not before. The markets and the Bank of Israel expect the April CPI to rise by 
about one percent. Nevertheless, nearly all forecasters expect inflation in 2009 to be 
below 2 percent, and we do not intend to react to one month's index, especially if it 
affected by seasonality. 
The Governor of the Bank has the role of economic adviser to the government. The 
budget  deficit  is  expected  to  be  six-and-a-half  percent  of  GDP  this  year,  and  five 
percent  next  year.  Growth  this  year  is  expected  to  be  a  negative  one-and-a-half 
percent, with a rise in the debt/GDP ratio. This is not an advisable direction for the 
economy to follow. What is of concern is that the debt/GDP ratio at the end of the 
decade  may  be  back  where  it  was at  its  beginning.  In order  to  prevent  the  deficit 
reaching above 6.5 percent this year and 5 percent next year, expenditure must be 
reduced. There are several ways of achieving that, e.g., cutting public sector wages 
and/or  postponing  reductions  in  tax  rates.  With  regard  to  the  current  deficit,  I 
BIS Review 62/2009 
 1
2. 
3. 
4. 
the  Bank; 
it  will  specify 
suggest  starting  with  the  6.5  percent  of  GDP  deficit  this  year  and  5  percent  next 
year, to make it very clear that the path is a downward one. 
The  second  of  this  year's  objectives  is  the  new  Bank  of  Israel  Law.  The  current 
Prime Minister and the Minister of Finance when I took up office expressed support 
on this issue, and that was one of my conditions on accepting the position. Why is 
the new law so important? There are several reasons: the new law will formalize the 
independence  of 
the  Bank's  obligation  regarding 
transparency;  there  will  be  a  Monetary  Committee  that  will  make  interest  rate 
decisions  together  with  the  Governor;  and  there  will  be  an  Administrative  Council 
that  will  approve  administrative  decisions.  Why  is  a  decision  by  committee 
preferable  to  a  decision  by  an  individual?  Research  has  shown  that  on  average, 
decisions made by a committee are better than those of a  single decision maker. 
The current Bank of Israel Law is 55 years old. 
The third task relates to the integration of Israel's economy into the global economy. 
Progress  has  been  made,  and  we  are  still  advancing  in  this  direction.  We  are 
following the procedure for joining the OECD, and expect to become members this 
year. 
Finally,  reform  of  the  bank  supervision  in  Israel.  There  is  a  worldwide  consensus 
that  supervision  reforms  are  necessary,  and  this  applies  to  Israel  too,  and  it  is 
important that we proceed rapidly in this area. 
In  conclusion,  I  would  summarize  by  saying  that  before  I  came  to  the  Bank  of  Israel  I  set 
myself several objectives, not all of which have been achieved yet. The list included a new 
Bank of Israel Law, a new wage agreement in the Bank, and the structural reorganization of 
the  Bank.  The  reorganization  that  has  taken  place  in  the  Bank  certainly  helped  it  deal 
correctly with the crisis. Other targets remain, albeit of somewhat less importance, but still 
worth mentioning: (i) to improve relations between the Ministry of Finance and the Bank – we 
share responsibility for the health of the economy, and with two doctors caring for the same 
patient, it is important that they agree on the correct course of treatment; (ii) to improve the 
level of public debate in Israel, and there is plenty of room for improvement in that area. 
2 
 BIS Review 62/2009
