Donald L Kohn: American International Group 
Testimony of Mr Donald L Kohn, Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve System, before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, US Senate, 
Washington DC, 5 March 2009. 
 Chairman  Dodd,  Ranking  Member  Shelby,  and  other  members  of  the  Committee,  I 
appreciate having  this opportunity  to  discuss  the  role  of  the  Federal Reserve  in  stabilizing 
American  International  Group,  Inc.  (AIG).  In  my  testimony,  I  will  detail  the  support  the 
Federal Reserve, working alongside the Treasury, has given AIG and the reasons for each of 
our actions. Before I go into the extended narrative, however, I think it would be useful to 
briefly put our decisions in their broader context.  
Over  the  past  year  and  a  half,  we have  all  been  dealing with  the  ongoing  disruptions  and 
pressures  engendered  by  an  extraordinary  financial  crisis.  The  weaknesses  at  financial 
institutions  and  resulting  constraints  on  credit,  declines  in  asset  prices,  and  erosion  of 
household and business confidence have in turn led to a sharp weakening in the economy. 
The Federal Reserve has employed all the tools at its disposal to break this spiral and help 
address the many challenges of the crisis and its effects on the economy. One of the most 
important of these tools is the Federal Reserve's authority under section 13(3) of the Federal 
Reserve  Act  to  lend  on  a  secured  basis  under  "unusual  and  exigent"  circumstances  to 
companies that are not depository institutions. Since last fall, in order to foster the stability of 
the financial system and mitigate the effects of ongoing financial stresses on the economy, 
we have used that authority to help to stabilize the financial condition of AIG. 
AIG is a widely diversified financial services company that, as of September 30, 2008, which 
is the reporting date closest to the date we first provided it assistance, reported consolidated 
total assets of more than $1 trillion. AIG was at that time, and continues to be, one of the 
largest insurance companies in the world and, in terms of net premiums underwritten, is both 
the largest life and health insurer in the United States and the second largest property and 
casualty insurer in the United States. It conducts insurance and finance operations in more 
than 130 countries and jurisdictions and has more than 74 million individual and corporate 
customers  and  116,000  employees  globally.  In  the  United  States,  it  has  approximately  30 
million customers and 50,000 employees. AIG is the leading commercial insurer in the United 
States, providing insurance to approximately 180,000 small businesses and other corporate 
entities,  which  employ  approximately  106  million  people  in  the  United  States.  It  is  also  a 
major  provider  of  protection  to  municipalities,  pension  funds,  and  other  public  and  private 
entities  through  guaranteed  investment  contracts  and  products  that  protect  participants  in 
401(k) retirement plans.  
AIG  has  also  been  a  major  participant  in  many  derivatives  markets  through  its  Financial 
Products business unit (Financial Products). Financial Products is an unregulated entity that 
exploited a gap in the supervisory framework for insurance companies and was able to take 
on substantial risk using the credit rating that AIG received as a consequence of its strong 
regulated insurance subsidiaries. Financial Products became the counterparty on hundreds 
of over-the-counter derivatives to a broad range of customers, including many major national 
and  international  financial  institutions,  U.S.  pension  plans,  stable  value  funds,  and 
municipalities. Financial Products also provided credit protection through credit default swaps 
it  has  written  on  billions  of  dollars  of  multi-sector  collateralized  debt  obligations  (CDOs). 
Financial  Products  did  not  adequately  protect  itself  against  the  effects  of  a  declining 
economy or the loss of the highest ratings from the credit rating agencies, and thereby was a 
source  of  weakness  to  AIG.  While  Financial  Products  has  been  winding  down  and  exiting 
many of its trades, it continues to have a very large notional amount of derivatives contracts 
outstanding with numerous counterparties. 
BIS Review 26/2009 
 1
It  is  against  this  background  that  the  Federal  Reserve  and  the  Treasury  Department  have 
taken a series of unusual actions to stabilize the company. These have entailed very difficult 
and  uncomfortable  decisions  for  a  central  bank.  These  decisions  were  particularly  difficult 
and discomforting because they involved addressing systemic problems created largely by 
poor decisionmaking by the company itself. Moreover, many of these decisions involved an 
unregulated  business  entity  that  exploited  the  strength,  and  threatened  the  viability,  of 
affiliates that were large, regulated entities in good standing. However, uncomfortable as this 
was,  we  believe  we  had  no  choice  if  we  are  to  pursue  our  responsibility  for  protecting 
financial stability.  
Our judgment has been and continues to be that, in this time of severe market and economic 
stress,  the  failure  of  AIG  would  impose  unnecessary  and  burdensome  losses  on  many 
individuals, households and businesses, disrupt financial markets, and greatly increase fear 
and  uncertainty  about  the  viability  of  our  financial  institutions.  Thus,  such  a  failure  would 
deepen and extend market disruptions and asset price declines, further constrict the flow of 
credit  to  households  and  businesses  in  the  United  States  and  in  many  of  our  trading 
partners, and materially worsen the recession our economy is enduring. To mitigate these 
risks, the Treasury provided equity capital to AIG and the Federal Reserve provided liquidity 
support backed by the assets of AIG.  
The Federal Reserve's involvement in AIG began in mid-September of 2008. AIG's financial 
condition  had  been  deteriorating  for  some  time.  The  financial  and  credit  markets  were 
experiencing severe stress due to various economic problems arising out of the broad-based 
decline in home prices, rise in delinquencies and foreclosures, and substantial drop in values 
of mortgages as well as mortgage-backed securities and other instruments based on such 
assets.  In  short-term  funding  markets,  very  high  spreads  between  lending  rates  and  the 
target federal funds rate and very illiquid trading conditions in term money markets had come 
to prevail. AIG was exposed to these problems because of the protection Financial Products 
had  written  on  mortgage-related  securities,  because  of  investments  AIG  had  made  in 
mortgage-related securities in connection with its securities lending program, and because its 
counterparties  had  begun 
through 
September.  The private sector worked through the weekend of September 13-14 to find a 
way  for  private  firms  to  address  AIG's  mounting  liquidity  strains.  But  that  effort  was 
unsuccessful in a deteriorating economic and financial environment in which firms were not 
willing  to  expose  themselves  to  risks  –  a  risk  aversion  that  greatly  increased  following  the 
collapse of Lehman Brothers on September 15.  
Under  these  circumstances,  on  September  16,  2008,  acting  with  the  full  support  of  the 
Treasury, the Board authorized the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (New York Reserve 
Bank) pursuant to section 13(3) to lend up to $85 billion to AIG through a revolving credit 
facility  (Revolving  Credit  Facility)  in  order  to  ease  the  liquidity  strain  on  AIG.  The  liquidity 
pressures  experienced  by  AIG  during  that  time  of  fragile  economic  markets  threatened  its 
ability to continue to operate, and the prospect of AIG's disorderly failure posed considerable 
systemic  risks  in  various  ways  as  a  consequence  of  its  significant  and  wide-ranging 
operations.  Such  a  failure  would  also  have  further  undermined  business  and  household 
confidence and contributed to higher borrowing costs, reduced wealth, and general additional 
weakening of the economy. Moreover, at the time the Board extended the Revolving Credit 
Facility, there was no federal entity that could provide capital to AIG to help stabilize it. The 
Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP) legislation was requested in part to fill that void and 
authorized by Congress on October 3, 2008. 
The Revolving Credit Facility was established with the purpose of assisting AIG in meeting its 
obligations  when  due  and  facilitating  a  restructuring  whereby  AIG  would  sell  certain 
businesses in an orderly manner, with minimal disruption to the overall economy. AIG would 
repay the Revolving Credit Facility over a period of two years as it sold assets. Importantly, 
the Revolving Credit Facility was (and remains) secured by a pledge of a substantial portion 
of  the  company's  assets,  including  AIG's  ownership  interests  in  its  domestic  and  foreign 
funding.  These  pressures  mounted 
to  withdraw 
2 
 BIS Review 26/2009
flows, 
liquidity,  earnings,  asset  valuation,  and  progress 
insurance  subsidiaries.  As  additional  compensation  for  the  Revolving  Credit  Facility,  AIG 
agreed to issue to a trust for the benefit of the Treasury, preferred stock convertible into 79 
percent of AIG's outstanding common stock. With these protections, the Board believed that 
the authorization of the Revolving Credit Facility would not result in any net cost to taxpayers. 
In  connection  with  the  extension  of  credit,  AIG's  CEO  was  replaced.  In  addition,  the  New 
York Reserve Bank established a team to review the financial condition of AIG, and monitor 
the implementation of AIG's plan to restructure itself and repay the Revolving Credit Facility. 
Furthermore, as an ongoing condition of the Revolving Credit Facility, the New York Reserve 
Bank staff established an on-site presence to monitor the company's use of cash flows and 
progress  in  pursuing  its  restructuring  and  divestiture  plan.  The  Federal  Reserve  does  not 
have  statutory  supervisory  authority  over  AIG  or  its  subsidiaries  as  we  would  over  a  bank 
holding company or state chartered bank that is a member of the Federal Reserve System. 
Rather, the rights of the Federal Reserve are those typical of a creditor and are governed by 
the  credit  agreement  for  the  Revolving  Credit  Facility.  Using  these  rights,  the  Federal 
Reserve works with management of AIG to develop and oversee the implementation of the 
company's  business  strategy,  its  strategy  for  restructuring,  and  its  new  compensation 
policies, monitors the financial condition of AIG, and must approve certain major decisions 
that might reduce its ability to repay its loan.  
The  Federal  Reserve  has  a  team  of  about  15  staff  members,  led  by  senior  officials,  who 
conduct oversight of the company pursuant to the credit agreement. The team has frequent 
on site contact at the company to make sure the Federal Reserve is adequately informed on 
funding,  cash 
in  pursuing 
restructuring and divestiture. Federal Reserve staff is also assisted by qualified advisers in its 
monitoring and coordinates with officials of the Treasury. 
We  routinely  make  our  views  known  on  key  issues,  such  as  major  incidents  of  corporate 
spending and executive compensation. For example, we pressed for the company to ensure 
that robust corporate governance surrounds all compensation actions and worked with AIG 
management on limits to executive compensation that restrict salary and bonuses for 2008 
and 2009. The Treasury has also imposed standards governing executive compensation that 
are  broader  than  the  general  restrictions  under  the  TARP  Capital  Purchase  Program.  The 
Treasury has also required a comprehensive written policy on corporate expenses that may 
be materially amended only with the Treasury's prior consent. 
Following the establishment of the Revolving Credit Facility, AIG accessed its funds to meet 
various liquidity needs and by October 1, 2008, the company had drawn down approximately 
$61 billion. In part these draws were used to settle transactions with counterparties returning 
securities they had borrowed from AIG entities under a securities lending program used by 
AIG insurance subsidiaries. The cash collateral received by AIG in these lending programs 
was used to purchase a portfolio of residential mortgage-backed securities (RMBS). As the 
value of RMBS declined, these transactions became a significant source of liquidity strain on 
AIG. When securities borrowing counterparties chose to terminate their securities borrowing 
transactions  with  AIG,  AIG  was  unable  to  immediately  dispose  of  the  illiquid  and  price-
depressed  RMBS  as  a  source  of  repayment  to  securities  borrowers  without  realizing 
substantial losses. As a result, AIG had to supply cash from its own resources to repay the 
securities borrowing counterparties.  
To  reduce  these  liquidity  pressures,  the  Board  approved  an  additional  credit  facility  (the 
Secured Borrowing Facility) that permitted the New York Reserve Bank to lend to certain AIG 
domestic insurance subsidiaries up to $37.8 billion in order to allow them to return the cash 
collateral  they  received  from  their  securities  borrowing  counterparties.  The  Secured 
Borrowing  Facility  was  designed  to  provide  the  company  additional  time  to  arrange  and 
complete  the  orderly  sales  of  RMBS  and  other  assets  in  a  manner  that  would  minimize 
losses to AIG and disruption to the financial markets. AIG borrowed approximately $20 billion 
under the Securities Borrowing Facility by November of 2008. State insurance authorities of 
BIS Review 26/2009 
 3
AIG's  regulated  insurance  subsidiaries  participating  in  the  securities  lending  program 
supported the Board's action. 
Additionally, toward the end of October, four AIG affiliates began participating in the Federal 
Reserve's Commercial Paper Funding Facility (CPFF) on the same terms and conditions as 
other  participants.  The  CPFF  is  a  generally  available  program  that  involves  the  purchase, 
through a special purpose vehicle with financing from the Federal Reserve, of three-month 
unsecured and asset-backed commercial paper directly from eligible issuers. As of February 
18, 2009, the AIG-affiliated CPFF participants had borrowed approximately $14 billion in the 
aggregate from the facility.  
During the month of October, credit markets continued to be severely stressed and liquidity 
pressures on AIG did not abate even with access to government credit. The company was 
negatively affected by the decline in market value of many assets owned by AIG entities or to 
which AIG entities were exposed through derivatives. Losses on the RMBS portfolios in the 
securities  borrowing  program  and  credit  default  swap  protection  Financial  Products  had 
written on multi-sector CDOs together accounted for approximately $19 billion of the $24.5 
billion  in  losses  announced  by  the  company  for  the  third  quarter  of  2008.  The  losses 
experienced through the third quarter, and the consequent capital erosion placed in jeopardy 
the credit ratings of AIG. Had the credit ratings agencies downgraded AIG in November, AIG 
would  have  been  required  to  find  additional  funds  to  meet  collateral  calls  and  termination 
events on the exposures held by Financial Products alone.  
The  Board  and  Treasury  therefore  took  a  series  of  actions,  announced  on  November  10, 
2008,  to  mitigate  the  effect  of  third  quarter  losses  and  liquidity  drains  on  AIG  and  its 
subsidiaries, and provide for a more stable capital structure. These actions were designed to 
facilitate AIG's execution of its divestiture plan in an orderly manner, and thereby protect the 
interests of the taxpayers, both by preserving financial stability and by giving AIG more time 
to repay the Federal Reserve and return the Treasury's investment.  
As part of the set of actions, Treasury invested $40 billion in newly issued Senior Preferred 
Stock of AIG under its recently granted TARP authority. In connection with that investment, 
the  Federal  Reserve  modified  the  terms  of  the  Revolving  Credit  Facility  to  be  more 
sustainable:  The  maturity  of  loans  extended  under  the  facility  was  extended  to  five  years 
(due 2013), the maximum amount available was reduced from $85 billion to $60 billion, and 
the  interest  rate  and  commitment  fees  were  reduced.  The  facility  remained  secured  by 
substantially all of AIG's assets, and the company continued to be required to apply proceeds 
of asset sales to permanently repay any outstanding balances under the facility. 
At the same time, the Board approved the establishment of an additional lending facility that 
would  provide  a  permanent  solution  to  the  AIG  securities  lending  program's  losses  and 
liquidity drains, thus eliminating the need for the Securities Borrowing Facility. Under the new 
facility, the New York Reserve Bank extended approximately $19.5 billion in secured, non-
recourse credit to a special purpose limited liability company in which AIG would hold a $1 
billion first-loss position (Maiden Lane II). Maiden Lane II then purchased, at market prices, 
RMBS  with  a  par  value  of  $39.3  billion  from  certain  AIG  domestic  insurance  company 
subsidiaries. This facility allowed AIG to terminate its securities lending program and to repay 
fully  all  outstanding  amounts  under  the  Securities  Borrowing  Facility,  which  was  then 
terminated.  
The  Federal  Reserve  also  took  steps  to  help  address  the  drain  of  liquidity  on  AIG  arising 
from  potential  collateral  calls  associated  with  credit  default  swap  contracts  written  by 
Financial  Products  on  multi-sector  CDOs.  The  New  York  Reserve  Bank  made  a  secured, 
non-recourse loan in the amount of $24.3 billion to another special purpose limited liability 
company (Maiden Lane III). Maiden Lane III then purchased, at market prices, multi-sector 
collateralized debt obligations with a par value of approximately $62 billion from credit default 
swap counterparties of Financial Products in return for the agreement of the counterparties to 
4 
 BIS Review 26/2009
terminate  the  credit  default  swaps.  AIG  provided  $5  billion  in  equity  to  Maiden  Lane  III  to 
absorb future losses on the CDOs held by Maiden Lane III.  
The  Federal  Reserve  loans  to  Maiden  Lane  II  and  III  have  a  term  of  six  years  and  are 
secured by the entire portfolio of each company. The Federal Reserve reports the amount of 
the loans to these facilities and the value of the supporting collateral regularly on its website. 
The investment manager to the New York Reserve Bank for these entities projects that, even 
under very stressed scenarios, the loans to Maiden Lane II and Maiden Lane III will be repaid 
over time with no loss to the taxpayer.  
On Monday, March 2, 2009, AIG announced a loss of approximately $62 billion for the fourth 
quarter of 2008, ending a year in which AIG suffered approximately $99 billion in total net 
losses.  As  a  consequence  of  increased  economic  weakness  and  market  disruption,  the 
insurance  subsidiaries  of  AIG,  like  many  other  insurance  companies,  have  recorded 
significant losses on investments in the fourth quarter of 2008. Commercial mortgage-backed 
securities  and  commercial  mortgages  have  experienced  especially  severe  impairment  in 
market  value,  requiring  a  steep  markdown  on  the  companies'  books,  despite  a  lack  of 
significant credit losses on these assets to date.  
The loss of value in the company's investment portfolios, which totaled approximately $18.6 
billion  pre-tax,  was  primarily  attributable  to  the  insurance  subsidiaries'  holdings.  This  loss 
was a substantial contributor to AIG's fourth quarter loss. The remainder of the fourth quarter 
loss  was  significantly  associated  with  the  mark  to  market  of  assets  transferred  to  Maiden 
Lane II and Maiden Lane III during the middle of that quarter, losses due to accounting on 
securities lending transactions that occurred during the fourth quarter, impairment of deferred 
tax  assets  and  goodwill,  and  other  market  valuation  losses.  At  the  same  time,  general 
economic weaknesses, along with a tendency of the public to pull away from a company that 
it viewed as having an uncertain future, hurt AIG's ability to generate new business during 
the last half of 2008 and caused a noticeable increase in policy surrenders. 
In  addition, these  extreme  financial  and  economic  conditions  have  greatly  complicated  the 
plans for divestiture of significant parts of the company in order to repay the U.S. government 
for its previous support. Would-be buyers themselves are experiencing financial strains and 
lack access to financing that would make such purchases possible. 
To  address  these  weaknesses,  the  Federal  Reserve  and  Treasury,  in  consultation  with 
management of AIG and outside advisers retained by the Federal Reserve, announced on 
March 2, 2009, a plan designed to provide longer-term stability to AIG while at the same time 
facilitating  divestiture  of  its  assets  and  maximizing  likelihood  of  repayment  to  the  U.S. 
government.  The  plan  involves  restructuring  the  current  obligations  of  AIG  to  the  Federal 
Reserve and Treasury, additional capital contributions by Treasury, and continued access to 
Federal Reserve credit on a limited basis for ongoing liquidity needs of AIG. 
Under the plan, Treasury will create a new capital facility that would allow AIG to issue to the 
Treasury up to $30 billion over five years in new preferred shares under the TARP as liquidity 
and capital needs arise. This brings the total equity support of the Treasury to $70 billion. 
Additionally,  Treasury  will  restructure  the  $40  billion  in  preferred  equity  AIG  issued  to  the 
Treasury  in  connection  with  the  actions  taken  to  aid  the  company  in  November.  This 
restructuring, along with the injections of capital from the new preferred shares, will bolster 
AIG's capital position and reduce its leverage, bolstering confidence in the company.  
Under  the  plan,  the  Federal  Reserve  also  has  agreed  to  reduce  and  restructure  AIG's 
outstanding  debt  under  the  Revolving  Credit  Facility.  Capacity  under  the  Revolving  Credit 
Facility will be reduced from $60 billion to $25 billion. The current outstanding debt of $39.5 
billion will be restructured in several ways. First, up to about $26 billion will be satisfied by 
providing  the  Federal  Reserve  with  preferred  equity  interests  in  AIG's  two  largest  life 
insurance  subsidiaries,  American  Life 
Insurance  Company  (ALICO)  and  American 
International Assurance Company (AIA). The actual amount will be a percentage of the fair 
BIS Review 26/2009 
 5
market value of AIA and ALICO based on valuations acceptable to the Federal Reserve. This 
action would be a positive step toward preparing these two valuable AIG subsidiaries for sale 
to third parties or disposition through an initial public offering, the proceeds of which would 
return  to  the  Federal  Reserve  through  its  preferred  equity  interest  stake  in  these  two 
companies.  
Another component of the debt restructuring involves the use of an insurance industry tool to 
monetize  cash  flows  on  a  specified  block  of  life  insurance  policies  already  in  existence. 
Under  the  plan,  the  Federal  Reserve  would  extend  up  to  $8.5  billion  in  credit  to  special 
purpose vehicles (SPV) that would repay the obligation from the net cash flows of identified 
blocks  of  life  insurance  policies  previously  issued  by  certain  AIG  domestic  life  insurance 
subsidiaries. The total amount of principal and interest due to the Federal Reserve on this 
credit would represent a fixed percentage of the estimated net cash flow from the underlying 
policies  that  would  flow  to  the  borrowing  SPVs.  This  "buffer"  between  the  amount  of  the 
credit  and  the  net  cash  flow  would  provide  the  Federal  Reserve  with  security  and  provide 
reasonable assurance of repayment.  
Each of the decisions to provide assistance to AIG has been difficult and uncomfortable for 
us. However, the Federal Reserve and the Treasury agree that the risks and potential costs 
to consumers, municipalities, small businesses and others who depend on AIG for insurance 
protection  in  their  lives,  operations,  pensions, and  investments,  as  well  as  the  risks  to  the 
wider economy, of not providing this assistance during the current economic environment are 
unacceptably  large.  The  disorderly  failure  of  systemically  important  financial  institutions 
during  this  period  of  severe  economic  stress  would  only  deepen  the  current  economic 
recession.  We  have  been  and  will  continue  to  work  alongside  the  Treasury  and  other 
government agencies to avoid this outcome. At the same time, in exercising the tools at our 
disposal, we are also committed to acting only when and to the extent that our assistance is 
necessary  and  can  be  effective  in  addressing  systemic  risks  and  we  are  committed  to 
protecting the interests of the U.S. government and taxpayer. 
6 
 BIS Review 26/2009
