Franz-Christoph Zeitler: How should banking regulation change? 
Introductory  statement  by  Professor  Dr  Franz-Christoph  Zeitler,  Vice-President  of  the 
Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the  conference  "The  future  of  banking  regulation",  organised  by 
Imperial College London and the Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main, 24 September 
2009. 
 I 
Roughly speaking, the crisis can be split into three phases: 
• 
Following  problems  on  the  US  subprime  mortgage  market,  the  players  lost  market 
confidence in many securitisations and their refinancing, which primarily affected the 
money markets.  
The crisis peaked with the Lehman insolvency on 15 September 2008. The crisis of 
confidence  engulfed  money,  capital  and  credit  markets  throughout  the  world  and 
made  it  necessary  for  central  banks  and  governments  to  launch  massive  support 
measures worldwide to safeguard liquidity supply and ensure solvency.  
The financial crisis spread to the real economy towards the end of 2008. Since then, 
governments have been combating this with massive fiscal stimulus measures.  
  II 
The crisis revealed a series of weaknesses in the financial system. A lot of recommendations 
and proposals for individual measures are currently being put forward and discussed on all 
issues,  some  of  which  do  not  always  appear  to  be  completely  devoid  of  institutional  self-
interest. 
All proposals should therefore be measured against the yardstick of whether they strengthen 
the sustainability of the international financial system. 
Sustainability,  a  term  that  was  originally  coined  in  ecology,  defines  a  development  which 
does not seek short-term success to the detriment of long-term success. If we translate this 
to the financial industry, we find a number of practices that did not comply with this principle:  
Sustainability is questionable, for example, in the case of business models based on 
• 
short-term,  variable-rate  loans  to  subprime  borrowers,  which  were  immediately 
securitised and tranched. The business model was based on the hope that the value 
of  the  collateral  would  increase  steadily  and  that  market  liquidity  for  securitisations 
would prove inexhaustible.  
Moreover, quantitative risk measurement methods, such as value-at-risk or expected-
shortfall  models,  which  could  figuratively  speaking  be  described  as  “looking  in  the 
rear-view  mirror”  and  whose  use  has  increased,  have  proved  necessary  but 
inadequate  and  should  be  supplemented  by  forward-looking  instruments  such  as 
stress  tests  and  scenario  analyses,  which  also  take  into  account  changes  in  third 
party behaviour.  
In  retrospect,  the  total  –  and  at  times  blind  –  faith  in  rating  agencies  and  their 
assessments  cannot  be  justified  as  the  massive  downgrading  of  entire  vintages  of 
securitisations demonstrates the instability of ratings across a cycle and highlights the 
inadequate scrutiny of the assets underlying securitisation products.  
Sustainability  is  also  a question  of accounting, which  is  based  to  a  large  extent  on 
current market value: Firstly, if valuations are allowed to shoot up in good times, they 
   BIS Review 116/2009 
 1
will have all the further to nosedive during a downturn. It is a well-known fact that the 
hangover  the  day  after  is  worse  the  wilder  the  party  was  the  evening  before.  And 
secondly, the compass of market value fails if market functions are disrupted.  
III 
Likewise, it would not be very sustainable if regulators were now to respond to the numerous 
individual  problems  by  intervening  with  an  equally  large  number  of  individual  measures. 
Rather, the strengthened international cooperation that has emerged during the crisis is an 
opportunity  to  devise  a  closed  and  coherent  regulatory  framework  that  sets  the  right 
incentives. 
• 
The scope of supervision is all about setting the right incentives; here, the G20 made 
an  important  policy  decision  back  in  the  autumn  of  last  year:  all  financial  market 
players – including near banks and shadow banks – must be regulated;1  
The issue of “incentives” also comprises the past practice of arbitrage between the 
banking book and the trading book, which the new Basel regulations aim to avoid.  
Ultimately, this includes a review of the rules that allowed the crisis to emerge;  
o 
  eg legal constructions such as non-recourse mortgage loans, which are used 
in some countries and were instrumental in promoting borrowers’ willingness 
to take out subprime loans;  
other  rules  that  need  to  be  reviewed  are  capital  requirements  for  liquidity 
facilities  or  the  favourable  capital  requirements  for  securitisation  tranches; 
major  progress  has  already  been  made  in  this  field  with  regard  to  greater 
transparency  and  risk-oriented  capital  charges.  However,  the  practice  of 
measuring the leverage ratio solely by on-balance-sheet items – as happens 
in some jurisdictions – also creates incentives to establish off-balance sheet 
special purpose vehicles.  
o 
IV 
In order to avoid getting mired in detail, we need to keep our eyes on the big picture in terms 
of the effects of the many proposals for new rules.  
I would like to illustrate this with an example relating to regulatory capital; a whole range of 
measures are currently being discussed: 
the definition of regulatory capital,  
• 
• 
the general increase in minimum capital requirements,  
a capital add-on for large institutions,  
• 
• 
the introduction of an anticyclical capital buffer,  
the introduction of a leverage ratio and  
• 
greater  capital  backing  for  certain  complex  securitisation  positions  and  the  trading 
• 
book (largely completed).  
The big picture should be kept in mind when evaluating the impact the measures will have on 
the capital situation of institutions; before any final decisions are taken, an in-depth impact 
                                                 
1   Guiding principles for the replacement of IAS 39; Nr. 10: To delink partially the valuation process from certain 
aspects of income and profit recognition. 
2 
 BIS Review 116/2009
the 
study  is  therefore  necessary  (and  is  actually  planned  according  to  current  documents)  to 
assess the individual proposals’ interdependence. 
Even  if  the  origin  of  the  crisis  (commercial  paper  market)  and  its  climax  (Lehman) 
represented  a  liquidity  crisis,  the  capital  debate  is  essentially  right.  For  strengthening 
institutions’  capital  base  makes 
financial  system  more  robust.  Higher  capital 
requirements  make  it  more  difficult  to  build  up  excessive  balance  sheet  leverage  and 
increase caution towards risky business models, as the owners' liability gains greater weight. 
Therefore, the debate represents an important step towards preventing the next crisis. 
However,  that  will  not  end  or  shorten  the  current  crisis.  Although  encouraging  signs  of 
recovery  are  emerging,  the  crisis  is  not  yet  over  and  it  will  take  years  to  come  back  to 
previous levels of output. Rising unemployment, a scarcity of private capital and the pressure 
to  deleverage  being  exerted  by  the  markets  and  rating  agencies  are  dampening  business 
and  earnings  possibilities.  At  the  same  time,  the  deteriorating  creditworthiness  of  many 
borrowers – euphemistically called rating migration – is hurting banks’ ability to lend. In terms 
of  securitisations,  this  effect  is  aggravated  by  the  “cliff  effects”  under  the  Basel  framework 
(sudden increase in capital requirements triggered by a rating fall below a certain threshold).  
The growing use of fair value accounting, strong rating migration and cliff effects under the 
Basel framework render the financial system to some extent procyclical. Regulators wishing 
to avoid this having a knock-on effect on banks’ ability to lend should therefore not implement 
capital measures until the crisis has been safely resolved. 
V 
The  crisis  provides  the  historic  opportunity  to  anchor  the  principle  of  a  social  market 
economy  internationally;  to  provide  global  “guard  rails”  for  the  markets'  innovation  and 
dynamism  which  will  ensure  system  stability  and  shock-absorb  destructive  excesses.  The 
key objectives when establishing these guard rails should be  
• 
• 
• 
For the financial sector as for regulators and supervisors, these principles will encourage a 
reversion to the role of a service industry. On the one hand, supervision is intended to protect 
creditors, on the other hand, however – when it comes to standards and regulations – it also 
serves the real economy indirectly by creating a framework allowing the financial industry to 
fulfil its role as an intermediary. 
to strengthen sustainability,  
to steer incentives, and  
to avoid procyclicity.  
BIS Review 116/2009 
 3
