Charles Bean: The Great Moderation, the Great Panic and the Great 
Contraction 
Text of the Schumpeter Lecture by Mr Charles Bean, Deputy Governor for Monetary Policy 
and Member of the Monetary Policy Committee, Bank of England, at the Annual Congress of 
the European Economic Association, Barcelona, 25 August 2009. 
I  am  grateful  for  the  assistance  of  Adrian  Penalver.  The  views  expressed  are  those  of  the  author  and  do  not 
necessarily reflect those of either the Bank of England or the Monetary Policy Committee. 
 Summary 
Charles  Bean,  the  Bank  of  England’s  Deputy  Governor,  Monetary  Policy,  was  invited  to 
deliver  the  Schumpeter  lecture  at  the  Annual  Congress  of  the  European  Economic 
Association. The Great Moderation, the Great Panic and the Great Contraction, looks back at 
the causes of the financial crisis and subsequent recession. He argues that much of what 
went wrong can be analysed using standard economic tools.  
The Great Moderation was a period of unusually stable macroeconomic activity in advanced 
economies. This was partly thanks to good luck, including the integration of emerging market 
countries into the global economy, and partly a dividend from structural economic changes 
and better policy frameworks. The longer this stability persisted, the more markets became 
convinced  of  its  permanence  and  risk  premia  became  extremely  low.  Real  short  and  long 
term interest rates were also low due to a combination of loose monetary policy, particularly 
in the US, and strong savings rates in a number of surplus countries.  
Low interest rates and low apparent risk created strong incentives for financial institutions to 
become  highly  geared.  Unfortunately  much  of  this  leverage  occurred  off-balance  sheet  in 
order  to  avoid  on-balance  sheet  capital  charges.  The  innovative  financial  instruments 
developed to achieve this were highly complex. This complexity did not seem to matter when 
markets  were  steady  and  defaults  low  but  was  fatal  once  conditions  deteriorated,  as  it 
became  impossible  to  understand  and  price  these  instruments  objectively.  Leveraged 
institutions were trapped; as their assets sank in value and funding dried up, buyers became 
wary  –  a  classic  lemons  problem.  As  losses  moved  inexorably  towards  institutions  at  the 
heart  of  the  financial  system,  the  complexity  of  the  inter-bank  network  created  enormous 
uncertainty about the extent of counterparty risk.  
Uncertainties in the financial system were transmitted to the real economy after the collapse 
of Lehman Brothers as expectations of future credit tightening, higher precautionary savings 
and the postponement of investment took a sudden and widespread toll on global demand. 
This  made  the  task  of  deleveraging  in  the  financial  system  even  more  difficult  and  the 
tightening  of  credit  more  severe.  Central  banks  responded  aggressively  with  sharp  cuts  in 
policy rates. To affect the yield curve over the medium run, central banks have made explicit 
commitments to keep rates low for a significant period of time or engaged in purchases of 
financial  assets.  Policy  makers  are  also  considering  the  benefits  of  developing  additional 
macroprudential instruments which can be used to respond to rapid credit growth and rising 
asset prices. These new instruments should directly target the incentives to extend excessive 
credit.  But  there  are  a  number  of  practical  questions  to  answer  before  they  can  be 
implemented. 
Charles  Bean  concludes  that  it  is  a  mistake  to  look  for  a  single  culprit.  Just  as  in  Agatha 
Christie’s Murder on the Orient Express, those with different motives but similar objectives 
can all contribute to the same outcome. The economics profession was one of those culprits 
and  there  are  lessons  for  the  discipline.  It  could  incorporate  psychology  or  behavioural 
economics into the study of financial markets but this may be unnecessary since much of the 
story can be explained using standard microeconomics. Economists should take more notice 
BIS Review 101/2009 
 1
of history and not treat crises as pathologies that happen in other times or in other places but 
as a central feature of free-market economies that models should aspire to explain. Finally, 
macroeconomists have to learn how to put credit markets into their models in a meaningful 
way and which enable us to model shocks originating in the financial sector rather than just 
as an amplification mechanism. 
The Great Moderation, the Great Panic and the Great Contraction 
The  past  twenty-four  months  have  been  tumultuous  for  the  global  economy,  for  economic 
policy  makers  and,  indeed,  for  the  discipline  of  economics.  Following  a  long  period  of 
unusually  good  economic  performance,  characterised  by  relatively  steady  growth  and  low 
and  stable  inflation  in  the  advanced  economies  and  rapid  growth  and  development  in  key 
emerging market economies, we have seen the eruption of a systemic financial crisis of quite 
unusual intensity and international reach. The nearest precedent is probably the widespread 
closing  of  international capital  markets  on  the  eve  of  the  First  World  War.  And  associated 
with that, we have seen the sharpest internationally synchronised slowdown in growth in the 
post-war period, together with an unprecedented contraction in world trade. 
To the public at large our present troubles are the fault of: whiz-kid financiers, who created 
financial  instruments  that  even  they  didn’t  properly  understand;  greedy  bankers,  who 
pursued  profit  and  personal  reward  without  regard  to  risk  or  common  sense;  somnolent 
supervisors,  who  failed  to  adequately  regulate  and  restrain  those  bankers;  and  negligent 
central bankers, who allowed an explosion in liquidity, credit and asset prices that supported 
the  whole  rotten  edifice.  And  all  the  while,  the  culprits  were  cheered  on  by  an  economics 
profession that was over-enamoured of theoretical models, blind to the lessons of history and 
subject to a severe case of “group think”. Wasn’t it blindingly obvious that the whole house of 
cards would come crashing down at some point? 
As one of those involved in responding to the crisis – and some might charge also a bit part 
in creating the conditions for it – I want to look this evening at how we got here. But rather 
than giving a blow-by-blow account of events, I want instead to focus on what I see as the 
key underlying economic forces. How could what appeared initially to be little more than an 
over-extension  of  loans  to  a  high-risk  subset  of  US  households  end  up  generating  total 
financial sector losses in the advanced economies currently estimated by the IMF to be in the 
region of $4.1 trillion and an output gap that is expected to reach nearly 6% of GDP in 2010? 
And  while  there  were  a  few  Wise  Owls1  who  saw  trouble  coming,  why  did  most  of  the 
profession  fail  to  spot  the  dangers?  Is  that  because  we  were  locked  into  an  inappropriate 
paradigm?  If  so,  is  the  time  ripe  for  a  Schumpeterian  “gale  of  creative  destruction”  in  the 
subject? 
The credit boom  
Let  me  start  by  recalling  a  few  facts  regarding  the  credit  boom  that  preceded  the  crisis. 
During  the  decade  preceding  the  crisis  there  was  a  substantial  increase  in  the  ratio  of 
household and business debt to GDP in a number of advanced economies, particularly the 
United States, the United Kingdom and Spain; see the left-hand panel of Fig. 1. A striking 
feature of this period was also the increased use of the credit markets by the financial sector 
to  fund  its  activities,  rather  than  relying  on  the  traditional  medium  of  deposits;  that  is 
illustrated in the right-hand panel for the United States. 
This  build  up  in  debt  accompanied  a  wave  of  financial  innovation.  There  was  a  marked 
expansion in the issuance of asset-backed securities: bundles of residential and commercial 
                                                 
1   Most notably Nouriel Roubini, Bob Shiller and Bill White and others at the BIS. 
2 
 BIS Review 101/2009
mortgages, other consumer credit, and of loans to businesses that were sold on by the loan 
originator,  thus  shifting  the  associated  risks.  And  a  new  class  of  asset  in  the  shape  of 
Collateralised  Debt  Obligations  (CDOs)  was  created,  which  facilitated  a  further  layer  of 
restructuring and redistribution of the risks in an asset-backed security. The extent to which 
loans  were  moved  off  balance  sheet  through  these  means  is  shown  in  Fig.  2  (left-hand 
panel). Finally, we saw a veritable explosion in the issuance of Credit Default Swaps (CDSs), 
which  allowed  investors  to  hedge  themselves  against  a  wider  range  of  default  risks  (right-
hand panel). 
The  picture  that  emerges  from  this  is  one  of  a  more  complex  process  of  financial 
intermediation, but one in which the innovation in contracts apparently allowed specific types 
of  risks  to  be  split  out,  traded  and  redistributed  towards  those  in  a  better  position  to  bear 
them. We thus seemed to be moving ever closer to an idealised Arrow-Debreu world of a full 
set  of  state-contingent  securities.  Moreover,  it  seemed  natural  to  think  that  the  increased 
dispersion of risk would make the financial system more, rather than less, stable, a view that 
was certainly held by the former Chairman of the US Federal Reserve, Alan Greenspan: 
“These 
instruments  have  been  especial 
contributors,  particularly  over  the  past  couple  of  stressful  years,  to  the 
development of a far more flexible, efficient, and resilient financial system than 
existed just a quarter-century ago.” (Greenspan, 2002). 
increasingly  complex 
financial 
Accompanying  this  expansion  in  credit,  there  was  also  a  rise  in  certain  asset  prices, 
particularly that of housing, in those countries where credit rose most sharply (see Fig. 3). 
But significantly, that explosion in credit was not associated with a marked expansion either 
in the demand for goods and services, or in consumer price inflation. It is also notable that 
the  run-up  in  house  prices  in  the  United  States  was  less  marked  than  in  the  other 
Anglophone  countries  and  Spain.  In  part,  that  may  reflect  a  more  elastic  response  in  the 
construction of new houses in the United States. 
The  point  to  stress  is  that  there  was  nothing  self-evidently  wrong  with  this  expansion  in 
balance  sheets  and  the  associated  rise  in  asset  prices.  There  is  some  evidence  from 
developing economies that suggests that increased development in financial markets helps 
to foster growth and catch-up. And if financial innovation allows households to gain access to 
mortgage finance where they were previously unable to, one should expect that to lead to a 
rise  in  the  real  price  of  houses.  But  just  as  there  is  evidence  that  increased  financial 
intermediation  is  often  a  Good  Thing,  so  there  is  also  evidence  from  numerous  past 
credit/asset  price  boom-bust  episodes  that  a  juxtaposition  of  rapid  credit  expansion  and 
sharp  asset  price  increases  is  often  a  harbinger  of  a  painful  bust  to  come.  So  everything 
hinges on whether the underlying developments are sustainable or not. The mistake of (most 
of) the economics profession, along with many others, was a failure to see what was really 
going on beneath the surface and to understand how disruptively things could unwind. But, 
as  I  shall  explain,  I  believe  that  the  standard  tools  of  economic  analysis,  far  from  being 
proved redundant, can shed useful light on what went wrong.  
Macroeconomic antecedents 
The proximate causes of the present crisis undoubtedly lie within the financial markets. But it 
is worth dwelling briefly on the macroeconomic environment in the years preceding the crisis, 
which was conducive to the formation of what proved to be an unsustainable credit bubble. 
BIS Review 101/2009 
 3
The Great Moderation 
To begin with, this period was characterised by an unusually high degree of macroeconomic 
stability, with steady growth and low and stable inflation in most of the advanced economies; 
see for instance Fig. 4, which shows performance in the G5 countries before and after 19922. 
There are three broad explanations for this “Great Moderation”. 
First,  it  could  just  have  been  a  happy  accident,  if  this  was  a  period  characterised  by 
unusually small, or a benign sequence of, shocks. In particular, access to a cheap source of 
manufactured goods as result of the rapid development of China and other emerging market 
economies  created  a  terms  of  trade  gain  for  the  advanced  countries  and  a  beneficial 
“tailwind”, which only mutated into a “headwind” towards the end of the period as rapid global 
growth put upward pressure on oil and other commodity prices. 
Second, changes in the structure of the economy could have meant that similar sized shocks 
had  smaller  macroeconomic  effects.  Candidate  structural  changes  included  the  shift  from 
manufacturing  to  services,  tighter  control  of  inventories  leading  to  an  attenuation  of  the 
inventory  cycle,  increased  competition  in  product  and  labour  markets,  and  innovation  in 
financial  markets  that  facilitated  the  greater  spreading  of  risk  and  an  enhanced  ability  to 
smooth spending in the face of shocks to income or wealth. 
A  final  possibility  is  that  better  macroeconomic  policies,  including  improved  policy 
frameworks, had moved economies closer to the eponymous Taylor frontier which traces out 
the lowest achievable inflation volatility for a given volatility of the output gap. In particular, 
earlier  periods  were  bedevilled  by  monetary  policies  that  had  failed  to  anchor  inflation 
expectations.  But  the  pursuit  of  inflation  targets  and  similar  stability-oriented  monetary 
policies by independent central banks seemed to have been more successful in anchoring 
inflation expectations. 
Now  if  the  Great  Moderation  was  down  to  “good  luck”,  then  improved  macroeconomic 
performance was more likely to be ephemeral. But if it was down to structural changes or 
better policy, there was more chance of it proving permanent. Moreover, if it was permanent, 
then  part  of  the  “dividend”  from  this  reduced macroeconomic  volatility  should  be a  greater 
willingness to take on risk. 
As it happens, the academic literature has so far failed to provide a conclusive answer on the 
relative  contributions  of  the  various  explanations3.  But  what  matters  is  how  market 
participants responded to these benign conditions. They are faced with what is, in essence, a 
complex signal-extraction problem. But whereas many such problems in economics involve 
learning about first moments of a distribution, this involves making inferences about higher 
moments. The longer such a period of low volatility lasts, the more reasonable it is to assume 
that it is permanent. But as tail events are necessarily rarely observed, there is always going 
to be a danger of underestimating tail risks. 
Certainly it appears from  measures of volatility  implied from options prices for US equities 
(VIX)  and  treasuries  (MOVE)  that  the  perceived  risks  in  financial  markets  had  shrunk  to 
extremely  low  levels  by  2006;  see  Fig.  5.  There  are  two  ways  of  rationalising  this.  One 
possibility  is  straightforward  extrapolation  into  the  future  of  the  benign  experience  of  the 
preceding few years. An alternative and complementary explanation is excessive faith in the 
                                                 
2   The Great Moderation appears to have started rather earlier, in the mid-1980s, in the United States.  
3  
In part, that is because shocks are not measured directly, only their consequences; so what appears to be 
‘good  luck’,  may  reflect  the  beneficial  influence  of  structural  changes  or  better  policy  in  ameliorating  their 
impact; see Bernanke (2004). Other contributions to this literature include: Cogley and Sargent (2005), Sims 
and Zha (2006), and Stock and Watson (2003), who ascribe a sizeable portion of the improved performance to 
good luck; and Clarida, Gali and Gertler (2000) and Lubik and Schorfheide (2004), who put more weight on 
better policies. 
4 
 BIS Review 101/2009
ability of policy makers to maintain steady growth in the real economy. The Fed’s reluctance 
to use interest rates to lean against asset price booms coupled with a willingness to relax 
monetary policy aggressively in the wake of sharp asset price falls (Greenspan, 2002) may 
also have helped place a floor under expected asset prices (the “Greenspan Put”; see Miller, 
Weller and Zhang, 2002).  
A  tendency  of  people  to  underestimate  future  risks  during  periods  of  good  economic 
performance seems to be a recurring theme in the history of financial markets. In part this 
seems to be a mixture of a willingness or desire to believe that the world has changed for the 
better,  and  moreover  to  find  ways  to  rationalise  that  belief  –  in  other  words,  “this  time  it’s 
different”.  To  that  must  be  coupled  a  limited  imagination  –  shared  in  this  instance  with 
regulators and central bankers – to see quite how badly things could go wrong. But when 
market participants can claim, as David Viniar, the Chief Financial Officer of Goldman Sachs, 
did  in  August  2007  that  they  “were  seeing  things  that  were  25-standard  deviation  moves, 
several days in a row” it is a sign that something must be badly wrong4. Wrong, that is, not 
with the world, but rather with market participants’ estimation of risk. 
A particular feature of this underestimation of risk lay in the prevalent assumption that bad 
shocks  were  likely  to  be  uncorrelated  with  each  other.  Thus  the  management  of  Northern 
Rock  probably  believed  that  if  they  were  unable  to  roll  over  their  short-term  wholesale 
funding in the Asset-Backed Commercial Paper market, then they would always be able to 
find an alternative source of funds in the inter-bank market. But as it transpired, the same 
forces that led to a shutting down of the former in August 2007 also led to the closure of the 
latter at all but very short maturities. By the same token, many investors thought they had 
purchased  relatively  safe  securities  because  there  were  insured  against  default  by  the 
monolines or through the purchase of CDS contracts. But that insurance proved worthless 
when  large  correlated  losses  occurred  and  the  insurers  proved  to  have  insufficiently  deep 
pockets.  A  systemic  financial  crisis  is  apt  to  generate  dysfunctions  in  multiple  markets 
simultaneously, making bad tail outcomes much more likely to occur than they appear when 
risks  are  treated  as  largely  independent.  And  joint  distributions  with  independence  in  the 
central  mass  but  high  correlation  in  the  tails  are  likely  to  be  extremely  hard  to  model  and 
calibrate. 
Monetary policy 
Other macroeconomic features also probably contributed to the growth in credit leading up to 
the crisis. In particular, according to some monetary policy was too loose over this period, 
especially in the United States (see Taylor, 2007). Fig. 6 shows the difference between the 
policy  rate  and  benchmark  estimates  of  an  “appropriate”  policy  rate  derived  from  a  Taylor 
rule. Notwithstanding the usual caveats about the construction of such benchmarks, the very 
low level of the Federal Funds rate relative to the Taylor rule during 2001-5 is striking. Of 
course, the FOMC held rates this low for a reason – they were concerned about entering a 
Japanese-style deflation and in order to mitigate that risk committed to holding the policy rate 
at a low level for a sustained period so as to pull down longer-term market interest rates. 
There is, though, little to suggest that policy rates were noticeably out of line in the euro area 
and the United Kingdom. Credit was nevertheless growing rapidly, as documented earlier in 
Fig. 1. Despite generally low and stable inflation, that led some – most notably Bill White and 
colleagues at the Bank for International Settlements (Borio and White, 2003; White 2006) – 
to argue that the credit/asset-price boom was storing up trouble for the future. Accordingly, 
they argued that central banks should actively “lean against the wind” to mitigate these risks, 
                                                 
4   Dowd, Cotter, Humphrey and Woods (2008) calculate that, with a normal distribution, a 25-sigma daily event 
should occur about once in every 1.31 x 10135 years; to put this in context, the universe is estimated to be just 
12-14 billion years old!  
BIS Review 101/2009 
 5
even  though  inflation  objectives  did  not  appear  to  be  under  threat.  Others,  including  the 
present  and  former  Chairmen  of  the  Federal  Reserve,  took  the  view  that  diagnosing  a 
misaligned asset price was only possible in retrospect and that only a large increase in policy 
rates could stop such a boom, which risked creating exactly the shock to the real economy 
that one wanted to avoid (see Bean, 2003, and the references therein). I shall return to this 
issue at the end of this lecture. 
Global imbalances 
Another feature of potential importance is the counterintuitive pattern of international capital 
flows. The rapid development and integration into the global market economy of China, India, 
Brazil  and  other  emerging  market  economies  could  have  been  expected  to  lead  to  capital 
flows from the advanced countries into these economies in order to provide the investment to 
equip the extra workers being brought on to the global labour market. But instead we saw 
China exporting capital and the United States and the United Kingdom importing it; see Fig. 
7. In 2007, for instance, the US current account deficit stood at $730 billion, while China’s 
surplus stood at no less than $372 billion. Moreover, the deficits are also large in historical 
terms.  
A number of competing explanations have been advanced for this pattern of flows. First, it 
could  simply  reflect  the  juxtaposition  of  strong  demand  in  the  United  States,  coupled  with 
China’s adoption of an undervalued exchange rate in order to accelerate the development of 
the traded goods sector and to soak up labour from the rural areas (Dooley, Folkerts-Landau 
and  Garber,  2004).  Second,  it  could  reflect  a  “savings  glut”  in  the  surplus  countries 
(Bernanke, 2005), resulting from a lack of an adequate household safety net in China, the 
accumulation of precautionary holdings of international reserves by several emerging market 
countries after the Asia crisis, and rational savings of the windfall gains from higher oil prices 
on  the  part of  oil  producers.  Finally,  it  has  been  suggested  that  the  United  States  holds  a 
comparative  advantage  in  the  creation  of  “high  quality”  financial  assets  from  real 
investments, leading to a direction of savings into the US financial markets (Caballero, Farhi 
and Gourinchas, 2008). 
Now while these flows are certainly likely to have added to the growth in credit, on the face of 
it  they  could  only  be  a  part  of  the  explanation.  For  instance,  the  cumulative  US  current 
account deficit over the 2000-7 period was $4.7 trillion. Over the same period, the stock of 
household,  corporate  and  government  debt  outstanding  rose  by  $14.4  trillion,  more  than 
three times as much. But it is possible that the global imbalances may have played into the 
credit  boom  through  another  route.  Bernanke’s  “savings  glut”  hypothesis  was  advanced 
primarily  as  an  explanation  for  the decline in  long-term  real  interest  rates  seen  during  this 
decade; see Fig. 8. And that low level of real returns on government bonds may in turn have 
encouraged financial institutions to shift into other, riskier, assets that offered a higher return, 
such as the burgeoning class of asset-backed securities – what came to be known as the 
“search for yield”. 
There  is  not  a  lot  of  research  yet  that  sheds light  one  way  or  the  other  on  the  role  of  the 
global imbalances in the credit/asset-price boom. There is quite a strong correlation across 
countries  between  house  price  inflation  and  current  account  deficits  (Fig.  9),  but  this  says 
nothing about causality, which plausibly could also run from house prices, via demand, to the 
current account. In fact, Granger-causality tests point to bi-directional causality, running from 
both current accounts to house prices and vice versa5. That is consistent with an influence of 
                                                 
5   With four lags of each variable on the right-hand side and a full set of time and country fixed effect dummies 
for  sixteen  countries  over  the  period  1975-2007,  the  F-statistic  for  the  exclusion  of  house  prices  in  the 
equation  for  the  current  account  is  8.2,  while  the  F-statistic  for  the  exclusion  of  the  current  account  in  the 
house price equation is 4.2. 
6 
 BIS Review 101/2009
the imbalances on asset prices. But equally the results could just indicate that both variables 
are affected by the state of the business cycle. 
What went wrong? 
While the macroeconomic environment may have provided fertile ground for the credit/asset 
price boom to develop, to explain both the extent of the growth in credit and the magnitude of 
the  subsequent  crisis  one  needs  to  dig  down  into  what  was  happening  inside  financial 
markets. And when one does that, one finds a variety of incentive distortions and information 
problems that appear to have played a central role.  
Distorted incentives 
Banks are vulnerable institutions because they make long-term loans with uncertain returns 
that  are  financed  predominantly  by  short-term  debt  instruments  and  callable  deposits.  If 
creditors  think  that  the  borrowers  will  be  unable  to  repay  the  loans,  then  there  is  every 
incentive  for  them  to  run.  That  is  why  banks  are  required  to  hold  a  buffer  of  capital  and 
reserves large enough to absorb losses in most feasible states of nature. 
Consider for a moment a very simple financial intermediary (a “bank”) that can finance risky 
lending  with  either  debt,  which  here  encompasses  both  deposits  and  credit  market 
instruments, or equity. Assume that the bank pays RD on its debt and earns (a stochastic) RL 
on its loans, net of intermediation and monitoring costs. Then the return on its capital, RK, is 
given by: 
RK = (1+λ)RL – λRD, 
where  λ  is  the  leverage  (debt-to-equity)  ratio.  In  the  normal  course  of  events,  one  would 
expect  the  return  on  debt  to  be  an  increasing  function  of  leverage,  as  the  greater  the 
leverage, the greater the chance that the bank’s capital will be wiped out in the event of low 
returns on the loans and they will be forced to default on part or all of the debt. Indeed, with 
symmetric  information  between  bank  and  creditor,  there  should  be  no  gain  from  raising 
leverage at all by virtue of the Modigliani-Miller theorem. 
For a number of reasons, however, this may not work in practice. Creditors – especially if 
they are households rather than sophisticated financial market participants – may not even 
factor in the implications of higher leverage for the possibility of default. And even if they do, 
the debt may be partially or wholly underwritten by the state, with the cost of the insurance 
only  imperfectly  passed  back  to  the  bank.  Similarly,  the  bank  may  be  thought  to  be  too 
important to be allowed to fail, in which case people might expect an injection of capital by 
the state to make good abnormal losses. In any of these cases, there is an incentive for the 
bank to raise leverage. Moreover, the lower is the perceived uncertainty associated with the 
loans, the more the bank can afford to leverage up, while maintaining the same uncertainty 
over the return on its capital. So the environment of the Great Moderation would have been 
particularly conducive to intermediaries increasing the leverage of their positions.  
The incentive distortions here are intrinsic to the process of financial intermediation. The next 
set  of  distortions  is  more  specific  to  the  present  conjuncture  and  relates  to  securitisation. 
Securitisation  is  attractive  because  selling  on  the  loans  and  the  attendant  risks  enables  a 
bank to leverage more loans off its capital. And, as noted earlier, such distribution of risks 
should in principle be beneficial for the economy. 
Unfortunately, it transpired that this model, or at least its application in the past few years, 
suffered from a number of incentive problems. First, there is the obvious one that if a loan 
originator can sell a loan on at par, then he has less incentive to take care who he lends to. 
The much higher default rates on cohorts of US sub-prime loans originated in 2006 and 2007 
compared with earlier years is indicative of the consequences of this lack of incentive (see 
BIS Review 101/2009 
 7
Fig. 10). The originator needs to have enough “skin in the game” if he is going to exercise 
due diligence in loan origination – and having a reputation at stake may not always suffice.  
Second,  the  crisis  revealed  that  many  of  the  risks  that  securitisation  was  supposed  to 
distribute more widely had in fact remained either within the banking system, or else could be 
re-intermediated back into it. Thus, the debt securities issued by one bank were not sold on 
to investors outside the banking system, but were instead bought by the proprietary trading 
desks of other banks, leading to a network of cross-holdings of the underlying loans. That 
may make sense when the main risks are idiosyncratic to the loans originated by particular 
banks, but looks rather foolish when the risks are macroeconomic in nature and the returns 
on all such securities are correlated. 
Moreover, a considerable amount of the remaining risk was contained in institutions which, 
while  not  formally  recognised  as  banks,  engaged  in  exactly  the  same  sort  of  maturity 
transformation,  financing  long-term  assets  by  short-term  debt  instruments.  These  included 
entities  such  as  conduits,  which  housed  the  securitised  loans  and  then  financed  them  by 
selling  short-term  paper.  But  in  many  cases  these  entities  had  back-up  credit  lines  to  the 
supporting bank, so that when funding difficulties arose, the securitised loans in effect came 
back onto the bank’s balance sheet. And even where there was no formal obligation to act as 
a lender of last resort, originators often chose to provide back-up finance in order to protect 
their name in funding markets.  
The  motive  for  setting  up  these  off-balance-sheet  entities  was  entirely  one  of  regulatory 
arbitrage. Off-balance-sheet vehicles were not required to hold capital in the same way as a 
bank  would  if  the  loans  were  on  their  balance  sheet.  So  it  appeared  to  be  a  neat  way  to 
boost profits without having to raise more capital. The Banco d’España, the Spanish banking 
supervisor,  insisted  that  Spanish  banks  would  have  to  treat  conduits  and  the  like  as  on 
balance sheet for capital purposes. As a result, Spain did not see the mushrooming of these 
off-balance-sheet vehicles. 
A third distortion lies in the nature of remuneration contracts. Incentive contracts that offer 
potentially unlimited upside rewards, but cap the downside losses, encourage traders to take 
on excessive risk. One unintended consequence of financial innovation was that it enabled 
clever traders to create positions with considerable embedded leverage – that is, portfolios 
requiring  little  payment  up  front,  but  whose  returns  amplified  changes  in  the  value  of  the 
underlying assets. Traders then had a natural incentive to gravitate towards these types of 
highly risky instruments. 
A related problem is that it is extremely difficult for management to observe the risk being 
taken  on  by  their  traders,  particularly  when  innovative  financial  instruments  have  unusual 
return distributions. Take, for example, a deeply out of the money option. This pays a steady 
income  premium  and  has  little  variation  in  value  when  the  underlying  instrument  is  a  long 
way from the strike price, but generates rapidly escalating losses in bad states of the world. 
In good times this looks like a high return, low risk instrument. Only in very bad states of the 
world do the true risks taken on become apparent. 
Information problems 
Information  problems  have  also  been  central  to  the  crisis.  Most  of  the  asset-backed 
securities  that  have  proved  toxic  are  far  from  simple.  A  plain  vanilla  Residential  Mortgage 
Backed  Security  (RMBS)  typically  contains  tens  or  hundreds  of  thousands  of  underlying 
mortgages  and  even  the  documentation  on  them  can  run  to  a  couple  of  hundred  pages. 
These instruments provide diversification, but unless the mortgages are fairly homogenous in 
nature, it will be difficult for an individual investor to monitor the evolution of the underlying 
risk exposures at all precisely. The problem is compounded when the pool of mortgages is 
continually topped up to replace maturing mortgages, as is the case with Master Trusts, as 
the characteristics of newer cohorts may differ from those of older cohorts. 
8 
 BIS Review 101/2009
In addition, US RMBS contain embedded options that further complicates the evaluation of 
their worth. Ordinary US mortgage loans are usually non-recourse and offer the borrower the 
option of both early repayment and of default if the price of the house falls below the value of 
the loan, leaving the lender to recover what they can from re-sale of the house at what will be 
an uncertain price. US sub-prime mortgages also embed an option for the lender. Essentially 
sub-prime  mortgages  are  structured  as  a  rolling  sequence  of  short-term  loans,  with  the 
lender sharing in some of the increase in housing equity when house prices rise and having 
discretion  over  whether  to  offer  a  new  and  affordable  loan  depending  on  whether  house 
prices have risen or not (see Gorton, 2008, for further details). As a consequence of these 
embedded options, RMBS, particularly of sub-prime mortgages, have a rather complex pay-
off structure that is tricky to price and difficult to monitor. 
CDOs  are  yet  more  complex.  These  re-package  the  payoffs  in  bundles  of  asset-backed 
securities into an ordered hierarchy of other securities, with each tranche only bearing losses 
once  tranches  above  it  have  been  wiped  out.  A  bundle  of  risky  assets  could  thus  be  re-
packaged  into  other  assets,  some  of  which  offered  bond-like  returns  suitable  for  investors 
such as pension funds seeking low-risk assets, while the tranches bearing more risk would 
be sold to those willing to carry more risk6. But the pay-offs to these assets are highly non-
linear  in  the  underlying  risks  (see  Fig.  11).  As  a  consequence  the  prices  are  apt  to  drop 
sharply  with  changing  perceptions  of  the  underlying  default  rates,  a  feature  that  has  been 
apparent during the crisis. 
A typical CDO comprises a large number and variety of RMBS, including a mix of prime and 
sub-prime mortgages from a variety of originators. On the face of it, this might seem like a 
good thing as it creates diversification. However, even more than with plain vanilla RMBS, it 
becomes impossible to monitor the evolution of the underlying risks – it is akin to trying to 
unpick the ingredients of a sausage. That may not matter too much when defaults are low 
and  only  the  holders  of  the  first,  equity,  tranche  suffer  any  losses.  Holders  of  the  safer 
tranches can in that case sit back and relax – a case of rational inattention. But once defaults 
begin to rise materially, it matters a lot what such a security contains. And with highly non-
linear payoffs, returns can be extremely sensitive to small changes in underlying conditions. 
When  defaults  on  some  US  sub-prime  mortgages  originated  in  2006  and  2007  started 
turning out much higher than expected, there was a realisation that losses could be much 
greater on some of these securities than previously believed. And a growing realisation of the 
informational complexity of these securities made them difficult to price in an objective sense. 
Essentially, investors switched from believing that returns behaved according to a tight and 
well-behaved distribution to one in which they had very little idea about the likely distribution 
of returns – a state of virtual Knightian uncertainty (Caballero and Krishnamurthy, 2008). 
There was also a higher-order information problem arising out of the interconnected nature of 
the  financial  system.  Banks,  when  they  appear  at  all  in  economic  models,  just  exist  to 
transfer  funds  from  savers  to  borrowers  and  to  monitor  the  latter.  But  the  reality  is  a  high 
degree  of  exposure  of  financial  institutions  to  each  other  as  a  result  of  interbank  loans, 
holdings of CDSs written by other parties, holdings of securities issued by other parties, and 
so  on.  In  normal  times,  one  does  not  need  to  know  much  about  a  counterparties’  risk 
exposure.  But  when  there  are  doubts  about  solvency  of  a  major  institution,  one  needs  to 
know not only one’s own exposure to that institution, but also about the exposure of one’s 
other counterparties. 
The collapse of Lehman Brothers was particularly critical in that, prior to that and particularly 
in the light of the rescue of Bear Stearns, such an institution was probably viewed as being 
too big and interconnected to fail. But the failure of the US authorities to put together a viable 
rescue  plan,  together  with  growing  doubts  about  the  likely  effectiveness  of  the  Troubled 
                                                 
6   As it turned out, those willing to carry the risk were not always those best placed to bear it.  
BIS Review 101/2009 
 9
Asset  Relief  Program  (see  Taylor,  2009),  raised  the  possibility  in  investors’  minds  of  the 
failure  of  a  whole  range  of  institutions  that  had  previously  been  considered  safe.  That  is 
evidenced  in  the  simultaneous  sharp  spike  upwards  in  the  CDS  spreads  of  a  number  of 
financial institutions after the collapse of Lehman’s (see Fig. 12). Moreover, the prospect of 
having to make significant default pay outs called into question the solvency of a key provider 
of that insurance, AIG. 
The bottom line of all this is that the information requirements for managing risk escalated 
rapidly at the same time as investors were waking up to the realisation that the distribution of 
prospective returns on a range of asset-backed securities was a great deal worse than they 
thought. Not surprisingly, there was a rush for the exits and a drying up of wholesale funding 
to institutions that were thought to be at all vulnerable. Moreover, attempts to cope with that 
by selling off assets ran into an adverse selection problem: if someone is selling an asset, 
then perhaps that indicates that they know it’s a “lemon”. And even the revelation of central 
bank  support  in  its  role  as  Lender  of  Last  Resort,  far  from  solving  the  problem,  could  be 
interpreted as a negative signal about an institution, as was so in the case of Northern Rock, 
for example. 
As a result, at times, such as during the “Little Panic” of August 2007, as well as the “Great 
Panic” of September-October 2008, the markets for a whole range of asset-backed securities 
closed completely and investors sought safety in liquid government assets. These pressures 
are reflected in the spread between measures of bank funding costs and equivalent maturity 
government  debt  (Fig.  13).  Even  when  confidence  has  appeared  to  be  improving,  the 
markets for asset-backed securities have remained dysfunctional. 
Amplification and propagation 
While  these  incentive  distortions  and  information  problems  help  to  explain  why  the  crisis 
happened,  they  don’t  explain  why  its  impact  has  been  so  great.  Back  in  2007,  the  US 
Federal Reserve estimated the unexpected losses associated with the sub-prime mortgage 
market would be of the order of $50 billion7. Since then, the IMF have progressively raised 
their estimate of the write-downs on US-originated assets to $2.7 trillion (see Fig. 14), while 
their current estimate for write-downs across the United States, Europe and Japan stands at 
$4.1  trillion.  Alongside  that  we  are  witnessing  a  sharp  and  internationally  synchronised 
slowdown in global growth that will probably turn out to have been the sharpest in the post-
war period, together with an unprecedented contraction in world trade (Fig. 15). The shortfall 
in  advanced  country  GDP,  relative  to  potential,  alone  is  projected  by  the  Fund  to  reach 
around $2.2 trillion by 2010. How could this come about? 
The first thing to be said is that much more was involved than the imprudent extension of 
loans to a few poor US households. Rather, the unexpected losses on sub-prime mortgages 
and assets backed by them acted as a trigger for generalised doubts about the viability of a 
whole class of assets and a general reappraisal of risk premia, which had become unduly 
compressed at the tail end of the Great Moderation period. So the fundamental shock was a 
much larger one.  
But a number of amplification and propagation mechanisms also appear to have kicked in. 
Some  of  these  positive  feedback  loops8  have  operated  entirely  within  the  financial  sector. 
The  most  obvious  is  that  the  withdrawal  of  funding  and/or  the  need  to  maintain  adequate 
                                                 
7   Testimony by Ben Bernanke to the US Senate Banking Committee, 19 July 2007. 
8   Numerous official-sector papers have insisted on referring to such mechanisms as negative feedback loops, 
because they generate a larger adverse impact on asset prices or the real economy from the original negative 
shock. But since they are amplifying, rather than stabilising, feedback loops, they should obviously be referred 
to as positive feedback loops. 
10 
 BIS Review 101/2009
capital  ratios  prompted  fire  sales  of  assets.  But  if  there  is  great  uncertainty  about  the 
fundamental value of an asset or there is a suspicion that the seller may have chosen to sell 
it because they know it is a lemon, then prices are likely to have to fall a long way before 
buyers step forward. That is particularly so if potential buyers are concerned about their own 
access to funding and therefore wish to remain in safe and liquid assets. But given the use of 
mark-to-market accounting to value trading books, the falls in asset prices then worsens the 
balance sheets of other institutions. That in turn reduces their capital ratios, aggravating their 
problems in raising funds and generating a further round of asset sales. 
Further  amplifying  mechanisms  arise  as  a  consequence  of  leveraged  positions.  The  net 
worth  of  a  leveraged  investor  deteriorates  much  faster  than  his  gross  worth  when  asset 
prices fall, as all of the loss is scored against capital. Thus even to hold leverage constant 
requires  substantial  asset  sales,  further  depressing  asset  prices.  For  instance,  an  investor 
with  $100  million  of  assets  financed  by  $10  million  of  capital  and  $90  million  of  debt  who 
experiences  a  $5  million  loss  in  asset  value  would  have  to  sell  $45  million  of  assets  and 
redeem an equivalent amount of the debt to restore his original leverage ratio. Brunnermeier 
(2009)  refers  to  this  as  a  “loss  spiral”.  In  fact,  things  are  even  worse  than  this  because 
lenders typically expect borrowers to fund a larger fraction of an investment themselves in 
such  circumstances,  reinforcing  the  downward  spiral.  And  Adrian  and  Shin  (2008)  indeed 
find that the leverage ratio of the five US large investment banks, which held a substantial 
quantity of the securitised loans, was indeed strongly correlated with the size of their balance 
sheets. 
Now I noted earlier that once counterparty risk becomes a material concern, it is not only the 
state of an intermediary’s immediate counterparties’ balance sheets that matter, but also the 
state  of  those  counterparties’  counterparties  balance  sheets,  and  so  on.  In  practice,  what 
used to be a very simple process of intermediating funds between savers and borrowers has 
evolved  into  a  highly  complex  network,  which  is  both  difficult  to  comprehend  and  a  major 
source of uncertainty. This complexity of the financial network is illustrated in Figs. 16 and 
17, in which the size of the nodes is proportional to the size of the balance sheet and the 
thickness of the external lines measures the sum of the bilateral exposures. Fig. 16 shows 
the  network  for  the  major  players  in  the  UK  financial  system,  while  Fig.  17  shows  a 
corresponding map for the international financial system. 
In the first instance, any losses that arise will be scored against an institution’s capital. But 
when it reaches the point of default, the losses cascade through the network until they reach 
intermediaries with enough capital to absorb them. And default itself amplifies losses in the 
network, most obviously through direct bankruptcy costs, but also through fire sales of the 
sort  already  discussed.  Moreover,  when  entities  are  highly  leveraged,  they  will  have  only 
limited capacity to absorb losses, making such a cascade of defaults more prone to occur. A 
similar network dynamic can occur when institutions are hit by a payment shock, such as the 
drying up of wholesale funding that occurred at the start of the crisis and again around the 
time of the collapse of Lehman’s. 
The analysis of the behaviour of such financial networks is still very much in its infancy9. But 
a key point material to regulatory design is that some types of network will be inherently more 
stable than others, depending on both the nature of the network and the obligations on its 
members.  For  instance,  a  network  where  all  institutions  are  of  similar  importance  and 
exposures  are  evenly  spread  is  likely  to  be  relatively  stable,  as  the  consequences  of  an 
adverse shock to any one institution will be spread widely and thinly. In contrast, as we saw 
with the collapse of Lehman’s, networks in which there are a relatively small number of key 
players are potentially very susceptible to the failure of a key player. By the same token, a 
network  in  which  exposures  are  collateralised  or  can  be  netted  across  the  system  will  be 
                                                 
9   For more discussion of this issue, see Haldane (2009). 
BIS Review 101/2009 
 11
more stable than one where gross exposures are forfeited in the event of default, as in the 
latter case the cascade through the network of the losses is likely to generate more failures 
on the way. 
All the discussion thus far relates to amplification within the financial sector. But what about 
the  substantial  impact  on  the  real  economy?  The  IMF’s  estimate  of  total  financial  sector 
write-downs in the advanced economies since the start of the crisis is around $4 trillion. If we 
assume an annual marginal propensity to consume out of wealth of 5%, that suggests a fall 
in demand of around $200 billion. But the loss in advanced country GDP relative to potential 
is projected to be more than 10 times bigger than that. So we cannot come near to explaining 
the “Great Contraction” purely in terms of wealth effects. 
The  most  obvious  additional  mechanism  for  the  propagation  of  the  financial  crisis  into  the 
real economy is through a “credit crunch” as banks tighten lending standards and with it the 
supply  of  credit  to  businesses  and  households.  That  could  arise  both  because  lenders 
correctly  realise  that  they  were  under-pricing  risk  and  because  of  a  need  for  them  to  de-
leverage. Both the bank lending data and credit conditions surveys in the US, UK and euro 
area  are  consistent  with  some  restriction  in  the  supply  of  credit  from  the  middle  of  2007 
onwards. But there was little evidence of an additional very sharp tightening in the supply of 
credit last autumn that could explain the sharp fall in activity in the six to nine months after 
the collapse of Lehman’s in 2008Q4 and 2009Q1. 
There are two candidate, and mutually inclusive, explanations for the large impact on output. 
Expectations  of  future  credit  availability  may  have  worsened  sharply.  Or,  more  plausibly, 
there  may  have  been  a  more  general  increase  in  uncertainty  as  a  result  of  the  near-
meltdown  in  the  financial  sector,  leading  to  an  increase  in  precautionary  savings,  the 
postponement of planned investment projects and a running down of inventories. But either 
way, globalised supply chains ensured that the shock to demand was transmitted worldwide. 
History suggests that downturns associated with financial crises tend to be both deeper and 
longer-lasting 
the 
macroeconomic characteristics of the present financial crisis against preceding episodes in 
both  advanced  and  emerging  market  economies.  Their  results  can  be  summarised  as 
follows: asset price collapses tend to be deep and prolonged; the aftermath of banking crises 
tend to be associated with substantial and prolonged falls in output; the downturns typically 
lead to a substantial build-up in public debt; and the antecedents of the present crisis appear 
remarkably  similar  to  those  in  previous  episodes.  Fig.  18  documents  some  similar  results 
from  a  recent  IMF  (2008)  exercise,  showing  that  the  cumulative  output  loss  in  outright 
recessions, as well as in milder slowdowns, on average tends to be almost twice as much if 
preceded  by  a  financial  crisis.  The  results  of  Furceri  and  Mourougane  (2009)  suggest, 
moreover, that part of this output loss is permanent; they find that the typical OECD financial 
crisis knocks around 2% off potential output, which rises to 4% for deep crises. 
These findings suggest that financial crises can have a material impact on both the dynamics 
of  the  business  cycle  and  on  the  underlying  equilibrium  growth  path.  The  literature  on  the 
“broad  credit  channel”  and  the  “financial  accelerator”  points  to  an  amplifying  effect  of 
changes in firms’ financial health on their cost of capital. In particular, when borrowers have 
less  collateral  they  face  a  higher  external  finance  premium  to  compensate  lenders  for  the 
increased  monitoring  costs  (see  e.g.  Bernanke,  Gertler  and  Gilchrist,  1999).  But  the 
quantitative magnitude of the effect in this type of model is usually relatively modest. And the 
banks  in  this  class  of  model  are  simple  or  non-existent,  and  any  incentive  or  information 
problems relate to the borrower, rather than the financial intermediary. 
Instead, it seems likely that the adequacy of bank capital and the associated phenomenon of 
financial sector de-leveraging are likely to play a central role. Capital is essential because it 
is the means by which intermediaries persuade creditors that they will almost surely get their 
money back. Increasing capital is one way to get leverage down; that is why governments in 
the  US  and  other  affected  countries  forced  banks  to  raise  more  capital  privately  or  else 
than  average.  Reinhart  and  Rogoff  (2008,  2009)  have  mapped 
12 
 BIS Review 101/2009
accept injections of extra capital financed by the taxpayer. Extending guarantees on funding, 
whether retail or wholesale, is another way to make creditors believe that they will get their 
money back, as are measures to insure or quarantine the risky bad assets. 
An  open  question  is  therefore  whether  the  banking  system  will  be  able  to  support  an 
adequate volume of credit as the extensive network of public support is removed. If not, then 
further attempts to de-leverage are possible. And de-leveraging through the restriction of new 
loans  generates  a  positive  feedback  loop  analogous  to  that  through  asset  sales.  De-
leveraging by restricting credit growth may be privately rational, but if every intermediary tries 
to do the same, the result will be lower activity and higher defaults and little improvement in 
leverage  ratios  –  what,  to  paraphrase  Keynes,  we  might  describe  as  the  “paradox  of  de-
leveraging”. A recent insightful contribution from Gertler and Karadi (2009) explicitly captures 
the role that de-leveraging can play in slowing a recovery when financial intermediaries need 
to hold capital in order to convince creditors that they will be repaid. 
Policy: cure and prevention 
The  severity  of  the  financial  crisis  and  the  sharpness  of  the  contraction  in  activity  have 
prompted an aggressive response by policy makers. I have already mentioned the measures 
taken to support the banking system directly. Lack of time prevents me expanding further on 
that topic. But it would be remiss if I did not say a few words about the response of central 
banks. 
The  first  action  has  been  to  offer  extensive  liquidity  support,  particularly  after  the 
intensification of the crisis in the wake of the collapse of Lehman’s. Following Bagehot, the 
classic guide for central banks in the face of a financial crisis is to lend freely against good 
collateral at a penalty rate. Although the details of the operations differ, the central banks in 
each  of  the  main  jurisdictions  have  followed  that  guide,  widening  both  the  range  of  the 
collateral that are prepared to lend against and extending the tenor of the loans. In the United 
States,  because  of  the  critical  importance  of  non-bank  financial  intermediaries  to  the  US 
economy,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  also  extended  the  range  of  counterparties  that  it  is 
prepared to deal with. As a result, the balance sheets of central banks have mushroomed 
(see Fig. 19). 
All of the key central banks have also cut their policy rates aggressively, so that both policy 
rates and short-term market rates are close to their effective floor of zero. Before the crisis 
erupted, and with policy rates averaging somewhere in the 4-5% range, most central bankers 
would have thought they had plenty of room for manoeuvre to offset adverse demand shocks 
by  cutting  policy  rates.  But  the  transmission  mechanism  of  monetary  policy  is  weakened 
when  the  financial  system  is  trying  to  de-leverage.  Hence  central  banks  have  found 
themselves needing to inject even more stimulus, taking them into unknown territory.  
There are two primary options10 confronting a central bank that has reached the zero interest 
rate lower bound, both of which seek to influence a wider range of asset prices. The first is to 
provide a commitment to keep the policy rate low for a significant period into the future. This 
approach had already been followed by the Federal Reserve earlier in decade, when it set 
interest  rates  much  lower  than  suggested  by  a  Taylor  rule.  At  the  present  juncture,  the 
Federal Reserve, the Bank of Canada and the Riksbank have all made explicit statements 
that imply policy rates will remain low. 
The  idea  behind  providing  such  commitments  is  that  they  both  pull  down  market  interest 
rates  further  out  along  the  yield  curve  and  raise  expected  future  inflation.  Indeed,  in  the 
canonical New Keynesian/New Classical DSGE model, this is the only way of stimulating the 
                                                 
10   King (1999) and Buiter and Panigirtzoglou (1999) discuss these and other more exotic approaches. 
BIS Review 101/2009 
 13
economy  at  the  zero  interest  rate  lower  bound,  as  the  impact  of  monetary  policy  is 
completely summarised by the current and future path of the policy rate. A variation on this 
theme, in essence adopted by the European Central Bank, is to provide unlimited financing 
to the banking system at the policy rate at longer maturities than usual.  
The  other  option  involves  the  outright  purchases  of  assets,  rather  than  the  normal 
repurchase agreements (i.e. collateralised lending) undertaken by central banks. This may 
involve the purchase of either government debt or a range of corporate assets. And they may 
be financed by the issuance of extra central bank reserves, raising the monetary base. Or 
they may be financed by the sale of other assets in which case there will be no effect on the 
monetary  base.  The  Federal  Reserve  and  the  Bank  of  England  have  bought  both 
government  and  private  assets,  though  with  different  emphases,  in  part  reflecting  the 
different financial market structures. In particular, the Federal Reserve has bought significant 
quantities of a variety of corporate assets, whereas the Bank’s purchases have been more 
heavily concentrated on purchases of government debt. 
The aim of purchases of corporate assets is to enhance market liquidity by having the central 
bank stand ready to act as a backstop buyer. In so doing, it should bring down spreads over 
government  bond  yields  by  reducing  liquidity  premia,  encourage  issuance  and  generally 
improve  the  functioning  of  capital  markets.  Importantly,  the  central  bank  may  not  need  to 
make a large volume of purchases to make a difference. The mere fact of credibly standing 
ready to buy may be enough to have the desired impact. However, the central bank will be 
taking private credit risk onto its balance sheet, potentially exposing itself – and indirectly the 
taxpayer – to the risk of credit losses. So ultimately, this may be better thought of as a fiscal 
action. 
Purchases  of  government  debt  are  instead  intended  to  have  a  more  general  impact  by 
pushing down bond yields. That, in turn, can be expected to push up a whole range of asset 
prices as the sellers subsequently re-balance their portfolios. Rather than being considered 
unconventional,  purchases  of  government  debt  financed  by  the  issuance  of  extra  central 
bank money is really just a return to the classic monetary policy operation of the textbook: an 
open  market  operation.  The  only  things  that  distinguish  the  present  operations  from  a 
traditional open market operation are the circumstances under which they are taking place 
and their scale. 
The  mechanism  whereby  asset  purchases  are  supposed  to  influence  the  economy  are 
absent  in  the  canonical  New  Keynesian/New  Classical  macroeconomic  model,  because  of 
the assumption that the returns on interest-bearing assets all move in tandem and that any 
risk  or  term  premia  are  constant.  The  rationale  for  asset  purchases  –  that  relative  asset 
supplies  affect  asset  prices  and  returns  –  instead  lies  in  an  older  strand  of  the  literature, 
dating back to Tobin (1969) and Brunner and Meltzer (1972)11. Under normal circumstances, 
when the asset purchases are financed by the issuance of additional central bank money, 
one  would  also  expect  the  increase  in  commercial  bank  reserves  to  lead  to  increased 
lending. However, when banks are trying to de-leverage, such additional reserves are more 
likely  to  be  hoarded.  That  appears  to  be  what  happened  during  the  Japanese  experiment 
with  quantitative  easing  in  the  early  part  of  this  decade  and  a  similar  response  is  to  be 
expected from banks at the current juncture. 
The  initial  responses  in  the  United  Kingdom  to  these  measures  have  been  moderately 
encouraging.  Government  bond  yields  fell  significantly  on  the  commencement  of  the 
programme of asset purchases, and yields appear to be some 50-75 basis points lower than 
they would otherwise be. And there are also signs of beneficial effects on conditions in the 
relevant corporate credit markets. Meier (2009) provides a fuller assessment. But it is very 
early  to  draw  conclusions  on  the  efficacy  of  these  measures,  as  the  transmission  lags 
                                                 
11   Andres, Lopez-Salido and Nelson (2004) is a rare recent contributions in this tradition. 
14 
 BIS Review 101/2009
through to nominal spending are likely to be quite long. Moreover, even in some years time, it 
will still be difficult to draw firm conclusions, as the counterfactual is bound to be uncertain. 
But it will certainly provide fertile ground for future PhD theses.  
Let me turn now to the lessons from the crisis regarding the conduct of monetary policy in the 
future. In the run-up to the crisis, there was a lively debate regarding the right way to respond 
to rapid credit growth and rising asset prices. On the one hand, economists at the Bank for 
International  Settlements  and  others  (e.g.  Borio  and  White,  2003;  Cecchetti,  Genberg  and 
Wadhwani, 2002) advocated “leaning against the wind” by raising interest rates above that 
apparently  warranted  by  inflation  and  activity.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Federal  Reserve 
espoused a policy of “benign neglect” coupled with aggressive relaxation in the event that 
asset  prices  fell  sharply  (see  e.g.  Greenspan,  2002;  Bernanke  and  Gertler,  2001)  on  the 
grounds that identifying an asset price bubble in its early stages was difficult and trying to 
deflate an established one was dangerous.  
The events of the past couple of years have clearly tipped the balance in favour of taking 
pre-emptive action. And in a second-best world, where monetary policy is the only instrument 
available  to  cool  a  credit/asset-price  boom,  then  that  may  well  make  sense.  Indeed,  an 
inflation-targeting  central  bank  ought  to  be  willing  to  undershoot  its  target  in  the  medium 
term, if it thereby improves its chance of meeting the target further out through the avoidance 
of a disruptive bust (Bean, 2003). But monetary policy is a blunt weapon for this purpose, 
and raising interest rates enough to cool a credit/asset-price boom that is in full swing is likely 
to involve substantial collateral damage to real activity. 
Instead,  with  an  additional  objective  in  the  shape  of  credit  growth/asset  prices  one  really 
needs another instrument that has a stronger and more direct impact on credit growth and 
asset  price  inflation  than  monetary  policy.  That  is  what  so-called  “macro-prudential 
regulation” is supposed to achieve. 
Most discussion in policy circles has so far revolved around introducing pro-cyclical capital 
requirements,  or  its  close  cousin  dynamic  provisioning.  Thus  banks  would  be  required  to 
build up extra capital/reserves during a credit/asset-price boom that can then be run down in 
the event of a bust. This should reduce the incentive for banks to leverage up in a boom, as 
well as making the financial system more robust in a bust. However, other instruments could 
also  be  deployed  to  this  end.  For  instance,  credit/asset-price  booms  seem  to  be 
characterised by an excessive shift into riskier forms of lending. In that case, an instrument 
more directly targeted at the microeconomic distortion would be to increase the risk-weights 
that are attached to such lending when computing banks' required capital. And, as we have 
seen in the present crisis, a lot of the action has taken place outside banks' balance sheets. 
In that case, varying margin requirements might be a more appropriate instrument for dealing 
with vulnerabilities building up in the capital markets more generally. The best approach is 
likely to involve a portfolio of instruments. 
Once  the  instruments  have  been  identified,  a  host  of  other  questions  then  need  to  be 
addressed.  Precisely  which  variables  should  the  instruments  vary  with  and  how  are  the 
variations supposed to be calibrated? And once that has been answered, policy makers need 
to  understand  both  the  macroeconomic  impact  of  the  instruments  and  how  their  operation 
interacts with monetary and fiscal policies. 
Everything I have said so far about macro-prudential regulation has been couched in terms 
of moderating the impact of the credit cycle over time. But the earlier discussion of network 
effects  highlighted  the  potential  role  played  by  large  and  highly  interconnected  financial 
intermediaries,  graphically  illustrated  in  the  aftermath  of  the  collapse  of  Lehman's.  That 
points to another role for macro-prudential regulation, namely to increase the robustness of 
the  financial  system  by  requiring  systemically  important  intermediaries  to  carry  heavier 
capital requirements. So the cross-section dimension adds another set of instrument design 
issues. 
BIS Review 101/2009 
 15
Some lessons for the discipline 
Let me conclude with some observations regarding the implications of the crisis for the future 
development of our subject. In all probability, the Great Panic and the Great Contraction of 
2008  will  join  the  Great  Depression  of  the  1930s  and  the  Great  Inflation  of  the  1970s  as 
discipline-defining  events.  The  struggle  to  understand  and  deal  with  the  Great  Depression 
led to the invention of macroeconomics as a distinct branch of the subject. In the case of the 
Great Inflation, economic theory for once led events, with the development of the natural rate 
hypothesis foreshadowing the subsequent take-off in inflation. But the subsequent decades 
were  spent  with  refining  our  understanding  of  the  inflationary  process.  What  will  be  the 
legacy of the Great Panic and the Great Contraction? 
First, in my view it would be a mistake to look for a single guilty culprit. Underestimation of 
risk born of the Great Moderation, loose monetary policy in the United States and a perverse 
pattern of international capital flows together provided fertile territory for the emergence of a 
credit/asset-price  bubble.  The  creation  of  an  array  of  complex  new  assets  that  were 
supposed to spread risk more widely ended up destroying information about the scale and 
location  of  losses,  which  proved  to  be  crucial  when  the  market  turned.  And  an  array  of 
distorted incentives led the financial system to build up excessive leverage, increasing the 
vulnerabilities when asset prices began to fall. As in Agatha Christie's Murder on the Orient 
Express, everyone had a hand in it.  
Second, the economics profession has oversold the virtues of unfettered financial markets. 
We  usually  start  from  a  presumption  that  markets  work  best  when  they  are  left  to 
themselves,  unless  there  are  obvious  market  failures  present.  By  the  same  token,  even 
though not strictly the case in theory, we usually start from a presumption that expanding the 
range  of  available  securities  is  beneficial.  Yet  that  has  resulted  in  a  deeply  unsatisfactory 
outcome. 
One view is that we need to bring psychology and the insights of behavioural economics into 
the study of financial markets (e.g. Akerlof and Shiller, 2009). That may indeed be part of 
producing a richer and more accurate description of financial market behaviour, particularly 
in regard to expectations formation. But, as I hope my lecture this evening has made clear, 
distorted incentives, information failings, collective action problems and network effects have 
played a large part in recent events. Our standard analytic toolkit should get us a long way in 
understanding what has happened. And that is one step on the road to avoiding a repeat. 
Third, we need to pay more heed to the lessons of history. Financial booms and busts have 
occurred  with  some  regularity  ever  since  the  Tulip  Mania  of  1636-7.  Yet  we  tend  to  treat 
them as pathologies that happen at other times or in other places. Their frequency suggests 
that we would be better advised to think of them as a central feature of capitalist economies 
that our models should aspire to explain. 
Fourth,  we  need  to  put  credit  back  into  macroeconomics  in  a  meaningful  way.  Financial 
intermediaries  are  conspicuous  by  their  absence  in  the  workhorse  New  Keynesian/New 
Classical  DSGE  model.  The  focus  is  on  intrinsic  dynamics  resulting  from  inter-temporal 
decision-making  in  the  face  of  a  variety  of  adjustment  costs  and  impediments  to  price 
adjustment; there are no financial frictions to speak of. That such a framework has developed 
is unsurprising in the light of the Great Inflation and its subsequent Great Moderation. But the 
fact that financial intermediation plays a negligible role in Mike Woodford's magisterial state-
of-the-art opus, Interest and Prices, speaks volumes. 
Some authors have sought to introduce financial frictions into the standard framework12. But 
in virtually all of this literature, financial intermediaries – if present at all – are very simple 
                                                 
12  See  e.g.  Christiano,  Motto  and  Rostagno  (2008);  Curdia  and  Woodford  (2009);  Gerali,  Neri,  Sessa  and 
Signoretti (2008); Goodfriend and McCallum (2007), as well as the earlier work on the broad credit channel 
16 
 BIS Review 101/2009
institutions  and  any  incentive  or  information  problems  relate  to  the  borrower.  But  much  of 
what  has  happened  recently  is  best  understood  in  terms  of  frictions  that  lie  within  the 
financial  sector  itself.  Models  that  have  a  role  for  bank  capital  and  where  the  evolution  of 
banks' balance sheets play a central role13, such as the recent contribution by Gertler and 
Karadi (2009) mentioned earlier, come closest to providing a suitable framework for analysis. 
However,  even  these  contributions  neglect  important  features  of  the  present  crisis. 
Developing  macroeconomic  models  with  a  sufficiently  rich  specification  of  the  financial 
intermediation sector that capture the variety of incentive distortions and information frictions 
I have discussed this evening represents a challenging research agenda14. 
Reintroducing the financial intermediation sector as a source of shocks, rather than merely 
acting  as  an  amplifying  mechanism  as  the  broad  credit  channel  does,  would  represent 
something  of  a  return  to  older  models  of  the  business  cycle,  in  which  credit  creation  and 
destruction played a central role. There has, in particular, been renewed interest in the work 
of Hyman Minsky as a result of recent events (see e.g. Minsky, 1982). In Minsky's theory of 
endogenous financial booms and busts, prosperous times lead to an excess availability of 
credit  and  the  gradual  development  of  credit-fuelled  asset-price  bubbles.  Financial  crises 
result  when  those  debt  levels  become  excessive  –  a  so-called  “Minsky”  moment.  A  credit 
crunch then ensues leading to a downturn in the real economy. Much of what I have said this 
evening contains echoes of Minsky's theory. 
As a student at Harvard, Minsky was a protege of Schumpeter, whose teaching influenced 
him greatly. Schumpeter viewed credit as an essential ingredient of the capitalist machine. 
He  would  surely  have 
in 
macroeconomics over the past forty years. And he would surely endorse the need to rectify 
that omission now. So let me leave the final words to him: 
“Credit creation [is] the monetary complement of innovation. This relation…is at the bottom of 
all the problems of money and credit.” (Schumpeter, 1939, p.111) 
the  downplaying  of 
intermediation 
regretted 
financial 
Bibliography 
Adrian, T. and Shin, H.S. (2008), “Financial intermediaries, financial stability and monetary 
policy”,  in  Maintaining  Stability  in  a  Changing  Financial  System,  pp.  287-334.  Federal 
Reserve Bank of Kansas: Kansas City. 
Aikman, D. and Paustian, M. (2006), “Bank capital, asset prices and monetary policy”, Bank 
of England working paper 305. 
Akerlof, G. A. and Shiller, R. J. (2009), Animal Spirits: How Human Psychology Drives the 
Economy, and Why It Matters for Global Capitalism. Princeton University Press: Princeton. 
Andrés, J., López-Salido, J. D. and Nelson, E. (2004), “Tobin’s imperfect asset substitution in 
optimising  general  equilibrium”,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  St.  Louis  working  paper  2004-
003A. 
Borio, C. and White, W. (2003), “Whither monetary and financial stability? The implications of 
evolving  policy  regimes”,  in  Monetary  Policy  and  Uncertainty:  Adapting  to  a  Changing 
Economy, pp. 131-212. Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City: Kansas City. 
                                                                                                                                                         
discussed in Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist (1999). There is also the strand of work stemming from Kiyotaki 
and Moore (1997). 
13   Other  recent  contributions  on  the  bank  capital  channel  include  Aikman  and  Paustian  (2006);  Chen  (2001); 
Meh and Moran (2004); Van der Heuvel (2008). 
14   Recent  contributions  with  richer  models  of  the  banking  sector,  but  less  developed  specifications  of  the 
macroeconomy include Goodhart, Sunirand and Tsomocos (2005, 2006) and Uhlig (2009). 
BIS Review 101/2009 
 17
framework”, 
Bean,  C.R.  (2003),  “Asset  prices,  financial  imbalances  and  monetary  policy:  are  inflation 
targets enough?” in Asset Prices and Monetary Policy (eds. A. Richards and T. Robinson), 
pp. 48-76. Reserve Bank of Australia: Sydney. 
Bernanke,  B.  S.,  (2004),  “The  Great  Moderation”,  remarks  at  the  Eastern  Economic 
Association, Washington, DC, 20 February. 
Bernanke,  B.  S.,  (2005),  “The  global  saving  glut  and  the  US  current  account  deficit”, 
Sandridge Lecture, Virginia Association of Economics, Richmond, Virginia, 10 March. 
Bernanke, B. S., and Blinder, A.S. (1988), “Credit, money and aggregate demand”, American 
Economic Review, vol. 78(2), pp. 435-439. 
Bernanke, B., and Gertler, M. (2001), “Should central banks respond to movements in asset 
prices?”, American Economic Review, May, 91(2), pp. 253-257. 
Bernanke, B.S., Gertler, M., Gilchrist, S. (1999), “The financial accelerator in a quantitative 
business  cycle 
in  J.B.  Taylor  and  M.  Woodford  (eds.)  Handbook  of 
Macroeconomics, pp. 1341-1393. North-Holland.  
Buiter, W. H., and Panigirtzoglou, N. (1999), “Liquidity traps: How to avoid them and how to 
escape them”, NBER working paper 7245. 
Brunner, K. and Meltzer, A. (1972), “Money, debt and economic activity”, Journal of Political 
Economy, vol. 80, pp. 951-977. 
Brunnermeier, M. K. (2009), “Deciphering the liquidity and credit crunch 2007-8”, Journal of 
Economic Perspectives, vol. 23(1), Winter, pp. 77-100. 
Caballero,  R.  J.,  Farhi  E.  and  Gourinchas,  P-O  (2008),  “An  equilibrium  model  of  global 
imbalances and low interest rates”, American Economic Review, vol. 98(1), pp. 358-393. 
Caballero,  R.  J.,  and  Krishnamurthy,  A.  (2008),  “Collective  risk  management  in  a  flight  to 
quality episode”, Journal of Finance, vol. 63(5), pp. 2195-2230. 
Cecchetti,  S.,  Genberg,  H.,  and  Wadhwani,  S.  (2002),  “Asset  prices  in  a  flexible  inflation 
targeting  framework”,  in  W.  Hunter,  G.  Kaufman  and  M.  Pomerleano,  eds.,  Asset  Price 
Bubbles:  The  Implications  for  Monetary,  Regulatory  and  International  Policies.  Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press, pp.427-444. 
Chen,  N.  K.  (2001),  “Bank  net  worth,  asset  prices  and  economic  activity”,  Journal  of 
Monetary Economics, vol. 48(2), pp. 415-436. 
Christiano, L. J., Motto, R. and Rostagno, M. (2008), “Financial factors in business cycles”, 
mimeo, Northwestern University. 
Clarida,  R.,  Gali,  J.  and  Gertler,  M.  (2000),  “Monetary  policy  rules  and  macroeconomic 
stability:  evidence  and  some  theory”,  Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics,  vol.  115(1),  pages 
147-180. 
Cogley, T. and Sargent, T. (2005), ”Drifts and volatilities: monetary policy and outcomes in 
the post-WWII US”, Review of Economic Dynamics, vol. 8, pages 262-302. 
Curdia, V., and Woodford, M. (2009), “Credit frictions and optimal monetary policy”, mimeo. 
Dooley, M.P., Folkerts-Landau and Garber, P. (2004), “The revived Bretton Woods system”, 
International Journal of Finance and Economics, vol. 9, pp. 307-313. 
Dowd,  K.,  Cotter,  J.,  Humphrey,  C.  and  Woods,  M.  (2008),  “How  unlucky  is  25-sigma?”, 
Nottingham University Business School CRIS working paper 2008.III, March. 
Freeman,  R.B.  (2008),  “Labor  market  imbalances:  Shortages,  surpluses  or  what?”,  in  J. 
Sneddon  Little,  ed.,  Global  Imbalances  and  the  World  Economy,  pp.  159-182.  Federal 
Reserve Bank of Boston: Boston.  
18 
 BIS Review 101/2009
Furceri, D., and Mourougane, A. (2009), “The effects of financial crises on potential output: 
New empirical evidence from OECD countries”, OECD Working Paper 699, May. 
Gerali, A., Neri, S., Sessa, L., and Signoretti, F. M. (2008), “Credit and banking in a DSGE 
model”, mimeo.  
Gertler,  M.,  and  Karadi,  P.  (2009),  “A  model  of  unconventional  monetary  policy”,  mimeo, 
NYU, April.  
Goodfriend, M., and McCallum B.T. (2007), “Banking and interest rates in monetary policy 
analysis: a quantitative exploration”, Journal of Monetary Economics 54(5), pp. 1480-1507.  
Goodhart,  C.  A.  E.,  P.  Sunirand,  and  D.  Tsomocos  (2005),  “A  risk  assessment  model  for 
banks”, Annals of Finance 1(2), pp.197-224. 
Goodhart,  C.  A.  E.,  P.  Sunirand,  and  D.  Tsomocos  (2006),  “A  model  to  analyse  financial 
fragility”, Economic Theory 27 (1), pp.107-42. 
Gorton,  G.  (2008),  “The  panic  of  2007”  in  Maintaining  Stability  in  a  Changing  Financial 
System. Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas, Kansas City, pp. 131-262. 
Greenspan, A. (2002) “World Finance and Risk Management”, Speech at Lancaster House, 
25 September. 
Greenspan, A. (2002) “Opening Remarks” in Rethinking Stabilization Policy, pp.1-10. Federal 
Reserve Bank of Kansas: Kansas City. 
Haldane,  A.  G.  (2009),  “Rethinking  the  financial  network”,  Speech  at  Financial  Student 
Association, Amsterdam, April. 
International Monetary Fund (2008), World Economic Outlook, October. Washington, DC. 
King,  M.A.  (1999),  “Challenges  for  monetary  policy:  New  and  old”,  New  Challenges  for 
Monetary Policy. Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas, Kansas City, pp. 11-58. 
Kiyotaki,  N.,  Moore,  J.  (1997),  “Credit  cycles”,  Journal  of  Political  Economy,  vol.  105(2), 
pp.211-248. 
Lubik,  T.  and  Schorfheide,  F.  (2004),  “Testing  for  indeterminacy:  an  application  to  US 
monetary policy”, American Economic Review, vol. 94(1), pages 190-217. 
Meier,  A.,  (2009),  “Panacea,  curse  or  non-event?  Unconventional  monetary  policy  in  the 
United Kingdom”, IMF Working Paper, July. 
Meh, C. and Moran, K., (2004), “The role of bank capital in the propagation of shocks”, Bank 
of Canada Working Paper 2004-6. 
Miller,  M.  H.,  Weller,  P.  A.  and  Zhang,  L.  (2002)  “Moral  hazard  and  the  US  stock  market: 
Analysing the Greenspan put”, Economic Journal, vol. 112, pp. C171-C186. 
Minsky, H. (1982), “The financial-instability hypothesis: Capitalist processes and the behavior 
of the economy” in Kindleberger and Laffargue, editors, Financial Crises. 
Reinhart, C. M. and Rogoff, K. S. (2008), “Is the US sub-prime financial crisis so different? 
An international historical comparison”, American Economic Review, vol.98(2), pp. 339-344. 
Reinhart,  C.  M.  and  Rogoff,  K.  S.  (2009),  “The  aftermath  of  financial  crises”,  American 
Economic Review,  
Schumpeter, J. A. (1939), Business Cycles: A Theoretical, Historical, and Statistical Analysis 
of the Capitalist Process. New York: McGraw-Hill. 
Sims,  C.  and  Zha,  T.  (2006),  “Were  there  regime  switches  in  US  monetary  policy?”, 
American Economic Review, vol. 96(1), pages 54-81. 
BIS Review 101/2009 
 19
Stock,  J.  and  Watson,  M.  (2003),  “Has  the  business  cycle  changed?  Evidence  and 
explanations”,  in  Monetary  Policy  and  Uncertainty,  pp.  Federal  Reserve  Board  of  Kansas 
City: Kansas City. 
Taylor,  J.  B.  (2007),  “Housing  and  monetary  policy”  in  Housing,  Housing  Finance  and 
Monetary Policy, pp. 463-476. Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City: Kansas City. 
Taylor, J. B. (2009), “The financial crises and the policy responses: An empirical analysis of 
what went wrong”, NBER working paper 14631, January. 
Tobin,  J.  (1969),  “A  general  equilibrium  approach  to  monetary  theory”,  Journal  of  Money, 
Credit and Banking, vol. 1(1), pp15-29. 
Uhlig, H (2009), “A model of a systemic bank run”, NBER working paper 15072. 
Van  den  Heuvel,  S.J.  (2008),  “The  welfare  cost  of  bank  capital  requirements”,  Journal  of 
Monetary Economics, vol. 55, pp. 298-320. 
White, W. R. (2006), “Is price stability enough?”, Bank for International Settlements working 
paper 205, April. 
Woodford,  M.  (2003),  Interest  and  Prices:  Foundations  of  a  Theory  of  Monetary  Policy. 
Princeton University Press: Princeton. 
 
 
 20 
  BIS Review 101/2009
 BIS Review 101/2009 
   21
 22 
   BIS Review 101/2009
 BIS Review 101/2009 
   23
 24 
   BIS Review 101/2009
    BIS Review 101/2009 
 25
 26 
   BIS Review 101/2009
   BIS Review 101/2009 
 27
 28 
   BIS Review 101/2009
 BIS Review 101/2009 
   29
 30 
 BIS Review 101/2009
