Mark Carney: Some considerations on using monetary policy to stabilize 
economic activity 
Remarks by Mr Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to a symposium sponsored 
by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, 22 August 2009. 
 It is an honour to provide a few comments on Carl Walsh’s excellent paper, which revisits 
some  fundamental  monetary  policy  issues.  Walsh’s  paper  highlights  many  useful  lessons 
that can be learned from the conventional framework and its various extensions. However, 
the financial crisis provides a stark and costly reminder of just how incomplete the standard 
model is. I will concentrate on the future of monetary policy in light of both the lessons of the 
crisis and the prospect of some central banks having more formal responsibility to promote 
financial  stability.  I  will  take  as  my  starting  point  Walsh’s  observation  that:  “distortions  in 
financial  markets  that  generate  real  effects  of  monetary  policy  also  imply  that  financial 
stability may require making trade-offs with the goals of inflation stability and stability of real 
economic activity.”1  
There is an emerging consensus that price stability does not guarantee financial stability and 
is, in fact, often associated with excess credit growth and emerging asset bubbles.2 There is 
also  general  agreement  that  the  first  line  of  defence  should  be  better  regulation,  including 
new macroprudential tools. However, it is less widely recognized that this will mean it is not 
“business as usual” for monetary policy. At a minimum, the regulatory response will change 
the transmission mechanism and, consequently, the implementation of monetary policy.  
A more fundamental policy question – one that has not yet been fully thought through – is 
whether the policy rate itself should lean into the wind for financial stability purposes. If so, 
how will central banks retain accountability and credibility, and their associated benefits for 
inflation  expectations?  Could  it  be  advantageous  to  amend  the  price  stability  mandate?  I 
would like to undertake an initial exploration of these issues today.  
What follows is a discussion of ideas worthy of consideration. It should not be seen as having 
any  bearing  on  the  current  conduct  of  monetary  policy  or  the  prospective  management  of 
financial stability in Canada. The Bank of Canada's current inflation-control agreement with 
the Government of Canada will remain in effect until the end of 2011. Any changes to our 
agreement  with  the  Government,  if  desired  by  both  parties,  would  only  come  into  effect 
thereafter.  Changes  to  financial  stability  regulation  are  generally  the  purview  of  the 
Government of Canada. 
Is price stability enough? 
While  most  central  banks  have  added  a  financial  stability  objective  in  recent  years,  the 
monetary policy and financial stability wings of many of our institutions have operated as two 
solitudes.3  For  example,  the  standard  New  Keynesian  transmission  channels  featured  in 
workhorse  monetary  policy  models  and  described  in  Walsh’s  paper  ignore  not  only  the 
financial  accelerator  but  also  broader  procyclical  dynamics  in  modern  money  and  credit 
markets. Importantly, these dynamics could be triggered by the attainment of price stability 
                                                 
1   Carl  Walsh,  “Using  Monetary  Policy  to  Stabilize  Economic  Activity.”  Prepared  for  the  Jackson  Hole 
Symposium on Financial Stability and Macroeconomic Policy, 20-22 August, 2009, pp. 33-34. 
2   See, for example, King (2009) and Shirakawa (2009).  
3   This was one of the primary motivations for the Bank of Canada’s organizational realignment last year. 
BIS Review 98/2009 
 1
itself.  Such  downplaying  of  real-financial  linkages  obscured  the  scale  of  emerging 
vulnerabilities and challenged the initial crisis response.  
The experience of the past two years is quickly changing these attitudes. Central banks are 
recognizing that they need a deeper understanding of financial system dynamics in order to 
better  understand  the  relationship  between  price  and  financial  stability  and,  ultimately,  the 
contribution of both to the stabilization of economic activity.  
The variable transmission mechanism  
Central banks have effectively treated the transmission mechanism as uncertain but fixed (or 
at best only mildly variable) when it is in fact highly variable and procyclical. The transmission 
mechanism is a function of, among other factors, (i) regulation, which changes over time; (ii) 
financial innovation, which often evolves to circumvent regulation; and (iii) confidence, which 
is influenced by monetary policy in ways not commonly acknowledged.4
Consider  three  states  of  the  world.  In  the  normal  state,  financial  agents  balance 
macroeconomic and idiosyncratic risks in their investing, lending, and financing decisions. In 
the  exuberant  state,  agents  become  complacent  about  macroeconomic  risks  and  seek  to 
exploit more idiosyncratic or obscure opportunities.5 In the panicked state, macroeconomic 
risks dominate and all idiosyncratic risks are shunned. The normal state is just that, normal. 
The other two extremes are the tails that we have just lived through. 
A prolonged, benign macroeconomic environment can encourage the transition from normal 
to  exuberant  states.  As  we  have  all  just  been  reminded  at  great  cost,  low,  stable,  and 
predictable  inflation  and  low  variability  in  activity  –  especially  when  associated  with 
exceptionally low and stable interest rates – can breed complacency among financial market 
participants as risk taking adapts to the perceived new equilibrium.6 Indeed, risk appears to 
be  at  its  greatest  when  measures  of  it  are  at  their  lowest.  Low  variability  of  inflation  and 
output (reduces current financial VaR and) encourages greater risk taking (on a forward VaR 
basis). Investors stretch from liquid to less-liquid markets. In parallel, low and stable interest 
rates  promote  larger  asset-liability  mismatches  across  credit  and  currency  markets.  These 
tendencies are particularly marked if there is a perceived certainty about the stability of low 
interest rates. 7  
Many  of  these  positions  are  funded  on  a  collateralized  basis.  Such  asset-based  financing 
creates  intensely  procyclical  liquidity  cycles.  In  these  cycles,  rising  asset  prices  increase 
funding  liquidity,  which  finances  further  purchases  and  prompts  additional  price  increases. 
Over time, haircuts are relaxed, further intensifying the cycle.8,9  
It  is  important  to  recognize  that  expectations  about  monetary  policy  can  feed  these 
dynamics.  It  would  appear  that  the  so-called  “Clean”  doctrine  reinforces  the  risk-taking 
behaviour of agents. This is a strategy that advocates using monetary policy to “clean up,” or 
respond  to,  the  consequences  of  a  burst  asset  bubble  rather  than  “leaning  into  the  wind,” 
                                                 
4   Other factors include where the economy is in the cycle and the state of household and corporate balance 
sheets. 
5   They do so within a perceived risk budget. The actual risk budget has, of course, grown. 
6   Either  perceptions  of  risk  or  risk  preferences  could  change.  In  the  former  case,  complacency  about  actual 
risks can mean taking greater risks within the same risk budget. 
7   See Diamond and Rajan (2005). 
8   See Gorton and Metrick (2009), Fisher (2008), and Adrian and Shin (2008) for comprehensive descriptions of 
these dynamics.   
9   Ways to limit such procyclicality include enforcing through-the-cycle margins in repo markets and limiting re-
hypothecation margins in securities lending to 100 per cent. 
2 
 BIS Review 98/2009
which would limit the progression of excess credit creation.10 The combination of the central 
bank’s silence over the existence of a possible bubble, the certainty that it would not respond 
to emerging financial pressures unless they affect price dynamics over the monetary policy 
horizon, and the expectation that it would mop up if the bubble bursts all conspire to sow the 
seeds of the next crisis.11  
Though they are far from the whole story, such dynamics are central to the understanding of 
the current financial crisis.12
The first line of defence is better regulation 
While  misery  loves  company,  we  must  be  careful  not  to  generalize  recent  failings.  The 
foregoing  description  of  liquidity  cycles  assumes  that  agents  can  extend  mismatches, 
increase  leverage,  and  boost  collateral-based  finance  if  conditions  appear  favourable.  In 
other words, regulatory quiescence or arbitrage is also required.  
Neither  has  been  universal.  The  oft-derided  existing  regulatory  tool  kit  has  been  deployed 
more  effectively  in  some  jurisdictions  than  in  others.  Indeed,  many  Inflation  Targeters 
achieved their price stability objectives and retained well-functioning, appropriately exuberant 
financial systems (including Canada, Australia, and New Zealand). This advantage is easily 
replicated  and  could  be  further  enhanced  if  an  effective  macroprudential  approach  were 
developed.13  
The implementation of monetary policy will have to change  
New macroprudential tools will change the transmission mechanism, potentially in real time if 
discretion  is  used  in  their  application.  As  a  result,  central  banks  will  need  to  coordinate 
across  conventional  monetary  policy  tools  and  those  emerging  financial  stability  tools  that 
have monetary policy implications. This could prove challenging.  
Fortunately, we are already on the learning curve. Strains in the interbank, repo, and credit 
markets  dramatically  tightened  the  effective  stance  of  monetary  policy.  In  response, 
extraordinary  liquidity  facilities  were  deployed.  The  effectiveness  of  these  facilities  varied 
across  jurisdictions  with  the  health  of  core  financial  institutions  and  the  scale  of  shadow 
banking systems. 
A  common  lesson  is  that  current  market  infrastructure  does  not  ensure  continuously 
available  core  funding  markets.  A  wholesale  restructuring  of  funding  markets  is  thus 
required.  Promising  avenues  to  break  such  liquidity  spirals  include  introducing  clearing 
houses,  standardizing  products,  implementing  through-the-cycle  margining,  and  ensuring 
more  effective  netting.  As  the  ultimate  provider  of  liquidity  to  the  system,  central  banks 
should consider whether to adapt our facilities to support continuous private liquidity creation. 
Through such measures, we can reduce the procyclicality of the transmission mechanism.  
How other emerging macroprudential tools are implemented also matters. If these new tools, 
such  as  time-varying  capital  buffers,  are  purely  rules  based,  perhaps  linked  to  aggregate 
credit  growth,  their  impact  on  the  transmission  mechanism  may  be  determined  with 
                                                 
10   See White (2009) for the definition and broader discussion. 
11   An  alternative  extreme  is  the  “dark  side”  of  credibility,  whereby  agents  make  bigger  mistakes  as  a 
consequence of believing central banks will always get policy right. This is consistent with the exuberant state. 
12   For a more complete exposition, see Bernanke (2009). 
13   According  to  Walsh,  “targeted  and  time  varying  financial  regulations  are  better  instruments  than  monetary 
policy  for  mitigating  many  of  the  effects  of  these  [financial]  frictions.  But  if  regulation  fails  to  do  so,  central 
banks cannot ignore financial frictions and financial stability” (2009, p. 28). 
BIS Review 98/2009 
 3
experience. Unfortunately, it is unlikely that we can get the rules right  ex ante and, in any 
event,  private  innovation  may  change  their  impact  over  time.  If  there  is  an  element  of 
discretion in their application, it may be less certain that such dynamic management of the 
transmission mechanism for financial stability purposes will be both timely and effective. This 
could place greater pressure on monetary policy to act. For this reason, there is likely value 
in  either  coordinating  such  decisions  in  the  same  authority  or  determining  some  other 
mechanism for joint optimization.  
The  basic  point  is  that  in  order  to  maximize  the  probability  of  achieving  both  price  and 
financial stability objectives, one objective of macroprudential tools should be to dampen the 
procyclicality of the transmission mechanism. This will take the weight off monetary policy to 
act for financial stability purposes and allow its use to be concentrated on the pursuit of price 
stability. 
Can central banks achieve dual price and financial stability mandates? 
With the advent of inflation targeting, price stability mandates for most central banks have 
become  increasingly  well  defined.  Until  recently,  the  vagueness  of  most  financial  stability 
mandates and the assumption that price stability was consistent with financial stability meant 
that there were few perceived conflicts. In the wake of the crisis, financial stability mandates 
can  be  expected  to  harden  and  conflicts  may  become  more  apparent.  Can  central  banks 
jointly optimize these objectives? What are the implications for monetary policy of trying to do 
so? 
Price  stability  should  be  retained  as  the  central  objective  of  monetary  policy,  although  its 
definition  may  have  to  change.  Price  stability  may  not  be  enough  to  stabilize  economic 
activity in all states of the world, but neither is it undesirable. Indeed, the single most direct 
contribution that monetary policy can make to sound economic performance is to provide our 
citizens  with  confidence  that  their  money  will  retain  its  purchasing  power.  That  means 
keeping inflation low, stable, and predictable. Price stability lowers uncertainty, minimizes the 
costs  of  inflation,  reduces  the  cost  of  capital,  and  creates  an  environment  in  which 
households and firms can invest and plan for the future. It has generally been coincident with 
sustainable growth in output and employment. 
Having  a  credible  price  stability  objective  has  also  proven  enormously  helpful  during  the 
crisis and should continue to be so during the eventual exit. The coherence of policy and the 
message derived from one fixed objective provide greater certainty for financial markets in a 
time of considerable turmoil. The ability to maintain inflation expectations has helped keep 
real  interest  rates  low  and  provide  the  necessary  monetary  stimulus.  The  inflation  anchor 
remains  essential  even  when  providing  extraordinary  guidance.  This  is  why  the  Bank  of 
Canada’s  current  commitment  –  that  our  target  rate  is  projected  to  remain  at  its  effective 
lower bound through the end of the second quarter of 2010 – is explicitly conditional on the 
outlook for inflation.  
Different time horizons for price and financial stability require flexibility 
The main challenge for joint optimization is that financial and price stability share common 
determinants  but  have  different  time  horizons.  Price  stability  dynamics  continuously  reflect 
real shocks and/or policy responses, while financial vulnerabilities are much less predictable. 
They  build over  time  and  can  persist  for  longer  than  expected.  Because  of  this  mismatch, 
policy actions consistent with targeting one may undermine the other.14  
                                                 
14  This may partially explain why asset prices are not accurate predictors of goods prices. See Walsh (2009, p. 
29). 
4 
 BIS Review 98/2009
This timing difference can be partially bridged in a couple of ways. First, housing prices can 
be  incorporated  in  the  consumer  price  index,  as  they  are  in  Canada.  Second,  monetary 
policy communications could adapt to reflect the behavioural dynamics of financial systems. 
An  effective  communications  strategy  for  normal  states  may  prove  counterproductive  in 
exuberant states. 
How  central  banks  communicate  can  influence  the  degree  to  which  low,  stable,  and 
predictable inflation fosters excess credit growth. It is important that markets understand how 
a central bank formulates policy, but that does not equate to perfect foresight. Differences in 
judgment and the fundamental uncertainties surrounding the economic outlook should mean 
occasional differences in view. These should be particularly marked during turning points in 
the economic cycle. As the review of liquidity cycles suggests, wider “markets” in expected 
economic  outcomes  (which  would  mean  greater  short-term  volatility)  could  promote  long-
term financial stability.15  
The alternative would be to generate price instability to prevent financial instability. That is, 
the  price  objective  might  have  to  become  less  stable  in  order  to  disrupt  the  endogenous 
liquidity creation that comes from relatively stable, predictable rate paths.16 This, rather than 
a higher inflation rate (if reliably achieved), would appear necessary to disrupt the dynamics 
described earlier.  
The trade-off between flexibility and credibility challenges joint optimization  
Flexible inflation targeting is the standard approach to bridge the different time horizons for 
financial and price stability. However, there are limits. The time frame for inflation targeting 
can  be  stretched,  but  the  credibility  essential  for  its  success  may  be  undermined  if  such 
flexibility is taken too far or deployed too frequently.17 Flexible inflation targeting works well 
with temporary or one-off shocks. Whether it can adapt to address unique but longer-lived 
shocks or different states of the financial economy, such as an asset boom, is the relevant 
question.  
The design of monetary policy frameworks depend in part on the trade-off between flexibility 
and credibility. This, in turn, is a function of both the extent to which (inflexible) rules enhance 
credibility and the ability of central banks to exercise the discretion required to deploy any 
flexibility in a credible manner. 
There is an important governance and accountability aspect to this, which the current debate 
often ignores. Inflation-targeting regimes generally have fixed targets, with bands and tight 
timelines for their achievement. This inflexibility sets clear objectives and helps hold central 
bankers accountable. It also can create a virtuous circle. As the inflation target is achieved, it 
enhances  the  central  bank’s  credibility,  which  further  anchors  inflation  expectations,  which 
then contribute to a more stable macroeconomic environment, and that, in turn, further builds 
policy credibility.  
We  should  be  careful  neither  to  underweight  the  value  of  resulting  simple  heuristics  of 
economic agents nor to minimize the risks of complicating them. If the central bank were to 
lean  for  financial  stability  reasons  and  miss  its  inflation  target  as  a  consequence,  its 
                                                 
15   In  this  regard,  the  Bank  of  Canada  views  its  use  of  a  conditional  commitment  as  an  unconventional  policy 
instrument, justified by the effective lower bound and by extreme market volatility. 
16   As argued below, it is not that the price objective itself should become less stable but that its attainment could 
become  more  volatile.  This  could  be  the  natural  consequence  of  adding  a  financial  stability  objective  if 
macroprudential tools and surveillance do not prove sufficient for the task.   
17   Since 1998, the Bank of Canada’s horizon has varied from five to ten quarters over our projection period.   
BIS Review 98/2009 
 5
accountability  could  be  diminished, 
expectations themselves could become unanchored.18
The  key  question  is  whether  the  financial  stability  benefit  of  greater  flexibility  is  worth  the 
price stability risk of forfeited credibility. 
its  credibility  reduced,  and  potentially, 
inflation 
Amending the price stability objective to promote financial stability 
This  all  suggests  that  if  monetary  policy  must  lean  into  the  wind  for  financial  stability 
purposes,  then  the  price  stability  objective  should  change  in  a  manner  consistent  with  the 
desired  variability  in  the  price  path.  This  could  be  accomplished  by  combining  flexible 
inflation targeting and price-level targeting.  
In general, policy-makers would rely on enhanced macroprudential regulatory frameworks to 
curb the enthusiasm in the financial system.19 While the policy interest rate would not be the 
primary  tool  for  promoting  financial  stability,  it  occasionally  might  be  used  to  support 
macroprudential tools. Leaning into the wind for financial stability purposes could thus result 
in  temporary  deviations  from  the  inflation  target.  To  avoid  threatening  the  monetary  policy 
objective, these deviations could be recovered over time in order to keep the economy on a 
predetermined path for the price level.  
The  prospect  that  the  target  rate  could  be  deployed  in  this  manner  would  help  maintain  a 
balance  between  macro  and  idiosyncratic  risk.  The  discipline  of  a  transparent  and 
accountable  price  stability  objective  via  the  price-level  target  could  maintain  central  bank 
credibility. 
However,  authorities,  if  they  are  granted  flexibility,  must  be  sufficiently  disciplined  not  to 
decide  that  all  shocks  are  uniquely  virulent.  This  suggests  that  exercising  any  flexibility  to 
lean  into  the  wind  for  financial  stability  purposes  should  be  episodic,  the  product  of  state-
dependent rules. That is, the central bank would need to make the judgment not only that an 
exuberant  state  is  developing,  but  also  that  macroprudential  tools  alone  are  insufficient  to 
counteract it. The possibility that the central bank would make this judgment would rise with 
the  degree  of  excess  credit  creation,  providing  a  partial  check  on  emerging  complacent 
financial expectations.  
A crucial motivation for this idea is that the balance of long-term price stability (i.e., achieving 
a predetermined price path) with higher short-term variability (due to the occasional leaning) 
is  ultimately  more  consistent  with  achieving  financial  stability  than  conventional  inflation 
targeting.20 This reflects the relationship between price stability; low, relatively stable interest 
rates;  and  the  emergence  of  exuberant  financial  states  of  the  world  described  earlier. 
However, it also presumes that regulation is not up to the task. It is important to stress again 
that  the  first  line  of  defence  against  these  dynamics  must  lie  in  improved  regulation  and 
market structure. 
It  is  also  important  to  remember  that  there  are  concerns  about  macro  stabilization  under 
price-level  targeting.  In  particular,  the  performance  of  a  price-level  target  may  suffer  if 
inflation  expectations  are  highly  backward  looking  and/or  if  the  economy  is  vulnerable  to 
shocks  generating  negative  correlation  between  output  and  inflation.21  Highly  persistent 
                                                 
18   A current example may concentrate the mind. What if it were thought that central banks might keep rates too 
low  for  too  long  from  a  price  stability  perspective  in  order  to  repair  the  banking  system  (from  a  financial 
stability perspective). Rising inflation expectations and bond yields could undermine the recovery.   
19   Walsh distinguishes between asset prices in normal and in bubble situations (2009, p. 32). 
20   A financial bubble and the policy response to it create the danger of yielding the reverse, i.e., short-term price 
stability but longer-term persistent deviations from the desired price path. 
21   See Steinsson (2003). 
6 
 BIS Review 98/2009
relative  price  shocks  may  also  pose  a  problem  for  macro  stabilization  under  price-level 
targeting.22 Any decision on the overall merits of price-level targeting must take all of these 
considerations into account. 
faces  a  difficult 
trade-off  between 
Conclusion 
Experience has shown that monetary and financial stability are more tightly bound than had 
been  appreciated.  Price  stability  is  a  necessary,  but  not  sufficient,  condition  for  the 
stabilization of economic activity, and it must be supplemented by a robust macroprudential 
regulatory  framework.  This,  in  turn,  will  have  consequences  for  the  implementation  of 
monetary policy. If these macroprudential tools prove insufficient to achieve financial stability, 
monetary  policy 
flexibility  and  credibility.  As  a 
consequence,  authorities  may  wish  to  adjust  the  monetary  policy  objective  to  have  the 
credible flexibility required to achieve both targets. Price-level targeting offers one potential 
avenue for consideration. 
A formal assessment of the merits of price-level targeting will require the development of a 
framework that has a more realistic depiction of real-financial linkages than is embodied in 
the standard financial accelerator model. These models are still in their infancy, and their use 
to study the relative merits of inflation targeting and price-level targeting is the subject of on-
going research at the Bank of Canada.  
The financial stability aspect of the price-level versus inflation targeting debate is only one of 
many  relevant  dimensions.  The  Bank  has  launched  a  multi-year  research  initiative  that 
includes a comprehensive examination of the possible advantages of moving to a price-level 
target.23 Our efforts in this area are ongoing and we look forward to continuing to work with 
monetary policy experts, academics, and central bankers from across the world. Carl Walsh 
has made a valuable contribution to that debate today. 
of  Canada. 
References  
Adrian, T. and H.S. Shin. 2008. “Financial Intermediaries, Financial Stability and Monetary 
Policy.”  Paper  prepared  for  the  economic  policy  symposium  “Maintaining  Stability  in  a 
Changing Financial System.” Jackson Hole, Wyoming. August. 
Amano,  R.,  O.  Kryvtsov,  and  J.  Murray.  2009.  “Price-Level  Targeting  in  a  Multi-Sector 
Economy.” Bank of Canada. Manuscript. 
Bank 
http://www.inflationtargeting.ca 
Bank of Canada Review. 2009. Special Issue: Research on Inflation Targeting. Spring. 
Bernanke,  B.  S.  2009.  “Four  Questions  about  the  Financial  Crisis.”  Speech  at  Morehouse 
College, Atlanta, Georgia. 14 April.  
Carney, M. 2008. “Building Continuous Markets.” Speech to the Canada – United Kingdom 
Chamber of Commerce. London, England. 19 November. 
Cateau, G. 2008. “Price Level versus Inflation Targeting under Model Uncertainty.” Bank of 
Canada Working Paper No. 2008-15.  
Targeting  Research 
(website). 
Available 
Inflation 
at 
                                                 
22   See Amano, Kryvtsov, and Murray (2009); Coletti et al. (2009); and de Resende, Dib, and Kichian (2009) 
23   See the Bank of Canada’s website on inflation-targeting research at www.inflationtargeting.ca; Cateau (2008); 
Kryvtsov,  Shukayev,  and  Ueberfeldt  (2008);  Cateau,  Kryvtsov,  Shukayev,  and  Ueberfeldt  (2009);  Dib, 
Mendicino, and Zhang (2008); Covas and Zhang (2008); and Coletti, Lalonde, and Muir (2008).   
BIS Review 98/2009 
 7
Cateau,  G.,  O.  Kryvtsov,  M.  Shukayev,  and  A.  Ueberfeldt.  2009.  “Adopting  Price-Level 
Targeting under Imperfect Credibility in ToTEM.” Bank of Canada Working Paper No. 2009-
17.  
Coletti,  D.,  R.  Lalonde,  and  D.  Muir.  2008.  “Inflation  Targeting  and  Price-Level-Path 
Targeting in the Global Economic Model: Some Open Economy Considerations.” IMF Staff 
Papers, Vol. 55, No. 2.  
Coletti, D., R. Lalonde, P. Masson, and D. Muir. 2009. “Commodities and Monetary Policy: 
Implications for Inflation and Price Level Targeting.” Bank of Canada. Manuscript.  
Covas, F. and Y. Zhang. 2008. “Price-Level versus Inflation Targeting with Financial Market 
Imperfections.” Bank of Canada Working Paper No. 2008-26. 
de  Resende,  C.,  A.  Dib,  and  M.  Kichian.  2009.  “Optimal  Monetary  Policy  in  Multi-Sector 
Small Open Economy Models: Conventional Wisdom?” Bank of Canada. Manuscript.  
Diamond, D. W. and R. Rajan. 2005. “Liquidity Shortages and Banking Crises.”  Journal of 
Finance 60 (2): 615–47. 
Dib, A., C. Mendicino, and Y. Zhang. 2008. “Price Level Targeting in a Small Open Economy 
with Financial Frictions: Welfare Analysis.” Bank of Canada Working Paper No. 2008-40. 
Fisher, P. R. 2008. “Commentary: The Role of Liquidity in Financial Crises.” Comments on a 
paper  presented  by  E.  Carletti  and  F.  Allen  at  the  symposium  “Maintaining  Stability  in  a 
Changing Financial system.” Jackson Hole, Wyoming. August. 
Gorton,  G.B.  and  A.  Metrick.  2009. “Securitized  Banking  and  the  Run  on  Repo.”  Yale  ICF 
Working Paper No. 14. Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1440752. 
King, M. 2009. Speech at the Lord Mayor’s Banquet for Bankers and Merchants of the City of 
London at the Mansion House. London, England. 17 June.  
Kryvtsov, O., M. Shukayev, and A. Ueberfeldt. 2008. “Adopting Price-Level Targeting under 
Imperfect Credibility: An Update.” Bank of Canada Working Paper 2008-37. 
Shirakawa,  M.  2009.  “Some  Thoughts  on  Incentives  at  Micro-  and  Macro-level  for  Crisis 
Prevention.” Remarks at the Eighth Bank for International Settlements Annual Conference. 
Basel, Switzerland. 26 June.  
Steinsson,  J.  2003.  “Optimal  Monetary  Policy  in  an  Economy  with  Inflation  Persistence.” 
Journal of Monetary Economics 50(7): 1425–65. 
Walsh, C. 2009. “Using Monetary Policy to Stabilize Economic Activity.” Paper prepared for 
the  symposium  “Financial  Stability  and  Macroeconomic  Policy.”  Jackson  Hole,  Wyoming. 
August. 
White, W. R. 2009. “Should Monetary Policy ‛Lean or Clean’?” Center for Financial Studies. 
Goethe University. Frankfurt. May. 
8 
 BIS Review 98/2009
