Pierre Duguay: Bank of Canada’s perspective on the stability of the 
Canadian financial system 
Opening  statement  by  Mr  Pierre  Duguay,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the 
House of Commons Standing Committee on Finance, Ottawa, 5 March 2009. 
 Good morning. Thank you for inviting me here to discuss the Bank of Canada’s perspective 
on the stability of the Canadian financial system. 
As  we  have  consistently  emphasized,  stabilization  of  the  global  financial  system  is  a 
precondition for economic recovery, both globally and in Canada. To that end, policymakers 
around  the  globe  have  acted  aggressively  and  creatively  by  initiating  a  series  of 
unprecedented  actions  aimed  at  stabilizing  the  global  financial  system.  Central  banks 
throughout the world, including the Bank of Canada, have provided unprecedented liquidity 
to keep the financial system functioning. 
Because  the  crisis  we  are  facing  is  global  in  nature  and  began  outside  our  borders,  most 
solutions must be found at the international level. We are taking part in discussions with our 
international colleagues on ways to strengthen financial stability globally. I would note that 
there  has  been  a  great  deal  of  interest  worldwide  in  the  resilience  of  Canada’s  financial 
institutions in the face of the global economic crisis. Unlike their counterparts in other major 
economies, Canadian banks have not been materially affected by the financial crisis. They 
have managed to raise capital during this troubled period to support continued lending and to 
make up for some of the decline in the demand for securitized products as well as the exit of 
non-bank lenders which had relied on securitization for financing their activities. In contrast, 
banks  in  most  other  major  economies  have  suffered  significant  losses  and  have  required 
significant  capital  injections  from  their  governments.  Thus,  Canada  has  maintained  much 
healthier credit conditions since the onset of this global recession than have been seen in 
other  major  countries.  Still,  the  Canadian  financial  sector  has  felt  the  effects  of  the  global 
turmoil which has increased funding needs while at the same time raising the costs and the 
uncertainty of term funding. In response, the Bank of Canada has made significant efforts to 
support liquidity in financial markets. 
Our actions aimed at stabilizing the Canadian financial system since the global crisis began 
18 months ago have been unprecedented and significant. The Bank of Canada has moved 
aggressively by expanding the provision of term purchase and resale agreements (PRAs) to 
a total of $41 billion at its peak in December, and $35 billion currently. Term PRAs provide 
liquidity to key market participants for terms of up to three months against a wide range of 
securities. The Bank has widened the range of assets that it will accept in these operations 
and has extended the range of counterparties with whom it will transact. We also introduced 
a new Term-Loan Facility for those financial institutions that participate directly in the Large 
Value  Transfer  System,  taking  their  non-mortgage  loan  portfolios  as  collateral.  Last  week, 
the Bank announced a new term PRA facility for private sector instruments that expands on 
the private sector term PRA facility that we set up last autumn for money market instruments. 
The facility is opened to a broader range of participants, against a broader range of eligible 
securities, and it is available for a longer term and at a lower minimum bid rate. The liquidity 
from this new facility should provide indirect support to credit growth in Canada by improving 
secondary-market liquidity and increasing demand for corporate securities. 
I would like to point out that these facilities have been financed, not by expanding the supply 
of central bank money to the financial system, but rather through the sale of treasury bills, 
either from the Bank’s own portfolio or from new issues whose proceeds are in turn held on 
deposit  at  the  Bank  of  Canada.  I  would  also  note  that,  on  a  consolidated  basis,  the 
Government of Canada earns net income from these operations, represented by the spread 
BIS Review 27/2009 
 1
between  the  yield  on  our  own  term  PRAs  and  by  the  yield  on  treasury  bills.  Furthermore, 
there is little risk to the taxpayer in these operations, as we require participants to pledge a 
greater amount of collateral than the amount of money borrowed. 
These liquidity operations have resulted in a significant reduction in spreads at the short end 
of  the  market.  CDOR-OIS  spreads  have  narrowed  substantially  since  last  fall,  when 
conditions  were  extremely  negative.  Improvements  are  especially  notable  at  shorter 
maturities  (such  as  1-month)  and  are  largely  attributable  to  the  liquidity  facilities  that  have 
been put in place. Spreads at 3 months which peaked at about 125 basis points in Canada, 
are now close to more normal levels; that is, about 25 basis points. 
While  the  Bank  of  Canada’s  liquidity  operations  are  focused  on  short-term  financing,  the 
Government of Canada has introduced measures aimed at supporting long-term financing for 
businesses  and  consumers.  Let  me  highlight  two.  One  is  the  Insured  Mortgage  Purchase 
Program, which allows financial institutions to fund new financing by selling pools of insured 
residential mortgages to CMHC; another is the Canadian Secured Credit Facility under which 
the Business Development Bank of Canada will buy term asset-backed securities backed by 
loans and leases on vehicles and equipment. 
All  of  these  measures  are  helping  to  meet  a  rising  demand  from  business  and  individuals 
who have been finding it difficult in this environment to raise adequate funds. We have all 
heard  reports  about  ongoing  tightening  in  both  the  availability  and  the  pricing  of  credit. 
Nonetheless, our latest figures show continued strong growth in total household credit – 9.6 
per  cent  in  January  compared  with  the  same  period  one  year  earlier  –  and  limited 
deceleration  in  growth  of  total  business  credit.  The  latter  stood  at  4.2  per  cent  in  January 
compared with the same period one year earlier as accelerating growth in bank lending has 
helped to offset a contraction in market financing. We will continue to closely monitor credit 
growth and credit conditions in Canada. 
In conclusion, as we are all very well aware, the Canadian economy is feeling the effects of 
the global turmoil and recession. Authorities have put a lot of fiscal and monetary stimulus in 
place – in Canada and globally – to support the recovery. However, as I noted at the outset, 
stabilization  of  the  global  financial  system  remains  a  precondition  for  the  global  and 
Canadian economic recoveries. Investor and public confidence has been badly shaken, but 
will  recover  with  the  timely  implementation  of  ambitious  plans  in  some  major  countries  to 
address toxic assets and to recapitalize financial institutions. However, if these national and 
multilateral measures are not timely, bold, and well-executed, Canada’s economic recovery 
will be both attenuated and delayed. 
I would now be pleased to answer your questions. 
2 
 BIS Review 27/2009
