Thomas Jordan: The Swiss National Bank’s monetary policy in turbulent 
times  
Summary of a speech by Mr Thomas Jordan, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss 
National Bank, at the Geldmarkt-Apéro of the Swiss National Bank, Zurich, 19 March 2009. 
The complete speech can be found in German on the Swiss National Bank’s website (www.snb.ch). 
 The financial market crisis has now widened into a global economic recession, and the Swiss 
economy  is  feeling  the  full  impact.  The  SNB  has  taken  prompt  and  decisive  action  in 
response, and substantially relaxed its monetary policy.  
In mid-March, as a result of the sharp economic downturn since December 2008, a further 
major  expansion  of  monetary  policy  became  necessary.  However,  the  SNB  was  already 
operating a de facto zero interest rate policy (ZIRP), and the natural limits of conventional 
monetary policy had been reached. The SNB therefore took three unconventional measures: 
increasing  the  number  of  transactions  in  repos  with  longer  terms,  purchasing  Swiss  franc 
bonds issued by private sector borrowers, and buying foreign currency on the open market.  
In  implementing  these  unconventional  steps,  the  SNB  has  demonstrated  that,  even  in  an 
environment of zero interest rates, it still has a number of tools at its disposal which allow it to 
react  flexibly  to  any  undesired  tightening  of  monetary  conditions.  In  this  context,  it  is 
important  not  to  misinterpret  the  foreign  currency  measures  as  the  start  of  a  “beggar  thy 
neighbour” policy. In periods of zero interest rates, such purchases help to counter the risk of 
deflation.  
The Swiss economy faces an exceptionally difficult year in 2009. Economic activity is set to 
pick up again gradually over the course of 2010, thanks to the extremely expansive monetary 
policy.  This  is,  however,  conditional  upon  an  economic  recovery  by  our  main  trading 
partners, as well as a return to stability on financial markets. The SNB measures are also 
aimed at reducing the risk of deflation in Switzerland.  
Despite the creation of massive amounts of liquidity, the SNB remains committed to ensuring 
price stability in the future. We will use all means at our disposal to reduce liquidity again in 
good time, so as to prevent any upsurge of inflation in Switzerland once the crisis has ended. 
BIS Review 33/2009 
 1
