Mervyn King: Monetary policy developments 
Speech by Mr Mervyn King, Governor of the Bank of England, at the Lord Mayor’s Banquet 
for Bankers and Merchants of the City of London at the Mansion House, London, 17 June 
2009. 
 My Lord Mayor, Mr Chancellor, My Lords, Ministers, Aldermen, Mr Recorder, Sheriffs, Ladies 
and Gentlemen, 
It has been quite a year. A year to remember, but not to repeat. Since we last met, a financial 
panic swept through markets in September, several major financial institutions failed, and a 
remarkable  collapse  of  confidence  around  the  world  led  to  unprecedented  declines  in 
industrial  production  and  national  output.  World  trade  fell  by  almost  15%  in  six  months,  a 
faster rate of decline than in the Great Depression. 
Faced with this crisis, the Bank of England took extraordinary actions. Bank Rate was cut 
virtually  to  zero,  and  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  embarked  on  a  programme  of  £125 
billion of asset purchases. And in your own businesses you too have had to deal with what 
some have called a once-in-a-century event. 
Since the panic last autumn, overall output has fallen by around 3% in the United States and 
the United Kingdom, 6% in Germany, and 7% in Japan. The collapse of spending in these 
economies  is  having  painful  consequences.  In  less  than  a  year,  over  5  million  jobs  have 
been lost in the United States, almost 2 million in the euro area, and almost half a million 
here in the United Kingdom. 
Despite those unprecedented falls in activity, there are some signs that the British economy 
is  beginning  to  stabilise,  and  financial  markets  have  improved  markedly.  There  are  three 
solid  reasons  for  thinking  that  a  recovery  in  activity  was  likely  to  occur  at  some  point  this 
year.  
The first I call the “Honda effect” – many firms, as Honda did last year at its plant in Swindon, 
cut  back  production  and  met  demand  from  stock,  resuming  production  this  year  once 
inventories had been reduced.  
The  second  factor  is  the  level  of  sterling  which,  despite  its  recent  rally,  is  still  some  20% 
lower than in the summer of 2007. That will encourage a switch in spending, at home and 
abroad, towards goods and services produced in the UK.  
Finally, and perhaps most important, is the enormous policy stimulus that has been injected 
into  the  economy.  Bank  Rate  was  cut  by  four  percentage  points  in  four  months.  But  the 
Monetary Policy Committee judged that even that was insufficient to prevent inflation falling 
below our 2% target, and so it embarked on a programme of asset purchases designed to 
increase  the  money  supply  and  improve  conditions  in  non-bank  corporate  credit  markets. 
The  programme  will  shortly  be  extended  to  working  capital  finance,  which  should  be  of 
particular  help  to  smaller  companies.  But  the  Bank  must  not  become  the  arbiter  of  the 
allocation of public credit to individual companies or sectors – such decisions are rightly and 
necessarily  the  province  of  government.  So  there  is  a  limit  to  the  scope  of  the  Bank’s 
activities in this area.  
The success of the policy is not to be judged by the increase in bank lending. Its aim is to 
increase  the  money  supply.  There  are  already  tentative  signs  that  the  programme  is 
beginning to have beneficial effects with the growth rate of broad money picking up.  
So there are certainly grounds for believing that the rapid falls in activity are coming to an 
end.  But  there  are  some  equally  solid  reasons  for  believing  that  the  path  to  full  recovery 
could be protracted. The most obvious is that the supply of bank lending to companies and 
BIS Review 76/2009 
 1
households remains constrained. The stock of bank lending to non-financial companies has 
been falling in recent months, and household lending has been flat. Part of this undoubtedly 
reflects  weak  demand  in  the  face  of  the  recession.  But  the  evidence  from  prospective 
borrowers, and the terms on which lenders are willing to extend credit, suggest that banks’ 
ability to finance a sustained recovery remains impaired by low levels of equity capital. Stress 
tests designed to assess the viability of banks are very different from tests of the capacity of 
the banking system to finance a recovery.  
Investors  continue  to  demand  high  returns  to  finance  banks.  Put  bluntly,  market  data  on 
credit spreads imply that some banks are viewed as a worse credit risk than some of their 
customers.  As  a  result,  companies  that  can  bypass  the  banks  to  access  capital  markets 
directly are doing so. Indeed, in the first four months of this year, more finance was raised in 
debt  and  equity  markets  than  is  normally  the  case  in  an  entire  year.  Most  companies, 
however, especially smaller and medium-sized enterprises, rely heavily on bank finance. And 
with  current  market  sentiment  it  may  take  further  additions  to  equity  capital  before  the 
banking system will be able to supply credit at a price and on a scale to finance a sustained 
recovery. That is likely to take time.  
It is too soon to reverse the extraordinary policy stimulus that has been injected into the UK 
economy through monetary policy, the provision of liquidity support to banks, guarantees of 
bank  funding,  and  fiscal  policy.  Nevertheless,  it  is  not  too  early  to  prepare  such  “exit 
strategies” and to explain how they would work. 
The  challenge  facing  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  is  straightforward  in  principle  but 
difficult in practice. As activity returns to more normal levels, the outlook for inflation will pick 
up.  And  it  is  the  outlook  for  inflation  that  will  guide  decisions  on  the  pace  and  timing  of  a 
withdrawal of monetary stimulus. Reaching judgements on the outlook for inflation is never 
easy, and assessing their implications for policy will always be a matter of balancing risks. In 
contrast, the choice of instruments is simple. When appropriate the MPC will raise Bank Rate 
and gradually run down its portfolio of assets in a manner consistent with maintaining orderly 
markets. 
Just  as  no  one  should  plan  on  the  present  degree  of  monetary  stimulus  persisting 
indefinitely, so too no bank should expect that the current extraordinary liquidity support will 
continue  for  ever.  In  due  course,  a  strategy  will  be  needed  to  exit  from  that  temporary 
support,  and  from  the  extensive  bank  guarantees,  to  the  permanent  regime  for  liquidity 
insurance that the Bank announced last year. The Bank of England will talk with the banks 
about how to manage the transition.  
As  we  emerge  from  recession,  fiscal  policy  too  will  have  to  change.  In  taking  the 
extraordinary measures to stabilise banks and the wider economy, some of the past build-up 
of debt has been transferred from the private to the public sector. And it was right to use a 
temporary fiscal stimulus to counter the depth of the downturn experienced last year. But five 
years  from  now  national  debt,  as  a  proportion  of  national  income,  is  expected  to  be  more 
than double its level before the crisis. So it is also necessary to produce a clear plan to show 
how  prospective  deficits  will  be  reduced  during  the  next  Parliament,  so  returning  to  a 
gradually declining path for the ratio of national debt to national income.  
We  must  learn  lessons  from  the  events  of  the  past  two  years.  They  cannot  be  final 
conclusions because the present crisis has some way to run. But two stand out. First, price 
stability  does  not  guarantee  stability  of  the  economy  as  a  whole.  Second,  the  instruments 
used to pursue financial stability are in need of sharpening and refining. 
Setting Bank Rate to maintain price stability was successful in itself, but did not prevent a 
recession induced by a financial crisis. But let’s not throw out the baby with the bathwater. 
The  period  prior  to  the  crisis  was  the  most  stable  economic  environment  for  generations. 
And, unlike most previous recessions, this crisis wasn’t preceded by an unsustainable boom 
in output. In the five years leading up to the crisis, overall GDP growth remained close to its 
long-run average and inflation differed from the 2% target on average by only 0.2 percentage 
2 
 BIS Review 76/2009
points.  Diverting  monetary  policy  from  its  goal  of  price  stability  risks  making  the  economy 
less stable and the financial system no more so. To argue that monetary policy should be 
directed to counter inadequately priced risk is to argue that unemployment is a price worth 
paying to tame the banking system. 
Inflation targeting is a necessary but not sufficient condition for stability in the economy as a 
whole. When a policy is necessary but not sufficient, the answer is not to abandon, but to 
augment,  it.  Indeed,  the  overarching  lesson  from  this  crisis  is  that  the  authorities  lacked 
sufficient policy instruments to take effective actions. Nowhere was this more evident than in 
dealing  with  Northern  Rock  in  the  absence  of  proper  resolution  powers.  For  domestic 
institutions that particular issue was settled by the Banking Act 2009, and the new resolution 
powers  were  successfully  deployed  by  the  Bank  to  deal  with  the  Dunfermline  Building 
Society in March.  
What  other  powers  are  required?  There  is  a  broad  consensus  that  our  traditional  policy 
instruments  need  to  be  augmented  by  a  “macro-prudential”  toolkit.  But  what  are  such 
“macro-prudential” instruments for? Are they to increase the resilience of individual banks, or 
are they to protect the economy from the banks? The former implies a sensible extension of 
the  current  regime  of  capital  requirements  for  individual  institutions.  The  latter  goes  to  the 
heart of the problems caused by the financial sector as a whole for the rest of the economy. 
We need to reflect more deeply on the nature of the failures before designing a regulatory 
response – after all many financial markets continued to function well. But banks entered the 
crisis with historically low levels of liquid assets, and inadequate levels of capital with which 
to absorb losses. Moreover, in the United Kingdom, the financial sector became too big and 
too highly leveraged. First, the size of our banking system was, as a proportion of GDP, five 
times  that  in  the  United  States,  and  the  risks  to  the  UK  taxpayer  correspondingly  greater. 
Second, the process of reducing very high leverage is doing great damage to the rest of the 
economy. And the required adjustment still has a long way to run – few of the largest banks 
in the United Kingdom managed to reduce their leverage ratios through 2008, which remain 
at  historically  high  levels.  Third,  interconnections  between  institutions  create  potential 
fragilities  across  the  system,  as  we  saw  last  September.  Fourth,  the  risks  associated  with 
large-scale proprietary trading are probably harder to control in limited liability companies. So 
we need instruments to prevent the size, leverage, fragility and risk of the financial system 
from  becoming  too  great.  The  resulting  “macro-prudential”  toolkit  will  contain  a  number  of 
instruments to reduce risk, both across the system and over time. It must not be put together 
in a hurry. And I share the concerns of many of you that we are a long way from identifying 
precise regulatory interventions that would improve the functioning of markets.  
As  far  as  individual  banks  are  concerned,  we  face  some  uncomfortable  choices  about  the 
structure and regulation of our banking sector. If some banks are thought to be too big to fail, 
then, in the words of a distinguished American economist, they are too big. It is not sensible 
to allow large banks to combine high street retail banking with risky investment banking or 
funding  strategies,  and  then  provide  an  implicit  state  guarantee  against  failure.  Something 
must give. Either those guarantees to retail depositors should be limited to banks that make 
a  narrower  range  of  investments,  or  banks  which  pose  greater  risks  to  taxpayers  and  the 
economy in the event of failure should face higher capital requirements, or we must develop 
resolution powers such that large and complex financial institutions can be wound down in an 
orderly  manner.  Or,  perhaps,  an  element  of  all  three.  Privately  owned  and  managed 
institutions that are too big to fail sit oddly with a market economy.  
One important practical step would be to require any regulated bank itself to produce a plan 
for an orderly wind down of its activities. That would provide the information to the authorities 
the absence of which made past decisions about the future of institutions difficult. Making a 
will should be as much a part of good housekeeping for banks as it is for the rest of us. And it 
would be sensible for the various authorities to work across national boundaries to identify 
detailed plans for how each large cross-border financial institution could be wound down.  
BIS Review 76/2009 
 3
The Bank of England has a new statutory responsibility for financial stability. Bank Rate is 
the instrument we deploy to achieve monetary stability, and should be used exclusively for 
that  purpose.  To  achieve  financial  stability  the  powers  of  the  Bank  are  limited  to  those  of 
voice and the new resolution powers. The Bank finds itself in a position rather like that of a 
church  whose  congregation  attends  weddings  and  burials  but  ignores  the  sermons  in 
between. Like the church, we cannot promise that bad things won’t happen to our flock – the 
prevention  of  all  financial  crises  is  in  neither  our  nor  anyone  else’s  power,  as  a  study  of 
history or human nature would reveal. And experience suggests that attempts to encourage 
a better life through the power of voice is not enough. Warnings are unlikely to be effective 
when people are being asked to change behaviour which seems to them highly profitable. So 
it is not entirely clear how the Bank will be able to discharge its new statutory responsibility if 
we can do no more than issue sermons or organise burials.  
Whatever the ultimate shape of the structure and regulation of the banking system – and, as 
many  of  you  have  said,  we  need  to  think  carefully  to  get  this  right  –  change  will  be 
necessary. The costs of this crisis are not to be measured simply in terms of its impact on 
public finances, the destruction of wealth, and the number of jobs lost. They are also to be 
seen  in  the  lost  trust  in  the  financial  sector  among  other  parts  of  our  economy.  For  a 
generation or more, businesses and families up and down the country were told, not least by 
the  City,  that  the  disciplines  of  the  market  economy  were  essential,  even  if  painful  in  the 
short  run,  for  greater  prosperity  in  the  longer  term.  That  belief  in  the  merits  of  a  market 
economy was embraced and for many years was not misplaced. But out of the blue – in this 
case  the  financial  sector  –  came  a  crisis  that  did  not  stem  from  weaknesses  in  the  real 
economy. It has wreaked havoc on those same businesses and families. Unemployment, as 
we saw in today’s figures, is rising sharply. And yet it is the banking system that has received 
financial support on an almost unimaginable scale. We who work in the financial sector have 
much to do to regain the trust of those who work outside it. “My word is my bond” are old 
words, but they were important. “My word is my CDO-squared” will never catch on. 
There is no support in this country, and no case, for excessively bureaucratic regulation. But 
change to the structure, regulation and indeed culture of our banking system is necessary. 
Blaming individuals is no substitute for acknowledging the failure of a system, of a certain 
type of banking. We have a real opportunity now to put that right, and regain the trust that 
has been lost.  
Lord Mayor, as we prepare to toast the Bankers and Merchants of the City of London, we 
remember that the City is more than banking and that banking is much more than the trading 
of complex securities. So all of us here tonight would like to pay tribute to your work since 
you became Lord Mayor, to support your efforts to promote financial literacy, and to thank 
both the Lady Mayoress and yourself for the splendid hospitality which you have extended to 
us all this evening. 
So I invite you all to rise and join me in the traditional toast of good health and prosperity to 
"The Lord Mayor and the Lady Mayoress", Ian and Lin Luder. 
4 
 BIS Review 76/2009
