Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: Developments and prospects for the European 
economy in 2009 
Speech by Mr Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, at the Conference “Altagamma: Scenari 2009”, Milan, 30 March 2009. 
 I  would  like  first  of  all  to  thank  the  President  of  Altagamma,  Leonardo  Ferragamo,  for  the 
invitation to participate to this conference.  
The  issue  I  was  asked  to  address  –  “Developments  and  Prospects  for  the  European 
Economy  in  2009”  –  is  certainly  not  an  easy  one.  Never  has  it  been  so  hard  to  make  a 
forecast,  not  only  about  the  future  but  also  about  the  present  and  even  the  recent  past 
(although it might sound paradoxical). The forecasts of major international organisations are 
being systematically revised downwards, not only with respect to the next few months, but 
mainly due to what happened over the past months, which turns out to be much worse than 
expected. The last ECB forecast, from early March, was worse than the one published a few 
weeks  earlier  by  the  European  Commission  mainly  because  it  was  able  to  include 
preliminary data for the last quarter of 2008, showing a GDP fall of 1.5%. 
In the last few days other forecasts have come out, based on more recent data, which are 
even more pessimistic. The difficulty in making forecasts in these circumstances derives from 
the fact that available economic models are not calibrated to take into account shocks of a 
size similar to the one we are experiencing, nor are they capable of understanding the nature 
and mechanisms of the transmission process.  
Rather than elaborating a new scenario, which risks becoming obsolete quite rapidly, I would 
like to share with you some reflections on the current crisis and on possible developments. In 
this respect, I would like to remind that, given that the Governing Council will meet on this 
coming Thursday, we are in the so-called Purdah period in which we abstain from making 
comments  on  monetary  policy.  What  I  will  say  should  thus  in  no  way  be  associated  to 
possible  monetary  policy  decisions,  and  I  would  appreciate  if  the  media  reporting  on  this 
event could acknowledge it. 
The starting point of this reflection is that before the start of the crisis the world economy was 
not  in  a  balanced  position.  On  the  contrary,  it  was  characterized  by  several  imbalances, 
within individual economies and across countries.  
At  the  global  level,  the  world  economy  experienced  wide  and  growing  current  account 
imbalances.  On  the  one  side,  the  US  ran  continuous  deficits  since  the  1980s,  with  the 
exception of a couple of years, and growing over time, reaching 6% of GDP in 2006. On the 
other  hand  several  Asian  countries,  notably  China,  recorded  growing  current  account 
surpluses (which in the case of China reached over 10% of GDP in 2007). The financing of 
the  US  deficit  took  place  largely  through  the  purchase  of  dollar  denominated  Government 
bonds  by  the  rest  of  the  world,  resulting  in  the  accumulation  of  huge  liquid  reserves,  in 
particular in China, Japan and oil exporting countries.  
Another  international  imbalance  derived  from  the  growing  pressure  that  world  demand 
exercised on the scarce resources of the planet, in particular primary commodities, such as 
oil,  generating  a  sharp  price  rise  until  mid  2008.  Primary  commodity  price  developments 
have  put  into  question  the  convenience  of  several  durable  products  with  high  energy 
intensity, thus reducing their demand.  
Imbalances  have  emerged  also  within  countries,  generating  excessive  growth  in  some 
sectors, such as finance and housing, and large financial flows, especially household debt. In 
the US all these imbalances have developed at the same time. Just to give an example, in 
the five years before the crisis the share of profits made in the financial sector profits rose to 
BIS Review 39/2009 
 1
40% of overall corporate profits, the double with respect to the average of the previous thirty 
years. 
From  2002  to  2007  the  world  economy  grew  at  a  yearly  average  of  4.3%,  pulled  by 
international trade growing by 7.3% per year. This has been the most intense period of post-
war growth. It has also been the most fragile, as a result of domestic and global imbalances.  
This  suggests  that  won’t  be  possible  to  exit  from  this  crisis  and  return  on  a  sustainable 
growth  unless  the  imbalances  which  have  accumulated  until  a  couple  of  years  ago  are 
reabsorbed. It implies in particular that some sectors of economic activity which grew in an 
unbalanced way in the past might be substantially downsized, not only in the short term but 
also over the medium term, when the world economy will start growing again.  
One of the sectors that is likely to be downsized, at least for some time, is finance, given that 
risk aversion is likely to remain elevated for some years, reducing the scope for innovation. 
Financial  regulation  will  tend  to  reduce  the  scope  for  non  regulated  sectors.  The  whole 
financial system will have less leverage, lower margins and thus less employment than in the 
so-called  “golden  years”.  Another  example  is  housing,  where  prices  are  unlikely  to  return 
soon to the pre-crisis levels, especially in some countries. Also in this sector profit margins 
are likely to be lower and so will investments and employment. Excess supply and debt might 
require years before being absorbed again, as shown in the early 2000s after the burst of the 
high-tech bubble. Other sectors which could be downsized in a permanent way are those in 
which technology turned out to be out of pace with medium term trends in energy prices. 
Another grave side of the current crisis – which was also largely unpredicted – is the collapse 
of  international  trade,  which  has  brought  the  process  of  economic  integration  backwards, 
some sort of de-globalization. This has hit exports and imports of all countries, in a rather 
brutal way, with multiplier effects on investment, consumption and employment. The sectors 
which  have  been  more  seriously  hit  are  those  that  were  more  exposed  to  international 
competition, which had grown strongly over the recent years thanks to the global integration 
of production processes. Those countries which relied most on exports and manufacturing 
production have been hit hardly by a crisis which had originated in the financial sector. 
According to some estimates, around 90% of world trade was partially or totally supported by 
financial  instruments,  which  in  the  past  years  had  also  experienced  a  rapid  process  of 
innovation. The crisis of confidence which burst after the failure of Lehman brothers, stopped 
financial flows, especially those between agents located in different countries which are less 
acquainted  with  each  other  and  base  their  transactions  on  market-based  liquid  and 
sophisticated  credit  instruments,  which  are  however  also  riskier.  The  reflow  of  capital 
towards  the  major  financial  centres  and  the  de-leveraging  process,  which  started  in  the 
second half of September 2008, has induced banks to reduce their non-core activities.  
Export credit, which consists in financing not only the export company but also the foreign 
importer  which  buys  from  the  exporter,  entails  higher  risks  than  domestic  activities.  Credit 
lines with foreign counterparties, which require a greater use of capital, tend to be reduced, 
especially  for  small  and  medium  size  enterprises  and  towards  emerging  markets.  We  are 
observing  recently  that  trade  finance  is  going  back  to  simpler  instruments,  such  as 
documentary credit and confirmed letters of credit, which substantially reduce risk. 
The  link  between  financial  integration  and  trade  integration  has  been  the  transmission 
mechanism through which the loss of confidence in the financial system has spread to the 
real  economy,  and  from  the  country  where  the  crisis  started  to  the  rest  of  the  world.  This 
implies that restarting the trade integration process will depend confidence coming back in all 
the  components  of  the  global  financial  system.  The  overall  solidity  of  the  global  system 
depends on its weakest part. During the last few months enormous resources have been put 
in  place,  on  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic,  to  support  the  commitment  made  by  the  policy 
authorities not to let any systemically important financial institution fail. The effects of these 
measures are starting to be appreciated.  
2 
 BIS Review 39/2009
Once  the  financial  system  is  stabilised,  time  will  be  needed  to  rebuild  a  financial 
infrastructure for international trade comparable to the one prevailing before the crisis. This 
means that the pace of exports and imports growth during the recovery could be slower than 
before the crisis.  
Another  risk  factor  for  the  rebound  of  world  trade,  over  the  medium  term,  relates  to  the 
fragmented network of production, distributed across borders, which contributed to maximize 
efficiency.  This  network  has  been  hardly  hit.  For  instance,  trade  in  euro  area  intermediate 
products  fell  in  January  2009  by  20%,  compared  to  the  previous  year.  The  protectionist 
pressures  and  the  slowdown  in  foreign  direct  investments  might  lead  to  a  restructuring  of 
production, which might take time and turn out to be less flexible and efficient.  
For those countries more open to international trade, which will be hit by the contraction of 
exports and imports, re-directing idle resources towards domestic demand might be slower 
and more difficult than expected. 
To sum up, a thorough analysis of the causes of this crisis suggest that it is due not only to 
cyclical factors but also structural ones, associated to the downsizing of sectors which had 
grown  too  quickly  and  excessively  in  the  past.  This  is  not  a  novelty.  During  al  recessions 
some sectors suffer more than others. Think about the burst of the high tech bubble in 2000. 
However,  never  before  was  the  over-indebtedness  so  spread  out  and  intertwined  with  the 
real economy. This explains why it is so difficult to understand how intense and lasting the 
downward  adjustment  of  economic  activity  will  be  and  how  much  dynamism  there  can  be 
after the through. 
This reflection suggests that the cyclical pick-up will hardly bring back economic activity to a 
level comparable with the one prevailing before the crisis, but rather to a lower level. This 
means that at the steady state, after the economy has stabilised and gone back to a growth 
path, production potential is likely to be significantly lower than before the crisis. This means 
that the so-called output gap, which measures the distance between the level of production 
and  its  potential,  and  which  is  generally  used  to  estimate  the  path  of  economic  recovery, 
could be substantially lower than the one estimated with traditional statistical methodology. In 
other words, this crisis might have affected the structure of the “world production function”, as 
a result of the downsizing of some productive sectors, such as finance, and the permanent 
change in relative prices.  
This  is  particularly  relevant  not  only  for  economic  analysis  put  also  for  the  conduct  of 
macroeconomic policies. These policies, in particular fiscal and monetary policies, contribute 
to  cyclical  stabilization  by  bringing  forward  resources  in  the  low  phase  of  the  cycle  and 
delaying payment to the favourable phase. For instance, an increase in public expenditures 
financed  through  debt  delays  payment  to  the  cyclical  upturn.  Monetary  policy  also  acts 
through incentives aimed at shifting consumption and savings over time. The sustainability of 
these policies crucially depends on the pace of economic growth and income level achieved 
over the medium term, after the crisis is over.  
Given the uncertainty on the structural and cyclical components of the current crisis, there is 
the  risk  of  a  divergent  assessment  of  the  sustainability  of  economic  policies,  between 
financial markets on the one side and policy authorities on the other. The latter might have 
the tendency, or the temptation, to calibrate the policy response on an income target as high 
as the pre-crisis one, as if the crisis was entirely of a cyclical nature rather than structural, 
while  financial  markets  might  consider  lower  levels  of  potential  income  over  the  next  few 
years,  as  a  consequence  of  the  structural  effects  of  the  crisis.  Such  a  divergence  might 
impair the effectiveness of macroeconomic policies.  
It  might  be  useful  in  this  respect  to  recall  the  experienced  of  the  1970s,  after  the  first  oil 
crisis, when economic policies did not take into account that the higher oil price had reduced 
potential growth in advanced economies and calibrated their policy response to an unrealistic 
target.  
BIS Review 39/2009 
 3
What can be drawn from the above considerations is that the exit from the current crisis does 
not  depend  on  macroeconomic  policies  only,  but  also  on  structural  factors,  such  as  the 
functioning of goods and labour markets. As I already mentioned, the contraction of sectors 
that had grown excessively before the crisis is likely to have a structural component, lasting 
over the medium term. This means that not all the employment lost in these sectors during 
the  slowdown  might  be  reabsorbed  during  the  recovery.  Some  labour  will  have  to  be 
reallocated  to  other  sectors,  to  avoid  weighing  on  growth  and  on  public  finances,  and  on 
social conditions. This raises the need for accompanying short term macroeconomic policies 
with  measures  aimed  at  reallocating  idle  resources,  for  instance  by  enhancing  training, 
human capital, market flexibility and income stabilizers.  
Measures aimed at improving competitiveness are also required, especially in those sectors 
exposed  to  international  competition  and  in  those  countries  which  experienced  poor 
performance even prior to the crisis, due to low productivity growth. Furthermore, the global 
dimension of the current crisis shows the need to support trade finance, in particular through 
traditional instruments of risk insurance. 
Experience  shows  that  measures  aimed  at  postponing  the  problems,  such  as  early 
retirement, should be avoided, as they aggravate public finances and slow down production 
potential.  Differently  from  previous  crisis,  the  current  one  takes  place  in  a  phase  of 
demographic stagnation, in which life expectancy increases while birth rates are falling. In a 
situation  similar  to  that  of  Italy,  an  increase  in  the  overall  number  of  retired  would 
dramatically worsen the working environment for the younger generation, which would have 
to pay for the higher contributions to finance the pension system. Under such circumstances 
all should be done to maintain a high participation rate in the labour market. 
The  highest  risk,  in  this  uncertain  environment,  is  to  limit  policy  action  to  the  short  term 
horizon, relying on stimulating the cycle without addressing the necessary structural reforms 
which  would  foster  a  better  allocation  of  resources  during  the  recovery.  We  would  loose 
precious time and would find ourselves down the road with problems even greater than we 
can imagine. It would be a grave mistake. Thank you for your attention.  
4 
 BIS Review 39/2009
