Daniel K Tarullo: Financial regulation in the wake of the crisis 
Speech  by  Mr  Daniel  K  Tarullo,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve  System,  at  the  Peterson  Institute  for  International  Economics,  Washington  DC, 
8 June 2009. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website.  
 As  has  been  widely  observed  in  recent  weeks,  there  are  signs  that  the  rapid  decline  in 
economic activity of the past few quarters is slowing. The latest data give some reason to 
hope that we are approaching a bottom in economic activity and that growth will resume later 
this year. Yet stabilization or improvement would begin from very low levels compared with 
those that prevailed in recent years. Recovery may be painfully slow, and the economy will 
remain  unusually  vulnerable  to  new  shocks.  The  news  remains  bad  in  two  areas  of  direct 
importance  to  American  families:  Unemployment  continues  to  rise  and  housing  prices 
continue to decline.  
One important reason why many observers predict only a gentle slope on the upward side of 
the  recession  curve  is  that,  despite  some  progress,  financial  markets  continue  to  exhibit 
signs of strain. Government-provided liquidity and guarantees remain as necessary supports 
in many areas. Because the collapse of these same markets set off the present crisis and the 
serious recession that has followed, the case for far-reaching reform appears a strong one.  
Indeed, the leverage and interconnectedness of firms in the financial services sector, and the 
critical role that financial intermediaries play in modern economies, mean that a malfunction 
in the financial industry can immediately and profoundly harm the entire economy. For this 
reason,  governments  in  the  United  States  and  in  other  countries  have  provided  extensive 
support for certain financial firms and markets in periods of high distress. As we have seen to 
our dismay in the last year, even where such support is forthcoming, the resulting damage 
inflicted on the real economy by the financial sector can still be extensive, and the potential 
costs to taxpayers can still be high.  
If we have learned anything from the present crisis, it is that systemic risk was very much 
built into our financial system. One element of systemic risk, the too-big-to-fail phenomenon, 
was  as  significant  as  had  been  argued  by  the  likes  of  Gary  Stern,  my  colleague  on  the 
Federal Open Market Committee, who warned in 2004 that the too-big-to-fail problem was 
"real,  costly,  and  becoming  more  severe."1  Moreover,  as  evidenced  by  government 
intervention when Bear Stearns and AIG were failing, and by the fallout from the failure of 
Lehman Brothers, the universe of firms that appeared too-big-to-fail during periods of stress 
included  more  than  insured  depository  institutions  and  extended  beyond  the  perimeter  of 
traditional safety and soundness regulation.  
A major reorientation of our regulatory and supervisory system is needed to address head-on 
the problem of systemic risk. My subject today is how we should understand and undertake 
the  improvement  of  microprudential  regulation  and  the  development  of  macroprudential 
regulation. The theme I want to highlight is how, to a considerable extent, the integration of 
traditional lending, trading activities, and capital markets defines both of these tasks.2  
                                                 
1   Gary Stern & Ron Feldman (2004), Too Big to Fail. 
2   The views presented here are my own and not necessarily those of other members of the Board of Governors 
or the Federal Open Market Committee. 
BIS Review 70/2009 
 1
A recent history of financial regulation 
Systemic crises typically reveal failures across the financial system. The present situation is 
no  exception,  with  fundamental  problems  apparent  in  both  the  private  and  public  sectors. 
There was a massive breakdown of risk management and a suspension of simple common 
sense within many financial firms. We also witnessed serious shortcomings in government 
regulation  of  financial  institutions  and  markets  as,  for  example,  with  respect  to  subprime 
mortgages,  certain  securitization  practices,  and  some  uses  of  credit  default  swaps.  These 
weaknesses were revealed as rapid and unsustainable appreciation of some asset prices – 
especially in residential real estate – continued for a considerable time. 
But, while these failings of recent years – and the global macroeconomic imbalances within 
which  these  failings  were  nurtured  –  surely  ignited  and  exacerbated  the  current  crisis,  the 
breadth and depth of the financial breakdown suggest that it has much deeper roots. In many 
respects, this crisis is the culmination of changes in both the organization and regulation of 
financial markets that began in the 1970s.  
Following  the  banking  crisis  of  the  early  1930s,  and  the  famous  bank  holiday  declared  by 
President Roosevelt soon after his inauguration, Congress enacted dramatic new measures 
that  would  define  financial  regulation  for  decades.  Most  important  for  commercial  banking 
were creation of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) and the Glass-Steagall 
Act.  Glass-Steagall  sharply  limited  both  the  securities  business  of  commercial  banks  and 
their affiliations with securities firms. Creation of the FDIC addressed the problem of runs and 
panics  by  insuring  the  bank  accounts  of  the  vast  majority  of  Americans.  With  the  new 
insurance, retail deposits became a highly stable source of relatively attractive financing for 
banks, supported by the 1933 statutory prohibition of interest payments on demand deposits 
and  the  Fed's  Regulation  Q  upper  limit  on  interest  rates  paid  on  savings  deposits,  which 
together suppressed competition for deposits among banks.  
Along with preexisting strictures included in the National Banking Act and state laws, Glass-
Steagall  established  a  regulatory  system  that  largely  confined  commercial  banks  to 
traditional lending activities and because of controls on branching and interstate acquisitions, 
to  a  relatively  narrow  geographic  area.  Like  the  later  Bank  Holding  Company  Act,  Glass-
Steagall  was  intended  to  help  insulate  banks  from  risks  that  could  be  transmitted  from 
securities  and  other  non-banking  activities.  This  regulatory  approach  fostered  a  banking 
system  that  was,  for  the  better  part  of  40  years,  quite  stable  and  reasonably  profitable, 
though not particularly innovative in meeting the needs of depositors and borrowers. 
turbulent 
Like  much  of 
macroeconomic  developments  of  the  1970s,  which  saw  the  demise  of  the  Bretton  Woods 
exchange rate system, a serious recession, and then high levels of inflation. These forces, 
along  with  technological  and  business  innovations,  helped  produce  an  increasingly  tight 
squeeze  on  the  traditional  commercial  banking  business  model.  The  squeeze  came  from 
both the liability side, in the form of more attractive savings vehicles such as money market 
funds,  and  from  the  asset  side,  with  the  growth  of  public capital  markets  and international 
competition.  
Some banks responded to this predicament by looking for higher returns from their traditional 
activities  through  lending  to  new  and  often  less  creditworthy  borrowers  at  higher  interest 
rates – a strategy that yielded at best mixed results. Other banks responded by borrowing 
short  and  lending  long  –  a  poor  strategy  in  a  rising  interest  rate  environment.  A  more 
common industry response was to seek removal or relaxation of the regulations that confined 
the activities, affiliations, and geographic reach of banks. While they differed with banks on 
some  important  particulars,  supervisors  were  sympathetic  to  this  industry  request,  in  part 
because of the potential threat to the viability of the traditional commercial banking system.  
The period of relative legal and industry stability that had followed the 1933 legislation thus 
gave way, beginning in the 1970s, to a nearly 30-year period during which many prevailing 
restrictions  on  banks  were  relaxed.  A  good  number  were  loosened  through  administrative 
the  economy,  commercial  banking  was  buffeted  by 
the 
2 
 BIS Review 70/2009
action  by  the  banking  agencies,  but  there  were  regular  and  important  statutory  measures 
heading in the same direction. This legislative trend culminated in the Gramm-Leach-Bliley 
Act of 1999, which consolidated and extended the administrative changes that had allowed 
more  extensive  affiliations  of  commercial  banks  with  investment  banks,  broker-dealers, 
merchant banks, and other financial firms.  
By  the  turn  of  the  century,  then,  the  Depression-era  cluster  of  restrictions  on  commercial 
banks  had  been  substantially  loosened.  Banks  could  operate  nationally,  had  few  practical 
restrictions on their ability to pay competitive deposit rates, could conduct a much broader 
range  of  activities  within  their  own  operations,  and  could  affiliate  with  virtually  any  kind  of 
financial  firm.  Meanwhile,  of  course,  financial  engineering  had  been  rapidly  changing  the 
character of the financial services sector as a whole. Securitization and associated derivative 
instruments were merging capital markets and traditional lending activities, fueling the growth 
of what has become known as the shadow banking system. As a result, both the asset mix 
and sources of funding of many banks were shifting, sometimes dramatically. Various larger 
banks were also becoming involved, either directly or through their affiliates, in the full range 
of activities associated with securitization – including sponsoring and administering special 
purpose vehicles used in the securitization process. 
Perhaps  because  the  removal  of  activities  and  affiliation  restrictions  occurred  in  stages, 
rather  than  in  a  single  legislative  or  administrative  action,  there  was  no  announced  new 
regulatory emphasis to address the changed industry. In practice, however, regulators relied 
increasingly on capital requirements, accounting rules, and to a lesser extent, limits on bank 
transactions with their corporate affiliates, to promote the safety and soundness of banking 
organizations.  
Although they had long used bank capital ratios as a supervisory tool, U.S. bank regulators 
did not impose explicit minimum capital requirements until the 1980s. In the ensuing quarter 
century,  the  attention  of  banking  regulators  has  been  heavily  oriented  toward  elaborating 
capital  requirements  to  reflect  more  precisely  the  particular  risks  faced  by  a  financial 
institution  –  first  through  the  Basel  I  process  and  more  recently  through  the  lengthier  and 
more  complex  Basel  II  process.  The  emphasis  on  capital  measures  was  reinforced  when, 
following the savings and loan calamity, Congress instructed federal banking agencies to use 
declining  capital  ratios  as  the  trigger  for  "prompt,  corrective"  remedial  action  that  was 
intended to constrain regulatory forbearance. 
The  proximate  reason  for  the  move  towards  capital  requirements  in  the  early  1980s  was 
regulator  concern  about  the  decline  in  capital  ratios  of  the  largest  banks  –  a  concern 
reinforced by Congress, as it saw some of those large banks facing enormous losses on their 
loans  to  foreign  countries.  At  the  same  time,  however,  regulators  were  coming  to  regard 
capital  requirements  as  a  supple  prudential  tool.  As  activity  and,  eventually,  affiliation 
restrictions were loosened, capital requirements seemed a promising way to provide a buffer 
against  bank  losses  from  any  activities  in  which  the  bank  or  its  affiliates  might  engage. 
Support also developed for the proposition that minimum capital levels could, by maintaining 
a  material  equity  value  for  the  bank,  serve  as  a  disincentive  for  excessive  risk-taking  by 
management and shareholders. 
As the activities and affiliations of banks became increasingly complex, regulators also relied 
more on focused supervisory attention to the specific risks of each institution. Similarly, they 
demanded that banks enhance their own internal risk-management systems. As with capital 
requirements,  regulators  reasoned  that  a  good  risk-management  system  could  effectively 
promote  bank  stability  in  the  face  of  quickly  changing  bank  activities.  The  two  regulatory 
trends – seeking greater risk-sensitivity in capital requirements and greater effectiveness of 
internal risk-management systems – came together in Basel II's advanced internal ratings-
based approach to capital regulation.  
Thus, at the onset of the current crisis, the financial regulatory system had accommodated 
the growth of capital market alternatives to traditional financing by relaxing some restrictions 
BIS Review 70/2009 
 3
on  bank  activities  and  virtually  all  restrictions  on  affiliations  between  banks  and  non-bank 
financial firms. In place of the superseded restrictions were capital requirements focused on 
credit and market risk, along with a greater emphasis on supervision and risk management, 
especially at larger firms. These legal changes facilitated a wave of mergers and acquisitions 
that created a number of very large, highly complex financial holding companies centered on 
a  large  commercial  bank.  These  were  subject  to  prudential  regulation.  At  the  same  time, 
there  was  a  group  of  very  large,  significantly  leveraged  "free-standing"  investment  banks 
whose market practices were regulated by securities laws, but were not subject to prudential 
regulation.  
financial 
firms.  Capital  requirements 
The imperative of regulatory reorientation  
There were, of course, many ways in which this financial regulatory system fell short of the 
objectives  of  maintaining  stability  in  the  financial  system.  Any  one  explanation  inevitably 
oversimplifies what was a complex and long-developing set of vulnerabilities. However, as I 
have earlier suggested, I believe an analysis can be profitably organized around the premise 
that  the  regulatory  system  did  not  come  close  to  adequately  accounting  for  the  impact  of 
trading and capital market activities on both traditional banking and systemic risk. This basic 
point was manifest in three important deficiencies of the prevailing regime: the shortcomings 
of microprudential regulation, the "boundary" problem, and the relatively undeveloped nature 
of a macroprudential complement to conventional financial regulation. 
At the microprudential level, although an intense focus on refining capital requirements for 
credit risk had certainly led to the increased risk-sensitivity of those requirements and, more 
recently,  to  advances  in  internal  risk  management,  it  came  at  the  expense  of  attention  to 
other risks. In particular, there was insufficient appreciation of the implications of the growth 
of the shadow banking system for the balance sheets of commercial banks, not to mention 
other 
for  asset-backed  securities  were  clearly 
inadequate, based as they were on a 10-day trading horizon and with insufficient attention to 
the credit risks inherent in these traded instruments. On the other side of the balance sheet, 
insufficient action was taken to address the considerable liquidity risks for the many firms that 
depended on the wholesale funding provided by securitization, commercial paper issuance, 
and  other  sources  –  funding  that  was  often  poorly  matched  to  the  maturity  of  the  firm's 
assets. 
More generally, bank holding company supervision was principally focused on protecting the 
commercial bank within the holding company. There was probably too little attention to the 
risks  faced,  and  created,  by  the  entire  holding  company,  including  the  affiliates  principally 
involved in trading and other capital market activities. This weakness may be explained in 
part  by  the  supervisory  approach  embedded  in  the  Gramm-Leach-Bliley  Act.  By  dividing 
supervisory authority for holding company affiliates among a number of supervisors based on 
their charter or activity, that law elevated the concept of "functional regulation" to the potential 
detriment of a more effective form of consolidated supervision. But it was also the case that 
not  enough  supervisory  scrutiny  was  given  to  the  risks  associated  with  securitization,  the 
common exposures of different affiliates, and the implications of the massive growth of off-
balance-sheet  assets  for  safety  and  soundness.  Indeed,  supervisors  sometimes  seemed 
themselves  to  underappreciate  the  importance  of  reputational  risk,  which  to  some  degree 
undermined the entire concept of an off-balance-sheet asset. 
The  boundary  problem  is  simply  stated:  Systemic  risk  concerns,  including  too-big-to-fail 
issues, extended beyond bank holding companies to firms that were unregulated, at least for 
safety and soundness purposes. Indeed, a dramatic development of the crisis was the series 
of  runs  on  nondepository  financial  institutions.  A  combination  of  leverage,  extensive 
counterparty  relationships,  and  dependence  upon  asset  sales  for  liquidity  made  such 
institutions both vulnerable to a wholesale funding run and a threat to the entire system.  
4 
 BIS Review 70/2009
One of the many striking consequences of the crisis for the U.S. financial system is that none 
of  the  five  large,  free-standing  investment  banks  that  existed  in  2007  remains  so  today. 
Lehman, of course, declared bankruptcy. Two have been absorbed into existing bank holding 
companies, and the remaining two have been converted into new bank holding companies, 
which  made  them  eligible  for  emergency  government  liquidity  and  guaranty  assistance.  In 
effect, then, government assistance has been available ex post to protect the counterparties 
of four of the five firms. Yet none was subject to a statutory ex ante framework for prudential 
regulation.  
Solving  the  boundary  problem  alone  will  not  counterbalance  contemporary  sources  of 
systemic  risk.  The  rapid  development  of  market-based  financial  intermediation  has  also 
highlighted  the  need  for  a  macroprudential  regulatory  approach  to  complement  more 
conventional prudential supervision. Of course, systemic risk and the associated problem of 
too-big-to-fail  have  long  concerned  financial  regulators.  Traditionally,  though,  systemic  risk 
was thought to rest in the potential for the failure of one bank to produce depositor panic that 
infected other, solvent banks, or for the failure of one large bank to bring down counterparties 
that  were  dependent  upon  payments  from  the  first  institution.  Federal  deposit  insurance 
addressed  the  first  source  of  systemic  risk.  The  second  risk  was  offset  by  regulations 
designed  to  ensure  the  solvency  of  each  bank  and  by  the  potential  availability  of  liquidity 
from the Federal Reserve in its role as lender of last resort. 
The metaphor frequently invoked in thinking about systemic risk was a row of dominoes. If 
one  bank  fell  –  either  becoming  illiquid  because  of  a  deposit  run,  or  insolvent  because  of 
severe  losses  –  then  the  whole  row  might  be  toppled.  A  limited  version  of  this  dynamic 
occurred in the mid-1980s when Continental Illinois Bank, systemically important because so 
many other banks held deposits in it, had to be rescued by the FDIC after a foreign depositor 
run that followed heavy losses. For the last quarter century, however, the near misses in our 
financial  system  have  originated  not  from  this  classic  pattern,  but  from  outside  the 
commercial banking system. 
The  new  market-based  liquidity  problems  arose  from  sudden  sharp  movements  in  asset 
prices  that  led  to  enormous  market  uncertainty  concerning  the  values  of  those  assets.  As 
now  liquidity-strained  institutions  made  increasingly  distressed  asset  sales,  they  placed 
further downward pressure on asset prices, leading to margin calls for leveraged actors and 
mark-to-market  losses  for  all  holders  of  the  assets.  Since  multiple  firms  were  relying  on 
similar marketable assets as a ready source of liquidity, extreme price declines could ensue, 
engendering  a  negative  feedback  loop  that,  if  unchecked,  would  threaten  the  solvency  of 
firms operating on the assumption of liquidity through asset sales or borrowings secured by 
such assets. 
In the cases of the 1987 stock market crash and the 1998 implosion of Long Term Capital 
Management,  the  damage  was  contained  by  quick  emergency  actions  initiated  by  the 
Federal Reserve. By 2007, unfortunately, the now familiar perils of poorly underwritten asset-
backed securities, liquidity strategies based on asset prices, and high leverage had pervaded 
the financial system. Systemic risk arose not because the illiquidity or insolvency of one firm 
would  directly  bring  down  another,  but  because  of  parallel  hedging  or  funding  strategies 
practiced by highly leveraged firms with substantial short-term liabilities that threatened large 
segments of the market.  
This "interplay of complexity and tight coupling"3 in funding practices poses a fundamentally 
different set of hazards from those conjured up by the image of a row of dominoes. The more 
apt  metaphor  is  of  a  dense  network  whose  connections  are  often  obscure  to  many 
participants, in which the risk is not simply of counterparty exposure, but of the potential for 
liquidity problems at a firm with which they have no relationship to affect their own balance 
                                                 
3   Richard Bookstaber (2007), Demon of Our Own Design at 145. 
BIS Review 70/2009 
 5
sheets and liquidity positions. The characteristics of this market-based liquidity system have 
theoretical5 
been  explicated  by  commentators  writing 
perspectives.  Although  some  regulatory  attention  was  devoted  to  these  risks  following  the 
earlier-mentioned market events, there is clearly the need for a comprehensive approach to 
analyzing and, where appropriate, taking action to address them.  
from  both  biographical4  and 
Framing a post-crisis regulatory program 
How, then, should we respond to the shortcomings of the current financial regulatory system, 
shortcomings so plainly highlighted by the most serious financial crisis experienced by our 
country since the Depression? Let me state at the outset that I do not believe the answer lies 
in an effort to recreate the regulatory system of the 1960s. Capital market developments of 
the  last  several  decades  are  not  going  to  be  fundamentally  reversed,  nor  should  we  want 
them to be. Reform by nostalgia is not usually an effective approach, since it tends to forget 
the  problems  of  the  past  and  deny  how  much  has  changed.  The  task  is  to  refashion  a 
regulatory structure so as to encourage the efficient allocation of capital to productive uses, 
while  protecting  the  financial  system  from  the  defects  and  excesses  that  are  inherent  in 
financial markets.  
For those of us at the regulatory agencies, I believe there should be a three-part response:  
• 
first,  the  agencies  should  adjust  their  policies  and  practices  in  light  of  the  lessons 
learned from examination of past shortcomings or of new problems revealed by the 
crisis;  
second, we should contribute to the discussion of possible Congressional initiatives 
that could provide useful new legislative authorities to help contain systemic risk and 
the problem posed by institutions that are too-big-to-fail; and  
third,  we  should  be  developing  ideas  and  proposals  that  are  not  appropriate  for 
adoption now – and, indeed, may never be – but are worthy of consideration to inform 
the debate on policy alternatives. 
  As to internal policies and practices under existing authority, before I arrived at the Board, 
the Federal Reserve had undertaken a systematic review of supervisory practices in the pre-
crisis  period.  That  process  is  yielding  a  variety  of  lessons,  which  will  be  implemented  to 
improve  the  process  of  consolidated  supervision.  At  the  same  time,  because  even  the 
highest  quality  supervision  has  its  limits,  particularly  in  the  oversight  of  large,  complex 
institutions,  it  is  important  to  attend  to  other  regulatory  tools.  The  three  pillars  of  rules, 
supervision,  and  market  discipline  laid  out  in  the  Basel  II  capital  framework  should  be  the 
foundation for regulation of financial institutions more generally.  
With respect to applicable rules, a parallel Board process of examining current regulations 
has  already  led  to  numerous  initiatives,  many  in  conjunction  with  our  fellow  American 
regulators and the foreign regulators in the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. Some 
of  the  more  important  of  these  initiatives  include  upgrading  the  quality  of  capital  held  by 
regulated  institutions,  overhauling  the  capital  requirements  applicable  to  market  risk,  and 
assessing the various ways in which regulation has had an undesirable pro-cyclical effect. 
While it is clear that improved capital regulation alone would not have prevented the financial 
crisis,  it  is  equally  clear  that  large  financial  institutions  should  have  been  required  to  hold 
higher levels of capital in the pre-crisis period.  
                                                 
4   Bookstaber, op cit. 
5   Stephen Morris & Hyun Song Shin (2008), "Financial Regulation in a System Context," Brookings Papers on 
Economy Activity; Markus Brunnermeir et al. (2009), The Fundamental Principles of Financial Regulation. 
6 
 BIS Review 70/2009
There  is  one  further  point  that  is  important  to  make  on  the  topic  of  minimum  capital 
requirements and indeed of all rules in prudential regulation. A rule that looks on paper to be 
a good approach to a regulatory concern can sometimes turn out not to be so in practice. 
Rules  will  not  serve  their  purpose  if  they  cannot  be  implemented  correctly  by  firms  or 
monitored and enforced adequately by regulators. 
The  central  role  of  liquidity  problems  in  fomenting  the  crisis  also  suggests  the  need  for 
considerable  attention  to  ensuring  that  firms  have  adequate  liquidity  risk-management 
practices. While the most serious liquidity problems occurred outside traditional commercial 
bank  lending  and  borrowing  activities,  the  crisis  revealed  significant  fragilities  in  financial 
institutions'  extensive  use  of  short-term  repurchase  agreements  and  reverse  repurchase 
agreements to finance large portions of dealer inventory and trading positions. The resulting 
pressures  in  the  tri-party  repo  market  reveal  why  liquidity  concerns  must  be  addressed  at 
both the firm-specific and system levels. 
Market  discipline  has  at  times  been  proposed  as  the  principal  means  either  to  ensure  the 
stability  of  financial  institutions  or  to  counter  too-big-to-fail  concerns.  This  has  always 
seemed  to  me  an  interesting  intellectual  position,  but  a  quite  impractical  one.  The 
opaqueness  of  complex  financial  institutions  is  unlikely  ever  to  be  fully  penetrated,  and 
market analysts can share misperceptions of risk with those inside financial institutions. As 
the U.K. Financial Services Authority has pointed out, credit risk spreads for major financial 
institutions in the spring of 2007 suggested that bank riskiness was at historically low levels, 
despite the imminence of major problems.6  
Yet one need not subscribe to an exaggerated view of the potential of market discipline in 
order to believe that there is considerable room for progress in enhancing the transparency 
of  financial  firm  operations  so  as  to  permit  better  market  monitoring.  Indeed,  the  relatively 
short  shrift  given  to  disclosure  requirements  in  the  Basel  II  process  reminds  us  how 
supervisors  can  at  times  place  excessive  trust  in  their  own  capacities  to  identify  risks  and 
evaluate risk-management capacities.  
A different kind of market, or at least non-government, discipline should be fostered in the 
internal  corporate  policies  of  financial  institutions.  Adequate  management  oversight  of  firm 
operations  and  board  of  director  oversight  of  management  are  as  important  to  prudential 
regulatory  policy  as  they  are  to  corporate  law.  Similarly,  compensation  systems  that 
incentivize employees to take actions that entail excessive risk in light of expected returns 
and costs can also have adverse effects on firm safety and soundness. While there is reason 
to  proceed  carefully  in  this  area,  there  is  a  real  need  for  additional  supervisory  action  to 
strengthen previous guidance on compensation. The Board is currently developing proposals 
that will help ensure that compensation systems take appropriate account of the riskiness of 
the firm's activities as well as the firm's financial performance. 
Finally, we are augmenting our supervisory approach for bank holding companies to include 
a more explicitly systemic perspective. "Horizontal reviews" of risks, risk management, and 
other practices across multiple financial firms can help identify both common trends and firm-
specific  weaknesses.  The  recently  completed  Supervisory  Capital  Assessment  Program 
(SCAP) of the nation's 19 largest bank holding companies both confirmed and advanced the 
utility of this supervisory technique. Use of a uniform set of supervisory stress parameters 
facilitated more precise identification of institution-specific strengths and weaknesses in both 
risk and risk-management capacities. Although the SCAP was an unprecedented exercise in 
an unprecedented situation, some lessons learned from our conduct of the exercise will be 
incorporated into more routine supervisory practice.  
                                                 
6   Financial Services Authority of the United Kingdom (2009), The Turner Review: A Regulatory Response to the 
Global Banking Crisis at 46. 
BIS Review 70/2009 
 7
More  broadly,  a  systemic  risk  perspective  requires  that  the  Board  conduct  more  closely 
coordinated supervision of major bank holding companies. This is the direction in which we 
will  be  moving  –  with  more  extensive,  regular  integration  of  Board  staff  into  the  ongoing 
supervisory  activities  of  Reserve  Bank  staff,  as  well  as  greater  emphasis  upon  common 
approaches to monitoring and supervising large institutions. 
As to a desirable legislative agenda, Chairman Bernanke has recently discussed the Board's 
views,7 and I testified on the subject before the Senate Banking Committee in March.8 So, as 
important as this second piece of a post-crisis regulatory agenda is, I will not fully discuss it 
this  afternoon.  Let  me  instead  review  in  summary  fashion  what  we  regard  as  the  key 
components of a legislative agenda to contain systemic risk. 
First, there should be a statutory requirement for consolidated supervision of all systemically 
important financial firms – not just those affiliated with an insured bank as provided for under 
the  Bank  Holding  Company  Act  of  1956  (BHC  Act).  A  robust,  consolidated  supervisory 
framework,  like  the  one  embodied  in  the  BHC  Act,  provides  a  supervisor  with  the  tools  it 
needs to understand, monitor and, when appropriate, restrain the risks associated with an 
organization's consolidated or group-wide activities. While the changes in the status of the 
formerly  free-standing  investment  banks  have  removed  one  important  set  of  firms  that  fell 
outside  the  boundary  of  prudential  regulation,  there  will  surely  be  other  such  systemically 
important firms in the future. Moreover, it is important to foreclose the possibility that firms 
might move into BHC status during periods of financial stress and reverse that status in order 
to escape regulation in calmer times. 
Second, there should be a resolution regime for systemically important non-bank institutions 
to  complement  the  current  regime  for  banks  under  the  Federal  Deposit  Insurance  Act.  In 
most cases, federal bankruptcy laws provide an appropriate framework for the resolution of 
nonbank  financial  institutions.  However,  this  framework  does  not  sufficiently  protect  the 
public's  strong  interest  in  ensuring  the  orderly  resolution  of  nondepository  financial 
institutions  when  a  failure  would  pose  substantial  systemic  risks.  The  absence  of  such  a 
regime leaves government authorities without a third alternative to the potentially unattractive 
options of uncontrolled bankruptcy or broad government assistance. The resolution regime is 
thus an important piece in an agenda to address the too-big-to-fail problem. 
Third, there should be clear authority for special regulatory standards – such as for capital, 
liquidity,  and  risk-management  practices  –  applicable  to  systemically  important  firms.  The 
contribution of these firms to the aggregate level of risk within the financial system and the 
huge negative externalities that would be produced by the failure of any one of these firms 
provide  powerful  arguments  for  such  standards.  If  there  is  more  than  one  consolidated 
supervisor of the universe of systemically important firms, it would be important to designate 
a single agency to enact these standards, perhaps after consultation with the others. 
Fourth,  there  should  be  an  explicit  statutory  requirement  for  analysis  of  the  stability  of  the 
U.S. financial system. Given the difficulties in identifying with precision latent systemic risks, 
and in distinguishing such risks from more benign market developments, it would seem wise 
to  involve  multiple  agencies  in  this  analytic  and  reporting  effort,  perhaps  as  a  designated 
subgroup of the President's Working Group on Financial Markets. Congress might also want 
to require this group to issue periodic reports on the stability of the U.S. financial system, in 
order to disseminate its own views and elicit the considered views of observers outside the 
government.  
                                                 
7   Ben S. Bernanke (2009), "Lessons of the Financial Crisis for Banking Supervision," speech delivered at the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Conference on Bank Structure and Competition, Chicago, May 7. 
8   Daniel K. Tarullo (2009), "Modernizing Bank Supervision and Regulation," before the Committee on Banking, 
Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, Washington, D.C., Washington, March 19. 
8 
 BIS Review 70/2009
Fifth,  additional  statutory  authority  is  needed  to  address  the  potential  for  systemic  risk  in 
payment and settlement systems. Payment and settlement systems are the foundation of our 
financial  infrastructure.  Financial  institutions  and  markets  depend  upon  the  smooth 
functioning of these systems and their ability  to manage counterparty  and settlement risks 
effectively. Thus if a system is not well-designed and able to manage the risks arising from 
participant  defaults  or  operational  disruptions,  significant  liquidity  or  credit  problems  could 
result.  Currently,  the  Federal  Reserve  relies  on  a  patchwork  of  authorities,  largely  derived 
from our role as a banking supervisor, to help ensure that critical payment and settlement 
systems  have  the  necessary  procedures  and  controls  in  place  to  manage  their  risks.  By 
contrast, many major central banks around the world have an explicit statutory basis for their 
oversight of these systems. 
While these five elements of a legislative program are by no means the only areas worthy of 
consideration  in  the  near  term,  we  believe  they  would  provide  a  sound  statutory  basis  for 
approaching  the  task  of  limiting  the  frequency  and  severity  of  systemic  problems.  But  we 
must all admit that we cannot know for certain if the regulatory, supervisory, and statutory 
changes I have already suggested will be an adequate program for containing systemic risk. 
If,  as  I  believe,  it  is  critical  that  systemic  risk  and  too-big-to-fail  problems  be  substantially 
reduced, the test for any regulatory reforms must be whether they accomplish this goal, not 
simply  whether  they  are  useful  supplemental  measures.  Thus  the  third  task  for  regulatory 
agencies is to think now about other possibilities, even as we work to implement this well-
considered agenda. 
Some  options  relate  closely  to  the  direction  in  which  we  are  already  headed.  There  has 
already been interesting thinking about developing rules for capital or liquidity requirements 
that  are  calibrated  to  the  degree  of  interconnectedness  of  an  institution  to  the  financial 
system as a whole. Such a metric, if workably accurate and administratively feasible, would 
be  preferable  to,  for  example,  simply  imposing  a  kind  of  capital  requirement  surcharge  on 
systemically important institutions. 
Other options extend existing regulatory approaches. One example is the proposal, offered 
by several commentators, for a requirement that financial institutions issue specified amounts 
of reverse convertible debentures, or similar capital instruments, to serve as a capital buffer 
in  times  of  stress.  Like  the  long-standing  proposals  for  mandatory  subordinated  debt,  this 
proposal is one that can be usefully discussed as either a complement to, or partial substitute 
for,  existing  capital  rules.  Another  example  is  the  idea  that  certain  short-term  wholesale 
funding  channels  might  be  guaranteed,  perhaps  in  connection  with  specific  forms  of 
securitization activities, in exchange for an insurance premium and regulatory requirements.  
Finally, there are some options that are considerably more dramatic. Proposals to limit the 
size  (or  interconnectedness)  of  financial  institutions  would  represent  a  historic  break  with 
how  we  have  regulated  the  financial  system.9  For  that  reason  alone,  as  well  as  the 
potentially  enormous  consequences  of  such  measures,  this  is  not  an  idea  that  should  be 
advanced  lightly.  However,  if  one  accepts  the  basic  premise  that  our  financial  system  will 
remain healthy only if the too-big-to-fail problem is addressed in a muscular way, this kind of 
idea  has  at  least  heuristic  value  in  making  us  think  hard  about  the  degree  to  which  the 
regulatory path we set for ourselves is leading to the proper destination of greater financial 
stability. 
                                                 
9   The statutory prohibition upon interstate acquisitions that would result in a commercial bank and its affiliates 
holding more than 10 percent of insured deposits in the United States is the closest instance of this approach 
in current law. See 12 U.S.C. § 1842(d). 
BIS Review 70/2009 
 9
Conclusion 
I  have  noted  the  observation  of  a  number  of  thoughtful  commentators  that,  given  the 
continuing difficulties in credit markets, we need not rush to reform our regulatory system. 
While I certainly agree with the propositions that we are unlikely to see widespread financial 
excesses in the near term and that we must get reform right, I believe it is essential to move 
forward  now.  History  shows  that  opportunities  for  real  reform  are  often  short-lived. 
Momentum  can  too  easily  be  lost,  and  the  return  of  better  times  too  easily  leads  to 
complacency. If we are to spare the next generation the pain and loss caused by a financial 
crisis, we must not only learn lessons. We must act on them. 
10 
 BIS Review 70/2009
