Charles Bean: Monetary policy developments 
Speech by Mr Charles Bean, Deputy Governor (Monetary Policy) of the Bank of England, at 
Cutlers’ Feast, Cutlers’ Hall, Sheffield, 21 May 2009. 
 Master Cutler, Lord Lieutenant, High Sheriff, Lord Mayor, My Lords, Ladies and Gentlemen. 
I am very grateful to you, Master Cutler, for inviting me here to Sheffield to speak at this great 
annual  Feast,  to  meet  the  leaders  of  such  an  important  sector  of  British  manufacturing 
industry, and to enjoy your magnificent hospitality. 
We  are  now  almost  two  years  into  the  financial  crisis,  which  broke  in  August  2007.  The 
preceding decade or so was marked by steady growth and low inflation, not just in the United 
Kingdom but in many other parts of the world. In 2003, the Bank’s Governor, Mervyn King, 
even went so far as to christen it the NICE decade – standing for non-inflationary consistently 
expansionary. He was at pains to point out that one should not expect that unusual stability 
to be maintained. But although we subsequently fretted about the vulnerabilities building up 
within  the  global  financial  system  as  a  result  of  the  relaxed  attitude  to  risk  and  the  easy 
availability  of  credit,  we  never  imagined  quite  how  extreme  the  unwinding  would  prove, 
particularly after the bankruptcy of Lehman's last September triggered a near collapse of the 
financial system and a world-wide plunge in business and consumer confidence. The result 
has been a sharp and synchronised contraction in economic activity across the globe and an 
unprecedented collapse in world trade. 
In  the  twelve  months  following  the  onset  of  the  crisis,  it  seemed  natural  to  expect  those 
countries where the build-up in debt had been greatest, such as the United States and the 
United Kingdom, and those sectors that seemed most exposed, particularly financial services 
and construction, to be the hardest hit. But that is not how it turned out. The fall in UK GDP of 
nearly 3½% over the final quarter of last year and the first quarter of 2009 represents the 
largest half-yearly decline since records began in 1955. But that is comparatively mild seen 
alongside  falls  of  almost  6%  in  Germany  and  nearly  8%  in  Japan,  both  countries  running 
consistent current account surpluses. 
Moreover,  as  most  of  you  will  be  only  too  aware,  the  downturn  has  hit  manufacturing 
especially hard, with output in that sector down over 10% in the UK, 20% in Germany and 
30% in Japan, reflecting the sharp decline in the demand for consumer durables and capital 
equipment  that  followed  the  loss  in  confidence  and  reduction  in  the  availability  of  credit. 
Rigorous  inventory  control  then  propagated  the  fall  in  demand  rapidly  along  globalised 
supply chains. 
Now  producers  cannot  run  down  inventories  indefinitely,  so  the  rate  of  contraction  should 
start  to  ease  as  de-stocking  slows.  And  indeed,  business  surveys  around  the  world  do 
suggest that the rate of contraction in activity has been moderating over the past few months 
and that business confidence has started to improve. So the bottom in economic activity may 
not be too far off. 
Unfortunately these encouraging signs – I hesitate to identify them as “green shoots” – do 
not tell us much about the strength and durability of the subsequent recovery. Here there are 
reasons for both caution and optimism. 
The main reason for caution lies in the nature of this downturn. Previous UK recessions were 
associated with the need to reduce inflation after a period of excess demand growth. But the 
period preceding the present crisis was not associated with excessively rapid growth in the 
demand  for  goods  and  services.  Instead,  it  was  characterised  by  excessive  growth  in  the 
demand for financial and real assets, and in the prices of those assets. All of that went into 
BIS Review 62/2009 
 1
reverse after August 2007, with a sharp reversal in perceptions of risk, falls in asset prices, a 
deterioration in banks’ balance sheets, and a drying up of credit. 
The Senior Warden, in his introduction, drew attention to the harm that the reduction in the 
availability of credit is having on otherwise viable businesses in this part of the country. We 
hear the same message repeatedly across the nation through the business contacts of our 
network of regional Agents. The issue is very much at the forefront of our concerns. 
The UK Government has already introduced a range of measures to underpin the banking 
system,  including  requiring  the  injection  of  additional  capital,  guaranteeing  bank  debt  and 
providing insurance against losses on some of the risky assets on banks’ balance sheets. 
That  has  served  to  stabilise  the  banking  system.  But  we  are  still  some  way  from  having 
banks  that  feel  sufficiently  secure  that  they  can  lend  normally,  and  investors  that  have 
enough confidence in the banks to provide them with sufficient funds. The Bank will continue 
to work alongside the Government and the FSA in trying to ensure an adequate flow of funds 
to  business.  Unfortunately,  past  experience  in  other  countries  suggests  that  it  often  takes 
time for the banking system to mend after a crisis, and it is possible that the supply of credit 
will remain impaired for some while. 
There are two reasons for optimism about the strength of the recovery. First, we have the 
advantage  of  a  substantial  depreciation  in  sterling,  whose  trade-weighted  value  is  about  a 
quarter down on its value before the crisis broke. That should encourage buyers to switch to 
goods and services made in this country and make it more profitable to produce them. As a 
result, it should facilitate the necessary re-balancing of the economy. 
Second,  an  unprecedented  policy  stimulus  is  working  its  way  through.  In  particular,  the 
Monetary Policy Committee has lowered Bank Rate to 0.5%, a level unmatched in the Bank's 
315-year  history  and  only  marginally  above  its  floor  of  zero.  But  given  the  strong 
contractionary tendencies in the economy, we decided that further stimulus was needed. So 
in  March,  we  announced  a  programme  to  purchase  £75  bn  of  public  and  private  financial 
assets, financed by issuing extra Bank of England reserves – an action going by the unlovely 
description  of  Quantitative  Easing.  And  at  our  meeting  at  the  beginning  of  this  month,  we 
upped the total amount of purchases to £125 bn, about half of which have so far been made. 
The  ultimate  aim  of  these  measures  is  to  boost  the  annual  rate  of  growth  of  nominal 
spending  in  the  economy,  which  has  been  roughly  flat  over  the  past  year,  to  a  level 
consistent with a sustainable level and rate of growth of real activity and inflation meeting our 
target. 
Quantitative easing has been described in some quarters as “printing money”, though it is not 
literally  that.  It  is  more  akin  to  us  buying  the  asset  with  a  cheque  drawn  on  the  Bank  of 
England, which the seller then deposits with his own bank. As a consequence, the quantity of 
bank deposits in the economy goes up, while the claims that the banks hold on the Bank of 
England also increase. 
The immediate impact of these purchases should be to drive up the price of the assets that 
we are buying, or equivalently to reduce their yield. That is indeed what we have seen, with 
gilt yields falling nearly ½ percentage point when the programme was initiated. But that is not 
the end of the matter, as investors need to do something with the proceeds from their asset 
sales. They could just sit on the proceeds, but it is more likely that in due course they will buy 
other assets, including those that offer a higher return. So, in the course of time, the whole 
range of equity and bond prices are driven up, lowering the cost of finance to companies and 
increasing its availability. 
Our purchases of corporate assets are intended to have the additional effect of improving the 
functioning  of  those  markets.  By  standing  ready  to  buy  commercial  paper  and  corporate 
bonds,  we  hope  to  improve  their  liquidity,  lowering  the  spread  above  safe  assets  of 
equivalent maturity, and with it the cost of finance to business. 
2 
 BIS Review 62/2009
There  are  signs  that  these  measures  are  having  a  beneficial  impact  too.  Spreads  on 
commercial  paper  eligible  for  purchase  have  fallen  by  around  ½  percentage  point and  the 
size  of  the  market  has  increased  by  around  10%.  Similarly,  average  spreads  on  sterling 
investment grade corporate bonds for industrial companies have declined by some 60 basis 
points and gross issuance of bonds by UK companies has been strong. These developments 
may reflect a range of influences, but feedback from market participants suggests that our 
purchases have indeed played a helpful role. 
In addition to these channels, the banks, finding themselves flush with extra reserves, may 
choose  to  lend  them  on,  providing  a  further  kick  by  boosting  the  supply  of  credit.  At  the 
current juncture, however, a scarcity of funding and capital is likely to make banks cautious 
about doing this. That was exactly what happened in Japan during its so-called “lost decade”. 
But there are signs that the extra reserves may be contributing to a decline in the interest 
rate that banks pay to borrow from each other. 
It  will  take  some  time  before  we  can  assess  just  how  effective  Quantitative  Easing  has 
proved to be. Our latest assessment is that the combined stimulus from policy easing and the 
lower value of sterling should be sufficient to lead to growth resuming as we move towards 
the end of the year. But the continuing drag from the financial sector means that the ensuing 
pickup  is  likely  to  take  place  relatively  slowly.  There  is,  however,  considerable  uncertainty 
surrounding that assessment. 
Our primary objective is, of course, to control inflation, not growth. Our target measure, the 
Consumer Price Index, has been running above the 2% target for the past eighteen months, 
reflecting in particular the surge in energy and other commodity prices during the first part of 
last year. But it is now dropping back, reflecting both the sharp decline in energy prices in the 
latter part of 2008 and the growing margin of spare capacity in the economy. We expect it 
soon to fall below target and it is more likely than not to remain there for the next year or two. 
The inflation rate as measured by the more familiar Retail Prices Index has fallen even more 
sharply, reflecting the reduction in mortgage interest payments associated with the reduction 
in Bank Rate and falling house prices. 
When the recovery does come, as it surely will, the margin of spare capacity in the economy 
will begin to shrink and inflationary pressures will start to build again. So at some stage, we 
will have to begin withdrawing the large monetary stimulus. Although this may be some way 
in the future, some market participants and commentators are already starting to worry about 
whether we will be willing and able to accomplish this sufficiently rapidly to prevent inflation 
taking  off,  particularly  given  the  scale  of  the  Government’s  prospective  financing  needs. 
Three points are worth making. 
First, the timing of the withdrawal of the monetary stimulus will be governed by the need to 
meet the MPC’s inflation objective, not by the Government’s financing needs. 
Second,  with  Bank  Rate  at  its  effective  floor,  we  presently  have  only  the  asset  purchase 
programme as a tool to stimulate demand. But when it comes to tightening policy, we have 
two instruments at our disposal: asset sales; and raising Bank Rate. It is not necessary to 
unwind the asset purchases before raising Bank Rate. 
Third, if we felt the need to drain the extra reserves from the system rapidly, we could also do 
it by exchanging the reserves for short-term Bank of England bills, allowing us to stagger the 
sales of the gilts. 
Of course, the execution of our exit strategy will still present us with a tricky judgement call. 
We do not want to nip a recovery in the bud prematurely. Equally we will not want to let the 
inflation  genie  out  of  the  bottle.  But  that  is  the  sort  of  balancing  act  that  monetary  policy 
makers regularly face, even if the scale of the downturn and the size of the policy stimulus 
that has to be withdrawn are so much larger now. 
A previous guest at this Feast, Winston Churchill, declared that he “would rather see finance 
less proud and industry more content”, shortly before he took the fateful decision to return 
BIS Review 62/2009 
 3
the pound to the gold standard at an overvalued rate. Finance has certainly been humbled by 
the events of the past couple of years and the post-crisis financial world is bound to look very 
different from the pre-crisis one. But let us also hope that it is a world in which industry is 
more content. 
It remains only for me to thank you again for a marvellous meal and to propose a toast. To 
the Manufacturing Industries of Hallamshire. 
4 
 BIS Review 62/2009
