Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Enhancing global interlinkages in the international 
Islamic financial system 
Opening  speech  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia,  at  the 
launch of Commodity Murabahah House, Kuala Lumpur, 17 August 2009. 
 It  is  my  great  pleasure  to  be  here,  this  afternoon,  on  this  occasion  of  the  launch  of  the 
Commodity Murabahah House. The establishment of the Commodity Murabahah House is, 
indeed  timely,  as  the  international  financial  crisis  is  gradually  stabilising  and  the  global 
economy is entering into a period of recovery. This decade has seen Islamic finance enter 
into  a  new  phase  of  development,  as  its  international  dimension  gains  significance.  Of 
significance,  is  that  the  international  financial  crisis  has  not  discouraged  this  trend.  The 
Islamic financial system has continued, during this period, to become increasingly integrated 
with  the  international  financial  system.  However,  as  this  inter-connectivity  intensifies,  the 
exposure to risks arising from financial and economic developments from other jurisdictions 
will  increase.  Essentially,  international  Islamic  financial  transactions  will  require  the 
development  of  the  supporting  financial  infrastructure,  in  particular,  the  systems  and 
structures for the management of liquidity.  
Malaysia  has  taken  several  initiatives  to  strengthening  the  international  dimension  of  our 
Islamic financial system during this decade, to increase our inter-linkages with other parts of 
the world. In 2002, the Malaysian Government became the first to issue a global sukuk. In 
the  same  year  Malaysia  was  in  the  pioneer  group  that  established  the  Islamic  Financial 
Services Board that sets international prudential standards for Islamic finance. In 2004, we 
issued three new licences to foreign Islamic financial institutions. In 2005, Islamic windows of 
the  conventional  banks  were  encouraged  to  be  transformed  into  Islamic  subsidiaries  that 
allowed foreign equity participation of up to 49%. The foreign exchange administration rules 
were  also  liberalised  to  allow  foreign  corporations  and  agencies  to  issue  ringgit  sukuk  in 
Malaysia.  In  2006,  foreign  tie-ups  were  encouraged  –  in  the  four  new  licences  for  takaful 
business that were issued.  
Following these developments, the MIFC was launched in 2006 to develop Malaysia as an 
international hub for Islamic finance. Under this initiative, new international Islamic banking 
and takaful players could be established in Malaysia to conduct business in foreign currency. 
In  2007,  foreign  entities  were  permitted  to  issue  non-ringgit  sukuk  from  the  Malaysian 
market. Foreign entities could also operate Islamic fund management activities here. Early 
this year, the announcement was made that up to two mega Islamic banking licences with up 
to  100%  foreign  ownership  would  be  issued  to  conduct  international  business.  These 
initiatives  cumulatively  have  internationalised  our  Islamic  financial  system  in  terms  of  the 
presence of foreign players and in terms of participation in our financial system. 
The Commodity Murabahah House, or the CMH, that is being established today will be an 
important  platform  that  will  further  enhance  global  interlinkages  in  the  international  Islamic 
financial  system.  The  CMH  is  designed  to  be  a  multi-currency  and  multi-commodity 
exchange-traded platform to facilitate the trading and settlement of commodity which acts as 
the  underlying  transaction  for  liquidity  management  between  Islamic  financial  centres.  It  is 
made convenient for worldwide usage as it is an internet based platform – the first of its kind 
in the world with crude palm oil (CPO) as its underlying base commodity. Although Malaysia 
already has a well functioning and efficient Islamic inter-bank market, the CMH provides a 
further viable alternative using the commodity murabahah concept.  
While the CMH will provide another alternative to the already robust liquidity management 
infrastructure  in  Malaysia,  it  will  also  enable  liquidity  management  in  the  global  financial 
system. The CMH has a vast potential to facilitate liquidity flows from one financial centre to 
BIS Review 98/2009 
 1
the  other.  The  increased  efficiency  in  the  liquidity  management  across  countries  will  also 
contribute towards sustaining overall stability of the Islamic financial services industry at the 
international level. In addition to enhancing liquidity management, the CMH will provide an 
environment for increased innovation in the Islamic financial industry whereby the financial 
institutions  will  be  able  to  provide  a  wider  range  of  new  financial  instruments  including 
deposit, financing, investments and hedging.  
To evolve Malaysia into an international Islamic financial hub, Malaysia has under the MIFC 
initiative,  put  in  place  a  facilitative  framework  for  both  ringgit  and  foreign  currency 
denominated  sukuk  issuance.  The  recent  issuance  of  the  US  dollar  1.5  billion  5-year 
Petronas Emas Global Sukuk on 12th August marks a new beginning for the foreign currency 
sukuk market in Malaysia. The issue, amidst the challenging global financial markets, was 
highly  successful,  attracting  significant  interest  from  a  wide  investor  base  with  Asia 
accounting for 60 percent of the issue.  
The  combined  size  of  the  Petronas  global  sukuk  and  conventional  bond  issuances 
amounting to 4.5 billion US dollars is the largest global issuance in Asia (excluding Japan) for 
the year. The brief time-to-market for the issuance of the US dollar Petronas sukuk and bond 
took approximately one month, from structuring the instrument and date of submission to the 
authorities, to book building and the issuance date – reflecting the efficiency of the Malaysian 
market.  
Prior  to  this,  Malaysia  has  also  seen  wide  ranging  ringgit-denominated  issuances  by  non-
resident issuers. Multi-nationals, foreign corporations and Multilateral agencies such as the 
International Finance Corporation, International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, 
and  the  Islamic  Development  Bank  have  successfully  issued  sukuk  in  Malaysia.  All  these 
issuances  garnered  overwhelming  response  from  resident  and  non-resident  investors  as 
reflected  by  the  oversubscription  of  these  sukuk  issuances.  The  liquidity  and  tradability  of 
these ringgit issuances have been supported by the diverse range of players in the domestic 
Islamic financial system and the increasing demand from foreign investors. 
The  establishment  of  CMH  marks  a  further  milestone  in  the  development  of  the  Islamic 
financial  system  under  the  MIFC  initiative,  sustaining  the  continued  evolution  and  the 
development  of  Islamic finance.  I  wish  to  acknowledge  the  endorsement  of  the  Ministry  of 
Plantation  Industries  and  Commodities  and  the  support  by  the  Malaysian  Palm  Oil  Board, 
Malaysian Palm Oil Association and Malaysian Palm Oil Council as well as the CPO industry 
players towards this initiative. 
On this occasion, I wish to take the opportunity to congratulate the team at Bursa Malaysia, 
Bank  Negara  Malaysia,  the  Securities  Commission  and  the  market  players  for  their 
perseverance in concluding this project that was started two years ago and in making it a 
reality today.  
2 
 BIS Review 98/2009
