Martín Redrado: Monetary policy autonomy in small open economies – 
fact or myth? 
Speech  by  Mr  Martín  Redrado,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Argentina,  at  the  Central 
Bank  of  Malaysia’s  High  Level  Conference  2009  “Central  Banking  in  the  21st  Century: 
Implications of Economic and Financial Globalisation”, Kuala Lumpur, 10 February 2009. 
 Let me first congratulate the Bank Negara Malaysia (and in particular to Governor Zeti, who 
is always a source of inspiration for us central bankers in the emerging world) for this 50th 
anniversary. It is a pleasure for me to be here sharing our thoughts in such a challenging 
period.  
For the first time in recent decades, the emerging world is not at the epicentre of a financial 
crisis.  
However,  not  all  developing  countries  are  being  hit  in  the  same  magnitude.  Since  the 
beginning of 2008, there is a growing differentiation of credit default swaps (CDS) premiums. 
Emerging markets with current account and fiscal deficits were hit the most as they became 
more  vulnerable  to  foreign  capital  outflows.  Investors  perceive  as  riskier  countries  those 
which  have  external  financing  as  an  important  source  of  funding,  requiring  a  greater  risk 
mark-up on their investments. In terms of CDS spreads, regions more susceptible to external 
shocks (those with large current account deficit) have increased 15 times their spread in the 
last 18 months, compared to a smaller but still important increase in spreads for countries 
with current account surplus and those with relatively low deficit (less than 5% of GDP).  
Meanwhile, uncoordinated policies in developed countries, including asset purchases, capital 
injections, and extension of deposit guarantees together with increasing political pressures 
over  banks  to  lend  domestically  is  accelerating  flows  out  of  emerging  markets.  In  this 
context,  the  understanding  of  this  phenomenon  by  local  investors  in  developing  countries 
creates  additional  risks  as  they  do  not  fully  acknowledge  that  those  capital  outflows  from 
global banks were just the response of calls from “the headquarters”.  
However, we have learnt our lesson. Mainly due to a history of financial instability a great 
number  of  central  banks  in  the  developing  world  have  patiently  build  countercyclical 
measures  to  absorb  external  shocks.  This  is  allowing  us  to  weather  this  crisis  without  the 
usual  stop-go  process  which  created  discontinuity  and  lack  of  confidence.  Persistence  will 
give our countries an unprecedented value in return: overcoming major disruptions providing 
our  population  with  an  unprecedented  public  good:  monetary  and  financial  stability.  In  this 
crisis  of  the  system  we  witness  significant  threats  to  stability  and  the  evaporation  of  bank 
lending  we,  central  bankers  around  the  globe,  are  revalidating  our  credentials  as  crisis 
managers.  
No  single  country  is  immune  to  this  epidemic.  Everything  revealed  short  when  mature 
financial markets are under stress. Economic activity is shrinking all around the world and at 
astonishing  pace  in  some  cases,  which  is  accompanied  by  massive  layoffs.  Financial 
markets  keeps  on  the  brink  and  world  trade  is  almost  frozen  by  the  lack  of  banking 
institutions willing to provide the needed funding. The only positive readings on indicators are 
more an expression of hope than good economic analysis. 
Given our experience in managing financial crisis, I believe that going forward the roadmap 
should have as minimum the following elements: 
First: the package put forward should over react. Action should be forceful in order to curb 
expectations and rebuild confidence – it should reflect that authorities are persuaded that the 
path to follow is the correct one.  
BIS Review 14/2009 
 1
Second: simplicity. The instruments used should be transparent and straight in order to be 
more effective. Action can be technically flawless but, if agents have trouble interpreting it, it 
can cause uncertainty and become ineffective. 
Third:  execute.  Show  delivery  capacity.  Effectiveness  to  overcome  complexities  related  to 
the implementation of any action is an important condition allowing, at the same time, to gain 
credibility. 
After  overcoming  several  turbulent  episodes in our  history,  policymakers  in  the  developing 
world have learnt that there is no single regime that is “right” for all countries at all times. In 
the 1990s, the so-called “bipolar view” argued that, over time, we would end up having only 
hard  pegs  (recognizing,  in  a  way,  the  inability  to  pursue  a  domestic  monetary  policy)  or 
purely floating arrangements. However, we have seen no “vanishing middle” at all, but the 
persistence  of  intermediate  regimes  during  the  2000s.  Even  countries  that  have  adopted 
inflation targeting approach show no unique foreign exchange regime: some 50% of inflation-
targeting countries are not pure floaters. Rather than an “optimal” monetary policy, one that 
is robust under alternative scenarios is what we are all trying to pursue. 
The  current  environment  proved  that  there  is  no  “one-size  fits  all”  exchange  rate 
arrangement. The managed floating exchange rate regime has been the most adequate at a 
certain time in history for many countries, particularly in Asia. Specially, for countries such as 
mine  with  decades  of  macroeconomic  volatility  and  dollarization  which  during  the  past  25 
years has spent more than a third of its time outside its dynamic stability path. In general, 
Latin American economies have shown lower rates of growth on average (less than a half) 
combined  with  higher  GDP  volatility  as  compared  to  Asia.  This  trait  has  been  particularly 
marked in the case of Argentina. As an example, in the last 25 years, the country showed a 
standard deviation of GDP growth about three times higher than emerging Asia. At the same 
time GDP annual growth rate was about fifteen times lower. Just to stress this point: if we 
take  either  growth  or  consumption,  their  distribution  over  time  looks  much  more  like  a 
random walk and, thus, difficult to predict. 
These contexts of high volatility are associated with high uncertainty which constraints the 
effectiveness  of  monetary  policy.  These  phenomena  have  severely  harmed  long-term 
performance, and were not cost-free in terms of welfare: excessive volatility in Latin America 
is probably the main reason behind its economic underperformance vis-à-vis Asian countries 
in the last three decades. 
In  order  to  deepen  our  analysis  of  the  subject  we  must  evaluate  the  dominance  factor 
because  it  poses  complex  problems  to  the  conduct  of  our  task.  Moreover,  in  certain 
circumstances, 
it  can  be  perceived  as  a  source  of  stand-alone  uncertainty  on 
macroeconomic dynamics. On the fiscal side, not long ago in my country we used to have 
not  only  the  central  bank  but  the  financial  system  financing  the  treasury  with  no  limits 
whatsoever. This is a key reform  made during my tenure, which is bearing fruit under this 
time  of  turbulence.  Similarly,  doubts  as  to  the  financial  system’s  solvency  or  external 
sustainability can also limit monetary policy room for manoeuvre. Failure to consider this in 
the  design  of  policies  could  eventually  lead  to  severe  disruption  in  macroeconomic 
performance, thus enhancing uncertainty. 
A prominent case of “financial” dominance in emerging economies has been dollarization or 
euroization of the system as we are seeing in Central Europe today. Indeed, this feature can 
affect the full utilization of monetary policy (and the choice of the exchange rate regime) due 
to  weaknesses  in  balance  sheets  of  lenders  and  borrowers.  In  this  case,  dominance 
becomes clear in the face of the negative impact that exchange rate depreciation has on the 
net  worth  of  financial  systems.  In  contexts  of  financial  frictions,  and  currency  substitution, 
constraints for monetary policy are non-trivial. The monetary authority could therefore show 
some preference for avoiding fluctuations in the currency rate if the latter could seemingly 
originate  “balance-sheet”  effects  that  might  end  up  affecting  the  solvency  of  the  financial 
2 
 BIS Review 14/2009
system.  In  fact,  the  presence  of  currency  mismatches  has  been  at  the  root  of  the  most 
important crises, or has contributed to amplify them. 
So,  in  our  economies,  where  society  has  developed  a  high  risk  aversion  and  the  need  to 
prevent a new crisis becomes a priority objective, it is important to take the fiscal, financial 
and external conditions into account when conducting monetary policy. Furthermore, in such 
scenario, monetary policy should be conceived under a general equilibrium approach, where 
fiscal solvency, the monetary stance and external sustainability are mutually determined.  
During this phase, both price and financial stability goals should be better tackled using all 
the tools of economic policy, involving joint and coordinated fiscal, wage, competition, and 
monetary policy actions, among others. 
Several studies outline the theoretical basis and macroeconomic implications of this kind of 
regimes. There are many reasons to mitigate excessive exchange rate volatility, particularly 
in  developing  countries  with  a  limited  capacity  to  absorb  external  resources  through  their 
capital  markets.  By  mitigating  fluctuations  without  disregarding  the  fundamentals,  this 
approach  combines  the  needs  of  the  various  segments  of  the  economy  while  preserving 
consistency  with  the  whole  of  economic  policy.  Recent  literature  factors  into  the  analysis 
segmentation and restricted access to markets. The most relevant conclusions suggest that 
the narrower the local markets and the fewer the instruments to hedge out currency risk, the 
better a managed floating exchange rate regime is to maximize social welfare. In a context of 
imperfect  functioning  of  foreign  exchange  markets  and  incomplete  capital  markets,  the 
adverse effects of a significant depreciation either on inflation or wealth is not negligible. As 
an example, in Argentina exchange rate volatility is positively correlated with volatility in retail 
deposits since depositors perceive the increase in volatility as a growing risk of vanishing of 
its saving’s purchasing power. 
Empirical work of several academics, which expanded and fine-tuned the analysis, showed 
that several developed and emerging countries can be considered “managed floaters.” Less 
than  a  half  of  inflation  targeting  countries  effectively  apply  a  pure  float.  In  this  sense,  the 
literature  states  that  reaction  functions  of  central  banks  in  inflation  targeting  emerging 
countries have a significant coefficient for the nominal exchange rate. This means that the 
exchange  rate  is  an  important  variable  for  monetary  policy  conduct.  These  arguments 
become  more  convincing  in  the  absence  of  an  international  monetary  system  and  a 
recession in the main reserve currencies of the world. 
Challenges  for  monetary  policy  are  also  reflected  on  a  shift  in  central  banks´  goals  and 
instruments.  The  ongoing  crisis  is  making  somewhat  obvious  that  financial  stability  is 
relevant for central banks. Mostly ignored (or left as a “by-product”), today financial stability is 
a goal as important as price stability. Furthermore, in my view, how to handle the links and 
trade-offs between these two goals is what would make us succeed as central bankers.  
Financial  stability  as  an  explicit  goal  has  been  for  years  very  common  throughout  the 
emerging world. It actually, became a must given our history of macroeconomic instability. 
During  past  decades,  crises  in  our  countries  have  helped  clarify  the  connection  between 
monetary and financial stability. On the other hand, in developed countries, where the real 
side  is  usually  highly  affected  by  disruptions  in  capital  markets,  financial  stability  was 
traditionally viewed more as an instrument rather than a goal per se. But now, when capital 
markets  are  at  stake,  monetary  and  financial  authorities  in  industrial  countries  have  taken 
every  needed  step  to  grant  stability,  even  in  a  context  where  traditional  central  bank 
instruments proved to be unable to deliver.  
We still confront the challenging task of defining and measuring financial stability. There is no 
unique or generally accepted definition. As well, when it comes to making financial stability 
an operational factor, disagreement among relevant actors arise, something that is somehow 
different with price stability goals. On top of that, there is also a lack of available instruments 
to achieve financial stability, whether it is a developed or emerging market economy. Those 
missing tools may have its part on explaining the under pricing of risk during recent times, 
BIS Review 14/2009 
 3
leading to a short-sighted vision on potential longer-term consequences of a reversion on the 
business cycle. In this regard, one of the key tools is to have a proper financial regulation 
and to use the information provided by monetary aggregates. This should also be consistent 
and  well-integrated  with  the  monetary  policy  framework.  This  means,  for  instance, 
developing a macro-prudential framework that could help to link both approaches.  
The  crisis  highlights  the  importance  of  the  risk  management  approach  in  the  design  of 
precautionary  strategies  for  the  conduct  of  an  effective  monetary  policy  in  small  open 
economies.  It  is  necessary  to  consider  not  only  the  most  likely  future  path  of  economic 
development,  but  also  the  distribution  of  feasible  outcomes  around  that  path.  An  informed 
judgment  of  the  costs  and  benefits  of  these  possible  outcomes  under  alternative  choices 
should be made.  
As usual, and regardless of undeniable costs, crises are a breeding ground for creativity, but 
also  for  the  inevitable  revision  of  previously  accepted  principles.  In  times  of  turmoil, 
theoretical  consensus  on  “what  to  do”  and  “how  to  do  it”  tends  to  vanish.  In  other  words, 
while the relationship between economic theory and policy recommendations is reasonably 
well  defined  during  “normal”  times,  in  periods  of  turmoil,  this  relationship  becomes  much 
weaker. We have reached a point in which economic theory is having a hard time keeping up 
with praxis.  
My reading is clear: there is no single policy or one optimal approach that could be defined in 
a vacuum. Every policy option has its costs and benefits. The key is to choose whether we 
want  to  avoid  “going  long”  or  “falling  short”.  Naturally,  beyond  any  attempt  to  mitigate  this 
trade-off,  the  strategy  and  policy  choice  will  crucially  depend  on  the  attitudes  of  the 
government  and  its  people  towards  risk.  It  will  also  depend  on  their  intertemporal 
considerations,  because  the  profit  and  loss  profile  of  alternative  regimes  will  not  always 
coincide. Furthermore, past trends in the relevant economy and the starting conditions will 
naturally affect our policy choice. 
Also,  current  turmoil  and  policy  reaction  in  developed  countries  is  an  opportunity  to 
understand  how  monetary  policy  is  performed  in  emerging  economies  where  financial 
markets  are  shallow,  the  power  of  monetary  policy  to  affect  aggregate  demand  is  limited. 
One interesting conclusion from the ongoing crisis is that the way of doing monetary policy in 
such  an  extreme  framework  is  not  much  different  in  emerging  or  developed  countries.  It 
could be framed as a matter of effectiveness of the available tool-kit. 
However, this is not a negligible point. Monetary authorities in emerging countries, are much 
more  used  to  employ  diverse  tools.  Even  the  emerging  countries  with  inflation  targeting 
regimes were forced to make their systems more flexible to face the new environment. In the 
end,  we  all  operate  under  similar  principles,  but  are  surrounded  by  different  realities, 
circumstances and idiosyncrasies.  
In  the  case  of  small  open  economies  the  job  becomes  even  more  comprehensive  from  a 
monetary  policy  perspective.  Emerging  economies  need  to  achieve  macroeconomic  and 
financial  stability,  develop  capital  markets,  deal  with  fewer  and  less  developed  policy 
instruments,  with  fiscal,  external  and  financial  dominance,  and  build  credibility,  all  at  the 
same time.  
We often lack developed economies’ room to implement counter-cyclical fiscal and monetary 
policies. It is hard to think of an Asian country doubling its monetary base in four months or 
reducing its reference interest rate to almost zero percent, as the U.S. did, without adversely 
affecting economic agents’ expectations regarding future inflation or the sustainability of the 
foreign  exchange  regime.  It  is  also  hard  to  imagine  an  emerging  economy  announcing  a 
fiscal package of 7 percent of GDP to bail out financial institutions, without creating doubts as 
to the sustainability of their public accounts. At the same time, emerging countries are more 
likely to experience joint crises. A drop in deposits may lead to FX pressures with an impact 
on the external position and may affect fiscal accounts (due to the impact on sustainability of 
4 
 BIS Review 14/2009
the potential fiscal cost of a financial system bailout or domestic currency depreciation in the 
face of a currency mismatch).  
These  limitations  together  with  second  round  effects  make  a  strong  case  for  more 
coordinated efforts with a greater voice from the emerging world. Otherwise, countries might 
be  tempted  to  further  address  the  shocks  in  an  uncoordinated  way  probably  by  taking 
measures to isolate themselves. The backfire could be seen either on financial integration 
(by controlling capital outflows), or on trade policy (rising barriers on imports).  
We have to avoid that the positive aspects of integration are overcome by the flaws of the 
system. It is also worth noting that self-insurance via international reserve accumulation or 
fiscal funds seems not to be enough when confronted to the magnitude of the de-leveraging 
process taking place at a global level. 
We  are  seeing  many  welcome  developments,  particularly  the  surge  in  bilateral  currency 
swaps  agreements  such  as  the  recent  one  between  the  Hungary  National  Bank  and  the 
Swiss  National  Bank  as  well  as  the  one  between  the  People’s  Bank  of  China  and  the 
Monetary  Authority  of  Hong  Kong  to  facilitate  a  smoother  trade.  This  adds  to  those  seen 
during last year between central banks in developed economies and with emerging ones: the 
Fed  with  Mexico,  Brazil,  Korea,  and  Singapore;  the  Bank  of  Japan  with  India  and  the 
Scandinavian  central  banks  with  Iceland.  All  of  these  bilateral  agreements  just  prove  the 
need for international cooperation in a context of an absence of a multilateral organization in 
a position to perform as a kind of “central bank of the central banks”. This is the next step we 
need to go for. 
While  challenges  for  policy  makers  around  the  globe  are  significant,  now  we  seem  to 
understand that policy recipes vary from one country to the other in this complex scenario. 
This progress is, obviously, welcomed. Especially for us, emerging markets’ policy makers, 
as we have to catch up with the standards of living of our population and, most importantly, 
build  institutions  and  credibility  at  the  same  time.  In  fact,  it  is  more  a  synchronic  than  a 
sequential  two-fold  challenge:  advancing  towards  the  development  of  our  economies  and 
building  institutions  simultaneously.  And,  specially  a  fundamental  institution:  a  deep  local 
currency  market  able  to  channel  domestic  savings  to  the  most  productive  investments  in 
order to minimize macroeconomic volatility. To implement these policies effectively, the only 
possible  way  is  to  keep  a  consistent  approach  (I  mean  consistent  with  the  history  and 
idiosyncrasies  of  each  economy).  This  approach  seems  to  be  the  rule  rather  than  the 
exception not only in the emerging world but also all across developed countries. 
BIS Review 14/2009 
 5
