Paul A Acquah: Enhancing confidence in the Ghanaian financial system 
in the midst of the financial crisis 
Keynote  address  by  Dr  Paul  A  Acquah,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Ghana,  at  The  Ghana 
Banking Awards Gala Night, Accra, 9 May 2009. 
 Mr. Chairman,  
Honorable Ministers of State,  
Executives of Corporate Initiative Ghana,  
Directors and Executive of Banks and Industry,  
Distinguished Guests,  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Thank you for the opportunity to join you at this year’s Ghana Banking Awards Gala Night, 
the eighth in the series held under the auspices of Corporate Initiative Ghana.  
First  of  all,  let  me  take  this  opportunity  to  commend  Corporate  Initiative  Ghana  for  their 
foresight in institutionalizing this programme to offer a platform where consumers of banking 
services give public recognition to banks that they have adjudged to have excelled in various 
areas of their businesses over the year. I believe the annual awards in the various categories 
help to promote a competitive spirit, financial innovation, diversity of products and services, 
and  efficiency  in  providing  services  to  customers,  and  fostering  confidence  in  the  banking 
sector.  
Today’s  event  is  organized  around  the  theme  “Enhancing  Confidence  in  the  Ghanaian 
Financial System in the Midst of Global Financial Crisis”. [My reading is that the captains 
of  industry  do  not  seem  to  be  having  sleepless  nights  like  their  counterparts  who  have 
become  the  targets  of  some  public  outrage  and  visible  scapegoats  for  the  crisis  in  the 
industrialised countries].  
This topic is very appropriate for this occasion. It offers the opportunity to draw lessons from 
this extra-ordinary global financial crisis and globally synchronized drop in economic activity 
and employment, and how it has spread in its severity across countries. We can look at it 
critically from our domestic perspective as we seek to anchor the financial sector as a pillar 
of growth in Ghana’s economic development.  
Mr. Chairman, the hallmark of the current crisis is its unprecedented complexity both in terms 
of its causes and effects. What ostensibly started as a sub-prime mortgage loan problem in 
the United States has transformed into a multi-faceted financial and economic turmoil. It has 
shaken the foundations of the financial architecture, the credit and equity markets, and the 
framework of financial regulations, asset valuations, and transfer of risks. And, the practical 
consequences have meant a loss of confidence and trust in the financial system on a scale 
that threatens financial stability.  
Financial institutions have weakened under the weight of the write-offs of toxic assets and 
corporate and consumer credit losses. Banking failures have been a feature of the contagion 
effects in many advanced countries and emerging market economies. Indeed, the failure of 
Lehmann Brothers, an erstwhile reputable investment bank delivered a major jolt to the crisis 
of confidence in the global financial system, heightening fears of insecurity on the part of all 
market players (consumers, investors, borrowers and lenders alike).  
Indeed,  the  fallout  of  the  financial  crisis  for  financial  institutions  has  been  dramatic.  Major 
financial institutions such as AIG (American Insurance Group), Merrill Lynch, and Northern 
Rock  have  had  to  be  bailed  out  through  capitalization  with  public  funds  or  nationalization, 
because they are “too big” to fail or “too coupled” with other institutions to be allowed to fail. 
Many others have simply declared bankruptcy and failed.  
BIS Review 60/2009 
 1
For  developing  countries  such  as  ours,  this  crisis  threatens  to  roll  back  the  considerable 
progress  of  recent  years  in  terms  of  economic  growth  and  financial  stability,  prospects  for 
improved  standards  of  living,  and  provision  of  social  safety  nets,  should  the  contagion 
become more severe and the impact not mitigated and well managed.  
Ghana has not been immune to the effects of the crisis but the impact has been limited. With 
the  deepening  global  recession,  the  flow  of  remittances,  a  significant  source  of  foreign 
exchange  resources,  seems  to  have  slowed  down.  Prices  of  Ghana’s  major  exports 
commodities  (gold  and  cocoa)  remain  reasonably  firm,  while  oil  prices  have  retreated  for 
sometime  on  the  international  markets.  Let  me  add,  however  that  the  global  conditions 
remain  fluid,  especially  with  regard  to  capital  flows  and  investments  needed  to  support 
growth in developing countries.  
One fundamental lesson from the global financial crisis is that a sound financial sector is vital 
to the health of the economy. Over the past years, the financial sector has been built on a 
strong  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  and  a  modern  payments  and  settlement 
infrastructure.  This  has  facilitated  the  development  of  a  banking  sector  that  is  reasonably 
efficient, financially innovative, competitive, profitable, and growing quite rapidly. The size of 
the balance sheet of the banking system expanded by 37.2 percent to 52.5 percent of GDP 
in 2008, from 37.3 percent of GDP in 2003. Total deposits have risen to 34.2 percent of GDP 
from 23.4 percent of GDP in 2003. The industry now has a branch network of 642 compared 
with 332 in 2003.  
Mr.  Chairman,  the  Ghanaian  banking  sector  is  on  a  sound  footing  and  well-positioned  to 
strengthen its intermediation role. The direct links to the global financial crisis is mainly by 
way of banks’ exposure to counterparties in the form of nostro balances and placements of 
funds  with  some  correspondent  banks  abroad.  Stress  analysis  suggests  that  only  a 
significant  default  or  recall  of  borrowings  in  excess  of  50  percent  by  counterparties  could 
pose  material  threat  to  their  risk-adjusted  capital.  Moreover,  stringent  stress  tests  confirm 
that the industry as a whole is quite robust to exogenous macroeconomic shocks given the 
current level of capital adequacy of banks.  
Mr.  Chairman,  over  the  past  year,  a  number  of  measures  were  introduced  that  should  re-
enforce the ability of banks in Ghana to withstand shocks and protect the soundness of the 
financial system.  
First,  was  the  increase  in  the  minimum  capital  of  banks  from  GH¢7.0  million  to  GH¢60.0 
million after due consultation with the banking industry. Some banks have already begun the 
capitalisation process.  
Second, the regulatory and supervisory framework was strengthened with the passage of the 
Borrowers  and  Lenders  Act,  2008  (Act  773),  the  Non-Bank  Financial  Institution  Act,  2008 
(Act 774), Home Mortgage Finance Act, 2008 (Act 770), and the Anti-Money Laundering Act, 
2008 (Act 749).  
Third,  in  recognition  of  the  growing  role  of  ICT  in  financial  services  delivery,  the  Bank 
published guidelines on branchless banking in August 2008, to allow collaboration between 
banks, telecom companies and merchants to provide greater access to banking and financial 
services for the banked, unbanked and under-banked segments of the society.  
Fourth, a common electronic platform (the e-zwich) was established in a further development 
of the payment and settlement system making it possible to link all banking institutions with a 
biometric smartcard as a vehicle for financial inclusion of all segments of the population. This 
should help deposit-based financial intermediation.  
Further, in line with international regulatory standards, the Bank of Ghana collaborated with 
the  Ghana  Institute  of  Chartered  Accountants  to  push  for  implementation  of  IFRS 
(International  Financial  Reporting  Standards)  starting  with  the  2008  accounts.  This  has 
brought about greater transparency and comparability of reported financial results. All banks 
have complied broadly with the directive and reported in line with IFRS.  
2 
 BIS Review 60/2009
Mr. Chairman, I cannot over emphasize that a stable and vibrant financial system is a pre-
requisite for economic growth and expansion. I believe that as stakeholders, we can in our 
diverse ways, play an immeasurable role in ensuring that our financial system is safe and 
secure. In this regard, it will be important to re-commit to the tenets of an unwritten compact 
that are essential to maintain the confidence and trust of the public.  
• 
The  first  is  prudent  lending  system  in  which  banks  are  innovative,  take  initiative 
without excessive risks out of proportion to their risk-adjusted capital, and bring full 
transparency  and  disclosure  to  their  lending  practices  including  pricing,  fees  in  the 
delivery of services to the public.  
The  second  is  prudent  borrowing  and  respect  for  loan  contracts  with  serious 
commitment to honouring debt obligations whether corporate or household borrower.  
The  third  is  effective  prudential  supervision  of  the  financial  system  within  the 
framework  of  predictable  transparent  regulations  and  laws  that  are  enforced  even-
handedly.  
Finally,  maintaining  an  environment  of  macroeconomic  stability  as  well  as  well-
anchored 
is 
indispensable for a sound and dynamic financial services industry.  
for  business  planning  and 
inflation  expectations 
investment 
   Let  me  say  in  closing  that  the  uncertainty  about  the  depth  and  duration  of  the  global 
recession  and  restoration  of  global  financial  stability  underscores  the  power  of  confidence 
and  its  mutually  re-enforcing  impact  on  expectations  in  shaping  economic  behaviour. 
Managing the repercussions of the global crisis to stay on a sustained growth path is the task 
of macroeconomic and financial policies, and enhancing confidence in our financial system.  
I am sure that the captains of industry and all stakeholders will work hard to keep our system 
in a position to contribute to accelerated growth and steady improvement in living standards.  
Thank you all for your attention. 
BIS Review 60/2009 
 3
