Donald L Kohn: Comments on “Financial intermediation and the post-
crisis financial system” 
Speech by Mr Donald L Kohn, Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve System, at the Eighth BIS Annual Conference 2009, entitled Financial System and 
Macroeconomic Resilience: Revisited, Basel, 25 June 2009. 
 Hyun Shin and his various coauthors have emphasized in a series of papers that practices 
within  the  financial  system  were  hugely  consequential  for  the  buildup  in  risk-taking  that 
preceded the current crisis and for the virulence of the subsequent pullback. In particular, the 
increase  in  leverage  within  the  sector,  the  lengthening  of  intermediation  chains,  and  the 
reliance on short-term financing that was subject to runs contributed to the vulnerability of the 
system and the severe aftereffects of its ensuing collapse. His analysis shows that we can't 
look through the veil of finance, as was so common in our models and, to a lesser extent, in 
our thinking. His suggested reforms flow naturally from that diagnosis: Constrain leverage, 
especially in good times, and shorten intermediation chains.1 
I  agree  that  the  nature  of  the  chains  of  interactions  within  the  financial  sector  and  the 
leverage and maturity mismatches were important factors in the buildup of imbalances and 
the  difficult  correction.  And  addressing  these  should  contribute  to  a  more  robust  financial 
system. 
But, to an extent, leverage was a symptom rather than a cause of the underlying crisis. And 
I'm not sure the accounting identity Shin uses, while a useful pedagogic device, illuminates 
the interactions within the financial sector and between that sector and the economy that led 
to the crisis. Treating symptoms helps, especially when the disease is complex and difficult 
to diagnose, but we also need to look for and treat the underlying causes, as I'm sure Hyun 
agrees. 
In my opinion, the root cause of the problems was the underpricing of risk as the financial 
sector  interacted  with  nonfinancial  sectors.  On  the  lending  side  of  the  financial  sector 
balance sheet, underpricing of loans relative to true risk resulted in a buildup of leverage in 
the  household  sector  that  left  lenders  vulnerable  to  declines  in  collateral  values  and  debt 
servicing  capacity.  On  the  borrowing  side,  households  ended  up  with  some  assets  –  like 
shares in money market mutual funds – that weren't as liquid as they were thought to be; 
when  money  funds  began  to  worry  about  the  liquidity  of  their  assets,  like  asset-backed 
commercial  paper,  and  when  households  and  businesses  tried  to  use  their  perceived 
liquidity, the resulting fire sales accentuated asset price declines and transmitted problems 
from one sector to another. 
The initial problems from the excessive risk buildup were exacerbated by the deleveraging 
that  followed,  including  in  the  financial  sector.  Although  there  are  many  reasons  that  the 
deleveraging  process  has  been  so  painful,  one  of  the  defining  characteristics  has  been  a 
sharp increase in uncertainty. Uncertainty is an aspect of every crisis, but it escalated to such 
an extreme degree in the summer of 2007 in response to an unexpected decline in housing 
prices that the financial system, which had been unusually stable and resilient, was pushed 
into a zone of increasing instability that in turn triggered an adverse feedback loop between 
the financial sector and the economy. 
                                                 
1  
The views expressed are my own and do not necessarily reflect the views of the other members of the 
Board of Governors. Matthew Pritsker of the Board's staff contributed to these remarks. 
BIS Review 93/2009 
 1
Risk had been mispriced, but by how much? Who was vulnerable? Would the markets and 
the  economy  overshoot  or  return  to  a  more  sustainable  relationship?  Financial  market 
participants  didn't  know  the  value  of  assets,  the  financial  health  of  counterparties,  or  the 
likelihood  that  they  themselves  would  be  subject  to  unexpected  hits  to  their  capital  or 
liquidity, for example, from ostensibly off-balance-sheet entities. The result was a hoarding of 
capital and liquidity, a sharp increase in risk premiums, and a generalized flight to liquidity 
and  safety  that  only  gathered  momentum  as  instabilities  in  the  economy  and  financial 
markets fed off each other. 
The  characteristics  of  the  networks  and  the  instruments  accentuated  the  uncertainty.  The 
instruments and  the  relationships  among  the  institutions  had  become  much  more  complex 
and opaque. The complexity of the instruments meant that investors did not understand the 
risk  characteristics  of  the  assets  they  were  buying;  among  other  problems,  they  relied  on 
credit  rating  agencies  for  due  diligence.  The  complexity  of  the  networks  meant  that 
participants did not understand how reliant they had become on a few large core institutions 
and  how  those  institutions  were  entwined  with  each  other  in  very  complex  ways;  when 
vulnerabilities  started  to  become  evident,  market  participants  became  worried  about  who 
their counterparties were exposed to. In sum, financiers were taking on more risks than they 
would like to, and in many respects they did not understand or were unaware that they were 
doing so. 
This  reasoning  suggests  that  policy  actions  to  treat  underlying  causes  should  address  the 
causes of risk mispricing and should attempt to reduce uncertainty. One approach to attend 
to both is through greater transparency of  
• 
Instruments  –  for  example,  by  creating  simpler  structures  that  are  easier  to  look 
through  to  evaluate,  and  by  making  the  underlying  credit  extensions  more  visible; 
and, as a complement, by having clearer and more robust credit ratings.  
Institutions  –  by  enhancing  financial  disclosures  to  report  more  detail  on  financial 
institutions' asset holdings and their value. Defining "value" is very difficult, and the 
appropriate value of any given asset may depend on the use of the information. But 
the  publication  of  the  results  of  the  capital  assessments  of  U.S.  banks  last  month 
showed  how  additional  information  about  the  risks  and  vulnerabilities  of  financial 
institutions – however imprecisely measured – can reduce uncertainty and promote 
financial stability.  
Markets – by reporting market aggregates on position-taking that would help market 
participants and policymakers alike monitor the buildup of risk exposures within the 
financial system.  
Networks  and  interrelationships  –  for  example,  by  using  central  counterparties 
(CCPs).  The  presence  of  such  counterparties  solves  an  information  problem,  since 
market participants would only have to worry about the solvency of the CCP and not 
each other. CCPs may make it easier for market participants to more willingly absorb 
the other's sales during a period of deleveraging. But CCPs do concentrate risk, so 
they need especially robust risk-management systems.  
   In  addition,  to  reduce  uncertainty  in  response  to  a  shock,  we  need  to  strengthen  those 
increasingly  critical  institutions  at  the  core  of  the  system.  Because  of  their  systemic 
importance, they must be held to higher capital, liquidity, and risk-management standards. 
Moreover,  resolution  authority  for  systemically  important  institutions  needs  to  be  clearly 
delineated ahead of time, so their failure will be orderly and the authorities can choose who 
will bear the cost without the uncertainty and delay involved in bankruptcy. 
The  mispricing  of  risk  and  the  resulting  uncertainty  also  reflected  skewed  incentives. 
Attempting to encourage appropriate pricing of risk at the level of the bank through capital 
standards may be too blunt an instrument on its own to restrain bank risk-taking, since those 
standards can  never  be  tuned  so  finely  that  traders  will  not  find  positions  for  which  risk  is 
2 
 BIS Review 93/2009
underpriced  –  and  then  load  up  on  those  risks.  The  solution,  in  addition,  lies  with  more 
closely  tying  traders'  compensation  to  the  long-run  performance  of  their  portfolios.  This 
internalization  of  the  costs  of  risk-taking  toward  those  most  capable  of  understanding  and 
measuring the risks should help blunt the buildup of excessive risk and leverage. 
Long and complex chains present problems, importantly because of the incentive problems 
along the chain. Nevertheless, there may be sound economic reasons why long chains are 
desirable.  For  example,  long  chains  of  lending  allow  for  some  financial  intermediaries  to 
specialize  in  screening  borrowers,  others  to  specialize  in  arranging  initial  short-term 
financing,  and  others  to  focus  on  securitizing  the  assets  and  selling  them  to  investors. 
Specialization  lends  itself  to  long  chains,  but  such  specialization  comes  with  incentive 
problems at every step of the chain. These incentive problems need to be recognized and 
dealt with. Proposals that require intermediaries along the chain to maintain "more skin in the 
game" are worth considering, but that approach is not a panacea. Many institutions that had 
skin in the game got into trouble anyway – perhaps because it is hard to judge how much 
skin  is  enough  to  maintain  proper  incentives.  In  addition,  it  may  be  impossible  to  police 
whether an institution has chosen to keep its own skin in the game or whether its risk has 
been  mitigated  through  hedging.  In  the  end,  no  one  can police  the market  better  than  the 
final investors, provided the instruments are simpler and more transparent. 
Finally,  our  efforts  to  stabilize  the  system  by  guaranteeing  much  of  the  liabilities  of 
systemically important institutions have further distorted the incentives of their counterparties. 
Offsetting  the  effects  of  this  moral  hazard  is  another  reason  to  hold  these  institutions  to 
higher standards and find better resolution mechanisms for them. 
I want to close by reiterating the importance of Hyun's contributions. He has led the way in 
showing that the organization of financial structures is critical to the resiliency of the financial 
system.  Going  forward,  we  need  to  address  not  just  the  unstable  structures  that  have 
become  so  evident  in  the  recent  crisis,  but  we  also  need  to  better  understand  why  these 
sorts of structures emerge and take steps to prevent their reoccurrence in whatever forms 
they may take. 
BIS Review 93/2009 
 3
