Jürgen Stark: Economies of central and eastern Europe and the euro 
Introduction  by  Mr  Jürgen  Stark,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European  Central 
Bank,  for  Session  III  “Economies  of  Central  and  Eastern  Europe  and  the  euro”  during  the 
National Bank of Poland Conference, Warsaw, 5 June 2009. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Thank you very much for having invited me to this session of a very interesting conference.  
More  than  a  decade  after  Europe’s  leaders  took  the  decision  to  launch  the  euro  we  have 
good reasons to be proud of the single currency. In the euro area, inflation expectations have 
been  anchored  at  low  levels  and  the  euro  has  increased  cross  border  trade,  financial 
integration and investment. For the European Union as a whole, the euro is a key catalyst of 
further economic and financial integration. As the EU enlarged in recent years, its benefits 
can  increasingly  spread  to  the  new  EU  members  that  joined  in  2004  and  2007.  In  the 
meantime, four of these twelve new Member States have already adopted the euro, showing 
clearly that the euro area is not a “closed shop”. 
Under  the  Treaty,  all  Member  States  that  have  joined  the  EU  since  2004  are  expected  to 
adopt the euro once they have achieved a sustainable degree of convergence. A first step on 
the  way  to  the  euro  is  participation  in  the  exchange  rate  mechanism,  ERM II.  This  is  not 
intended to be merely a “waiting room” on the way towards euro adoption. Rather the main 
purpose of ERM II is to act as a “training room” as it helps countries to prepare for future 
membership. While participating in ERM II, Member States should demonstrate that they can 
maintain price stability, fiscal discipline and also competitiveness without major changes in 
the  exchange  rate.  The  ability  to do  so,  is  a critical  pre-condition  for successful euro  area 
membership. 
At a later stage, a country’s readiness to adopt the euro is formally assessed with the well-
known convergence criteria defined in the Maastricht Treaty and the Protocol serving as the 
relevant benchmark. This framework is a fundamental part of the acquis communautaire to 
which all Member States subscribed when they joined the EU. This framework has served us 
well. In my view it would be absolutely inappropriate to change the agreed rules of the game 
as  sometimes  requested  by  some  observers  who  consider  this  as  a  “quick  fix”  of  the 
problems  faced  by  some  countries.  Indeed,  without  sufficient  convergence,  fixing  the 
exchange  rate  irrevocably  can  become  a  very  costly  process  for  an  economy,  with  large 
losses in welfare.  
Indeed,  I  think  that  the  global  financial  crisis  has  once  again  demonstrated  the  sound 
economic  logic  which  underlies  the  convergence  process  as  laid  down  in  the  Treaty.  This 
convergence  process  builds 
first  of  all  on  sustainability  as  evidenced  by  sound 
macroeconomic fundamentals, in particular the absence of any major imbalances which may 
threaten  sustainability.  It  is  not  surprising  to  see  that  the  countries  which  have  been  hit 
hardest by the crisis in the central and eastern European region are those that built up large 
imbalances  and  vulnerabilities  in  the  past.  These  imbalances  and  vulnerabilities  were,  in 
turn, often the result of unsustainable policies and lack of progress with respect to structural 
reforms. 
When  talking  about  unsustainable  policies,  it  is  straightforward  to  point  to  significant  fiscal 
imbalances  which  have  been  accumulated  in  some  countries.  However,  several  countries 
also  suffered  from  an  overheating  of  the  economy,  fuelled  by  too  low  real  interest  rates, 
strong  credit  growth  fuelling  private  consumption  and  investment,  and  local  asset  price 
bubbles. As a consequence of excessive domestic demand, several countries recorded very 
high current account deficits and were dependent on strong inflows of foreign capital. At the 
same time, due to the overheating of the domestic economy and associated pressures on 
BIS Review 70/2009 
 1
wages and prices, countries operating under fixed exchange rate regimes underwent strong 
losses in external competitiveness. Countries with flexible exchange rates, such as Poland, 
were in a better position to avoid such imbalances in the past and they also seemed to have 
absorbed the crisis shocks better than others. A further vulnerability that has been built up in 
many countries over recent years stems from the existence of high levels of foreign currency 
loans  extended  by  the  financial  system  to  unhedged  borrowers,  thereby  giving  rise  to 
significant currency and maturity mismatches.  
It  should  be  clear  to  everyone  that  having  achieved  sustainable  convergence  before  euro 
adoption is very much in the interest of the country concerned. Without such convergence 
the monetary policy stance of the ECB is likely to be inappropriate for the country, and it may 
face a risk of excessive output volatility leading potentially to a series of boom-bust cycles as 
the country lacks important tools to stabilise economic conditions at home. Therefore, it is 
crucial that euro adoption only takes place after the elimination of major imbalances in the 
country and when sufficient convergence has been achieved and a high likelihood exists that 
the  economy  of  the  country  will  be  in  a  position  to  reap  the  full  benefits  from  euro 
introduction. 
In  addition,  it  should  be  clear  to  everyone  that  also  for  the  euro  area  it  is  crucial  that  the 
institutional  roadmap  for  euro  adoption  is  fully  respected.  A  loosening  of  the  institutional 
framework  could  imply  considerable  losses  in  the  credibility  of  the  overall  foundations  on 
which the monetary union is built. The achievement of the sustainable convergence of all its 
member  countries  is  therefore  key  for  the  coherence  of  the  euro  area  and  the  efficient 
functioning of the single monetary policy.  
I mention all this to make the point that the fundamental logic of the Treaty remains correct: 
countries have to make sure that they pursue sound macroeconomic policies. They should 
first  and  foremost  focus  on  ensuring  sound  fiscal  and  sustainable  macroeconomic 
developments  in  their  own  country  and  complement  this  with  the  necessary  structural 
reforms. And by doing so, they will actually kill two birds with one stone, as they then also 
follow  the  best  possible  strategy  for  ensuring  a  smooth  integration  into  the  euro  area  in  a 
lasting manner.  
One  may  wonder  why  the  catching-up  process  of  some  current  EMU  members  was 
smoother than that of many central and eastern European Member States. Similarly to the 
new Member States, some current euro area countries started their accession to the EU from 
relatively low initial per capita income levels. Nevertheless, a number of these countries went 
through  a  more  gradual  convergence  process  spread  over  a  longer  period,  allowing  their 
economies to gradually adjust to the conditions prevailing in the single market before they 
entered EMU.  
The experience of some current euro area countries also shows that euro adoption per se 
does  not  solve  home-made  problems  and  that  important  challenges  will  persist  also  after 
euro adoption. In several countries in the euro area, inflation remained persistently above the 
euro area average following euro adoption. Not surprisingly, cost competitiveness in these 
countries  eroded,  leading  to  widening  external  imbalances.  These  imbalances  built  up 
despite  very  different  developments  in  economic  activity.  Any  accumulated  losses  in 
competitiveness  will  have  to  be  unwound  eventually.  For  a  country  belonging  to  the  euro 
area  this  implies  periods  of  below  average  unit  labour  cost  growth.  Without  sufficient 
flexibility in wages this may imply drawn-out and costly adjustment periods.  
The  experience  of  current  euro  area  countries  shows  that  there  have  been  persistent 
differences  across  some  countries  after  the  adoption  of  the  euro  in  terms  of  inflation,  unit 
labour costs and external imbalances. These differences have in part been due to excessive 
fiscal  deficits  or  to  bubbles  which  developed  in  domestic  housing  markets.  Partly  they  are 
also due to a lack of responsiveness of prices and wages, which have not always adjusted 
smoothly  across  countries,  regions  and  sectors.  Essentially,  this  protracted  adjustment 
reflects the fact that national macroeconomic policies and structural reforms have not been 
2 
 BIS Review 70/2009
ambitious  enough  to  avoid  the  build-up  of  imbalances  or  to  provide  the  economy  with 
sufficient  flexibility  to  deal  with  the  necessary  adjustment.  Without  having  achieved  a 
sufficient degree of sustainable convergence, the risk of such undesirable boom-bust cycles 
is particularly high.  
To conclude, we can indeed be proud of the achievements of the euro. However, there is still 
scope  to  draw  greater  benefits  from  it.  The  build-up  of  macroeconomic  imbalances,  inside 
but especially outside the euro area, shows that the surveillance framework in the EU should 
be strengthened. Strengthened surveillance could provide early warnings to policy markers, 
thereby  allowing  them  to  adjust  policies  early  enough.  Sound  macroeconomic  policies 
coupled with a targeted and ambitious structural reform agenda are key in this regard. Such 
policies should be implemented very forcefully, both by countries that participate in the euro 
area as well as those that are preparing for it. 
BIS Review 70/2009 
 3
