Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: The global financial crisis and access to 
finance 
Speech  by  Prof.  Emmanuel  Tumusiime-Mutebile,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Uganda,  at  the 
AfDB Ministerial Round Table Discussions, Dakar, Senegal, 12 May 2009.  
 Introduction 
I  
The Ministerial Round Table discussion this morning has articulated the key issues faced by 
African  economies  in  the  context  of  the  global  financial  crisis  and  global  recession.  These 
discussions have provided a springboard for further reflections on the effects of the global 
crisis onto our economies.  
The global economic and financial crisis threatens to affect the key drivers (i.e. technology, 
capital  and  labor)  of  sustained  economic  growth  via  depressed  prices  of  and  demand  for 
primary  commodities  and  lower  than  anticipated  foreign  capital  inflows  and  foreign  direct 
investment  (FDI).  While  the  previous  two  decades  witnessed  sustained  growth  and 
macroeconomic  stability  in  Africa  on  the  backdrop  of  reduced  fiscal  deficits  and  current 
account deficits, the global recession risks compromising our macroeconomic gains via the 
triple  deficit  problem  of  high  fiscal  deficits,  high  current  account  deficits  and  high  private 
sector  savings-investment  gap.  The  issue,  therefore,  is  whether  or  not  this  triple-deficit 
problem  is  temporary  (and  therefore  requiring  short-term  measures)  or  permanent  (and 
therefore requiring major macroeconomic adjustment policies).  
My discussion this afternoon will focus on the effects of the global financial crisis and access 
to financing in the African context. I will focus on three important issues:  
• 
Is the international response well tailored to the different requirements of the African 
countries?  
Is the response commensurate to the challenges faced by the countries?  
What additional measures should be considered by the MDBs to increase access to 
finance?  
 The basic contours of the global financial crisis are by now well known. Mr. Alan Greenspan, 
the former Chairman of the Federal Reserve Board called it a “once in a century tsunami”, 
born  of  a  collapse  deep  inside  the  US  housing  sector  and  cascaded  outwards  leading  to 
instability in financial markets and near stagnation of the real economy, and more recently, a 
recession. The global financial crisis has affected the private-public sector divide alike with 
the hit being taken by private firms leading to heavy revenue shortfalls for governments the 
world over.  
II  
Appropriateness of the international response to the different financing 
requirements of the African countries  
Growth and sound macroeconomic policy considerations  
The IMF projects the world economy to have experienced a severe recession caused by the 
financial  crisis  and  loss  of  confidence.  Consequently,  global  output  is  projected  to  decline 
sharply  by  -3.3%  in  2009  in  developed  countries,  and  -2.0%  each  for  emerging  and 
BIS Review 61/2009 
 1
developing countries, contrasting with previous growth rates of 3.2%, and 6.1% each in 2008 
respectively.  
By contrast, many African economies and indeed most emerging and developing countries 
have  thrived  in  the  two  decades  to  2007/08.  This  was  largely  on  account  of  prudent 
macroeconomic management that resulted into lower inflation, sustainable fiscal and balance 
of  payments  and  rapid  economic  growth  that  placed  them  in  good  stead  to  respond  to 
exogenous shocks like the one we are discussing here today. The key issue is whether or 
not the new macroeconomic policy responses and investment decisions by the development 
partners are appropriate to safeguard the economic requirements of African economies.  
For Africa as a whole, growth forecasts for 2009 have been drastically revised downwards, 
from 5.9% in November 2008 to 2.8% in February 2009. Likewise, export growth is projected 
to  decline  by  7%  while  import  growth  will  decline  by  4.7%  largely  on  account  of  adverse 
terms of trade, as well as declining volumes. Although the effects of the global recession are 
not  uniformly  distributed,  they  are  broadly  resulting  into  a  deterioration  of  current  account 
balance for most countries.  
Capital inflows  
For over a decade, many African economies have been experiencing a super-cycle1 in their 
terms-of-trade trends, robust private capital and remittance inflows, as well as FDI. This was 
largely  on  account  of  implementation  of  prudent  macroeconomic  policies,  structural 
adjustment  programs,  the  liberalisation  of  the  current  account  and  account  as  well  as  the 
boom in S.E. Asia and China. The strong balance of payments performance as a result of the 
above developments is under threat by the global economic crisis, as evidenced by falling 
export prices and volumes, and declining capital flows. If the global recession persists, then 
many African economies risk backsliding into a severe macroeconomic crisis regime caused 
by  unsustainable  triple-deficit  problem  of  unsustainable  balance  of  payments  deficit, 
unsustainable fiscal deficit and unsustainable private sector savings-investment gap. This in 
turn risks high inflation and sustained decline in economic growth.  
There are uncertainties about the magnitudes of the main risks arising from the global credit 
crunch,  and  a  negative  feed-back  loop  from  the  financial  sector  and  the  real  economy  in 
developed economies. There are also uncertainties about the magnitudes of the effects of 
the spillovers to African economies with respect to measured effects of the collapse of global 
demand,  the  effects  of  the  collapse  in  commodity  prices  on  African  export  volumes  and 
values, and the effects of reduced balance of payments surplus.  
In Uganda’s case, the international economic slowdown and financial crisis is likely to impact 
adversely on Uganda’s external accounts although the persistence of this remains uncertain. 
While  there  has  been  no  indication  of  a  decline  in  official  aid,  export  receipts,  private 
transfers  and  FDI  have  slowed  in  the  last  quarter  of  2008  and  are  expected  to  remain 
depressed in the near future. Due to the high import component of public investment plans, it 
is expected that both the current and capital account balances of the balance of payments 
will decline, resulting in a small drawdown in official reserves in 2009/10. At the policy level, 
BOU remains committed to let the economy adjust, by allowing the level of the exchange rate 
to remain  market determined, and  intervening only to smoothen out excessive volatility. In 
the medium term the balance of payment is projected to remain weak but stable at the levels 
estimated in 2008/09.  
                                                 
1  
I.e. favorable terms of trade (tot) for many developing countries persisted for a longer than usual continuous 
periods of over five years compared to the past experiences when favorable tot tended to last less than two 
years. 
2 
 BIS Review 61/2009
To mitigate the effects of the global economic and financial crisis on African economies, the 
total value of the facilities at the IMF (Exogenous Financing Facility), the World Bank’s Rapid 
Access Facility, the African Development Bank’s US$2.5bn for both the emergency liquidity 
facility  and  the  trade  finance  facility;  and  any  new  facilities  from  the  bilateral  donor 
community need to be increased (by the donors) adequately to offset the impact of both the 
current as well as future balance of payments deficits. In addition, while responding to the 
immediate  challenge  of  revitalizing  capital  flows,  the  long-term  challenge  of  economic 
diversification  to  reduce  dependence  on  primary  commodities  remains  key  for  improving 
Africa’s resilience to external shocks. This is in addition to the need to provide fiscal space 
for countercyclical economic policies and investments to sustain economic growth in Africa.  
Other current and capital inflows  
The annual growth rate in exports of goods and services from developing countries was 12.3 
percent for the five year period to 2007 compared to 4.2 percent registered in the 1980s and 
4.8  percent  in  the  1990s.  The  search  for  higher  returns  in  developing  countries  including 
African economies led to a record one trillion dollars worth of private capital flows in 2007. 
Also  FDI  and  portfolio  equity  finances  increased  to  about  4.5  percent  of  GDP  in  2007 
compared  to  2-3  percent  in  early  2000s.  All  the  above  flows  plus  remittances  provided 
financing to spur the continent into robust economic growth and poverty reduction.  
Commensurate responses to the challenges faced African economies  
III  
The global crisis-credit crunch, and the global recession are likely to impact financing and its 
access in varying ways. The dangers posed by the crisis to access to finances by the private 
sector can be summarized into refinancing risk, credit risk and regulatory risk.  
Refinancing risk 
The global liquidity contraction will likely affect the cost and availability of funding for African 
economies.  Given  the  risk  averseness  of  markets,  both  African  domestic  and  international 
banks are likely to be tighter, slower and more conservative in lending. With the expected 
attendant hike in interest rates as observed in Eastern Europe and South Asia and recent 
depreciation  of  the  local  currencies  witnessed  across  the  continent,  meeting  of  foreign 
currency loan obligations by the African private sector may be more difficult, especially for 
those companies that are net savers of foreign exchange.  
Consolidating  implementation  of  export-oriented,  as  well  as  capacity  and  productivity 
enhancing policies  through  reducing  the  costs of  doing  business  in  the  African  economies 
could assist entities to access domestic credit and reduce refinancing risks. This provides an 
opportunity  for  African  economies  to  consolidate  financial  sector  reforms  policies  aimed  at 
avoiding financial repression, which remains a key factor in increasing efficiency in savings 
mobilization and investment allocation.  
Credit risks  
Although international commodity and oil prices have receded from the record levels reached 
in 2007/08, many economies are still reeling from the high food and fuel prices. Accordingly, 
given deep recession in many industrial countries, some businesses may have trouble with 
repayment of credit facilities. Also as investment financing drops off, business projects may 
be  incomplete  thereby  saddling  banks’  balance  sheets  with  non-performing  assets.  At  a 
micro level, some exporters are reportedly already finding it hard to obtain trade credits from 
abroad which could cripple the export sector that has to contend already with falling foreign 
demand.  
The  above  concerns  provide  an  opportunity  for  central  banks  in  Africa  to  strengthen  their 
regulatory capacity by setting up financial stability units as well as the required capacity. This 
BIS Review 61/2009 
 3
would enable Supervisory Authorities to undertake various sector stress tests with a view to 
undertaking appropriate policy responses to minimize the impact of the risks.  
Regulatory risk and financial stability  
One of the key roles of many central banks in Africa involves the task of maintaining a safe 
and sound banking system as well as ensuring an effective payments system. The task for 
continuous  oversight  of  the  financial  system  largely  involves  risk-based  supervision  and 
regulation. For Uganda’s case, the Bank of Uganda has put in place a comprehensive and 
well-designed  risk-based  analytical  apparatus 
for  early  detection  of  changes  and 
vulnerabilities  that  could  develop  into  a  serious  systemic  crisis.  The  main  purpose  of  this 
analytical apparatus is to ensure that there is timely detection of vulnerabilities in banks and 
all other depository institutions that are of central importance to depositors as well as for the 
payments  system,  which  requires  shareholders  of  these  institutions  to  make  prompt 
provisioning of capital. These measures are aimed at ensuring that the various institutions as 
well as the financial markets function properly. The process also involves continuous follow-
up with financial market participants to ensure timely implementation. In view of the lessons 
from  the  global  financial  crisis  and  the  global  recession,  the  BOU  is  also  setting  up  a 
Financial Stability Department whose role, among others, will be to provide basic analysis of 
financial  stability.  The  emphasis  will  be  to  provide  a  comprehensive  stability  assessment, 
highlighting the various risks to macroeconomic stability.  
The case for “light-touch” policy responses 
The  crisis  also  presents  the  danger  of  the  policy  makers  and  regulators  panicking  and 
overreacting  in  their  response.  In  such  circumstances,  there  is  a  high  propensity  to  favor 
short-term  “politically  rewarding”  policies  like  interest  rate  cuts,  exchange  rate  policy 
reversals  to  the  detriment  of  long  run  benefits  of  consolidation  of  macroeconomic  stability 
and  growth  underpinned  by  fundamentals.  Accordingly,  there  is  need  to  consolidate 
macroeconomic stability and growth, and minimize policy reversals.  
Dangers posed to public financing  
As  noted  above,  the  global  recession  may  impact  negatively  on  the  demand  for  exports 
leading to a higher trade deficits. This coupled with reduced current transfers poses concerns 
for  the  current  account  deficits  and  their  attendant  financing.  In  Uganda’s  case,  export 
earnings have declined by an average of 20 percent for the period November 2008-February 
2009 compared to their corresponding levels a year ago. Current transfer inflows have also 
reduced from US$ 844.6 million during the first half of 2007/08 to US$ 706.9 million received 
in the first half of 2008/09. Consequently, Uganda’s current account position has worsened 
from a surplus of US$ 204.7 million in the first half of 2007/08 to a deficit of US$ 401.0 million 
registered in the first half of the current financial year.  
With most African countries running current account deficits of 5 percent or more of GDP, 
vulnerability to swings in the various sources of external financing is unavoidable.  
The  likely  slow  down  in  global  trade  poses  challenges  for  the  Tax  Revenue  Authorities.  A 
possible  below-target  performance  is  anticipated  for  FY  2008/09  leading  to  higher  than 
anticipated fiscal deficits for Uganda and other African economies. Portfolio investment could 
also fall, as greater risk aversion may keep capital closer to “home”. Exit of offshore investors 
in capital markets was observed in the latter part of 2008 leading to instability in the foreign 
exchange markets and decline in share values across Africa.  
Although FDI is historically more resilient to shocks, some decline is anticipated. In addition, 
access to international capital by African governments and businesses may come at higher 
interest rates on account of risk-aversion of lenders.  
4 
 BIS Review 61/2009
Though budget priorities of donor countries are expected to shift with some impact on donor 
flows and aid to African economies, the recent G20 summit in London went a long way in 
reassuring the world and especially Africa on the key issues of financing by the advanced 
countries and multilateral institutions like the IMF and the World Bank. The rescue package 
put in place by the industrial countries, and the one trillion US dollar package may go a long 
way to reverse the global recession.  
Possible policy responses include fast-tracking regional integration to increase exports within 
the regional, consolidation of export-oriented trade policy measures, as well as investing in 
infrastructure aimed at increasing domestic productivity and reducing domestic resource cost 
ratios.  
IV  
Policy measures that could be considered by the MDBs to increase access to 
finance  
The main challenges facing many African economies relate to addressing acute shortages of 
financing,  especially  for  long-term  public  investment  programs,  private  investment,  and 
export trade financing. Addressing these challenges remains critical for both minimizing the 
impact of the global crisis and positioning the continent to take advantage of opportunities 
arising from the global economic recovery after the crisis.  
Credit crunch  
Although many African economies survived the initial impact of the financial crisis due to lack 
of direct exposure to the American sub-prime mortgage debts, their access to international 
capital has been severely curtailed. For example, in the case of Uganda, several entities are 
reported to have repositioned themselves from borrowing from abroad, to borrowing from the 
domestic  banks.  The  limited  capacity  for  domestic  banks  to  meet  the  new  domestic  credit 
demands suggests a threat to maximum growth of Africa’s trade. Accordingly, this suggests 
a need for MDBs to provide lines credits to domestic financial institutions, to increase their 
capacity to deal with this new development.  
Capital inflows 
The  global  crisis  is  reversing  the  recent  upward  trend  in  capital  inflows  to  Africa.  The 
stagnation and in some cases, decline in private foreign capital inflows a need for the MDBs 
and  the  G20  to  increase  development  assistance  to  Africa  in  amounts  that  should  be 
adequate  to  offset  the  projected  shortfalls  in  the  balance  of  payments  in  both  the  short-, 
medium- and long-run.  
Shortage of infrastructure financing  
The  severe  shortage  of  key  infrastructure  in  Africa  is  a  key  constraint  to  supporting  high 
productivity and economic growth in the continent, as well as increased access to markets. 
This suggests a critical need for MDBs and the G20 group of countries to increase access to 
investment  finance  for  African  economies  by  scaling  up  and  targeting  development 
assistance to bridge the infrastructure gap.  
Access to finance for SMEs  
Many SMEs in Africa lack access to long-term finance to support large-scale activities. MDBs 
could  assist  local  domestic  banks  to  build  capacity  by  providing  lines  of  credits  aimed  at 
addressing  the  financing  needs  of  SMEs,  especially  during  this  time  of  tight  access  to 
international credit markets following the global crisis.  
BIS Review 61/2009 
 5
Measures to support domestic savings mobilization 
MDBs  need  to  support  domestic  efforts  aimed  at  increasing  and  strengthening  domestic 
resource  mobilization  to  augment  the  aid  and  other  development  efforts.  Accordingly,  it  is 
important that MDBs support the development of the domestic financial sector is to enhance 
domestic resource mobilization, with a focus on promoting its efficiency and deepening.  
Stabilization funds  
The  persistent  swings  in  commodity  prices  as  well  as  terms  of  trade  for  many  African 
economies, and the global recession, suggest a need for MDGs to put in place stabilization 
funds to finance countercyclical measures. 
Additional policy measures need to be tailor-made to address the downward risks to growth 
as  discussed  above.  Key  among  these  include  external  sector  policy  measures  aimed 
mitigating  the  decline  in  the  demand  for  exports  of  Africa  and  other  developing  countries, 
especially from industrial countries. It also requires measures to address the adverse effects 
of the terms of trade. In the case of Uganda, the Government has decided to consolidate its 
public infrastructure investments in roads and energy to increase productivity by reducing the 
costs of doing business and to increase exports within the region.  
Multilateral Institutions could assist African economies by providing appropriate instruments 
to enable appropriate adjustment to the global  shocks. For example, balance of payments 
support as well as structural adjustment loans could be provided for those countries that are 
primary commodity dependent and have been severely affected by adverse terms of trade. 
For well diversified economies, emphasis could be consolidating measures aimed increasing 
productivity  gains.  In  Uganda’s  case,  as  the  global  financial  centers  seemingly  headed 
towards  a  meltdown  in  September/October  2008,  the  BOU  allowed  the  economy  to  partly 
adjust  to  the  global  shocks  through  the  flexible  exchange  rate  policy  already  in  place. 
Accordingly,  in  the  face  of  uncertainty,  policy  measures  aimed  maintaining  a  flexible 
exchange rate regime might assist to absorb part of the balance of payments pressures, as 
well as partly to reduce the adverse impact of the terms of trade.  
Most importantly, the issue of macroeconomic stability and the triple-deficit problem need to 
be  appropriately  calibrated  and  well  coordinated  to  avoid  a  potential  risk  of  a  return  to 
unsustainable  macroeconomic  imbalances.  In  the  case  of  Uganda,  a  review  of  the  fiscal 
program was made to accommodate lower than programmed domestic revenues.  
Additional policies going forward  
The global recession is a threat to Africa’s strong economic growth performance of recent 
years  as  well  as  its  plans  to  scale-up  infrastructure  spending.  But  reflecting  the  prudent 
policies of recent years, Africa must be in a good position to weather the storm including on 
account of the planned increase in public investment.  
The  scaling  up  of  investment  especially  into  infrastructure  should  prove  a  good  enough 
stimuli  if  absorption  issues  as  ell  as  efficiency  and  effectiveness  in  the  implementation  of 
public programs are well catered for.  
With respect to monetary policy, the Central Banks across Africa should pursue the objective 
of  preserving  foreign  reserves  and  maintaining  sound  macroeconomic  stability.  This  is 
important because the outlook for capital inflows of all forms (FDI, portfolio, remittances) as 
outlined prior is declining.  
The Balance of Payments (BOP) shocks should be partly allowed to be absorbed via flexible 
exchange rate adjustments.  
I will also add my voice to the need to strengthen and broaden financial stability assessments 
beyond  the  traditional  banking  sector.  This  should  include  cross-border  cooperation  to 
ensure sound international financial rules and systems to minimize financial contagion.  
6 
 BIS Review 61/2009
Concluding remarks  
V  
The impact so far on financing for development is not too big to warrant a major policy shift in 
a number of our economies, and certainly not in the case of Uganda. In other countries that 
are  heavily  dependent  on  few  primary  commodities,  the  appropriate  policy  would  be  to 
diversify exports and maintain a flexible exchange rate policy.  
While  the  global  financial  and  economic  recession  appears  to  be  severe  among  industrial 
countries, the limited integration of Uganda’s financial sector and the overall economy into 
the global economy provides some safety net. However, the second round effects associated 
with the global recession poses a major threat to Uganda’s economy.  
Maintaining sound economic fundamentals necessary to help economies adjust to the crisis 
will require prudent and flexible macroeconomic management policies together with smarter 
financial market regulation, including risk-based banking supervision.  
Finally,  there  is  need  for  an  effective  and  focused  public  communication  strategy  of 
confidence  building  by  our  governments  so  as  not  to  undermine  the  performance  of  our 
economies 
that  could  be  caused  by  unnecessary  panic.  The 
communication  strategy  needs  to  emphasize  the  need  to  exploit  all  the  opportunities  that 
could  be  availed  by  the  global  crisis.  Government  actions  need  to  be  well-coordinated  to 
avoid  “beggar-thy-neighbor”  policies  that  could  make  the  financial  sector  regulators’  job 
harder in the future.  
through  mistakes 
BIS Review 61/2009 
 7
