Christian Noyer: Central banks in the financial crisis 
Speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France, at Paris Europlace, Paris, 
3 July 2009. 
 Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It’s a great pleasure for me to address such a distinguished audience.  
From the outset, central banks have been major actors in fighting the financial crisis. Overall, 
their  actions  have  been  broadly  applauded.  In  the  period  to  come,  however,  steering  the 
economy  in  an  environment  of  high  uncertainty  will  prove  particularly  challenging.  It  is 
therefore timely to reflect upon the past, present and future course of central banks' actions. 
Today, I would like to address three questions: Is monetary policy responsible for the crisis? 
How to assess the policy response from the central banks up to now? And, finally, to which 
extent does the crisis change our vision of their role in the future? 
Is monetary policy responsible for the crisis?  
To those who think it is the case, the standard argument goes as follows: in the aftermath of 
the equity bubble that burst in 2000, interest rates have been kept too low for too long. This 
created, for investors, both an incentive and a possibility to take excessive risk. The incentive 
came from the low level of interest rate where the "search for yield" could only be satisfied by 
moving  to  riskier  assets  and  increasing  leverage.  The  possibility  was  created  by  ample 
liquidity and the availability of cheap financing. 
Another criticism of monetary policy owes to its alleged asymmetric response to asset prices. 
central banks would not lean against bubbles, but were prepared to clean the consequences 
after they burst. Investors were thus led to believe that monetary policies would always bail 
them out in case of trouble. This created a "macroeconomic put" which could only result in 
excessive risk taking. 
I am not fully convinced by those arguments for three reasons:  
• 
First, to the extent that the crisis has been triggered by macro economic imbalances, 
the causes seem more real to me than monetary. Specifically, low nominal interest 
rates, between 2002 and 2005, reflected low real interest rates rather than permissive 
monetary policies. Indeed, when policy rates were progressively raised, in 2004 and 
2005,  long-term  rates  did  not  follow,  and  the  yield  curve  flattened  unexpectedly, 
creating the famous "conundrum". The abundance of saving in the world, especially in 
emerging economies, prevented real rates from rising, which both gave rise to capital 
exports  to  the  US  (and  the  accompanying  current  account  deficit)  and  exerted 
worldwide pressure on the long end of the yield curve.  
Second,  part  of  the  bubble  can  be  explained  by  more  "structural"  factors  such  as 
asymmetry  in  financial  development  between  emerging  and  developed  economies. 
According to the analysis developed by Caballero and others, the world suffers from 
an "asset shortage". The supply of liquid and safe financial instruments is insufficient 
to meet demand, and that supply is asymmetrically distributed across the world. As 
the US is the primary supplier of liquid and safe assets, it attracts inflows of capital, a 
process  which  accentuates  global  imbalances.  Excess  demand  for  those  assets 
pushes  their  prices  up,  which  triggers  financial  bubbles.  Financial  development  in 
surplus countries would go a long way to solve that problem by reducing the asset 
shortage, thus the probability of future bubbles. 
 BIS Review 85/2009 
 1
 Third, there is no denying that weaknesses and failures in financial markets played a 
major role in the build up to the crisis. Over the last decade, financial innovation has 
been organized to "transform" illiquid and risky instruments into (apparently) safe and 
liquid assets. That unsustainable process has abruptly come to an end with the burst 
of  the  credit  bubble.  During  that  period,  rating  agencies,  accounting  rules, 
unregulated and off balance sheet entities as well as very poor risk management all 
contributed,  willingly  or  unwillingly,  to  fragilize  our  financial  systems.  Those 
weaknesses  are  at  the  origin  of  the  crisis.  Had  they  been  addressed  in  due  time, 
most of the problems we are now dealing with could have been avoided. Creating a 
new  regulatory  regime  and  strengthening  our  supervisory  arrangements  are  at  the 
forefront of efforts conducted at the national and, for the EU, at the European level. 
Those  efforts  are  closely  coordinated  worldwide  through  the  G20  process  and  the 
newly created Financial Stability Board.  
Central banks' response to the crisis 
History taught us that banking crises degenerate into deep and lasting depressions unless 
they  are  dealt  with  quickly  and  forcefully.  Those  lessons  were  not  lost  on  both  fiscal  and 
monetary  authorities  and  the  policy  response  worldwide  has,  indeed,  been  exceptional  by 
any historical standard. I would like to focus here on three characteristics of central banks 
interventions 
• 
First, they have been fast and decisive. Indeed, the start of the crisis can be dated 
back  to  August  9  2007,  when  the  Eurosystem  provided  up  to  95  billion  euros  in 
exceptional liquidity support to the interbank market. As the crisis developed, those 
interventions  multiplied  and  evolved,  a  point  to  which  I  will  return  shortly.  The 
deterioration  of  the  real  economy  and  subsequent  easing  of  inflationary  pressures 
opened room for a substantial relaxation of the monetary policy stance. In the euro 
area,  seven  reductions  in  policy  rates  brought  the  interest  rate  on  our  main 
refinancing operations from 4.25% in October 2008 to 1% today. 
Second, those interventions have been flexible and highly innovative. Central banks 
saw as their mission to avoid the paralysis of financial intermediation and keep the 
monetary transmission mechanisms working efficiently. To achieve those objectives, 
they considerably expanded and diversified their tools and instruments. In countries 
where  markets  play  an  important  role  in  the  allocation  of  credit,  they  created 
numerous  new  facilities  to  provide  financing  and  to  lower  spreads  through  the 
purchase  of  private  and  public  debt  securities.  In  the  euro  area,  where  banks  are 
dominant,  interventions  were  designed  to  ensure  that  adequate  liquidity  would  flow 
into the system without obstacles or restrictions. It has become commonplace to talk 
about  those  measures  as  "unconventional"  and,  indeed,  they  are.  The  important 
point,  however,  is  that  they  do  not  substitute,  but  complement  "conventional" 
movements in policy rates and can be implemented in parallel. In other words, there 
is no need to wait for policy rates to reach zero (or any "lower bound") to innovate in 
the  design  and  implementation  of  monetary  policy.  For  the  Euro  area,  the  most 
important shift took place in October 2008, when the Governing Council decided to 
allocate liquidity to banks in unlimited amounts at the policy rate. Although it was not 
advertised as such at the time, this apparently technical measure deeply transformed 
the policy framework and marked the move into unconventional territory. 
Third,  those  interventions  have  been  remarkably  cooperative  and  convergent.  The 
largest coordinated reduction in interest rates in history took place on 8 October 2008 
with the participation of seven major central banks. A dense network of bilateral swap 
agreements has insured that liquidity shortages in international banking and financial 
markets can be addressed speedily and efficiently. Finally, as the crisis triggered a 
synchronized slowdown in activity and inflation worldwide, monetary policy rates have 
  2 
 BIS Review 85/2009
converged to low and comparable levels. Remaining differences can be explained by 
slight differences in economic prospects and financial systems. Monetary conditions 
are  almost  identical:  three  and  six  months  Libor  and  Euribor  rates  do  not  differ  by 
more than 50 basis points. 
I strongly believe that those three features – speed, innovation and cooperation – allowed 
central banks to play a decisive part in containing the crisis and limiting its impact.  
Has the crisis changed our vision of central banking? 
The credit bubble has already extracted heavy costs on our economies and the welfare of 
our citizens. All must be done to avoid the repetition of such developments. 
Bubbles are however complex phenomena: hard to detect, hard to prevent, hard to fight. Can 
we do better in the future and what contribution can central banks bring ?  
The crisis has revived the old, but ongoing, debate on whether monetary policy should aim, 
or  not,  at  ensuring  financial  stability  in  parallel  to  its  main  objective  of  price  stability.  The 
arguments  are  well  known,  on  both  sides.  New  ideas  are  being  brought,  regarding,  in 
particular,  the  impact  of  monetary  policy  on  overall  maturity  transformation  and  leverage 
inside the financial system. It is desirable and healthy that this discussion takes place. Let 
me give you my own reflexion, at this stage:  
• 
The primary and dominant objective of monetary policy should remain price stability. 
Any dilution of this fundamental mandate would be take us back three decades and 
be extremely detrimental to our welfare and prosperity in the long run. 
Without  prejudice  to  this  primary  objective,  all  mandates  allow  for  consideration  of 
other objectives. Looking at our experience over the last decade, there is a good case 
for  bringing  financial  stability  higher  in  our  priorities.  That  may  imply,  in  particular, 
that, when assessing the economic and financial environment, central banks should 
take a longer term perspective and be more alert to incipient financial imbalances. 
I  would  note,  in  passing,  that  the  Eurosystem  is  well  equipped  to  take  such  a 
perspective. Our "two pillar "approach allows us to look permanently at the dynamics 
of money and credit aggregates, which are essential to detect both long term risks to 
price stability and potential threats to financial stability. 
But  more  should  be  done.  It  is  now  broadly  accepted  that  a  "macro  prudential" 
approach  should  be  taken  when  implementing  financial  supervision.  That  means 
looking both at system wide implications of our prudential decisions and their impact 
on financial imbalances and the real economy. 
Central banks have a major role to play in this process for four reasons: (1) they have 
an  incentive  to  act,  since  well  functioning  financial  markets  are  essential  for  the 
transmission  of  monetary  policy;  (2)  being  equipped  to  permanently  look  both  at 
financial markets and economic cycles they may have an informational advantage in 
analyzing 
to  produce 
dispassionate and candid assessments of risks; (4)and, finally, their proximity to the 
banking  system  provides  them  with  an  intimate  knowledge  of  financial  dynamics. 
Indeed,  one  of  the  main  lessons  of  the  crisis  may  be  that  those  countries  where 
central  banks  assume  banking  supervision  took  advantage  of  their  ability  to  react 
quickly and flexibly to emergency situations. 
independence  allows 
interaction;  (3) 
there 
them 
their 
    Obviously,  for  macro  prudential  supervision  to  succeed,  all  actors  involved  –  regulators, 
central banks, national Treasuries and fiscal authorities – will have to closely work together. 
Amongst plans being floated or decided, it is notable that central banks have been assigned 
the function of systemic risk supervisor. 
BIS Review 85/2009 
 3
Conclusion 
Let me now conclude. All major financial crises in history have led to revisiting and redefining 
the role of central banks. This one is no exception. Central banking will not be the same after 
the crisis. It is important, however, that changes that will occur do not impact on their ability 
to reach their primary objective. Price stability may not be a sufficient condition for financial 
stability.  But  it  is  certainly  a  necessary  one.  Central  banks  have  to  enrich  their  role  and 
expand their functions for the benefit of general welfare and prosperity. In that process, they 
will  remain  guardians  of  the  integrity  and  stability  of  money,  which  is  a  cornerstone  of  the 
social contract in our democratic societies.  
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 85/2009
