Svein Gjedrem: Investing for the long run 
Dinner speech by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at 
The  Norwegian  Government  Pension  Fund’s  Investment  Strategy  Summit,  Oslo,  3  June 
2009. 
 Minister, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
We are gathered here for a conference – and a dinner – centred on investing for the long 
run. And indeed, it is my expectation that the Government Pension Fund – Global will endure 
through good times and bad times in the markets to provide a permanent revenue stream for 
our children and grandchildren. 
I  would  like  to  thank  all  the  participants  for  the  good  advice  and  interesting  analyses  you 
have  presented  here  today.  It  has  really  been  inspiring  to  attend,  and  to  listen  to  your 
presentations and discussions. 
The oil age in Norway has spanned some 40 years, and it appears that it will continue for 
years ahead.  
The idea of a fund arose in the early 1980s. Up to 1995, all government revenues were used 
for  investment  in  the  petroleum  sector  and  to  cover  budget  deficits  during  the  recession 
around 1990. 
The formal structure of the Fund was actually decided on in 1990 in the midst of a banking 
and  currency  crisis,  with  meagre  growth  and  high  unemployment.  I  have  every  reason  to 
believe that the people that prepared the proposal did not think at the time that the savings in 
the Fund would prove to be of any significance. 
By  setting  up  the  Fund  –  with  investment  abroad  –  it  became  possible  for  Norway  to 
establish  a  path  for  the  production  of  oil  and  gas  that  is  independent  of  the  profile  for 
petroleum  revenue  spending.  The  alternative  to  a  fund  would  have  been  to  regulate  the 
extraction path by putting a conservative upper limit on annual extraction.  
The  Fund  serves  as  a  buffer  between  wide  swings  in  petroleum  revenues  and  domestic 
spending. The decisions on annual revenue spending can be made independently of the size 
of the revenues. As a result, swings in petroleum revenues do not have an automatic impact 
on  the  Norwegian  economy.  The  existence  of  the  Fund  contributes  to  stabilising  the  NOK 
exchange rate, and countercyclical economic policies are more effective for a country with 
net foreign assets. 
The virtues of the fund structure are many. The authorities have established a transparent 
system  for  managing  government  petroleum  income  as  all  oil  revenues  are  transferred 
directly into the Fund. The Norwegian parliament must adopt a resolution on any use of the 
return or the capital of the Fund. Oil revenues are not earmarked. There is no hidden use of 
revenues, or any use for special purposes. The Fund is strictly and effectively "out of bounds" 
to special interests. It is important that this remains a feature in the future. 
We  now  have  close  to  fifteen  years  of  a  rapidly  expanding  Fund  behind  us,  and  it  is 
becoming  more  likely  that  the  fund  will  be  a  very  long-term  savings  plan.  The  plan  is 
underpinned by a political commitment to spend only the expected real return of four per cent 
over  the  business  cycle.  Nevertheless,  we  should  not  underestimate  the  risk  that 
extraordinary economic circumstances could turn a surplus into a deficit.  
The accumulation of capital in the Fund reflects the depletion of a non-renewable resource, 
which is exchanged for financial assets through the Fund’s investments. Sound returns on 
BIS Review 68/2009 
 1
these  investments  will  help  us  cope  with  future  financial  commitments  linked  to  an  ageing 
population.  
But at the same time as the wave of an ageing population flows towards us with its demand 
for public services and increased consumption, we also should ask if investments in Norway 
could  be  an  alternative to  those  we  make  in international  financial  markets.  And  clearly,  a 
good  argument  could  be  made  for  investing  more  in  schools,  universities  and  research  to 
develop  our  human  capital.  But  that  should  be  possible  in  any  case,  given  the  increased 
spending the fiscal rule already allows for.  
It  could  also  be  argued  that  we  should  invest  more  in  our  domestic  infrastructure,  for 
example  roads  and  highways.  This  may  be  important  for  regional  reasons.  But  on  the 
margin, these investments are probably not adding very much to our economic growth. To 
illustrate  this  point,  the  net  present  value  of  road  projects  in  the  new  10-year  national 
investment  plan  is  estimated  at  some  minus  NOK  20  billion  after  positive  effects  on  road 
safety and the environment have been taken into account.1  
Among  other  important  tasks  in  coming  years  and  decades,  the  government  would  need 
return  from  financial  assets  to  provide  for  future  pensioners.  We  can  probably  expect  that 
productivity  and  real  wages  will  continue  to  grow  in  parallel,  and  future  pensioners  would 
most  likely  want  to  take  part  in  that  welfare  gain.  This  may  imply  that  government 
expenditures will increase more than the overall growth in the economy, as the number of 
pensioners is growing fast and the demand for healthcare also will be higher. Although real 
wages  increase,  it  will  not  be  easy  to  raise  the  tax  level.  Thus,  the  government  will  need 
return from financial assets to finance the increased expenditure for pensioners. 
International capital markets have played a crucial role in allowing us to follow the strategy 
for  extraction  of  petroleum.  We  drew  heavily  on  borrowing  opportunities  abroad  when  the 
petroleum industry was being built up. We did the same in order to expand welfare schemes 
and to finance the countercyclical policy of the mid-1970s and the early 1990s. Over the last 
decade and a half, international capital markets have enabled us to convert national oil and 
gas resources into equities and bonds abroad in the Fund.  
The  implementation  of  our  investment  strategy  is  dependent  on  free  capital  movements.  I 
would like to remind the audience that only some twenty five to thirty years ago we had very 
rigorous capital restrictions ourselves. For instance, Norwegians could only purchase foreign 
equities through a fixed pool established in the 1960s (by using the so-called “security dollar” 
market),  and  foreigners’  investments  in  Norwegian  equities  were  strictly  regulated  and 
actually  limited  to  NOK  50  000  per  person  until  1979.  That  ceiling  was  raised  to 
NOK 1 million in 1979. 
Experiences  over  the  past  year  may  cast  doubt  on  the  effectiveness  and  benefits  of 
international  capital  markets.  Nevertheless,  history  has  seen  a  number  of  deep  financial 
crises,  and  it  is  my  belief  that  market  conditions  will  also  return  to  normal  this  time.  I  am 
confident that private entrepreneurship and public limited companies will continue to exist as 
the primary organisational bodies for commercial activities. Owners and investors will also be 
needed in the years to come. But capitalism will have to adapt. After all, the willingness to 
trust the free play of market forces in finance has been seriously impaired. 
International stock exchanges lost more of their value in 2008 than in any other single year in 
recent history. Absolute results, especially with regard to equities, were highly unusual. Many 
investors have suffered losses. As a result of this experience, required returns will be higher 
in the future. An investor such as the Government Pension Fund – Global will earn more in 
the long term because of wide fluctuations in equity values. 
                                                 
1   National Transport Plan 2010–2019 (St.meld.nr.16 (2008-2009). 
2 
 BIS Review 68/2009
is 
important  advantage 
The Fund has a longer investment horizon than the vast majority of other market participants. 
The  important  question is  therefore how  sound today’s  investments  will  prove  to  be  in  the 
long term. The government now owns close to one per cent of the global business sector. 
This represents real value that will provide a return reflecting both global economic growth 
and the risk related to fluctuations in equity prices. 
Another virtue of the Fund is the strict division of labour between the Norwegian government 
as  owner  and  Norges  Bank  as  the  manager.  The  bank  has  been  given  a  clear  mandate 
which regulates our responsibilities as the operational manager of the Fund.  
The  Fund  has  important  distinguishing  characteristics  which  form  the  basis  for  the 
investment strategy. The most important are its size and long-term investment horizon. Our 
potential to achieve results as an investor lies in turning these factors to the Fund’s benefit 
through  active  strategies,  and  our  most 
the  possibility  of 
implementing these strategies at low cost.  
Our owner expects added value from active ownership. It is important that large institutional 
investors such as Norges Bank exercise their rights as minority shareholders. In our dealings 
with  companies,  our  legitimacy  and  influence  depend  on  us  being  seen  as  a  long-term 
investor pursuing financial interests.  
It  is  clear  to  me  that  the  quality  of  the  investment  management  organisation  can  only  be 
ensured  by  pursuing  excellence  in  all  parts  of  the  investment  activities.  To  build  an 
organisation which aims to be average will only assure mediocrity. 
The  financial  crisis  revealed  that  many  institutions  based  their  strategies  on  short-term 
funding.  When  credit  was  no  longer  available,  many  business  models  collapsed.  Heavy 
losses were passed on to owners and investors. 
The situation for savings in the Fund is different. We have had to record losses on equity 
investments and active credit investments. However, the Fund has no traditional liability side 
and liquidity risk is low. The growing risks in the market did not force us to make changes 
that would have resulted in huge realised losses for our owners. 
The final results of our strategies through the troubled waters of the financial crisis cannot be 
deduced from the quarterly results at the peak of the crisis. Actually, the Fund has spent the 
last few quarters increasing its ownership in companies worldwide. As for credit, values are 
not lost as long as borrowers fulfil their obligations. The Fund is prepared to retain ownership 
of  its  illiquid  investments  until  they  mature  in  a  few  years  time.  Moreover,  unless  the 
economic outlook goes from bad to considerably worse, the Fund will record a substantial 
excess return in years ahead from holding on to assets that the market has priced down due 
to a collapse in liquidity and fear. In fact, as the global economy seems to be stabilising, this 
effect is already evident.  
Let me conclude by underlining the topic of this conference: “Investing for the long run”. The 
Fund is a long-term savings plan and capable of riding out large swings in the markets. This 
is the very foundation of the investment strategy. Our ability to adhere to this strategy in a 
critical phase – even if this should last for some time – is crucial if the Fund is to deliver the 
returns we expect in the longer term. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 68/2009 
 3
