Petar Goshev: Brief overview of the financial crisis and its impact   
Opening  speech  by  Mr  Petar  Goshev,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  the  Republic  of 
Macedonia,  at  the  international  economic  forum  “Faster  towards  the  European  Union”, 
organized  by  the  Economic  Chamber  of  the  Republic  of  Macedonia,  Ohrid,  2  November 
2008. 
 Honorable President Azevski, 
Dear presidents, business leaders, honorable excellencies, ladies and gentlemen. 
Let me thank Mr. Azevski for the given honor to speak in front of you this evening, in this 
exceptionally turbulent, exciting and at the same time challenging period in the economic and 
financial history of the world. From the invitation I can read that I have the honor to address 
representatives  of  ten  countries  in  the  region,  primarily  people  who  face  all  sorts  of 
challenges in solving the puzzles from the real economic life, every day. From the statistics I 
looked through, I may conclude that I have the pleasure to speak in front of representatives 
of  nearly  64  million  citizens  (63.89  in  2007),  whose  GDP  was  around  507  billion  Euros 
altogether  in  2007,  as  opposed  to  the  GDP  of  40,000  billion  achieved  by  the  world  (i.e. 
1.27% of those 40,000 billion), in front of the representatives of the 64 million citizens who 
during the same year exchanged goods and services with the rest of the world in the amount 
of 295 billion Euros, as opposed to the 20.4 thousand billion of realized foreign trade of the 
whole world, i.e. a share of 1.43%. Since the European Union has realized GDP of 12.34 
thousand billion of the world's 40,000 (which means around 30%), our share, i.e. the share of 
the 10 countries, participants in tomorrow's conference, in the GDP of the 27 EU Member 
States, equals 4.5%. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I  do  not  present  these  figures  for  pure  statistical  reasons.  It  was  agreed  with  president 
Azevski to give you a brief overview of today's hottest issue, "the financial crisis in the world". 
Management of this crisis, as well the response of each of us individually and jointly of the 
region, is directly related to the answer to the question in the focus of tomorrow's conference: 
How to go faster towards the EU? The figures that you are very well aware of, and I only 
reminded of them, indicate that: we were not in a position to cause the latest world financial 
crisis,  that  we  are  not  in  a  position  to  solve  it,  but  that  we  are  definitely  bearing  the 
consequences from it for a simple reason: borders are open. Balance of payments current 
accounts  are  100%  liberalized.  Varying  from  country  to  country,  the  export  and  import  of 
goods  and  services  participate  with  over  50%,  up  to  nearly  100%  in  the  domestic  GDP. 
Capital accounts are also 100% liberalized in some of the participants in the conference, the 
others are close to that. Both individually and all together we are absorbers of the shocks 
coming from the rest of the world, and that rest of the world is 98.75% of the world population 
(we are only 1.25%); 98.57% of the foreign trade, 98.73% of GDP in 2007. Therefore it is 
important for us to penetrate as close as possible to the nature of the current financial crisis, 
to  the  necessary  and  true  answers  to  the  question  how  it  should  be  managed,  which  are 
primarily sought and ought to be found by the developed countries, what lessons are to be 
drawn  from  this  crisis,  what  will  be  the  damage  for  the  region,  what  is  the  best  way  to 
cushion part of the inevitable impact as successfully as possible. 
What has actually happened? 
Starting from August 2007, the world was lapped by an intensive financial disorder, turmoil. 
Once again the trigger was pulled with a severe downward turn in the USA. First, "Fannie 
Mac" and "Freddie Mac" were taken into conservatorship. The following weekend "Lehman 
Brothers" turned out to be incapable of finding a buyer and they went bankrupt. This shocked 
the market, which expected that it will be saved by the government, as it was the case with 
BIS Review 18/2009 
 1
"Bear Stearns" in the beginning of the year. Then, "AIG" had to be rescued after the rumors 
about the size of its losses incurred by agreements for commercial debt securities. Hence, 
the  pressures  increased  enormously  for  the  other  dealers  in  securities.  Then,  Secretary 
Paulson revealed the initial plan of 700 billion $ for purchasing assets in order to support the 
banking sector. However, this did not eliminate the doubts. 
The pressures grew in Europe, too. In September, Dexia, Fortis and Hypo Real Estate had to 
receive an urgent capital injection, mainly from the governments. In England, the authorities 
facilitated the quick consolidation in the mortgage sector by having Abbey Santander buying 
Alliance  and  Leicester,  they  supported  some  mergers  in  the  construction  sector  and 
suggested a merger of LTSB and HBOS. Finally, at the end of September, the transparent 
authorities  in  England  intervened  in  order  to  solve  the  rising  difficulties  in  Bradford  and 
Bingley,  by  transferring  the  deposits  and  the  branch  network  to  Abbey  Santander  and  by 
undertaking  the  remaining  assets  and  liabilities  in  public  ownership,  and  subsequently 
closing them in an organized manner. 
All analysts perceived the events on the financial markets as something unseen ever since 
the great financial crisis in the period 1929-1933 of the previous century. As early as in the 
second half of September the companies and non-banking financial institutions accelerated 
their  withdrawal  even  from  the  short-term  financing  of  the  banks,  and  the  banks  were 
increasingly losing the confidence for extending loans to each other. The costs of financing 
grew  tremendously.  Many  institutions  could  make  only  overnight  borrowing.  The  credits  to 
the real sector almost stopped. On the financial markets, the trust to the others plummeted to 
a point below which the investors sought their way out mainly in the government instruments, 
for example US Treasury Bills, which at a certain point had a negative yield. Distrust went 
much  further  than  the  sub-group  of  vulnerable  banks.  The  reports  reveal  that  USA  and 
Europe have registered market losses from the asset loans of nearly 3 trillion US Dollars. 
Regardless  of  the  fact  that  all  these  losses  will  not  encumber  the  banks  and  can 
overemphasize the losses of those able to keep the debt until the maturity, the investors and 
their partners became very concerned about the amount of the actual losses in the banking 
and  trade  portfolio  in  broader  scope  of  the  institutions  and  their  capability  to  continue 
financing  their  business.  The  focus  of  the  concern  moved  from  prospective  profitability  to 
prospective survival. That is why the CDS premium increased to unprecedented ranges, the 
prices  of  the  banks'  shares  plunged,  while  the  money  market  overdried.  The  interbank 
lending  margin  deepened  dramatically,  the  lending,  as  I  mentioned  previously,  reduced  to 
only overnight loans. Around October 6 and7 even the overnight loans stopped.  
How did the central banks of the countries in the crisis' epicenter respond? 
In  the  beginning,  the  central  banks  were  committed  to  provide  liquidity  as  much  as 
necessary.  The  volume  of  the  liquidity  support  from  the  central  banks  of  USA,  England, 
Europe was without precedent in the history so far. It included a wide spectrum of measures, 
including  the  long-term  repo  based  on  broad  spectrum  of  collaterals  and  introduction  of 
special  liquidity  patterns  enabling  the  banks  to  swap  illiquid  assets  for  Treasury  Bills  for  a 
period of up to three years. Incredible, unseen till now. However, some knew, others maybe 
did  not,  that  is  far  from  sufficient.  That  the  liquidity  injecting  has  vital  role  only  to  delay, 
prolong  the  immediate,  forthcoming  collapse.  That  such  steps  can  help  to  overcome  the 
crisis only until the elimination of the actual reasons that were spreading the distrust. Also, to 
help understanding the severity of the fundamental problem and to postpone the inevitable 
day for calling to account. "Exactly as the high temperature, the fever (as Mervin King wrote) 
is by itself a symptom for the basic condition, thus the freezing of the interbank and money 
markets was a symptom for deeper structural problems in the banking sector". That is why 
another group of measures had to follow. The new, additional measures were designed to 
eliminate  the  fear  arising  from  the  thought  and  the  facts  that  the  banks  are  insolvent.  To 
ensure that the banks have enough capital to survive the harsh economic plummeting and 
hence, to enable them to continue lending on normal criteria for the good credits. With a fully 
2 
 BIS Review 18/2009
solvent  banking  system,  guarantees  may  be  given  without  exposure  of  the  tax  payers  to 
unacceptable risk (just to mention that the British tax payers currently have larger claims in 
the form of bank assets, as collateral maintained by the Bank of England, than the total value 
of the banks' capital in England). That is the reason why the morning of October 8, the Prime 
Minister of England and the Minister announced the plan for recapitalization of the banking 
system, which was then, one way or another, followed by others in the world, primarily USA 
and Europe. 
More precisely, why did this radical plan have to follow?  
When the financial turmoil commenced (in August 2007), the markets of numerous financial 
instruments, including the MBS (mortgage-backed securities), ceased functioning. They dried 
out. Most of the analysts thought that it is on a temporary basis. But, the time passed and the 
markets failed to reopen. It became clear that the problem is much bigger. The concern that 
insolvency is in question was rising and it was verified. Actually, it became evident that the 
main problem is solvency and sustainability of the financing model. That is why the liquidity 
injecting  was  only  intended  to  buy  some  time.  The  securitized  mortgages,  polling  of 
mortgages  sold  through  securities,  including  the  infamous  US-sub-prime  mortgages,  were 
traded on the market during the upward trend in the prices of apartments and houses, and 
when the interest rates were low, it disguised the risks of the core loans. With securitization 
of  mortgages  in  such  a  volume,  the  banks  have  transformed  the  liquidity  in  their  loan 
portfolios. They financed that by wholesale borrowing. But when the defaults multiplied, and 
the prices of the apartments dropped, firstly in the USA, and then wider, the investors had to 
reassess the risks inherent to these securities. Observed as more risky, they lost their value. 
The demand for these securities plunged. For the same reasons, the value of the mortgage 
portfolio went down. The value of their assets reduced, whereas the value of the liabilities 
which  remained  unchanged.  The  negative  effect  increased  with  the  very  high  level  of 
borrowing  compared  to  the  capital  (or  the  so-called  leverage),  with  which  many  banks 
worked, and with the fact that the banks have purchased a large quantity of securitized and 
more  complex  financial  instruments  from  one  another.  Not  only  the  real  evaluation  was 
difficult, but the distribution of the losses through the financial system was vague. The price 
of the banks' shares dropped. The capital became restricted. The market has sent a clear 
signal: the banks' capital was insufficient. The message? Recapitalize them immediately.  
What does the latest news from the market say? 
Since  the  recapitalization  packages  and  other  measures  have  been  announced,  signs  of 
improvement  occurred.  The  credit  default  swap  premium  indicator,  showing  the  markets' 
concern  for  the  banks'  solvency,  which  according  to  many  experts  is  the  most  significant 
individual diagnostic statistics, started to decline. Especially the CDS premium (commercial 
debt securities premia) dropped significantly.  
The progress with the guarantees, although gradual, is also encouraging, with more banks 
issuing  bonds  even  without  utilization  of  guarantee  (government)  being  registered.  The 
LIBOR spread also shrunk, and it is expected to "continue to narrow gradually compared to 
the period before the measures were undertaken" (this primarily pertains to England). 
Many  banks  continue  to  face  with  deleveraging  and  rebalancing  in  order  to  lower  the 
dependence on financing through the central banks.  
The stronger capital and financial position of the banks will be possible in a period of several 
years. In wider terms, the financial system remains to be under acute clench, tension. The 
real economic sector bears the consequences.  
The unemployment increases. The business financing is getting harder and more expensive. 
The  economies'  growth  decreases.  Also  the  so-called  emerging  economies  started  to  feel 
decline in the growth. It seems that we are entering into recession. The central banks of the 
developed  economies  transfer  the  focus  of  their  measures  from  the  inflation  control  to 
recession prevention.  
BIS Review 18/2009 
 3
What conclusions can be derived from this crisis? 
1. 
Nout  Wellink,  President  of  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  and 
Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Netherlands,  quotes  Charles  Kindleberger, 
saying in his famous book "Manias, Panics and Crashes", that the "financial crises 
are typically a result of extended accumulation of imbalances preceded by certain 
exogenous shock, or structural changes in the financial system. The examples are 
in  the  changes  in  the  political  environment,  new  regulations  and  financial 
innovations. These changes create new possibilities, but also, uncertainties and lack 
of  awareness  of  potential  risks  from  the  so-called  unknown-unknowns".  In  such 
environment,  says  Wellink,  "the  traditional  checks  and  balances  can  become 
inappropriate and can easily result in excessive risk".  
Really, we have faced:  
      Fiscal and balance of payments deficits, which failed to be treated because 
there  was  no  enough  good  will  for  that  in  the  globalized  world,  and 
accordingly to discuss about the foreign exchange rates.  
Huge imbalances in the financial sector, the dimensions of which grew to 
explosion. While the savings rates were decreasing with a limited rise in the 
households'  deposits  being  registered,  the  banks  were  filling  in  the  gap 
between the retail deposits and the credit growth by using sources from the 
wholesale markets. For example, in England, the gap between the lending 
to  clients  and  the  deposits  climbed  from  zero,  in  the  beginning  of  the 
century, to over British Pounds 700 billion in the first half of 2008, says Sir 
John Gieve, Deputy Governor of the Bank of England.  
The  expansion  of  the  banks'  aggregate  balances,  which  became  too 
padded out, exceeded the increase in the real economy. 
The  structure  of  the  liabilities  excessively  relied  on  the  maintained 
availability of the so-called wholesale funding, the maturity of which was on 
a short-term basis.  
The  discrepancy  between  the  capital  and  liquidity  on  one  hand  and  the 
risks on the part of liabilities, was constantly increasing.  
The financial innovations brought a lot of unknown-unknowns, together with 
the  fast  trend  of  globalization.  It  means  that  structural  changes  through 
financial innovations occurred. The best illustration for this is the so-called 
"originate-to-distribute" model, i.e. extending credits and claims distribution 
to  chained  financial  intermediates  and  end-users,  which  replaced  the  so-
called  "originate-to-hold"  banking  model,  i.e.  issuance  of  credits  and 
holding to their maturity. It really opened new possibilities for the financial 
system  to  broaden  and  manage  risks  and  maturity  mismatches.  Some  of 
the  banks  developed  this  model  into  a  complete  integrated  business 
strategy and primary source of financing of their activities. They securitized 
the loans, transferred the risk to others in a short period of time, in order to 
borrow capital over and over again, in order to sell the claim again, and to 
benefit promptly, but it definitely lowered the lending standards.  
2. 
4 
 What should be the medium-term agenda of response to the fundamental problems 
in the financial sector as a lesson from what we have witnessed so far? 
• 
Neither  macroeconomic  nor  sector  imbalances,  of  which  I  have  spoke 
before, must be tolerated for too long.  
The  banks'  risk  management  processes  and  procedures  must  be 
dramatically  improved.  This  includes  revision  of  the  existing  limits  on  the 
 BIS Review 18/2009
   for  defining 
the  main  elements  which  the 
banks'  exposure  to  certain  risks,  improvement  of  the  stress-testing 
procedures and elimination of the weaknesses related to risk management 
which  arise  from  the  investments  in  structural  financial  products.  We,  as 
National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia, have adopted new regulations 
related to these issues and we continue to work on that with our banks.  
Strengthening of the principles for liquidity risk management, especially in 
crisis.  Internationally,  steps  have  already  been  undertaken.  In  April  2008, 
FFS  prepared  a  Report  and  defined  67  activities  for  strengthening  the 
markets  and  the  resilience  of  the  institutions.  The  Report  pays  special 
attention  to  liquidity,  and  on  September  28,  the  Basel  Committee  on 
Banking  Supervision  announced  the  new  Principles  for  Sound  Liquidity 
Risk  Management  and  Supervision.  The  responsibility  is  located  with  the 
banks  and  supervisors.  We,  as  National  Bank,  have  already  passed  new 
regulations 
liquidity  risk 
management system of each bank must incorporate. The aim is to ensure 
level of liquidity which the banks will be able to use as source for covering. 
The  transparency  of  the  operations  of  the  financial  institutions  must 
increase through the type and the scope of the data these institutions will 
disclose. This will lead to increasing the confidence in the financial system. 
The  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  and 
for 
International  Accounting  Standards  have  already  undertaken  certain 
activities. 
The  regulation  on  determining  and  measuring  banks'  solvency  deserves 
special attention. The appropriate level of capital is the main anchor for a 
stable  banking  system.  When  this  issue  is  discussed  internationally, 
primarily  a  reference  is  made  to  the  New  Capital  Accord,  the  so-called 
BASEL  II.  It  is  being  criticized  even  before  its  full  implementation  and 
therefore  it  is  inappropriate  to  refer  to  it  as  one  of  the  reasons  for  the 
current  crisis.  However,  it  is  important  to  mention  that  draft  amendments 
have  already  been  prepared  as  a  response  to  the  new  developments. 
Those are, inter alia, the following: 
- 
the  Board 
Improvement of the manner of covering the risks arising from the 
use of structural financial products. 
Changes  in  determining  the  capital  necessary  for  covering  the 
risks from banks' trading portfolio, especially of those instruments 
characterized with lower liquidity on the market.  
Measures for reducing the effects from the economic cycles on the 
level of the capital requirement. The purpose is: to allocate more 
reserves  in  periods  of  expansion  in  order  to  provide  sufficient 
capital  for  covering  the  losses  in  times  of  crisis.  This  is  Spanish 
experience, known as "dynamic provisioning".  
Expanding of the type of data which the banks will be obliged to 
disclose. I would only like to mention that the National Bank has 
commenced  the  activities  for  implementing  BASEL  II  in  the 
Macedonian banking system.  
   Does and will this crisis have an impact on our economies? 
It already has and it will have an additional impact depending on its duration. The first blow is 
for the real sector. In all of our countries, depending on the structure of the economy, the 
export sector will be most severely hit.  
BIS Review 18/2009 
 5
Consensus Forecasts of October 2008, envisages that the growth of the US economy  will 
equal 1.4% and in 2009 it will be 0%, with a projected fall of the personal consumption and 
faster decline in the investment consumption. 
The growth of the EU economy for 2008 has been adjusted downward (1.4%) and for 2009 it 
is 0.6%. For an illustration, 60% of the Macedonian export is in the EU countries. The trading 
conditions have already deteriorated and we project further deepening of the trade and the 
current account deficits, whereas the increased minus between the exports and the imports 
will act toward reducing our growth rate. We expect a negative impact also in the capital and 
financial  accounts,  but  at  this  moment  it  is  difficult  to  quantify  it.  Banking  will  not  be  hit 
directly. There is no exposure in risk-bearing financial instruments. Deposits are dispersed 
according to the regulations. It will be very important for the banking in the region to work as 
hard as possible on preserving the confidence in the institutions, in the banks. To prevent as 
much as possible the speculations which may cause panic with the depositors. The region 
should respond to the world financial crisis and recession movements with increased mutual 
cooperation.  Both  economic  and  political.  The  reduced  export  demand  in  the  developed 
economies  could  be  partially  offset  with  the  increased  trade  and  mutual  increase  in  the 
private crediting in trading or financial terms. Tomorrow's conference has a chance to give its 
contribution to that. 
Is  the  world  financial  crisis  going  to  create  larger  innovations  in  the  international 
financial  system  and  order  and  are  there  any  developments,  redistributions  in  the 
international financial architecture and power in sight?  
I personally think that it is quite possible. Almost inevitable.  
From the one hand, it is becoming very clear that globalized markets and the total globalized 
economy  require  global  and  efficient  international  institutions  where  efficient  and  timely 
coordinated responses to the economic and financial risks and crises will be agreed. 
Just for example, Switzerland was obliged to support UBS and Credit Suisse. However, the 
problem is that they exceed its capacity, as in that case, and in many new such cases, with 
the financial giants in many other countries.  
Bush  and  Sarcozy  have  met,  and  the  issue  was  nothing  less  than  an  entirely  new  world 
financial  system,  immediately  encompassing  China,  India  and  Brazil.  These  countries  are 
included in order to help the West to overcome the recapitalization problems.  
The British Prime Minister Gordon Brown strongly supports new "Bretton Woods" Agreement 
for  the  international  monetary  system.  The  freedom  that  the  New  York  institutions  for 
residential sector financing enjoy currently, will vanish.  
It seems that the Arabian countries and Russia are not ready to discuss in this direction, or it 
just seems like that. But Putin, during his visit to China, suggested the Chinese leaders to 
initiate trade in their national currencies, showing explicit non-confidence in the US Dollar.  
The Persian Gulf countries are planning a monetary union. Will they take this step?  
According  to  all  this,  dear  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  we  are  living  in  an  exciting  historical 
period.  Yes,  it  is  crisis.  But,  probably,  it  is  not  by  chance  that  the  wise  Chinese  have  two 
signs for the crisis. The one denotes the danger, and the other one, possibilities. This crisis is 
a real possibility to learn a lot, in this case from the mistakes of the developed ones, in order 
to  build  a  financial  system  and  an  economy  which  will  be  less  vulnerable  to  any  future 
shocks.  
Thank you! 
6 
 BIS Review 18/2009
