Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: Three questions on monetary policy easing 
Lecture by Mr Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, at the University of Ancona, Ancona, 6 March 2009. 
 Introduction1
1.  
It is a pleasure to be at the University of Ancona and to be able to deliver this lecture. Thank 
you very much for the invitation. 
When  preparing  this  lecture,  I  found  myself  thinking  about  the  speech  I  gave  in  October 
2006. At that time, central banks worldwide were raising interest rates, so I thought it would 
be useful to consider the key challenges that monetary policy faced in a tightening phase. I 
asked the following three questions: When to start tightening monetary policy? At what speed 
to tighten? And when to stop tightening? 
Circumstances have changed. Now, central banks worldwide are lowering interest rates. So 
we could ask the same questions, but just change one word: When to start easing monetary 
policy? At what speed? And when to stop easing? Today I would like to share with you some 
thoughts on these three questions. 
In theory, the answers to the three questions should be simple. A loosening phase begins – 
and the interest rate should be cut – when downward risks to inflation prevail. The interest 
rate should be cut at a pace necessary to ensure price stability in the medium term. Finally, 
the easing phase should end when upward risks to inflation become dominant again. In the 
euro  area,  the  downward  or  upward  risks  to  inflation  refer  to  the  ECB’s  definition  of  price 
stability, which is less than, but close to, 2%. 
This may sound easy, in theory. In practice, how do you decide if upward or downward risks 
to  inflation predominate?  There  is no  silver  bullet,  no  single  indicator and  no  single  model 
that can do the job for monetary policy-makers. Any modern central bank looks at a variety of 
indicators,  at  a  variety  of  models,  and  uses  careful  judgement  to  reach  a  firm  view 
concerning risks to price stability. At the ECB, as you know, we find it useful to organise the 
analysis of risks to price stability on the basis of two complementary perspectives. First, in 
what we call the “economic analysis”, we assess the short to medium-term determinants of 
price developments. The focus is on real activity, price indexes and financial conditions. The 
second perspective, the “monetary analysis”, focuses on the medium to long run. Here we 
explore  the  medium  to  long-run  link  between  monetary  and  financial  variables  and 
inflationary  pressures  in  order  to  cross-check  the  economic  analysis.  We  employ  this  two-
pillar  strategy  when  forming  a  view  on  whether  upward  risks  or  downward  risks  to  price 
stability  predominate;  and  when  forming  a  view  on  whether  the  interest  rate  should  move. 
Regardless  of  the  phase,  the  analytical  process  remains  essentially  the  same  –  at  the 
beginning of the loosening phase or in the middle of it or even when we are about to decide 
to begin raising the interest rate. We adhere to the same principles whenever we make an 
interest  rate  decision.  We  do  so  because  we  believe  that  monetary  policy  is  about  a 
continuous commitment to price stability over the medium term.  
                                                 
1  
I would like to thank Luca Benati and Bartosz Maćkowiak for their contributions to this speech. I remain solely 
responsible for errors; the opinions expressed here are mine. 
BIS Review 27/2009 
 1
Forward-looking monetary policy 
from  different  monetary  regimes,  and 
2.  
Let me start by recalling why the conduct of monetary policy is more complicated in practice 
than  it  may  seem  in  theory.  The  key  factor  relates  to  the  transmission  lags  of  monetary 
policy. It is the time that it takes for changes in the interest rate to have an impact on other 
economic  variables,  in  particular  inflation,  which  amounts  to  several  months.  That  the 
transmission  lags  of  monetary  policy  are  significant  is  one  of  the  best-known,  most  robust 
findings  of  monetary  economics.  It  is  a  finding  supported  by  evidence  from  different 
countries, 
is  based  on  alternative  empirical 
methodologies.  
Milton  Friedman  used  perhaps  the  simplest  methodology  to  suggest  that  the  transmission 
lags  of  monetary  policy  are  significant.  In  a  paper  published  in  1972,  he  considered 
correlations between changes in monetary aggregates and changes in industrial production 
and in consumer prices indexes.2 He did so for a range of leads and lags, using data from 
the  United  States.  Friedman’s  main  finding  was  that  the  highest  correlation  for  industrial 
production was for the monetary aggregate M1 leading by three months and for M2 leading 
by six months. Furthermore, the highest correlation for consumer prices was for M1 leading 
by 20 months and for M2 leading by 23 months. Friedman reported this evidence almost 40 
years ago. It is remarkable that recent evidence confirms his findings. In the United States 
and in the United Kingdom, there is a lag of one to two years between changes in monetary 
aggregates and changes in inflation.3 In the euro area, the low-frequency component of M3 
growth leads the low-frequency component of HICP inflation by about two years. 
Techniques  more  sophisticated  than  Friedman’s  also  suggest  that  changes  in  the  interest 
rate have the strongest impact on the economy with a delay. I refer here to structural vector 
autoregression models, VAR models, and to dynamic stochastic general equilibrium models, 
DSGE models. The results from structural VARs for the euro area are in line with the findings 
based on data from the United States and elsewhere.4 Peersman and Smets, in a volume 
devoted to the transmission of monetary policy in the euro area,5 find that an increase in the 
interest rate is followed by a fall in output after about two quarters. The effect on output is 
strongest after about three to five quarters. The price level responds even more sluggishly 
than  output.  Furthermore,  it  appears  that  the  price  level  responds  more  slowly  in the  euro 
area compared with the United States. This is something you would expect, given that prices 
of individual goods and services appear to change less frequently in the euro area compared 
with  those  in  the  United  States.6  DSGE  models  estimated  from  euro  area  data  arrive  at 
results  broadly  in  line  with  those  from  structural  VAR  models.  For  example,  the  model  by 
Smets and Wouters shows hump-shaped responses of output and inflation to a change in 
the interest rate, with the strongest effects occurring with a delay similar to that found in VAR 
studies.7
The lags between changes in the interest rate and their impact on the economy appear to 
remain approximately constant over time and across different monetary policy regimes. For 
the euro area, Peersman and Smets find that they cannot reject the null hypothesis, namely 
that, since the early 1970s, the response of the economy to monetary policy has remained 
                                                 
2   See Friedman (1972). 
3   See Batini and Nelson (2001). 
4   The structural VAR literature on monetary policy is surveyed in Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (2000). 
5   See Peersman and Smets (2003). 
6   Altissimo  et  al.  (2006)  and  Maćkowiak  and  Smets  (2008)  survey  the  evidence  concerning  the  flexibility  of 
prices of individual goods and services in the euro area and in the United States. 
7   See Smets and Wouters (2003, 2005). 
2 
 BIS Review 27/2009
unchanged.8  It  might  be  possible  that  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  (EMU)  has  caused 
changes in the transmission mechanism and that such changes are too recent to be detected 
in statistical analysis. All we can say so far is that the available evidence points towards the 
absence of significant changes in the transmission mechanism. For example, a recent paper 
by  Boivin,  Giannoni  and  Mojon  reports  no  significant  changes  in  the  transmission  of 
monetary policy to inflation since January 1999.9
To  sum  up,  given  the  lags  in  the  transmission  of  its  effects,  monetary  policy  has  to  be 
forward-looking. A central bank has to try to forecast as well as it can developments in the 
economy over the so-called “policy-relevant horizon”. It also has to try to detect the risks to 
price stability and decide the appropriate level of interest rate to achieve its objective.  
When to start monetary easing? 
3. 
On the basis of the analytical framework described above, any loosening of monetary policy 
should in theory start before the cyclical downturn; it must start before economic activity falls 
below  its  potential  level.  But  to  start  the  loosening  cycle  inflation  expectations  need  to  be 
firmly anchored, in line with the central bank’s definition of price stability. If interest rates are 
reduced  in  a  context  of  rising  inflation  expectations,  there  is  a  risk  of  dis-anchoring  them 
which  would  jeopardise  the  effectiveness  of  the  policy  move.  This  refers  to  expectations 
prevailing not only in the financial markets but also in the goods and labour markets. In the 
financial  markets,  an  increase  in  inflation  expectations  would  lead  to  a  higher  long-term 
interest rate, possibly also in real terms, which would discourage investment – precisely what 
the monetary easing did not intend to achieve. In the goods market, if a cut in the interest 
rate  were  made  while  producers’  pricing  expectations  remained  high,  or  were  even 
increasing, it would further encourage mispricing behaviour in the face of a slowdown and 
would in fact exacerbate it. In the labour market, if wage behaviour were based on excessive 
inflation expectations, a rate cut could justify such expectations and excessive increases in 
remunerations, which would be a development out of line with the growth slowdown ahead. 
Therefore,  the  timing  of  any  policy  easing  has  to  be  linked  to  inflation  expectations,  in 
particular  longer-term  ones.  A  central  banker  has  to  extract  information  from  a  series  of 
indicators,  relating  to  the  financial  market,  professional  forecasts,  pricing  behaviour  by 
companies  and  by  wage  developments.  The  slower  inflation  expectations  adjust  to  the 
economic  slowdown,  the  slower  the  central  bank  will  adapt  monetary  conditions  to  the 
projected decrease in inflation risks over the policy-relevant horizon. In other words, it is not 
enough  for  the  central  bank  to  forecast  accurately  the  slowdown  of  the  economy,  and  the 
associated reduction in inflation risks, for it to act promptly. The private sector also needs to 
adjust its expectations accordingly. 
A consequence of the above is that in countries where the private sector, in particular the 
participants in the goods and labour markets, are less flexible in adjusting their pricing and 
wage behaviour in the face of exogenous shocks, the central bank will be slower in easing 
monetary  policy  when  confronted  with  a  slowdown.  This  might  explain  some  of  the 
differences  between  monetary  policy  in  the  US  and  the  euro  area.  In  the  former,  where 
markets are more flexible, the Federal Reserve may be able to cut interest rates in response 
to the economic slowdown at an earlier stage, because that slowdown is expected to bring 
about a rapid adjustment in pricing behaviour and expectations. In the euro area, however, 
price and wages tend to follow the cycle with a lag, and tend to keep rising for some time 
even after the slowdown starts.  
                                                 
8   See Peersman and Smets (2001). 
9   See Boivin, Giannoni and Mojon (2009). 
BIS Review 27/2009 
 3
Let us consider the most recent example of the start of the easing cycle in the fall of 2008. 
The euro area economy was projected to slow down in the second half of 2008 already for 
some time. For instance, in the ECB 2008 spring forecast, the euro area GDP growth was 
projected to fall from 2.7% in 2007 to 1.8% in 2008 and 1.5% in 2009. However, in spite of 
the projected slowdown, inflationary pressures continued to rise until the summer of 2008. 
Headline inflation rose to 4%, on account of strong commodity price pressures. Long-term 
inflation  expectations  derived  from  inflation-linked  bonds  increased  in  the  course  of  the 
spring,  from  levels  slightly  above  2%  to  levels  above  2.5%  in  June  2008.  Shorter  term 
forecasts from Consensus, the ECB’s Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF) and other 
private sector forecasts, as well as forecasts from international organisations, pointed to an 
inflation  rate  above  2%  in  2009.  Growth  in  compensation  per  employee  also  continued  to 
increase in the second and third quarter of 2008 at a rate above 3%, in spite of the expected 
economic slowdown. Under these circumstances, a premature interest rate cut would have 
signalled a passive acceptance of such behaviour, which would have translated into a further 
misalignment of price and wage expectations with respect to the underlying fundamentals. 
This would have made the current slowdown ultimately more severe.  
In  conclusion,  with  the  benefit  of  hindsight,  the  easing  cycle  often  seems  to  start  too  late. 
However,  this  apparent  delay  is  due  to  the  rather  inflexible  adjustment  of  private  sector 
expectations and behaviour. 
At what speed should monetary policy be eased? 
4.  
This question gives rise to a related one: is there an asymmetry between a loosening phase 
and a tightening phase? Should policy-makers react more strongly, and faster, to negative 
deviations  of  the  inflation  forecast  from  the  inflation  objective,  compared  with  positive 
deviations? 
Suppose  that  the  economy  was  characterised  by  a  linear  structure,  with  slowdowns  and 
recoveries  of  similar  intensity,  and  that  the  policy-makers’  preferences  have  the  form  of  a 
quadratic  loss  function.  In  this  case,  the  optimal  behaviour  of  policy-makers  should  be 
characterised  by  a  linear  response  function:  the  interest  rate  would  react  proportionally  to 
deviations of inflation and the output gap from desired levels.10  
In practice, we observe that monetary policy easing tends to be quicker and more decisive 
than  tightening.  This  means  that  one  of  the  two  simplifying  assumptions  mentioned  above 
does  not  hold.  Let’s  consider  first  the  policy-makers’  preferences.  An  argument  which  is 
sometimes advanced in support of asymmetric central bank behaviour is political pressure on 
central  banks,  which  might  be  stronger  during  an  economic  downturn  than  at  a  time  of 
inflationary pressure.  
Cukierman and Gerlach show formally how inflation bias in monetary policy can arise due to 
the  combination  of  asymmetric  concerns  about  positive  and  negative  output  gaps,  and 
uncertainty about the future state of the economy.11 This observation could explain why the 
loosening  phases  of  monetary  policy  reductions  are  generally  quicker  than  the  tightening 
ones. They obtain this result despite the fact that, in their model, the central bank’s desired 
level  of  economic  activity  is  the  same  as  potential  output.  This  is  in  contrast  with  the 
traditional  literature,  which  derives  inflation  bias  based  on  “time-consistency”  arguments, 
related to the fact that the central bank targets a level of economic activity which is above 
potential output.12  
                                                 
10   Svensson (1997) and Clarida, Gali, and Gertler (1999). 
11   See Cukierman and Gerlach (2003). 
12   See in particular Kydland and Prescott (1977) and Barro and Gordon (1983a, b). 
4 
 BIS Review 27/2009
Cukierman and Gerlach find support for their theory using data from 22 OECD countries.13 
This hypothesis nevertheless does not seem to be fully convincing for independent central 
banks. Surico (2007), for instance, produced evidence suggesting that the Federal Reserve 
exhibited asymmetric preferences only until 1979, with a stronger reaction of the interest rate 
to output contractions than to output expansions. 
In discussing his experience as Vice-Chairman of the Fed, Alan Blinder seems to suggest 
the opposite: “…in most situations the central bank will take far more political heat when it 
tightens  pre-emptively  to  avoid  higher  inflation  than  when  it  eases  pre-emptively  to  avoid 
higher unemployment”.14 This is also consistent with my own experience. There were many 
more pressures on the ECB – not only from political authorities but also from academics – at 
the start of the tightening cycle, at the end of 2005, than during the loosening cycle of the last 
few months. Needless to say, such pressures have obviously no impact on the conduct of 
monetary  policy.  Independent  central  banks  are  used  to  hearing  but  not  listening,  as  Wim 
Duisenberg once said. 
The alternative hypothesis is that the business cycle itself is asymmetric. Wesley Mitchell, a 
pioneer  of  business-cycle  analysis,  wrote  in  1927:  “…business  contractions  appear  to  be 
briefer and more violent than business expansions”.15 Modern economic analysis, based on 
data  from  the  United  States,  confirms  that  contractions  in  employment  tend  to  be  more 
abrupt than expansions.16 Furthermore, cyclical downturns may be associated with financial 
market  turbulence  and  blockages  in  some  segments  of  the  financial  market.  Under  these 
circumstances, it is appropriate for the central bank to ease monetary policy quite rapidly, in 
line with the expected slowdown of the economy.  
If inflation expectations remain well anchored during a downturn, it might be preferable to err 
on the side of quick and large reductions in the interest rates than on the side of gradualism. 
A  key  question  in  this  respect  is  how  far  down  to  go  –  an  issue  I’ll  consider  next.  But 
assuming that the central bank has a view on the appropriate level, it is preferable to reach it 
sooner than later. The reason is that the stimulatory effect of a rate cut is limited if agents 
expect  the  central  bank  to  implement  further  cuts.  Agents  may  delay  their  borrowing 
decisions for investment or consumption purposes until interest rates reach the lowest level. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  rate  which  matters  for  investment  or  borrowing  decisions  is  not 
necessarily the very short-term one. Longer-term rates also matter. An undesirable outcome 
of a decision to lower the policy-relevant interest rate would be to lead to an increase in the 
long-term  ones,  especially  if  it  is  so  in  real  terms.  This  would  discourage  investment  and 
penalise agents holding longer-term risky assets.  
To avoid such a problem, any policy rate cut has to be justified on the basis of the prevailing 
monetary  policy  framework.  Any  departure  from  such  a  framework,  through  erratic  and 
unexpected  behaviour,  would  risk  being  misinterpreted  by  economic  agents  and  be 
associated with a change in the underlying approach to monetary policy. If this happened, 
the predictability of monetary policy, which is an important asset for central banks, would be 
undermined.  For  instance,  sharp  unexpected  cuts  in  interest  rates  might  lead  market 
participants  to  expect  more  cuts  in  the  future.  They  might  also  fuel  expectations  that  the 
central bank has more (negative) information on the underlying economic developments or 
on  financial  market  risks  than  market  participants.  This  might  aggravate  pessimistic 
                                                 
13   See  Ruge-Murcia (2004) for  analogous evidence for the  G7 countries.  Surico (2007) finds that the Federal 
Reserve exhibited asymmetric preferences only before 1979, with a stronger reaction of the interest rate to 
output contractions than to output expansions, resulting in a positive inflation bias of 1.5%. 
14   See Blinder (1998). 
15   The quote is taken from Reis and McKay (2008). 
16   See Reis and McKay (2008). 
BIS Review 27/2009 
 5
expectations about economic and financial conditions, more than would be justified by the 
facts.  
Over recent months the deterioration in economic conditions, as reflected by the sharp fall in 
all  leading  indicators,  and  the  rapid  decrease  in  inflation,  has  created  room  for  fast  and 
substantial  cuts  in  interest  rates.  The  ECB  has  cut  its  key  policy  rate  by  275  basis  points 
since October last year. It has done so with unprecedented moves, including one move taken 
outside  the  regular  monetary  policy  meetings.  But  it  has  also  done  so  within  its  traditional 
monetary  policy  framework,  in  order  to  provide  market  participants  with  the  appropriate 
analytical anchor to understand its decisions. 
Another  issue  to  take  into  account  is  the  transmission  of  the  easing  impulse  of  monetary 
policy to the rest of the economy. It is not sufficient that the policy rate is reduced to ensure 
that  monetary  conditions  are  eased  accordingly;  the  stance  of  monetary  policy  has  to  be 
measured  also  on  the  basis  of  overall  financing  conditions.  The  monetary  transmission 
mechanism  might  be  impaired,  in  particular  because  of  financial  instability  or  problems 
incurred  by  the  banking  sector.  Under  these  circumstances,  it  is  not  sufficient  to  ease 
monetary  policy  by  lowering  official  interest  rates.  Measures  aimed  at  improving  the 
transmission of the monetary impulse to the rest of the economy need to be implemented, in 
order to affect the interest rates that are really relevant for borrowing and lending. 
Improving the functioning of the financial market is not a task that can be achieved by the 
central bank only. Central banks have adopted in recent months measures in this direction. I 
will not try to summarise what the ECB has done in this field, and what it intends to do in the 
future.  However,  without  a  more  decisive  action  by  the  fiscal  and  by  the  supervisory 
authorities to recapitalise the banking system and ensure more transparent accounting and 
loss  recognition,  the  transmission  mechanism  will  continue  to  remain  impaired,  thereby 
hampering  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy.  This  is  a  risk  for  the  credibility  of  central 
banks.  I  also  see  a  risk  that  the  other  authorities  hide  behind  the  activism  of  the  central 
banks and shirk from their own responsibilities. 
The  current  situation is  certainly  a good  example  of  how  a  very  accommodative  monetary 
policy  stance  in  major  industrial  countries,  aimed  at  supporting  economic  activity  and 
maintain  price  stability,  is  partly  impaired  by  financial  market  distress,  in  particular  in  the 
interbanking market. For instance, in the US, while the overnight rate is close to zero, the 3-
month Libor rate, which is a key rate in the transmission mechanism, is around 1.3%, in line 
with  the  2003-2004  period.  In  the  euro  area,  the  3-month  Euribor  rate  has  progressively 
fallen to a level slightly below the ECB policy rate, which was 2% until yesterday, and in line 
with the levels prevailing in 2003-2005. After yesterday’s decision to reduce policy rates to 
1.5%, the 3-month Euribor rate is expected to fall to a level very close to the one prevailing in 
the US. The overnight rate will also fall, presumably to levels just above 0.5%. 
When to stop easing? 
5.  
Finally, let me turn to the last of the three questions on monetary policy loosening: when to 
stop? This is like asking: what interest rate level should mark the floor of an easing cycle? 
The standard literature would suggest that the answer to this question depends on forecasts 
about the slowdown of the economy and the underlying inflationary pressures. The greater 
the output gap and the lower the inflation expectations, the more the interest rate should be 
cut to support the economy while maintaining price stability. The literature has rationalised 
such a relationship with the estimate of reaction functions or Taylor rules.17
                                                 
17   See for example Clarida, Gali, and Gertler (2000) and Lubik and Schorfheide (2004) for the United States, 
Clarida and Gertler (1997) for Germany, and Clarida, Gali, and Gertler (1998) for Germany, Japan, the US., 
the U.K., France, and Italy over the period 1979-1993. 
6 
 BIS Review 27/2009
In recent years, the discussion has been pushed further, with the suggestion that, given the 
uncertainties  surrounding  forecasts  and  estimates  of  output  gaps  and  inflation,  it  might  be 
appropriate to bring the policy-relevant interest rate substantially below the level consistent 
with the output gap and inflation, even to zero, its natural floor. Following this argument, as 
soon  as  the  economy  is  hit  by  a  negative  shock  monetary  policy  should  err  on  the 
expansionary  side,  this  risk  being  more  acceptable  than  the  opposite  one,  and  this  could 
contribute to bringing output rapidly back to a level consistent with potential. As output starts 
moving back to potential, the interest rate would then be increased again, back towards its 
longer-term level.  
This view is based on the assumption that a rate cut to an extremely low level would have no 
counterargument  and  would  actually  enable  the  economy  to  recover  more  quickly.  It  also 
assumes that when the economy starts recovering, the central bank would face no obstacles 
to increase rates quickly enough to avoid fuelling inflation.  
In this regard, some observations are useful. First, a policy which consists of cutting rates to 
very low levels and then increasing them rapidly as the economy reaches the trough of the 
cycle might not be very effective in supporting economic activity. Agents might be induced to 
borrow  more  aggressively  when  interest  rates  are  at  zero,  since  borrowing  conditions  can 
only worsen thereafter. Yet, if the main problem faced by the economy is insufficient lending, 
for  instance,  because  of  weak  confidence  in  the  banking  sector,  rather  than  insufficient 
borrowing, what matters most for the recovery is to convince savers to hold risky long-term 
assets to finance the banking system and the real economy. When rates are at zero, or close 
to zero, the likelihood that interest rates will move up increases, especially if the central bank 
is committed to increasing rates as early as needed. Such a rate increase would penalise 
those on the lending side who have invested in risky long-term assets, as they would suffer a 
capital loss. A policy of very low interest rate levels favours borrowers but penalises lenders, 
and if the economic crisis is associated mainly with a lending crisis, a policy of extremely low 
interest rate might be counterproductive. 
If  the  rate  cut  stops  at  a  higher  level,  consistent  with  the  medium-term  inflationary 
projections, it is more likely that the interest rate will remain at that (above zero) floor level for 
some time and lenders will be more inclined to invest in long-term risky assets. It might seem 
paradoxical, but a policy of persistently low interest rates might be more credible at a slightly 
higher level of interest rate than at zero. The ECB’s announcement that it will provide fixed 
rate liquidity allotments at unlimited amounts for a prolonged period should also contribute to 
the effectiveness of this signal. 
An excessively low level of interest rates may also have some unintended consequences in 
financial markets. It might drive some financial intermediaries out of business, for example 
money  market  funds  having  small,  but  strictly  positive  investment  fixed  costs  and  not 
anymore in the position to offer positive net returns to risk averse investors, thus risking large 
redemptions. It could also trigger a disorderly unwinding of investment in certain securities, 
causing  mis-pricing  in  other  market  segments.  This  problem  could  be  more  serious  in  a 
situation in which large parts of the financial system are already distressed. 
I would also like to emphasise that even at zero rates the central bank can stimulate lending 
by entering directly into the credit market, making up for the absence of lenders and buying 
long-term assets.18 This however implies that the central bank is willing to take the capital 
losses  that  are  likely  to  emerge  when  interest  rates  are  increased  again.  Furthermore, 
monetary policy becomes blurred with fiscal policy and risks crowding out the functioning of 
the private capital markets. In any case, its effectiveness in lowering long term interest rates 
and thus inducing other agents to buy risky assets has to be demonstrated. 
                                                 
18   See in particular the analysis of Bernanke, Reinhart, and Sack (2004). 
BIS Review 27/2009 
 7
Another way to avoid the first problem mentioned above is for the central bank to convince 
market participants that they will not suffer capital losses because interest rates will remain 
low  for  a  prolonged  period  of  time.  Agents  might  tend  to  have  such  expectations  if  they 
foresee  the  economy  remaining  in  recession  for  a  protracted  period  or  if  they  project 
deflationary pressures ahead. This would be reflected in a flat yield curve and low long-term 
rates. However, if the yield curve does not reflect such deflationary expectations, the central 
bank may try to flatten it by committing to maintain low interest rates for a prolonged period 
of time, and may try to convince agents that they can safely invest their savings in long-term 
assets  without  incurring  in  capital  losses.  Yet  such  a  policy  may  encounter  a  series  of 
additional problems. 
By committing to keep rates low for a prolonged period of time, the central bank is effectively 
reneging on its promise of raising rates as quickly as possible once the trough of the cycle 
has been reached. De facto, the policy of cutting rates to zero and then raising them quickly 
is not time-consistent. After rates have been cut the central bank has an incentive to keep 
rates  low  for  some  time  to  encourage  agents  to  invest  in  risky  assets.  Any  such 
inconsistency  between  what  is  signalled  or  announced  and  what  is  delivered  ex  post  can 
undermine the credibility of the central bank and hamper the transmission of monetary policy. 
Furthermore,  such  a  policy  is  a  prologue  to  maintaining  low  rates  for  a  very  long  time, 
possibly  too  long,  thus  favouring  the  formation  of  a  new  bubble.  Indeed,  when  rates  are 
increased  again  the  holders  of  long-term  assets  are  hit  by  a  capital  loss,  thus  negatively 
affecting the economy. The incentive is to delay such a hit until the economy is well on the 
way  to  recovery,  thus  avoiding  to  “rock  the  boat”.  Central  banks  are  often  accused  of 
increasing rates too early. In 1994 even the Fed’s modest interest rate increase was heavily 
criticised by financial markets, as it led to a sharp increase in market volatility and substantial 
losses for many market participants. In December 2005, when the ECB increased rates after 
holding them at 2% for over two years, politicians, academics and commentators criticised 
the decision, presumably on the grounds that it would undermine the recovery.19 This is not 
to say that central banks should not stand ready to reduce interest rates when needed, even 
to very low levels, but to suggest that, the longer they wait to raise rates when the economic 
situation so requires, the sharper will be the impact on the financial markets and thus on the 
economy. 
Finally, bringing rates to zero and committing to keep them there for as long as needed, even 
while  agents  rule  out  a  deflationary  scenario,  suggests  that  the  central  bank  knows  more 
than  the  private  sector  about  deflationary  risks.  This  message  is  risky  and  might  be 
misinterpreted  by  market  participants,  who  might  then  reconsider  their  own  expectations, 
thus increasing the probability of deflation. This could disanchor expectations and increase 
the probability of the worst-case scenario materialising.  
To sum up, cutting rates to zero, or to a level below what would be justified by the underlying 
fundamentals can lead to substantial problems. Overall, policy-makers have to balance type I 
and  type  II  errors,  and  their  potential  implications.  The  type  I  error  is  to  underestimate  a 
deflationary scenario, and keep rates too high, which would further exacerbate deflation. The 
type II error, in contrast, is to attach too high a probability to a deflationary scenario which is 
not on the cards, and to cut interest rates to a very low level, even zero. This would then 
create the next bubble and unleash a new crisis. Some would suggest that the type I error is 
always the gravest, with the most serious consequences for the economy, while the type II 
error can be more easily corrected. The arguments developed above show that type II errors 
can be just as grave and are not so easily reversible. 
                                                 
19   See in particular Blanchard and Giavazzi (2005). Subsequent events have clearly shown that the decision to 
raise rates, although controversial at the time, was in fact correct. The Financial Times, for example, pointed 
out, one year and a half later, that such decision had been “vindicated” by subsequent events (see Atkins and 
Barber, 2007). 
8 
 BIS Review 27/2009
Empirical  evidence  seems  to  support  that  type  II  errors  are  not  uncommon.  In  particular, 
Jarociński and Smets (2008) estimate a VAR model for the US, using real GDP, the GDP 
deflator,  the  federal  funds  rate,  and  so  on,  to  answer  the  following  two  questions.20  First, 
“Was US monetary policy excessively expansionary at the beginning of this millennium?” In 
other words, was the federal funds rate kept low for too long between 2002 and 2004, on 
average,  given  the  circumstances  prior  to  that  period?  The  answer  is  “Yes”.  The  second 
question is, “Did this expansionary monetary policy cause a part of the housing boom in 2004 
and  2005?”  Again,  the  answer  from  the  VAR  model  is  “Yes”.  Putting  the  two  answers 
together,  we  see  that  easy  monetary  policy  prompted  by  the  perceived  risks  of  deflation 
between  2002  and  2004  contributed  to  the  housing  boom  in  the  years  thereafter.  And,  I 
would add, the crisis we are currently in is the result of the bursting of that bubble. 
Obviously, we should be careful in interpreting these results. But they have been confirmed 
by other research.21 To be sure, these results are obtained with the benefit of hindsight. It is 
certainly possible – even likely – that, had the extent of the housing bubble been known two, 
three years ahead, the interest rate decision would have been different. On the other hand, 
this suggests that we should learn from the experience of the last decade. 
This doesn’t mean that policy-makers should not stand ready to cut rates to a very low level, 
even to zero, if the underlying conditions in the economy justify it, in particular if the economy 
is really on the verge of persistent deflation. And in such a case it is better to do it sooner 
rather than later. However, if the economy is not in that predicament, cutting rates to a very 
low level, even to zero, just to insure against the worst case scenario can have deleterious 
effects in both the short and long term.  
Conclusions 
6.  
To conclude, I have analysed today three questions that policy-makers have been pondering 
in recent months. The answers can be summarised as follows: first, start cutting rates when 
you  see  growth  slowing  down  but  not  before  inflation  expectations  abate  towards  the 
objective  of  price  stability;  second,  cut  rates  quickly,  but  within  a  credible  monetary  policy 
framework; third, be careful to avoid overshooting and cutting interest rates to too low levels.  
To  be  sure,  any  decision  on  the  easing  of  monetary  policy,  i.e.  when  to  cut  rates,  how 
quickly, and to what level, has to be based on an assessment of the underlying and projected 
economic developments. I do not believe it is sound to always err on the side of excessive 
easing,  and  to  insure  against  the  worst-case  deflationary  scenario,  even  when  such  a 
scenario is unlikely to materialise. It would be like giving antibiotics for curing any cough, just 
in case it could be bacterial. That medicine not only is not appropriate, but can also weaken 
the body and facilitate the attack of the real bacteria, when they finally come later on. 
To sum up, there are no safe bets for central banks. Before taking decisions, policy-makers 
must make every effort to diagnose the state of the economy and seriously evaluate all risks 
ahead. Only then should they draw up a carefully considered prescription.  
References 
Altissimo, Filippo , Ehrmann, Michael, and Smets, Frank (2006), “Inflation Persistence and 
Price-Setting  Behaviour  in  the  Euro  Area  –  A  Summary  of  the  IPN  Evidence”,  ECB 
Occasional Papers Series No. 46, June 2006. 
                                                 
20   See Jarociński and Smets (2008). 
21   See for example Taylor (2007) and Eickmeier and Hofmann (2009). 
BIS Review 27/2009 
 9
Atkins, Ralph, and Barber, Lionel (2007), “Under Fire, on Target”, on the Financial Times, 18 
May 2007, page 9. 
Barro,  Robert  J.,  and  Gordon,  David  (1983a),  “A  Positive  Theory  of  Monetary  Policy  in  a 
Natural Rate Model”, Journal of Political Economy, 91(4), 589-610. 
Barro, Robert J., and Gordon, David (1983b), “Rules, Discretion, and Reputation in a Model 
of Monetary Policy”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 12(1), 101-121. 
Batini,  Nicoletta,  and  Nelson,  Edward  (2001),  “The  Lag  from  Monetary  Policy  Actions  to 
Inflation: Friedman Revisited”, International Finance, 4(3), 381-400. 
Bernanke,  Benjamin,  Reinhart,  Vincent.,  and  Sack,  Brian  (2004),  “Monetary  Policy 
Alternatives  at  the  Zero  Bound:  An  Empirical  Assessment”,  Finance  and  Economics 
Discussion Series 2004-48, Federal Reserve Board. 
Blanchard, Olivier, and Giavazzi, Francesco (2005), “Credibility does not require dogmatism 
– only clarity of purpose”, at: http://www.voxeu.eu/ 
Blinder, Alan (1998), Central Banking in Theory and Practice, Cambridge, The MIT Press. 
Blinder, Alan S., Ehrmann, Michael, de Haan, Jakob, Fratzscher, Marcel, and Jansen, David-
Jan  (2008),  “Central  Bank  Communication  and  Monetary  Policy:  A  Survey  of  Theory  and 
Evidence”, Journal of Economic Literature, 46(4), 910-945. 
Boivin,  Jean,  and  Giannoni,  Marc  (2006),  “Has  Monetary  Policy  Become  More  Effective?”, 
Review of Economics and Statistics, 88(3), 445-462. 
Boivin,  Jean,  and  Giannoni,  Marc,  and  Mojon,  Benoit  (2009),  “Has  the  Euro  Changed  the 
Monetary  Transmission?”,  in  Daron  Acemoglu,  Kenneth  Rogoff  and  Michael  Woodford, 
editors, NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2008, Cambridge, The MIT Press, forthcoming. 
Borio,  Claudio  E.  V.  and  McCauley,  Robert  N.  (1995),  “The  Anatomy  of  the  Bond  Market 
Turbulence of 1994”, BIS Working Paper No. 32, December 1995. 
Canova,  Fabio,  and  Gambetti,  Luca  (2009),  “Structural  Changes  in  the  US  Economy:  Is 
There  a  Role  for  Monetary  Policy?”,  Journal  of  Economic  Dynamics  and  Control, 
forthcoming. 
Christiano, Lawrence J., Eichenbaum, Martin and Evans, Charles (2000), “Monetary policy 
shocks:  What  have  we  learned  and  to  what  end?”,  Taylor,  John,  and  Woodford,  Michael, 
editors, Handbook of Macroeconomics, North Holland. 
Christiano, Lawrence J., Motto, Roberto and Rostagno, Massimo (2007), “Shocks, Structures 
or Monetary Policies? The Euro Area and US after 2001”, ECB Working Paper No. 774, July 
2007. 
Clarida, Richard, Gali, Jordi, and Gertler, Mark (1998), “Monetary Policy Rules in Practice: 
Some International Evidence”, European Economic Review, 42(6), pp. 1033-1067. 
Clarida, Richard, Gali, Jordi, and Gertler, Mark (1999), “The Science of Monetary Policy: A 
New Keynesian Perspective”, Journal of Economic Literature, 37(4), 1661-1707. 
Clarida,  Richard,  and  Gertler,  Mark  (1997),  “How  the  Bundesbank  Conducts  Monetary 
Policy”, in Romer, Christina D., and Romer, David H., editors, Reducing Inflation: Motivation 
and  Strategy,  The  University  of  Chicago  Press  for  the  National  Bureau  of  Economic 
Research. 
Clarida,  Richard,  Gali,  Jordi,  and  Gertler,  Mark  (2000),  “Monetary  Policy  Rules  and 
Macroeconomic  Stability:  Evidence  and  Some  Theory”,  Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics, 
115(1), pp. 147-180. 
Cukierman,  Alex,  and  Gerlach,  Stefan  (2003),  “The  Inflation  Bias  Revisited:  Theory  and 
Some International Evidence”, The Manchester School, 71(5), 541-565. 
10 
 BIS Review 27/2009
De Long, Bradford J. (1997), “America’s Peacetime Inflation: The 1970s”, in Romer, Christina 
D., and Romer, David H., editors, Reducing Inflation: Motivation and Strategy, The University 
of Chicago Press for the National Bureau of Economic Research. 
Dolado,  Juan  ,  Pedrero,  Ramon  Marıa-Dolores,  and  Ruge-Murcia,  Francisco  J.  (2004), 
“Nonlinear Monetary Policy Rules: Some New Evidence for the U.S.”, Studies in Nonlinear 
Dynamics and Econometrics, Volume 8, Issue 3, Article 2. 
Eickmeier,  Sandra,  and  Hofmann,  Boris  (2009),  “Monetary  Policy  and  Private  Sector 
(Im)balances in the U.S.”, Bundesbank and European Central Bank, mimeo. 
Friedman,  Milton  (1972),  “Have  Monetary  Policies  Failed?”,  American  Economic  Review, 
Papers and Proceedings, 62 (1-2), 11-18. 
Kydland,  Finn,  and  Prescott,  Edward  (1977),  “Rules  Rather  Than  Discretion:  The 
Inconsistency of Optimal Plans”, Journal of Political Economy, 85(3), 473-491. 
Jarociński,  Marek  and  Smets,  Frank  (2008),  “House  Prices  and  the  Stance  of  Monetary 
Policy” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, 90(4), 339-365. 
Lubik, Thomas, and Frank Schorfheide (2004), “Testing for Indeterminacy: An Application to 
U.S. Monetary Policy”, American Economic Review, 94(1), 190-217. 
Maćkowiak,  Bartosz  and  Smets,  Frank  (2008),  “On  Implications  of  Micro  Price  Data  for 
Macro Models”, ECB Working Paper No. 960, November 2008. 
McCallum,  Bennett  (1995),  “Two  Fallacies  Concerning  Central  Bank  Independence”, 
American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 85(2), 207–211. 
Mitchell, Wesley C. (1927), “Business Cycles: The Problem and Its Setting”, National Bureau 
of Economic Research, New York. 
Orphanides, Athanasios, and Wieland, Volker (2000), “Efficient Monetary Policy Design Near 
Price Stability”, Journal of the Japanese and International Economies, 14(4), 327–365. 
Peersman, Gert, and Smets, Frank (2003), “The Monetary Transmission Mechanism in the 
Euro  Area:  More  Evidence  From  VAR  Analysis”,  in  Angeloni,  Ignazio,  Kashyap,  Anil,  and 
Mojon, Benoit, editors, Monetary Policy Transmission in the Euro Area, Cambridge University 
Press, chapter 2, 36-55. 
Primiceri, Giorgio E. (2005), “Time Varying Structural Vector Autoregressions and Monetary 
Policy”, Review of Economic Studies, 72(3), 821-852. 
Reis,  Ricardo,  and  McKay,  Alisdair  (2008),  “The  Brevity  and  Violence  of  Contractions  and 
Expansions”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 55(4), 738-751. 
Ruge-Murcia,  Francisco  J.  (2003),  “Inflation  Targeting  under  Asymmetric  Preferences”, 
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 35(5), 763-785. 
Ruge-Murcia, Francisco J. (2004), “The Inflation Bias when the Central Banker Targets the 
Natural Rate of Unemployment”, European Economic Review, 48(1), 91-107. 
Smets,  Frank,  and  Wouters,  Raf  (2003),  “An  Estimated  Stochastic  Dynamic  General 
Equilibrium Model of the Euro Area”, Journal of the European Economic Association, 1(5), 
1123-1175. 
Smets, Frank, and Wouters, Raf (2005), “Comparing Shocks and Frictions in U.S. and Euro 
Area  Business  Cycles:  A  Bayesian  DSGE  Approach”,  Journal  of  Applied  Econometrics, 
20(2), 161-183. 
Surico,  Paolo  (2007),  “The  Fed’s  Monetary  Policy  Rule  and  U.S.  Inflation:  The  Case  of 
Asymmetric Preferences”, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 31(1), 305-324. 
Svensson,  Lars  E.  O.  (1997),  “Inflation  Forecast  Targeting:  Implementing  and  Monitoring 
Inflation Targets”, European Economic Review, 41(6), 1111-1146. 
BIS Review 27/2009 
 11
Taylor,  John  B.  (2007),  “Housing  and  Monetary  Policy”,  panel  remarks  at  the  Kansas  City 
FED  conference  on  “Housing,  Housing  Finance,  and  Monetary  Policy”,  Jackson  Hole, 
Wyoming, August 30-September 1, 2007. 
12 
 BIS Review 27/2009
