K C Chakrabarty: India’s economic transformation – a snapshot 
Inaugural address by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at 
the Antique India Markets Conference 2009, Mumbai, 7 September 2009. 
The  assistance  provided  by  Mr.  Rajan  Goyal  and  Mr.  Sujit  K  Arvind  in  preparation  of  the  address  is  gratefully 
acknowledged.  
 Mr. K.V. Kamath, Chairman, ICICI Bank; Mr. Gagan Chaturvedi, Director, Antique Finance 
Limited;  Distinguished  participants  from  different  parts  of  the  World,  invited  guests,  Ladies 
and Gentlemen: 
It is a great pleasure for me to be here in such august company and distinguished group of 
people. I would like to thank the organisers for inviting me to share my thoughts on a topic 
which has great relevance for sustained growth of Indian economy. I would be sharing my 
views  with  all  of  you  during  this  session  on,  “India’s  Economic  Transformation”  and  its 
changing  contours  over  the  years.  Structural  reforms,  during  last  two  decades,  have 
unambiguously altered the economic landscape of the country. However, there are certain 
questions/ concerns that have always been a source of discomfort and have acquired a new 
relevance  as  economy  moved  to  a  higher  growth  trajectory  in  recent  years.  For  instance, 
how inclusive our growth process is? Are we moving towards affording a decent standard of 
life  to  people  at  large?  After  a  brief  discussion  on  how  the  reforms  brought  about 
transformation  in  different  sectors  of  the  economy,  I  would  like  to  flag  some  of  these 
contentious issues.  
The Indian economy has registered an impressive growth in recent times with GDP recording 
an average of 7.2 per cent growth rate in the current decade from an average growth of 5.7 
per cent in the nineties. A comparison with the earlier period since the beginning of the last 
century brings out the extent of economic transformation far more clearly. During the first 50 
years  of  the  nineteenth  century  the  average  GDP  growth  rate  has  been  just  0.7  per  cent 
which picked up to 3.5 per cent (popularly called as “Hindu rate of growth”) in the next three 
decades  after  independence,  before  progressing  to  higher  growth  path  in  the  recent 
decades. Concomitantly, the per capita income grew from a mere 0.2 per cent in 1900-1950 
and 1.1 per cent in 1951-1980 to 3.2 per cent in the eighties and 3.6 per cent in the nineties 
and further to 5.4 per cent in the current decade (Table 1).  
 
Transformation  of  the  economy  is  quite  apparent  from  the  noticeable  changes  that  have 
occurred in the sectoral composition of output. The share of services in the national income 
has steadily increased with corresponding fall in the contributions of agriculture and industry 
BIS Review 104/2009 
 1
to 
led 
that 
transformation  spreading  over  all 
over the years. Services sector now accounts for nearly two third of total output as against 
less than half in the early eighties and the nineties. Share of industry declined marginally to 
19 per cent from 20 per cent whereas share of agriculture registered steep decline from 38 
per cent to just 17 per cent (Annex 1).  
This  positive  performance  seems  to  be  an  outcome  of  reforms  encompassing  a  range  of 
measures 
the  sectors  of  economy. 
Transformation  brought  in  higher  degree  of  sophistication  and  efficiency  in  operations  of 
almost  all  the  sub  segments  of  real  as  well  as  financial  sectors.  Moreover,  domestic 
economy has become far more integrated with rest of the world which is visible not only in 
terms of growing trade volumes; financial flows from and to the outside world have also been 
steadily  growing.  There  are  some  experts  who  argue  that  India’s  economic  transformation 
needs  to  be  attributed  to  change  in  policy  orientation  of  1980s  rather  than  the  reforms 
undertaken  during  1990s.  Although  they  do  recognise  the  possibility  that  improvement  in 
1980s  might  have  run  out  of  steam  without  further  reforms  undertaken  in  the  nineties 
(Subramanian,  2007).  While,  academic  debate  as  to  what  triggered  the  economic 
transformation  might  still  be  unresolved,  there  is  a  near  consensus  with  regard  to  the 
important role of liberalisation process initiated in the early nineties in placing the economy 
on a higher growth path. 
The economic reforms that ushered in 1991 put forward some important political questions. 
The first question comes to our mind is about the timing of the reforms i.e. why the reforms 
were started only in 1991 and why not earlier? How the process of reforms continued despite 
changes in ruling party at the centre? How the direction of reforms sustained and remained 
irreversible despite various hurdles and hiccups? The answers to these questions, to a large 
extent,  lie  in  the  transformation  in  political  spectrum  of  the  Indian  electoral  democracy.  As 
one avid follower of India’s economy puts it, “ --- the greatest change in the last 10 years has 
been in the attitude towards reforms. Whereas the vocal supporters of reforms within India 
were  rare  during  the  1980s,  virtually  every  political  party  today  recognises  the  need  for 
continued reforms” (Panagariya, 2008).  
Besides  brewing  up  of  twin  economic  imbalances  i.e.  fiscal  crisis  and  external  payment 
crisis,  the  timing  of  reforms  may  have  been  the  outcome  of  international  and  domestic 
political events. Internationally, two major events questioned the basic premise of our earlier 
social  consensus  regarding  the  development  strategy.  First  was  the  collapse  of  erstwhile 
USSR  and  the  East  European  socialist  regimes  and  their  march  towards  market  oriented 
economic system. Second, the spectacular success of “socialist market economy” of China 
with the aggressive opening up since 1978 and its associated success in poverty reduction 
raised  concerns  about  the  efficacy  of  India’s  inward  orientated  strategy.  Domestically,  the 
appreciable growth performance of 1980s which was induced by hesitant liberalization efforts 
strengthened  the  hands  of  pro-liberalization  minority  in  the  bureaucracy  and  in  the 
Government  that  has  been  instrumental  in  systemic  reforms  in  the  1990s.  (Tendulkar  and 
Bhavani, 2007). 
The continuation of reform process and irreversibility of its direction could be explained with 
three interlinked political developments. First is the emergence of regional parties and their 
increasing  hold  in  national  politics.  Second  is  the  beginning  of  the  era  of  coalition 
Government at the centre. Third is the growing and widespread acceptance of the need for 
rapid  economic  growth  that  can  be  achieved  by  the  market-oriented  reforms.  Besides, 
competing  claims  of  various  states  on  benefits  of  economic  reforms  has  also  helped  in 
sustaining the momentum of reform process in India. During the reform period some states 
have  performed  well  while  others  have  been  lagging.  This  has  been  the  effect  of  policy 
environment  and  the  quality  of  governance  at  the  state  level.  Those  states,  which 
reorganized their policies in favour of market oriented reforms in tune with national economic 
policy framework and provided hassle free investment environment to entrepreneurs, have 
reaped more benefits of economic reforms in terms of high growth and per capita income. 
2 
 BIS Review 104/2009
Let  us  now  see  how  the  reform  process  has  brought  about  transformation  in  each  of  sub 
sectors of the economy.  
Economic transformation – real sector 
Real  Sector  Policy  measures  mainly  focussed  on  the  manufacturing  sector  in  the  early 
stages  of  reform  process.  Deregulation  of  industry  by  way  of  eliminating  licensing 
requirement, overhauling of public enterprises, enhanced role for private sector, abolition of 
MRTP Act, automatic approval route for foreign investment, elimination of quantitative import 
restrictions  and  reduction  in  tariff  rates  crated  a  conducive  environment  to  gear  up  the 
industry to face growing domestic as well as external competition to which it was exposed by 
the reform process. Another area where reforms came about at a later stage related to de-
reservation of large number of items that were earlier meant to be produced exclusively in 
the  small  scale  sector.  Measures  were  further  supplemented  with  liberalisation  of  foreign 
direct investment not only in terms of scope and proportion of foreign ownership but also with 
regard  to  procedural  details.  Industry  responded  to  reforms  by  undertaking  massive 
restructuring  of  its  operations  by  upgrading  their  technologies,  expanding  to  more  efficient 
scales  of  production,  resorting  to  mergers  and  acquisitions  both  within  and  outside  the 
country and refocusing their activities to the core competence. 
While  manufacturing  became  more  competitive  and  efficient,  major  impact  occurred  with 
respect  to  services  sector.  Entry  of  private  sector  and  foreign  direct  investment  that 
introduced competition and state of the art technology brought a sea change in the services 
sector. For instance, there was a time when telephone was a luxury and customers had to 
queue up for years to get a connection. Now it is available on demand. Mobile phones have 
reached to the lowest rung of the society and have played a key role in integrating the far 
flung  areas  to  the  main  stream.  Synergies  provided  by  the  manufacturing  sector, 
liberalisation  of  financial  sector  with  entry  of  private  sector  in  areas  hitherto  restricted  to 
public  sector  and  policy  initiatives  with  regard  to  information  technology  led  to  surge  in 
growth of services sector.  
The boom in information technology (IT) and Information Technology and Enabled Services 
(ITES) sector essentially led to an era of “services-led growth” as India emerged as global 
hub  for  BPO/KPO  services  in  the  world.  This  shift  in  the  pattern  of  off-shoring  services  to 
India was mainly due to inherent advantages of Indian IT/ITES sector. Advantage of the low 
wage  structure,  flexibility  due  to  time  zone  differences  and  access  to  a  larger  and  better 
talent pool provide globally active companies, India as an ideal place, to look for off-shoring 
services.  
In  the  last  two  decades,  the  Indian  IT/ITES  industry  has  contributed  significantly  to  Indian 
economic growth in terms of GDP, foreign exchange earnings and employment generation. 
Indian IT/ITES sector’s contribution to the country’s GDP has been steadily increasing. As a 
proportion of national GDP, the IT/ITES sector has grown from 1.2 per cent in FY98 to 5.2 
per cent in FY07.  
IT  to  an  extent  has  generated  the  employment  opportunities  for  both  skilled  and  unskilled 
labours. The direct employment in the IT/ITES sector was expected to be 2.0 million by end 
of FY08 and has been growing at a compounded annual growth rate (CAGR) of 26 per cent 
in the last decade. Studies have shown that for every one job created in the IT/ITES sector, 
four additional jobs are created in the rest of the economy.  
Socio-economic dimension, that lends uniqueness to India’s pattern of growth and economic 
transformation, is evident in the relative surge in the growth of industrial and services sectors 
vis-à-vis  primary  segment.  India  seems  to  have  skipped  the  stage  of  development  that 
emphasises growth in labour intensive industries with absorption of surplus labour from the 
agricultural  sector.  As  transformation  of  industrial  as  well  as  services  sector  has 
overwhelmingly  been  based  on  capital  intensive  techniques  requiring  skilled  manpower, 
BIS Review 104/2009 
 3
relative  shift  in  sectoral  incomes  have  been  devoid  of  any  commensurate  relocation  of 
surplus labour and more than three-fifth of population continued to draw its livelihood from 
the primary sector. 
While, foregoing has been the reason for general perception about relative isolation of the 
agricultural sector from the reform process; keeping with the growing openness, a series of 
policy  initiatives  transformed  this  sector  as  well.  Measures  relating  to  free  movement  of 
agricultural commodities, APMC Act permitting farmers to bypass the mandatory requirement 
of  sale  in  regulated  markets  and  relaxation  of  restrictions  under  Essential  Commodity  Act, 
1955  along  with  introduction  of  future  trading  brought  major  change  in  the  pricing 
mechanism. National commodity futures markets discover price rather manipulation by local 
traders. Banks in association with professionally managed godowns extend credit to farmers 
against  warehouse  receipts.  Large  consumer  goods  companies  directly  source  agricultural 
produce from the farmers. While, these developments have worked towards improving the 
terms of trade (TOT) for the agriculture sector, this trend in TOT was also strengthened by 
lowering of protection for the manufacturing sector and market determined price of foreign 
exchange.  With  economic  growth  and  rising  disposable  incomes,  the  consumption  basket 
has  changed  significantly.  Growing  demand  for  milk,  poultry  products  and  horticulture 
products, has induced substantial diversification towards allied activities which now account 
for nearly three fifth of total primary sector output.  
Economic transformation – financial sector 
Reforms  in  financial  sector  complimented  the  real  sector  developments.  Transformation  of 
financial  sector  not  only  assisted  in  sharp  pick  up  in  services  sector  growth,  it  helped  the 
manufacturing sector to progress from a high cost to internationally competitive segment of 
the  economy.  It  was  a  clear  recognition  of  the  role  of  market  forces  in  price  discovery 
process. Prior to these reforms, pricing of financial resources whether it is bank lending to 
corporates  or  borrowings  by  the  Government  or  the  foreign  exchange,  each  of  these  was 
determined broadly on the basis of regulator’s decision or an administrative fiat rather than 
its opportunity cost. Cost of resources hardly reflected the underlying situation of a capital 
scarce economy. Along with free pricing, removal of constraints in terms of participation, type 
of  instruments,  market  infrastructure  and  policy  environment  instilled  life  in  severely 
underdeveloped  financial  market  segments.  While  measures  were  taken  to  bring  financial 
markets at par with international best practices, it was a conscious decision to go slow on 
derivative  products,  a  stand  amply  vindicated  by  the  current  global  crisis  and  relative 
immunity of India’s financial sector. 
Money market 
Reforms  in  money  market  were  essentially  aimed  at  providing  avenues  for  the  market 
players to deploy or access to short-term funds and a platform to the monetary authority to 
modulate  liquidity  in  the  system.  Liberalisation  measures  in  money  market  preceded  the 
overall reform process as steps related to deregulation of interest rates and introduction of 
new instruments were initiated in the late 1980s itself. A series of steps over the years viz., 
freeing  of  interest  rates  on  call  and  other  money  market  instruments,  introduction  of 
Commercial Paper and Certificate of Deposit, exemption of inter-bank lending from reserve 
requirement,  introduction  of  screen  based  trading  and  rupee  derivatives  such  as  Interest 
Rate  Swaps  (IRS)  and  Forward  Rate  Agreements  (FRA),  enlarging  the  scope  of  Repo 
market by expanding the repo-able securities and eligible participants in the repo market and 
introduction  of  tripartite  repo  i.e.  CBLO  to  create  pure  interbank  call money  market,  led  to 
pick  up  in  activity  and  volumes  across  the  instruments  unlike  in  the  past  when  volumes 
remained concentrated in call money market.  
With  steps  towards  making  call  market  a  pure  interbank  market,  turnover  progressively 
switched from call money market to repo and CBLO market as daily average volumes in call 
4 
 BIS Review 104/2009
market  got  almost  half  in  2008-09  from  Rs.  23,161  crore  in  1999-00.  Volumes  in  case  of 
market  repo,  on  the  other  hand,  rose  by  two  fold  during  the  period  and  in  case  of  CBLO 
increase has been four-fold during 2004-05 to 2008-09. Volumes in other market segments 
such as CP and CD rose as well (Annex 2). Besides, reforms also lent stability to the market 
as  volatility  in  call  market  got  reduced  by  nearly  half  in  the  current  decade  from  levels 
prevailing in the nineties (Annex 3).  
Government securities market 
Till mid-eighties or the early nineties, Government had been borrowing at sub-market rates, a 
system sustained by captive market created by statutory reserve requirement. As a part of 
reforms, concessionary financing was eliminated with introduction of market auction system 
and  phasing  out  of  automatic  monetisation  with  Ways  and  Means  Advances  (WMA).  As 
yields became market related and Government started competing with the private sector in 
the  market  for  funds,  it  had  the  desired  impact  on  G-Sec  market  as  evident  by  rising 
secondary market activity and near emergence of market yield curve. The annual turnover in 
the market has grown from about Rs 2.8 lakh crore in 1998-99 to Rs. 56.3 lakh crore in 2007-
08. Yields on G-Sec now provide bench mark for pricing of securities in other markets. 
With  reforms,  G-Sec  is  no  longer  a  captive  market.  Investment  in  G-Sec  by  the  banks  is 
based on their commercial judgement rather than being dictated by the reserve requirement. 
Since  late  nineties,  banks’  holding  of  G-Sec  have  been  far  in  excess  of  the  reserve 
requirement with ratio going up to near 42 per cent of net demand and time liabilities. Banks 
progressively off-loaded excess investment in SLR securities from 2004-05 onward in view of 
the strong credit demand.  
Importantly, since April 2006, Reserve Bank does not participate in the primary segment of 
the G-Sec market that not only provide leeway to RBI in implementing monetary policy, the 
pricing of Government securities has also become far more market oriented. Beside these 
core aspects, development of the market was sustained by up-gradation of technology and 
market infrastructure with regard to settlement systems and trading systems and amendment 
of legislative provisions. 
Foreign exchange market 
Prior  to  reforms,  foreign  exchange  market  was  virtually  absent.  Exchange  earners  were 
required to surrender/ purchase foreign exchange from Reserve Bank at the reference rate. 
In  this  highly  regulated  system,  very  few  transactions  used  to  take  place  among  the 
authorised  dealers  and  trades  were  required  to  be  squared  off  by  the  close  of  the  day. 
Introduction of market based exchange rate regime, adoption of current account convertibility 
and relaxation on capital account, inter alia, in terms of permission to run open positions, to 
hold investments abroad and to retain foreign exchange along with introduction of hedging 
tools  (derivatives)  led  to  emergence  of  active  and  vibrant  foreign  exchange  market.  Now 
exchange  rate  is  flexible  and  market  determined;  and  capital  account  is  also  effectively 
convertible for the non-residents. 
It is interesting to note that with significant liberalisation on the capital account and given that 
market forces play a predominant role in determining external value of the rupee, there has 
not  been  large  volatility  in  this  market  barring  few  mild  episodes  related  to  turbulence  in 
global markets. Daily exchange rate volatility in rupee had been in the range of 1.6 to 4.7 per 
cent  during  2001  to  2006  as  compared  to  7.5  in  1993-95.  It  is  lower  than  most  of  the 
emerging economies. Computed from monthly NEER and REER indices, volatility in Indian 
market is one of the lowest in the world. Reform measures enhanced depth and liquidity in 
the  market  reflected  in  rising  turnover  and  moderation  in  bid-ask  spread  over  the  years. 
There has been more than four-fold rise in total annual turnover in foreign exchange market 
from US $ 1.3 trillion in 1997-98 to US $ 5.7 trillion in 2006-07.  
BIS Review 104/2009 
 5
Capital market 
Like other market segments, there have been far reaching changes in both the primary and 
secondary  market  segments  of  capital  market.  Primary  market  witnessed  a  significant 
movement  away  from  CCI  regime  imposing  primary  issuance  at  sub-market  rates  to  free 
pricing and book-building system along with mandatory disclosures as prescribed by SEBI. In 
the  secondary  market,  corporatisation  of  exchanges,  screen  based  trading  replacing  open 
outcry system, introduction of options and futures replacing erstwhile Badla System, rolling 
settlement replacing 14-day settlement cycle, dematting of securities with depository system 
created state-of-the art infrastructure comparable to best international practice. This not only 
integrated  stock  markets  across  the  country,  capital  market  became  far  more  efficient  as 
could be observed in terms of various parameters. There has been sharp increase in liquidity 
as  observed  from  fall  in  impact  or  transaction  cost  by  more  than  50  per  cent  and  rise  in 
turnover  ratio  from  20.3  per  cent  in  1991-92  to  a  peak  level  of  409.3  in  2000-01  before 
moderating  to  81.8  per  cent  in  2006-07.  Similarly,  in  terms  of  market  stability,  volatility 
declined from 3.3 in 1992 to 1.1 in 2005. 
Credit market 
Prior to reforms, banking operations both on the assets and liabilities side were governed by 
the guidelines set out by the regulator. With guidelines that ensured banks’ margin on cost 
plus basis, competition was virtually absent with no incentive to cut cost, raise efficiency or 
upgrade credit assessment skills. While, broad approach to reforms in this market has been 
to bring more competition along with higher flexibility and operational autonomy to the banks, 
stability of the players at the same time was intended to be ensured by emphasising building 
up of risk management capabilities and introduction of prudential regulation and supervision 
in line with best international practices. Moreover, widening of ownership due to stock market 
listing  and  associated  disclosure  requirements  brought  greater  market  discipline  and 
transparency  in  the  bank  management.  These  measures  transformed  the  banking  sector 
which could be discerned in measures of efficiency and soundness. There has been steady 
decline  in  intermediation  cost  of  banks  from  6.24  per  cent  in  1991-92  to  3.43  in  2006-07. 
DEA  based  estimates  of  efficiency  and  productivity  indicates  sharp  improvement  in 
operations  of  public  sector  banks  and  are  now  comparable  to  their  counter  parts  in  the 
private sector (RBI, 2008). Growing soundness of the banking sector is also evident in falling 
NPAs from 7.7 per cent in 1995-96 to about 1 per cent in 2006-07.  
While  banks’  operations  became  more  efficient,  there  has  been  considerable  progress  in 
terms  of  business  volumes  reflecting  growing  economy  and  reach  of  the  banking  sector. 
Over the past 11 years, on an average, deposits of scheduled commercial banks have risen 
at a compound growth rate of 17.7 per cent and advances grew by 21 per cent. Growth has 
been  higher  for  urban  and  semi  urban  branches  compared  to  rural  branches.  In  terms  of 
advances  to  various  sectors  of  the  economy  banks’  portfolio  has  been  quite  diversified. 
Since, 1998-99, while share of advances to agriculture sector remained around 12 per cent, 
there has been progressive diversification from industrial and wholesale credit to segments 
such as professionals, personal loans, etc (Annex 4).  
Payment systems 
The  rapid  developments  in  the  Payment  Systems  and  technology  have  led  to  the  deeper 
penetration in terms of increase in the number of direct and indirect participants and market 
players  in  the  payment  systems.  Among  the  major  developments  in  recent  times,  the 
enactment  of  the  Payment  and  Settlement  Systems  Act,  2007  empowering  the  Reserve 
Bank  to  regulate  and  supervise  payment  and  settlement  systems,  lay  down  policies  and 
providing a legal basis for multilateral netting and settlement finality, is of great significance. 
Another recent development has been to make free the use of other bank ATMs with effect 
from  April  1,  2009.  The  service  charges  for  “Electronic  Payment  Products”  and  outstation 
cheque  collection  have  also  been  rationalised.  “Speed  Clearing”  has  been  introduced  to 
6 
 BIS Review 104/2009
reduce  the  time  taken  for  realisation  of  outstation  cheques  to  T+1  or  T+2  basis.  “Cheque 
Truncation System (CTS)” has been introduced in cheque clearing since July 2008 in New 
Delhi. The coverage of Electronic Clearing System (ECS) has been increased to 75 centres 
and 89 banks with 55, 225 branches are participating in National Electronic Funds Transfer 
(NEFT) system. 
In  terms  of  payment  systems  growth,  the  Real  Time  Gross  Settlement  System  (RTGS) 
volume has gone up from a modest 17.67 lakh in 2005-06 to 133.6 lakh in 2008-09, and the 
value has gone up from Rs.1,15,40,836 crore to Rs. 3,22,79,881 crore in the corresponding 
period. The retail Electronic Clearing volume has gone up from 8.3 crore in 2005-06 to 28.06 
crore in 2008-09, and the value has gone up from Rs.1, 06,598 crore to Rs. 4, 16,419 crore 
in the corresponding period. The MICR Cheque Clearing volume has gone up from 101.59 
crore in 2005-06 to 114.04 crore in 2008-09, and the value has gone up from Rs.54, 01, 429 
crore to Rs. 58, 49, 642 crore in the corresponding period. The Cards volume has gone up 
from 201.77 crore in 2005-06 to 387.21 crore in 2008-09, and the value has gone up from 
Rs.39,783 crore to Rs. 83,903 crore in the corresponding period. The spread of ATMs has 
increased  from  34,  789  in  March  2008  to  43,  651  in  March  2009  and  the  volume  of  ATM 
transactions has increased from 17,797 lakh in 2007-08 to 23,530 lakh.  
These  data  suggest  that  the  payment  systems  in  India  are  robust,  sound  and  have  been 
growing at a steady pace.  
Economic transformation – integration with the global economy 
Another  aspect  of  developments  in  India’s  economic  arena  that  facilitated  the  process  of 
transformation  by  enabling  rapid  growth  of  services  sector  and  change  in  character  of 
manufacturing  sector  in  terms  of  efficiency  and  sophistication  with  considerable  outward 
orientation,  relates  to  its  growing  integration  with  rest  of  the  world.  The  most  common 
measure of country's integration with the global economy is its openness, i.e., its participation 
to international trade and capital flows. In India, the share of merchandise exports to GDP 
increased  from  5.8  per  cent  in  1990-91  to  15.1  per  cent  in  2008-09,  the  share  of 
merchandise imports as a per cent to GDP, on the other hand, increased from 8.8 per cent to 
25.5  per  cent  during  the  same  period.  On  the  import  side,  India's  demand  for  primary 
products, viz., raw materials and energy has increased since 1990s, which may be linked to 
its rapid economic growth. In 2007, India was the 7th largest oil importer of the world. While, 
India’s merchandise trade has grown many folds in the current decade, during 2008, India 
ranks  26th  in  the  world  with  a  share  of  1.1  per  cent.  However,  in  terms  of  commercial 
services exports, India ranks much higher at 9th in the world with a share of 2.7 per cent. 
In terms of capital flows, India has emerged as one of the most favoured destination of global 
investment  among  the  developing  and  emerging  market  economies.  Net  capital  inflows 
increased from US $ 7.1 billion in 1990-91 to $45.2 billion in 2006-07, and further to $108.0 
billion  during  2007-08.  The  gross  volume  of  capital  inflows,  however,  amounted  to  $428.7 
billion  in 2007-08  as  against  an  outflow  of  $320.7  billion. Overall,  India's  total  transactions 
with rest of the world (current receipts plus current payments plus capital inflows plus capital 
outflows) increased from 31.4 per cent of GDP in 1990-91 to 119.7 per cent of GDP in 2007-
08  before  declining  marginally  to  112.4  per  cent  of  GDP  in  2008-09  in  the  wake  of  global 
financial crisis.  
This growing integration of Indian economy with rest of the world was essentially an outcome 
of reform measures triggered by BOP crisis in 1991. Apart from a swift transition to a market 
determined  exchange  rate  regime,  other  important  reforms  measures  included  dismantling 
trade  restrictions,  moving  towards  current  account  convertibility,  liberal  inflows  of  private 
capital,  removal  of  restrictions  on  all  inflows  and  related  outflows,  as  also,  gradual 
liberalisation of certain restrictions on outflows. 
BIS Review 104/2009 
 7
Trade liberalisation 
De-licensing  of  virtually  all  intermediate  inputs  and  capital  goods,  progressive  reduction  in 
tariff  rates  along  with  permission  for  all  current  business  transactions,  expenses  for 
education and medical and foreign travel enabled India to accept IMF Article VIII obligation 
thereby  making  rupee  convertible  on  current  account  as  early  as  in  1994.  Further 
liberalisation with regard to import licensing for consumer goods and reduction of tariff rate 
below 10 per cent (barring few exceptions, such as automobiles) considerably enhanced the 
outward orientation of Indian economy. 
Capital account 
Although,  the  external  payment  crisis  of  1991  brought  to  the  fore  the  need  for  debt-
dominated capital account financing, the move towards full capital account liberalisation has 
been  calibrated  with  extreme  caution.  The  broad  approach  that  characterised  the  policy 
framework for capital inflows involved supplementing debt capital with non-debt capital with a 
clear prioritisation in favour of the latter.  
Foreign direct investment 
The major policy thrust towards attracting foreign direct investment (FDI) began in the early 
1990s  by  introduction  of  automatic  approval  route  that  empowered  RBI  to  approve  equity 
investment up to 51 per cent in select 34 priority industries. Currently, unless there is specific 
restriction  contained  in  FDI  policy,  100  per  cent  foreign  investment  is  permitted  under 
automatic route. A very limited number of activities fall under this category viz., retail trading, 
atomic energy, lottery business, gambling and betting. Again, the list for FDI cap below 100 
per  cent  is  also  quite  short  including  broadcasting,  print  media,  defence,  insurance,  asset 
reconstruction, investment companies, petroleum and air transport. 
Portfolio investment 
Portfolio investment both in primary and secondary market by Foreign Institutional Investor 
(FII) was opened up in 1992. At the same time, Indian companies were permitted to raise 
equity finance through issue of GDR and ADR in Europe and American markets. Policy with 
regard  to  FII  investment  was  progressively  liberalized  with  total  FII  share  in  equity  being 
raised from 24 per cent to total sectoral cap on foreign investment. For majority of sectors 
this  cap  is 100  per  cent.  Beside,  FII  are  permitted  to  invest  in  debt  instruments  issued  by 
both  private  corporate  and  the  Government,  and  they  can  operate  in  forward  market  to 
hedge their currency risks.  
External commercial borrowings 
Permission  to  access  ECB  further  contributed  to  integration  of  India’s  financial  sector  with 
rest  of  the  world  with  corporate  increasingly  compared  the  cost  of  financing  and  switched 
between ECB and the domestic bank credit. In the recent years, corporate have increasingly 
accessed commercial borrowings from abroad with net inflow on account of ECB rising from 
USD  5  billion  in  2004-05  to  more  than  USD  22  billion  in  2007-08.  However,  the  policies 
towards  ECB  that  inter  alia  include  bank  loans,  buyers’  credit,  suppliers’  credit  have  been 
guided  by  the  overall  consideration  of  prudent  external  debt  management  by  keeping  the 
maturities long, cost low and priority for projects in the infrastructure and core sectors.  
Outward flows 
In  line  with  liberalized  regime  with  regard  to  inflows,  outward  capital  flows  were  also 
progressively relaxed for both individuals and the corporate sector. Firms can invest abroad 
up to their net worth plus EEFC holdings and also the foreign exchange raised through ADR/ 
GDR.  This  has  been  a  key  policy  feature  that  enabled  emergence  of  Indian  MNCs  in  the 
recent years. 
8 
 BIS Review 104/2009
in  various 
for  a  brief  period 
financial  market  segments.  Except 
Global crisis and impact on India 
Growing integration of Indian economy with the rest of the world essentially explains as to 
why our economy couldn’t remain completely immune to global events though initially, India 
like many other emerging economies remained impervious to these global developments till 
as  late  as  October  2008.  But  for  the  equity  market  there  has  been  no  direct  impact  of 
meltdown abroad on Indian financial sector as reflected by liquidity, turnover and the price 
movements 
in 
September/October,  2008,  the  transactions  were  not  impeded  on  account  of  counterparty 
concerns since the Indian banking system is  prudently regulated, well capitalised and free 
from “toxic” assets. A closer look at the sequence of events would reveal that impact on the 
financial sector eventually emanated from the real sector which had a direct impact from the 
global financial crisis. 
Worsening of external environment with Lehman failure caused sudden sell-off in domestic 
equity markets by portfolio investors reflecting deleveraging. Consequently, the net outflow 
by portfolio investors was to the tune of US $ 14 billion during 2008-09 against the net inflow 
of  about  US  $  29  billion  in  the  preceding  year.  Besides,  access  to  external  commercial 
borrowings  (ECB)  and  trade  credits  was  also  rendered  somewhat  difficult.  Net  inflow  on 
account of ECB during 2008-09 was US $ 8 billion approximately as against US $ 22 billion 
in  the  preceding  year.  On  the  whole,  net  capital  inflows  during  2008-09  were  substantially 
lower  than  in  2007-08.  While,  reverse  flow  of  capital  and  constrained  external  financing 
adversely  impacted  the  funding  of  investment,  situation  also  got  worsened  with  downward 
movement in export of goods as well as services due to sluggish global demand. Growth in 
exports, on BOP basis, declined from a peak of 43 per cent in Q1 of 2008-09 to -9 per cent in 
Q3  and  further  to  -24  per  cent  in  Q4.  Though,  invisible  earnings  remained  stable  due  to 
resilience of software and remittances, current account deficit rose to 2.6 per cent of GDP in 
2008-09 compared to 1.5 per cent in the preceding year. This gradual slowdown in demand, 
both from within and abroad, eventually reflected in lower growth estimates for GDP in the 
3rd  and  4th  quarters  at  5.8  per  cent  with  overall  growth  rate  of  6.7  per  cent  in  2008-09 
against an average growth rate of 8.8 per cent in the preceding 5 year period.  
Slower  real  sector  growth  had  two  pronged  impact  on  the  financial  sector.  First,  with 
progressive slowdown of the real sector, bankers/ lenders have become apprehensive and 
concerned about  future  rise  in  non-performing  assets, secondly,  with  global  meltdown  and 
liquidity  constraints  abroad,  not  only  borrowers  have  increasingly  switched  to  rupee 
borrowings there has been increased demand for working capital with inventory level rising 
on account of slowdown in both domestic and external demand.  
The  series  of  unconventional  measures  swiftly  initiated  by  the  Reserve  Bank  helped  to 
assuage  liquidity  conditions,  while  reassuring  the  market  that  the  Indian  banking  system 
continued to be safe and sound, well capitalised and well regulated. Overall monetary policy 
stance has been to provide ample  rupee liquidity, ensuring comfortable dollar liquidity and 
maintaining a market environment conducive for the continued flow of credit to all productive 
sectors.  The  liquidity  situation  has  remained  comfortable  since  mid-November  2008  as 
evidenced  by  the  LAF  window  where  the  Reserve  Bank  has  been  absorbing  nearly 
Rs.1,20,000  crore  (USD  24.5  billion)  on  a  daily  average  basis  during  the  current  financial 
year. Government policy action to deal with the global crisis has been particularly noteworthy 
despite its impact on fiscal deficit. Sharp expansion of government expenditure supported the 
aggregate demand and moderated the impact on overall growth. However, to revert to the 
higher  growth  trajectory  and  to  ward  off  probable  inflationary  pressures  timely  exit  from 
expansionary monetary and fiscal stance would be critical.  
Do we deserve accolades? 
Structural transformation of almost all the segments of the economy during past two decades 
has brought discernible improvement in terms of efficiency, competitiveness and productivity. 
BIS Review 104/2009 
 9
This reflects in economy moving over to higher growth trajectory with far greater integration 
with  the  rest  of  the  world  in  terms  of  diversification  of  goods  and  services  as  well  as 
destinations  to  which  exports  are  being  made.  Of  course,  we  take  pride  in  these 
achievements and we together deserve it. But, there are enough reasons that we must not 
get  complacent  with  regard  to  transformation  process.  We  need  to  ask  ourselves  a  few 
relevant  questions.  How  far  the  benefits  of  economic  progress  have  percolated  down? 
Whether standard of living of the population has uniformly improved? Can we say economic 
transformation has brought prosperity to public at large and could we make dent in poverty? I 
would  like  to  flag  and  touch  upon  some  of  these  areas,  though  do  not  claim  to  know  the 
answer for all these questions. 
Poverty 
In terms of incidence of poverty measured on the basis of consumption expenditure, there is 
a definite improvement over the years, both in rural and urban areas. There is about 7 to 8 
percentage points decline in poverty ratio in 2004-05 over 1993-94 and improvement being 
more  predominant  in  the  rural  areas.  While  these  numbers  seems  to  suggest  satisfactory 
improvement,  divergence  in  income  distribution  has  worsened  further  since  the  early 
nineties. Gini Coefficient, a standard measure of income/ expenditure inequality, has further 
deteriorated  from  32.9  per  cent  in  1993  to  36.2  per  cent  in  2004.  Per  capita  spending  in 
absolute  terms  would  suggest  that  there  is  lot  more  to  be  done  to  fend  off  hunger  and 
malnutrition. As per NSS 61st round, per capita consumption expenditure of more than 60 
per cent population was less than Rs. 20 per day in 2004-05. 
 Socio-economic development 
Human Development Index (HDI), a widely used indicator of socio-economic conditions has 
placed India at 132 out of 179 countries in the world in the year 2006 – deterioration from a 
relatively  better  ranking  of  121  in  the  year  1990.  However,  in  terms  of  pure  index,  India’s 
position did improve from 0.28 in 1990 to 0.61 in 2006, which implies countries in the world 
have  grown  and  improved  their  lot  much  faster  than  India.  This  slip  in  ranking  is  broadly 
reflective of poor performance in terms of health and education services as shown by their 
respective individual rankings (Annex 5).  
Health 
Since,  a  transition  from  high  mortality  to  a  state  where  people  generally  lead  a  long  and 
ailment free life is a desirable social goal, India’s policies have been focussed on this aspect 
since  beginning  and  there  has  been  significant  improvement  over  the  years  in  terms  of 
various  demographic  indicators  such  as  life  expectancy,  infant  and  child  mortality  and 
maternal mortality rates. However, in terms of international comparison, India slipped further 
10 
 BIS Review 104/2009
in terms of ranking and continues to lag behind otherwise comparable countries in the world 
(Annex 6). A little dated report making international comparison of Health care infrastructure, 
places  India  below  the  average  of  low-income  countries  in  virtually  all  dimensions  (World 
Bank, 2001).  
Resources devoted to health services are much lower in India compared to other countries, 
even  if  both  public  and  private  sector  expenditure  is  taken  into  account.  Per  capita 
expenditure on health services in India in 2006 has been lowest among select countries – 
just half of that spent by Sri Lanka and a bit lower than that spent by Nigeria (Annex 7). While 
poor infrastructure is reflective of a small share of GDP devoted to health services, perhaps 
efforts need to be made in terms of public-private partnership and appropriate supervision of 
these services particularly in the public sector. To quote Report of the National Commission 
on  Macroeconomics  and  Health  (2005),  “The  existing  system  of  primary  health  care  has 
collapsed in several parts of the country, for reasons other than underfunding”. 
Education 
Indian constitution had set the goal of free education for all children aged up to 14 years by 
1960 and recently 86th constitutional amendment has made free and compulsory education 
to  all  children  of  6  to  14  years  of  age  a  fundamental  right.  Given  the  enormity  of  task, 
Government  envisaged  to  shoulder  primary  responsibility  for  provision  of  elementary 
education. Overall there is improvement as discernible from gross enrolment ratio, but as per 
one survey conducted in 2006, 8.9 per cent of children of age 6-14 years in rural areas still 
remain out of school. 
Although,  in  terms  of  public  spending  on  education,  there  has  been  some  marginal 
improvement from 3.6 per cent of GDP in 1993 to 4.1 per cent of GDP in 2002, reasons for 
poor outcome lies in sub-optimum performance of Government sector. Teacher absenteeism 
and  achievement  level  (test  score)  are  worse  than  low-end  private  schools.  As  per  one 
estimate  made  in  2006,  overall  teacher  absenteeism  has  been  at  25  per  cent  in  India, 
compared  with  16  per  cent  in  Bangladesh  and  29  per  cent  in  Uganda  (Chaudhary,  et  al). 
Apart from these, quality of education is another area of  major concern. As revealed by a 
recent survey assessing quality of education, less than 9 per cent of student in 1st and 2nd 
grade could read their respective text books. Nearly half of the 5th grade students are unable 
to  read  level  2  texts  (Pratham,  2006).  Improving  quality  of education  and  skill  formation  is 
important, if we want to encash demographic dividend and retain our edge in services sector. 
Significantly, China has made considerable progress in modernising its education system in 
recent years and its gross enrolment ratio is almost approaching twice that of India. 
Way forward 
Our discussion of process of transformation, its achievements as well as failures do throw up 
some issues which need to be addressed to ensure that economic progress is sustainable 
and it is percolating downwards for the benefit of the masses.  
Agricultural investment 
While structural transformation from agriculture to services led growth is a positive feature, 
corresponding  movement  in  terms  of  population  dependent  on  respective  sectors  has  not 
occurred. The share of agriculture in total income has dropped to 17 per cent; still more than 
60 per cent of population continues to draw its livelihood from this sector. This workforce also 
accounts for sizeable proportion of poor in the country. There is an urgent need to enhance 
investment in this sector not only to raise crop productivity, but also to create employment 
opportunities  outside  the  farming.  There  is  a  need  to  effectively  integrate  rural  sector  with 
urban economy by creating needed infrastructure viz., roads in rural areas; electricity; major 
and minor irrigation projects; and cold-storage chains to provide farm producers access to 
urban markets. Besides, there is also a requirement felt for bringing legal reforms with regard 
BIS Review 104/2009 
 11
to  tenancy  rights  that  would  give  a  boost  to  contract  farming  and  higher  productivity  in 
farming activity particularly when individual farm size is rapidly dwindling. 
Labour reforms 
The topic of Labour Laws Reforms in India has always been a matter of debate. The issue 
here is not to argue whether the Indian labour laws are rigid or liberal, but to find out whether 
the  existing  laws  are  helping  in  bringing  market  efficiency  and  productivity.  We  have  to 
analyse  whether  the  present  laws  are  encouraging  and  promoting  the  growth  of  the 
entrepreneurs, creating a positive investment environment and opportunities. There is a need 
to ensure relativity in the rights of management and workers to promote healthy milieu for 
growth  and  progress.  A  liberal  exit  policy  can  only  coexist  with  generous  unemployment, 
retraining benefits and severance pay. One may also need to examine and rationalise some 
extant labour regulations and provisions. For instance, let us see the pension laws where the 
workers get the right of pension only after having devoted a minimum numbers of years in 
the job which in fact restrain them from availing the best opportunities in the market.  
The  disparity  between  the  organised  and  the  unorganised  sectors  in  terms  of  working 
condition and protection of employees’ rights also needs to be bridged. There is a need to 
enhance protection of workers in the unorganised sector with provision of insurance, pension 
schemes, medical facility and vocational training. In recent times, it has been witnessed that 
those  countries,  especially  the  emerging  market  economies  where  the  labour  laws  have 
been rationalised and more awareness has been created in the unorganised sectors, have 
achieved  higher  growth  rate  of  economic  development.  If  we  are  able  to  address  these 
issues successfully, we will be deriving many folds benefits of the economic development. 
Let  this  critical  matter  be  debated  more  earnestly  at  all  levels  and  necessary  steps  taken 
urgently, as in India we do not have the type of social security mechanism put in place the 
way  the  developed  countries  have  done  so  in  their  respective  countries  to  take  care  and 
protect the interests of the people. 
Demographic dividend 
Beside technology, a key factor that has immensely added to India’s economic potential is its 
demographic  advantage  popularly  called  as  “demographic  dividend”.  Share  of  the  working 
age  group  (15-64)  in  the  population  has  been  increasing  since  the  1980s  and  has  been 
projected to be in the range of 62 to 68 per cent during first quarter of current century (Annex 
8). However, for these demographic changes to provide upward push to economic growth, it 
needs to be accompanied by process of skill formation and employment opportunities. This 
would  require  larger  investment  in  human  capital  formation  and  encouragement  to 
entrepreneurial  activities  by  creating  conducing  environment.  Current  performance  of  the 
education sector particularly in terms of quality leaves much scope for improvement.  
Financial inclusion 
While financial sector has performed appreciably in the past two decades with gains in terms 
of  efficiency  and  productivity,  it  has  grown  many  folds  in  terms  of  volumes  and  thereby 
supporting overall growth in the economy. However, it is increasingly being felt that benefits 
of  growth  have  not  percolated  down  to  the  under  privileged  sections.  While  a  number  of 
steps  have  been  taken  to  achieve  inclusive  growth  through  various  Financial  Inclusion 
initiatives,  these  are  constrained  by  several  factors.  High  operating  cost  in  remote  areas, 
small ticket size, lack of collaterals and illiteracy have obstructed the steps towards financial 
inclusion. Today, availability of banking technology has brought the realisation that poor are 
bankable with good business prospects and hence our efforts should be in the direction of 
using technology in such a fashion to make the transaction cost cheaper and affordable for 
the poor.  
12 
 BIS Review 104/2009
the  economy,  which 
Conclusion 
To sum up, the reform process that began economic transformation since the early nineties 
has been based on a broad political and intellectual consensus in the country that explains 
as  to  why  there  has  never  been  any  policy  reversal  since  then.  At  times  we  have  been 
accused to be slow in taking up reforms in certain sectors, but our stance with regard to pace 
and timing of reforms have been vindicated by our ability to ward off each of the crises that 
occurred in the global economy.  
improved 
Transformation  of 
competitiveness, efficiency and productivity across all the sectors, has led the economy to a 
higher  growth  trajectory.  Consequent  shift  in  relative  contribution  of  various  sectors  to 
national 
the 
transformation  process  and  the  need  for  an  “inclusive  growth”.  This  would  require  greater 
focus towards investment in the sectors namely, agriculture and allied activities, small and 
micro enterprises, and infrastructure. The use of technology to make available “affordable” 
financial and banking services to the under privileged sections of our society for achieving 
inclusive growth is also our noble but critical objective. Finally, economic transformation is an 
ongoing process that needs to be pursued with perseverance and consensus while keeping 
in view their aptness to the domestic economy. Let us hope that this process continues and 
gains pace in the coming years. 
Thank you. 
income,  however,  brought 
for  sustainability  of 
is  discernible 
the  concerns 
form  of 
fore 
the 
to 
in 
Select references: 
Acharya,  Shankar  (2004),  “India’s  Growth  Prospects  Revisited”,  Economic  and  Political 
Weekly (October 9). 
Ahluwalia,  Montek  (2002),  “Economic  Reforms  in  India  since  1991:  Has  Gradualism 
Worked?” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 16, no. 3:67-88. 
Banga, Rashmi, and Bishwananth Goldar (2004) “Contribution of Services to Output Growth 
and  Productivity  In  Indian  Manufacturing:  Pre  And  Post  Reforms”,  Working  paper  139, 
ICRIER. 
Bosworth,  B.,  S.M.  Collins  and  A.  Virmani  (2007),  “Sources  of  Growth  in  the  Indian 
Economy”, Working Paper 12901, NBER. 
Central  Statistical  Organisation  (2008),  National  Accounts  Statistics  (Base  Year  1993-94), 
(New Delhi: Government of India). 
Chaudhury, N. et al, (2006), “Missing in Action: Teacher and Health Care Worker Absence in 
Developing Countries” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 20(1). 
Economic Survey various issues, Government of India, http://indiabudget.nic.in. 
Goldar,  Bishwanath  (2004)  “Indian  Manufacturing:  Productivity  Trends  in  Pre-  and  Post-
Reform Periods”, Economic and Political Weekly November 20: 5033-42. 
Ifzal  A.  and  J.  Zhuang(  2007)  ,  “Inclusive  Growth  toward  a  Prosperous  Asia:  Policy 
Implications”, ERD Working Paper No. 97. 
Maddision, A. (2006): The World Economy, OECD.  
Mohan, Rakesh (2007), “India's financial sector reforms – fostering growth while containing 
risk”, Address at Yale University, New Haven, 3rd December 2007. 
Panagariya, Arvind (2004). “India in the 1980s and 1990s: A Triumph of Reforms,” Economic 
and Political Weekly, Vol. 39, No. 25:2581-94. 
Panagariya, Arvind, (2008), India: The Emerging Giant, Oxford University Press, New York. 
BIS Review 104/2009 
 13
Pratham (2006), Annual Status of Education Report (Rural), www.pratham.org. 
Reserve Bank of India, Report on Currency and Finance (2004-05). 
Reserve Bank of India, Report on Currency and Finance (2005-06). 
Reserve Bank of India, Report on Currency and Finance (2006-08). 
Rodrik, Dani, and Arvind Subramanian. 2005. “From “Hindu Growth” to Productivity Surge: 
The Mystery of the Indian Growth Transition,” IMF Staff Papers, vol. 52, No.2. 
Subramanian,  Arvind,  (2008),  “India’s  Turn:  Understanding  the  Economic  Transformation”, 
Oxford University Press, New Delhi. 
Tendulkar  S.D.  and  T.  A.  Bhavani  (2007),  “The  Political  Economy  of  Reforms:  Some 
Individual  Initiatives’  in  Understanding  Reforms:  Post  1991  India.  Oxford  University  Press, 
New Delhi. 
UNDP, Human Development Report, (various issues), Oxford University Press, New York. 
World Bank (2001), “Better Health Systems for India’s Poor: Analysis, Findings and Options”, 
Report No. 24124, Washington DC. 
 
 
 14 
   BIS Review 104/2009
  BIS Review 104/2009 
  15
16 
 BIS Review 104/2009
  BIS Review 104/2009 
 17
    18 
 BIS Review 104/2009
    19
BIS Review 104/2009 
 