Glenn Stevens: Recent economic and financial developments in 
Australia 
Opening statement by Mr Glenn Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the 
House of Representatives Standing Committee on Economics, Sydney, 14 August 2009. 
 Mr Chairman,  
Thank you for the opportunity to meet once again with the House Economics Committee. 
When we last met with you in February, international financial markets were stabilising after 
the extreme turmoil of September and October 2008. But the fallout of the financial events for 
demand, production and trade flows in the global economy was only then starting to become 
apparent in hard data. 
Household  and  business  confidence  around  the  world  had  been  severely  damaged. 
Households had sharply pulled back their discretionary spending, were tending to try to save 
more and were looking to pay down debts. Businesses had responded very quickly to a fall in 
demand by cutting production and costs, as well as shelving their plans for expansion. 
It was already fairly clear by February that the resulting contraction in economic activity in the 
December  quarter  was  severe  in  many  countries,  and  that  global  growth  had  suffered  its 
biggest setback in decades. Global trade was falling rapidly. 
Central banks had eased monetary policy aggressively, including taking short-term interest 
rates  to  near  zero  in  several  cases,  and  some  were  considering  or  implementing 
“unconventional” measures to deliver additional stimulus. Governments were putting in place 
fiscal stimulus packages. 
But these measures would take time to have their effect. In the short term, we worried that 
the March quarter outcomes for the global economy would be just as bad as occurred in the 
December  quarter.  For  some  months,  the  news  from  abroad  indeed  continued  to  be  very 
poor and global demand contracted further in the March quarter. 
Given the speed of the global deterioration, we believed that it would not be possible to avoid 
a  period  of  weakness  in  the  Australian  economy.  We  thought  that  Australia  had  several 
advantages – a sound financial system, an absence of the worst of the problems afflicting 
some  other  countries,  exposure  to  an  emerging  China,  and  scope  to  use  macroeconomic 
policies to cushion the downturn. The exchange rate had declined, which would also assist in 
adapting  to  weak  global  conditions  and  lower  commodity  prices.  So  we  could  reasonably 
have expected to have a smaller downturn than others. 
But it is very rare for Australia to escape an international downturn altogether, and it seemed 
quite  unlikely  that  we  could  avoid  one  of  this  size  completely,  despite  the  advantages  we 
had. For confidence here too had suffered a serious setback. This was clear in equity prices, 
in numerous surveys of sentiment and in the feedback we were receiving directly from firms. 
Australia was being affected through our trade, financial and business linkages with the rest 
of the world. 
Australia  was  doing  better  than  most  countries,  as  had  been  anticipated.  But  for  a  few 
months it was not clear how much comfort we should take from that, because the economic 
news from abroad seemed to be so dire. 
As  one  metric,  the  IMF’s  forecasts  for  global  output  in  2009  as  at  last  February  were  for 
growth  of  ½  per  cent.  That  was  already  a  marked  reduction  from  a  few  months  earlier. 
Subsequently  they  were  cut  further,  and  when  released  in  late  April  showed  an  expected 
contraction of over 1 per cent, which would be the weakest outcome for at least six decades. 
BIS Review 97/2009 
 1
Forecasts for Australia were inevitably marked down as well. The time of our May Statement 
on Monetary Policy was when the outlook for the local economy seemed weakest. 
In this environment, the possibility that we would need to ease monetary policy further was 
obviously canvassed. Financial markets expected as much, at one point pricing in a decline 
in  the  cash  rate  to  less  than  2  per  cent.  Yet  the  Board  had  already  aggressively  eased 
monetary  policy,  delivering  the  largest  reduction  in  debt  servicing  costs  to  households  in 
modern times. Interest rates were low, or in some cases very low, by historical standards. 
Substantial fiscal stimulus was also in train. These could be expected to provide significant 
support for demand. So even as activity abroad continued to contract, the Board had to be 
mindful  of  how  much  action  had  already  been  taken  in  anticipation  of  serious  economic 
weakness. Those measures would take time to have their full effect. But that lag could not be 
shortened by increasing the dosage. 
Accordingly, while keeping open the option of further easing, the Board kept a fairly steady 
setting  through  this  period.  There  was  one  further  small  decline  in  the  cash  rate  in  April. 
Apart from that, official interest rates have been unchanged since we last met, in contrast to 
the very sharp falls from September through to February. 
Where then do we stand at present? 
Things  abroad  hardly  look  rosy,  but  they  look  distinctly  better  than  they  did  a  few  months 
ago.  Conditions  in  international  financial  markets  have  continued  to  improve.  There  have 
been  occasional  reversals,  but  each  time  the  improving  trend  has  resumed.  Extreme  risk 
aversion  has  abated;  spreads  have  narrowed;  capital  markets  have  continued  to  thaw, 
though in some overseas cases this has relied heavily on central bank financing activities. 
Financial institutions in the United States and Europe have recorded better earnings. Global 
equity markets have risen to be nearly 50 per cent above the lows in early March this year. 
There has been substantial new issuance of debt and equity. Spot commodity prices have 
picked up. 
In  addition,  it  appears  that  the  really  large  contractions  in  major  countries’  GDP  are  now 
behind  us  and  that  global  output  is  levelling  out.  International  trade  and  global  industrial 
production have even recorded small gains over recent months. 
Of course there is a long way to go and there are notable differences in economic activity 
across regions. While the United States and Europe only now seem to be at or near a turning 
point, there has already been a marked improvement in economic activity in much of east 
Asia  and  India.  This  reflects  significant  stimulus  put  in  place  by  governments  in  Asia,  the 
dynamics  of  the  inventory  cycle,  the  healthier  state  of  their  financial  systems  and,  in  all 
likelihood, the inherently better secular growth prospects for these sorts of economies. The 
improvement has been most pronounced in China, but it is not confined to China. Korea, an 
important  trading  partner  for  Australia,  recorded  a  significant  bounce  in  GDP  in  the  June 
quarter. There are also some signs that the Japanese economy has begun to grow. 
The IMF has recently raised its outlook for world growth in 2010. These forecasts are actually 
still for pretty lacklustre growth overall. But it is the first time we have seen upward revisions 
for quite a while. 
The  Australian  economy  has  been  resilient,  with  economic  activity  looking  stronger  than 
expected a few months ago. Both foreign and local factors have been at work. 
Exports have been remarkably strong. For Australia, they grew over the six months to March, 
whereas for most countries exports fell sharply over that period. Further growth appears to 
have occurred in the June quarter. This reflects the strength of Chinese resource demand, as 
well as some other factors. The strength in demand from China has also been associated 
with the continuation of attractive prices for many commodities. Australia’s terms of trade are 
likely to be around 20 per cent lower than their peak last year. But they are about 45 per cent 
higher than the average for the two decades up to 2000. 
2 
 BIS Review 97/2009
Domestic demand has likewise held up pretty well, with retail sales posting a solid increase 
in  the  first  half  of  the  year.  Demand  for  housing  credit  is  up,  as  are  house  prices,  and 
purchases of some investment goods by firms rose mid year. Some of this strength is likely 
to be temporary, the result of fiscal measures that have a finite life. We are assuming, for 
example, that consumer demand, and first home buyer demand for finance, will be softer in 
the second half of the year. Nonetheless, the retreat from the extreme risk aversion of nine 
months ago, the partial recovery of household net worth and the impact of low interest rates 
will offer support to private demand over the period ahead. 
Survey  measures  of  business  confidence  have  lifted  from  the  very  low  levels  seen  at  the 
beginning of the year to be close to their long run average. Capacity utilisation has stopped 
its  sharp  decline.  Business  credit  has  been  falling,  but  this  has  been  more  than  offset  by 
increases  in  non  intermediated  sources  of  funding,  such  as  equity  raisings  and  corporate 
bond issuance. Overall business external funding has remained positive, at rates similar to 
those seen in the 2001 slowdown. For their part, financial institutions remain profitable, even 
though they are absorbing higher loan impairments. 
Business investment has been an area of expected weakness in forecasts for the Australian 
economy. This is still likely to be true, though recent liaison suggests that some firms may be 
re-thinking the size of their planned cuts to investment spending. Differences across sectors 
remain. The commercial property sector, for example, is part way through a difficult period of 
adjustment  to  valuation  and  leverage,  even  as  parts  of  the  mining  sector  are  back  to 
producing at full tilt to supply Chinese demand for resources. 
The labour market has seen considerably softer conditions, but there has been little decline 
in overall employment, and the rise in unemployment, to date, looks smaller than had been 
feared  a  few  months  ago.  As  several  commentators  have  pointed  out,  there  has  been  a 
significant fall in hours worked, as there usually is in downturns. This may be a more reliable 
gauge  of  the  extent  of  labour  market  weakening  than  employment  or  unemployment. 
Compared with some earlier cycles, the reduction in hours has occurred via a reduction in 
working  hours  across  more  people,  rather  than  being  concentrated  among  a  group  of 
unemployed. At this point, the fall in hours worked looks larger than what occurred in 2001, 
but not as large as in 1991. 
In  fact,  that  is  probably  a  reasonable  characterisation  of  this  downturn  in  general.  On  the 
basis of the information to hand at present, this may well turn out to be one of the shallower 
recessions Australia has experienced. 
Inflation,  meanwhile,  has  been  easing.  CPI  inflation  has  recorded  its  lowest  outcome  in  a 
decade, of 1½ per cent over the year to June. This compares with a peak of 5 per cent in 
September  last  year.  The  size  of  this  decline  overstates  the  real  extent  of  the  slowing  in 
prices, just as the peak figure overstated the real extent of inflation. Measures of underlying 
inflation remain a good deal higher, at around 3¾ per cent over the year, but they too are 
gradually  declining.  We  believe  that  decline  has  further  to  go,  though  in  the  medium  term 
inflation on either a CPI or underlying basis does not look like it will fall as far as we thought a 
few months ago. 
Looking  ahead,  some  of  the  recent  strength  in  private  demand  might,  as  I  noted  earlier, 
prove to be temporary. But at the same time, the contribution of public spending to growth in 
demand is likely to increase over the year ahead. More generally, there has been enough 
genuine  strength  in  the  run  of  recent  indicators,  sufficient  further  improvement  in  financial 
conditions  and  enough  recovery  in  sentiment  such  that  forecasters  are  starting  to  lift  their 
numbers for overall growth in both 2009 and 2010. 
As always, there are risks. 
The global economy could suffer another setback of some kind. The likelihood of that has 
declined in our view, but the possibility remains. 
BIS Review 97/2009 
 3
Perhaps the growth in China’s demand will falter. Certainly the pace of China’s growth seen 
in  the  June  quarter,  which  was  extraordinary,  cannot  continue  for  long,  and  may  be 
moderating now. We need to keep an eye out for potential imbalances in China. That said, 
though,  sceptics  about  the  growth  of  China  thus  far  may  have  underestimated  the 
determination of the Chinese policy makers to grow their economy over the medium term. I 
doubt that determination has lessened. 
Some of the pick up in global industrial output is clearly due to the cessation of inventory run 
down, and prospects for final demand will be important in determining the pace of ongoing 
growth. On that score, the process of balance sheet consolidation for both the private and 
public  sectors  in  some  major  countries  will  probably  weigh  on  growth  in  demand  there  for 
some time. (I am not talking about Australia here.) 
On  the  other  hand,  performances  of  both  Australia  and  some  of  our  key  trading  partners 
have  exceeded  expectations  in  the  recent  past;  that  could  continue,  particularly  if  rising 
confidence were to feed further demand, thus increasing income, and so on. That, after all, is 
the way most recoveries proceed, in cases where there is no strong headwind from financial 
restructuring. 
Moreover, just as the severity and simultaneity of the global downturn was unprecedented, 
so  was  the  speed  and  strength  of  the  policy  response.  Six  months  ago  the  possibility  of 
concerted global policy action delivering a surprise on the upside for global growth was noted 
by some, but it seemed perhaps rather theoretical at that point. It is a bit easier to imagine 
now.  
The forecasts outlined in the recent Statement on Monetary Policy give our best assessment 
of the most likely outcomes for Australia, contingent on these and other factors. Considerable 
uncertainty inevitably surrounds these numbers. Nonetheless if things continue to look like 
they  will  turn  out  in  that  fashion,  there  will  come  a  time  when  the  exceptional  monetary 
stimulus in place at present will no longer be needed. It will then be appropriate for the Board 
to do what it has done on past such occasions, namely to start adjusting interest rates back 
towards normal levels. The timing and pace of those adjustments, if and when they come, 
will be a matter of careful consideration, taking into account all the relevant factors, including 
what might be happening with market interest rates. 
Mr Chairman, last time we met, I said that there were reasonable grounds to think that the 
Australian economy would come through this very difficult episode as well placed as any to 
benefit  from  renewed  expansion.  That  remains  my  view.  The  economy  appears  to  be 
weathering a very large storm pretty well, and the community’s confidence about the future 
has improved commensurately. No doubt the future will pose its own challenges, but we are 
well placed to meet them. 
My colleagues and I now look forward to your questions. 
4 
 BIS Review 97/2009
