Anselmo L S Teng: Conference on human resources issues (closing 
remarks) 
Closing remarks by Mr Anselmo L S Teng, Chairman of the Monetary Authority of Macao, at 
the  12th  Conference  of  Central  Banks  of  Portuguese  Speaking  Territories  on  Human 
Resources, Macao, 16 September 2009. 
 Dear Delegates,  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
In the past two days, we have listened to a series of professional and indepth deliberations 
on the big topic of human resources. The knowledge imparted to us will no doubt provide 
food  for  further  thought  and  subsequent  practical  implementation.  I  am  here  today  not  to 
repeat  what  have  been  said,  but  to  present  to  you  my  observations  on  human  resources 
issues related to the recent financial tsunami.  
What caused the financial crisis which triggered a recession not seen since 1930? The post-
mortem report will tell you a number of reasons, such as excess liquidity, savings glut, carry 
trade etc. I would however share with you some of the causes which are related to human 
resources, the main theme of this conference.  
The most popular motto on the Wall Street before the financial tsunami was “greed is great”. 
Remunerations  of  originators,  traders  and  top  level  executives  were  based  on  profit  of 
current  period.  Such  a  policy  increased  appetite  on  the  part  of  employees  to  take 
unwarranted risks on behalf of the institutions they were working for.  
It is never too late to mend. After all, we all learn from mistakes. It is therefore imperative in 
human  resources  management  to  devise  a  fair  compensation  scheme  for  financial 
institutions. It is my personal conviction that compensation for risk taking should be based on 
the following principles:  
1) 
An executive compensation scheme should adequately reflect the performance of the 
executive in the medium and long term. Therefore, executives and traders should not 
be compensated based on current year revenue but the average income of a financial 
institution in a defined period. 
Executives and traders who are compensated on deals done basis should never get 
their shares immediately after the completion of the transaction. There should be a 
vesting period to make sure that the profits are not illusory.  
Compensation schemes based on deals done should be symmetrical. That is to say, 
when failures ensue, penalty should be imposed. This is to avoid the one way traffic 
of paying out enormous rewards once the transaction has been completed while the 
responsible staff would come out unscathed when the deal turns sour later.  
2) 
3) 
To avoid another financial tsunami, a financial institution should adopt a check and balance 
approach in management. In the heyday, deal makers in a financial institution are the golden 
boys.  They  tended  to  disregard  those  who  are  supposed  to  control  risks.  Normally,  when 
there was an argument over whether a certain deal should be done, the senior management, 
whose  year-end  bonus  may  depend  on  the  current  year  revenue,  or  who  are  more 
concerned with the profit and loss account of the institution, would invariably stand on the 
side  of  the  deal  maker.  This  is  usually  the  root  of  huge  losses  to  be  incurred  later.  To 
harness  risks,  the  risk  management  function  should  be  vested  with  more  authority.  The 
internal  control  function  should  go  to  board  level.  There  should  be  a  minimum  level  of 
knowledge of internal control to be required for all audit committee members. Knowledgeable 
internal controllers and anti-fraud experts may be hired by financial institutions to implement 
BIS Review 110/2009 
 1
risk-assessment  and  fraud  prevention  measures.  Measures  and  procedures  are  to  be 
implemented to prevent management overriding internal control systems.  
The greatest safety to ensure the stability however comes from self disciplined practitioners 
of  the  financial  sector.  Legislations  and  regulators  are  serving  merely  as  directions  and 
referees. It is the professional skills and ethics of practitioners which will give the greatest 
comfort and protection to a financial institution and hence the financial system as a whole. It 
is therefore the endeavour of human resources function to provide adequate training in these 
respects, especially ethics, in order to have a long term solution which warrants the stability 
of the financial system.  
Macao returned to China in 1999. This year is the 10th Anniversary of the founding of the 
Macao  Special  Administrative  Region.  Under  the  principle  of  “One  country,  two  systems”, 
“Macao people ruling Macao” and “High degree of autonomy”, Macao’s economy has grown 
by  leaps  and  bounds.  The  financial  sector  has  burgeoned  in  tandem  with  the  spectacular 
performance  of  the  overall  economy.  We  have  witnessed  a  surge  in  deposits,  assets  and 
profits  in  our  financial  sector.  Capital  adequacy  ratio  for  the  banking  sector  is  well  above 
what is required by the Basel Committee while non-performing loans ratio lingers at a low 
level.  Our  financial  system  is  not  immune  to  the  financial  tsunami  but  it  has  emerged 
unscathed.  There  is  however  no  ground  for  complacency.  The  financial  sector  and  the 
regulators  are  adopting  a  prudent  and  cooperative  approach  and  have  been  working  in 
harmony  in  the  best  interest  of  the  community.  We  are  doing  our  best  to  attract  qualified 
people to join the financial work force with a view to maintaining the stability of our financial 
system.  
Nowadays, the official languages of the MSAR are Chinese and Portuguese. In the wake of 
globalization, we have to utilize English as the medium language to communicate with other 
parts  of  the  world.  It  would  be  perfect  if  all  our  staff  are  conversant  with  3  languages. 
However, I should admit that personnel of such a qualification are very hard to find. We are 
striving  to  provide  training  to  our  practitioners  in  the  financial  sector  so  that  financial 
practitioners are well versed in at least two of them. We believe a good communication is a 
job half done.  
Last  but  not  the  least,  please  allow  me  to  express  my  heartfelt  thanks  on  behalf  of  the 
Monetary Authority of Macao to all participants and to my colleagues including, of course, Mr. 
António Félix Pontes, for the great effort in making this Conference a success.  
Finally, I do hope you will enjoy Macao and that we shall meet again in the not so distant 
future.  Meetings  and  conferences  held  in  Macao  embody  Macao  as  a  service  platform  for 
economic and commercial cooperation between China and Portuguese speaking countries.  
Thank you again, please enjoy the rest of your stay in Macau and have a pleasant trip home! 
2 
 BIS Review 110/2009
