Ben S Bernanke: Commencement address 
Speech  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve System, at the 2009 Commencement of the Boston College School of Law, Newton, 
Massachusetts, 22 May 2009. 
 I am very pleased to have the opportunity to address the graduates of the Boston College 
Law School today. I realized with some chagrin that this is the third year in a row that I have 
given  a  commencement  address  here  in  the  First  Federal  Reserve  District,  which  is 
headquartered at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston. This part of the country certainly has 
a remarkable number of fine universities. I will have to make it up to the other 11 Districts 
somehow. 
Along those lines, last spring I was nearby in Cambridge, speaking at Harvard University's 
Class Day. The speaker at the main event, the Harvard graduation the next day, was J. K. 
Rowling, author of the Harry Potter books. Before my remarks, the student who introduced 
me took note of the fact that the senior class had chosen as their speakers Ben Bernanke 
and J. K. Rowling, or, as he put it, "two of the great masters of children's fantasy fiction." I will 
say  that  I  am  perfectly  happy  to  be  associated,  even  in  such  a  tenuous  way,  with 
Ms. Rowling, who has done more for children's literacy than any government program I know 
of. 
I  get  a  number  of  invitations  to  speak  at  commencements,  which  I  find  a  bit  puzzling.  A 
practitioner, like me, of the dismal science of economics – and it is even more dismal than 
usual these days – is not usually the first choice for providing inspiration and uplift. I will do 
my best, though, and in that spirit I will take a more personal perspective than usual in my 
remarks today. The business reporters should go get coffee or something, because I am not 
going to say anything about the markets or monetary policy. 
Instead,  I'd  like  to  offer  a  few  thoughts  today  about  the  inherent  unpredictability  of  our 
individual lives and how one might go about dealing with that reality. As an economist and 
policymaker,  I  have  plenty  of  experience  in  trying  to  foretell  the  future,  because  policy 
decisions  inevitably  involve  projections  of  how  alternative  policy  choices  will  influence  the 
future  course  of  the  economy.  The  Federal  Reserve,  therefore,  devotes  substantial 
resources  to  economic  forecasting.  Likewise,  individual  investors  and  businesses  have 
strong financial incentives to try to anticipate how the economy will evolve. With so much at 
stake, you will not be surprised to know that, over the years, many very smart people have 
applied the most sophisticated statistical and modeling tools available to try to better divine 
the  economic  future.  But  the  results,  unfortunately,  have  more  often  than  not  been 
underwhelming. Like weather forecasters, economic forecasters must deal with a system that 
is extraordinarily complex, that is subject to random shocks, and about which our data and 
understanding will always be imperfect. In some ways, predicting the economy is even more 
difficult  than  forecasting  the  weather,  because  an  economy  is  not  made  up  of  molecules 
whose  behavior  is  subject  to  the  laws  of  physics,  but  rather  of  human  beings  who  are 
themselves thinking about the future and whose behavior may be influenced by the forecasts 
that  they  or  others  make.  To  be  sure,  historical  relationships  and  regularities  can  help 
economists, as well as weather forecasters, gain some insight into the future, but these must 
be used with considerable caution and healthy skepticism. 
In planning our own individual lives, we all have a strong psychological need to believe that 
we  can  control,  or  at  least  anticipate,  much  of  what  will  happen  to  us.  But  the  social  and 
physical environments in which we live, and indeed, we ourselves, are complex systems, if 
you will, subject to diverse and unforeseen influences. Scientists and mathematicians have 
discussed the so-called butterfly effect, which holds that, in a sufficiently complex system, a 
BIS Review 62/2009 
 1
small  cause  –  the  flapping  of  a  butterfly's  wings  in  Brazil  –  might  conceivably  have  a 
disproportionately large effect – a typhoon in the Pacific. All this is to put a scientific gloss on 
what you probably know from everyday life or from reading good literature: Life is much less 
predictable than  we  would  wish.  As  John Lennon  once said,  "Life is what  happens  to  you 
while you are busy making other plans."  
Our lack of control over what happens to us might be grounds for an attitude of resignation or 
fatalism, but I would urge you to take a very different lesson. You may have limited control 
over the challenges and opportunities you will face, or the good fortune and trials that you will 
experience. You have considerably more control, however, over how well prepared and open 
you  are,  personally  and  professionally,  to  make  the  most  of  the  opportunities  that  life 
provides you. Any time that you challenge yourself to undertake something worthwhile but 
difficult, a little out of your comfort zone – or any time that you put yourself in a position that 
challenges your preconceived sense of your own limits – you increase your capacity to make 
the most of the unexpected opportunities with which you will inevitably be presented. Or, to 
borrow another aphorism, this one from Louis Pasteur: "Chance favors the prepared mind." 
When  I  look  back  at  my  own  life,  at  least  from  one  perspective,  I  see  a  sequence  of 
accidents and unforeseeable events. I grew up in a small town in South Carolina and went to 
the public schools there. My father and my uncle were the town pharmacists, and my mother, 
who had been a teacher, worked part-time in the store. I was a good student in high school 
and expected to go to college, but I didn't see myself going very far from home, and I had 
little notion of what I wanted to do in the future. 
Chance  intervened,  however,  as  it  so  often  does.  I  had  a  slightly  older  friend  named  Ken 
Manning, whom I knew because his family shopped regularly at our drugstore. Ken's story is 
quite  interesting,  and  a  bit  improbable,  in  itself.  An  African  American,  raised  in  a  small 
Southern  town  during  the  days  of  racial  segregation,  Ken  nevertheless  found  his  way  to 
Harvard for both a B.A. and a Ph.D., and he is now a professor at MIT, not too far from here. 
Needless to say, he is an exceptional individual, in his character and determination as well 
as his remarkable intellectual gifts. 
Anyway,  for  reasons  that  have  never  been  entirely  clear  to  me,  Ken  made  it  his  personal 
mission to get me to come to Harvard also. I had never even considered such a possibility – 
where was Harvard, exactly? Up North, I thought – but Ken's example and arguments were 
persuasive,  and  I  was  (finally)  persuaded.  Fortunately,  I  got  in.  It  probably  helped  that 
Harvard was not at the time getting lots of applications from South Carolina. 
We all have moments we will never forget. One of mine occurred when I entered Harvard 
Yard  for  the  first  time,  a  17-year-old  freshman.  It  was  late  on  Saturday  night,  I  had  had  a 
grueling trip, and as I entered the Yard, I put down my two suitcases with a thump. I looked 
around at the historic old brick buildings, covered with ivy. Parties were going on, students 
were calling to each other across the Yard, stereos were blasting out of dorm windows. I took 
in the scene, so foreign to my experience, and I said to myself, "What have I done?" 
At some level, I really had no idea what I had done, or what the consequences would be. All I 
knew was that I had chosen to abandon the known and comfortable for the unknown and 
challenging. But for me, at least, the expansion of horizons was exactly what I needed at that 
time in my life. I suspect that, for many of you, matriculation at the Boston College law school 
represented something similar – a leap into the unknown and new, with consequences and 
opportunities that you could hardly have guessed in advance. But, in some important ways, 
leaving the known and comfortable was exactly the point of the exercise. Each of you is a 
different person than you were three years ago, not only more knowledgeable in the law, but 
also possessing a greater understanding of who you are – your weaknesses and strengths, 
your goals and aspirations. You will be learning more about the fundamental question of who 
you really are for the rest of your life. 
After  I  arrived  at  college,  unpredictable  factors  continued  to  shape  my  future.  In  college  I 
chose to major in economics as a compromise between math and English, and because a 
2 
 BIS Review 62/2009
senior economics professor liked a paper I wrote and offered me a summer job. In graduate 
school at MIT, I became interested in monetary and financial history when a professor gave 
me  several  books  to  read  on  the  subject.  I  found  historical  accounts  of  financial  crises 
particularly  fascinating.  I  determined  that  I  would  learn  more  about  the  causes  of  financial 
crises, their effects on economic performance, and methods of addressing them. Little did I 
realize then how relevant that subject would become one day. Later I met my wife Anna, to 
whom I have been married now for 31 years, on a blind date. 
After finishing graduate school, I began a career as an economics professor and researcher. 
I pursued my interests from graduate school by delving deeply into the causes of the Great 
Depression of the 1930s, along with many other topics in macroeconomics, monetary policy, 
and  finance.  During  my  time  as  a  professor,  I  tried  to  resist  the  powerful  forces  pushing 
scholars to greater and greater specialization and instead did my best to keep as broad a 
perspective  as  possible.  I  read  outside  my  field.  I  did  empirical  research,  studied  history, 
wrote theoretical papers, and established connections, usually in a research or advisory role, 
with the Fed and other central banks.  
In  the  spring  of  2002,  I  was  asked  by  the  Administration  whether  I  might  be  interested  in 
being  appointed  to  the  Federal  Reserve's  Board  of  Governors.  I  was  not  at  all  sure  that  I 
wanted to take the time from teaching and research. But this was soon after 9/11, and I felt 
keenly that I owed my country my service. Moreover, I told myself, the experience would be 
useful for my research when I returned to my post at Princeton. I decided to take a two-year 
leave  to  go  to  Washington.  Well,  once  again,  so  much  for  foresight.  I  have  now  been  in 
Washington  nearly  seven  years,  serving  first  as  a  Fed  governor,  then  chairman  of  the 
President's Council of Economic Advisers. In the fall of 2005, President Bush appointed me 
to  be  Chairman  of  the  Fed,  effective  with  the  retirement  of  Alan  Greenspan  at  the  end  of 
January 2006. 
You will not be surprised to hear that events since January 2006 have not been precisely as I 
anticipated, either. My colleague, Bank of England Governor Mervyn King, has said that the 
object  of  central  banks  should  be  to  make  monetary  policy  as  boring  as  possible. 
Unfortunately, by that metric we have not been successful. The financial crisis that began in 
August 2007 is the most severe since the Great Depression, and it has been the principal 
cause of the global recession that began last fall. Battling that crisis and trying to mitigate its 
effect on the U.S. and global economies has dominated my waking hours now for some 21 
months. My colleagues at the Fed and I have been called on to take many tough decisions, 
including adopting extraordinary and unprecedented policy measures to address the crisis. 
I  think  you  will  agree  that  the  chain  of  events  that  began  with  my  decision  to  go  far  from 
home  for  college  and  has  culminated  –  so  far  –  with  the  role  I  am  playing  today  in  U.S. 
economic policymaking is so unlikely that we could have safely ruled it out of consideration. 
Nevertheless, of course, it happened. Although I never could have prepared in advance for 
the  specific  events  of  the  past  21  months,  I  believe  that  my  efforts  throughout  my  life  to 
expand my horizons and to keep a broad perspective – for example, to study and write about 
economic and financial history, as well as more conventional topics in macroeconomics and 
monetary economics – have helped me better meet the challenges that have come my way. 
At the same time, because I appreciate the role of chance and contingency in human events, 
I try to be appropriately realistic about my own capabilities. I know there is much that I don't 
know. I consequently try to be attentive to all points of view, to work collaboratively, and to 
involve  as  many  smart  people  in  policy  decisions  as  possible.  Fortunately,  my  colleagues 
and  the  staff  at  the  Federal  Reserve  are  outstanding.  And  indeed,  many  of  them  have 
demonstrated  their  own  breadth  and  flexibility,  moving  well  beyond  their  previous  training 
and  experience  to  tackle  a  wide  range  of  novel  and  daunting  issues,  usually  with  great 
success.  
Law is like economics in that, although it has its own esoterica known only to initiates, it is at 
bottom a craft whose value lies primarily in its practical application. You cannot know today 
BIS Review 62/2009 
 3
what problems or challenges you will face in the course of your professional lives. Thus, I 
hope  that,  even  as  you  continue  to  acquire  expertise  in  specific  and  sometimes  narrow 
aspects of the law, you will continue to maintain a broad perspective and willingness, indeed 
an eagerness, to expand the range of your knowledge and experience. 
I have spoken a bit about the economic and financial challenges that we face. How do these 
challenges  bear  on  the  prospects  of  the  graduates  of  2009?  The  economic  situation  is  a 
trying one, as you know. We are in a recession, and the labor market is weak. Many of you 
may not have gotten the job you wanted; some may have had offers rescinded or the start of 
employment delayed. I do not minimize those constraints and disappointments in any way. 
Restoring economic prosperity and maximizing economic opportunity are the central focus of 
our efforts at the Fed. 
Nevertheless, you are in some ways very lucky. You have been trained in a field, law, that is 
exceptionally  broad  in  its  compass.  At  the  Federal  Reserve,  lawyers  are  involved  in  every 
aspect  of  our  policies  and  operations  –  not  just  because  they  know  the  legal  niceties,  but 
because they possess analytical tools that bear on almost any problem. In law school you 
have honed your skills in reasoning, reading, and writing. Many of you have work experience 
or  bring  backgrounds  to  bear  ranging  from  history  to  political  science  to  the  humanities  to 
science. There will always be a need for people with your abilities and talents. 
So,  my  advice  to  you  is  to  stay  optimistic.  Things  usually  have  a  way  of  working  out.  My 
second piece of advice is to be flexible, even adventurous as you begin your careers. As I 
have tried to illustrate today, you are much less able than you think to foresee how your life, 
both  professional  and  personal,  will  play  out.  The  world  changes  too  fast,  and  too  many 
accidents  and  unpredictable  events  occur.  It  will  pay,  therefore,  to  be  creative  and  open-
minded  as  you  search  for  and  consider  professional  opportunities.  Look  most  carefully  at 
those options that will give you a chance to learn new things, explore new areas, and grow 
as a person. Think of every job as a potential investment in yourself. Will it prepare your mind 
for the opportunities that chance will provide? 
You are lucky also to be living and studying in the United States. There is a lot of pessimistic 
talk  now  about  the  future  of  America's  economy  and  its  role  in  the  world.  Such  talk 
accompanies every period of economic weakness. The United States endured a decade-long 
Great Depression and returned to prosperity and global leadership. When I graduated from 
college in 1975, and from graduate school in 1979, the economy was sputtering, gas prices 
and inflation were high, and pessimism – malaise, President Carter called it – was rampant. 
The U.S. economy subsequently entered more than two decades of growth and prosperity. 
The economy will recover – it has too many fundamental strengths to be kept down for too 
long – and the mood will brighten. 
This is not to ignore real challenges. Our society is aging, implying higher health-care costs 
and  fiscal  burdens.  We  need  to  save  more  as  a  country,  to  reduce  global  imbalances  in 
saving and investment, and to set the stage for continued growth. Our educational system is 
strong in some areas, including our university system, but does not serve everyone equally 
well, contributing to slower growth and greater income disparities. In the diverse capacities 
for  which  your  training  has  prepared  you,  many  of  you  will  play  a  vital  role  in  addressing 
these problems, both in the public and private spheres. 
I conclude with congratulations to the graduates, your families, and friends. You have worked 
hard and accomplished much. You have a great deal to look forward to, as many interesting 
and gratifying opportunities await you. I hope that as you enter or re-enter the working world, 
you make sure to stay flexible and open-minded and to learn whenever you can. That's the 
best way to deal with the unpredictabilities that are inherent in life. I wish you the best of luck, 
with the proviso that luck is what you make of it. 
And perhaps you will advise next year's class to invite J. K. Rowling. 
4 
 BIS Review 62/2009
