Jean-Claude Trichet: Integration and innovation – the Alpha and Omega 
of a successful retail payments market in Europe 
Opening remarks by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the 
Joint  ECB/the  Netherlands  Bank  conference  on  "Retail  payments: 
integration  and 
innovation", Frankfurt am Main, 25 May 2009. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure for me to open this conference on integration and innovation of retail 
payments.  This  conference,  organised  jointly  by  the  European  Central  Bank  and  De 
Nederlandsche Bank, brings together participants coming from more than 30 countries of all 
five continents. The research papers have been carefully selected from an amazing number 
of submissions. 
Together,  we  will  explore  how  to  interlink  policy  conduct,  research  activities  and  market 
practice in a field of banking that is not always in the limelight, namely retail banking. Retail 
banking has proven to be an area of stability within the banking business during the recent 
period  of  financial  turmoil.  Payments  business,  which  generates  about  one  quarter  of  all 
banking revenues, has remained a source of strength. At a time when banks’ other sources 
of income are more volatile, they can count on reliable and regular revenues being generated 
through payment services. 
The other side of the coin is less alluring. Payments business roughly accounts for one third 
of the operational costs of the banks. In Europe, part of these costs is obviously related to 
the current fragmentation in the retail payments market. Overcoming such fragmentation by 
means of more integration would decrease the operational costs banks are confronted with. 
This is the link to our topic today.  
Against this background, it is no surprise that today’s first theme will be the relevance of retail 
banking and payments for banks’ profitability. Mr. Lavayssière, Director of Global Financial 
Services  Capgemini,  will  make  the  keynote  speech  on  this  theme,  and  I  am  sure  that  his 
remarks  and  the  following  academic  session  will  provide  fundamental  insights  into  the 
economic rationale for the integration and innovation of the retail payments market. 
Successful  integration  of  retail  payment  markets  will  not  only  provide  benefits  in  terms  of 
diminishing  costs,  it  will  also  contribute  to  financial  stability.  Restoring  confidence  in,  and 
improving the resilience of, financial systems is of paramount importance.  
Governments  and  central  banks  around  the  globe  have  made  unprecedented  use  of  their 
policy  tools  to  fight  further  economic  and  financial  decline.  The  ECB  and  the  Eurosystem 
have  taken  rapid  and  bold  actions  in  response  to  the  crisis.  These  measures  have  been 
providing  refinancing  to  the  banks  well  above  the  usual  levels  and  under  more  flexible 
conditions  than  usual.  Executive  branches  have  decided  exceptional  measures  to  support 
financial  institutions  and  help  stabilising  the  financial  markets.  You  may  now  ask:  does  it 
make  sense  in  current  times  to  focus  on  the  integration  of  payment  markets  and 
infrastructures? Does it make sense to invest in the integration and modernisation of retail 
payments business? Our answer is: Yes, it does. 
Let me first briefly discuss how integrated payment instruments, systems and infrastructures 
have strengthened the backbone of modern economies. Second, I will explore how benefits 
by integration and innovation are to be realised in retail payments business. 
Quite fundamentally, the availability of reliable and safe payment means for the transfer and 
settlement of funds is a conditio sine qua non for economic interaction. Due to the very rapid 
growth  in  the  volume  and  the  value  of  payment  transactions  stemming  from  the  money, 
BIS Review 64/2009 
 1
foreign exchange and securities markets, the importance of payment clearing and settlement 
infrastructures has grown considerably over the last two decades. The integration of these 
markets  is  closely  correlated  with  the  degree  of  integration  of  the  underlying  payment 
infrastructure. Thus, the effective transmission of the single monetary policy throughout the 
euro  area,  the  depth  and  liquidity  of  financial  markets,  and  the  resilience  of  the  European 
financial  system  as  a  whole  depend  to  a  considerable  extent  on  the  integration  of  the 
payment infrastructure. 
The ECB report on financial integration of April 2009 has assessed the state of the European 
financial  integration  process.  The  segment  closest  to  the  single  monetary  policy,  the  euro 
area money market, continued to be highly integrated until autumn 2008, when the financial 
crisis intensified. This integration has been supported by the high degree of integration of the 
underlying large-value payment system. The second generation of TARGET, TARGET2, has 
not only established an even more uniform wholesale payment service in the euro area, it 
has  also  introduced  innovative  functionalities.  In  fact,  TARGET2  is  the  first  market 
infrastructure to be completely integrated and harmonised at the European level. In the same 
way  that  TARGET2  backed  the  integration  of  the  uncollateralized  money  market,  the 
introduction  of  TARGET2-Securities  (T2S)  will  further  foster  the  integration  process  by 
supporting the collateralised money market. 
The retail banking segment in Europe, by contrast, remains rather fragmented, as does the 
underlying  market  infrastructure.  Despite  the  introduction  of  the  euro,  payment  habits  still 
vary widely across the euro area. In some countries, cash is making up more than 90% of 
retail payment transactions by households. In other countries, cashless payment instruments 
have driven down cash usage considerably. Likewise, retail payment clearing and settlement 
is  organised  differently  in  the  various  countries,  reflecting  local  tradition  and  business 
preferences. 
To overcome these entrenched differences, the banking industry joined forces in 2002 and 
launched  the  initiative  to  create  the  Single  Euro  Payments  Area,  SEPA.  The  primary 
objective of this initiative is to achieve a fully integrated market for retail payment services. 
Distinctions between national and cross-border payments should vanish. Practically, one set 
of  pan-European  payment  instruments  should  be  available  to  serve  the  whole  market, 
making national legacy payment instruments superfluous. 
Needless  to  say,  such  an  initiative,  which  requires  unprecedented  forms  of  co-operation 
among competing market actors, may give rise to competition concerns. It may also get to a 
situation  where  the  self-regulatory  powers  of  the  banking  community  have  reached  their 
boundaries,  and  regulatory  support  is  required.  The  European  Commission  and  the 
Eurosystem  have  been  supporting  SEPA  by  closely  monitoring  the  developments  and  by 
providing  guidance  to  the  market.  The  Payment  Services  Directive  (PSD),  which  is  to  be 
transposed at national level in November of this year, and the revised Regulation 2560 on 
cross-border payments, provide the harmonised legal basis for retail payments in Europe. 
Today’s  second  theme  will  look  at  competition  and  regulation  issues  that  emerged  in  the 
integration process of retail payment markets. I am very pleased that Commissioner Neelie 
Kroes will deliver the keynote speech on this theme. The subsequent panel will focus on the 
role  of  central  banks  in  shaping  the  future  of  retail  banking  and  payments.  Unlike  for 
TARGET2  and  TARGET2-Securities,  the  ECB  and  the  Eurosystem  have  chosen  not  to 
approach  the  retail  payments  market  as  a  system  owner  and  operator  –  although  some 
national central banks that are part of the Eurosystem have such operational role – but rather 
as  a  catalyst,  supporting  the  market  processes  by  using  their  technical  and  analytical 
expertise as well as consultative and cooperative contacts with the banking sector and other 
public authorities. 
Tomorrow,  we  will  look  at  the  other  challenging  dimension  that  shapes  the  future  of  retail 
banking and payments, which is innovation. I regret to have to say that while the chip, the 
internet and the mobile phone have fundamentally changed the way we communicate in the 
2 
 BIS Review 64/2009
last  20  years,  modernisation  in  the way  we  pay,  be  it  as  large  companies  or  as  individual 
retail clients, still have to catch up these developments. Therefore, I am pleased to see the 
focus on the requirements and expectations of large corporations and public administrations.  
I wish you a fruitful conference, and I am confident that it will be another building block on our 
way to do what has to be done. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 64/2009 
 3
