Savenaca Narube: Protecting Fiji from money laundering   
Closing  remarks  by  Mr  Savenaca  Narube,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji,  at  the 
National Anti-Money Laundering Conference, Suva, 18 February 2009. 
 Introduction 
I trust that you have found this day-long conference useful and informative. I was not able to 
be  here  for  most  of  the  day  but  I  believe  that  you  had  a  good  day  of  discussion.  The 
organizers have selected very relevant and interesting topics. The speakers have elaborated 
on a variety of issues on preventing money laundering.  
I am told that this is the first conference of its kind on this important topic. Preventing money 
laundering must concern us all. We should therefore be aware that we have a role to play in 
fighting money laundering. It is not only government and law enforcement agencies that need 
to be concerned. The public sector, businesses, the private sector and yes, even  ordinary 
citizens must play a role in combating money laundering. This conference to me is therefore 
a  timely  one.  It  brings  all  stakeholders  together  to  discuss  these  issues.  I  would  like  to 
suggest to the FIU that we make this an annual conference. 
Why  do  we  need  to  fight  money  laundering?  What  are  the  consequences  of  not  doing 
enough?  We  are  an  isolated  small  island  in  the  big  Pacific  Ocean.  Why  should  we  be 
spending  much  needed  resources  to  fight  money  laundering  in  Fiji?  The  Attorney  General 
answered some of these questions this morning and you may have discussed these in the 
course of today. But let me share with you my thoughts on them. 
I have just returned last night from a conference of central bankers on the global financial 
crisis.  The  crisis  or  particularly  its  depth  and  coverage  have  brought  up  some  very 
fundamental  questions  like  whether  capitalism  is  sustainable  and  whether  globalization  is 
now under threat. Almost the entire world has embraced capitalism. The supporters of Karl 
Max’s centrally controlled economy are very few and declining. As you know, in a capitalist 
society entrepreneurship and innovation thrive. They provide the engine of growth and drive 
profitability. Rewards are associated with risk taking. This is well and good. But we all know 
too  that  in  real  life  there  are  those  that  use  this  capitalistic  world  to  forge  their  illegal 
businesses.  Criminals  can  be  the  most  innovative  and  entrenuership  people  in  the  private 
sector.  
Ladies and gentlemen, criminal activities are therefore part and parcel of private enterprise. 
They are a world wide reality. Criminals spread their operations far and wide. Globalization 
has  provided  the  channel  for  these  funds to  flow  freely  around  the  globe.  Technology  has 
provided the locomotive for these to reach the remote parts of the globe. So while we may 
say or feel in Fiji that we do not need to worry to much about these activities, let me tell you 
today that the evidences show otherwise. Fiji is not immune. Recent arrests have surprised 
everyone that such sophisticated crimes can happen under our very noses. 
We are part of the global village whether we like it or not. I believe that globalization is here 
to stay. Therefore, while the center of these international crimes is definitely not in Fiji, their 
ramifications will reach us. To be successful, the fight against crime must be a universal one. 
Like water which will find its way to the lowest possible level, criminal will find the easiest 
spot  through  which  to  operate  or  launder  their  illegal  funds.  Fiji  must  take  its  place  in  this 
crusade. We must join the global community in taking all necessary measures to make life 
difficult for these criminals.  
The global financial system is now under immense stress. But it has evolved and matured 
particularly in the last 20 years and is now much harder today to hide criminally derived funds 
BIS Review 18/2009 
 1
then it was before that. Unfortunately, criminals are also rising to the occasion and changing 
money laundering methods and techniques to overcome these barriers.  
That is exactly why we are here today at Fiji’s first national anti-money laundering conference 
– To Protect Fiji from Money Laundering. Public awareness is an important weapon in our 
battle. The FIU has been busy in undertaking this public awareness. Such conferences as 
this  that  bring  everyone  together  in  one  room  are  extremely  useful.  I  would  like  to 
acknowledge this and congratulate all of you for your participation. I thank the FIU for this 
initiative and the arrangements made for the conference. 
Establishment of the FIU 
The Financial Intelligence Unit is spearheading our fight against this crime. I would therefore 
like to say something briefly on the establishment and the current arrangement of the FIU.  
For many years the Reserve Bank of Fiji has been following the progress in the international 
efforts to fight money laundering. It was quite obvious that every country was being asked to 
take  the  necessary  measures  to  prevent  money  laundering  and  terrorist  financing.  We 
convinced government that Fiji also needed to do the same. 
As the custodian of the financial system, it was quite obvious to me that the Reserve Bank 
will need to spearhead the work on anti money laundering which we did. The FIU was then 
temporarily set up in the Reserve Bank as we developed the legislation. We carried the FIU 
for some time until it was formally established by law in 2006.  
There was some discussion on where the FIU should be located. In some countries it is with 
government or under a law enforcement agency like the Police. Some are with the central 
bank. In others they are an administered under a separate body. Many stakeholders that we 
consulted preferred that it be with the Reserve Bank. I did not argue too much against this 
suggestion.  I  knew  that  practically  this  was  the  best  option  for  the  FIU  where  we  could 
quickly  nurture  and  develop  the  skills  and  the  processes  that  are  needed  to  establish  the 
unit. 
However, I had expected that while the Bank can administer the FIU, the Government should 
foot the bill. Like many good government, they also passed this bill to the Reserve Bank. The 
Bank now covers the full cost of the FIU from its own resources.  
As part of the agreement with government, the Minister for Justice has delegated almost all 
of his powers under the Act to the Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji. However, I wish to 
stress that the functions of the FIU are totally independent of the Bank. I made sure that this 
independence is well protected. The FIU uses some administrative processes from the Bank. 
It is also operates as a separate cost center with its own budget approved by the Board. 
The independence of the FIU is paramount and must be respected and protected. Neither 
the  Governor  nor  the  Minister  must  interfere  in  FIU  carrying  out  its  functions.  While  the 
current set up is working well, it should really be temporary. I am of the view that government 
should  seriously  think  of  allowing  the  FIU  to  be  an  independent  body.  It  will  give  the  Unit 
more freedom and flexibility in its work. The FIU should also be independently funded from 
the  proceeds  of  its  own  work  as  allowed  under  the  Act.  This  will  give  it  additional 
independence that it needs.  
With  independence  comes  accountability.  This  accountability  is  extremely  important  for  an 
agency  like  FIU.  The  Unit  collects  many  confidential  information.  It  must  make  sure  that 
these  are  used  only  for  the  purpose  of  the  Act.  The  FIU  right  now  is  accountable  to  the 
Governor  and  the  Minister.  They  should  also  be  accountable  to  Parliament  through  the 
Minister. We need to work out in greater detail how this accountability can be improved. The 
FIU is accountable to the Board of the RBF on how it uses its funds. I am glad to say that the 
accounts  of  the  FIU  are  audited  together  with  the  audit  of  the  Bank.  The  FIU  has  already 
2 
 BIS Review 18/2009
published its annual report. I would like to see that the next report also include its financial 
accounts. 
Obviously,  an  agency  like  the  FIU  can  never  be  fully  transparent  in  its  operations.  This  is 
taken.  But  in  my  view  it  will  still  need  to  be  transparent  in  the  results  of  its  work.  These 
results are already included in its annual report and other publications. 
Summary of some notable achievements 
We have come a long way since we established an informal FIU in the RBF. Some of the 
notable  achievements  of  Fiji’s  anti-money  framework  that  I  would  like  to  mention  this 
afternoon are as follows: 
1. 
We  now  have  comprehensive  anti-money  laundering  laws  that  includes  the 
Proceeds  of  Crime  Act,  Mutual  Assistance  in  Criminal  Matters  Act  and  Financial 
Transactions  Reporting  Act  together  with  its  Regulations.  This  has  virtually 
completed our legislation work. 
We have formally established the national AML Officials Committee under the Act 
and formed various sub committees to assist in its work. 
We have widened the coverage of the Act to commercial banks, non-bank financial 
institutions,  as  well  as  other  financial  service  providers  and  businesses  (such  as 
lawyers, accountants & real estate agents). 
We  have  started  to  report  the  results  of  the  suspicious  transaction  reporting 
framework. 
We  have  introduced  the  $10,000  border  currency  reporting,  $10,000  cash 
transaction reporting, and the reporting of all international electronic funds transfers. 
We have set up special investigation units such as, the Transnational Crime Unit, 
the Police Money Laundering Investigation Unit, and FIRCA’s Fraud & Evasion Unit. 
We have developed the FIU’s online electronic reporting and data management IT 
system that the Minister launched this morning. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
to 
the  report 
the  publication  of 
implement  many  of 
International obligations 
Where do we stand on global anti-money laundering standards? 
The  Minister  this  morning  referred  to  the  World  Bank  assessment  of  Fiji’s  framework  for 
combating money laundering and terrorist financing in early 2006. I am happy to say that we 
have  not  done  too  badly  as  a  small  developing  island  nation.  At  the  same  time,  Fiji  has 
worked  hard  since 
the  key 
recommendations. 
These  include  the  border  currency  reporting  framework  that  I  have  mentioned  and  the 
issuance of the FTR regulations. 
What will happen if we fail to comply with these international standards? We will send out a 
signal  to  criminals  that  they  can  launder  money  through  our  country.  We  can  then  be 
blacklisted by the international community. Sending money to Fiji will be very cumbersome 
and  expansive.  Remittances  will  decline.  We  will  also  send  the  wrong  single  to  potential 
investors  that  Fiji’s  financial  system  may  not  be  robust  enough.  This  will  scare  away 
investors. They will go to other jurisdictions that have a stronger standards than we do. We 
need  investment  to  promote  growth  and  we  need  remittances  to  support  our  foreign 
reserves.  So  the  ramifications  of  not  keeping  up  with  world  standards  can  be  extremely 
serious.  We  should  therefore  continue  to  do  what  we  can  to  comply  with  international 
standards. 
BIS Review 18/2009 
 3
Incidentally, some of our Pacific neighbours were threatened to be blacklisted some years 
ago because they did not comply with these standards. I can still recall high level delegations 
from  these  islands  scurrying  off  to  New  York  to  try  to  get  them  off  the  list.  Almost  all 
succeeded  except  perhaps  one.  You  see,  these  islands  had  established  offshore  financial 
centers before these anti money laundering standards were introduced. Some 20 years ago 
Fiji seriously contemplated setting up similar offshore financial centers. I remember writing 
papers on this and actually visiting the Caribbean to study this issue. Fortunately, the RBF 
was  able  to  convince  Government  that  this  was  not  a  prudent  thing  to  do  and  this  advice 
remains as of today. 
Results 
What are the results so far? The FIU received 479 suspicious transactions in 2008. It was 
able to analyze 372 STRs which resulted in the dissemination of 202 case reports to relevant 
law enforcement agencies such as the Fiji Police Force, FIRCA and the Transnational Crime 
Unit. 
The  FIU  also  received  over  100,000  cash  and  international  electronic  fund  transfer 
transactions last year. 
Integrated effort 
We  must  ask  ourselves,  have  we  done  enough  today  to  protect  ourselves  from  money 
laundering activities? I think that we still have some away to go. 
Combating money laundering starts at the detection stage and as I have said we have done 
a lot in this area. But that is not enough. We need to successfully investigate and prosecute 
those that launder money in Fiji. That means that our law enforcement agencies, prosecution 
offices and the courts musty be adequately geared-up to make sure that crime does not pay. 
In my assessment we have some way to go in this area. 
Have we really looked at various products and services provided by our banking sector under 
the  anti-money  laundering  microscope?  We  should  continue  to  deepen  our  understanding 
and our assessment of these products. The use of technology in banking is a wonderful idea 
but they do bring with them higher risks of their use for illegal purposes. We need to up skill 
our  supervisors  to  be  able  to  properly  assess  these  modern  products,  instruments  and 
systems.  The  on  site  supervision  of  financial  institutions  now  includes  examination  of  anti 
money  laundering.  Key  concepts  like  CDD  (Customer  Due  Diligence)  and  KYC  (Know 
Your Customer) are well in place in our commercial banks and other non-bank institutions. 
I know that  these controls incur costs which are invariably borne by customers. But in my 
view the cost of not having them in place for the whole country can be even more. 
Capacity building 
Let me end with a word on capacity building. We can have the best laws to combat money 
laundering, the best system to prosecute the offenders and the best database but if we lack 
the human capacity to implement them then our efforts will be in vain. Building local capacity 
must therefore be at the forefront of our efforts. Supervisors and analysts must be able to 
know what to ask and where to look. At the Bank and the FIU, this capacity building is an 
ongoing priority. 
Needless  to  say,  the  judiciary  and  law  enforcement  agencies  must  also  be  adequately 
resourced  in  people,  facilities  and  technology  if  we  are  to  have  a  chance  to  successfully 
investigate and prosecute criminals. 
4 
 BIS Review 18/2009
Conclusion 
In  concluding,  let  me  repeat  that  it’s  in  everyone’s  responsibility  to  do  something  about 
“Protecting Fiji from Money Laundering”. I urge those of us here today, to be champions 
in this global war on money laundering. 
We  live  in  an  integrated  world  where  financial  systems  have  been  regularly  subjected  to 
crisis. The present one seems to be the mother of all crises. The global economic fall out is 
painful.  Wealth  has  been  virtually  halved  over  night.  Massive  job  losses  have  occurred 
across the globe. These are indeed unprecedented times.  
If ever there was a time to work closely together and collaborate on an integrated approach 
this is it. We need a collaborative approach to our economic challenges. And we certainly 
need the same collaborative approach to fighting money laundering. We each have a role to 
play and I look forward to your corporation 
I  now  have  the  pleasure  of  formally  closing  the  2009  National  Anti-Money  Laundering 
Conference. 
Vinaka Vakalevu. 
BIS Review 18/2009 
 5
