Rundheersing Bheenick: Developing banking technology in Mauritius 
Remarks by Mr Rundheersing Bheenick, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at the launch of 
the “New Business On Line” project by Standard Bank, Port Louis, 20 May 2009.  
 Good evening, ladies and gentlemen 
It is my pleasure to be here at this Product Presentation as you prepare to roll out the “New 
Business On Line” project in Mauritius. You operate in a very competitive environment and it 
is  quite  appropriate  that  you  should  always  be  on  the  lookout  to  extract  every  inch  of 
competitive advantage that you can from having a state-of-the-art technology platform and 
thus strive to stay ahead of the field. How I wish I could say as much for my own institution!  
If you had to contend with the built-in inertia and resistance to change existing practices and 
structures, that I have encountered, you would not be rolling out this world-class technology 
to  the  domestic  corporate  and  institutional  market.  You  would  not  be  coming  with  the 
technological  enhancements  that  make  Mauritius  more  attractive  to  Multinationals  with 
centralised African Regional Hubs and Shared Service Centres. Your product will stimulate 
the  flow  of  foreign  capital  into  the  country,  by  creating  a  new  banking  environment  that 
provides increased choice, control, security and accessibility.  
We  all  know  how  critical  it  has  become  to  transform  the  physical  flow  of  funds  to  an 
electronic delivery channel without undermining the security and confidence of the banking 
public. And, at the Central Bank, we are acutely conscious of the role of a smooth functioning 
payment system to the effective functioning of the economy. 
Since Standard Bank started operations here in Mauritius in November 2001, it has made 
significant progress. Its asset base (2008) now stands at around USD850 million and its total 
deposits amount to USD745 million, having almost doubled over the last two years. 
Standard  Bank  has  been  a  pioneer  when  it  comes  to  adapting  its  business  model  to  the 
rapidly-changing market conditions. In 2006, it became the first offshore bank as they were 
then  called,  to  shift  to  universal  banking.  Its  new  strategy  comprised  two  main  elements, 
namely  (i)  international  corporate  and  investment  banking  (ii)  domestic  corporate  and 
investment banking, with appropriate treasury/global market and private banking.  
Since then, the bank has launched several initiatives such as (i) provision of global custody 
services to foreign offshore funds and private equity funds, (ii) the establishment of a private 
banking suite, and (iii) the launch of internet banking platform for wealth management and 
private banking clients. I understand that this "New Business On Line” project of your bank 
forms  part of  a  broader  plan  of  Standard  Bank  Group  encompassing  the  African  region  to 
provide an enhanced service to the Group’s corporate and institutional clients.  
And, in terms of initiatives, there was the coup d’éclat when the Group became the first to 
partner with a major Chinese bank, namely Industrial and Commercial Bank of China (ICBC) 
to  support  its  strategy  to  expand  its  African  and  international  networks  and  capabilities, 
including in China. And they did this before the global financial sector got embroiled in the 
current turmoil.  
The  Bank  of  Mauritius  has  every  reason  to  be  satisfied  with  the  performance  of  Standard 
Bank  in  our  country.  We  value  your  contribution  to  our  regular  dialogue  with  the Mauritius 
Bankers’  Association.  We  are  currently  engaged  in  a  sustained  dialogue  with  your  bank 
regarding the development of the domestic bond market, an area where Standard Bank has 
made  a  big  contribution  in  Africa.  It  is  no  coincidence  that  Standard  Bank  Mauritius  was 
nominated  for  several  awards  by  the  2009  Euromoney  Private  Banking  and  Wealth 
Management survey. I wish to commend your bank for being at the forefront of innovation. 
BIS Review 81/2009 
 1
Role of ICT and online banking 
We  all  know  the  pivotal  role  that  Information  and  Communication  Technology  plays  in 
business development. The ability to transfer information through shared electronic files and 
computer networks considerably enhances business efficiency and lowers transaction costs. 
We recognize that our banks have been investing heavily in technology. Most of them have 
developed sophisticated information systems to support their operations. It seems now that 
they are waking up to the call of e-networking – following the example of our youngsters who 
now develop social ties through Facebook. On a more serious note, the creation of networks 
through  ICT  has  tremendous  advantages  from  an  economic  perspective.  By  rapidly 
increasing  firms’  networks,  ICT  is  able  to  reduce  the  gap  between  more  established 
businesses  and  newcomers.  Online  banking  bridges  the  distance  between  geographically 
remote  locations,  creating  new  business  opportunities.  It  is  an  imperative  in  the  era  of 
financial globalisation.  
Risks 
Online banking presents a wide range of potential risks and has led to heightened concerns 
about the vulnerability of bank and electronic payment systems. These concerns cannot be 
overemphasised – the lack of trust in e-business processes and legal protection with regard 
to confidentiality of data and transactions can be a major constraint to the adoption of this 
alternative  way  of  doing  business.  This  is  why  we,  as  regulator,  consistently  insist  on  the 
need for financial institutions to properly ascertain the vulnerabilities and threats potentially 
affecting  individual  online  systems,  and  to  establish  compensating  internal  controls  with  a 
view to mitigating those risks. We need to have robust systems that would ensure integrity of 
online transactions and backup mechanisms in case of failure. 
The smooth functioning and confidence in the payments system are areas that are very dear 
to a regulator’s heart. Indeed the extent of that confidence determines to a large extent the 
decision  of  investors  and  businesses  on  where  to  place  their  funds  or  to  locate  their 
company’s ventures. 
Therefore  all  initiatives  geared  towards  ensuring  a  modern,  efficient  and  safer  banking 
environment  are  most  welcomed.  In  fact,  innovation,  whether  in  the  banking  sector  or 
elsewhere, is subject to important network externalities. To illustrate the point I am making 
here, let us take the example of the TGV (Train à Grande Vitesse – high speed train) having 
to  share  rail  networks  with  an  old-fashioned  steam  engine  train.  It  probably  would  not  get 
very far and run the risk of damaging the whole rail network. In the same way innovation by 
an individual bank is greatly enhanced if everybody else is innovating, not least the regulator. 
The global financial crisis has very clearly exposed the dangers of the failure of regulators to 
keep abreast of developments taking place in the financial arena. 
The  Bank  of  Mauritius  is  fully  aware  that  it  has  a  role  to  play  in  supporting  innovation  by 
individual banks. It has also been active on this front with a heightened role in the area of 
regional  integration.  Central  banks’  concerns  are  however  of  a  different  nature.  Central 
banks  look  at  the  critical  role  of  a  smoothly  functioning  payment  system  in  maintaining 
financial stability and in promoting the orderly and balanced development of the economy. 
The Bank initiated a number of projects, regrettably those projects have been unduly stalled 
– for reasons that I would not wish to evoke here. However I will give you an overview of the 
changes  that  the  implementation  of  those  projects  would  have  brought  to  the  payments, 
clearance and settlement system in our country. 
REPSS 
As  cross-border  trade  grows,  the  increased  volume  of  transactions  and  migration  to  open 
account terms, that is, supplier credit extended to buyer at time of sale, are exerting pressure 
2 
 BIS Review 81/2009
on banks as well as on the payment systems to improve the cross-border payment process. 
The current system of cross-border trade payments handled through correspondent banking 
relationships is slow, inefficient and costly for banks and businesses. Improvements require 
significant  investments  in  terms  of  changed  processes  and  systems.  In  this  context,  the 
COMESA  Clearing  House  was  mandated  to  implement  a  system  to  facilitate  cross-border 
payment and settlement between Central Banks in the COMESA region. This system, named 
"Regional  Payment  and  Settlement  System  –  REPSS"  will  provide  a  single  gateway  for 
Central  Banks  within  the  region  to  effect  payment  and  settlement  of  trades.  It  will  be  a 
complete  real-time  online  system  with  an  open,  published  interface  based  on  S.W.I.F.T 
standards. 
The  main  aim  of  REPSS  is  to  stimulate  and  increase  intra-regional  trade  by  enabling 
importers to pay for goods and services in their local currency, whilst exporters will be able to 
invoice for their products in their local currency. Local banks will access the payment system 
through their central banks. Any participating bank will, therefore, be able to make payments 
to,  and  receive  payments  from,  any  other  participating  bank.  The  linkages  through  central 
banks will avoid the complex payment chains that may sometimes occur in correspondent 
bank arrangements. The system will use the infrastructure of each member country’s central 
bank  and  commercial  banking  system  to  make  it  operational.  Each  country  will,  however, 
need  to  put  in  place  adequate  enabling  legislation.  In  addition,  a  Trust  Fund  will  be 
established to assure daily settlements in the event of an inability to settle by one or more 
participating banks. 
The  cornerstone  of  the  REPSS  operational  model  is  a  settlement  agent  which  will  hold 
accounts of participants and carry out end-of-day procedures. At the Twelfth Meeting of the 
COMESA  Committee  of  Governors  of  Central  Banks  held  in  Tripoli  on  8  and  9  November 
2007, it was decided that a REPSS participating Central Bank acts as the Settlement Agent 
for the COMESA Clearing House (CCH) and opens a CCH USD and a CCH EURO account 
at  its  Central  Bank.  In  this  context,  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  has  been  designated  to  act  as 
Settlement Agent for the CCH and relevant EURO and USD accounts are being opened for 
participating  member  central  banks.  When  we  recall  that  COMESA  is  a  grouping  of  19 
countries, with a population of 425 million, a GDP of USD345 billion, and an external trade of 
USD200 billion, you wonder why we at the Bank of Mauritius have had so much difficulty in 
getting equipped to deliver on this commitment.  
Cheque Truncation 
The Bank of Mauritius has embarked on the modernisation of the clearing and settlement of 
cheques in the country through a system called truncation. This process enables clearing to 
be achieved in a more speedy and secure manner through images of cheques instead of the 
physical movement of cheques to the Clearing House for exchange. 
The modernisation of the cheque clearing and settlement process started in November 2002 
when all cheques issued by banks were standardised and the use of Magnetic Ink Character 
Recognition  cheques  was  introduced.  Since  then,  banks  started  exchanging  code  lines 
through the Mauritius Automated Clearing and Settlement network. The project on Cheque 
Truncation  was  first  discussed  at  the  Port  Louis  Automated  Clearing  House  Committee  in 
September  2005  and  a  Steering  Committee  was  set  up  in  August  2006  for  the  project 
implementation. 
It was initially envisaged to develop the application for image based cheque clearing at the 
Bank. However, given the resources required to develop such a system and the fact that a 
number of Cheque Truncation System applications existed on the market, it was decided in 
April 2008 to purchase an off-the-shelf solution. The Request for Proposal was prepared and 
the  Bank  organised  an  international  competitive  bidding  process  where  suitably  qualified 
vendors were invited to bid for the project in June 2008.  
BIS Review 81/2009 
 3
While  all  this  was  happening  –  some  skeptics  might  say,  while  nothing  was  actually 
happening  –  the  value  of  cheques  cleared  has  been  steadily  rising  from  Rs187  billion  to 
reach  Rs254  billion  last  year.  What  this  means  is  that  some  five  million  transactions  that 
could have been done instantly now take three to five days to be cleared in a very inefficient 
and antiquated matter. That is the heavy price that all of us in Mauritius, banks, customers, 
economic operators have paid needlessly. It is a matter of regret for me that we are lagging 
behind,  while  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  which  started  the  same  project  in  2006,  has  already 
implemented  it  in  2008.  Closer  to  us,  Botswana  and  Madagascar  already  have  Cheque 
Truncation as part of their payment systems.  
Modernisation of MACSS 
The MACSS, a real time gross settlement system, provides the means for real time interbank 
payments  and  is  used  to  settle  cheque  clearing  positions  of  the  Port  Louis  Automated 
Clearing House for the final settlements of the Contribution Network Payment to the accounts 
of the Mauritius Revenue Authority and for settlements for the Central Depository System.  
The  pressing  demands  of  the  growing  financial  sector  and  increasing  cross-border 
transactions  poses  new  and  complex  challenges 
the  current  payment  system 
infrastructure. The need for a more dynamic, flexible and business-friendly payment system 
capable  of  better  resisting  systemic  shocks  and  providing  for  international  exposure  is 
increasingly  felt.  In  that  respect,  the  Bank  has  decided  to  replace  the  existing  MACCS 
application  with  new  application  based  on  best  international  practice  and  built  on  a  more 
resilient  architecture,  supporting  multi-currency  transactions  with  extended  settlement 
windows and providing for low cost messages. The core application is operational as from 14 
January 2009 and all advanced features will soon be implemented.  
to 
Online reporting and monitoring system 
The  Bank  sees  also  a  need  to  enhance  the  data  collection,  collation  and  dissemination 
process by developing an online application available across banks. Banks currently report 
information to the Bank through mails or hardcopy documents. Recognising the drawbacks of 
the  existing  system,  the  Bank  decided  to  launch  the  Central  Database  System  (CDS) 
initiative in July 2007 designed to bring all data used for analysis and decision making into a 
single repository. The CDS would also provide a Customised Dashboard for Management to 
retrieve  crisp  information  for  decision-making  purposes.  The  CDS  initiative  would  also  be 
extended to licensed Cash Dealers and moneychangers with a view to exercising a closer 
monitoring of the market. 
Our efforts to modernise the payments, clearance and settlement system have taken many 
twists and turns over the last two years. My determination to push these projects through has 
not flagged. And this must be done; and must be done fast, in the interests of the efficiency 
of  the  banking  sector  and  of  the  economy  generally.  The  new  platform  of  Standard  Bank 
serves both as an encouragement and a reminder for us that status quo is definitely not an 
option in this rapidly-changing world. 
I  therefore  congratulate  Standard  Bank  for  yet  another  milestone  and  wish  you  every 
success with this new suite of products. I hope it will help you to live up to your promise to 
deliver  corporate  and  business  banking  “at  your  [client’s]  finger  tips  with  its  24-hour 
availability,  anytime,  anywhere…..  and  access  to…  entire…  banking  portfolio(s)  across 
products, countries and currencies” and all this with a single login. 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 81/2009
