Rundheersing Bheenick: The first Pan-African Derivatives Exchange in 
Mauritius 
Address by Mr Rundheersing Bheenick, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at The Seminar 
on Currency Derivatives, organised by Global Board of Trade, Port Louis, 16 July 2009. 
 It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  be  with  you  this  morning  at  the  opening  ceremony  of  this 
Seminar on Currency Derivatives, organized by the Global Board of Trade. The launch of the 
first Pan-African Derivatives Exchange – which is what GBOT is – here in Mauritius marks a 
milestone  in  the  development  of  our  financial  sector.  The  waves  of  financial  sector 
liberalization first touched our shores in a big way in 1994 with the suspension of exchange 
control which was how we had kept our external accounts in balance until then, supported 
much of the time by steep import tariffs, administrative controls, lending ceilings and directed 
interest rates. 
Our financial sector has attracted favourable reviews from international financial institutions 
and has emerged over the past few years as an important contributor to the economy. It has 
also been a key driver in our efforts to participate fully in globalization, supported by other 
measures such as tariff reduction and fiscal consolidation. In 2008, the financial sector was 
the second-fastest growing area of activity, just after the booming construction sector, with a 
growth rate of 10.1 per cent, against 7.5 per cent in 2007. It employed 12, 500 persons and 
its share in GDP was just below 11 per cent. And this year, when the global economy has 
stalled as Western economies have nosedived in what has been called the Great Recession, 
our financial sector continues on its growth path. Its contribution to GDP is predicted to rise 
to  11.5  per  cent  in  2009  and  to  keep  rising  thereafter  as  the  contributions  of  traditional 
sectors to GDP continue on their declining trend. 
Although  our  financial  sector  witnessed  an  impressive  development  over  the  last  decade 
following  the  suspension  of  capital  controls,  the  focus  remained  on  sound  bank  lending, 
securities issuances and trading, and foreign direct investment. We relied on domestic retail 
deposits, not foreign wholesale money markets. We, as regulator and supervisor, did not fall 
asleep  at  the  wheel  and  our  banks  have  continued  to  be  profitable  and  have  not  become 
wards of the state! Our financial system is of course far from perfect and suffers from several 
deficiencies – e.g. markets for bonds, currency and derivatives are thin!  
In a brief interview I had given to the “Business Standard” newspaper in India in March last 
year, I said that even if our economy was suffering from a deluge of foreign exchange via 
Foreign Direct Investment inflows, most of the foreign exchange operations were confined to 
the spot market. I added that I wanted to encourage the development of a vibrant currency 
futures and forward market. I took the view that such a development would help in creating 
an  active  foreign  exchange  market  and  introduce  newer  instruments  for  exporters  and 
entrepreneurs to hedge and trade in the financial services sector.  
Forward  transactions  accounted  for  less  than  one-fifth  of  total  reported  foreign  exchange 
transactions during the last two financial years. Of this, options comprised only a tiny fraction. 
This was the prevailing situation despite the fact that, the Bank had authorised one bank to 
engage  in  cross-currency  options  in  major  currency  pairs  with  corporates  as  far  back  as 
2003.  Clearly,  some  more  robust  action  was  called  for  if  we  were  to  dampen  the  volatility 
arising from over-reliance on a fairly thin forex spot market with too few players. 
I have underscored on various occasions the importance of an efficient financial system to 
sustain our growth as a small export-oriented economy, situated far from its main markets, 
and forced by globalization and trade liberalization to compete without the protection of the 
preferential trading arrangements which we relied on earlier to pay our way. It is a truism to 
say that the financial system can be efficient only in so far as it has efficient financial markets 
BIS Review 90/2009 
 1
to support it. Let me borrow the image of a four-legged table from Randall Dodd , Director of 
the Financial Policy Forum and Derivatives Study Centre, in Washington DC, to illustrate this 
notion.  His  four-legged  table  is  made  up  of  (i)  securities  markets,  which  issue  and  trade 
bonds and equity shares, (ii) banks which issue loans and provide payment and settlement 
services,  (iii)  insurance  and  pension  funds  which  provide  future  income  and  collateral  for 
lending, and (iv) derivatives markets, which facilitate risk management and price discovery. 
Dodd concludes: “All four legs serve to support the table, and it is no more stable than its 
weakest leg.” Indeed! No wonder our table proved rather wobbly: one leg has been missing 
all along! 
Measures  such  as  the  elimination  of  centralised  controls  over  prices  and  resource 
distribution,  trade  liberalization,  freeing  nominal  interest  rates  and  abolishing  exchange 
controls,  fundamentally  alter  the  economic  and  financial  risk  exposures  of  financial 
institutions and companies. They generate a demand for effective risk management products 
that cover both liquidity and price risk. As the financial system develops, the sophistication of 
financial  products  increases.  Borrower  and  investor  choice  is  widened;  and  products  that 
better  match  their  specific  requirements  are  more  likely  to  be  on  offer,  thus  encouraging 
greater  use  of  the  financial  sector.  In  addition,  financial  products,  like  instruments  with 
market-determined  returns  (for  example,  government  bonds),  derivatives  (for  example, 
financial futures), and foreign exchange products facilitate arbitrage that links prices across 
time, markets, and countries. 
Derivatives  perform  two  economically-useful  purposes:  (i)  risk  shifting,  also  known  as  risk 
management or hedging, and, (ii) price discovery, which is the process of determining the 
price  level  for  a  commodity,  asset  or  other  item,  based  on  supply  and  demand  factors. 
Derivatives  provide  excellent  opportunities  to  hedge  risk  for  different  kinds  of  participants, 
importers,  export-oriented  enterprises  etc.  Here,  I  have  particularly  in  mind  our  dear 
exporters, relentless and unabashed champions of sustained depreciation of our Rupee.  
I  am  sure  that  once  GBOT  would  have  explained  the  complexities  and  risks  of  currency 
derivatives  and  how  those  risks  are  mitigated,  our  economic  operators  and  other  market 
players will appreciate that there would be commensurate reward for those who are willing to 
assume the risk as for those who are seeking to shift the risk. A market for foreign exchange 
hedging instruments can help domestic corporates in managing currency mismatches in their 
assets and liabilities. Our banks can also become members of the exchange in the foreign 
currency segment. In spite of the fact that forex futures, like all futures, are in the nature of a 
zero-sum  game,  differences  in  risk  appetites  mean  that  there  is  a  potential  for  win-win 
outcomes all round. 
Let me comment briefly on the evolution of the derivatives markets worldwide just to provide 
some  context.  The  latest  BIS  Triennial  Central  Bank  Survey  of  Foreign  Exchange  and 
Derivatives  Market  Activity  shows  that  derivatives  markets  worldwide  witnessed  explosive 
growth during the period covered, that is the three years from May 2004 to April 2007. The 
OTC  derivatives  segment,  the  average  daily  turnover  of  interest  rate,  as  well  as  non-
traditional foreign exchange contracts increased by 71 percent to USD  2.1 trillion over the 
three-year  period,  maintaining  an  annual  compound  growth  of  20  percent  witnessed  since 
1995. Turnover of foreign exchange options and cross-currency swaps more than doubled to 
USD0.3 trillion per day, outpacing the growth in “traditional” instruments such as spot trades, 
forwards or plain foreign exchange swaps.  
In  the  wake  of  the  financial  crisis,  it  has  been  found  that  the  explosion  of  the  derivatives 
markets  was  partly  due  to  speculation  and  an  abuse  and  misuse  of  derivatives.  The 
ballooning of trade in derivatives across all categories to a staggering total of $596 trillion in 
December  2007  was  driven  by  strong  speculative  interest  and  did  not  reflect  economic 
fundamentals. In the two years to December 2007, currency derivatives grew by 78 per cent 
to reach $56 trillion. The semiannual statistics on OTC derivatives of the BIS indicate that 
currency derivatives had fallen to $50 trillion by December 2008. The growth in the market 
2 
 BIS Review 90/2009
for currency derivatives is likely to decline further as regulators contemplate limits on trade in 
view of large losses which drove the South Korean won to a decade low; led to lawsuits in 
India; and caused shares of China's Citic Pacific Ltd. to collapse. So, there is a downside and 
it  is  as  well  that  we  should  be  aware  of  the  potential  dangers  that  lie  ahead  and  that  we 
should guard against. 
I must say that I have seen lately the first encouraging signs of the maturity of our exchange 
arrangements: the recognition of the greater role assigned to market forces in determining 
the exchange value of the Rupee. I have already mentioned recently the proposal of the IMF 
to  reclassify  our  exchange  rate  regime  from  “managed  float”  to  “free  float”,  based  on  our 
performance in the recent past. We have come a very long way indeed since the collapse of 
the  Bretton  Woods  system  of  fixed  exchange  rates  in  1971.  Countries  of  our  size  were 
paralysed  by  the  fear  of  floating.  They  did  not  have  the  credibility  to  have  independent 
monetary and currency regimes. By being recognized as a free-floater, we have truly come 
of age as an independent nation, with an independent currency.  
As an aside, let me recall that currency futures, which we are discussing this morning, were 
also  made  possible  by  the  collapse  of  the  system  of  fixed  exchange  rates.  The  Chicago 
Mercantile Exchange launched the first forex future in 1972.  
Let me make a few comments on our Exchange Rate Policy! Over the past year, the Bank 
has  limited  its  interventions  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  but  we  have  nevertheless 
ensured that the Rupee did not suffer from any undue volatility despite the spillover effects of 
the financial turbulence in other parts of the world. If we are upgraded to the category of “free 
floater”, this would mean a continuation of our policy of limited intervention and would imply a 
greater role to the market in managing the exchange rate. We expect that trade in currency 
derivatives can assist this area, by relieving pressure on the spot market and contributing to 
eradicate erratic and opportunistic behaviour, and thus reducing volatility. 
The launch of a global derivatives exchange in our jurisdiction is yet another indication of the 
growing sophistication of our financial system. I strongly believe that the domestic financial 
market  is  now  mature  enough  to  engage  in  derivatives  trading  under  proper  regulation.  I 
would  like  to  mention  in  the  same  breath  the  efforts  of  the  Bank  to  develop  a  secondary 
market for Treasury Bills and Bank of Mauritius Bills. This will add greater depth and liquidity 
to the official paper segment of the market and perhaps pave the way for a bond and interest 
rate futures market. Another initiative worth mentioning is the introduction of Islamic financial 
services and the need for Islamic Treasury Products. Discussions have been ongoing with 
GBOT for several months now to provide a platform for launching and trading such products. 
Yesterday  itself,  the  press  reported  that  the  Stock  Exchange  of  Mauritius  (SEM)  and  the 
Central Depository & Settlement Co Ltd had approached the Financial Services Commission 
to launch index futures trading, targeting the SEM-7 Index.  
All  these  initiatives  aim  at  remedying  the  deficiencies  of  our  financial  system  to  which  I 
alluded earlier and which need to be addressed to achieve greater financial system efficiency 
and realize our ambition to become an international financial centre. The development of a 
vibrant market for trading currency derivatives, not just for the domestic market but for the 
region,  is  another  element  that  would  contribute  to  position  Mauritius  as  a  world-class 
financial  centre.  It  would  help  in  forging  deeper  economic  ties  and  strengthen  our 
commitment to regional integration. Such ties are mutually beneficial – for Mauritius they can 
help to overcome the constraints posed by the small size of our domestic market and for our 
regional  partners  in  Africa,  they  can  contribute  to  accelerate  the  pace  of  development. 
Perhaps there can be no better testimony to our commitment to regional integration than the 
determined drive by some of our major banks to expand their operations in the region. As the 
process gathers momentum, others will follow suit; and currency derivatives are set to take 
on greater importance in the risk management toolkit of our banks. 
This seminar comes at a time when policy-makers across the world are reflecting deeply on 
the role of the financial crisis in the global recession and the necessary changes to be made 
BIS Review 90/2009 
 3
to the financial system to make it more resilient. Amid the chaos and confusion surrounding 
the debacle of the global financial system, it is important to remind ourselves of the role of 
the financial sector in allocating resources and risks. We may disagree about the precise role 
which  complex  financial  instruments  played  in  the  financial  crisis,  but  there  is  broad 
agreement that the way forward is not a turning back of the clock of global finance, but for 
better  understanding  by  all  market-players,  including  regulators,  about  the  nature  of 
sophisticated  financial  instruments.  This  seminar  is  therefore  both  timely  and  pertinent  in 
enhancing  our  understanding  of  complex 
in  dispelling 
misconceptions, as we prepare for recovery and transition to a new world order.  
financial  products,  and 
A word of caution: the regulator’s perspective 
One word of caution before concluding my remarks – while currency derivatives are hedging 
products, and therefore, risk mitigating instruments, the absence or inadequacy of robust risk 
management  practices  and  oversight  surrounding  this  activity  could  have  disastrous 
consequences.  Our  banks  should  therefore  ensure  that  their  dealers  are  well-trained,  that 
there  are  clear-cut  controls  on  their  operations,  and  that  the  activities  are  audited  on  a 
concurrent basis, at least in the initial stages. While the exchange has the responsibility to 
ensure against settlement risks, it is the institution concerned that must address the internal 
procedural  issues.  Let  us  not  forget  that  the  scandals  that  affected  such  institutions  as 
Barings and Société Générale, although related to derivatives, had their origin in a failure of 
the internal controls of the banks.  
As  much  as  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  recognizes  the  wealth  of  opportunities  which  the 
development of a currency derivatives market can bring, we are also mindful of its potential 
implications for financial stability. Derivative activities can contribute to build up vulnerabilities 
and  adverse  market  dynamics,  particularly  if  the  necessary  supporting  financial  and  legal 
infrastructure  is  not  in  place.  We  would  not  have  been  here  this  morning,  if  the  new 
Insolvency Act had not made provision for the netting of financial contracts drawing on best 
international practice in this area. This set the stage for the development of the derivatives 
market in Mauritius. The mechanisms in place to ensure that these instruments are used to 
hedge risks and not for speculative purposes must also be there. 
To conclude, let me refer to the Bond-Currency-Derivatives nexus that Percy Mistry, Director 
of Oxford International Group, had laid emphasis on in his Committee Report on converting 
Mumbai into an International Financial Centre. He had indeed taken a similar position earlier 
when he led a Commonwealth Secretariat team to Mauritius to examine ways and means to 
dynamise the export of tradeable services. He concluded that Mauritius needed to “develop 
the ability to provide such specialized international financial services with the knowledge and 
skills set necessary to give it an added advantage in developing suitable financial derivative 
(risk-hedging)  contracts  for  African  securities  markets….and  over  time……Mauritius  might 
develop the ability to offer and trade more sophisticated derivative contracts…..”.  
Mistry provides the script for the derivatives play. We at the Bank of Mauritius consider the 
development  of  a  futures  market  one  of  our  priorities  to  further  our  financial  sector 
development  agenda,  in  collaboration  with  our  sister-regulator,  the  Financial  Services 
Commission. The Bank and FSC have a major role which – to stay in the theatrical world – 
may be likened to that of Lord Chamberlain – producer, controller and censor! So, here we 
are with all the elements falling in place: the stage is set; the playwright’s script has been 
passed; the Lord Chamberlain is watching over everything; the players are busy rehearsing 
their roles and learning their lines (which is what the seminar is all about); and the curtain will 
soon go up. Excited and expectant, I say to all of you: let the show begin. I wish GBOT and 
all players every success in this endeavour. 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 90/2009
