Rakesh Mohan: Global financial crisis – causes, impact, policy 
responses and lessons 
Speech  by  Dr  Rakesh  Mohan,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  7th 
Annual India Business Forum Conference, London Business School, London, 23 April 2009. 
Based  on  remarks  delivered  by  Dr  Rakesh  Mohan,  Deputy  Governor  at  the  RBI-BIS  Seminar  on  “Mitigating 
Spillovers and Contagion – Lessons from the Global Financial Crisis” at Hyderabad on 4 December 2008, at the 
International Chambers of Commerce at New Delhi on 16 January 2009, at the Yale School of Management, Yale 
University on 3 April 2009 and at the 7th Annual India Business Forum Conference at London Business School, 
London on 23 April 2009. Assistance of Muneesh Kapur in preparing the speech is gratefully acknowledged.  
 The intensification of the global financial crisis, following the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers 
in September 2008, has made the current economic and financial environment a very difficult 
time for the world economy, the global financial system and for central banks. The fall out of 
the  current  global  financial  crisis  could  be  an  epoch  changing  one  for  central  banks  and 
financial regulatory systems. It is, therefore, very important that we identify the causes of the 
current crisis accurately so that we can then find, first, appropriate immediate crisis resolution 
measures  and  mechanisms;  second,  understand  the  differences  among  countries  on  how 
they are being impacted; and, finally, think of the longer term implications for monetary policy 
and financial regulatory mechanisms.  
These are all large subjects and I cannot hope to do justice to in the limited space available 
in one speech. A legion of both policymakers and scholars are at work analysing the causes 
of  the  crisis  and  findings  both  immediate  and  longer  term  solutions  (For  example,  the  de 
Larosiere Report (2009), the Turner Review (2009), the Geneva Report (2009), the Group of 
Thirty  Report  (2008)  and  the  IMF  Lessons  paper  (2009b)).  I  can  only  attempt  some 
conjectures, raise issues and identify some possible directions in which we should move. 
What I will attempt to do is to provide my interpretation of the unfolding of the present global 
financial  crisis;  how  it  is  affecting  us;  why  the  Indian  financial  sector  has  been  able  to 
weather  the  crisis  relatively  well;  the  analytics  of  our  policy  response;  and,  finally,  some 
implications of its longer lasting effects. 
I.  
Global financial crisis  
Genesis of global financial crisis 
The  proximate  cause  of  the  current  financial  turbulence  is  attributed  to  the  sub-prime 
mortgage sector in the USA. At a fundamental level, however, the crisis could be ascribed to 
the persistence of large global imbalances, which, in turn, were the outcome of long periods 
of excessively loose monetary policy in the major advanced economies during the early part 
of this decade (Mohan, 2007, Taylor, 2008).  
Global  imbalances  have  been  manifested  through  a  substantial  increase  in  the  current 
account  deficit  of  the  US  mirrored  by  the  substantial  surplus  in  Asia,  particularly  in  China, 
and in oil exporting countries in the Middle East and Russia (Lane, 2009). These imbalances 
in the current account are often seen as the consequence of the relative inflexibility of the 
currency  regimes  in  China  and  some  other  EMEs.  According  to  Portes  (2009),  global 
macroeconomic  imbalances  were  the  major  underlying  cause  of  the  crisis.  These  saving-
investment imbalances and consequent huge cross-border financial flows put great stress on 
the  financial  intermediation  process.  The  global  imbalances  interacted  with  the  flaws  in 
financial markets and instruments to generate the specific features of the crisis. Such a view, 
however, offers only a partial analysis of the recent global economic environment. The role of 
BIS Review 54/2009 
 1
monetary policy in the major advanced economies, particularly that in the United States, over 
the same time period needs to be analysed for a more balanced analysis.  
Following the dot com bubble burst in the US around the turn of the decade, monetary policy 
in  the  US  and  other  advanced  economies  was  eased  aggressively.  Policy  rates  in  the  US 
reached  one  per  cent  in  June  2003  and  were  held  around  these  levels  for  an  extended 
period  (up  to  June  2004)  (Chart  1).  In  the  subsequent  period,  the  withdrawal  of  monetary 
accommodation was quite gradual. An empirical assessment of the US monetary policy also 
indicates  that  the  actual  policy  during  the  period  2002-06,  especially  during  2002-04,  was 
substantially looser than what a simple Taylor rule would have required (Chart 2). “This was 
an  unusually  big  deviation  from  the  Taylor  Rule.  There  was  no  greater  or  more  persistent 
deviation  of  actual  Fed  policy  since  the  turbulent  days  of  the  1970s.  So  there  is  clearly 
evidence  that  there  were  monetary  excesses  during  the  period  leading  up  to  the  housing 
boom”  (Taylor,  op.cit.).  Taylor  also  finds  some  evidence  (though  not  conclusive)  that  rate 
decisions of the European Central Bank (ECB) were also affected by the US Fed monetary 
policy decisions, though they did not go as far down the policy rate curve as the US Fed did. 
 
 2 
  BIS Review 54/2009
  
Excessively  loose  monetary  policy  in  the  post  dot  com  period  boosted  consumption  and 
investment  in  the  US  and,  as  Taylor  argues,  it  was  made  with  purposeful  and  careful 
consideration by monetary policy makers. As might be expected, with such low nominal and 
real interest rates, asset prices also recorded strong gains, particularly in housing and real 
estate,  providing  further  impetus  to  consumption  and  investment  through  wealth  effects. 
Thus,  aggregate  demand  consistently  exceeded  domestic  output  in  the  US  and,  given  the 
macroeconomic  identity,  this  was  mirrored  in  large  and  growing  current  account  deficits  in 
the US over the period (Table 1). The large domestic demand of the US was met by the rest 
of the world, especially China and other East Asian economies, which provided goods and 
services  at  relatively  low  costs  leading  to  growing  surpluses  in  these  countries.  Sustained 
current account surpluses in some of these EMEs also reflected the lessons learnt from the 
Asian financial crisis. Furthermore, the availability of relatively cheaper goods and services 
from China and other EMEs also helped to maintain price stability in the US and elsewhere, 
which  might  have  not  been  possible  otherwise.  Thus  measured  inflation  in  the  advanced 
economies remained low, contributing to the persistence of accommodative monetary policy. 
 
BIS Review 54/2009 
 3
 
The emergence of dysfunctional global imbalances is essentially a post 2000 phenomenon 
and  which  got  accentuated  from  2004  onwards.  The  surpluses  of  East  Asian  exporters, 
particularly  China,  rose  significantly  from  2004  onwards,  as  did  those  of  the  oil  exporters 
(Table  1).  In  fact,  Taylor  (op.  cit.)  argues  that  the  sharp  hike  in  oil  and  other  commodity 
prices in early 2008 was indeed related to the very sharp policy rate cut in late 2007 after the 
sub-prime crisis emerged. 
It would be interesting to explore the outcome had the exchange rate policies in China and 
other EMEs been more flexible. The availability of low priced consumer goods and services 
from EMEs was worldwide. Yet, it can be observed that the Euro area as a whole did not 
exhibit  large  current  account  deficits  throughout  the  current  decade.  In  fact,  it  exhibited  a 
surplus except for a minor deficit in 2008. Thus it is difficult to argue that the US large current 
account  deficit  was  caused  by  China’s  exchange  rate  policy.  The  existence  of  excess 
demand for an extended period in the U.S. was more influenced by its own macroeconomic 
and  monetary  policies,  and  may  have  continued  even  with  more  flexible  exchange  rate 
policies in China. In the event of a more flexible exchange rate policy in China, the sources of 
imports for the US would have been some countries other than China. Thus, it is most likely 
that the US current account deficit would have been as large as it was – only the surplus 
counterpart countries might have been somewhat different. The perceived lack of exchange 
rate flexibility in the Asian EMEs cannot, therefore, fully explain the large and growing current 
account  deficits  in  the  US.  The  fact  that  many  continental  European  countries  continue  to 
exhibit surpluses or modest deficits reinforces this point. 
Apart  from  creating  large  global  imbalances,  accommodative  monetary  policy  and  the 
existence of very low interest rates for an extended period encouraged the search for yield, 
and  relaxation  of  lending  standards.  Even  as  financial  imbalances  were  building  up, 
macroeconomic  stability  was  maintained.  Relatively  stable  growth  and  low  inflation  have 
4 
 BIS Review 54/2009
been witnessed in the major advanced economies since the early 1990s and the period has 
been dubbed as the Great Moderation. The stable macroeconomic environment encouraged 
underpricing  of  risks.  Financial  innovations,  regulatory  arbitrage,  lending  malpractices, 
excessive  use  of  the  originate  and  distribute  model,  securitisation  of  sub-prime  loans  and 
their  bundling  into  AAA  tranches  on  the  back  of  ratings,  all  combined  to  result  in  the 
observed excessive leverage of financial market entities. 
Components of the crisis 
Most  of  the  crises  over  the  past  few  decades  have  had  their  roots  in  developing  and 
emerging  countries,  often  resulting  from  abrupt  reversals  in  capital  flows,  and  from  loose 
domestic monetary and fiscal policies. In contrast, the current ongoing global financial crisis 
has had its roots in the US. The sustained rise in asset prices, particularly house prices, on 
the  back  of  excessively  accommodative  monetary  policy  and  lax  lending  standards  during 
2002-2006  coupled  with  financial  innovations  resulted  in  a  large  rise  in  mortgage  credit  to 
households,  particularly  low  credit  quality  households.  Most  of  these  loans  were  with  low 
margin  money  and  with  initial  low  teaser  payments.  Due  to  the  “originate  and  distribute” 
model, most of these mortgages had been securitized. In combination with strong growth in 
complex credit derivatives and the use of credit ratings, the mortgages, inherently sub-prime, 
were  bundled  into  a  variety  of  tranches,  including  AAA  tranches,  and  sold  to  a  range  of 
financial investors.  
As inflation started creeping up beginning 2004, the US Federal Reserve started to withdraw 
monetary  accommodation.  With  interest  rates  beginning  to  edge  up,  mortgage  payments 
also  started  rising.  Tight  monetary  policy  contained  aggregate  demand  and  output, 
depressing  housing  prices.  With  low/negligible  margin  financing,  there  were  greater 
incentives to default by the sub-prime borrowers. Defaults by such borrowers led to losses by 
financial institutions and investors alike. Although the loans were supposedly securitized and 
sold to the off balance sheet special institutional vehicles (SIVs), the losses were ultimately 
borne  by  the  banks  and  the  financial  institutions  wiping  off  a  significant  fraction  of  their 
capital.  The  theory  and  expectation  behind  the  practice  of  securitisation  and  use  of 
derivatives  was  the  associated  dispersal  of  risk  to  those  who  can  best  bear  them.  What 
happened in practice was that risk was parcelled out increasingly among banks and financial 
institutions,  and  got  effectively  even  more  concentrated.  It  is  interesting  to  note  that  the 
various stress tests conducted by the major banks and financial institutions prior to the crisis 
period had revealed that banks were well-capitalised to deal with any shocks. Such stress 
tests,  as  it  appears,  were  based  on  the  very  benign  data  of  the  period  of  the  Great 
Moderation and did not properly capture and reflect the reality (Haldane, 2009). 
The  excessive  leverage  on  the  part  of  banks  and  the  financial  institutions  (among 
themselves),  the  opacity  of  these  transactions,  the  mounting  losses  and  the  dwindling  net 
worth  of  major  banks  and  financial  institutions  led  to  a  breakdown  of  trust  among  banks. 
Given  the  growing  financial  globalization,  banks  and  financial  institutions  in  other  major 
advanced economies, especially Europe, have also been adversely affected by losses and 
capital write-offs. Inter-bank money markets nearly froze and this was reflected in very high 
spreads  in  money  markets.  There  was  aggressive  search  for  safety,  which  has  been 
mirrored  in  very  low  yields  on  Treasury  bills  and  bonds.  These  developments  were 
significantly  accentuated  following  the  failure  of  Lehman  Brothers  in  September  2008  and 
there was a complete loss of confidence.  
The deep and lingering crisis in global financial markets, the extreme level of risk aversion, 
the  mounting  losses  of  banks  and  financial  institutions,  the  elevated  level  of  commodity 
prices  (until  the  third  quarter  of  2008)  and  their  subsequent  collapse,  and  the  sharp 
correction in a range of asset prices, all combined, have suddenly led to a sharp slowdown in 
growth momentum in the major advanced economies, especially since the Lehman failure. 
Global  growth  for  2009,  which  was  seen  at  a  healthy  3.8  per  cent  in  April  2008,  is  now 
projected to contract by 1.3 per cent (IMF, 2009c) (Table 2). Major advanced economies are 
BIS Review 54/2009 
 5
in recession and the EMEs – which in the earlier part of 2008 were widely viewed as being 
decoupled from the major advanced economies – have also been engulfed by the financial 
crisis-led slowdown. Global trade volume (goods and services) is also expected to contract 
by 11 per cent during 2009 as against the robust growth of 8.2 per cent during 2006-2007. 
Private capital inflows (net) to the EMEs fell from the peak of US $ 617 billion in 2007 to US $ 
109 billion in 2008 and are projected to record net outflows of US $ 190 billion in 2009. The 
sharp  decline  in  capital  flows  in  2009  will  be  mainly  on  account  of  outflows  under  bank 
lending  and  portfolio  flows.  Thus,  both  the  slowdown  in  external  demand  and  the  lack  of 
external financing have dampened growth prospects for the EMEs much more than that was 
anticipated a year ago.  
 
 Volatility in capital flows: implications for emerging market economies 
Monetary policy developments in the leading economies not only affect them domestically, 
but also have a profound impact on the rest of the world through changes in risk premia and 
search for yield leading to significant switches in capital flows. While the large volatility in the 
monetary policy in the US, especially since the beginning of this decade, could have been 
dictated by internal compulsions to maintain employment and price stability, the consequent 
volatility in capital flows impinges on exchange rate movements and more generally, on the 
spectrum  of  asset  and  commodity  prices.  The  monetary  policy  dynamics  of  the  advanced 
economies thus involve sharp adjustment for the EMEs. 
Private  capital  flows  to  EMEs  have  grown  rapidly  since  the  1980s,  but  with  increased 
volatility over time. Large capital flows to the EMEs can be attributed to a variety of push and 
pull factors. The pull factors that have led to higher capital flows include strong growth in the 
EMEs  over  the  past  decade,  reduction  in  inflation,  macroeconomic  stability,  opening  up  of 
capital  accounts  and  buoyant  growth  prospects.  The  major  push  factor  is  the  stance  of 
monetary policy in the advanced economies. Periods of loose monetary policy and search for 
yield  in  the  advanced  economies  encourages  large  capital  inflows  to  the  EMEs  and  vice 
versa in periods of tighter monetary policy. Thus, swings in monetary policy in the advanced 
economies  lead  to  cycles  and  volatility  in  capital  flows  to  the  EMEs.  Innovations  in 
information technology have also contributed to the two-way movement in capital flows to the 
6 
 BIS Review 54/2009
EMEs. Overall, in response to these factors, capital flows to the EMEs since the early 1980s 
have grown over time, but with large volatility (Committee on Global Financial System, 2009).  
After remaining nearly flat in the second half of the 1980s, private capital flows jumped to an 
annual  average  of  US  $  124  billion  during  1990-96.1  With  the  onset of  the  Asian  financial 
crisis, total private capital flows fell to an annual average of US $ 86 billion during 1997-2002. 
Beginning 2003, a period coinciding with the low interest rate regime in the US and major 
advanced economies and the concomitant search for yield, such flows rose manifold to an 
annual average of US $ 285 billion during 2003-2007 reaching a peak of US $ 617 billion in 
2007 (Chart 3). As noted earlier, the EMEs, as a group, are now likely to witness outflows of 
US $ 190 billion in 2009 – the first contraction since 1988. Amongst the major components, 
while direct investment flows have generally seen a steady increase over the period, portfolio 
flows  as  well  as  other  private  flows  (bank  loans  etc)  have  exhibited  substantial  volatility. 
While direct investment flows largely reflect the pull factors, portfolio and bank flows reflect 
both the push and the pull factors. It is also evident that capital account transactions have 
grown  much  faster  relative  to  current  account  transactions,  and  gross  capital  flows  are  a 
multiple of both net capital flows and current account transactions. Also, large private capital 
flows have taken place in an environment when major EMEs have been witnessing current 
account surpluses leading to substantial accumulation of foreign exchange reserves in many 
of these economies. 
 
 
As noted earlier, the policy interest rates in the US reached extremely low levels during 2002 
– one per cent – and remained at these levels for an extended period of time, through mid 
2004. Low nominal interest rates were also witnessed in other major advanced economies 
over  the  same  period.  The  extremely  accommodative  monetary  policy  in  the  advanced 
economies was mirrored in the strong base money expansion during the period 2001-02 – 
shortly before the beginning of the current episode of strong capital flows to EMEs. As the 
monetary  accommodation  was  withdrawn  in  a  phased  manner,  base  money  growth 
                                                 
1   The data on capital flows are based on World Economic Outlook Database (April 2009) of the International 
Monetary Fund (IMF, 2009c). 
BIS Review 54/2009 
 7
witnessed  correction  beginning  2004.  However,  contrary  to  the  previous  episodes,  capital 
flows to the EMEs continued to be strong. The expected reversal of capital flows from the 
EMEs was somewhat delayed and finally took place in 2008. Similarly, the previous episode 
(1993-96)  of  heavy  capital  inflows  was  also  preceded  by  a  significant  expansion  of  base 
money during 1990-94, and sharp contraction thereafter. This brief discussion highlights the 
correlation between monetary policy cycles in the advanced economies on the one hand and 
pricing/mispricing of risk and volatility in capital flows on the other hand. At present, monetary 
policies  across  the  advanced  economies  have  again  been  aggressively  eased  and  policy 
interest  rates  have  reached  levels  even  lower  than  those  which  were  witnessed  in  2002. 
Base money in the US more than doubled over a period of just six months between June and 
December 2008. Given such a large monetary expansion and given the past experiences, 
large capital inflows to the EMEs could resume in the foreseeable future, if the unwinding of 
the current monetary expansion is not made in a timely fashion.  
In rapidly growing economies such as India, high real GDP growth needs concomitant growth 
in  monetary  aggregates,  which  also  needs  expansion  of  base  money.  To  this  extent,  the 
accretion  of  unsterilised  foreign  exchange  reserves  to  the  central  bank’s  balance  sheet  is 
helpful  in  expanding  base  money  at  the  required  rate.  However,  net  capital  flows  and 
accretion  to  foreign  exchange  reserves  in  excess  of  such  requirements  necessitate 
sterilisation and more active monetary and macroeconomic management. Thus, large inflows 
of capital, well in excess of the current financing needs, can lead to high domestic credit and 
monetary growth, boom in stock market and other asset prices, and general excess domestic 
demand leading to macroeconomic and financial instability. Abrupt reversals in capital flows 
also lead to significant difficulties in monetary and macroeconomic management.  
While, in principle, capital account liberalisation is expected to benefit the host economy and 
raise  its  growth  rate,  this  theoretical  conjecture  is  not  supported  by  the  accumulated 
empirical evidence. Despite an abundance of cross-section, panel, and event studies, there 
is strikingly little convincing documentation of direct positive impacts of financial opening on 
the  economic  welfare  levels  or  growth  rates  of  developing  countries.  There  is  also  little 
systematic  evidence  that  financial  opening  raises  welfare  indirectly  by  promoting  collateral 
reforms of economic institutions or policies. At the same time, opening the financial account 
does  appear  to  raise  the  frequency  and  severity  of  economic  crises  (Obstfeld,  2009).  The 
evidence  appears  to  favour  a  hierarchy  of  capital  flows.  While  the  liberalisation  of  equity 
flows seems to enhance growth prospects, the evidence that the liberalisation of debt flows is 
beneficial to the EMEs is ambiguous (Henry, 2007; Committee on Global Financial System 
(2009)).  
Reversals of capital flows from the EMEs, as again shown by the current financial crisis, are 
quick, necessitating a painful adjustment in bank credit, and collapse of stock prices. Such 
reversals  also  result  in  the  contraction  of  the  central  bank’s  balance  sheet,  which  may  be 
difficult to compensate with accretion of domestic assets as fast as the reserves depletion. 
These developments can then lead to banking and currency crises, large employment and 
output losses and huge fiscal costs. Thus, the boom and bust pattern of capital inflows can, 
unless  managed  proactively,  result  in  macroeconomic  and  financial  instability.  Hence,  the 
authorities  in  the  EMEs  need  to  watch  closely  and  continuously  financial  and  economic 
developments in the advanced economies on the one hand and actively manage their capital 
account.  
To  summarise,  excessively  accommodative  monetary  policy  for  an  extended  period  in  the 
major advanced economies in the post dot com crash period sowed the seeds of the current 
global financial and economic crisis. Too low policy interest rates, especially the US, during 
the  period  2002-04  boosted  consumption  and  asset  prices,  and  resulted  in  aggregate 
demand  exceeding  output,  which  was  manifested  in  growing  global  imbalances.  Too  low 
short-term rates also encouraged aggressive search for yield, both domestically and globally, 
encouraged by financial engineering, heavy recourse to securitisation and lax regulation and 
supervision. The global search for yield was reflected in record high volume of capital flows 
8 
 BIS Review 54/2009
to  the  EMEs;  since  such  flows  were  well  in  excess  of  their  financing  requirements,  the 
excess  was  recycled  back  to  the  advanced  economies,  leading  to  depressed  long-term 
interest rates. The Great Moderation over the preceding two decades led to under-pricing of 
risks  and  the  new  financial  and  economic  regime  was  considered  as  sustainable.  The 
combined  effect  of  these  developments  was  excessive  indebtedness of  households,  credit 
booms,  asset  price  booms  and  excessive  leverage  in  the  major  advanced  economies,  but 
also in emerging market economies. While forces of globalisation were able to keep goods 
and  services  inflation  contained  for  some  time,  the  aggregate  demand  pressures  of  the 
accommodative monetary started getting reflected initially in oil and other commodity prices 
and  finally  onto  headline  inflation.  The  consequent  tightening  of  monetary  policy  led  to 
correction in housing prices, encouraged defaults on sub-prime loans, large losses for banks 
and  financial  institutions,  sharp  increase  in  risk  aversion,  complete  lack  of  confidence  and 
trust amongst market participants, substantial deleveraging, and large capital outflows from 
the EMEs.  Financial excesses of the 2002-06 were, thus, reversed in a disruptive manner 
and have now led to the severest post-war recession. In brief, the large volatility in monetary 
policy  in  the  major  reserve  currency  countries  contributed  to  the  initial  excesses  and  their 
subsequent painful correction. 
II.  
Impact on India 
Initial impact of the sub-prime crisis 
The initial impact of the sub-prime crisis on the Indian economy was rather muted. Indeed, 
following the cuts in the US Fed Funds rate in August 2007, there was a massive jump in net 
capital inflows into the country. The Reserve Bank had to sterilise the liquidity impact of large 
foreign  exchange  purchases  through  a  series  of  increases  in  the  cash  reserve  ratio  and 
issuances  under  the  Market  Stabilisation  Scheme  (MSS).2  With  persistent  inflationary 
pressures  emanating  both  from  strong  domestic  demand  and  elevated  global  commodity 
prices, policy rates were also raised. Monetary policy continued with pre-emptive tightening 
measures up to August 2008.  
The  direct  effect  of  the  sub-prime  crisis  on  Indian  banks/financial  sector  was  almost 
negligible because of limited exposure to complex derivatives and other prudential policies 
put  in  place  by  the  Reserve  Bank.  The  relatively  lower  presence  of  foreign  banks  in  the 
Indian banking sector also minimized the direct impact on the domestic economy (Table 3). 
The larger presence of foreign banks can increase the vulnerability of the domestic economy 
to  foreign  shocks,  as  happened  in  Eastern  European  and  Baltic  countries.  In  view  of 
significant liquidity and capital shocks to the parent foreign bank, it can be forced to scale 
down  its  operations  in  the  domestic  economy,  even  as  the  fundamentals  of  the  domestic 
                                                 
2  
In view of sustained large capital flows, the finite stock of government securities with the Reserve Bank, and 
the  absence  of  the  option  of  issuing  central  bank  securities  under  the  RBI  Act,  a  new  scheme,  Market 
Stabilisation  Scheme  (MSS),  was  introduced  in  April  2004  to  manage  the  large  capital  flows.  Under  this 
scheme, the Reserve Bank has been empowered to issue government Treasury Bills and medium duration 
dated securities exclusively for sterilization purposes, so as to manage liquidity appropriately. The proceeds 
collected under MSS auctions are kept in a separate identifiable cash account with the RBI, and are used for 
redemption and/or buy back of securities issued under the MSS. The payments for interest and discount on 
MSS securities are not made from the MSS Account, but shown in the government budget transparently. The 
MSS securities are indistinguishable from normal government Treasury Bills and dated securities in the hands 
of the holders. The introduction of MSS has succeeded  broadly  in restoring LAF to its intended function  of 
daily liquidity management (see Mohan (2006)). MSS operates symmetrically as a store of liquidity: it helps to 
absorb excess liquidity in times of large capital flows and to inject liquidity in periods of reversals in capital 
flows.  Thus,  balances  under  MSS  rose  from  around  Rs.39,000  crore  at  end-January  2007  to  around 
Rs.1,75,000 crore by end-May 2008 in the face of large capital flows; in the subsequent period, with reversals 
in  capital  flows,  MSS  balances  came  down  to  around  Rs.  88,000  crore  by  end-March  2009  and  helped 
maintain adequate rupee liquidity in the system. 
BIS Review 54/2009 
 9
economy remain robust. Thus, domestic bank credit supply can shrink during crisis episodes. 
For  instance,  in  response  to  the  stock  and  real  estate  market  collapse  of  early  1990s, 
Japanese banks pulled back from foreign markets – including the United States – in order to 
reduce  liabilities  on  their  balance  sheets  and  thereby  meet  capital  adequacy  ratio 
requirements.  Econometric  evidence  shows  a  statistically  significant  relationship  between 
international bank lending to developing countries and changes in global liquidity conditions, 
as measured by spreads of interbank interest rates over overnight index swap (OIS) rates 
and  U.S.  Treasury  bill  rates.  A  10  basis-point  increase  in  the  spread  between  the  London 
Interbank  Offered  Rate  (LIBOR)  and  the  OIS  sustained  for  a  quarter,  for  example,  is 
predicted to lead to a decline of up to 3 percent in international bank lending to developing 
countries (World Bank, 2008).  
 
Impact of Lehman failure 
Balance of payments: capital outflows 
There  was  also  no  direct  impact  of  the  Lehman  failure  on  the  domestic  financial  sector  in 
view  of  the  limited  exposure  of  the  Indian  banks.  However,  following  the  Lehman  failure, 
there was a sudden change in the external environment. As in the case of other major EMEs, 
there was a sell-off in domestic equity markets by portfolio investors reflecting deleveraging. 
 10 
 BIS Review 54/2009
Consequently,  there  were  large  capital  outflows  by  portfolio  investors  during  September-
October  2008,  with  concomitant  pressures  in  the  foreign  exchange  market.  While  foreign 
direct investment flows exhibited resilience, access to external commercial borrowings and 
trade credits was rendered somewhat difficult. On the whole, net capital inflows during 2008-
09 were substantially lower than in 2007-08 and there was a depletion of reserves (Table 4). 
However, a large part of the reserve loss (US $ 33 billion out of US $ 54 billion) during April-
December 2008 reflected valuation losses. 
 
  
The  contraction  of  capital  flows  and  the  sell-off  in  the  domestic  market  adversely  affected 
both  external  and  domestic  financing  for  the  corporate  sector.  The  sharp  slowdown  in 
demand in the major advanced economies is also having an adverse impact on our exports 
and industrial performance. On the positive side, the significant correction in international oil 
and other commodity prices has alleviated inflationary pressures as measured by wholesale 
price index. However, various measures of consumer prices remain at elevated levels on the 
back of continuing high inflation in food prices.  
Fiscal impact 
Government finances, which had exhibited a noteworthy correction starting 2002-03, came 
under  renewed  pressure  in  2008-09  on  account  of  higher  expenditure  outgoes  due  to  (i) 
higher international crude oil prices (up to September 2008) and the incomplete pass-through 
to domestic prices (ii) higher fertiliser prices and associated increase in fertiliser prices (iii) 
the Sixth Pay Commission award and (iv) debt waiver scheme. The fiscal stimulus packages 
involving additional expenditures and tax cuts have put further stress on the fisc. Reflecting 
these factors, the Central Government’s fiscal deficit more than doubled from 2.7 per cent of 
GDP in 2007-08 to 6.0 per cent in 2008-09, reaching again the levels seen around the end of 
the 1990s. The revenue deficit at 4.4 per cent of GDP will be at its previous peak touched 
during  2001-02  and  2002-03.  Primary  balance  again  turned  into  deficit  in  2008-09,  after 
recording surpluses during the preceding two years (Table 5). Net market borrowings during 
2008-09 almost trebled from the budgeted Rs.1,13,000 crore to Rs.3,29,649 in the revised 
BIS Review 54/2009 
 11
estimates (actual borrowings were Rs.2,98,536 crore as per Reserve Bank records) and are 
budgeted at Rs.3,08,647 crore (gross borrowings at Rs. 3,98,552 crore) in 2009-10.  
In view of the renewed fiscal deterioration, the credit rating agency Standard and Poor’s has 
changed  its  outlook  on  long-term  sovereign  credit  rating  from  stable  to  negative,  while 
reaffirming  the  “BBB-”  rating.  If  bonds  issued  to  oil  and  fertiliser  companies  are  taken  into 
account,  the  various  deficit  indicators  will  be  even  higher.  Moreover,  in  order  to  boost 
domestic  demand,  the  Government  has  announced  additional  tax  sops  subsequent  to  the 
interim  vote-on-account  budget  putting  further  pressure  on  fiscal  position.  Thus,  while  the 
slowdown  in  the  domestic  economy  may  call  for  fiscal  stimulus,  fiscal  manoeuvrability  is 
limited.  
 
According to the IMF, based on measures already taken and current plans, it is estimated 
that  government  debt  ratios  and  fiscal  deficits,  particularly  in  advanced  economies,  will 
increase significantly. For the G-20 as a whole, the general government balance is expected 
to  deteriorate  by  3½  percent  of  GDP,  on  average,  in  2009.  While  the  fiscal  cost  for  some 
countries  will  be  large  in  the  short-run,  the  alternative  of  providing  no  fiscal  stimulus  or 
financial sector support would be extremely costly in terms of the lost output (IMF, 2009b).  
 12 
 BIS Review 54/2009
Impact on the real economy 
Reflecting  the  slowdown  in  external  demand,  and  the  consequences  of  reversal  of  capital 
flows, growth in industrial production decelerated to 2.8 per cent in 2008-09 (April-February) 
from 8.8 per cent in the corresponding period of 2007-08. On the other hand, services sector 
activity has held up relatively well in 2008-09 so far (April-December) with growth of 9.7 per 
cent  (10.5  per  cent  in  the  corresponding  period  of  2007-08).  Services  sector  activity  was 
buoyed  up  by  acceleration  in  “community,  social  and  personal  services”  on  the  back  of 
higher government expenditure. Overall, real GDP growth has slowed to 6.9 per cent in the 
first three quarters of 2008-09 from 9.0 per cent in the corresponding period of 2007-08. On 
the expenditure side, growth of private final consumption expenditure decelerated to 6.6 per 
cent from 8.3 per cent. On the other hand, reflecting the fiscal stimuli and other expenditure 
measures, growth in government final consumption expenditure accelerated to 13.3 per cent 
from 2.7 per cent.  
III.  
Financial regulatory policies to manage financial stability: why the Indian 
financial sector has weathered the storm?  
As the preceding discussion shows, it is apparent that the Indian banks and financial system 
had  only  negligible  direct  exposure  to  the  type  of  toxic  assets  that  have  contaminated  the 
Western  countries’  banking  system.  Bank’s  credit  quality  remains  of  high  quality. Although 
bank credit growth was quite high at around 30 per cent per annum during 2004-07, it would 
appear  that  there  was  no  significant  relaxation  of  lending  standards.  Bank’s  loans  to 
individuals for housing have been backed by prudent loan-to-value ratios. However, in view 
of the rapid credit growth to certain sectors, the Reserve Bank had pre-emptively tightened 
prudential norms (provisioning requirements and risk weights) for these sectors in order to 
safeguard financial stability; provisioning norms for standard assets were also raised across 
the  board  except  for  agriculture  and  SMEs.  These  tightened  provisioning  norms  and  risk 
weights have now been rolled back in the wake of slowdown in order to ensure flow of credit 
to  the  productive  sectors  of  the  economy.  This  “dynamic  provisioning”  approach  has 
facilitated adequate buffers within the banking system. Such “dynamic provisioning” is now 
being advocated as general practice internationally. Therefore, unlike the banking system in 
the Western world, domestic banks have not recorded losses so far and there has been no 
need for any government bailout.  
Bank balance sheets remain healthy and adequately capitalised. The CRAR of all scheduled 
commercial banks (SCBs) taken together was 13.0 per cent at end-March 2008, well-above 
the regulatory requirement of 9 per cent. No SCB has CRAR below 9 per cent. Of the 79 
SCBs, 77 banks had CRAR above 10 per cent, while 2 banks had CRAR between 9 and 10 
per cent. Asset quality of the domestic banks also remains satisfactory with net NPAs being 
only 1.0 per cent of net advances and 0.6 per cent of assets at end-March 2008 (Table 6).  
 
BIS Review 54/2009 
 13
  
A more rigorous assessment of the health of commercial banks, recently undertaken by the 
Committee  on  Financial  Sector  Assessment  (CFSA)  (Chairman:  Dr.  Rakesh  Mohan)  (RBI, 
2009),  also  shows  that  the  commercial  banks  are  robust  and  resilient.  The  single-factor 
stress  tests  undertaken  by  the  CFSA  reveal  that  the  banking  system  can  withstand 
significant  shocks  arising  from  large  potential  changes  in  credit  quality,  interest  rate  and 
liquidity conditions. These stress tests for credit, market and liquidity risk show that Indian 
banks are generally resilient. Given the ongoing financial crisis and its likely impact on the 
Indian economy, the CFSA conducted stress tests for the end of September 2008. Under the 
worst-case  scenario  (150  per  cent  increase  in  gross  NPAs),  the  overall  capital  adequacy 
position of the banking sector would have declined to 10.6 percent in September 2008 – still 
well-above  the  regulatory  requirement  of  9  per  cent.  Thus,  even  under  the  worst  case 
scenario, CRAR remains comfortably above the regulatory minimum. 
Growth in bank credit remained strong up to October 2008 but has decelerated since. The 
financial  system  is  working  normally  and  accordingly  there  has  been  no  need  for  any 
enhancement of government guarantee for bank deposits or banks’ other liabilities. In view of 
the  strong  balance  sheets  and  the  transparency  in  the  operations,  there  is  no  mistrust 
between  banks  and  the  inter-bank  money  market  has  been  working  throughout  the  period 
normally  (Table  7).  Volumes  in  the  money  market  have  in  fact  grown  over  the  past  few 
months. There was some volatility in the call money rate, but this resulted from the sudden 
reversal  in  capital  flows  and  resulting  tightening  of  liquidity  in  September-October  2008. 
Thus,  the  Indian  banking  system  is  displaying  none  of  the  distresses  that  the  Western 
banking system has exhibited since the start of the sub-prime crisis. 
 
14 
 BIS Review 54/2009
 The  resilience  of  the  Indian  financial  sector  in  the  face  of  the  worst  global  financial  crisis 
since  the  1930s  can  also  be  attributed  to  our  approach  to  financial  globalization.  The  key 
features of our approach have been reflected in a full, but gradual opening up of the current 
account but a more calibrated approach towards the opening up of the capital account and 
the financial sector. As far as the capital account is concerned, whereas foreign investment 
flows, especially direct investment inflows are encouraged, debt flows in the form of external 
commercial  borrowings  are  generally  subject  to  ceilings  and  some  end-use  restrictions. 
Macro  ceilings  have  also  been  stipulated  for  portfolio  investment  in  government  securities 
and corporate bonds. Capital outflows have also been progressively liberalized. Along with 
the calibrated approach to opening of the capital account, we have also practised prudential 
regulation, particularly of banks to manage financial instability. 
The financial sector, especially banks, is subject to prudential regulation, with respect to both 
liquidity and capital. A number of initiatives have been taken by the Reserve Bank over the 
past 5-6 years with a view to mitigating liquidity risks, at the very short end, systemic level 
and institution level viz., (i) participation in the overnight unsecured overnight money market 
has been restricted to banks and primary dealers (PDs) and ceilings have been stipulated on 
their borrowing and lending operations in this market; (ii) prudential limits have been imposed 
on  banks  on  their  inter-bank  liabilities  in  relation  to  their  net  worth;  (iii)  asset-liability 
management guidelines have been framed that take cognizance of both on and off balance 
sheet  items;  and  (iv)  a  detailed  policy  on  the  provision  of  liquidity  support  to  Special 
Purchase Vehicles (SPVs) has been outlined in the guidelines on securitization of standard 
assets. 
With the objective of further strengthening capital requirements, the credit conversion factors, 
risk  weights  and  provisioning  requirements  for  specific  off-balance  sheet  items  including 
BIS Review 54/2009 
 15
derivatives  have  been  reviewed.  Furthermore,  in  India,  complex  structures  like  synthetic 
securitisation  have  not  been  permitted  so  far.  Introduction  of  such  products,  when  found 
appropriate would be guided by the risk management capabilities of the system. 
Detailed  guidelines  have  been  issued  by  the  Reserve  Bank  on  the  implementation  of  the 
Basel  II  framework  covering  all  the  three  pillars.  Minimum  CRAR  of  9  per  cent  has  been 
prescribed. Banks have been advised to bring Tier I CRAR to a minimum of 6 per cent before 
end-March 2010. All foreign banks operating in India and Indian banks having a presence 
outside  India  migrated  to  Basel  II  by  March  31,  2008  and  all  other  scheduled  commercial 
banks have migrated to Basel II by March 31, 2009.  
Apart  from  normal  prudential  requirements  on  banks,  additional  prudential  measures  in 
respect of exposures to specific sectors such as real estate, housing loans to individuals and 
consumer  credit,  have  been  successively  imposed,  on  the  lines  of  dynamic  provisioning. 
Furthermore,  the  regulation  and  supervision  of  Non-banking  Finance  Companies  (NBFCs) 
was tightened by reducing regulatory arbitrage vis-à-vis the banking sector. The regulatory 
requirements are also higher in the case of deposit-taking NBFCs vis-à-vis the non-deposit-
taking ones which has helped to contain leverage in this sector. 
Thus,  a  number  of  prudential  measures  were put  in  place  incrementally  over  the  past  five 
years  in  order  to  maintain  stability  in  the  Indian  financial  system  and  these  measures  in 
conjunction with the overall cautious approach to financial and external sector liberalisation 
have contributed to domestic macroeconomic and financial stability. 
Our response to the unfolding impact of the crisis 
IV.  
As noted earlier, the main impact over the past few months, especially following the collapse 
of Lehman Brothers in September 2008, has been the outcome of the reduction in net capital 
inflows and the significant correction in the domestic stock markets on the back of sell-off in 
the equity market by FIIs. The reduced foreign funding and the lacklustre domestic capital 
market had put pressures on some segments of the financial system, such as NBFCs and 
mutual funds. A substantial proportion of collections of mutual funds reflected bulk funds from 
the  corporate  sector  under  the  money  market  schemes,  partly  reflecting  tax  and  other 
regulatory  arbitrage.  As  alternative  sources  of  funding  dried  up  and  also  due  to  the 
substantial  correction  in  stock  prices,  there  were  large  redemption  pressures  on  mutual 
funds. While the mutual funds promised immediate redemption, there assets were relatively 
illiquid.  Maturity  mismatches  between  assets  and  liabilities  of  mutual  funds  further 
aggravated the problems. Drying up of funds with mutual funds, which in turn were provider 
of  funds  to  other  sectors,  further  accentuated  the  flow  of  funds.  Consequently,  all  the 
pressure for fund availability came to rest on banks: from the corporate sector unable to get 
external funds or equity, from NBFCs and from mutual funds; and the perception of a credit 
crunch emerged. 
Reserve Bank’s policy response: analytics  
In  view  of  the  lower  level  of  capital  inflows,  there  were  some  pressures  in  the  foreign 
exchange market. Consistent with its policy objective of maintaining orderly conditions in the 
foreign  exchange  market,  the  Reserve  Bank  sold  foreign  exchange  in  the  market.  While 
foreign  exchange  sales  attenuated  the  mismatch  in  the  foreign  exchange  market,  these 
operations drained liquidity from the rupee market and accentuated pressures on the rupee 
liquidity. Accordingly, the Reserve Bank has been pro-actively managing liquidity since mid-
September 2008 to assuage the liquidity pressures through a variety of measures. The cash 
reserve ratio (CRR) was reduced from 9 per cent (September 2008) to 5 per cent by early 
January  2009  injecting  nearly  Rs.1,60,000  crore  of  primary  liquidity  in  the  system.  Fresh 
issuances  under  MSS  were  stopped  and  buyback  of  existing  MSS  securities  was  also 
resorted  to  inject  liquidity  into  the  system.  Buybacks  were  timed  with  government  market 
16 
 BIS Review 54/2009
borrowing programme. Following the amendment to the Memorandum of Agreement on the 
MSS, Rs.12,000 crore was transferred to the Government cash account from the MSS cash 
account. Reflecting the various operations, MSS balances declined from Rs.1,75,362 crore 
at end-May 2008 to around Rs.88,000 crore by end-March 2009. Other measures taken by 
the Reserve Bank in response to the global financial crisis include cut in the statutory liquidity 
ratio (SLR), opening of new refinancing windows, refinance to SIDBI and EXIM Banks, and 
clawing back of prudential norms in regard to provisioning and risk weights. The measures to 
improve  forex  liquidity  included  increase  in  interest  rate  ceilings  on  non-resident  deposits, 
and easing of restrictions on external commercial borrowings and on short-term trade credits. 
Simultaneously,  in  view  of  the  adverse  impact  of  the  global  slowdown  on  the  domestic 
economy, policy rates were also cut - the reverse repo rate by 425 basis points from 9.00 per 
cent to 4.75 per cent and the reverse repo rate by 275 basis points from 6.00 per cent to 3.25 
per cent. However, it may be noted that, at present, the reverse repo rate (the lower band of 
the LAF corridor) is the operational policy rate, whereas, in the period prior to mid-September 
2008, the repo rate (the upper band of the LAF corridor) was the operational policy rate. The 
effective policy rate has, thus, seen a larger cut of 575 basis points from 9.00 per cent in mid-
September 2008 to 3.25 per cent now. This is mirrored in the money market interest rates 
(weighted  average  of  call,  market  repo  and  CBLO)  falling  from  9.3  per  cent  in  September 
2008 to 3.8 per cent in March 2009 (2.8 per cent as on April 22, 2009).  
While in 2007 and previous years, large capital flows and their absorption by the Reserve 
Bank led to excessive liquidity, which was absorbed through sterilization operations involving 
LAF, MSS and CRR. During 2008, in view of reversal in some components of capital flows, 
fresh  MSS  issuances  were  initially  scaled  down  and  then  reversed.  The  MSS  operates 
symmetrically,  and  acts  as  a  store  of  liquidity  and  hence  has  the  flexibility  to  smoothen 
liquidity  in  the  banking  system  both  during  episodes  of  capital  inflows  and  outflows.  The 
existing set of monetary instruments has, thus, provided adequate flexibility to manage the 
evolving  situation.  In  view  of  this  flexibility,  unlike  central  banks  in  major  advanced 
economies,  the  Reserve  Bank  did  not  have  to  dilute  the  collateral  requirements  to  inject 
liquidity. LAF repo operations can, however, be limited by the excess SLR securities held by 
banks. 
Furthermore,  in  view  of  the  large  government  market  borrowing  programme,  the  Reserve 
Bank  has  been  conducting  purchases  of  government  securities  under  its  open  market 
operations  (OMO)  as  warranted  by  the  evolving  monetary  and  financial  market  conditions. 
On  March  26,  2009,  the  Reserve  Bank  announced  a  calendar  for  OMOs  for  the  first  half 
(April-September  2009)  of  the  fiscal  year.  Taking  into  account  the  expected  unwinding  of 
MSS securities of Rs.42,000 crore during April-September  2009 and other factors in view, 
the  Reserve  Bank  announced  that  it  intended  to  purchase  government  securities  of 
Rs.80,000  crore  under  OMOs  during  the  first  half.  The  OMO  calendar  and  amounts  are 
indicative and the Reserve Bank will have the flexibility to make changes in the amount of 
OMO depending on the evolving liquidity conditions and its other operations. These actions 
reflect  the  need  for  close  co-ordination  between  government  debt  management  and 
monetary policy operations. This can be done smoothly in our case since the Reserve Bank 
also acts as the debt manager for the government. 
Analytically, the various policy actions by the Reserve Bank since mid-September 2008 have 
been aimed at offsetting the contraction caused to its balance sheet due to fall in its foreign 
assets. Policy initiatives have aimed at expanding domestic assets on the Reserve Bank’s 
balance  sheet  through  open  market  operations,  scaling  back  of  MSS,  refinance  facilities, 
regular operations under LAF and special market operations for oil bonds. The central bank 
balance  sheet  is  the  ultimate  source  of  money  and  credit  creation  and  expansion  in  the 
economy.  It  is  therefore  important  that  the  central  bank  balance  sheet  and  the  monetary 
base/reserve money continue to expand so as to meet the normal monetary requirements of 
a  growing  economy  consistent  with  price  stability.  The  reduction  in  CRR  is  expected  to 
increase the money multiplier. The various monetary and liquidity measures, taken together, 
BIS Review 54/2009 
 17
have  released  actual/potential  liquidity  amounting  to  over  Rs.4,90,000  crore  since  mid-
September 2008 (about 9 per cent of GDP) (Table 8). In brief, the proactive policy initiatives 
to  avoid  contraction  of  the  RBI  balance  sheet  coupled  with  the  increase  in  the  money 
multiplier are aimed at ensuring non-inflationary growth of money supply in the economy to 
support the needs of the real economy. Despite large capital outflows and the concomitant 
sales  of  foreign  exchange  by  the  Reserve  Bank  and  the  depletion  of  its  assets  side,  the 
Reserve Bank was able to substitute them with equivalent domestic assets so as to stabilise 
the growth of reserve money. Year-on-year growth in reserve money (adjusted for changes 
in the CRR) was 19.0 per cent at end-March 2009 as compared with 25.3 per cent in the 
previous  year.  Reserve  money  expansion,  thus,  remains  consistent  with  the  growth 
requirements of the Indian economy and long-run trends. In contrast to the trends in major 
advanced economies (discussed next), there has been no excessive expansion of reserve 
money.  Hence,  the  issue  of  unwinding  and  exit  of  the  current  excessively  accommodative 
monetary  and  liquidity  policies,  which  is  of  extreme  concern  in  the  major  advanced 
economies, is not relevant for us in view of the consistent growth in reserve money. 
 
 Monetary aggregates in major advanced economies: recent trends 
In this regard, the recent behaviour of US monetary aggregates is interesting. With interest 
rates  approaching  near  zero  levels,  the  US  Federal  Reserve  has  resorted  to  aggressive 
quantitative easing as reflected in its expansion of balance sheet. In view of the continuing 
strains  in  the  US  financial  markets,  the  Fed’s  major  policy  tools  –  lending  to  financial 
institutions,  providing  liquidity  directly  to  key  credit  markets,  and  buying  longer-term 
securities  –  represent  a  use  of  the  asset  side  of  the  Fed's  balance  sheet,  that  is,  they  all 
involve  lending  or  the  purchase  of  securities.  According  to  the  Federal  Reserve,  these 
policies  provide  it  the  flexibility  to  continue  to  push  down  interest  rates  and  ease  credit 
conditions in a range of markets, despite the fact that the federal funds rate is close to its 
zero  lower  bound.  The  Fed  prefers  to  dub  this  approach  as  “credit  easing”  –  rather  than 
terming it as “quantitative easing”, the policy approach used by the Bank of Japan from 2001 
to 2006. While both approaches involve an expansion of the central bank's balance sheet, in 
18 
 BIS Review 54/2009
a  pure  quantitative  easing  regime,  the  focus  of  policy  is  the  quantity  of  bank  reserves 
(liabilities of the central bank); the composition of loans and securities on the asset side of 
the  central  bank's  balance  sheet  is  incidental.  In  contrast,  the  Federal  Reserve's  credit 
easing  approach  focuses  on  the  mix  of  loans  and  securities  that  it  holds  and  on  how  this 
composition  of  assets  affects  credit  conditions  for  households  and  businesses  (Bernanke, 
2009). The Bank of England is also now doing similar quantitative easing. 
Reflecting the massive liquidity injection operations, monetary base in the US almost doubled 
between  June  2008  and  December  2008.  Over  the  same  six-month  period,  money  supply 
(M2) and bank credit increased by only 6 per cent. M2 money multiplier correspondingly fell 
from  8.8  to 4.9  over  the  same  period.  Thus,  even  as  the  Fed  expanded  its  balance  sheet 
significantly, money supply and bank credit appeared to maintain their normal growth. This 
can  be  attributed  to  the  fact  that  banks,  rather  than  employing  such  additional  liquidity 
pumped  by  the  Federal  Reserve  into  the  system,  have  preferred  to  keep  these  funds  as 
excess reserves with the Fed itself: banks deposits with the Federal Reserve jumped from 
around US $ 90 billion to US $ 839 billion between June and December 2008. Thus, all the 
efforts  of  the  Fed  to  accelerate  the  pace  of  credit  and  monetary  aggregates  in  the  US 
economy  have  been  largely  offset  by  the  increased  holdings  of  commercial  bank  deposits 
with  the  Fed.  As  noted  earlier,  the  strong  growth  in  monetary  base  holds  the  potential  to 
increase capital flows to the EMEs with lags. Since December 2008, there has been some 
moderation in the expansion of monetary base, and pick-up in money supply growth (Table 
9). 
 Credit growth in India: perceptions and reality 
In view of the changed environment due to capital outflows and risk aversion, there was a 
substantial  shrinking  of  non-bank  sources  of  funding  in  India  –  such  as  domestic  capital 
markets,  funding  from  NBFCS  and  mutual  funds  and  external  funding  in  the  form  of 
commercial borrowings and ADRs/GDRs (Table 10). Accordingly, there was a sudden rush 
for bank credit from the various sectors of the economy and there were perceptions of credit 
crunch.  Moreover,  in  view  of  incomplete  pass-through  to  domestic  petroleum  prices  in  the 
first half of 2008-09 (before the sharp correction in international crude oil prices), there was a 
large demand from petroleum companies for bank credit. For almost similar reasons, fertilizer 
companies also had a large resort to bank credit. Reflecting these factors, growth in non-food 
bank credit (y-o-y) accelerated to around 30 per cent by October 2008. Nonetheless, there 
was a perception that there was credit crunch during this period, which could be attributed to 
a large decline in non-bank sources of funding. The slowdown of the manufacturing sector 
BIS Review 54/2009 
 19
and a temporary build-up in inventories as well as liquidity problems faced by mutual funds 
and NBFCs during this period added to an increased demand for bank credit. At the same 
time, there might have been an increase in precautionary demand for bank credit in the last 
quarter of 2008 in view of the heightened uncertainties. The cumulative impact of all these 
demand pressures was reflected in acceleration of non-food bank credit from around 25-26 
per  cent  in  the  quarter  July-September  2008  to  around  30  per  cent  in  October  2008. 
Accordingly, a number of steps were taken by the Reserve Bank to make available adequate 
rupee and forex liquidity and to ensure adequate flow of credit.  
  
Non-food bank credit growth has, however, moderated from the peak of around 30 per cent 
in October 2008 to around 18 per cent by end-March 2009. This could be attributed to both 
demand and supply factors. The demand-side factors include the significant moderation in 
industrial  activity  over  the  past  few  months,  the  substantial  correction  in  international 
commodity and raw material prices and the still elevated bank lending rates. On the supply 
side, some risk-aversion on the part of the banks could have reduced the availability of bank 
credit. The cumulative impact of deceleration in bank credit, relatively strong deposit growth 
and various measures by the Reserve Bank to increase liquidity is mirrored in the Reserve 
Bank’s LAF operations – switch from an average net repo (injection) of around Rs. 45,600 
crore in September 2008 to an average net reverse repo (absorption) of around Rs.43,000 
crore during January-March 2008. 
Stickiness in bank domestic and lending rates  
While the policy rates have been substantially eased since early October 2008, some rigidity 
has  been  observed  in  banks’  deposit  and  lending  rates.  Banks  deposit  and  lending  rates 
continue  to be  high,  albeit  some  easing  has  been  witnessed  in  the  past  few  months.  This 
rigidity  could  be  attributed  to  a  variety  of  factors.  First,  while  headline  inflation  in  terms  of 
wholesale price index has seen a significant easing over the past few months (from around 
12 per cent in September 2008 to 0.3 per cent by end-March 2009), it is largely due to the 
substantial decline in international crude oil prices and some reduction in domestic prices of 
administered oil products. Food articles inflation in the WPI continues to remain at high levels 
(6  per  cent).  Reflecting high  food  inflation,  various  measures  of  consumer  price  inflation  – 
which have a relatively higher weight for food items vis-à-vis WPI – also remain at elevated 
levels (around 10-11 per cent). Second, the interest rate on small savings continues to be 
administered and any reduction in interest rates on bank deposits can make bank deposits 
20 
 BIS Review 54/2009
relatively  unattractive,  which  could  lead  to  some  deceleration  of  growth  in  bank  deposits. 
Third, the bulk of banks’ time deposits continue to be at fixed interest rates. While interest 
rates on incremental time deposits are coming down, the average cost of deposits will remain 
high till the maturing deposits get renewed. This, in turn, constrains an immediate substantial 
reduction in lending rates. Thus, for a variety of factors, bank lending rates are expected to 
exhibit only a gradual softening, which impedes monetary transmission. 
 
 Conclusions and lessons 
V.  
The  ongoing  global  financial  crisis  can  be  largely  attributed  to  extended  periods  of 
excessively loose monetary policy in the US over the period 2002-04. Very low interest rates 
during this period encouraged an aggressive search for yield and a substantial compression 
of risk-premia globally. Abundant liquidity in the advanced economies generated by the loose 
monetary  policy  found  its  way  in  the  form  of  large  capital  flows  to  the  emerging  market 
economies. All these factors boosted asset and commodity prices, including oil, across the 
spectrum  providing  a  boost  to  consumption  and  investment.  Global  imbalances  were  a 
manifestation  of  such  an  accommodative  monetary  policy  and  the  concomitant  boost  in 
aggregate demand in the US outstripping domestic aggregate supply in the US. This period 
coincided  with  lax  lending  standards,  inappropriate  use  of  derivatives,  credit  ratings  and 
financial  engineering,  and  excessive  leverage.  As  inflation  began  to  edge  up  reaching  the 
highest  levels  since  the  1970s,  this  necessitated  monetary  policy  tightening.  The  housing 
prices  started  to  witness  some  correction.  Lax  lending  standards,  excessive  leverage  and 
weaknesses  of  banks’  risk  models/stress  testing  were  exposed  and  bank  losses  mounted 
wiping off capital of major financial institutions. The ongoing deleveraging in the advanced 
economies and the plunging consumer and business confidence have led to recession in the 
major  advanced  economies  and  large  outflows  of  capital  from  the  EMEs;  both  of  these 
channels are now slowing down growth in the EMEs. 
Monetary policy and asset prices 
The conventional wisdom is that, even if the monetary authority can ex-ante identify an asset 
bubble, the typical monetary policy actions – changes of 25 or 50 basis points – would be 
BIS Review 54/2009 
 21
insufficient to stop the bubble. It has been argued that only substantial hikes in policy rates 
could  prick  the  bubble  but  this  would  be  at  a  substantial  cost  to  the  real  economy.  The 
influence of interest rates on the speculative component of asset prices is unclear from both 
a  theoretical  and  empirical  perspective  (Kohn,  2008).  In  the  context  of  the  current  global 
financial  crisis,  with  deleterious  impact  on  growth  and  employment  and  significant  fiscal 
costs,  the  issue  of  relationship  between  monetary  policy  and  asset  prices  needs  to  be 
revisited.  It  can  be  argued  that  the  output  losses  of  a  pre-emptive  monetary  action  might 
have  been  lower  than  the  costs  that  have  materialised  from  a  non-responsive  monetary 
policy. At least, a tighter monetary policy could have thrown sand in the wheels and could 
have reduced the amplitude of asst price movements. As asset prices bubbles are typically 
associated with strong growth in bank credit to certain sectors such as real estate and stock 
markets,  pre-emptive  monetary  actions  could  be  reinforced  by  raising  risk  weights  and 
provisioning  norms  for  sectors  witnessing  very  high  credit  growth.  For  both  monetary  and 
regulatory actions to be taken in tandem, it is important that both the functions rest with the 
central banks. In this context, the recent trend of bifurcation of monetary policy responsibility 
from  regulatory  responsibility  appears  to  be  unhelpful  (Mohan,  2006b).  On  balance,  it 
appears that pre-emptive and calibrated monetary and regulatory measures would be better 
than  an  inertial  monetary  policy  response.  Such  an  approach  can  help  in  mitigating  the 
amplitude of the bubble in both the upswing and the downswing of the cycle and contribute to 
both macroeconomic and financial stability. This view seems to be  gaining ground. As the 
IMF in its recent assessment notes: “Central banks should adopt a broader macro-prudential 
view, taking into account in their decisions asset price movements, credit booms, leverage, 
and the build up of systemic risk. The timing and nature of pre-emptive policy responses to 
large imbalances and large capital flows needs to be re-examined” (IMF, 2009b). 
It  thus  appears  that  the  sharp  swings  in  monetary  policy,  especially  periods  of  prolonged 
accommodation, in the advanced economies are the underlying causes of the ongoing global 
financial crisis. While until recently, the “Great Moderation” since the early 1990s – reduction 
in inflation and reduction in growth volatility – had been attributed, in part, to the rule-based 
monetary policy, it now appears that that volatility in monetary policy can also have the side-
effect of creating too much volatility in financial markets and financial prices, which can then 
potentially  feed  into  the  real  economy  with  dangerous  consequences,  as  indicated  by  the 
ongoing global financial crisis.  
Management of capital flows by EMEs 
Large volatility in capital flows to EMEs has been a recurrent feature of the global economic 
landscape since the early 1980s. Periods of large capital inflows, well above the financing 
need,  have  been  followed  by  a  sudden  drying  up  of  capital  flows.  Such  large  swings  in 
capital flows over a very short period of time impose significant adjustment costs and large 
output and employment losses on the EMEs. As is well-known, capital flows reflect both push 
and pull factors. The push factors are critically dependent upon the stance of monetary policy 
in the advanced economies, a factor over which domestic authorities have no control. In view 
of these factors, it would be better for the EMEs to manage their capital account. Contrary to 
the  theoretical  expectation,  empirical  evidence  does  not  find  any  support  that  free  capital 
movement leads to higher economic growth. While benefits from external debt flows remain 
unproven, equity flows, especially FDI, are found to be beneficial. This suggests a relatively 
liberal  regime  for  direct  investment  flows.  Progress  in  the  liberalisation  of  debt  flows, 
especially  short-term  debt  flows,  by  EMEs  would  depend  upon  greater  macroeconomic 
stability, convergence of inflation levels and development of financial markets. 
Issues in financial regulation 
Finally,  the  current  global  financial  crisis  has  again  shown  that  markets  can  fail  and  such 
market failures have huge costs. The financial system is prone to excesses, given the high 
leverage  of  banks  and  other  financial  institutions.  Within  the  financial  system,  banks  are 
22 
 BIS Review 54/2009
“special”, whether locally- or foreign-owned, because they effectively act as trustees of public 
funds through their deposit taking activities and are the lynch pins of the payments systems. 
The  speed  with  which  a  bank  under  a  run  collapses  is  incomparable  with  any  other 
organisation.  A  failure  of  one  bank  can  have  a  strong  contagion  on  the  rest  of  the  banks, 
even if they are healthy. In this age of globalisation, as the current crisis has revealed, the 
lack of confidence in banks in one country can also have a contagion on banks in the rest of 
the  world.  It  is  because  of  this  that  many  governments  in  EMEs  had  to  guarantee  the 
deposits in their banking systems during the later part of 2008. Given the risks to financial 
stability,  governments  in  advanced  economies  had  to  bail  out  their  largest  banks  and 
financial institutions. The notion that markets will take care of weaknesses has once again 
been  proven  wrong.  So  far,  the  focus  of  banking  regulation  globally  has  been  on  capital 
adequacy. As this crisis has shown, liquidity issues are equally important and it is appropriate 
to  note  that,  in  India,  we  have  focussed  our  attention  on  these  issues  as  well.  Given  the 
complex inter-linkages between banks and non-banks and the move towards conglomerates, 
it is important that regulatory arbitrage loopholes are fixed to avoid regulatory arbitrage. It is 
in this context that we have tightened the regulatory regime in regard to NBFCs over the past 
few years in a phased manner. It is, therefore, important that banks and other financial sector 
players are well-regulated, while permitting them the necessary flexibility to grow and expand 
and  meet  the  financing  needs  of  a  growing  economy.  A  host  of  other  issues  such  as 
accounting, auditing and compensation have also received attention in the aftermath of the 
global financial crisis. All these issues are engaging the active attention of policymakers and 
academics alike around the world (G-20, 2009). In view of the fast pace of technological and 
financial  innovations,  regulatory  authorities  would  have  to  follow  an  approach  that  would 
have to be dynamic and adjust in response to changing economic environment.  
of 
13. 
January 
Available 
Economics, 
References 
Bernanke,  Ben  (2009),  “The  Crisis  and  the  Policy  Response”,  Stamp  Lecture  at  London 
School 
at 
http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/bernanke20090113a.htm 
Committee on the Global Financial System (2009), Report of the Working Group on Capital 
flows  to  Emerging  Market  Economies  (Chairman:  Rakesh  Mohan),  Bank  for  International 
Settlements, Basel. 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis (2009), Monetary Trends, April.  
Group of Thirty (2009), “Financial Reform: A Framework for Financial Stability” (Chairman: 
Paul A. Volcker), Washington D.C. 
Geneva  Report  (2009),  “The  Fundamental  Principles  of  Financial  Regulation”,  Geneva 
Reports  on  the  World  Economy  11  (by  Markus  Brunnermeier,  Andrew  Crocket,  Charles 
Goodhart, Avinash D. Persaud and Hyun Shin).  
G-20  (2009),  “Working  Group  on  Enhancing  Sound  Regulation  and  Strengthening 
Transparency (Co-Chairs: Tiff Macklem and Rakesh Mohan). 
Haldane, Andrew (2009), “Why Banks Failed The Stress Test?”, Bank of England. 
Henry,  Peter  Blair  (2007),  “Capital  Account  Liberalization:  Theory,  Evidence,  and 
Speculation”, Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. XLV, December. 
International  Monetary  Fund  (2009a),  “Group  of  Twenty:  Note  by  the  Staff  of  International 
Monetary Fund”, January. 
------ (2009b), “Initial Lessons of the Crisis”, February. 
----- (2009c), World Economic Outlook Database, April. 
BIS Review 54/2009 
 23
Kohn,  Donald  (2008),  “Monetary  Policy  and  Asset  Prices  Revisited”,  Remarks  at  the  Cato 
Institute's  26th  Annual  Monetary  Policy  Conference,  November  19.  Available  at 
http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/kohn20081119a.htm  
Lane,  Philip  (2009),  “Global  Imbalances  and  Global  Governance”,  Paper  presented  at  the 
`Global Economic Governance: Systemic Challenges, Institutional Responses and the Role 
of the New Actors’, Brussels, February. 
de Larosiere Report (2009), “Report of the High-Level Group on Financial Supervision in the 
EU” (Chairman: Jacques de Larosiere), Brussels.  
Mohan, Rakesh (2006a), “Coping With Liquidity Management in India: A Practitioner's View”, 
Reserve Bank of India Bulletin, April. 
---- (2006b), “Evolution of Central Banking in India”, Reserve Bank of India Bulletin, June 
----  (2007),  “India's  Financial  Sector  Reforms:  Fostering  Growth  While  Containing  Risk”, 
Reserve Bank of India Bulletin, December. 
Portes,  Richard  (2009),  “Global  Imbalances”  in  Mathias  Dewatripont,  Xavier  Freixas  and 
Richard Portes (Ed.), “Macroeconomic Stability and Financial Regulation: Key Issues for the 
G20”, Centre for Economic Policy Research, London. 
Obstfeld, Maurice (2009), “International Finance and Growth in Developing Countries: What 
Have  We  Learned?”,  Working  Paper  14691,  National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research, 
Cambridge, MA. 
Reserve  Bank  of  India  (2009a),  “India’s  Financial  Sector:  An  Assessment”  Committee  on 
Financial Sector Assessment (Chairman: Rakesh Mohan), March.  
---- (2009b), “Macroeconomic and Monetary Developments during 2008-09”, April. 
Taylor, John (2009), “The Financial Crisis and the Policy Responses: An Empirical Analysis 
of  What  Went  Wrong”,  Working  Paper  14631,  January,  National  Bureau  of  Economic 
Research. 
Turner Review (2009), “The Turner Review: A Regulatory Response to the Global Banking 
Crisis” by Lord Turner, Chairman, Financial Services Authority, UK.  
World Bank (2008), Global Development Finance 2008: The Role of International Banking, 
World Bank. 
24 
 BIS Review 54/2009
