Zeti Akhtar Aziz: The Malaysian bond market  
Speech by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the Launch of 
AmBank's  Malaysia  Corporate  Bond  Handbook  Commodity  Murabahah  House,  Kuala 
Lumpur, 18 August 2009. 
 It is my pleasure to be here today on this occasion of the launch of the Malaysia Corporate 
Bond  Handbook.  The  handbook,  which  is  the  first  comprehensive  guidebook  for  bond 
investors,  is  an  initiative  that  will  contribute  towards  improving  the  visibility  and  the 
development of the Malaysian bond market. Our bond market continues to be dynamic, with 
continued new developments that enhance Malaysia's position as a centre of origination for 
securities. In addition, a deeper and more liquid domestic bond market is also important for 
the development of a vibrant regional bond market which would in turn allow for a part of the 
savings in the region to be recycled and re-invested in the region. 
Growth and development of the Malaysian bond market 
The  Malaysian  bond  market  has  experienced  significant  transformation  over  the  recent 
decade and is now well positioned to have a more significant role to support the changing 
requirements  of  the  economy  in  our  next  stage  of  development.  Initiatives  introduced  by 
Bank Negara Malaysia to spur the development of the domestic bond market started as far 
back  as  1986.  The  establishment  of  Cagamas  Berhad,  the  national  mortgage  corporation 
was  the  first  institution  that  the  Bank  established  as  part  of  the  efforts  to  develop  the 
domestic bond market. This was followed with the establishment of other institutions, which 
included the Securities Commission and the domestic rating agencies. The Bank also put in 
place a comprehensive and modern depository, delivery and settlement system to facilitate 
the issuance, trading and settlement of debt securities in the market.  
Mechanisms  to  increase  liquidity  in  the  market  to  enhance  the  overall  price  discovery 
process  were  also  introduced  through  the  provision  of  updated  market  information.  In 
addition, measures were also introduced to release the captive holdings and to facilitate the 
efficient borrowing and lending of securities. More flexible foreign exchange policies was also 
implemented to facilitate capital raising and investment by non-residents to further accelerate 
the development of our domestic bond market. 
Today, the Malaysian bond market is the largest in the ASEAN region, accounting for nearly 
90 percent of our gross domestic product. Corporations now have access to more innovative 
and sophisticated financing solutions through the bond market to meet their diverse funding 
requirements. Financing through the bond market by the corporate sector now accounts for 
58 percent of their total financing compared to 33 percent prior to the Asian financial crisis, 
when there was greater reliance on the banking system for financing. With the advent of new 
financing instruments and supporting infrastructure, trading activity in the secondary market 
have  also  increased  by  more  than  three  fold,  with  the  trading  volume  now  amounting  to 
RM516 billion. 
A key development of the Malaysian financial market is the enormous growth of the sukuk 
market. As a pioneer in the global sukuk market, Malaysia has remained firmly established 
as  one  of  the  largest  issuers  of  sukuk,  with  62  percent  of  the  world's  outstanding  sukuk 
having  originated  in  Malaysia.  Malaysia's  lead  is  also  reflected  in  the  innovative  and 
competitive  structures  that  have  been  pioneered  such  as  the  exchangeable  sukuk 
musharakah and sukuks based on istisna' and ijarah. All these augurs well for Malaysia to 
evolve as an International Islamic financial hub and as a centre of sukuk origination. 
BIS Review 27/2009 
 1
Riding through the global financial market uncertainties 
The enhanced resilience of our financial system during this challenging international financial 
environment can be attributed to the comprehensive reform measures undertaken over this 
decade  which  has  contributed  to  reduce  the  impact  of  the  global  financial  crisis  on  our 
financial  system  and  our  economy.  The  domestic  financial  markets  have  remained  orderly 
despite experiencing greater volatility, higher outflows and lower trading volume at the height 
of  the  crisis.  The  financial  sector  has  also  remained  solid  and  has  continued  its 
intermediation function without disruption throughout this period. 
A number of pre-emptive measures has also been initiated to ensure continued access to the 
bond market for funding. This includes the establishment of Danajamin Nasional Berhad, a 
national financial guarantee insurer to provide credit enhancement for viable corporations to 
raise financing from the bond market. This initiative is expected to enhance the prospects for 
companies to tap the bond market. Within three months of its operations, two submissions 
have  been  received  with  30  more  in  the  pipeline.  These  applications  amount  to  a  credit 
enhancement  to  raise  RM8.4  billion  of  bonds.  A  further  initiative  in  this  direction  is  the 
resumption  in  the  operations  of  the  Corporate  Debt  Restructuring  Committee  (CDRC),  to 
facilitate  the  restructuring  of  debts,  including  private  debt  securities  of  the  larger  viable 
corporations. 
Renewed optimism in the financial market 
It is now more than two years since the onset of the global financial crisis. The effects of the 
crisis  on  the  Asian  economies  began  to  be  felt  in  the  second  half  of  2008.  Measures  to 
stabilise the financial systems in the advanced countries and the implementation of massive 
fiscal and monetary stimulus on a global scale have begun to contribute towards a gradual 
improvement in economic activity in most countries.  
Conditions in the domestic economy have also shown signs of improvement in the second 
quarter, with the decline in the industrial production index and in retrenchments being at a 
much slower pace. As labour market conditions stabilises and the business and consumer 
sentiments turn positive, and as this is reinforced by the accelerated implementation of the 
fiscal stimulus packages, the continued access to financing and the lower rate of inflation will 
cumulatively improve conditions in the domestic economy in the second half of 2009 and into 
2010.  
Signs of optimism have also started to emerge in the bond market. The recent narrowing of 
spreads between benchmark issuances and triple A rated papers indicate that risk aversion 
has now eased. In the primary market, new corporate bond issuance has increased by about 
40 percent to RM28.4 billion in the second quarter of this year. In the secondary market, the 
recent average daily trading volume has also increased by more than 50 percent. 
Demand for higher-yielding securities are also beginning to rise ahead of the recovery in the 
global economy. In addition, in view of the prospects for an earlier recovery in Asia, global 
investors  in  the  current  uncertain  international  environment  will  increasingly  be  looking  at 
Asian  financial  markets  for  investment  opportunities.  This  trend  is  already  being  observed 
through the substantial inflow of funds dedicated for emerging markets since the middle of 
April this year with an estimated average inflows of USD 144 million per week compared to 
the  net  outflow  recorded  in  the  early  part  of  the  year.  This  positive  trend  enhances  the 
opportunity for Malaysia to further expand its bond market.  
Timely issuance of corporate handbook by AmBank 
The corporate handbook being launched by AmBank today therefore comes at an important 
juncture  in  the  development  of  the  bond  market.  Encapsulating  the  profiles  of  100 
conventional and sukuk issuers in the Malaysian bond market, it is indeed a commendable 
2 
 BIS Review 27/2009
effort  by  AmBank  to  provide  this  comprehensive  information  to  foreign  and  domestic 
investors to facilitate their investment decisions.  
On this note, I wish to congratulate AmBank on the official launch of the Malaysian corporate 
bond handbook and to all those involved in its successful publication. 
BIS Review 27/2009 
 3
