Ingimundur Friðriksson: The banking crisis in Iceland in 2008 
Paper by Mr Ingimundur Friðriksson, Governor of the Central Bank of Iceland, prepared for a 
seminar  which  was  scheduled  to  be  held  at  the  Bank  of  Finland,  6  February  2009.  The 
author was unable to attend. 
 Iceland  has  been  hit  extraordinarily  hard  by  the  financial  crisis  that  has  swept  across  the 
globe. The rapid growth of the country’s financial system in the past few years rendered it 
much more vulnerable to global developments than it would otherwise have been. In my talk 
today,  I  would  like  to  trace  in  broad  terms  various  aspects  of  the  runup  to  the  Icelandic 
banking crisis, particularly from the point of view of the Central Bank. It will not be a complete 
picture. 
After Iceland’s banks were fully privatised early this century, they began expanding at a rapid 
pace,  with  the  primary  focus  of  that  growth  outside  Iceland.  They  acquired  financial 
companies in other countries, opened branches, and expanded their international business 
from  their  headquarters  in  Reykjavík.  This  rapid  growth  was  facilitated  by  Iceland’s 
membership in the European Economic Area (EEA) through which the country had created 
for its financial system a regulatory framework that was rooted in the directives adopted by 
the  European  Union.  Among  other  things,  this  meant  that  operating  licences  granted  to 
Icelandic financial companies extended not only to Iceland but to all other EEA states. For 
example,  they  were  permitted  to  operate  branches  anywhere  in  the  EEA.  The  European 
regulatory  framework  gave  the  Icelandic  banks  the  same  operational  flexibility  all  over  the 
EEA as they enjoyed in Iceland. They had the same rights and responsibilities as banks in all 
of the other EEA states. The Icelandic Financial Supervisory Authority based its operations 
on  European  law,  regulations,  and  procedures,  and  was  given  good  marks  by  rating 
agencies and the International Monetary Fund. 
But  the  regulatory  environment  was  by  no  means  the  sole  factor  allowing  the  banks  to 
expand to the degree that they did. During the early years of the 21st century, the situation 
on  the  global  financial  markets  was  highly  unusual.  The  supply  of  credit  was  virtually 
inexhaustible  and  interest  rates  lower  than  they  had  been  in  a  hundred  years.  Financial 
markets  were  hungry  for  bonds,  including  those  issued  by  Iceland’s  banks,  which  were  a 
welcome addition to many of the structured securities that became so popular. The banks 
were  thoroughly  scrutinised  by  international  rating  agencies  and  their  favourable  credit 
ratings greatly facilitated the banks’ foray into the bond market. The banks became a vital 
link in the national economy, their expansion and that of other Icelandic companies garnered 
widespread  support,  they  offered  handsome  salaries,  and  they  paid  the  Treasury  sizeable 
tax revenues, directly and indirectly. 
The  banks  attracted  international  attention  late  in  2005  and  early  in  2006.  The  market 
became more wary of them, their CDS spreads began rising toward the end of 2005, and 
they received more probing and critical coverage by the media and others than they were 
accustomed  to.  The  criticism  was  wide  ranging,  targeting  the  banks’  growth  pace,  risk 
appetite,  low  deposit  ratios  and  high  dependence  on  borrowed  funds,  as  well  as  cross 
ownership, lack of transparency, and so on. Until that time, the banks had increasingly been 
active in the global bond market, with ever larger debt issues. 
In February 2006, Iceland’s Prime Ministry, Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Business Affairs, 
Financial  Supervisory  Authority,  and  Central  Bank  concluded  a  collaboration  agreement 
centring on financial stability and contingency measures. The government then established 
an advisory group on the basis of this agreement. 
BIS Review 22/2009 
 1
The Icelandic banks sought to respond in various ways to the criticism levelled at them. They 
greatly  enhanced  their  information  disclosure  to  the  global  marketplace,  thus  improving 
transparency  in  their  operations.  They  sought  to  reduce  cross-ownership,  improve  their 
liquidity  position  and  capital  ratios,  and  took  the  first  steps  toward  increasing  the  share  of 
deposits on the liabilities side of their balance sheets. They were strongly encouraged to do 
so  by  rating  agencies  and  numerous  foreign  financial  analysts,  among  others.  Landsbanki 
launched its Icesave deposit accounts in the United Kingdom toward the end of 2006. The 
banks also sought out new credit markets for example in the US which was wide open at the 
time for issuers with favourable credit ratings. 
Because they took this action, the Icelandic banks were perhaps better prepared than they 
would  otherwise  have  been  for  the  sudden  changes  that  took  place  in  the  global  financial 
markets in mid-2007. In this context, I wish to cite the Central Bank’s 2007 Financial Stability 
report, which appeared in April that year. It contained the following statement: “The Central 
Bank underlines that global market conditions can take a sudden turn for the worse and it is 
important to be on the alert and prepared for such a contingency.” The report goes on to say: 
“The current episode of ample liquidity and lower interest rates which has been ideal for risk-
seeking  investors  may  change  unexpectedly.  Short-term  interest  rates  have  been  rising  in 
most markets recently and capital costs are no longer so favourable.” With this warning, the 
Central Bank was merely stating what should have been obvious, at least to those engaged 
in  banking.  The  time  had  come  to  prepare  for  a  change  in  the  economic  and  financial 
climate. In the global arena, it had been stressed time and time again that risk premia were 
far too low, risk was not correctly priced, and that change would come. 
One of the side effects of the dramatic developments in the global financial markets starting 
in  mid-2007  was  the  sharp  rise  in  risk  aversion  among  investors  and  the  rapidly  shrinking 
supply of credit. CDS spreads began rising, including those of Icelandic banks. Around mid-
August  2007,  Kaupthing  Bank  announced  its  intention  to  acquire  the  Dutch  bank  NIBC, 
which was roughly two thirds its size. Kaupthing’s CDS spreads widened as a result, as the 
proposed acquisition would have increased its need for re-financing in the years to follow. 
Global market conditions continued to deteriorate throughout 2007: share prices plummeted, 
access  to  credit  became  much  more  limited,  and  interbank  business  transactions  more 
complicated at best. CDS spreads widened, including those of all the Icelandic banks. Many 
clung to the hope that conditions would improve in early 2008. That hope proved fruitless. 
Market conditions continued to deteriorate, and the supply of credit became tighter than ever. 
The Icelandic banks’ CDS spreads rose to very high levels. 
As  I  have  mentioned,  the  banks  began  to  increase  their  deposit  business  after  the 
experience of early 2006 by offering favourable premiums. Retail deposits in branches and 
subsidiaries abroad grew quickly and soon became an important source of funding for two of 
the  banks,  particularly  in  2007  and  early  2008.  But  the  bond  markets  remained  virtually 
closed to them as the year 2008 progressed. 
At  the  beginning  of  May  2008,  the  Central  Bank  published  its  annual  Financial  Stability 
report,  which  included  a  detailed  analysis  of  the  state  of  and  prospects  for  the  financial 
system.  The  report  pointed  out  vulnerabilities  but  also  identified  elements  that  tended  to 
strengthen the system. The title of the Central Bank’s analysis was: “Current conditions test 
the banks’ resilience.” The report stated that the system was considered broadly sound but 
that  contingency  measures  were  needed.  The  chief  risk  factors  were  a  vulnerable  foreign 
exchange market and limited access to capital, which represented a short-term risk. For the 
longer term, vulnerabilities centred rather on the effects of higher cost of capital and the risk 
of erosion of asset quality. The report included a detailed analysis of the quality of the banks’ 
loan portfolios. Although the conclusion was that the banks were well prepared to face rising 
defaults  and  loan  losses  at  that  time,  particular  attention  was  drawn  to  the  fact  that  the 
previous  year  had  seen  increases  in  the  ratio  of  large  exposures  to  capital  and  in  the 
proportion  of  holding  companies  among  borrowers.  The  report  emphasised  that  there  was 
2 
 BIS Review 22/2009
good reason to scrutinise this development closely. The Central Bank had actually noted this 
in  earlier  publications  as  well.  For  the  near  term,  the  banks’  most  critical  task  was  to 
guarantee  access  to  foreign  credit  and  reduce  their  borrowing  requirement.  Furthermore, 
confidence among investors and depositors was of vital importance. It was deemed unlikely 
that conditions in the international markets would improve to any dramatic extent in the near 
future,  and  when  they  did,  investors  would  undoubtedly  demonstrate  more  caution  and 
conservatism than they had previously. In addition to this, the report shed light on the banks’ 
very large re-financing needs in the next few years: They would need to re-finance 35 billion 
euros in foreign bonds through 2012, including 17 billion in 2009 and 2010. 
Some critics have maintained that, in the May 2008 issue of Financial Stability, the Central 
Bank contradicted its own knowledge of the state of the banks – or even that it did not know 
any  better.  This  is  untrue.  The  report  examined  in  a  transparent  manner  the  financial 
system’s weaknesses, as well as its strengths. The developments in the global arena since 
the spring of 2008 rendered the risks mentioned in Financial Stability far more serious than 
was foreseen. 
In  its  monetary  policy  statement  in  July  2008,  the  Board  of  Governors  said  inter  alia  that 
“Iceland’s commercial banks play an important role in maintaining confidence in the financial 
system. Under the current global financial market conditions, they must protect their liquidity 
and capital position, seek all possible ways to reduce their need for foreign credit, and adapt 
the scope of their operations to dramatically changed circumstances.” 
Throughout  2008,  the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland  focused  increasing  attention  on  the 
developments  and  operational  outlook  at  the  nation’s  financial  institutions  –  particularly  its 
large  banks.  Among  other  things,  it  monitored  their  liquidity  much  more  closely  and 
frequently than is stipulated in the Bank’s rules on liquidity requirements, and considerably 
more  than  had  been  customary.  The  Central  Bank  met  with  leaders  from  the  large 
commercial banks and reviewed various aspects of their operations, requesting information 
on and explanations of the developments in certain areas, such as liquidity, funding, changes 
in  lending  and  deposits,  asset  sales,  etc.  The  banks  were  urged  to  show  restraint  and 
downsize, and to follow that up, the Central Bank specifically collected information from them 
on their downsizing efforts. They realised, of course, that they were in a tight position, and 
they  responded  by  selling  assets  and  discontinuing  selected  activities  in  a  number  of 
countries,  among  other  things.  Kaupthing  Bank’s  decision  to  abandon  its  plans  to  acquire 
NIBC in the Netherlands was very important in this regard, not just for Kaupthing itself but for 
all of the banks. The Central Bank supported all of these actions wholeheartedly; however, it 
did not have the statutory authority power to force the banks to change their conduct. 
It  is  known  that  the  Central  Bank  expressed  its  growing  concern  over  the  position  of  the 
banks  during  meetings  with  governmental  authorities.  Early  last  year,  the  Central  Bank’s 
concern  centred  not  least  on  the  banks’  large  near-term  refinancing  requirement  for  the 
coming years, which I have already mentioned, and the opinion, expressed by leaders of a 
number  of  international  banks,  that  the  global  credit  crunch  was  unlikely  to  ease  in  the 
foreseeable  future.  The  Central  Bank  feared  that  credit  markets  could  remain  closed  to 
Icelandic banks for some time to come. Although various explanations have been given for 
the swift rise in the Icelandic banks’ CDS spreads, first in early 2008 and again that summer, 
it is perhaps possible to claim that the most important explanation lay in growing scepticism 
about  the  banks’  ability  to  obtain  the  medium-term  funding  they  needed  for  refinancing 
purposes. 
In  late  2006,  the  Central  Bank  had  doubled  its  foreign  exchange  reserves  through  an 
international  Treasury  bond  issue  the  proceeds  of  which  were  deposited  with  the  Central 
Bank. Early in 2008 it began preparing to fortify its reserves still further, as is explained in a 
BIS Review 22/2009 
 3
memorandum published on the Central Bank’s website in October 2008.21 Raising the foreign 
reserves  was  deemed  important  in  order  to  bolster  confidence  in  the  Icelandic  financial 
system and thus to facilitate its adjustment to a new reality. Currency swap agreements with 
three Nordic central banks were announced in May 2008 and renewed towards the end of 
the  year.  No  other  central  banks  apart  from  the  Nordic  ones  were  prepared  to  lend  their 
support in 2008, in spite of the Central Bank’s requests and in spite of the public declarations 
from the international community, including the Financial Stability Forum, about the necessity 
for consultation and co-operation, not least among central banks, including the establishment 
of swap lines. 
As mentioned, the Icelandic banks significantly increased their presence in the retail deposit 
market abroad, beginning in late 2006. Actually, they were so confident about their success 
that, at meetings held over the course of 2008, some of their leaders voiced the expectation 
that it should be easy for them to fund all of their outstanding bonds and other debt for the 
coming  years  through  deposit  business  in  Europe.  However,  through  discussions  with 
governors and other representatives from central banks abroad, the Board of Governors of 
the Central Bank of Iceland had become aware of growing opposition to the Icelandic banks’ 
accumulation of deposits. No doubt this opposition stemmed from many factors, among them 
the fact that banks in those same parts of Europe felt the pressure of the sudden competition 
and  communicated  their  concerns  to  their  authorities.  Another  cause was  the  fact  that  the 
accumulation  of  deposits  in  foreign  subsidiaries  increased  the  potential  obligations  of  the 
deposit  insurance  schemes  in  the  countries  of  operation.  A  third  factor  may  have  been 
concerns  that  the  relatively  high  interest  rates  offered  by  the  Icelandic  banks  might  reflect 
underlying  weakness.  A  fourth  consideration  was  the  concern  about  the  Icelandic  deposit 
insurance scheme with respect to deposits in foreign bank branches. It was clear, however, 
that  the  Icelandic  system  fulfilled  the  requirements  set  forth  in  European  directives,  which 
stipulate  that  the  government  must  ensure  that  such  a  deposit  insurance  scheme  is 
established  but  do  not  address  the  issue  of  government  responsibility  for  the  scheme’s 
commitments,  and  certainly  not  in  the  event  of  a  system-wide  shock.  Official  European 
documents corroborate this. 
Some declared outright that the Icelandic banks would be prevented from receiving deposits 
or that they would be forbidden to receive further deposits in the countries where they were 
already established. There were examples of demands that the banks reduce their deposits, 
in  spite  of  the  provisions  in  EU  directives  on  financial  companies’  equal  right  to  conduct 
business  anywhere  within  the  European  Economic  Area.  In  this  case  national  interests 
outweighed  pan-  European  commitments.  As  a  result,  it  appeared  as  though  the  banks’ 
plans to meet their funding needs through retail deposits would be, at best, difficult to carry 
out. The Board of Governors of the Central Bank explained the foreign authorities’ attitudes 
towards this deposit accumulation to the leaders of the Icelandic banks and informed them 
that they would be faced with strong and swiftly mounting opposition. 
The Central Bank of Iceland was unequivocally of the opinion that the banks’ foreign deposits 
should be held in subsidiaries rather than branches and that Landsbanki’s deposit business 
in London should be transferred to a subsidiary of the bank. The preparation for this transfer 
began early in 2008, and the Central Bank was informed soon thereafter of what was needed 
to  make  the  change  and  how  long  it  would  take.  Judging  from  discussions  with  senior 
executives at Landsbanki, the Central Bank assumed that the process had begun that spring. 
In July, it was revealed that this was not the case. Although the Central Bank’s position on 
the  matter  was  clear,  it  did  not  have  the  power  to  force  changes  or  make  demands. 
Moreover, other Icelandic authorities also had limited legal power in this respect under the 
legislation then in force which was and is based on EU Directives. 
                                                 
1
 
See the memorandum dated October 9, 2008: Currency swap agreements and attempts to reinforce the 
foreign exchange reserves. 
4 
 BIS Review 22/2009
As  I  have  mentioned,  the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland  kept  close  watch  on  the  liquidity  of  the 
Icelandic  banks  throughout  2008,  both  by  compiling  data  regularly  and  by  meeting  with 
senior  executives  in  the  banks.  Among  other  things,  the  Central  Bank  tracked  the  banks’ 
liquidity virtually on a daily basis and kept abreast of their refinancing efforts and asset sales. 
It was common knowledge that one of the banks, Glitnir, had a large foreign loan payment 
coming up in mid-October. Unlike the other banks, Glitnir had not been active in creating a 
presence  in  the  retail  deposit  market  abroad,  having  chosen  instead  to  bolster  liquidity  by 
selling assets. In mid-September, the Board of Governors of the Central Bank met with the 
Glitnir management and reviewed the bank’s liquidity outlook once again. At that time, the 
prospects  for  funding  the  October  payment  were  good,  and  according  to  information 
presented to the Central Bank, Glitnir would be able to cover that payment with an asset sale 
that  was  virtually  complete.  It  was  then  that  American  investment  bank  Lehman  Brothers 
collapsed, starting a tremor that would shake financial markets all over the globe. 
In its Quarterly Review in December 2008, the Bank for International Settlements went so far 
as to say that, after the failure of Lehman Brothers, the global financial markets “seized up 
and entered a new and deeper state of crisis.(…) With credit and money markets essentially 
frozen  and  equity  prices  plummeting,  banks  and  other  financial  firms  saw  their  access  to 
funding eroded and their capital shrink owing to accumulating mark to market losses.” The 
Lehman bankruptcy had triggered a widespread crisis of confidence. 
Among other repercussions of the Lehman Brothers collapse, the above-mentioned virtually 
completed sale of Glitnir assets did not materialise. This kicked off the well-known chain of 
events. Glitnir turned to the Central Bank for assistance. Not only was the bank unsuccessful 
in its attempt to sell assets, it was unable to renew a bank loan that it had expected to extend 
without any difficulty. Ultimately, the Government decided that the Treasury should acquire a 
majority holding in Glitnir, but before that could be finalised, the bank collapsed. 
In  early  October,  there  was  substantial  pressure  on  Landsbanki’s  deposit  accounts  in 
London, and the British Financial Services Authority (FSA) steadily tightened the demands it 
made on the bank. Landsbanki’s liquidity difficulties became insurmountable, and it was clear 
that  rescuing  the  bank  would  not  represent  prudent  use  of  the  Central  Bank’s  foreign 
exchange  reserves.  The  amounts  involved  were  simply  too  large.  By  this  time,  only 
Kaupthing  remained  of  the  three  large  banks.  In  view  of  the  prospects  for  Kaupthing’s 
liquidity, the bank was deemed likely to survive the storm. On the basis of that assumption, 
the Central Bank, after consulting the Government, granted Kaupthing a collateralized four-
day  loan  that  should  have  sufficed  –  as  things  stood  then.  Subsequent  events  in  London 
changed that, however, including the FSA´s action against the Kaupthing subsidiary. 
The  three  leading  commercial  banks,  representing  about  85%  of  total  banking  assets,  all 
collapsed.  The  Icelandic  Financial  Supervisory  Authority  took  over  their  operations  on  the 
basis of  newly  adopted  legislation, and  they  were  divided into  two  entities,  the  new  banks 
and the old. I will not expound on that process here, except to say that top priority was given 
to the maintenance of smooth payment intermediation and uninterrupted banking operations, 
and  that  efforts  in  that  regard  were  successful  in  spite  of  measures  such  as  the  “freezing 
order” imposed on Landsbanki by the British authorities under the Anti-Terrorism, Crime and 
Security Act – a freezing order that originally extended as well to the Icelandic government, 
Central  Bank,  and  Financial  Supervisory  Authority,  among  others. 
the 
circumstances, the relative ease with which banking operations and payment intermediation 
continued to function bordered on the miraculous. 
The  International  Monetary  Fund  conducted  an  FSAP  appraisal  of  the  Icelandic  financial 
system  during  the  summer  of  2008.  The  resulting  staff  report  can  be  found  on  the  Fund’s 
website. Another report, which was submitted to the Fund’s Executive Board in connection 
with  the  Icelandic  government’s  November  2008  request  for  a  Stand-By  Arrangement, 
includes the following statement: 
fact, 
In 
in 
BIS Review 22/2009 
 5
“Iceland’s overstretched, over-leveraged banking system was ill-positioned to cope with 
the  global  financial  turmoil.  The  Icelandic  banking  sector  experienced  a  dramatic 
expansion in just a few years, funded by cheap foreign financing, which allowed it to 
boost its assets from 100 to almost 900 percent of GDP between 2004 and end-2007. 
This expansion made the Icelandic banking system one of the largest in the world in 
relation to GDP. As global conditions deteriorated in early 2008, banks’ CDS spreads 
rose  to  unprecedented  levels.  In  response,  banks  slowed  lending  growth,  enhanced 
liquidity  buffers,  reduced  costs,  and  started  a  process  of  downsizing  non-core 
operations and laying off staff. But their ability to deleverage was limited by the global 
risk  aversion.  A  recent  FSAP  update  and  Article  IV  Consultation  conducted  in  June 
2008  pointed  to  several  risks  that  were  mounting  throughout  2008:  (i)  liquidity  and 
funding  risks,  associated  with  the  banks’  reliance  on  market  funding  and  their  large 
funding  needs  over  the  short  run;  (ii)  credit  and  market  risks,  resulting  from  foreign 
currency, equity exposures, and high indebtedness of domestic borrowers, as well as 
collateralized  lending,  connected  lending,  and  large  exposures;  (iii)  operational  risks, 
associated with the banks’ rapid expansion in recent years; and (iv) quality of capital 
risks, related to complex ownership structures. In this light, the Staff Report concluded 
that “if risks were to materialize in full, Iceland could face severe financial strains.” 
Despite  the  authorities’  attempts  to  prepare  for  contingencies  earlier  in  the  year,  the 
crisis brought down the three main banks within a week. In May 2008, the central bank 
entered into swap agreements with other Nordic central banks, in an effort to secure 
liquid foreign exchange should the need arise. In September, the government borrowed 
300 million Euro to further boost reserves. At the same time, the central bank had been 
increasing liquidity provision, easing rules on eligible collateral (including by accepting 
uncovered bonds from banks) and reducing reserve requirements. But renewed global 
pressures in late September led to a swift loss of investor confidence in the Icelandic 
economy  and  financial  system,  and  a  massive  depreciation  of  the  króna.  The  three 
main banks could not secure payments for their due obligations, and the government 
decided  to promptly  intervene  rather  than  to  continue  what  was  considered  to  be  an 
eventually unsustainable process of supporting the three banks.“ 
frequently  and  exchanged 
As I have already mentioned, the Central Bank responded to developments and prospects in 
2008 by monitoring the banks’ liquidity even more frequently and maintaining close contact 
with  them.  In  addition,  the  Bank’s  contingency  committee  had  been  mobilised  and  worked 
continuously from the fall of 2007 onward. The advisory committee from the Prime Minister’s 
Office, Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Business Affairs, Financial Supervisory Authority, and 
Central  Bank  met 
information.  The  committee  prepared 
contingency plans and had a legislative bill drafted – the bill that later became the emergency 
legislation passed in early October. 
It is obvious that the banks had become too large in relation to the Icelandic economy. They 
took  advantage  of  a  liberal  regulatory  environment,  good  credit  ratings,  and  the  unusually 
advantageous  conditions  on  the  global  markets  and  expanded  their  operations  at  a  rapid 
pace. The European regulatory framework made this possible. In many ways their activities 
resembled those of banks in other countries. Under normal market conditions, this posed no 
immediate problem. The banks could have funded their operations even under sub-optimal 
market conditions. Many were of the opinion that the Central Bank should build up very large 
foreign exchange reserves, even up to a multiple of GDP, in order to back up the financial 
system. Given the current account deficit on the balance of payments, this would only have 
been possible with massive foreign borrowing. It would never have transpired, for the simple 
reason  that  the  Icelandic  government  would  have  been  unable  to  borrow  such  a  large 
amount. Its credit ratings would not have tolerated it, and lenders would have been difficult to 
find. 
As  I  have  touched  on,  the  banks  responded  to  mounting  difficulties  in  various  ways. 
Kaupthing,  for  example,  abandoned  its  plans  to  acquire  the  Dutch  bank  NIBC.  All  of  the 
6 
 BIS Review 22/2009
to 
to  rescue  banks  and  other 
financial  companies,  resorting 
banks  sold  assets  and  discontinued  various  non-core  operations;  however,  as  the  IMF 
mentioned in the previously cited Staff Report, it was not a seller’s market. In addition, the 
banks all reduced their lending and laid off staff. Meetings held last summer with the banks’ 
leaders revealed, among other things, that some of them were making vigorous attempts to 
attract foreign investors, those with retail deposit collection in foreign branches were aiming 
to transfer the deposits held in those branches to subsidiaries within a few months, and some 
were even considering moving their headquarters out of Iceland which the Central Bank did 
not object to. 
As pressures in the global liquidity markets intensified, much like banks in other parts of the 
world,  the  Icelandic  banks  turned  to  the  Central  Bank  for  funding,  as  many  banks  abroad 
have  done.  The  Central  Bank  of  Iceland  expanded  its  liquidity  facilities,  as  did  its  foreign 
counterparts.  Iceland’s  banks  obtained  funding  both  from  their  own  Central  Bank  and, 
through their foreign subsidiaries, from the European Central Bank (ECB), from which they 
sought liquidity in euros. As other banks, they became heavily dependent on ready access to 
liquidity  facilities.  However,  the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland  could  not  provide  liquidity  in 
currencies other than the Icelandic króna, and until recently most other central banks only 
provided loans in their own currency. All over the globe, central banks and other authorities 
fought 
increasingly 
unconventional measures in the process. In spite of these attempts, financial companies of 
all  sizes  have  gone  bankrupt,  while  others  have  been  rescued  –  at  least  temporarily  – 
through  massive  government  assistance  or  guarantees.  At  this  point,  banks  are  almost 
entirely dependent on central bank liquidity facilities, and the interbank markets are more or 
less non-functional because of the utter lack of confidence. The balance sheets of the world’s 
largest  central  banks  have  grown  significantly  since  the  end  of  last  summer,  with  some 
expanding many times over. 
For several years, the Central Bank of Iceland’s rules on liquidity facilities have been largely 
modelled  on  those  of  the  ECB.  I  say  largely  because  for  quite  a  while  the  Icelandic  rules 
were rather more stringent than those in Europe – that is, the Central Bank of Iceland set 
stricter  requirements  concerning  eligibility  of  collateral.  Facilities  in  the  Central  Bank  of 
Iceland resembled those in the ECB’s jurisdiction; the collateral accepted was similar, and so 
on. This applied, among other things, to bonds issued by banks. Last year, steps were taken 
to align the Icelandic rules more closely with those in Europe in order to increase access to 
liquidity. 
In  2008,  the  European  Central  Bank  responded  sharply  to  what  it  considered  excessive 
borrowing  from  the  ECB  by  Icelandic  banks  through  subsidiaries  in  EMU  countries.  The 
loans concerned had been taken in compliance with the ECB’s rules on liquidity facilities for 
financial  undertakings  in  EMU  countries,  but  the  ECB  demanded  that  the  Icelandic  banks 
repay, quite quickly, a large share of the facilities of which they had availed themselves in 
good  faith.  Those  repayments  were  funded  at  least  partially  with  deposit  accumulation  in 
foreign branches. Early in October, two Icelandic banks received sizeable margin calls from 
the ECB. The ECB demanded that they be met immediately, which would have driven the 
banks to collapse. The news of these margin calls spread widely. For reasons that were not 
explained, the ECB withdrew the margin calls at the last moment, in spite of the fact that the 
Central Bank of Iceland had been informed that such decisions by the ECB were irrevocable. 
In retrospect, perhaps the safest way to prevent the collapse of the Icelandic banks would 
have been, at the outset, to place more stringent limits on their operations than were placed 
on financial institutions in other EEA states; in other words, to deny them the rights conferred 
by the EEA Agreement. Had this been done, Iceland would not have been a full participant in 
the internal market of the European Union. I will leave it to others to answer the question of 
whether political support would have been forthcoming for the imposition of such restrictions 
on the banks at that time. On the other hand, in view of recent developments, it is obvious 
that  the  banks  took  advantage  of  extremely  favourable  conditions  to  expand  more  rapidly 
than was sustainable for the long term as things developed. Because of their relative size, 
BIS Review 22/2009 
 7
the Icelandic banks were more vulnerable than many other businesses even to moderately 
adverse developments, not to mention the catastrophic events that have shaken the global 
financial  environment  in  the  past  year.  The  question  of  when  it  would  have  been  right  to 
intervene – and how – is extremely difficult to answer, however. No one has perfect foresight. 
Many lessons will doubtless be learned from the experience of the past few years, including 
lessons  about  capital  and  liquidity  requirements,  concentration  of  financial  company 
ownership, financial links between owners and financial companies, and financial companies’ 
ownership of other businesses, to name a few. But those lessons are outside the scope of 
my talk today. 
Conditions  in  the  global  financial  system  are  at  their  worst  since  the  Great  Depression, 
particularly  after  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers.  It  is  virtually  an  unprecedented  crisis. 
Perhaps it is possible to say after the fact that the fall of Lehman sealed the fate of Iceland’s 
banks. Once Lehman had failed, nothing could have saved them. Assets had become almost 
impossible to sell due to the crisis of confidence and the global credit squeeze the Icelandic 
banks faced a much harsher operating environment and could expect that strict limitations 
would  be  placed  on  their  foreign  deposit  business  –  if  it  were  not  stopped  entirely. 
Government  authorities  in  other  countries  consulted  with  one  another  more  and  more 
frequently on these issues. 
Early  in  October,  the  Icelandic  Parliament  passed  emergency  legislation  authorising  the 
Financial  Supervisory  Authority  to  take  over  the  banks’  operations.  The  authorities  had  no 
choice  but  to  act  on  that  authorisation  immediately,  take  over  the  three  large  banks,  and 
divide their operations into two parts, the old banks and the new. The new banks, which are 
owned  by  the  government,  took  over  domestic  banking  activities,  while  foreign  operations 
remained  within  the  old  banks,  which  have  been  granted  a  moratorium  on  payment.  The 
government’s  response  in  October  was  guided  by  the  overriding  aim  of  guaranteeing 
continued  domestic  banking  operations  and  domestic  and  cross-border  payment 
intermediation under extraordinarily difficult circumstances. 
Following the collapse of the banks, the Icelandic government negotiated a Stand-By Facility 
from the International Monetary Fund on the basis of an economic programme focusing on 
three main objectives: first, to stabilise the foreign exchange market and provide support for 
the appreciation of the króna from its recent exceptionally low levels; second, to formulate a 
fiscal policy for 2009 and beyond aimed at establishing a sustainable level of debt; and third, 
to  restructure  the  banking  system  in  a  transparent  manner  consistent  with  internationally 
recognised practice. That process is underway. The Treasury was virtually debt-free on a net 
basis  when  the  crisis  struck  but  will  now  have  to  take  on  large  debt,  the  exact  amount  of 
which  cannot  yet  be  estimated  with  any  certainty  because  the  government’s  total  deposit 
insurance liability is still undetermined. The economic adjustment ahead will be sharp, but if 
the global economy makes a gradual recovery, Iceland should be well equipped to return to 
sound  economic  growth  at  the  end  of  that  adjustment.  The  assumption  concerning  global 
economic recovery is of vital importance, however, and remains shrouded in uncertainty. 
8 
 BIS Review 22/2009
