Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Global financial crisis, recent 
macroeconomic developments and performance of private investments 
in Uganda  
Speech  by  Prof  Emmanuel  Tumusiime-Mutebile,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Uganda,  at  the 
Workshop  on  “Dissemination  of  Results  of  the  Private  Sector  Investments  Survey  (PSIS) 
2008 and Launch of the PSIS 2009”, Kampala, 18 June 2009. 
 The Guest of Honour, the Honorable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic 
Development  
The Executive Directors of Uganda Investment Authority;  
The Executive Directors of Uganda Bureau of Statistic;  
Representative from MEFMI;  
The representatives of the various Private Sector Entities and Organizations in Uganda,  
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen  
Let me take this opportunity to welcome you all to this workshop for the dissemination of the 
results of the 2008 Private Sector Investment Survey and to launch the cycle for the 2009 
Survey. I would especially like to thank the Honorable Minister for accepting our invitation to 
preside over this important event. Honorable Minister, you are most welcome.  
Private  investment  surveys  are  a  valuable  tool  for  enhancing  our  understanding  of  the 
economy  and  of  some  of  the  factors  which  determine  economic  growth.  Their  success 
depends on the participation of firms in the private sector: hence I wish to thank all of our 
partners  from  the  private  sector  for  their  continued  cooperation  in  this  exercise.  I  am  also 
grateful  to  all  the  members  of  the  Uganda  Working  Group  on  Private  Investments  for  the 
work they have done to prepare the findings that will be presented here today.  
Global financial crisis, recent macroeconomic developments and performance of 
private investments in Uganda  
I would like to share with you my views on the global financial crisis and its impact on our 
economy. Our economy is integrated into the global economy. Not surprisingly, the breadth 
and depth of the global crisis that has been unfolding since 2007 leaves many people in this 
country  wondering  whether  our  economy  can  emerge  unscathed  when  so  many  others 
around the world are taking such a hammering. This is, of course, particularly, important for 
private  investors  because  uncertainty  is  a  major  factor  affecting  investment  decisions:  the 
more uncertain are economic prospects, the more likely it is that private investors will put off 
decisions  to  commit  resources  to  investment.  It  is,  therefore,  important  to  understand  the 
nature of the global economic crisis, the channels through which it will affect the Ugandan 
economy and how our economy can adjust to meet the challenges it faces.  
The genesis of the global financial crisis  
The  global  crisis  was  triggered  by  rising  defaults  in  the  sub-prime  mortgage  sector  of  the 
USA  which  seriously  weakened  the  balance  sheets  of  numerous  financial  institutions,  not 
only in the USA, which were exposed to the US sub prime market through their purchase of 
mortgage backed securities or the various derivatives of these securities.  
Over  the  course  of  2008  and  the  current  year,  the  losses  incurred  in  the  US  subprime 
mortgage  sector  were  amplified  several  fold  because  they  occurred  in  a  context  of  much 
broader  financial  vulnerabilities.  These  vulnerabilities  stemmed  from  an  unsustainable 
expansion  of 
in  developed  economies,  an  unsustainable 
intermediation 
financial 
BIS Review  82/2009 
 1
accumulation  of  private  sector  debt  in  some  developed  and  transition  economies  and 
unsustainable macroeconomic imbalances at the global level. In turn, the rapidly increasing 
financial  fragility  in  the  financial  sector,  in  the  non  financial  corporate  sector  and  the 
household sector has led to a sharp decline in private sector consumption and investment 
spending and thereby induced recession in most of the developed economies and in some 
transition and developing economies.  
I would like to elaborate briefly on these issues.  
At the global level, the 2000s were characterized by huge macroeconomic imbalances. The 
USA,  the  UK,  Spain  and  many  countries  in  Eastern  Europe  experienced  booms  in  private 
consumption,  mostly  fuelled  by  easy  credit,  and  incurred  large  current  account  deficits.  In 
contrast,  many  emerging  market  economies,  with  China  being  the  most  obvious  example, 
and  a  few  developed  economies  enjoyed  rapid  growth  of  exports  alongside  high  savings 
rates. As a result they accumulated large current account surpluses. These current account 
surpluses were invested in the economies of the current account deficit countries, thereby 
allowing the latter to continue financing their profligate spending.  
It is arguable that macroeconomic policy, particularly in some of the developed economies 
such as the USA and UK, was too expansionary in the mid 2000s and thereby contributed to 
the  build  up  of  these  unsustainable  imbalances.  Moreover  the  low  interest  rates  which 
characterized  many  economies  in  the  2000s  induced  investors  to  seek  higher  returns  by 
diversifying their portfolios into riskier assets. In doing so, investors often assumed risks the 
nature of which was poorly understood even by sophisticated financial investors.  
The financial sector played a central role in the spending booms which took place in many 
countries.  The  financial  sector  was  itself  transformed:  it  both  expanded  very  rapidly  and 
became  increasing  dominated  by  market  based  transactions,  such  as  the  trading  of  asset 
backed securities, as opposed to more traditional relationship banking. It also developed an 
array  of  complex  new  financial  instruments  such  as  derivatives,  from  which  large  profits 
could  be  generated  while  the  risks  were  often  regarded,  wrongly,  as  negligible.  This 
transformation of the financial sector was facilitated by the “light touch” regulation practiced 
especially in the USA and UK. Light touch regulation was partly motivated by a belief in the 
efficiency of financial markets that now looks naïve, partly by the desire of governments to 
attract  globally  mobile  financial  services  to  their  own  territories  and  partly  by  regulatory 
capture.  
However,  rapid  expansion  of  balance  sheets  and  the  assumption  of  risks  that  were  not 
properly  understood  created  financial  fragility  in  many  financial  institutions,  including  those 
which had been bastions of the financial establishment. Furthermore, the complexity of the 
modern financial system and opacity of many  new financial instruments created enormous 
uncertainty  among  investors  as  to  where  risks  were  actually  held.  Allied  to  the  increasing 
importance  of  transactions  in  securities  markets,  for  example  to  source  funds  for  bank 
lending and the growth of a shadow banking sector, this served to increase the vulnerability 
of the financial system to systemic risk. It was the systemic risk to the financial system that 
forced  governments  in  several  countries  to  risk  huge  sums  of  public  money  to  bail  out 
distressed financial institutions, even though the  problems faced by these institutions were 
largely of their own making.  
Impact of the global crisis on Africa  
In contrast to some of parts of the world, most countries in Africa, including Uganda, have not 
suffered direct contagion from the financial crisis in the developed economies. Although there 
are substantial capital flows between Africa and the rest of the world, banks in Africa have 
virtually no exposure to the developed worlds’ toxic assets. Nor do African banks depend on 
wholesale  securities  markets  for  funding,  unlike  many  banks  in  the  developed  world.  As  a 
consequence,  neither  the  asset  quality  nor  the  liquidity  of  most  African  banks  has  been 
2 
 BIS Review 82/2009
directly  impaired  by  contagion  from  the  financial  crisis  in  the  developed  economies. 
Furthermore,  most  African  economies  have  not  funded  large  current  account  deficits  with 
short term external private borrowing. Hence they are not at risk of a capital account crisis, in 
contrast  to  some  of  the  transition  economies  in  Eastern  Europe.  For  these  reasons  most 
African economies have not suffered systemic failures in their financial systems as a result of 
contagion from the global crisis not have they been forced to adjust to sudden stops in their 
capital accounts through draconian expenditure reduction.  
Nevertheless, the impact of the global crisis is being felt in Africa, although it is somewhat 
more  muted  than  in  some  other  parts  of  the  world.  The  sharp  slowdown  in  global  growth 
affects Africa, including Uganda, through its impact on demand for the continent’s exports of 
goods  and  services  such  as  tourism,  on  transfers  of  remittances  from  Africans  working 
abroad  and  on  inflows  of  foreign  capital,  both  direct  investment  and  portfolio  capital.  As  a 
consequence,  foreign  exchange  inflows  will  be  reduced  and  the  growth  of  private  sector 
spending  will  fall.  This  will  inevitably  reduce  economic  growth  in  Africa.  The  IMF’s  latest 
Regional  Economic  Outlook  projects  real  GDP  growth  in  the  oil  importing  sub-Saharan 
African countries, excluding South Africa, falling from an average of 6.1 percent in 2008 to 
3.3 percent in the current calendar year, before recovering partially next year to 5.1 percent.  
The prospects for Uganda  
I would like now to focus on the prospects for the Ugandan economy. In terms of real growth 
of  output,  Uganda  has  performed  better  than  the  average  for  sub  Saharan  Africa  in  the 
2000s. There are solid grounds for believing that the economy is well placed to weather the 
challenges  posed  by  the  global  crisis  and  that  strong  real  output  growth  rates  can  be 
maintained,  although  at  slightly  lower  rates  than  in  recent  years,  for  the  reasons  I  have 
already mentioned. We are currently forecasting real GDP growth of 6 percent in the 2009/10 
fiscal year. This is approximately two percentage points lower than the average GDP growth 
of  8  percent  over  the  last  three  fiscal  years,  but  is  nevertheless  still  above  the  forecast 
regional average. 
The grounds for optimism are the following.  
First,  the  supply  side  of  our  economy  has  been  strengthened  in  the  2000s.  Private 
investment  has  risen  steadily  to  relatively  high  rates  of  17  percent  of  GDP  in  2008/09. 
Exports have been diversified with, in particular, vibrant growth of exports of manufactured 
products to Sudan and other neighbouring countries.  
Secondly,  sound  macroeconomic  management  has  been  pursued  in  Uganda  for  the  best 
part of two decades. As a result, the fiscal position is strong, with relatively low fiscal deficits 
and public debt. Inflation has been controlled at moderate levels despite the fuel and food 
price  shocks  which  hit  the  economy  last  year  and  is  now  falling  back  as  these  shocks 
subside.  Consumer  price  inflation  has  fallen  from  14.8  percent  in  February  2009  to  12.4 
percent  in  May  2009.  The  Bank  of  Uganda  has  also  accumulated  a  substantial  stock  of 
foreign exchange reserves, in excess of 2.25 million dollars, which can provide a buffer for 
our  balance  of  payments.  For  these  reasons  it  will  possibly  to  pursue  moderately 
countercyclical macroeconomic policies during the forthcoming fiscal year which will help to 
sustain  aggregate  demand  in  the  economy  without  jeopardising  fiscal  sustainability,  the 
control of inflation or external stability.  
Thirdly,  part  of  the  adjustment  to  the  much  less  favourable  international  economic 
environment  will  be  facilitated  by  exchange  rate  depreciation.  The  exchange  rate  of  the 
Uganda  Shilling  against  the  dollar has  depreciated  in  nominal  terms  by  almost  35  percent 
since  September  2008.  Although  this  makes  imports  more  expensive,  it  will  help  our 
economy by improving the competitiveness of our exports and inducing consumers to switch 
demand from imports to non tradeable domestically produced goods. It thereby enables the 
economy  to  adjust  to  maintain  external  balance  without  having  to  undergo  a  painful 
BIS Review  82/2009 
 3
recession  to  reduce  import  demand.  In  some  countries,  where  the  private  sector  has 
borrowed  heavily  in  foreign  currency  denominated  loans,  exchange  rate  depreciation  has 
been damaging because of its negative impact on private sector balance sheets, but this is 
not a major cause for concern in Uganda. Exchange rate flexibility is an important tool to help 
the  economy  adjust  to  an  external  shock.  However,  the  Bank  of  Uganda  will  ensure  that 
exchange rate adjustment is smooth and avoids disruptive volatility which would be harmful 
to users of foreign exchange in our economy.  
Fourthly,  the  Ugandan  banking  sector  has  proved  to  be  resilient  in  spite  of  the  global 
financial  crises.  It  is  well  capitalized  with  no  indication  of  direct  exposure  to  distressed 
financial institutions or toxic financial assets in other parts of the world. The banking sector 
has grown and diversified, with 21 commercial banks now offering a wide-range of financial 
products.  The  non-bank  financial  institutions  and  microfinance  companies  have  also 
continued to expand their products and operations to the countryside.  
Conclusions  
The  current  global  financial  crisis  is  largely  attributable  to  the  mismanagement  of  financial 
institutions  in  developed  economies,  weak  financial  regulation,  and  to  macroeconomic 
policies  in  the  industrialised  economies  which  contributed  to  large  global  macroeconomic 
imbalances.  
The direct contagion affects of the global financial crisis on the Ugandan financial sector are 
not significant, because of the limited exposure of banks in our economy to problem assets 
and  distressed  financial  institutions  in  the  developed  world.  Nevertheless,  the  secondary 
effects,  of  the  global  economic  recession  pose  a  threat  to  Uganda’s  economy  through 
reduced  demand  for  export  products,  lower  remittances  and  tourism  earnings  and  a 
reduction of foreign capital inflows. As a result, real economic growth will slow to some extent 
but will remain strong. Uganda will continue to maintain prudent and flexible macroeconomic 
policies management in order to adjust to the global crisis.  
Finally,  both  the  private  and  public  sector  must  act  together  by  sharing  vital  data  and 
information  to  guide  macroeconomic  monitoring  and  policy.  It  is  therefore  important  to  get 
your support in collecting more frequent, timely and accurate data on developments in the 
economy.  I  want  to  take  this  opportunity  to  appeal  to  private  investors  to  continue  to 
cooperate  and  provide  timely  and  accurate  data.  I  also  wish  to  thank  those  who  have 
responded to our previous surveys. 
4 
 BIS Review 82/2009
