Masaaki Shirakawa: Recent developments in Japan’s economy and the 
conduct of monetary policy 
Statement by Mr Masaaki Shirakawa, Governor of the Bank of Japan, concerning the Bank's 
Semiannual Report on Currency and Monetary Control, before the Committee on Financial 
Affairs, House of Representatives, Tokyo, 13 March 2009. 
 Introduction 
I  am  pleased  to  have  this  opportunity  to  present  an  overall  review  of  the  Bank  of  Japan's 
conduct  of  monetary  policy.  The  Bank  submitted  to  the  Diet  its  Semiannual  Report  on 
Currency and Monetary Control for the second half of fiscal 2007 on June 10, 2008 and that 
for the first half of fiscal 2008 on December 12, 2008. Today I would like to talk about recent 
developments in Japan's economy and the conduct of monetary policy. 
financial 
lending  attitudes  of 
institutions  are  severe.  Under 
Developments in Japan's economy 
I.  
Japan's  exports  have  been  decreasing  substantially  reflecting  a  slowdown  in  overseas 
economies, and domestic demand has become weaker against the background of declining 
corporate  profits  and  the  worsening  employment  and  income  situation  in  the  household 
sector.  Financial  conditions  have  remained  tight,  as  shown  by,  for  example,  a  continued 
increase in the number of firms, especially small firms, reporting that their financial positions 
are  weak  and 
these 
circumstances, economic conditions have deteriorated significantly and are likely to continue 
deteriorating for the time being. 
On the price front, domestic corporate goods prices have been decreasing, mainly due to the 
drop  in  international  commodity  prices.  The  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in  the  CPI 
(excluding  fresh  food)  has  recently  moderated  reflecting  the  declines  in  the  prices  of 
petroleum  products  and  the  stabilization  of  food  prices,  and,  with  increasing  slackness 
evident in supply and demand conditions, will likely become negative in the future. 
There  are  risks  to  the  outlook  for  economic  activity  and  prices.  Much  depends  on  global 
financial conditions as well as developments in overseas economies, and particular attention 
will need to be paid to the downside risks to economic activity. In addition, there is the risk of 
a  further  weakening  in  domestic  private  demand  if  firms'  medium-  to  long-term  growth 
expectations decline and pressures to adjust capital stock and employment increase. 
If  financial  conditions  should  tighten  further,  pressures  acting  to  depress  economic  activity 
from the financial side might become more marked and the adverse feedback loop between 
financial and economic activity might intensify. Turning to prices, there is a possibility that the 
inflation  rate  will  decline  further  if  downside  risks  to  economic  activity  materialize  or 
commodity prices fall. In this case, the risk of a decline in the medium- to long-term inflation 
expectations of firms and households would warrant attention. 
Conduct of monetary policy 
II.  
Since fall 2008, when the turmoil in global financial markets and in the U.S. and European 
financial systems increased in severity, the Bank, in order to support the economy from the 
financial side, has taken monetary easing measures in the following three areas: reductions 
in  the  policy  interest  rate,  provision  of  ample  liquidity  to  stabilize  financial  markets,  and 
facilitation  of  corporate  financing.  Regarding  the  policy  interest  rate,  the  Bank  reduced  it 
twice  in  October  and  December  2008,  and  currently  encourages  the  uncollateralized 
overnight  call  rate  to  remain  at  around  0.1  percent.  In  order  to  ensure  stability  in  financial 
BIS Review 44/2009 
 1
markets,  the  Bank,  as  part  of  the  coordinated  measures  of  central  banks,  has  been 
conducting  U.S.  dollar  funds-supplying  operations  whereby  funds  are  provided  with  no 
explicit ceiling on the total amount. The Bank has also continued to provide ample liquidity in 
yen,  taking  measures  such  as  actively  purchasing  Japanese  government  securities  under 
repurchase  agreements  and  increasing  the  amount  of  outright  purchases  of  Japanese 
government  bonds  (JGBs).  To  facilitate  corporate  financing,  the  Bank  has  expanded  the 
range  of  corporate  financing  instruments  eligible  as  collateral,  and  has  conducted  special 
funds-supplying  operations  to  facilitate  corporate  financing through  which,  taking  corporate 
debt as collateral, it provides unlimited funds at a low interest rate. 
The Bank has also implemented measures exceptional for a central bank, such as outright 
purchases of CP and corporate bonds. 
Meanwhile, the Bank resumed purchases of stocks held by financial institutions in February 
2009, to support financial institutions' future endeavors to reduce market risk associated with 
stockholdings and thereby ensure the stability of the financial system. 
The future conduct of monetary policy 
III.  
The  outlook  for  economic  activity  and  prices  is  highly  uncertain  at  present.  The  Bank  will 
continue  to  carefully  assess  the  future  outlook  for  economic  activity  and  prices,  closely 
considering  the  likelihood  of  its  projections  as  well  as  risk  factors,  and  to  exert  its  utmost 
efforts as a central bank to facilitate the return of Japan's economy to a sustainable growth 
path with price stability. 
2 
 BIS Review 44/2009
