Rundheersing Bheenick: Positive developments in Mauritius against the 
background of the financial crisis 
Address  by  Mr  Rundheersing  Bheenick,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius,  at  the  Annual 
Dinner in honour of Economic Operators, Port Louis, 5 December 2009. 
 I am delighted to welcome you all to the Annual Dinner in honour of our principal economic 
operators, to celebrate a year of fruitful collaboration and to reflect on the critical elements for 
sustaining this effective partnership.  
We  are  delighted  that  His  Excellency  Tito  Mboweni  has  accepted  our  invitation  to  be  our 
special  guest  tonight.  The  Great  Tito  was  until  recently  Governor  of  the  South  African 
Reserve Bank and is now a committed fisherman. Well may I say he is a great catch for us 
tonight. I first met Tito Mboweni as Governor Designate in Davos in the margins of a World 
Economic Forum meeting in February 1999, when I had the honour to accompany my Prime 
Minister as a Minister in his Cabinet.  
I have gained much from this illustrious man who shared with me glimpses of his vast and 
rich  career.  I  must  confess  that  my  first  meeting  with  him  as  Governor  was  even  more 
memorable.  It  happened  in  Washington  during  the  IMF/World  Bank  Annual  Meetings  in 
October 2007. It was as close to a telling-off as a Governor ever gets from another Governor:  
“My brother Governor from Mauritius”, Tito said drily, “I understand you have been on the job 
for nearly a year now … but you haven’t found the time to pay us a visit or to take an interest 
in our work in SADC”. 
I was cut to the quick by this stinging remark, especially as I had actually played a key role in 
getting Mauritius to join SADC in the first place. I am a quick learner and I learnt my lesson. 
Governor, you will be pleased to know that I currently luxuriate under the additional title of 
Chairman  of  the  COMESA  Committee  of  Central  Bank  Governors.  And  I  had  the  singular 
honour to chair the Commonwealth Meeting of Central Bank Governors in Cyprus and report 
on our work to the plenary meeting of Commonwealth Finance Ministers. Indeed, some claim 
I  have  learnt  my  lesson  too  well!  Some  complain  that  I  have  taken  the  regional  and 
international dimensions of the job so much to heart that I am hardly ever here. 
Now as Governor Mboweni steps from the limelight and has plans to pursue his great love of 
fishing, I invite him to elect Mauritius as his second home, so that he may indulge in his new 
hobby in our tranquil waters. You are most welcome Tito: it is our honour to have you with 
us. But, I am afraid, in this open and liberal economy we offer no “free lunches”. So we are 
going to ask you, a little later, to sing for your supper.  
But first, on a sombre note, may I ask you to remember our good friend and colleague, Anil 
Gunness, late CEO of the State Bank of Mauritius, assassinated in November 2008 in the 
Mumbai terrorist attack whilst on official duty. His death has been a great loss to us, a terrible 
tragedy for his family and a mark of the uncertain times in which we live. He was a man of 
integrity at the height of his powers, much loved and respected by all he met. So let us not 
allow the assassins their victory and, in this moment of reflection, let us recall the words of 
Dylan Thomas:  
“Though lovers be lost, 
Love shall not, 
And death shall have no dominion.” 
Let us rise and observe a moment of silence in his memory ... Thank you. 
Many of us here, last met in similar convivial circumstances in 2007, for the 40th anniversary 
of  the  Central  Bank.  Since  then  much  has  changed.  The  greatest  economic  and  financial 
BIS Review 163/2009 
 1
crisis of our generation happened. Indeed, it is still with us. So let us take time to reflect on 
the last two years and try to look forward to our role in the pursuit of our Prime Minister’s 
challenge of Maurice Ile Durable. But as we do so, there is just one thing ahead, of which 
we can be sure, in the immortal words of Yogi Berra, the US baseball star:  
“the future ain’t what it used to be!”  
This is not the moment to go over the now well-documented blowing away of so many star 
players in the western banking system and its knock-on effects in the real economy. That is 
all  available  in  the  roaring  paperback  trade;  and  those  failed  econometric  models  are  just 
today’s  pulp  fiction.  So  as  an  economist  I  agree,  somewhat  with  hindsight,  with  Kenneth 
Boulding, another economist – whose textbook guided my first steps in the field and figures 
among my most-prized possessions. Boulding succinctly expressed what many others have 
been thinking too:  
“Anyone who believes that exponential growth can go on forever in a finite world is either a 
madman, or an economist!” 
For what lies ahead for us is, nothing less than, a rethinking of western finance, and in the 
words of Kevin Warsh, a Governor at the US Federal Reserve:  
“We are witnessing a fundamental reassessment of the value of every asset everywhere in 
the world. (And) … a new financial architecture …” is taking shape before our eyes. 
As we look back across the debris of a collapsing western system of thought and practice on 
banking and financial matters, we might well ask, why did we miss the call to action before. 
Could  the  doctors  in  charge  have  saved  the  patient?  What  were  the  telling  signs  and 
symptoms?  
The very first cough maybe? When Barings Bank, with a Royal seal of approval, was hit by 
their own young man in Hong Kong, who sold them down the futures and derivatives drain, 
while senior managers were sipping cocktails … perhaps the pink champagne with which this 
Governor is allegedly permanently sozzled.  
If we look back, there was once a time when accountants were thought to be, if anything, 
rather boring, and absolutely straight: then there was Enron and Madoff. 
There was once a time when bankers led the field in asserting “safe as houses”; we don’t 
seem to hear that phrase too often now! But have we yet put in place a re-designed system 
to review the content of assets and their continuing value in the Books? We know Basel II is 
not the end of the road? But will even a Basel III be solid enough? Will the new codes of the 
International Accounting Standards Board, with the move away from current fair-value rules, 
set  us  up  straight  again?  Will  they  reach  an  accord  with  the  US  Financial  Accounting 
Standards Board, so that we have a unified western system? But while we are sorting out 
those books, who is keeping the accounts on the depreciation of the natural assets of the 
paradise isle and the costs of climate change and sea level rise? 
There was once a time when one could say “safe as the Bank of England”, but even that 
seems to have lost its currency! As we see major banks in key countries becoming wards of 
the  state,  we  can’t  help  musing  that  there  was  once  a  time  when  bankers  might  have 
preferred defenestration to nationalisation!  
Is  this  the  end  of  the  history  of  the  western  financial  and  banking  model  and  the 
public/private divide? 
“The old order changeth, yielding place to the new ...” 
as Tennyson intoned in La Morte d’Arthur, and with foresight warned: 
“lest one good custom should corrupt the world.” 
There  was  once  a  time  when  we  spoke  of  the  promise  of  a  stable  state  and  an  end  to 
poverty.  Even  development  economics  followed  a  set  of  well-established  principles;  and 
2 
 163/2009
banking never hit the headlines. Now banking seems daily to be front page news. And over 
the last fortnight we at the Bank of Mauritius are contributing our fair bit as well. 
You know I’m not really one for conspiracy theories. But last year, when they made another 
James  Bond  film,  I  was  reminded  of  the  advice  of  Goldfinger  to  Bond,  in  that  eponymous 
thriller:  
“Mr Bond, they have a saying in Chicago – Once is happenstance; Twice is co-incidence; 
The third time it’s enemy action.” 
Obviously,  we  must  not  become  paranoid  and  see  enemies  and  conspirators  everywhere. 
But, maybe we bankers here should be heeding such advice, don our flak jackets and re-
examine, with our economic partners, what banking is about, and what its future role should 
be in the real world.  
What exactly is the business we are in? I think the crisis has given some useful pointers. As 
bankers, we are not in the business of making money: that is where we have gone astray, 
giving too much latitude to the young man in Barings, or the young man in Société Générale, 
or the army of bonus-seekers playing hard and fast with other peoples’ money like Leeson 
and Kerviel. 
The business of banking is business. It is doing business with you, the operators in the real 
economy,  to  promote  more  business,  and  through  that  to  secure  economic  and  social 
welfare  and  sustainable  development.  The  money  is  not  an  end  in  itself.  The  bottom  line 
matters … but so does the top line. That is why I have been keen to explore another model 
here which brings the money closer to the action in the real economy – Islamic banking. 
Some of you may know I was not here last week. A pity, because they tell me there was a bit 
of street theatre that I missed. Last week, I was away in the Gulf States, as for some time I 
have been concerned that the champion we were counting on to support our move in Islamic 
banking, Dubai, was looking a bit wobbly and weak at the knees. I was right. And so with a 
few phone calls, some discreet and rapid negotiations in the Gulf, I have returned confident 
that  we  shall  be  signing  up  partners  from  a  cash-rich  Gulf  state  to  establish  a  complete 
Sharia-compliant banking service in Mauritius. This will set a new pace for our business and 
banking  world.  And  I  am  pleased  to  report  that  we  are  now  a  full  member  of  the  Islamic 
Financial  Services  Board,  the  international  standard-setting  body  in  this  rapidly-developing 
area.  Which  makes  us  the  second  non-Islamic  country,  after  Singapore,  to  accede  to  this 
coveted position. 
Islamic  finance  will  bring  a  new  model  for  banking  and  for  business  to  revitalise  our 
partnership with  the  real  economy,  in  big  business  and  in  small.  Watch  this  space.  These 
Arab thoroughbreds move fast and are bred to be quick on the turn. For I sometimes fear the 
western  model  of  banking  has  an  inherent  kamikaze  conservatism;  a  bit  slow  on  its  feet 
under fire. In that sense it is rather like a former South African Archbishop’s depiction of his 
Church: 
“like a train that will not take a sharp turn” 
Now at this point, I must confess, I have heard mutterings that, sometimes at these events, I 
tend to drift a little beyond my allotted time! So let me reassure you of two things. First there 
will be for insomniacs a fuller version of my take on what we did this year in the Letter to 
Stakeholders to be issued in a few weeks’ time. It will be on our website. Which means I shall 
be  the  soul  of  brevity  now.  Second,  echoing  the  words  of  Lord  Birket,  I  do  not  object  to 
people looking at their watches when I am speaking. But I do strongly object when they start 
shaking them to make certain they are still working! 
Briefly,  then,  I  take  my  hat  off  to  you  all  here  tonight  in  your  response,  as  innocent 
bystanders,  to  the  financial  crisis  that  has  been  shaking  the  world  beyond  our  shores. 
Government fiscal policy has been bold, just and effective. We at the Bank have adjusted our 
BIS Review 163/2009 
 3
No crisis of credit, 
No crisis in housing,  
No collapse of banks, and  
Regulation which is sound, just, timely and respected. 
monetary steps to dance in perfect cadence. To some applause from the Fund and the World 
Bank, I must add. 
Our banks have been prudent and a safe harbour in the storm. The private sector and our 
sanguine  people  in  the  market  place  have  managed  the  business  of  business  very  well.  I 
think tonight you can all take a collective bow! For unlike the general crash, abroad, here in 
Mauritius these last two years have definitely not been the worst of years. Indeed, all things 
considered,  they  shine  through  as  some  of  our  best,  showing  our  fortitude  and  good 
judgment in weathering the storm. For here in Mauritius there is:  
• 
• 
• 
• 
What is more, here in Mauritius:  
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Here,  I  am  reminded  of  the  difference  between  recession  and  depression,  as  defined  by 
Harry Truman: 
“It’s a recession when your neighbour loses his job; it’s a depression when you lose yours.” 
Now, as some of you may guess, I am very preoccupied these days but I am certainly not 
depressed.  
For we are: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Improving our forecasting methods,  
Establishing more transparency, 
Already rolling out added support to enterprises in distress and to SMEs,  
Seeing  more  efficiency  and  more  customer-friendly  services,  stimulated  by  our 
smart fresh high street entrants showing the old timers a new trick or two, and 
Moving towards a regional role as a clearing house for COMESA. 
Inflation is coming down,  
Public debt is declining, 
The economy is buoyant, 
Revenue is increasing,  
Growth remains positive and  
You (at least) are all pretty safe in your jobs. 
• 
Total  assets  in  banks  here  continue  to  grow  well,  both  in  deposits  and  advances,  with 
scarcely a whiff of the toxic fumes that are besetting our distant neighbours.  
Thus, as you will appreciate from these brief remarks, my stewardship of the Bank has not 
been  as  negative  as  some  recent  press  coverage  might  lead  the  uninformed  observer  to 
believe. Let me give you a few other strong positives. 
First,  our  management  of  foreign  exchange  reserves.  Our  net  international  reserves 
increased by nearly Rs18 billion to stand at Rs96 billion in October 2009. That’s an increase 
of  nearly  23%  since  December  2006.  This  constitutes  more  that  40  weeks’  imports,  as 
against  38  weeks  of  imports  in  December  2007,  notwithstanding  the  rise  in  the  value  of 
imports  during  this  period.  Still  on  this  topic,  tiny  Mauritius  became  the  2nd  country  to 
participate in the Fund’s gold sales this year, coming hard on the heels of the South Asian 
Elephant, India. 
4 
 163/2009
Second,  the  exchange  rate.  The  rupee  exchange  rate  index  MERI1  and  MERI2  which  we 
rolled  out  last  year,  has  declined  steadily  since  May  this  year  to  close  at  around  98  in 
November  2009,  compared  to  its  base  of  100  for  Calendar  Year  2007,  thus  indicating  an 
appreciation of the rupee. I understand that last week Bloomberg commented that the rupee 
appreciated by 2% vis à vis the dollar, in spite of our “Theatre de Boulevard”. The Bank also 
acted  as  lender  of  last  resort  in  foreign  exchange  at  about  this  time  last  year  when  trade 
credit  lines  dried  up.  I  am  sure  the  grand  daddy  of  central  banking,  Bagehot,  would  have 
approved. 
Third, banking and finance. The banking sector, which is the bread and butter of the Central 
Bank, has seen its profit surge by a full 50% since December 2006 to reach Rs 12.6 billion 
for the year ended 30 June 2009. While banks in the rest of the world are drowning in red 
ink, we have seen non-performing loans declining to a historical low of 2.5% in September 
2009. Thus, there is scarcely a whiff of the toxic fumes that are besetting banking elsewhere. 
Both banking sector assets and banking deposits grew by nearly 22% between December 
2006 to September 2009. And there is not a trace of any credit crunch as advances have 
increased by over 60% to stand at Rs 427 billion at the end of the period, of which nearly 
40% was directed to the domestic market. 
Banks have also expanded their footprint in the country, with the number of branches going 
up  from  177  to  202,  and  the  number  of  ATM’s  increasing  from  326  to  376  during  the  last 
three years. Employment in the banking sector has gone up by about 30 per cent from 4,923 
in December 2006 to 6,365 in September 2009. 
Many central banks have sent their officers to our Bank on attachment and study tours to see 
how we conduct business in various areas of central banking. This redounds to the credit of 
the institution, which is a small player but is known and respected. 
Of  course,  when  I  look  back  over  the  past  2½  years,  I  do  have  some  regrets  about  what 
might  have  been  but  did  not  happen.  I  realize  that  vision  is  not  enough  to  effect 
organizational  change  to  make  the  Bank  perform  at  optimal  level.  I  am  dismayed  by  the 
resistance which I encountered when I tried to introduce what is now being termed “dynamic 
provisioning” last year to provide for future expected losses, which was then sheer anathema 
to  the  accounting  profession,  but  which  is  likely  to  become  accepted  as  a  new  standard 
soon.  Thus,  the  Bank  missed  a  golden  opportunity  to  be  a  pace-setter  in  this  area  in  the 
emerging world.  
Another  regret  is  our  failure  as  the  main  provider  of  data  on  banking,  finance  and 
international  trade  to  the  IMF  to  graduate  to  the  IMF’s  Special  Data  Dissemination 
Standards. Had other key players in the sector shared our vision, we would have ranked with 
Malta and Cyprus, both of which joined the league of SDDS countries last week. All is not 
lost,  though,  as  we  are  working  hard  to  join  this  higher  reporting  standard  so  that  we  can 
rank among the best. Punching above one’s weight has always been a key driver for many of 
my  actions.  This  is  done  more  easily  if  the  entire  team  shares  the  same  mind-set  and  is 
prepared to leave their comfort zone to reach ever higher and higher. 
Hilary Clinton, the US Secretary of State, has been lavishing praise on our government as an 
economic and moral leader in Africa. The World Bank has given our economy a clean bill of 
health. The IMF is holding what it calls our “hybrid system of inflation targeting” as a model 
for  other  countries  to  emulate.  And,  for  good  measure,  the  Fund  has  re-classified  our 
exchange rate regime as “free floating”, going up one notch above “managed floating.” We 
do  not  have  the  vaulting  ambition  to  aim  for  the  next  level,  which  is  that  of  a  reserve 
currency! 
To a troubled world we seem to have offered some fresh tuition. Yet we should beware of 
hubris. So let us be warned by H G Wells, one of the founding fathers of that fine institution, 
LSE – much beloved of our Minister of Finance, and my daughter – who asserted over 100 
years ago:  
BIS Review 163/2009 
 5
“Human history becomes more and more a race between education and catastrophe”.  
Thus  we  must  learn  from  the  current  troubles,  shrewdly  building  on  our  evidence-based 
approach to business, banking and finance. 
The World Economic Forum index may put us top of the African league on probity, but we 
still come low on the Global list; Hilary likes our form of democracy, but the Privy Council has 
probed some of our political election practices and found some of our customs wanting. We 
may  be  getting  along  in  economic  growth;  but  what  about  the  degradation  of  our  natural 
environment and the effectiveness of our response to the risks of climate change and sea 
level rise?  
Our lodestar must be the rule of law, and not those quaint misleading dubious customs of the 
past.  Let  us  pay  due  respect  to  our  electoral  laws  and  codes,  and  our  banking  laws  and 
regulations, and to the safe future of our natural environment. It is our commitment to these 
duties in business, that can best protect our state and our planet earth from degradation and 
our people and our leaders from unwarranted calumny.  
Now, perhaps as never before, we must face the music, and press on with those reforms in 
our practices that will keep us resilient and on the fast track to growth with equity and justice. 
Or we will all face the fate of the dodo.  
Finally, I must observe, that a core problem with business, as with fiscal and monetary policy, 
is  knowing  whether  it  will  be  a  success.  Last  time  I  offered  you  the  Maradonna  theory  of 
interest  rates;  tonight  may  I  close  by  offering  you  the  Albert  Einstein  theory  of  success.  I 
hope this will help many in business who are addicted workaholics.  
Einstein proposed a very simple formula: A= X +Y+Z, where A represents success in Life, X 
is work, Y is play, and Z is keeping your mouth shut. I can hear your silent imprecations that I 
pay some heed to that last Z element! 
But, before I do so, let me call upon you all, to rise and drink a toast, to a prosperous new 
future for banking in Mauritius, coupled firmly with the real economy and the private sector 
and  a  firm  commitment  in  our  work  to  face  the  music  and  dance  with  agility  to  our  own 
Mauritian tunes.  
Thank you! 
6 
 163/2009
