Caleb M Fundanga: Developments in the Zambian banking sector 
Opening remarks by Mr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the official 
opening  of  the  Stanbic  Bank  Zambia  Limited,  Mulungushi  branch,  Lusaka,  24  November 
2009. 
 Members of the Board of Directors, Stanbic Bank Zambia Limited 
Stanbic Bank Zambia, Managing Director, Mr. Joseph Chikolwa 
Management and staff of Stanbic Bank Zambia 
Distinguished Invited Guests 
Members of the Press 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Allow  me  to  begin  by  thanking  the  Stanbic  Bank  Zambia  Limited  Managing  Director  Mr 
Joseph  Chikolwa  for  inviting  me  to  this  occasion  which  marks  the  official  opening  of  the 
Stanbic Bank Zambia Limited Mulungushi Branch. 
As  the  regulatory  authority  for  the  banking  sector,  the  Bank  of  Zambia  is  pleased  to  be 
associated  with  achievements  of  institutions  that  we  regulate,  particularly  where  these 
developments lead to increased access to banking services as well as convenience for the 
Zambian public. It is also encouraging to see banks expanding their services to areas outside 
the central business district in order to bring their products and services to their customers’ 
door  step.  This  is  no  doubt  a  strategic  move  that  confirms  that  there  are  enormous 
opportunities  here,  which  the  bank  can  benefit  from  despite  the  stiff competition.  The  vast 
number of bank branches around this part of the city also confirms the stiff competition in the 
banking  sector  and  we  hope  that  the  public  will  be  the  ultimate  winner  though  affordable 
products and services. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, it is a well known fact that bank branch expansion programs play an 
important role in increasing access to the unbanked. However, there is need to complement 
physical branch expansion with other product innovation programmes that will capture a lot 
more people in the remote areas of our country. The real challenge for all of us is how to 
enhance  savings  mobilisation,  and  effectively  channel  the  public’s  savings  to  its  most 
productive  use.  I  therefore  encourage  banks  to  offer  an  expanded  range  of  innovative 
banking products in order to mobilise savings to support financing of economic activities in all 
parts of the country. 
Distinguished  Guests,  the  banking  sector  in  this  country  has,  over  the  last  few  years, 
witnessed significant growth in consumer lending. As a matter of fact, on a sectoral basis the 
“personal loan” category has been the largest recipient of total credit and accounted for 24% 
of  at  end-October  2009.  The  resultant  credit  expansion  has  no  doubt  brought  significant 
benefits to the economy. However, the secondary effects of the recent global economic crisis 
pose  a  real  challenge  to  the  banking  sector  through  increased  non-performing  loans.  For 
instance, non-performing loans were recorded at 7.2% as at December 2008 but has almost 
doubled as at September 2009 to 13.1%. 
In order to mitigate the high credit risk noted in the banking sector, it is important for banks to 
address  the  risk  posed  by  information  asymmetries  through  a  credit  information  sharing 
mechanism. To this end, the Bank of Zambia through NB Circular 3/2008 of December, 2008 
made it mandatory for banks and other financial service providers in Zambia to go through 
the Credit  Reference Bureau before a loan is provided.  Consequently any loans approved 
without passing through the Credit Reference Bureau will attract Regulatory Action. 
BIS Review 152/2009 
 1
I must also mention here that in striving to increase credit, banks must always comply with 
the  rules  and  regulations  as  stipulated  in  the  Banking  &  Financial  Services  Act  and  other 
subsidiary regulations to ensure the safety of customers’ deposits. Furthermore, much more 
credit needs to be directed to sustainable productive sectors like Agriculture, Manufacturing 
and Tourism in order to drive the economy forward and not lending for consumption only. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, it is pleasing to note that despite the recent challenges facing the 
banking sector, Stanbic Bank Zambia Limited’s commitment to growth and re-investment is 
unwavering. The bank continues to be adequately capitalised with its total assets accounting 
for 12.1% of the banking sector’s total assets. Its deposit base remained strong at 12.9% of 
the total industry deposits while total loans accounted for 13.8% of the sector’s total loans as 
at  end-October  2009.  The  bank  has  a  network  of  12  branches  including  this  Mulungushi 
branch and about 47 automated teller machines. In fact, on 10 July, 2009, I was privileged to 
participate  at  the  “Foundation  Stone  Laying”  ceremony  for  the  multi-billion  Stanbic  Bank 
Zambia Limited new Head Office building. I therefore, commend the bank for its relentless 
effort in trying to modernise its facilities and expand its network. 
Allow  me  to  conclude  by  appealing  to  all  banks  and  other  financial  institutions  to  explore 
ways of enhancing the efficiency in service delivery. By enhancing efficiency, banks will be 
capable  of  offering  more  affordable  banking  services.  This  has  the  potential  of  drawing  a 
larger number of Zambians to the financial system resulting in an expanded banking clientele 
for the benefit of both the banks and the economy. This will go a long way in complementing 
the Government and the Bank of Zambia’s efforts in addressing the various weaknesses in 
the financial sector as well as to guide efforts for realising the vision of a stable, sound and 
market based financial system that would support the efficient mobilisation and allocation of 
resources necessary for economic diversification and sustainable growth. 
In  the  recent  past,  the  Government  has  adopted  prudent  fiscal  policies  that  enabled  the 
private sector to access more credit from the financial system. In line with this, the yields on 
Government securities have drastically reduced with the 91 days Treasury bill rate dropping 
to  7.88%  in  the  latest  auction  while  inflation  has  also  trended  downwards  to  12.3%  in 
October. Some players have responded positively to these market movements by reducing 
their  lending  base  rates.  However,  some  are  still  dragging  their  feet  and  are  yet  to  adjust 
their rates. While we commend the banks that have responded positively, we call upon those 
who have not done so to act in a positive and prompt manner in order to make credit more 
affordable to the majority of our people. This in turn will lead to the growth of the productive 
sector and in particular Agriculture and the SME sectors, which are the engine for economic 
growth of our country. 
Finally, let me extend my gratitude to the Board of Directors and the Managing Director of 
Stanbic Bank for inviting me to be with you on this auspicious occasion of the opening of this 
branch. It now gives me great pleasure and honour to declare Mulungushi Branch of Stanbic 
Bank Zambia Limited officially open and I thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 152/2009
