Bandid Nijathaworn: Rethinking procyclicality – what is it now and what 
can be done? 
Presentation  by  Mr  Bandid  Nijathaworn,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the 
Bank  for  International  Settlements/Financial  Stability  Institute-Executives’  Meeting  of  East 
Asia-Pacific Central Banks (BIS/FSI-EMEAP) High Level Meeting on “Lessons Learned from 
the Financial Crisis – An International and Asian Perspective”, Tokyo, 30 November 2009.  
 First,  let  me  thank  FSI  and  the  EMEAP  Working  Group  on  Banking  Supervision  for  the 
invitation,  and  also  a  special  thanks  to  our  host,  the  Bank  of  Japan  and  the  Financial 
Services Agency, for the excellent arrangement. 
The  topic  of  this  session  is  procyclicality  and  macroprudential  supervision.  As  the  first 
speaker, I have been asked to give an overview of the issue. A good starting point to discuss 
the issue is to remind ourselves that the issue of procyclicality, especially procyclicality of the 
financial system, is not new. Discussion about interactions between the financial system and 
the real economy, especially the idea that the financial sector can amplify economic activities 
and business cycles, has been well documented by economists, for example, in the financial 
accelerator model.  
Here  in  Asia,  the  issue  of  procyclicality  had  been  brought  to  the  fore  during  the  Asian 
financial crisis, after which the issue was extensively discussed. Two important conclusions 
emerged from those early discussions. First, procyclicality of the financial system poses risk 
to financial stability, and to address it, efforts call for policy to dampen the procyclical effects 
through  counter-cyclical  financial  regulation  and  macroprudential  measures.  Second,  to 
avoid large build-up of excesses, macroeconomic policy especially monetary policy has an 
important  role  to  play.  And  in  the  case  of  emerging  markets,  the  procyclical  behaviour  of 
international  capital  flows  adds  another  dimension  of  challenge  because  of  its  effects  on 
domestic  monetary  conditions.  Hence,  to  effectively  address  the  issue,  a  combination  of 
macroeconomic  policy  and  financial  regulation  is  needed  to  restrain  the  build-up  of 
imbalance, a process to which procyclical financial behaviour is a key contributing factor. 
The current financial crisis also raises the issue of procyclicality. Apart from its global nature, 
a key feature of the current crisis when compared with past crises is the scale of excessive 
risk-taking  and  leverage  that  took  place  that  was  accentuated  by  procyclical  financial 
behaviour.  This,  therefore,  puts  the  issue  of  procyclicality  and  financial  regulation  into  the 
policy spotlight. 
What  I  want  to  do  this  afternoon  is  to  discuss  procyclicality  and  the  policy  approach  to 
address  it  from  a  wider  perspective  of  macroeconomic  management  aimed  at  ensuring 
financial stability. My focus is to offer a framework for analyzing procyclicality, and to propose 
a view that policies from different orientations, especially financial regulation, are needed to 
deal effectively with the issue. 
In its simplest form, procyclicality refers to the interactions between the financial system and 
the  real  economy  which  are  mutually  reinforcing.  Such  interactions  tend  to  amplify  the 
amplitude  of  the  bussiness  cycle,  thereby  heightening  the  risk  to  financial  stability.  This 
description of  procyclicality  presupposes  the  existence  of two  cycles, namely  the  business 
cycle and the financial cycle, that interact and reinforce each other. However, economic and 
financial decisions underlying the two cycles are not independent. They are inherently linked 
by the risk-taking behaviour of economic agents: the behaviour which is prone to change in 
response to incentive, perception of risk, regulation, and new information. It is this change in 
risk-taking  behaviour  that  explains  large  swings  in  investor  sentiment,  from  a  period  of 
optimism when risk is disregarded to a period of pessimism when there is no willingness to 
BIS Review 160/2009 
 1
take risk. And it is this change in risk-taking behaviour that underscores the abrupt change in 
financial behaviour, and in the direction and momentum of economic activities. 
It follows therefore that procyclicality is a mechanism that encompasses the interactions of at 
least three reinforcing cycles that move in tandem. They are the business cycle, the financial 
cycle, and the cycle of risk-taking beheviour represented by fluctuations in asset prices or the 
asset price cycle. The three cycles are self-reinforcing, and it is the ways the cycles interact 
with each others that define the amplitude and the momentum of the cyclical flunctuations, as 
well as risk of a financial crisis. 
Interactions of the three cycles can be illustrated with reference to a typical boom-bust cycle. 
In  the  beginning,  a  period  of  low  macroeconomic  volatility  usually  brings  about  an 
expansionary phase of the business cycle. As the period of stability grows longer, we have 
rising investor and consumer confidence, depicting a bout of optimism. The rise in optimism 
leads  to  increased  risk-taking,  resulting  in  increased  demand  for  credit  and  rise  in  asset 
prices. 
In this period of optimism, the pricing of risk tends to fall, lending spread narrows, and banks 
tend to provision less as they focus more on a short-term outlook rather than a longer-term 
perspective  of  risk.  This  leads  to  an  upswing  in  the  financial  cycle.  Demand  for  credit  is 
further  bolstered  by  a  rise  in  asset  price  which  raises  the  valuation  of  collactoral,  further 
raising  confidence  and  magnifying  the  risk-taking  behaviour  and  leverage.  Next,  greater 
availability of credit leads to more spending and adds to the expansionary forces as business 
outlook is elevated by perception of low risk and strong profitability. 
It  is  when  confidence  changes  that  the  interactions  of  the  three  cycles  go  into  reverse. 
Decline  in  confidence  closes  down  the  risk-taking  behaviour,  leading  to  a  fall  in  credit 
demand. Banks respond to this re-assessment of risk by de-risking their financial exposure, 
exacerbating the downturn in the financial cycle. This results in large adverse impacts on the 
real economy that further weaken confidence. In the downturn, the three cycles interact and 
move in synchronization, propagated by deteriorations in the balance sheets. It is only when 
confidence improves, typically following a major policy intervention, that the downturn both in 
the business and financial cycles begin to stabilize. 
With reference to the current crisis, there were at least two specific features of the financial 
structures in the advanced economies that amplified the procyclical tendencies in the three 
cycles I have just described, thereby making the situations worse than might have been. 
First, the duration of the upswing in the financial cycle was made longer by changes in the 
financial structures that resulted from financial innovation, misplaced incentives, and the way 
businesses  had  expanded  by  circumventing  financial  regulation  which  allowed  risk  to  be 
underrecognized  for  a  long  period.  A  case  in  point  is  the  originate-to-distribute  model,  the 
CDO  derivatives,  and  the  use  of  SIVs  as  a  vehicle  for  taking  risk  out  of  banks’  balance 
sheets. 
Second, in this crisis the downturn of the cycles were particularly damaging partly because 
of the interactions or feedbacks within the financial system, as opposed to the interactions 
between  the  financial  system  and  the  real  economy.  These  within-the-system  interactions 
took the form of positive feedback loops in various market segments that were set in motion 
in  the  downturn  as  market  participants  responded  to  the  emerging  problems  and  distress. 
Such  feedback  loops  included  the  SIV  shutdown  and  its  compounding  effects  on  CDO 
losses, the asset fire sales driven by risk management response by banks, and heightened 
concern  about  counterparty  risk  that  precipitated  the  hoarding  of  liquidity.  Moreover,  while 
these  feedback  loops  were  important  in  setting  into  motion  self-reinforcing  losses  and 
deleveraging, it was also the interactions amongst them, through joint exposure to common 
risk drivers and network linkages, that contributed to the multiplication of losses. 
Let me now turn to the second part of my talk which I will focus on the policy approach to 
deal with procyclicality. 
2 
 BIS Review 160/2009
A  good  starting  point  to  discuss  policy  is  to  recognize  that  business  cycles  are  a  normal 
feature  of  market  economies  and  their  existence  –  especially  the  interaction  of  the  three 
cycles – can not be eliminated. The best we can do is to recognize the cycles and find ways 
to  manage  them  in  a  way  that  markets  continue  to  function  without  risking  systemic 
instability. Reflecting this, it is clear that the objective of policy is to reduce the amplification 
of the cycles and their interactions by limiting the build-up of excesses. A common wisdom at 
this time is that policy should aim to limit the build-up of excess in the good time and ensure 
that the system has adequate capacity or buffers to manage the downturn in the bad time. 
But because the build-up of financial excess tends to be a result of many factors, some of 
which  are  not  related  to  financial  institutions,  therefore,  a  broader  approach  to  policy  is 
needed so that many measures, both macro and micro, are used to help solve the problem. 
Apart  from  being  more  comprehensive,  such  approach  will  help  ensure  that  the  economic 
cost of policy or regulation is spreaded out, thereby avoiding an undue burden falling on a 
particular sector of the economy or measure. 
 
 Table  1.  summarizes  the  policy  framework  along  the  line  I  have  just  described.  The 
framework  encompasses  a  three-pronged  approach  to  address  procyclicality,  focusing  on 
taming the business cycle, the financial cycle, and the risk-taking behaviour cycle through a 
combined  use  of  macroeconomic  policy,  financial  regulation,  and  other  education  and 
disclosure measures. 
On macroeconomic policy, especially monetary policy, the role of policy is to achieve long-
term economic growth with stability. This means avoiding too-eased monetary conditions for 
too  long  by  tightening  policy  when  there  are  signs  that  risk  is  being  underestimated  and 
imbalance  is  developing.  For  financial  regulation,  its  role  is  to  reduce  the  procyclical 
behaviour  in  the  financial  institutions  by  limiting  excessive  risk-taking.  And  the  role  of 
education  and  disclosure  is  to  promote  greater  awareness  of  risk  by  making  available 
information to improve risk assessment by market, so that extreme shifts in sentiment and 
confidence are avoided. Important in this context for emerging markets is the abrupt shift in 
BIS Review 160/2009 
 3
investors’ confidence that drives sudden reversals of capital flows and liquidity. But amongst 
all  these  measures,  financial  regulation  remains  the  core  approach  to  addressing 
procyclicality. This is because large and sustained booms on credit and asset prices, once 
they occur, are typically a reflection of the failure of financial institutions to manage risk. 
Let  me  now  turn  specifically  to  financial  regulation.  To  the  extent  that  financial  regulation 
contributes  to  procyclicality  and  excessive  risk-taking,  supervisors  could  design  their 
regulation  in  a  counter-cyclical  fashion  to  reduce  procyclical  behaviour  of  financial 
institutions. Reflecting this thinking, discussion to date on the role of financial regulation to 
address procyclicality has focused on four areas. 
The  first  is  to  reduce  procyclical  tendencies  of  the  Basel  II  capital  regulation  by  aligning 
capital requirement more with a longer-term perspective of risk. On this, key measures under 
discussion include: (1) building capital buffers by capital conservation measures; (2) reducing 
procyclical  effects  of  minimum  capital  requirement  by  adopting  through-the-cycle  risk 
parameters  to  achieve  a  less  pro-cyclical  capital  ratio;  (3)  promoting  forward-looking 
provision that can cover loan losses that are not yet incurred but expected, with supporting 
accounting rule and valuation; and (4) using additional capital charge for the large and more 
complex banks based on indicators of systemic relevance. 
The  second  area  of  focus  is  the  use  of  macroprudential  supervision.  The  aim  is  to  use 
prudential  measures,  when  needed,  to  restrain  the  build-up  of  risk  either  in  the  overall 
financial markets or in specific asset class. Examples here include use of loan-to-value ratio 
on  real  estate  loans  and  margin  requirements  for  derivatives  and  securities  transactions. 
Also, a recent idea of using leverage ratio to help take account of the unknown risk beyond 
those identified by the risk-adjusted capital regulation also falls into this category.  
The  third  area  of  focus  is  the  macro-surveillance  of  the  financial  system  to  monitor 
aggregate  risk  and  identify  structural  change  that  opens  up  new  vulnerabilities  by  making 
liquidity  and  capital  regulations  less  binding,  thereby  exacerbating  the  procyclical  financial 
behaviour. Important in this context is the subtle shifts in market due to financial innovation or 
changes  in  business  model  that  effectively  dilute  or  even  arbitrage  regulations  that  are 
designed to dampen procyclicality. In the current crisis, the combination of the originate-to-
distribute  model,  together  with  CDOs,  unregulated  hedged  funds,  and  undercapitalized 
investment  banks  creates  an  interlinked  market  structure  that  adds  vulnerability  to  the 
system, by effectively removing the liquidity and capital constraints of banks in underwriting 
loans and in investing in securitized products. 
Finally,  the  fourth  area  is  to  contain  incentives  in  the  context  of  remuneration  to  limit 
excessive  risk-taking.  The  argument  is  that,  in  this  crisis,  misaligned  incentives  based  on 
short-term  performance  did  encourage  excessive  risk-taking  and  contributed  to  increased 
leverage.  The  solution  under  discussion  is  to  align  compensation  scheme  more  with  a 
longer-term prespective of risk and profitability, as well as to promote greater transparency of 
rewards and incentives through public disclosure. 
What  I  have  outlined  is  an  overview  of  the  procyclicality  issue  and  the  direction  that  the 
current policy effort is taking to address it. My view is that, to be effective, a consistent set of 
policies at both the macro and the micro levels is needed to address the issue. As I noted at 
the outset, procyclicality is not a new issue. It has long been a feature of the financial system 
in the market economies and always has a role to play in a financial crisis. The current crisis 
is no exception. The difference this time is that efforts are being made at the global level to 
systemically address the issue through the revision of international regulatory standards. The 
hope is that we can make progress on the issue by taking the right and balanced approach 
so that the issue can be tackled without unsettling the level playing field, without repressing 
financial  developments  and  liberalization  which  is  important  for  emerging  markets,  and 
without undermining the spirit of innovation which is the hall-mark of market economies. 
4 
 BIS Review 160/2009
