Ardian Fullani: Monetary & financial stability policies – lessons from the 
crisis 
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  the  8th  International 
Conference of the Bank of Albania: "Monetary & Financial Stability Policies – Lessons from 
the Crisis", Tirana, 17 September 2009. 
 Honourable Mr. Prime Minister, 
Dear Governors, 
Distinguished guests, 
I feel deeply privileged to open the proceedings of the 8th International Conference of the 
Bank of Albania entitled: “Monetary & Financial Stability Policies – Lessons from the Crisis”. I 
hope  the  proceedings  will  help  the  participants  better  realize  the  issues  facing  the  global 
economy during this period and draw the proper lessons. I am personally convinced that the 
prominent  speakers’  reputation  is  a  guarantee  in  this  regard.  Before  I  invite  the  guests  to 
discuss the features and lessons drawn from the global and regional crisis according to their 
viewpoints and experiences, allow me to say a few words on this conference. 
The  topic  chosen  to  be  dealt  with  in  this  conference  is  at  the  forefront  of  the  institutions’ 
agenda,  responsible  for  macroeconomic  policies  and  financial  system  surveillance  at  a 
national and international level. The panic that followed the Lehman Brothers’ failure almost 
a year ago transformed the turmoil in the U.S. mortgage loan market into a genuine global-
wide  financial  crisis.  The  integration  of  the  financial  markets  caused  the  crisis  to  spread 
swiftly, while the vital role of the credit system in free market economies transformed it into a 
global recession, hitting the East and South-East European countries as well. 
The experience gained so far has allowed a better acknowledgment of the causes that led to 
the crisis and the factors that triggered and accelerated its spreading, and a reassessment of 
the diverse supervisory and regulatory practices. I would like our discussions on the crisis to 
focus on two directions: what we learnt and what we could not learn from the crisis. Among 
the  numerous  aspects  debated  at  length,  I  would  like  to  distinguish  three  of  them:  the 
dichotomy  between  the  state  and  the  market,  the  degree  of  confidence  in  the  forecast 
models, and the importance of coordinating the pre-emptive measures. 
With  respect  to  the  “state  vs.  market”  debate,  I  would  like  to  re-stress  my  unwavering 
confidence  in  the  market  and  our commitment  as  policy-makers  to  make  it operate  by  the 
rules  and  efficiently  24/24.  The  last  few  years  have  witnessed  the  rapid  development  of 
forest models and techniques. Avoiding the tendency to underestimate their high importance 
to  the  day-to-day  work  of  every  analyst  and  policy-maker,  we  have  to  be  aware  of  the 
restraints in these models and of the risks arising from the excessive reliance on them. The 
high cost of coping with the consequences of the crisis makes us aware of the importance of 
building pre-emptive mechanisms and above all, of the importance of coordinating them at a 
national and international level. 
Today, nearly two years after the first signs of the crisis, the global economy and financial 
market  are  in  a  more  optimistic  situation.  The  economic  recovery  has  been  reflected  in 
improved  business  and  consumer  confidence  indices,  mitigated  deflationary  pressures, 
normal  functioning  of  banking  and  financial  systems  and  higher  economic  activity  growth 
rates in almost all production sectors. As in the other regional countries, these developments 
have been present in Albania as well. 
The  last  quarters  have  attested  to  higher  lending  to  economy,  improved  confidence  in  the 
banking  system,  relative  exchange  rate  sustainability  and  the  anchoring  of  inflation 
expectations. 
BIS Review 118/2009 
 1
There is now a global consensus that the hardest part of the crisis belongs to the past. This 
is certainly good news although not sufficient. Time is ripe to consider all the options for the 
so-called  “exit  strategy”.  The  mitigation  of  anti-crisis  measures’  side-effects  calls  for  co-
ordinated, proper and timely actions. Policy-makers need to reassess macroeconomic and 
financial policy objectives in the light of the most recent positive developments. 
Narrowing  down  the  geographic  extension  of  my  discussion  from  global  to  regional,  I  will 
briefly dwell on some of the above-mentioned issues. 
I  once  told  a  friend  of  mine  that  small  open  economies,  as  is  the  case  with  the  Balkan 
economies, are net importer of goods, services and crises. The crisis did not originate in the 
region. It was gradually transmitted as a result of the integration of the region with the global 
markets  and  economy  and  a  consequence  of  the  presence  of  large  international  banking 
groups.  Our  countries  are  all  as  similar  as  they  are  different.  Consequently,  the  form, 
outburst  and  consequences  of  the  crisis  were  as  similar  as  they  were  different.  The 
economic  and  social  structure,  the  level  of  convergence  and  integration  with  the  global 
markets,  the  legal  and  institutional  norms  and  the  nature  of  exchange  rate  regimes  in 
particular, have established the features of the crisis for each country. The experience of the 
distinguished governors present in this conference will throw light on the above aspects. 
As  regards  the  Albanian  case,  the  last  12  months  have  been  challenging  for  the  banking 
industry. Despite the turbulent times, the banking system has in no case shown any signs of 
panic or confusion. The Bank of Albania considers that the rationale behind is the prudence 
shown in the recent years with respect to the banking system’s financial stability. 
The  high  level  of  resilience  and  the  quick  recovery  were  a  consequence  of  a  number  of 
important decisions. By adopting the new banking law in the Republic of Albania and a range 
of  other  monetary  policy  and  banking  supervision-related  decisions,  we  have  aimed  at 
firming up the macroeconomic balances further and strengthening financial stability. At the 
focus  of  the  Bank  of  Albania’s  strategy  were  the  good  governance  and  better  risk 
management, improved banking activity transparency to the customer and the strengthening 
of  internal  control.  This  strategy  peaked  with  a  large-scale,  exceptional  and  contemporary 
programme of open and constant communication with the public. 
I believe that the favourable liquidity and capital situation characterizing the Albanian banking 
system  on  the  eve  of  the  financial  crisis  last  fall  helped  to  cope  with  the  withdrawal  of 
deposits  during  September-October  2008.  However,  the  Bank  of  Albania  deemed  as 
necessary  the  prudent  monitoring  of  the  situation  and  took  a  number  of  actions,  which 
alleviated the pressures over the banking system substantially. These actions helped to relax 
the liquidity situation and they were in harmony with the ECB’s operational response to the 
crisis. 
First,  an  ad-hoc  task  force  was  set  up.  Its  main  responsibility  was  and  remains  the  daily 
monitoring  of  each  individual  bank.  Our  direct  conclusion  was  that  the  analysis  should 
consider all micro-level aspects, each and every cell of the system and indicators. 
Second, a number of facilities were adopted for the incessant supply of the system with the 
required  liquidity.  The  type  of  auction  for  the  injection  of  liquidity  changed  to  fixed-price 
auctions, the collateral base for repo agreements expanded, the use of the required reserve 
increased from 20 to 40 percent, and the spread between the Bank of Albania’s key interest 
rate and overnight loan reduced from 175 to 75 basis points. 
Third,  through  a  special  act,  the  Bank  of  Albania  required  higher  capitalization  of  banking 
activity  from  the  banking  sector,  adding  to  the  guarantee  of  the  banking  sector’s  financial 
soundness. 
Current financial system developments show that the overall situation in the banking sector 
has improved constantly. Deposits are back to the banking system, attesting to the improved 
public confidence.  
2 
 BIS Review 118/2009
Credit to economy has also shown signs of recovery. Another positive development relates 
to  the  fact  that  lending  in  the  Albanian  Lek  has  increased  considerably.  The  European 
markets  have  been  performing  amid  a  more  optimistic  climate.  Statistics  show  that  the 
recovery of the crisis began even before the most optimistic forecast. 
Distinguished guests, 
I believe the prominent panellists and the central bank governors of our region will address 
all the issues related to the crisis and the lessons drawn from it thoroughly. However, allow 
me to briefly address some issues I believe are of interest to the audience. 
First, the large-scale globalization of the world economy in the past two decades could not 
but spread the crisis throughout the world; consequently, there was an immense need for co-
ordinated protection at an international level. In the early days of the crisis, we saw biased 
actions which led to arbitrage of negative effects. 
Globalization requires the financial infrastructure to be everywhere similar in shape, contents, 
and  human  and  technological  capacities.  It  should  operate  under  similar  standards  and 
practices and have the proper flexibility to precede the financial novelties.  
Second,  the  last  crisis  calls  for  the pre-emptive  and  forerunning  nature  of  supervision  and 
legal  regulations  in  general.  I  believe  a  regulatory  framework  is  genuinely  effective  and 
successful when it intertwines the simplicity and transparency of a rule-based approach with 
the flexible and far-sighted characteristics of a principle-based approach. At any case, this is 
indispensable to make banks accountable, to convince the supervision inspector on the risk 
characteristics and on the transformation of new different on- and off-balance sheet products, 
before  they  exceed  a  certain  threshold  in  terms  of  magnitude  and  exposure.  The  Bank  of 
Albania is making efforts in terms of identifying the aspects that need further improvement. In 
this  undertaking,  we  will  take  into  account  the  similar  developments  in  the  region  and 
broader,  to  preserve  the  market  competitiveness  and  the  convergence  in  supervisory 
practices. 
Third,  I  believe  that  the  crisis  requires  the  existence  of  an  international  institution  which 
should guide the financial stability, assess the systemic risk and determine the quantitative 
indicators  measuring  it.  In  this  process,  it  is  important  that  the  regulatory  norms  be 
transparent  to  everyone.  At  the  same  time,  it  should  be  followed  by  an  accelerated 
convergence process of the supervisory and regulatory practices according to the financial 
centres of influence. 
Fourth, the current crisis confirmed our concern related to the exposure of the Balkan region 
to a relatively small group of banking operators of vast regional extension. Shocks affecting 
parent banks would affect one or several regional countries. A similar risk still persists even 
in the case when one of the branches in the region is hit by a shock. Similarly, the contagion 
risk is still present. 
Fifth, I believe the region should scrutinize carefully lending in foreign currency. It is essential 
to  set  a  better  balance  between  lending  in  the  national  currency  and  lending  in  foreign 
currency. 
To this aim, the nature of the exchange rate regime and the impracticability of central banks 
in the region to act as lender of last resort should be taken into account. In this context, we 
should  support  a  stronger  role  of  the  national  currency  in  bank  lending,  making  lending  in 
foreign currency more costly for banks if it is not supported by savings in foreign currency. 
The  strong  reliance  of  banks  on  foreign  currency  financial  resources  to  support  the  rapid 
lending should be addressed and managed timely. 
Sixth,  I  think  the  current  crisis  will  make  the  financial  funds,  which  for  a  long  time  have 
rushed in numerous forms across all former communist countries of East Europe, scarcer. 
This situation may have considerable implications for the long-term economic growth rates in 
the  regional  countries,  which  still  are  in  need  for  foreign  financial  funds  to  support  their 
BIS Review 118/2009 
 3
convergence process. Therefore, I believe that the crisis has called for another lesson: the 
need  to  draft  and  implement  joint  regional  programmes  and  structural  reforms  to  absorb 
projects and financing lines, which will in turn expand and deepen our joint Balkan market. 
It is true that after each crisis, macroeconomics as a science has made steps forward. Each 
crisis represents an event with specific characteristics, dissimilar or partly dissimilar from the 
previous crises. Each crisis brings in new information, regardless of the intensity, geographic 
extension or duration. Each crisis fills in a piece of the hard puzzle of free-market economy 
functioning, helping to a better understanding of the whole. 
I hope to provide a consensual conclusion if I say that we, the administrators, had the fortune 
to govern in a time of crisis and that we have a motive to feel privileged – and why not proud 
– to have coped with the challenge, being witnesses and active players in that regard. 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 118/2009
