Jean-Claude Trichet: The crisis and its lessons 
Lecture  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
University of Venice, Venice, 9 October 2009. 
 Introduction 
I.  
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure for me to be at the University of Venice. Ca’ Foscari is one of the most 
prominent and vibrant universities in Italy. I know it is also one of the universities that is most 
open  to  international  exchanges.  Its  blend  of  research  excellence  and  cultural  diversity 
makes it close to the ECB in spirit. The ECB is perhaps the most diverse central bank in the 
world in terms of its staff composition: more than 27 countries are represented in our ranks. 
And our economic departments constitute a relevant centre of economic analysis in Europe.  
As  a  central  bank,  we  are  prime  consumers  of  economic  research.  For  this  reason,  we 
maintain very close interactions with the academic world. We import tools and ideas and are 
eager to employ excellent economists from centres of advanced economic studies such as 
Ca’  Foscari.  At  the  same  time,  the  ECB  is  an  active  source  of  cutting  edge  economic 
thinking.  I  was  very  happy  to  see  that  last  year  our  electronic  Working  Papers  Series  – 
posted  on  our  web-site  –  attracted  some  4  million  downloads.  A  number  of  those  articles 
have made significant contributions to macroeconomic research. 
I  am  also  most  delighted  to  be  in  Venice.  This  city  talks  both  to  the  artist  and  to  the 
economist. I have discovered that its name can be construed to signify its charm. As you will 
know,  Francesco  Sansovino,  for  example,  claims  that:  "[i]t  is  held  by  some  that  this  word 
VENETIA signifies VENI ETIAM, that is, come again, and again, for however often you come, 
you will always see new things, and new beauties”.1
But,  for  all  its  beauty,  Venice  was  never  a  place  of  idle  contemplation  for  its  citizens.  My 
countryman  and  great  scholar  of  European  civilizations,  Fernand  Braudel,  chronicles  that 
wealthy Venetian merchants in the early 1500s used to instruct their agents to “never leave ‘li 
danari  mortti’,  money  lying  dead.”  “Sell  quickly,  even  at  a  lower  price,  in  order  to  ‘venier 
presto sul danaro per un altro viaggio.’”2 It would be nearly impossible to find a more fitting 
description of the inner force that moves a market economy. In a vibrant market economy, 
money  does  not  rest  and  is  used  to  serve  the  creativity  and  the  effort  of  undertaking 
enterprises.  
The financial crisis 
II.  
Let me start my remarks by recalling the origins of the crisis as I see them.  
Over  past  decades,  our  economies  have  greatly  benefited  from  the  effects  of  financial 
liberalisation and financial innovation. For example, the securitisation of assets has played a 
role in facilitating an efficient allocation of economic risks. It allowed the financial sector to 
offer credit for productive purposes, at more favourable conditions than was possible in the 
repressed credit systems of the past.  
                                                 
1   Francesco Sansovino, Venetia città nobilissima et singolare, Venice, 1581. 
2   Cited in F. Braudel, “Civilization and Capitalism, 15th-18th Century: The Wheels of Commerce” University of 
California Press, 1992. 
BIS Review 125/2009 
 1
More recently, however, managing genuine economic risk gradually ceased to be the main 
concern  of  international  finance.  Instead,  the  creation  and  assumption  of  financial  risk 
became the core activity of the financial industry. The decoupling of financial positions from 
the  underlying  flows  of  goods  and  services  gradually  created  the  conditions  for  a  credit 
boom. The credit boom was reinforced by an asset price boom, which credit itself was partly 
sustaining. Both the credit and the asset price expansion found formidable amplifiers in the 
microeconomics of the financial markets and in global imbalances.  
In  the  financial  market,  compensation  schemes  for  bank  loan  managers  weakened  their 
incentive to conduct a prudent screening of loans. Executive pay was a function of overall 
volumes, which encouraged turn-over and the origination of loans. At the same time, risks 
could be shed – or so it seemed – by selling off the loan to other investors in the secondary 
market. As for these investors, increasingly complicated financial structures made it difficult 
for them to assess the quality of the assets that they were acquiring. They had to trust the 
originators.  More  than  in  the  past,  the  viability  of  the  financial  system  came  to  depend 
critically on trust and confidence.  
On a global scale, a chronic shortage of savings in some industrialised economies had to be 
financed  out  of  an  excess  of  savings  in  other  parts  of  the  world.  So,  international 
intermediation provided a potent fuel to the expansion of finance.  
In August 2007 – suddenly but not unexpectedly – trust and confidence started evaporating. 
The  circular  interactions  between  asset  price  appreciation,  biased  incentives,  excessive 
complexity  and  global  imbalances  went  into  reverse.  Market  liquidity  became  scarce  and 
investors extremely afraid of the risks that they had been exposing themselves to for so long. 
Finally, mid-September 2008, the collapse of a major financial player turned the re-pricing of 
risk into major financial panic. The chart of money market spreads tells this tale clearly. 
As the collapse of confidence became evident, financial intermediaries made every possible 
attempt  to  restore  liquidity  buffers.  Credit  spreads  soared.  Financial  market  activity  fell 
dramatically, and the global financial system came close to seizing up.  
 2 
 BIS Review 125/2009
 The crisis triggered a freefall in economic activity.  
Within a few months, from January to July 2009, the distribution of GDP projections for the 
current  year  shifted  to  the  left,  increasingly  into  negative  territory.  To  fully  appreciate  the 
massive change in perspective that this brought for all of us, compare the range of outcomes 
that were considered likely in successive rounds of forecast updates.  
In January, forecasters predicted on average a decline of 1.5% for this year. In March, they 
had become even more pessimistic, and they provided a decline of 2.5%. The uncertainty 
surrounding these forecasts was high, but even in March a decline of 4.5% was not seen as 
possible. This figure was outside the range of all forecasts and was a zero-probability event. 
Four  months  later,  in  July  2009,  it  became  the  central  forecast.  This  shows  the  rapid  and 
dramatic  free-fall  in  economic  activity.  By  now,  in  September,  there  has  been  a  slight 
improvement, to a 3.9% contraction for this year.  
BIS Review 125/2009 
 3
Faced with such unprecedented challenges, central banks around the globe demonstrated a 
remarkable unity of purpose. Different economies, different channels of transmission called 
for different responses.  
 In the end, the action taken by the leading central banks paid off. If I can return to my first 
picture, money market spreads – a symptom of the lack of trust that had gripped financial 
transactions in the early autumn – retreated from their peaks. They are now back at levels 
that were prevalent before the intensification of the crisis.  
 4 
 BIS Review 125/2009
The ECB’s response to the crisis 
III.  
How did the ECB meet the challenge? The turmoil started on 9 August 2009. The ECB was 
in the vanguard among major central banks. It was first in identifying the severity of market 
distress,  and  the  first  to  act  on  the  very  same  day.  As  the  financial  debacle  finally 
materialised, in the autumn 2008, the ECB’s approach to crisis management was diversified 
but consistent.  
We activated both conventional and non-conventional instruments of policy. We cut our key 
policy interest rate by 325 basis points, bringing it to a level that has no historical precedent 
in  post-World  War  Europe.  In  parallel,  we  adopted  a  wide  spectrum  of  “non-standard” 
measures. They were designed to ensure that the reductions in our policy instrument were 
transmitted to the broader credit market and the economy at large.  
These  non-standard  measures  are  part  of  what  we  collectively  define  as  our  policy  of 
“enhanced credit support”.  
 
  This policy comprises five building blocks:  
1. 
rates in our refinancing operations.  
  First, full accommodation of banks’ demand for central bank liquidity at fixed interest 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
  Second, a further expansion in the list of assets eligible for use as collateral in our 
refinancing operations. 
  Third,  a  further  extension  of  the  range  of  maturities  at  which  liquidity  is  made 
available  to  banks  in  our  refinancing  operations.  The  longest  maturity  is  now  one 
year.  
  Fourth, provision of liquidity in foreign currencies, notably US dollars.  
  Fifth and finally, a direct covered bank bond purchase programme aimed at reviving 
a segment of the financial market that is important in Europe. 
BIS Review 125/2009 
 5
Let me emphasise only a few selective aspects of this policy. First, our primary mission is to 
preserve  price  stability.  It  implies  that  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy  impulses  is 
functioning  correctly  and  that  the  money  market  is  not  disrupted.  In  this  new  unexpected 
situation we had to tackle the paralysis of inter-bank transactions in the money market. The 
money market is where banks can refinance their assets as a precondition for rolling over 
their loans to the economy. The flow of credit is primarily channelled by banks in the euro 
area. A complete breakdown in the funding relationships that constitute the money market 
would  have  derailed  the  bank  lending  channel  altogether.  The  interruption  of  the  bank 
lending channel would have turned the financial crisis into a very profound depression. By 
granting  unlimited  access  to  central  bank  liquidity  –  the  “fixed-rate  full-allotment”  tender 
procedures – we put banks in a position to maintain their crucial role in the financing of the 
real  economy.  By  expanding  the  list  of  eligible  collateral,  we  ensured  that  banks  could 
refinance that large proportion of their assets that had become less liquid in the crisis. By 
extending  the  maturity  of  their  liquidity  provisions,  we  gave  banks  a  more  medium-term 
perspective in their liquidity planning. This measure greatly attenuated the maturity mismatch 
between assets and liabilities in banks’ books, which would otherwise have further deterred 
bank lending activity.  
We have also been providing foreign exchange liquidity. This primarily took the form of US 
dollar  liquidity  backed  by  a  swap  facility  with  the  US  Federal  Reserve  System.  The 
malfunctioning  of  the  foreign  exchange  swap  market  had  made  the  currency  mismatch  in 
banks’ balance sheets extremely severe. Thanks to our policy, they could count on ongoing 
access  to  foreign  currency  balances.  This  policy  was  made  possible  by  the  very  close 
cooperation between central banks in the crisis.  
Finally,  the  Governing  Council’s  decision  to  intervene  directly  in  the  financial  market  by 
purchasing  covered  bonds  was  meant  to  re-ignite  activity  in  a  market  segment  that  is 
particularly important as a source of funding for banks.  
Liquidity and exit considerations 
IV.  
Our enhanced credit support policies have boosted market liquidity. Through that channel – 
as I showed a few minutes ago – the reductions in our policy instrument could be transmitted 
to a whole spectrum of interest rates that are used as re-setting benchmarks for adjustable-
rate  loan  contracts.  This  has  greatly  benefited  households  and  firms.  But  what  is  the  link 
between  liquidity  and  price  stability?  Will  enhanced  liquidity  provision  trigger  inflation 
sometime  in  the  less  proximate  future?  In  this  respect,  let  me  emphasise  two  important 
aspects of our exceptional policies.  
The  first  aspect  is  related  to  the  definition  of  liquidity.  Our  non-standard  measures  have 
increased  central  bank  liquidity  –  cash  reserves  that  the  Eurosystem  makes  available  to 
banks  in  refinancing  operations.  But  this  has  not  led  to  an  increase  in  broader  monetary 
aggregates. In fact, broad measures of money growth are decelerating in the euro area. In 
normal  times,  banks  would  use  an  increase  in  our  liquidity  provision  to  expand  credit  to 
households and enterprises. In current conditions, however, liquidity primarily takes the form 
of precautionary balances that certain banks are deliberately holding with the Eurosystem. 
As  long  as  central  bank  liquidity  serves  at  least  in  part  banks’  precautionary  motives,  this 
extra liquidity will not result in higher inflation in the future.  
These  considerations  bring  me  to  the  second  aspect  of  our  non-standard  policies:  the 
conditions for their unwinding. Exceptional times have called for exceptional measures. But 
we will need to phase out these measures once the rationale for their adoption fades away 
and the situation normalises.  
The Governing Council believes that it would be premature today to think that the crisis has 
been overcome and conquered in a sustainable manner. So, it is not the time to exit yet. Our 
6 
 BIS Review 125/2009
future  decisions  on  the  phasing-out  of  non-standard  measures  will  be  guided  by  a 
transparent exit strategy. This exit strategy has been designed around four cornerstones.  
 
  First, it will be linked to our primary objective and thus to our monetary policy strategy. The 
crisis  has  not  changed  the  ECB’s  primary  objective.  This  means  that  any  non-standard 
measure  whose  continuation  would  compromise  the  maintenance  of  price  stability  at  any 
time in the future will be undone promptly and unequivocally.  
Second, the forward-looking initial design of the measures will help us wind them down when 
the time is ripe. The ECB’s non-standard measures were designed with exit considerations in 
mind. A number of measures – think of our refinancing operations – will phase out naturally 
by  design.  At  the  same  time,  the  size  and  scope  of  the  outright  purchases  have  been 
calibrated  so  that  they  would  not  interfere  with  the  implementation  of  appropriate  liquidity 
conditions in a phase of interest rate increases.  
Third, the ECB has the technical and institutional capability to act. The operational framework 
of the ECB proved very resilient at the start of the turmoil. It is also sufficiently flexible and 
reliable  to  fit  all  possible  situations  which  could  realistically  arise  in  the  future.  On  the 
institutional side, the Governing Council has the unfettered capacity to decide and institute 
appropriate  policies  whenever  circumstances  warrant  this.  The  ECB  rests  on  a  strong 
institutional platform, with a clear dividing line between what pertains to the central bank and 
what belongs to the fiscal sphere of responsibility.  
Fourth,  the  Governing  Council  can  mobilise  its  reputation  for  swift  and  decisive  action 
whenever  that  reputation  will  be  required  to  support  the  credibility  of  its  policies.  Over  the 
past decade, our institution has established a clear track record of steady-handedness. This 
is  also  because  market  participants  know  that  we  are  permanently  alert  and  that  we  act 
decisively and in a timely fashion when conditions so demand.  
BIS Review 125/2009 
 7
The current situation 
V.  
The  ECB’s  “steady-handed  approach”  to  conventional  monetary  policy  action  has  not 
impeded, in fact it has strengthened, a swift transmission of policy changes to market rates 
and  to  credit  conditions  more  broadly.  This  was  possible  for  two  reasons.  First,  steady-
handedness  makes  policy  changes  more  powerful.  Private  sector  expectations  regarding 
future interest rates adjust and move in a manner consistent with policy-makers’ intentions at 
all  maturities.  Second,  interest  rate  reductions  have  been  reinforced  by  our  non-standard 
monetary policy measures. These policies have made financial intermediaries less reluctant 
to pass on the degree of credit easing that the ECB wanted to implement.  
All  in  all,  there  are  encouraging  signs  that  the  substantial  stimulus  introduced  is  gradually 
bearing  fruit.  The  negative  inflationary  readings  over  the  summer  have  been  due  to  large 
declines  in  the  price  of  crude  oil  in  relation  to  the  previous  year.  In  this  sense,  the  fall  in 
inflation  –  by  boosting  the  purchasing  power  of  our  citizens  –  has  acted  as  an  automatic 
stabiliser at a time in which the economic conditions were deteriorating.  
Inflation expectations are a good measure of the degree to which the free fall in the economy 
and the dis-inflationary process could come to feed upon itself. They have remained stable 
around levels consistent with our definition of price stability.  
 
  The  economy,  too,  is  showing  signs  of  stabilisation.  After  the  strongly  negative  readings 
recorded  earlier  this  year,  economic  activity  in  the  second  quarter  is  estimated  to  have 
declined by 0.2% relative to the previous quarter. In the period ahead, we expect to see a 
very  gradual  recovery.  While  the  statistical  risks  to  this  outlook  remain  broadly  balanced, 
there  is  no  room  for  complacency  and  we  are,  as  always,  alert  to  any  unexpected 
developments.  On  the  upside,  the  impact  of  the  macroeconomic  stimulus  packages  and 
other policy measures may prove to be stronger than currently foreseen. On the downside, 
the negative feedback between the real economy and the still strained financial sector may 
prove more protracted than expected.  
8 
 BIS Review 125/2009
Lessons to be learnt 
VI. 
What lessons can we learn from the financial crisis that has shaken our world so profoundly? 
The crisis has exposed the fundamental fragility of the international financial system. I had 
mentioned that the macroeconomic situation shows signs of stabilisation. We expect a very 
gradual recovery ahead, but substantial risks remain.  
We have to consider all aspects of finance very seriously. The financial system needs to be 
as immunised as possible against its intrinsic tendency towards complacency, irresponsibility 
and self-destruction. Three intrinsic weaknesses need correction. 
• 
First,  the  pro-cyclicality  of  the  financial  system  needs  to  be  mitigated  by 
mechanisms  that  can  provide  built-in  stabilisers.  The  quality  and  quantity  of  bank 
capital and banks’ liquidity buffers have to be improved in good times to provide a 
sufficient  buffer  for  bank  equity  to  withstand  the  inevitable  increase  in  credit  risk 
when  the  cycle  turns.  The  cyclicality  of  market  economies  is  inevitable.  But  the 
financial system should not be allowed to amplify swings. 
Second,  the  transparency  of  the  financial  structures  needs  to  be  enhanced. 
Financial  innovation  cannot  be  built  upon  –  and  exploit  –  gaps  in  investor 
information  and  a  lack  of  financial  literacy.  Well-informed  decisions  by  market 
agents  are  a  key  element  of  any  functioning  market  economy.  All  institutions, 
instruments  and  markets  that  are  of  any  relevance  for  systemic  stability  need  to 
enhance their risk disclosure. The reach of financial regulation needs to be extended 
to  better  reflect  the  role  of  highly  leveraged  institutions  and  prevent  abuse  in  the 
derivatives markets. 
Third,  short-termism  in  the  design  of  financial  contracts  needs  to  be  corrected. 
Market  participants  –  traders,  loan  managers,  risk  committees  and  boards  of 
directors  –  were  given  strong  economic  incentives  to  focus  on  short-term  profits. 
Long-term value creation was not a concern in the pre-crisis world. Collectively, this 
resulted in excessive risk taking. In tune with the last G-20 pledge, a reform of the 
executive compensation schemes and practices is an essential part of our effort to 
secure financial stability. 
  Far from putting off the agenda for structural reforms, the crisis has made them more urgent. 
No segment of the market or category of players has been immune to the crisis. The list of 
areas that proved dysfunctional can be extended to include the risk management and credit 
assessment  of  banks,  accounting  standards,  audit  quality,  supervision,  and  many  more 
elements.  No  market  segment  or  financial  actor  should  escape  profound  rethinking.  This 
rethinking  should  have  the  scope  and  ambition  of  a  paradigm  change.  The  new  paradigm 
should be based on three notions. 
First,  medium-term  and  long-term  sustainability  in  macroeconomic  policies  and  financial 
strategies should replace the myopic perspective that is always a temptation. Herd behaviour 
in the financial markets might have two parallels in the macroeconomic sphere. These are: 
profligate  fiscal  policies  in  times  of  boom  and  over-accommodating  monetary  policy  in 
downturns.  A  new  medium-term  perspective  should  concentrate  policies  on  medium-term 
objectives. Like financial contracts, policies should not amplify economic fluctuations.  
Second,  authorities  and  major  players  in  the  financial  scene  should  immunize  themselves 
against complacency. The crisis has proved that unpredictable shocks, however unlikely, can 
compound in the aggregate. In these conditions, historical correlations of risks become an 
insufficient instrument to check the resilience of an institution or the system as a whole. A 
constant monitoring of resilience should become part of the new regime.  
Third, the approach should be holistic. The global proportions of the crisis call for a rethinking 
of  the  links  between  financial  behaviour  and  macroeconomic  policies.  This  has  two 
implications. The first concerns domestic governance. Major economies need to complement 
BIS Review 125/2009 
 9
their  micro-prudential  apparatus  with  a  new  macro-prudential  function.  Macroeconomic 
resilience calls for a systemic analysis of risk. Macro-prudential supervision offers this type of 
analysis  and  can  act  as  a  countervailing  force  to  the  tendency  of  the  financial  system  to 
amplify  economic  swings.  A  far-reaching  reform  in  this  direction  is  underway  in  the  EU.  A 
new European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) will be created which will detect risks to the EU 
financial system and issue warnings and recommendations to national supervisors.  
The second implication concerns international macro-governance. Over the last year, efforts 
to find new fora in which risks to the global economic order can be identified, discussed and 
addressed  have  intensified.  Throughout  the  turbulent  times,  coordinated  guidelines  have 
been put forward at the European and international levels by the Financial Stability Forum, 
the Eurogroup and the European Council. They were reflected in the declarations of the G-20 
summits.  The  G-20  itself  has  emerged  as  the  premier  forum  for  international  economic 
dialogue.  
Within  the  G-20,  I  find  it  encouraging  that  there  is  now  a  broad  consensus  between  the 
emerging  market  economies  and  the  industrialised  countries  on  the  principal  directions  of 
financial reform. In this field, I see a very strong consensus in the global community of central 
banks. As first signs of recovery can be observed and as banks are returning to profitability, it 
is important to keep up momentum and to proceed with the further steps that are necessary 
to ensure that events of such intensity do not recur in the future.  
Yet,  in  the  new  economic  order  that  will  emerge  these  fora  –  and  each  single 
macroeconomic  authority  that  is  represented  at  the  table  –  will  share  a  precisely  defined 
responsibility:  the  correction  of  global  imbalances.  Trade  and  financial  imbalances  were  a 
major source of instability in the pre-crisis world. Now, it is the precise mandate of the world 
economic  leaders  to  identify  a  pattern  of  growth  across  countries  that  is  more  sustainable 
and balanced. They need to evaluate whether the macroeconomic policies that are enacted 
domestically by the major economic players are collectively consistent with more sustainable 
and balanced growth worldwide. 
For this process to be effective, peer pressure needs to be made  more compelling than it 
was in the past.  
Let me say a few words on Italy.  
The  Italian  economy  is  undergoing  an  unprecedented  adjustment,  as  are  virtually  all 
developed countries throughout the world. Many Italian enterprises, in particular small and 
medium-sized  ones,  are  currently  dealing  with  very  challenging  times.  I  am  confident  that 
they  will  emerge  from  present  hardships  with  leaner  cost  structures  and  a  more  efficient 
organisation  of  production  processes.  In  the  end,  the  entrepreneurial  spirit  that  is  in  the 
genes of this nation will prevail. 
The financial crisis, the macroeconomic response to it and the lessons that we need to learn 
have been the themes of my talk today. My main message is that despite all the difficulties, 
the crisis is an opportunity for this continent and for this country in particular. Italy is a country 
that  has  traditionally  gained  confidence  in  the  severest  of  circumstances.  I  therefore  hope 
that  reflections  on  the  causes  and  lessons  of  the  crisis can  contribute  to  economic  reform 
that can bring a new era of progress for Italy.  
First of all, the crisis has shown the health of private finance in Italy. Italy never indulged in 
the financial excesses of the recent past. It remains an economy, where finance is first and 
foremost  support  for  real  economic  production.  Strong  saving  propensities  and  prudent 
banking represent a platform of security from which the economy can restart.  
But economic reforms cannot be delayed. The crisis can be the trigger for an ambitious plan 
to modernise the Italian economy and to make it more dynamic. Labour market institutions 
need to be overhauled to make labour compensation better reflect individual effort and firm-
level excellence. The pricing chain – notably in the service sector – needs to be streamlined 
10 
 BIS Review 125/2009
to  increase  the  flexibility  of  prices.  Welfare-enhancing  positions  that  are  a  drain  on 
disposable incomes and the economic potential of the country need to be discarded.  
I would like to encourage policy makers to tackle these issues.  
Concluding remarks 
VII.  
Bold  efforts  by  central  banks  and  governments  around  the  world  have  been  effective  in 
containing the propagation of a formidable shock. But short-term steps to alleviate the crisis 
need  to  be  reinforced  by  longer-term  reforms  that  can  inhibit  the  development  of  bubbles, 
stabilise  financial  markets  and  provide  greater  financial  security  to  households  and 
businesses. 
A  number  of  elements  and  –  one  might  even  say  “totems  and  taboos”  –  of  the  pre-crisis 
economic  universe  have  now  lost  most  of  their  value.  This  applies  to  individual  financial 
players and business models alike. Other elements, however, have maintained their worth. It 
is on these latter elements that we should build the future of this continent.  
The  euro  –  the  single  currency  –  and  the  macroeconomic  framework  of  the  Union  have 
certainly proved their strength in the last 12 months. The countries of Europe were not left to 
weather the storm alone. The financial maelstrom has not turned into any national debacle. A 
medium-term-oriented  macroeconomic  framework  had  helped  –  before  the  crisis  –  to  put 
Europe  on  a  solid  ground.  Those  solid  foundations  have  enabled  it  to  withstand  the 
onslaught. 
In the end, the strength to overcome the present hardships will come from the inside. Our 
openness  to  trade,  our  balanced  and  dynamic  business  structures,  our  talented  and  well-
trained workforces are part of our future. We know that technological progress will continue 
unabated in Europe. Companies and people will continue to prove their entrepreneurial spirit 
in large and small organisations. Reflection and endurance will be rewarded by a sense of 
personal  fulfilment  and  by  collective  progress.  Private  thrift  and  a  sense  of  prudent 
housekeeping are Europe’s primary safeguards against the risk of developing into a bubble 
economy.  
All this will be the engine that will steer the economy towards tomorrow’s recovery.  
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 125/2009 
 11
