Christian Noyer: Beyond Pittsburgh – the future of financial regulation 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Christian  Noyer,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France,  at  the  Paris 
Europlace International Financial Forum, Singapore, 26 October 2009. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen,  
I  am  delighted  to  address  this  distinguished  audience  at  the  Paris  Europlace  forum  in 
Singapore. I will take this opportunity to present my analyses on the lessons learned from the 
crisis regarding the essential reforms in financial regulation. 
Since the crisis started, in August 2007, we have gone through the most difficult years in our 
modern financial history. We have mobilized enormous resources to ensure the survival of 
the financial system and preserve its integrity. We have implemented exceptional measures, 
both on the fiscal and monetary front.  
We have acted in permanent cooperation between all countries, industrialized and emerging 
alike. That spirit of cooperation was on full display during the G20 Summit that took place 
recently in Pittsburgh. The cohesion shown by G20 members has powerfully contributed to 
restoring confidence.  
Today, we can be reasonably assured that we have stabilized our economies and avoided 
the worst. Current forecasts by the IMF show reasonable prospects for growth in the world 
economy in 2010. But there are many downside risks and adverse scenarios that could still 
materialize. Above all, we have a duty, and a mandate, to make sure that the causes of the 
crisis are addressed and that our economies do not fall victim to such shocks in the future.  
Reforming  and  adapting  financial  regulation  remains  an  urgent  priority.  G20  Leaders  have 
agreed on detailed principles and a roadmap. The newly formed Financial Stability Board has 
the difficult task of steering regulatory reform. We are very fortunate that the FSB, as well as 
the Basel Committee, has been enlarged and become a true reflection of the world economy. 
As you may know, the European Union is moving towards the creation of a new European 
Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) which will be responsible for macro-financial supervision and 
will  draw  extensively  on  the  resources  and  expertise  of  the  Eurosystem.  In  France,  the 
Government  has  decided  to  create  a  single  authority  responsible  both  for  banking  and 
insurance supervision, with very close links to the Central Bank. This will enable us to look at 
the state of and developments in the financial system from a truly systemic perspective.  
Much remains to be done. Let me outline the main objectives. In the current circumstances 
we should (1) try and keep up the momentum in the pursuit of reforms, (2) achieve balance 
in  the  implementation  of  the  agenda;  and,  (3)  ensure  consistency  between  our  regulatory 
actions and macroeconomic policy.  
Keeping up the momentum 
Over  the  last  few  weeks,  major  international  banks  have  announced  impressive  quarterly 
profits. It is striking that these performances were achieved only a few months after some of 
those same institutions came very close to failure. This might give the impression that the 
financial sector has recovered its balance and that no further reforms are necessary. Nothing 
could be further from the truth. Indeed, one major risk in the period to come is the emergence 
of  a  "business  as  usual"  mentality.  Once  the  immediate  dangers  have  receded,  the 
incentives to reform may become weaker and the opposition stronger. It is essential that we 
keep up the momentum. 
First, it is clear to everyone that recent profits in the financial sector, while welcome, are, for 
the most part, a result of public policies implemented to combat the crisis. They would have 
BIS Review 133/2009 
 1
not  been  possible  without  the  low  interest  rates  which  currently  prevail  and  the  public 
guarantees still in place.  
Second, there are signs that parts of the financial industry have resumed risk taking practices 
reminiscent  of  those  which  led  to  the  crisis.  This  impression  may  be  reinforced  by 
compensation  packages  which,  although  formally  compatible  with  G20  agreed  rules  and 
principles,  may  appear  out  of  line  with  the  underlying  performance  of  the  industry.  At  the 
same time, bank credit to the business sector is faltering, especially for small and medium-
sized  companies,  and  most  of  the  negative  effects  of  the  economic  downturn  on  balance 
sheets are still to come.  
It  is  therefore  crucial  that  we  keep  focused  on  our  long  term  goals.  Our  economies  need 
more robust and better capitalized banks. They need greater transparency and regulation of 
non-bank financial entities. They need more countercyclical prudential and accounting rules. 
They  need  sound  infrastructures  for  clearing  and  settling  credit  derivatives,  in  order  to 
minimize  systemic  risk.  They  need  stronger  and  robust  risk  management  and  better 
governance in all parts of the financial industry. They need increased oversight and stronger 
supervision of systematically important institutions. 
As a result of the crisis, the financial system will be permanently changed. Reforms will make 
it possible to increase its efficiency and, at the same time, improve its stability. This will be 
achieved  through  stronger  international  cooperation.  It  is  very  significant  that  the  leaders 
announced in Pittsburgh that Basel II will soon become a truly international standard and, at 
the same time, it will be reformed and adapted to take on board the lessons of the crisis. 
Striking a balance 
The  regulatory  agenda  is  comprehensive  and  complex.  It  has  been  thoroughly  debated.  It 
has to be taken as a whole and cannot be implemented in a piecemeal fashion; otherwise we 
would recreate distortions and new possibilities of regulatory arbitrage.  
Let me give you two examples. 
First,  on  procyclicality.  It  is  widely  recognized  that,  in  the  past,  prudential  and  accounting 
regimes have increased the procyclicality of financial systems, especially in boom periods, by 
encouraging  excessive  risk  taking.  Accordingly,  reforms  are  being  considered  both  in  the 
capital and accounting frameworks. As a consequence of decisions taken by the G20 and 
the FSB, countercyclical capital requirements will be implemented by the Basel Committee 
and  accounting  standard  setters  have  been  asked  to  put  in  place  a  countercyclical 
provisioning  regime.  While  respecting  the  independence  of  standard  setters,  it  is  very 
important that these two efforts progress in parallel. It is the combination of accounting and 
prudential rules which shape the incentives of investors and managers. Partial reform, limited 
to  the  prudential  field  for  instance,  will  not  suffice  and  could  even  introduce  additional 
distortions. The Basel Committee has come out with a comprehensive approach to capital 
and accounting reform to reduce procyclicality, embodied, in particular, in the Principles for 
revision  of  IAS  39  (“Financial  Instruments:  Recognition  and  Measurement”).  It  should  be 
strongly supported. 
Second,  on  leverage.  Excessive  leverage  has  been  a  major  cause  of  the  crisis.  In  many 
instances,  it  could  not  be  detected  early  enough,  because  attention  was  focused  on  risk-
weighted  measures  of  capital  utilisation.  There  is  great  merit,  therefore,  in  introducing  a 
leverage ratio as an essential tool of macro-prudential supervision. It is also envisaged as 
part  of  the  capital  requirement  regime  as  a  complement  and  "backstop"  to  risk-weighted 
measures.  
It may be almost impossible, however, to use it as a binding instrument on an international 
basis.  The  reason  is  simple:  while  it  is  relatively  easy  to  measure  the  evolution  of  the 
leverage  ratio  over  time  for  an  institution  or  group  of  institutions,  it  is  almost  unfeasible  to 
2 
 BIS Review 133/2009
measure  it  consistently  across  countries,  due  to  differences  in  accounting  regimes  and 
banking structures. An enormous amount of work is therefore necessary before integration of 
a leverage ratio into the Basel framework can be implemented. In particular, full convergence 
in  accounting  measurements  of  both  assets  and  capital  is  an  absolute  prerequisite.  Any 
attempt  to  short-cut  this  process  and  build  up  ad  hoc  measures  for  purely  prudential 
purposes  will  not  succeed.  It  runs  the  risk  of  adding  significant  distortions  and  having 
unwanted consequences. In particular, if not carefully drafted, the leverage ratio could create 
incentives for banks to pile up riskier assets in their balance sheets, in order to maintain the 
same  returns  on  equity  with  lower  leverage.  This  would  only  aggravate  the  problems  that 
regulation is trying to solve and precipitate the next crisis. This is why some scepticism is 
warranted as to the possibility of using the leverage ratio as a universally binding, or in the 
language of regulators, a "pillar one" component of the capital framework. 
Consistency with macroeconomic policy 
Regulatory  reform  has  today  to  be  implemented  in  a  very  uncertain  macroeconomic 
environment.  It  is  therefore  important  that  we  strike  the  right  balance: efforts  towards  long 
term reform must not create, in the short run, additional downside risks to economic activity. 
Since  Pittsburgh,  we  have  a  roadmap  and  we  have  deadlines.  We  must  find  the  optimal 
sequencing to reconcile our ultimate objectives with the need not to impede the recovery.  
This is especially relevant for the capital regime. Banks must have a much stronger capital 
base  in  the  long  run.  But,  in  the  short  run,  we  expect  credit  to  continue  flowing  to  the 
economy and we want, therefore, to avoid any abrupt and disorderly deleveraging. We don't 
want,  in  short,  the  introduction  of a  new  capital  regime  to  have  a  procyclical  effect  on  our 
economies. In  the  euro area,  the  economy  depends  on the  banking  system  for  more  than 
two-thirds  of  its  financing.  Any  lasting  disruption  to  credit  flows  would  cause  considerable 
harm.  
Regulators could jointly decide on the following sequence. In the immediate future, priority 
should be given to capital conservation. As I mentioned, most of the current banking profits 
are, in fact, by-products of public policies and there is a good case for requesting that they 
should  be  kept  inside  the  banking  system  and  used  to  strengthen  balance  sheets  and 
finance credit to the economy. This would require some restraint in dividend distribution and, 
of course, in the overall amount of variable compensation. In parallel, all possibilities to issue 
new equity should be exploited. This would be a first step. 
As a second step, a progressive schedule of capital strengthening could be precisely defined 
and  published  for  the  future.  It  would  be  crucial  that  this  schedule  be  made  explicitly 
contingent on the state of the world economy. Again, we want the direction and the path to 
be  clear.  But  it  is  important  to  avoid  any  negative  procyclical  effects.  The  same  approach 
could apply to the new liquidity regime when it is introduced. 
Let me conclude by mentioning one broader and fundamental issue. We don't know yet what 
kind of financial system will emerge from the crisis. We need to think about this. We want to 
reduce or eliminate moral hazard, but the definition of a systemic institution still eludes us. As 
a result of the turmoil, and of the policies implemented to contain it, some financial activities 
have  become  heavily  concentrated  among  a  very  small  numbers  of  players.  This  raises 
some  basic  questions  about  monopolistic  tendencies.  Competition  policy  in  the  financial 
sector must be reinvented. This cannot be done without some vision about the future shape 
and  structure  of  the  financial  industry,  as  well  as  the  degree  and  modalities  of  its 
internationalisation. The debate is clearly open. This is – for all G20 policy-makers, the FSB 
and regulators – a formidable challenge. 
BIS Review 133/2009 
 3
