Masaaki Shirakawa: Toward development of robust payment and 
settlement systems 
Speech  by  Mr  Masaaki  Shirakawa,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  a  symposium 
commemorating  the  25th  anniversary  of  the  Center  for  Financial  Industry  Information 
Systems, Tokyo, 13 November 2009. 
 Introduction 
I. 
It is a great pleasure to have this opportunity to speak at the symposium commemorating the 
25th anniversary of the Center for Financial Industry Information Systems (FISC). Since its 
establishment  in  1984,  the  center  has  greatly  contributed  to  strengthening  the  safety  of 
financial  information  systems  and  improving  the  sophistication  and  efficiency  of  financial 
services  in  Japan.  FISC  has  served  the  industry  through  its  wide-ranging  activities,  which 
include developing industry guidelines on information system audit and security, publishing 
annual  reports  on  financial  information  systems  in  Japan,  and  organizing  seminars  on 
various topics. As the center marks its quarter-century milestone, I would like to express my 
respect and gratitude for the work it has done over the years. 
The twenty-five years of FISC closely overlap with the history of the birth and evolution of the 
Bank of Japan Financial Network System (BOJ-NET). The  Bank of Japan had just started 
developing the system when the center was founded in 1984. The system went live in 1988, 
followed by a number of improvements thereafter. These include the introduction of delivery-
versus-payment (DVP) for Japanese government bonds (JGBs), the development of an out-
of-region backup center in Osaka, a changeover from deferred net settlement (DNS) to real-
time gross settlement (RTGS), and the introduction of liquidity-saving features into the RTGS 
system. These measures have contributed to enhancing the safety and efficiency of payment 
and settlement systems in Japan. 
One major objective behind improvements in payment and settlement systems is to avert the 
negative impact of a financial crisis on the economy. As recent events in the global financial 
system  have  shown,  unfortunately,  financial  crises  occur  repeatedly.  While  each  crisis 
emerges  in  a  different  manner,  there  are  certain  common  features:  an  overly  optimistic 
outlook on the economy, followed by excessive leverage and liquidity, finally leads to a crisis; 
and unwinding of leverage and contraction of liquidity take place once the crisis is underway. 
Preventing the emergence of a bubble economy and the occurrence of a financial crisis is a 
challenge we must continuously tackle. However, considering the history of recurring "boom-
and-bust"  cycles,  I  must  emphasize  the  importance  of  building  a  robust  financial 
infrastructure  that  can  absorb  shocks  in  a  flexible  manner.  This  is  especially  relevant  for 
payment  and  settlement  systems,  which  form  the  bedrock  of  the  financial  infrastructure. 
Today,  I  would  like  to  present  to  you  the  Bank’s  views  on  the  challenges  that  need  to  be 
addressed to further strengthen the robustness of payment and settlement systems in Japan. 
II. 
Performance of Japan’s payment and settlement systems during the recent 
crisis 
The failure of Lehman Brothers in autumn 2008 triggered unprecedented disruptions in the 
global  financial  market.  The  aftermath  of  the  disruptions  challenged  Japan’s  payment  and 
settlement systems to prove its robustness against shocks. Overall, a favorable assessment 
can be made that the payment and settlement systems in Japan withstood the turmoil in the 
financial  market,  operating  effectively  as  designed.  At  a  minimum,  unfavorable  issues  in 
payment and settlement systems did not trigger a chain of defaults among Japan’s financial 
institutions.  It  is  true  that  the  financial  crisis  revealed  some  tasks  that  still  need  to  be 
BIS Review 155/2009 
 1
addressed. Nevertheless, I would like to emphasize that the systems have demonstrated a 
high level of robustness, and praise the patient efforts that the relevant parties have made to 
improve  the  systems  over  the  years.  Chart  1  shows  some  major  streams  of  ceaseless 
efforts. In order to correctly acknowledge the progress made to date, I will start by giving two 
examples. 
Elimination of foreign exchange settlement risk 
A. 
First,  the  arrangement  for  eliminating  foreign  exchange  settlement  risk  has  functioned 
effectively. Settlement of foreign exchange transactions entails the risk, namely principal risk, 
that  a  party  to  a  trade  pays  one  currency,  for  example,  the  yen,  but  cannot  receive  the 
counter-currency,  for  example,  the  U.S.  dollar  –  a  risk  that  arises  due  to  the  time  zone 
difference  between  the  settlement  systems  for  the  two  currencies.  In  order  to  resolve  this 
problem, major banks around the world jointly invested to establish CLS Bank International 
(CLS;  stands  for  continuous  linked  settlement)  in  New  York,  which  began  its  settlement 
service in 2002. Major economies’ central banks, including the Bank of Japan, played a key 
role in the establishment of CLS. 
Under the CLS system, settlement of the two currency legs is carried out simultaneously on a 
payment-versus-payment (PVP) basis. Each participant holds an account for the two traded 
currencies  at  CLS,  and  the  transfer  of  the  two  currencies  is  made  on  the  two  parties’ 
accounts simultaneously only if the payer of each currency has sufficient funds or foreign-
currency collateral for settlement in their accounts (Chart 2). Transfer of funds between CLS 
and its participants takes place on their accounts at the central banks, currency by currency. 
CLS deals with seventeen eligible currencies, and the CLS settlement process takes place 
during a five-hour window corresponding to the morning hours in Europe, early evening in 
Japan, and very early morning in the United States, respectively. 
CLS has played a critical role throughout the recent financial crisis. On an average day, CLS 
settles  3  to  4  trillion  U.S.  dollars,  which  accounts  for  almost  60  percent  of  the  foreign 
exchange settlements worldwide.1 While the value further surged immediately following the 
failure  of  Lehman  Brothers,  CLS  completed  settlement  of  the  significant  amounts  of 
payments in a stable manner. 
The effective functioning of CLS was particularly important because, over the course of the 
recent global financial crisis, the functioning of the U.S. dollar funding market was severely 
impaired  and  non-U.S.  financial  institutions,  including  Japanese  and  European  financial 
institutions, became increasingly dependent on foreign exchange swaps as a source of U.S. 
dollar  funding.  If  CLS’s  PVP  mechanism  had  not  existed  and  financial  institutions  had 
confronted foreign exchange settlement risk under the rapid undermining of confidence in the 
soundness of financial institutions, they would have had much more difficulty in funding U.S. 
dollars through the foreign exchange swap market. Simultaneous multi-currency settlement 
in  CLS  acted  as  a  bulwark  to  protect  against  the  intensifying  shock  of  the  global  financial 
crisis. 
Ensuring settlement of JGB transactions 
B. 
A second example is that JGB transactions continued to be settled without serious problems 
despite the significant shock arising from the failure of Lehman Brothers Japan (LBJ). I will 
explain the JGB settlement process, focusing on a central counterparty (CCP) called Japan 
Government Bond Clearing Corporation (JGBCC). 
                                                 
1   See Bank for International Settlements, Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems (2008). 
2 
 BIS Review BIS Review 155/2009
A CCP replaces a bilateral contract between parties with two contracts between the CCP and 
the individual party. Thus, the CCP becomes a buyer to every seller and a seller to every 
buyer.  This  brings  two  benefits.  First,  the  CCP  offsets  a  large  number  of  obligations  and 
claims across the participants, thereby reducing the amount of securities and cash needed 
for settlement. For example, in September 2009, an average of 35 trillion yen worth of JGB 
transactions was submitted to the JGBCC every day, but this came to a net 9 trillion yen or a 
quarter of the amount of the original transactions.2  
Second,  in  the  event  of  a  participant’s  default,  a  CCP  guarantees  performance  of  delivery 
and payment obligations to other participants (Chart 3). In such an event, the CCP becomes 
unable to receive securities from the participant in default, which would result in the failure of 
delivery to other participants on the settlement day, the so-called "settlement fails." It would 
immediately attempt to purchase securities from the market and therefore resolve settlement 
fails.3  For  payment  obligations,  the  CCP  borrows  funds  to  make  payments  to  other 
participants  as  scheduled.  It  repays  funds  by  liquidating  the  securities  that  were  originally 
intended for delivery to the participant in default. 
A CCP cannot function well without appropriate risk management measures. A CCP needs 
to be equipped with contingency liquidity funding arrangements to continue the performance 
of payment obligations. Moreover, it needs to have adequate financial resources and loss-
sharing  arrangements  among  the  participants,  so  as  to  be  prepared  for  potential  losses 
arising from the closing-out of a defaulter’s outstanding positions. 
JGBCC  and  other  CCPs  in  Japan  have  been  working  to  strengthen  risk  management 
measures. Thanks to these continuous efforts, the existing risk management controls have 
proved effective and the operations of CCPs have been ensured during the recent financial 
crisis.  With  LBJ’s  default,  JGBCC  had  to  fund  significant  amounts  of  liquidity  very  quickly. 
Nevertheless,  it  managed  to  raise  funds  from  external  sources  using  the  existing  liquidity 
arrangements. In addition, while JGBCC and other CCPs suffered losses from the closing-
out  of  LBJ’s  outstanding  positions,  those  losses  were  fully  covered  by  collateral  that  LBJ 
provided.4  
Having said that, there is still room for improvements in CCPs’ risk management framework. 
Moreover,  there  is  also  a  long-standing  issue  with  respect  to  JGBCC.  The  netting  ratio  of 
JGBCC is not high, because not all major market players participate in JGBCC. Although it is 
fundamentally  a  matter  between  JGBCC  and  the  participants,  a  higher  netting  ratio  would 
benefit  all  market  participants.  From  this  perspective,  the  Bank  expects  CCPs  in  Japan  to 
provide the lead in efficient and safe clearing business with strengthened risk management 
framework. 
                                                 
2   For monthly statistics of major payment and settlement systems in Japan, see the Payment and Settlement 
Statistics released on the Bank’s web site (http://www.boj.or.jp/en/index.htm). 
3   After LBJ’s failure, a chain of settlement fails has spread to the broad JGB markets via the CCP and other 
market participants who had bilateral contracts with LBJ.  Since many institutional investors had little tolerance 
to  settlement  fails,  market  participants  in  general  became  concerned  about  the  creditworthiness  of 
counterparties, and the liquidity of repo market has shrunk. To address these issues, the securities industry is 
working  to  increase  acceptance  of  settlement  fails  and  reviewing  the  fails  practice.  See  Bank  of  Japan, 
Financial Markets Department (2009b) (available only in Japanese). For the number and average duration of 
settlement fails, see Figures on Settlement of Japanese Government Bonds released on the Bank’s web site 
(http://www.boj.or.jp/en/index.htm). 
4   See Bank of Japan, Payment and Settlement Systems Department (2009a) (available only in Japanese). It 
explains how payment and settlement systems in Japan coped with the failure of LBJ, and summarizes the 
lessons  learned  from  the  experience.  Also  see  Bank  of  Japan,  Financial  Markets  Department  (2009a) 
(available only in Japanese) and Bank of Japan (2009b). They summarize what implications LBJ’s failure had 
on Japan′s money markets and identify challenges for Japan’s repo markets. 
BIS Review 155/2009 
 3
Apart  from  use  of  a  CCP,  the  industry  had  worked  on  the  introduction  of  RTGS,  the 
achievement  of  DVP  for  securities  transactions,  and  the  dematerialization  of  securities 
certificates. Those safeguarding measures are now taken for granted, but the fact that these 
mechanisms prevented initial disruptions to amplify the scale of the financial crisis through 
malfunction of payment and settlement systems should not be underestimated (Chart 1). 
Challenges confirmed from the experience of the financial crisis 
III. 
As I explained, payment and settlement systems in Japan functioned well during the financial 
crisis.  Nevertheless,  there  are  several  remaining  challenges  to  the  development  of  robust 
payment  and  settlement  systems.  The  financial  crisis  provoked  active  debate  on  financial 
supervision and regulation, and opinions have not converged yet. Compared with this topic, 
some consensus has been reached on the way to strengthen the robustness of payment and 
settlement systems. 
What  is  a  robust  payment  and  settlement  system?  It  is  a  payment  and  settlement  system 
capable  of  preventing  the  outbreak  of  a  financial  crisis  even  in  the  face  of  an  extremely 
stressful  shock  to  itself.  To  realize  such  a  robust  system,  it  is  important  to  identify  what 
determines the magnitude of systemic risk, that is, the factor that influences the probability of 
a  certain  shock  leading  to  a  financial  crisis.  In  my  view,  the  following  three  measures  are 
essential to mitigate systemic risk in payment and settlement systems: (1) reducing the size 
of  outstanding  settlement  positions  of  individual  market  participants;  (2)  taking  appropriate 
measures  depending  on  the  state  of  interconnectedness  embedded  in  payment  and 
settlement  systems;  and  (3)  enhancing  alternative  arrangements  for  critical  settlement 
functions.  I  will  explain  the  challenges  for  Japan’s  payment  and  settlement  systems, 
according to these three factors. 
Reducing the size of outstanding settlement positions 
A. 
The  first  challenge  is  to  reduce  the  size  of  individual  market  participants’  outstanding 
settlement  positions.  While  the  size  of  financial  transactions  is  a  given  with  respect  to  a 
payment and settlement system, the settlement risk of financial transactions can be reduced. 
The key in this regard is outstanding settlement positions or outstanding exposures arising 
from settlement activities. Please see Chart 4. The horizontal axis shows the time from trade 
execution  to  settlement,  and  the  vertical  axis  shows  the  settlement  value  of  financial 
transactions.  The  longer  the  time  to  settlement,  in  which  participants  are  exposed  to 
settlement risk, the more likely one could suffer losses from the default of the counterparty. 
Principal risk in securities and foreign  exchange settlements can be eliminated using DVP 
and PVP mechanisms. However, market risk – a risk of loss arising from price movements 
during replacement of unsettled positions – increases as time to settlement lengthens. In an 
intuitive sense, the area inside the rectangle in this graph shows the size of risk exposures. 
Given  the  value  of  financial  transactions  or  settlement  on  the  vertical  axis,  a  key  point  for 
systemic risk control is how to reduce the length of time on the horizontal axis. 
If a time from trade execution to settlement is shortened, outstanding settlement positions will 
be  reduced.  Chart  5  shows  the  outstanding  settlement  positions  where  one  unit  trade  is 
executed  per  day.  In  the  next-day  settlement  system  –  the  so-called  T+1  settlement  – 
outstanding settlement positions will be reduced to one third, compared with T+3 settlement. 
Moreover, if securities are delivered a day after the trading day, settlement fails, which may 
arise from the default of market participants, are likely to be resolved more quickly. In other 
words, a shorter settlement cycle contributes to reducing the risk of loss and liquidity burden 
arising from the replacement of unsettled positions. 
In  the  United  States  and  the  United  Kingdom,  the  government  securities  markets,  where 
huge value is exchanged every day, have moved to T+1 settlement and have managed to 
reduce  outstanding  settlement  positions.  In  Japan,  market  participants  have  initiated  a 
4 
 BIS Review BIS Review 155/2009
project that aims to achieve a shorter settlement cycle for the government securities market. 
A shorter settlement cycle not only reduces the size of outstanding settlement positions, but 
also  makes  government  securities  more  attractive  financial  instruments.  Government 
securities are highly liquid assets that are easily convertible to cash, but the securities with 
the T+1 settlement are more liquid and more favorable than those with the T+3. Government 
securities  are  extensively  traded  among  a  wide  range  of  market  participants  including 
dealers,  institutional  investors,  and  foreign  investors.  The  move  to  shorten  the  settlement 
cycle  would  require  operational  changes  to  the  front,  middle,  and  back  offices  of  those 
market participants. While much work needs to be done on the market side, the Bank will 
provide extensive support to market participants’ efforts. 
Taking appropriate measures depending on the state of interconnectedness 
B. 
The  second  challenge  is  to  take  appropriate  measures  that  consider  the  state  of 
interconnectedness  of  settlement  between  market  participants.  In  practice,  the  network  of 
interconnections within the financial system is very complex. In a single financial market or a 
payment and settlement system, market participants are interconnected through trading and 
settlement  activities.  Moreover,  market  participants  participate  in  multiple  financial  markets 
including money, bonds, equity, and derivatives markets, and settle their funds and securities 
transactions 
through  multiple  payment  and  settlement  systems.  This  creates 
interconnectedness between payment and settlement systems by common participants. 
While interconnectedness raises important issues for financial supervision and regulation, I 
will  focus  on  the  issue  of  interconnectedness  within  payment  and  settlement  systems. 
Chart 6-1 illustrates the workings of a bilateral settlement network, with market participants 
represented by circles and obligations between market participants indicated by lines. This is 
a  model  of  one  hundred  market  participants  settling  transactions  in  a  given  payment  and 
settlement  system.5  Suppose  a  financial  institution  goes  bankrupt  and  fails  to  perform 
settlement  obligations;  depending  on  the  size  of  default,  this  could  lead  to  subsequent 
defaults of its counterparties at the ends of lines. The chart does not take into account the 
timing  of  each  settlement,  but  the  order  of  securities  deliveries  and  payments  is  also  an 
important  factor  under  the  RTGS  environment.6  For  the  bilateral  settlement,  it  is  important 
that  individual  participants  have  adequate  management  of  counterparty  risk;  for  example, 
collection of margins and the closing-out procedures in the event of a counterparty’s default. 
Chart 6-2 shows an image of settlement via a CCP. As you can see, the network complexity 
is  resolved  because  a  bilateral  contract  between  parties  is  replaced  with  a  set  of  new 
contracts  with  the  CCP.  On  the  contrary,  risks  are  concentrated  on  the  CCP.  From  this 
perspective, and based on the experience of LBJ’s default, CCPs in Japan are reexamining 
their  risk  management,  such  as  by  reviewing  contingency  liquidity  arrangements  and 
strengthening  stress  testing  schemes.  It  is  not  easy  to  reach  a  consensus  among  diverse 
                                                 
5   See  Imakubo  and  Soejima  (2008a)  (available  only  in  Japanese).  It  shows  that  the  network  of  bilateral 
obligations  within  financial  markets  has  a  very  complex  structure.  It  notes  that  the  settlement  network  in 
money markets in Japan has shifted from a “hub-and-spoke” model centered on money market brokers, to a 
“dual  structure  of  core  and  periphery”  model  with  small-world  network  property,  and  examines  what 
implications  the  changes  in  network  structure  have  on  systemic  risk.  It  also  gives  examples  of  empirical 
studies on financial networks  with respect to the money market transactions in Italy, settlement in Fedwire, 
and interbank exposures in Switzerland. 
6   See Imakubo and Soejima (2008b) (available only in Japanese) and Bank of Japan (2009a) (Box 2-2). They 
verify  how  liquidity  shock  propagates  within  a  network  through  a  chain  of  settlement  delays  using  the  real 
settlement data of BOJ-NET. The former demonstrates that the contagion process of liquidity shock is strongly 
dependent on the network structure. The latter demonstrates that the liquidity saving features of the BOJ-NET 
Funds Transfer System significantly reduces the magnitude of contagion triggered by liquidity shock using a 
simulation approach. 
BIS Review 155/2009 
 5
participants  in  CCPs,  but  the  Bank  is  confident  that  CCPs  in  Japan  are  making  progress 
toward better risk management commensurate with the important roles of CCPs. 
Chart 6-3 shows one example of the intermediate structure. The settlement via CLS, which I 
explained earlier, corresponds to this structure. This network model also has a weak point. In 
the CLS settlement, a large number of indirect participants settle their transactions through a 
relatively  small  number  of  direct  participants.  In  this  business  model,  a  direct  participant 
takes on significant credit and liquidity risks due to indirect participants for which they settle, 
and this issue was highlighted during the experience of the recent financial crisis. In relation 
to CLS, another issue is that some important transactions are not eligible for the five-hour 
settlement  window  of  CLS  and  are  settled  outside  CLS.7  To  address  this  point,  CLS  is 
exploring the possibility of setting up a second settlement window. 
In  sum,  it  is  important  that  every  payment  and  settlement  system  takes  systemic  risk 
reduction measures according to the state of interconnectedness and the network structure. 
As a tangent to the main point, I will give you an example of an attempt to reduce systemic 
risk;  namely,  taking  advantage  of  a  CCP  for  the  over-the-counter  (OTC)  credit  derivatives 
market,  which  has  attracted  much  attention  recently.  In  the  United  States  and  Europe, 
several  CCPs  for  credit  default  swaps  (CDSs)  have  been  established.  Traditionally,  CDS 
contracts traded in the OTC market were settled bilaterally between market participants, as 
shown in Chart 6-1. The global CDS markets have expanded rapidly since the early 2000s, 
creating a complicated web of obligations between market participants. Major dealers’ back 
offices could not catch up with the expansion of CDS transactions, causing significant growth 
in a backlog of outstanding confirmations. As a result, it is said that regulatory authorities and 
market participants themselves faced difficulty understanding the size of the CDS market and 
the  whole  structure  of  counterparty  risk  that  the  participants  were  exposed  to  via  bilateral 
transaction. The startup of CCPs for CDSs, as well as encouragement of the use of trade 
confirmation services and trade repository services, aimed to improve risk management and 
market  transparency.  Broad  use  of  CCPs  is  also  expected  to  promote  standardization  of 
OTC credit derivatives contracts. 
It  should  be  noted,  however,  that  setting  up  a  CCP  and  simplifying  complex  relationships 
alone  does  not  eliminate  systemic  risk.  The  CCP  becomes  the  single  nexus  of  all 
counterparty  risks,  and  consequently  takes  on  significant  risks.  Therefore,  it  must  be 
equipped  with  an  adequately  rigorous  risk  management  framework,  and  special  attention 
needs to be paid to the continuation of clearing operations under an extreme but plausible 
market condition. In fact, overseas central banks have been strengthening oversight of CCPs 
while encouraging the use of CCPs, as they are two sides of the same coin with respect to 
risk concentration into a CCP. In Japan, the setting up of a CCP for OTC credit derivatives 
market is becoming an important issue, so I would emphasize again the importance of an 
adequately rigorous risk management framework. 
C.  Enhancing alternative arrangements for critical settlement functions 
The  third  challenge  is  to  enhance  alternative  arrangements  in  the  event  of  disruption  to 
critical settlement functions. Critical settlement functions could be disrupted by various kinds 
of contingencies including failure of a financial institution, a natural disaster, and the outbreak 
of  a  pandemic.  If  a  certain  critical  settlement  function  is  disrupted  due  to  those  external 
shocks  and  no  alternatives  are  available,  it  could  potentially  lead  to  the  manifestation  of 
systemic risk; in other words, a kind of financial crisis. 
                                                 
7   The  same-day  foreign  exchange  transactions  are  not  eligible  for  the  current  settlement  window  of  CLS.  In 
addition, the out leg of in/out swaps – the measures used by CLS members to reduce liquidity risk in CLS 
settlement – is settled outside CLS. 
6 
 BIS Review BIS Review 155/2009
For this reason, financial institutions and operators of payment and settlement systems have 
been  making  efforts  to  develop  and  improve  backup  systems.  Within  these  efforts,  the 
strengthening  of  utilities  services  including  a  backup  communication  network  and  power 
supply has been one major challenge. Furthermore, to enhance alternative arrangements for 
critical settlement functions, it is important to set up contingency staffing arrangements while 
securing  a  backup  for  hardware  and  software.  As  we  all  know,  FISC  has  been  making 
significant  contributions  in  this  area.  Thanks  to  these  contributions,  steady  progress  has 
been made in the business continuity arrangements of financial institutions and payment and 
settlement  systems  during  the  last  decade.  I  hope  that  relevant  parties  will  make  further 
efforts toward the development of robust payment and settlement systems. 
IV.  The Bank’s involvement in payment and settlement systems 
I would now like to turn to the involvement of the Bank in improving the safety and efficiency 
of payment and settlement systems. Among the various activities of the Bank in this area, 
today I will focus on the operation of BOJ-NET and oversight of private-sector payment and 
settlement systems. 
Improving the safety and efficiency of BOJ-NET 
A. 
I  will  start  with  the  operation  of  BOJ-NET.  As  the  central  bank  of  Japan,  the  Bank  is 
responsible  for  providing  society  with  risk-free  settlement  assets  in  the  form  of  banknotes 
and current accounts at the Bank in a safe and efficient manner. Transfer of funds across 
those  accounts,  as  well  as  the  transfer  of  JGBs,  takes  place  over  BOJ-NET,  a  settlement 
platform  operated  by  the  Bank.  On  an  average  day,  BOJ-NET  settles  50  thousand  funds 
transfers worth 100 trillion yen and 15 thousand JGB transfers worth 80 trillion yen. BOJ-NET 
has  continued  to  demonstrate  extremely  high  operational  stability  and  has  ensured  the 
smooth processing of such large transaction amounts. 
Over the years, the Bank has worked to improve the functionality of BOJ-NET. One example 
of recent enhancements is the Next-Generation RTGS (RTGS-XG) project for the BOJ-NET 
Funds Transfer System. In 2001, the system was converted from a DNS system to a pure 
RTGS system, which settles transactions one-by-one on a real-time basis. An RTGS system, 
by its design, is effective in eliminating settlement risks associated with DNS, but at the same 
time requires relatively larger amounts of liquidity. The RTGS-XG project aims to reduce the 
amount of liquidity needed under RTGS while also expanding the benefits of RTGS to large-
value payments that are currently settled in private-sector DNS systems, namely the Foreign 
Exchange  Yen  Clearing  System  (FXYCS)  and  the  Zengin  System  (clearing  system  for 
domestic funds transfers). 
The  project  is  being  implemented  in  two  phases.  Phase  1  is  the  introduction  of  liquidity-
saving features into the BOJ-NET Funds Transfer System and the settlement of payments in 
the FXYCS through RTGS. This was successfully implemented in October 2008.8 
The  liquidity-saving  features  consist  of  centralized  queuing  and  offsetting  mechanisms 
(Chart 7). "Queuing" allows payment instructions to be held pending within the system. The 
"offsetting" mechanism searches among the newly entered and queued payment instructions 
for  a  set  of  instructions  that  can  be  settled  simultaneously.  Our  estimate  based  on  actual 
transaction data shows that the liquidity-saving features enable payments to be settled much 
earlier in the day using a lower amount of liquidity9 (Chart 8). 
                                                 
8   For the details of payment activity after Phase 1 and a description of liquidity-saving features, see Bank of 
Japan (2009a) and Bank of Japan, Payment and Settlement Systems Department (2009b). 
9   The change in average settlement time is largely due to the shift of the FXYCS from DNS to RTGS. 
BIS Review 155/2009 
 7
The Bank is currently working in cooperation with the Zengin System to implement Phase 2 
of the project, which aims to settle large-value payments in the Zengin System – defined as 
payments above 100 million yen – through RTGS (Chart 9). Implementation of Phase 2 is 
scheduled for November 2011 in coordination with the next upgrade of the Zengin System. 
With  such  implementation,  virtually  all  large-value  interbank  payments  in  Japan  will  be 
processed on an RTGS basis. 
Another example of enhancements to BOJ-NET is the planned development of the new BOJ-
NET  system.  The  current  BOJ-NET  system  went  live  in  1988  and  has  been  serving  the 
industry  with  highly  reliable  and  stable  operation  for  more  than  twenty  years.  During  this 
period,  the  environment  surrounding  the  system  has  gone  through  significant  change, 
including  increasing  interconnectedness  among  payment  and  settlement  infrastructure  and 
globalization of financial markets. The Bank believes that the new BOJ-NET system should 
have  the  capability  to  respond  to  ongoing  and  future  developments  in  both  payment  and 
settlement  industry  and  technologies  supporting  the  industry,  and  that  this  should  be 
achieved  by  migrating  to  the  latest  information  processing  technology,  adopting  a  system 
architecture  with  greater  flexibility  for  future  changes,  and  enhancing  accessibility  from  its 
participants and external systems to the new BOJ-NET systems and services. 
The Bank decided to fully review the configuration of the BOJ-NET system, and last month 
released  the  principles  guiding  development  of  the  new  system  and  the  implementation 
schedule.10  This  was  done  following  a  public  consultation  process,  with  many  valuable 
opinions received from relevant parties. Some of the possible changes under the new BOJ-
NET system include (1) expanding the range of transactions that can use the liquidity-saving 
features, (2) facilitating interoperability with other systems – for example, by adopting XML-
based  messages  –  and  (3)  improving  connectivity  with  other  securities  settlement 
infrastructure.  The  Bank  believes  that  the  enhanced  BOJ-NET  system  will  underpin  the 
activities  of financial  institutions in  Japan  as  they  pursue  new  opportunities  in  response  to 
developments  in  financial  markets  and  services.  The  Bank  will  continue  to  closely  consult 
with relevant parties as it develop the detailed functionalities and specifications of the new 
system. 
B.  Oversight of private-sector payment and settlement systems 
In  addition  to  the  operation  of  BOJ-NET,  the  Bank  conducts  oversight  of  private-sector 
payment and settlement systems. Oversight involves monitoring the design and operation of 
individual  systems  and  encouraging  improvements  where  necessary,  with  primary  focus 
placed on systems that are systemically important. Oversight is widely recognized around the 
world as a critical function of central banks, although its legal basis may vary from country to 
country. Financial stability, together with price stability, supports sound development of the 
national  economy.  Central  banks  have  attached  importance  to  their  oversight  activities  to 
ensure that payment and settlement systems do not become a source of instability, and to 
lay the foundation for further enhancement of the financial system. 
One issue that the Bank has worked on over the years as part of its oversight activities is 
preparing arrangements for coping with participant default. In the international standard for 
systemically  important  payment  systems  prepared  by  central  banks,  it  is  considered  best 
practice  for  multilateral  netting  systems  to  ensure  completion  of  daily  settlements  on  time, 
even  in  the  event  that  the  two  participants  with  the  largest  settlement  obligations  in  the 
system  cannot  fulfill  their  obligations.  In  many  cases,  this  is  achieved  by  using  collateral, 
third-party guarantees, and/or contingency liquidity arrangements such as committed lines of 
credit. The Bank discussed the need to achieve such a high level of safety with operators of 
private-sector payment systems. In 2003, the Zengin System enhanced its risk management 
                                                 
10   See Bank of Japan (2009c). The public consultation document is available only in Japanese. 
8 
 BIS Review BIS Review 155/2009
measures to meet the international best practice; the FXYCS followed in 2004. These efforts 
have enhanced the robustness of these systems against financial shocks. 
The Bank also oversees securities settlement systems. After introducing DVP for JGBs as 
the central securities depository (CSD) for JGBs, the Bank worked with private-sector CSDs 
and stock exchanges to develop detailed plans for the introduction of DVP for other types of 
securities;  namely,  dematerialized  commercial  paper  (CP),  corporate  and  other  bonds, 
investment trusts, and equities. The Bank was also involved in the development of CCPs for 
equities  and  JGBs,  which  went  live  one  by  one  from  2003  to  2005.  During  the  planning 
phase  of  these  systems,  the  Bank  provided  its  views  on  the  system  design  in  light  of 
international discussions and standards on risk management. 
As I explained earlier, work is under way to address the lessons learned from the financial 
crisis. The Bank has already started discussions and initiated studies with system operators 
and market participants on the shortening of the JGB settlement cycle and improvements in 
liquidity arrangements in JGBCC. Other ongoing work includes a review of market practice 
on  settlement  fails  and  strengthening  CCPs’  risk  management  methodologies  using  stress 
testing. 
Making  changes  to  payment  and  settlement  systems  through  the  oversight  process  takes 
time. The Bank considers that long-term engagement through its effective oversight activities 
is  critical  to  ensuring  that  financial  transactions  continue  to  be  settled  without  any  friction, 
even in the event of a crisis. 
V.  Closing remarks 
At the beginning of my speech, I touched upon some of the major developments in payment 
and  settlement  systems  in  Japan  that  have  taken  place  over  the  past  twenty-five  years. 
Earlier in my career, I was involved in some of those initiatives in the late 1980s. At that time, 
RTGS, DVP, and dematerialization of securities seemed like a dream. After years of efforts, 
however, they have become reality. I am proud to have taken part in such an exciting period 
of Japan’s payment and settlement system development. Looking back on the past quarter-
century, I would like to conclude by offering three observations. 
First,  improvements  in  payment  and  settlement  systems  bring  a  very  high  return  for  the 
economy in the long run. To take a rather cynical view, over the years, financial institutions in 
Japan  and  overseas  have  been  heavily  beaten  by  a  number  of  events  –  for  example,  the 
Latin American debt crisis, East Asian financial crisis, and the collapse of the mortgage and 
commercial real estate bubble – that resulted in large losses eating away at the reserves of 
past  earnings.  In  contrast,  investments  in  payment  and  settlement  system  reforms  have 
constantly brought subtle but significant benefits to the economy and the financial system as 
a whole, although it is difficult to quantify such benefits at the level of individual institutions. 
An understanding that investments in forward-looking projects pay off can be gained simply 
by  imagining  what  would  have  happened  during  the  recent  global  financial  crisis  if  RTGS, 
DVP, and various other projects were left untouched. 
Second, because of such wide-ranging effects, it is critical that the relevant parties continue 
to  plan  and  implement  changes  with  a  long-term  perspective,  taking  into  account 
developments in financial markets and technological innovation. In this context, in Europe, a 
big project called TARGET2-Securities is under way. Under this project, participating CSDs 
will outsource their securities settlement function to the centralized single platform operated 
by the Eurosystem. This is expected to enhance efficiency and reduce costs of cross-border 
transfer of euro-denominated securities, contributing to further development of the integrated 
market. In Japan, too, continuous efforts for improvement in view of future developments will 
be essential. 
Third, effective implementation of forward-looking initiatives requires a deep understanding of 
and insight into the value of developing payment and settlement infrastructure, not only by 
BIS Review 155/2009 
 9
working-level  experts  but  also  by  the  senior  management  of  financial  institutions  and 
infrastructure  providers.  At  many  firms,  payment  and  settlement  activities  are  usually 
categorized  as  "back-office"  functions  and  a  "cost  center."  However,  improvements  in 
payment and settlement procedures could have positive externalities, resulting in advances 
in  industry  practices  and  market  growth  with  new  opportunities  for  generating  additional 
value. I hereby ask senior management officials to review their payments business in light of 
such possibilities and continue to support ongoing and future initiatives in this area. 
I  am  sure  that  FISC  will  continue  to  play  an  important  role  in  the  various  efforts  toward 
development of a robust payment and settlement system.  
Thank you for your kind attention. 
References  
Bank for International Settlements, Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems (2008), 
"Progress in Reducing Foreign Exchange Settlement Risk," May 2008. 
Bank  of  Japan  (2009a),  "Payment  and  Settlement  Systems  Report  2007–2008,"  February 
2009. 
Bank of Japan (2009b), "Financial Markets Report," March 2009.  
Bank of Japan (2009c), "Establishment of the New BOJ-NET," October 2009.  
Bank of Japan, Financial Markets Department (2009a), "Developments and Issues of Money 
Markets in Japan: The Tokyo Money Market Survey in August 2008 and the Impact of the 
Failure of Lehman Brothers," January 2009 (available only in Japanese). 
Bank  of  Japan,  Financial  Markets  Department  (2009b),  "Toward  the  Well-Established 
Practice on Settlement Fails in Japan: Focusing on Significance and Role of Fails Practice 
and the Review of Fails Practice in the U.S., " October 2009 (available only in Japanese). 
Bank of Japan, Payment and Settlement Systems Department (2009a), "Lessons for Japan’s 
Payment and Settlement Systems Learned from the Collapse of Lehman Brothers Japan," 
March 2009 (available only in Japanese).  
Bank  of  Japan,  Payment  and  Settlement  Systems  Department  (2009b),"BOJ-NET  Funds 
Transfers after the Implementation of Phase 1 of the Next-Generation RTGS  Project," No. 
09-E-04, Bank of Japan Review, July 2009.  
Imakubo,  Kei,  and  Yutaka  Soejima  (2008a),  "Transaction  Network  in  Japanese  Interbank 
Money Market," vol.27 (2), Kin’yu Kenkyu, November 2008 (available only in Japanese).  
Imakubo, Kei, and Yutaka Soejima (2008b), "The Microstructure of the Japanese Interbank 
Money  Market:  Interconnection  of  the  Fund  Transfer  in  BOJ-NET  Settlement  Data," 
vol.27 (2), Kin’yu Kenkyu, November 2008 (available only in Japanese).  
10 
 BIS Review BIS Review 155/2009
Graphs 
   BIS Review 155/2009 
 11
  12 
   BIS Review BIS Review 155/2009
    BIS Review 155/2009 
 13
   14 
 BIS Review BIS Review 155/2009
   BIS Review 155/2009 
 15
  16 
   BIS Review BIS Review 155/2009
