Norman T L Chan: The risk of asset-price bubbles 
Speech by Mr Norman TL Chan, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at 
the Hong Kong Economic Summit, Hong Kong, 14 December 2009. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Economic Summit. 
I am very honoured to have this opportunity to speak to you today at the Hong Kong 
Potential risks of an asset bubble 
2. 
Recently,  many  people  in  Hong  Kong  have  become  concerned  about  the 
emergence of an asset-price bubble. As we all know, interest rates are now very low due to 
the extremely loose monetary policies around the world. Attracted by a promising outlook for 
economic  recovery,  large  amounts  of  funds  have  flowed  into  Asia,  including  Hong  Kong. 
From October last year up to now, more than HK$640 billion have flowed into the Hong Kong 
dollar. This will certainly exert an upward pressure on local asset markets. I am sure you are 
all aware that the Hong Kong asset markets have become very active again. In particular, the 
prices  of  residential  properties  rose  for  10  consecutive  months  from  the  beginning  of  this 
year,  and  prices  and  turnover  have  returned  to  levels  we  saw  before  the  financial  crisis. 
Many people are asking whether there is already a bubble. 
3. 
Bull  markets  normally  occur  in  times  of  rapid  economic  growth,  abundant  liquidity 
and strong investment sentiment. However, as to how far a bull market can develop before it 
becomes a bubble, there is no easy answer. There is a view in the international community 
that it is very difficult to identify an  asset bubble before it  materialises or even after it has 
already formed. This is true to a certain extent. For example, property prices in Hong Kong 
have  increased  nearly  20-fold  in  the  past  30  years.  Flats  in  the  Taikoo  Shing,  a  large 
residential estate on Hong Kong Island, were sold for only $300-400 a square foot in the 70’s 
when they were built. The prices then spiralled upwards to over $1,000 a square foot in the 
80’s and reached a peak of nearly $10,000 a square foot in 1997. Although there have been 
ups and downs in property prices in Hong Kong in the past 30 years, the trend has basically 
been up. During each upward leg, ordinary middle-class households usually felt that prices 
were too high and difficult to afford, and there were always questions about whether a bubble 
had developed in the property market. However, with the benefit of hindsight, the rises in the 
70’s and 80’s were not the result of bubbles but were supported by economic fundamentals, 
including growth in productivity and household incomes. A real and massive bubble did occur 
in the 90’s as a result of a bull market. However, many people at that time tried to explain the 
irrational  surges  in  prices  as  being  part  of  the  “Hong  Kong  miracle”.  The  bubble  and  its 
subsequent  bursting  in  the  third  quarter  of  1997  dealt  a  severe  blow  to  Hong  Kong.  We 
experienced  an  economic  contraction  for  five  consecutive  quarters  and  property  prices 
plunged  by  more  than  60%.  Many  families  found  themselves  trapped  in  “negative  equity”, 
and the unemployment rate was above 8%. Hong Kong began to recover in 2003 after six 
years’ hard struggle. I am sure that this experience is still fresh in our memory. 
Japan is another good example. It enjoyed rapid economic development after World 
4. 
War II, quickly becoming a powerful industrial nation. During the late 80’s when its stock and 
property  markets  were  booming,  a  huge  bubble  was  created,  which  we  only  realised 
afterwards. Few people spotted the emergence of a bubble at the time, and the extraordinary 
and irrational exuberance was interpreted as the “Japanese miracle”. We all know now that 
what a disaster this “Japanese miracle” was for its people. Twenty years on, the Nikkei Index 
still hovers around the 10,000 level, only a quarter of its peak of 39,000, while the average 
residential land price in six major cities is equivalent to only a third of its level two decades 
BIS Review 167/2009 
 1
ago. Of course, there are other structural problems that have prevented a Japanese recovery 
for such a long period. 
5. 
The current global financial crisis was caused by the bursting of the property bubble 
in the US, which left many financial institutions under stress. For those who take the view 
that asset bubbles cannot be identified with certainty, it is neither appropriate nor necessary 
for the government to take action to burst them. Support for this view comes from the stock 
market crash in 1987 and the collapse of the IT bubble in 2000. In both cases, central banks 
were able to stabilise the financial market rapidly by aggressively cutting interest rates and 
injecting large amounts of liquidity into the market, and the economy and employment quickly 
resumed their upward paths. But the situation may be very different this time. Because the 
property  and  financial  markets  were  closely  inter-locked,  risks  were  dispersed  by  the 
bundling of sub-prime securities and other financial derivatives, and a large bubble formed. 
The bursting of this bubble caused great damage to the European and US economies and 
people in Europe and America have had to pay an unprecedented price. The US government 
used US$700 billion to bail out banks and car manufacturers, and the UK government spent 
GBP 76  billion  on  rescuing  the  Royal  Bank  of  Scotland  and  Lloyds  Bank  alone.  Many 
European governments have also bailed out their banking systems, including the injection of 
capital into large banks by the Dutch and Belgian governments. 
6. 
Based on experience in Asia in the past two decades, I believe asset-price bubbles, 
rather than inflation, pose the greatest risk to financial stability. My reasons for thinking this 
are many and complex, and we may discuss them on another occasion. I am not saying that 
inflation is not a concern for Asia. But I believe it is more important to address the harm that 
might  be  caused  by  asset-price  bubbles.  Although  I  agree  it  is  difficult  to  predict  the 
occurrence of an asset-price bubble, I am certain that once a bubble is created, it will grow 
with immense power and suppressing it will be difficult. The bigger the bubble, the greater 
the devastation it will cause when it bursts. The best way to avoid the damage and heavy 
cost is to prevent the occurrence of a bubble or to contain it before it’s too late. To do this, we 
have  to  make  decisions  at  the  early  stage  of  a  bubble’s  formation,  not  later.  More 
importantly, when a bubble is taking shape, we have to take appropriate and effective steps 
to stop it getting too big. 
Prudent risk management 
7. 
The  current  extremely  loose  monetary  policies  around  the  world  and  the  large 
inflows of funds provide an ideal environment and provided nourishment for the formation of 
asset-price bubbles in Asia. So the risk of asset-price bubbles is not small. But Hong Kong 
cannot  raise  interest  rates  as  it  wishes,  and  even  if  we  could,  this  would  attract  more  hot 
money  with  undesirable  consequences.  So  Hong  Kong,  like  many  other  small  and  open 
economies, has to resort to other means to prevent the bubble from growing too large. 
8. 
So what methods and tools should we use? For the property market, it is obvious 
that if there is a bottleneck or an imbalance in the supply of land, we have to deal with it. But 
the factors affecting demand, supply and prices of properties are very complex. Sometimes 
property  prices  rise  not  because  there  is  a  shortage  of  residential  flats  to  satisfy  housing 
demand, but because people expect that the market will continue to rise making it better to 
buy  now  to  reap  short-term  profit  or  hold  on  for  bigger  gains  in  the  long  run.  Currently  in 
Hong  Kong,  the  rapid  surge  in  luxury-property  prices  may  not  necessarily  be  caused  by 
insufficient supply of high-end residential flats, since rentals have not moved up in proportion 
with  the  prices.  Actually,  the  increases  were  caused  by  the  fact  that  many  investors, 
including those from Mainland China, were optimistic about the outlook for future prices. 
Apart from regulating the supply of land, another method that has long been used in 
9. 
Hong  Kong  to  reduce  the  risk  of  bubbles  in  the  property  market  is  for  banks  to  act  as 
gatekeepers  in  preventing  sharp  increases  in  mortgage  lending.  The  regulatory  measures 
implemented  by  HKMA  on  23  October  that  tightened  the  loan-to-value  ratio  for  luxury 
2 
 BIS Review 167/2009
properties priced at HK$20 million or more to 60% serve this purpose. Some may argue that 
since  many  buyers  of  luxury  properties  are  wealthy,  they  may  not  need  to  apply  for 
mortgages and therefore the HKMA’s measures may not have the expected effect. I agree 
that  this  would  be  the  case  if  all  property  buyers  used  their  savings  and  did  not  need  to 
borrow  from  banks.  However,  I  do  not  believe  that  none  of  the  purchasers  of  luxury 
properties borrow from banks. Some buyers do not approach banks for mortgages because 
they still have time before completing the transactions, or because they do not intend to hold 
the flats for a long time. I also do not believe that the markets for small and medium-sized 
residential flats could have become so active without abundant credit from banks. I therefore 
believe  that  the  prudential  measures  that  we  have  taken  and  good  risk  management  by 
banks will help stop asset-price bubbles from forming. 
10. 
While banks will help to control the risks, members of the public and corporations in 
Hong Kong also need to be more alert. They should consider what they can afford and not 
borrow  too  much  at  a  time  when  interest  rates  are  so  low  to  avoid  getting  into  financial 
difficulties when interest rates rise again. But I can see that this is not easy. As hot money 
continues to flow into Hong Kong, it pushes the market higher. If this continues, people may 
get into a mistaken mindset that the market can only go up and overlook the risk that capital 
and hot would might one day reverse course without warning. 
11. 
Finally, I would like to share with you an article I read last week. The article pointed 
out the differences between an asset-price bubble and a bull market. The author was of the 
view that people who don’t manage to enter the stock market in time or don’t dare to do so 
when  the  market  has  gone  up  will  regard  it  as  a  bubble  and  will  support  the  government 
taking measures to cool things down; but investors who have entered the market will see the 
increases as a bull market. Price increases can be interpreted in many ways. Well, a non-
mainstream view like this may have some merit and, right or wrong, it illustrates the difficulty 
of  dealing  with  asset-price  bubbles,  particularly  the  courage  needed  to  make  decisions  at 
critical  moments.  Whether  these  decisions  are  correct  or  not  is  difficult  to  say  with  total 
confidence  and  certainty  beforehand,  and  mistakes  may  be  made.  But  we  cannot  avoid 
mistakes by not making decisions because the damage to society of an asset-price bubble is 
too  great  to  ignore.  And  we  should  not  just  rely  on  the  government  to  stop  the  bubble 
expanding. It requires the involvement of banks, corporations and individuals – they need to 
be  more  risk-conscious  and  self-disciplined.  My  colleagues  at  the  HKMA  and  I  will  do  our 
best, and I invite everyone to work hard together to meet the challenges brought about by the 
global financial tsunami. 
BIS Review 167/2009 
 3
