Yandraduth Googoolye: Leasing – fuelling the economy 
Address by Mr Yandraduth Googoolye, First Deputy Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at 
the Launching Ceremony of the Conference “Leasing: Fuelling the Economy”, organized by 
the Association of Leasing Companies, Port-Louis, 6 October 2009. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen 
Good morning 
At  the  outset  I  must  congratulate  the  Association  of  Leasing  Companies,  Mauritius,  for 
coming  out  with  this  initiative  of  organising  a  conference  to  underscore  the  significance  of 
leasing  as  a  vehicle  of  economic  development.  I  am  happy  to  note  that  the  Association, 
intends, among others, to play an educative role of increasing awareness of the benefits of 
leasing  and  asset  finance  to  specific  legislative  and  business  audiences  as  well  as  to  the 
general  community  and  that  this  conference  is  being  organised  in  furtherance  of  this 
objective. I do recall that Mr Jugurnauth had during one of the meetings with us some time 
back mentioned about the Association wanting to hold this conference and had sought our 
support. I had told him then that the Bank as a regulator would support such efforts.  
A study by International Finance Corporation (IFC) observes that leasing plays an important 
role in promoting a strong and sustainable private sector in emerging markets, particularly as 
it  supports  underserved  markets,  such  as  micro,  small,  and  medium  enterprises,  to  gain 
access to finance. Moreover, in emerging markets, leasing can be a major financing tool to 
enable  growth  and  investment  in  infrastructure,  construction  and  the  services  sectors. 
Leasing is also seen as a favoured vehicle for SMEs as it bridges a significant gap in their 
access to finance arena. This is because,  
• 
firstly,  as  an  asset-backed  term  financing  product,  leasing  helps  avoid  need  for 
collaterals; and, 
secondly, leasing institutions are expected to develop or possess critical skills that 
give them a strong comparative advantage on the SME client segment.  
 This seems to be the case in Mauritius too which is perhaps why the Government chose the 
leasing  companies  to  channel  its  assistance  to  the  SME  sector  as  part  of  the  stimulus 
package in the wake of the global crisis. 
As  a  base  definition,  leasing  can  be  considered  as  a  written  agreement  under  which  a 
property owner allows a tenant to use the property for a specified period of time and rent. 
However,  over  time  leasing  has  evolved  into  a  method  of  financial  intermediation  where 
people who have capital or access to capital buy assets for use by economic operators in 
need  of  those  assets.  As  this  activity  evolved,  it  developed  different  variants  and  its  own 
rules of the game. This led to the evolution of a regulatory framework to deal with the sector. 
In  Mauritius,  the  regulation  of  the  leasing  sector  does  not  come  within  the  purview  of  the 
Bank  of  Mauritius  but  that  of  the  Financial  Services  Commission.  However,  a  number  of 
leasing companies also accept public deposits to finance their leasing business and there we 
have a role since deposit taking requires a licence from the Bank. In fact, eleven out of the 
twelve entities involved in leasing are deposit taking institutions too. The non-bank deposit 
taking companies which engage in leasing are thus subject to dual oversight, one from the 
Bank for their deposit taking activity and the other from the Financial Services Commission 
with regard to their leasing business.  
This dual regulation could have different implications. 
• 
It might mean overlaps leading to excessive supervision; 
BIS Review 128/2009 
 1
 It might result in supervisory gaps leading to regulatory arbitrage; and 
It could also lead to lack of supervisory focus resulting in wastage of resources of 
the supervisors and the regulated entities.  
Very often it results in all these three consequences.  
The  key  to  avoiding  these  is  coordination  among  the  supervisors.  As  you  are  aware,  in 
Mauritius we have a formal mechanism for coordination between the Bank of Mauritius and 
the Financial Services Commission through the Protocole d’Accord signed between the two 
of us under which we have set up a Joint Coordination Committee which meets periodically 
to discuss issues of common interests and exchange notes. While this is working reasonably 
well,  I  am  sure  Mr  Meetarbhan  shares  my  view  that  there  is  a  lot  more  to  be  done  to 
strengthen  coordination  and  cooperation.  For  instance,  one  area  where  we  need  to  move 
forward is to conduct coordinated on site examinations so that the supervisory resources of 
both organisations are optimally used. Moreover, and as we move forward, we also need to 
determine the lead regulator for financial sector conglomerates. 
Until  recently,  banks  were  not  permitted  to  undertake  leasing  business  directly  but  only 
through  a  subsidiary.  In  2008,  banks  were  permitted  to  offer  financial  leasing  themselves. 
This was done by including financial leasing activity in the definition of “banking business”. 
However, barring a few cases, this has not resulted in any large offering of leasing products 
by the banks. Therefore, within the spectrum of institutions regulated by us, leasing is still 
largely in the domain of the non-bank deposit taking institutions.  
The  orderly  growth  of  a  sector  requires  a  proper  legislative  framework.  The  legislative 
framework envisages that the non-bank deposit taking institutions and the banks should be 
subject to the same prudential regime. In furtherance of this, the Bank of Mauritius decided to 
extend several guidelines to this segment and we are soon bringing it under a risk weighted 
capital  adequacy  measurement  system.  There  is  another  important  aspect  that  I  need  to 
highlight  here.  The  legislation  envisages  that  we  encourage  merger  of  deposit  taking 
institutions among themselves or with banks or even their conversion as banks.  
The  contribution  of  financial  intermediation  in  the  GDP  of  Mauritius  has  been  growing 
steadily and has gone up from 10.3 per cent in 2005 to 10.5 per cent in 2007. It is forecast to 
be about 10.8 per cent in 2008. While the specific contribution of leasing is not captured in 
the data, it is important that leasing also plays a significant role. What is heartening though is 
that the outstanding lease assets have been growing at a rate of 10 per cent or more over 
the last five years. If we look at the leasing business of the non-bank deposit taking sector 
we  see  that  outstanding  leases  have  gone  up  from  Rs10.1  billion  in  December  2006  to 
Rs11.5 billion in December 2007 and further to Rs12.6 billion at the end of 2008.  
While  the  leasing  sector  has  been  growing  steadily,  there  is  need  for  leapfrogging  if  the 
sector has to catch up with other segments within the financial intermediation industry. The 
share  of  deposits  of  leasing  companies  in  total  deposits  declined  from  6.5  per  cent  in 
December  2007  to  6.2  per  cent  in  December  2008.  An  IFC  study  identifies  financial 
management  skills,  access  to  diversified  sources  of  local  currency  financing,  good 
governance and performance management framework besides development of a sustainable 
competitive niche as critical for the growth of the leasing sector.  
In this context, I would highlight the proper assessment of credit risk and post disbursement 
management as very critical. Delinquencies in the leasing segment are comparatively higher 
than in the banking sector. Now that non-bank deposit taking institutions have access to the 
Mauritius Credit Information Bureau (MCIB) data base we hope to see tangible improvement 
in this area. If leasing has to grow fast, it must be cost advantageous too and a lower rate of 
delinquencies will help operators to keep their margin with a lower spread. 
Before concluding, let me say that I am sure the deliberations of this conference would help 
identify what needs to be done in the times ahead for the leasing industry to be able to play 
2 
 BIS Review 128/2009
its role to its fullest potential in a fast growing emerging economy like ours. I am confident it 
will lead to greater awareness of the leasing business among all stakeholders in Mauritius 
and eventually pave the way for the sector emerging as a significant contributor to our growth 
in general and the SME segment in particular. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 128/2009 
 3
