Hirohide Yamaguchi: Some remarks on the financial crisis over the past 
year 
Speech by Mr Hirohide Yamaguchi, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the 4th Annual 
Euromoney Japan Capital Markets Congress, Tokyo, 18 September 2009. 
 Introduction 
I  am  honored  to  be  invited  to  speak  today  at  the  fourth  annual  Euromoney  Japan  capital 
markets congress. 
The collapse of Lehman Brothers one year ago triggered unprecedented disruptions in the 
global financial markets. Fortunately, financial conditions have improved recently to a great 
extent, but they have not yet fully recovered from the crisis. Today, by looking back on the 
financial and economic developments in the past year, I will provide some of my impressions 
of those developments. 
increasingly  cautious  about 
Economic and financial developments after the collapse of Lehman Brothers 
I.  
The  global  financial  markets  changed  drastically  after  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers  in 
September  2008.  Market  participants  became 
taking 
counterparty risk, causing trading volume to decrease sharply and market liquidity to decline 
significantly.  Credit  spreads  widened  and  the  prices  of  financial  products,  including 
securitized  products,  plunged.  Consequently,  financial  institutions  experienced  business 
difficulties or failed one after another in many countries, thereby aggravating financial system 
concern.  Credit  provisions  from  financial  institutions  to  firms  and  households  declined 
markedly,  leading  to  a  global  credit  contraction.  Confidence,  which  is  the  most  crucial 
element in the financial system and markets to function smoothly, was virtually lost. 
Meanwhile, economic conditions deteriorated simultaneously and rapidly around the globe. 
Final  demand  –  namely,  housing  investment,  private  consumption,  and  business  fixed 
investment – plunged, leading to large-scale adjustments in inventory and production. This 
deterioration  in  economic  conditions,  together  with  a  spread  of  anxiety  among  firms  and 
households, exacerbated the malfunctioning of the financial system, and in turn deteriorated 
economic  conditions  further,  causing  a  downward  spiral  –  the  emergence  of  the  so-called 
adverse feedback loop between financial and economic conditions. 
Also  in  Japan,  the  functioning  of  commercial  paper  and  corporate  bond  markets  was 
impaired, and strains in Japan’s short-term money markets increased as reflected in a rapid 
expansion of the LIBOR-OIS spreads. Nevertheless, the stress imposed on financial markets 
and the financial system in Japan after the collapse of Lehman Brothers was low relative to 
that  in  the  United  States  and  Europe  because  financial  institutions  in  Japan  had  little 
exposure to securitized products. However, the slowdown in economic growth was rapid in 
Japan, compared with that in the United States and Europe. Against a backdrop of a global 
accumulation  of  inventories  of  durable  and  capital  goods  and  the  ensuing  large-scale 
reduction  in  production  to  adjust  the  level  of  inventories,  exports  of  automobiles,  electrical 
machinery,  and  general  machinery  –  industries  in  which  Japan  excels  –  declined  in  an 
unprecedented manner. Accordingly, production declined considerably. 
The  factor  behind  the  sudden  contraction  of  financial  and  economic  activities  on  a  global 
basis,  including  Japan,  was  an  accumulation  of  various  excesses  during  the  mid-2000s, 
particularly in the United States and Europe, and the adjustments of the balance sheets of 
firms and households emerged in the process of the unwinding of excesses. During the mid-
2000s,  the  world  economy  constantly  registered  unprecedented  high  levels  of  growth  at 
BIS Review 117/2009 
 1
in 
the  sophistication  of 
around five percent. Despite this high growth rate, prices continued to be generally stable, 
and  accommodative  financial  conditions  continued  for  a  long  time  around  the  world.  The 
continued  benign  environment  of  high  growth,  low  inflation,  and  accommodative  financial 
conditions  led  to  the  prevalence  of  optimism  for  the  future  (which  in  retrospect  is  hard  to 
believe).  Meanwhile,  overconfidence  also  spread 
financial 
technologies  that  were  developing  remarkably  at  the  time.  In  those  circumstances, 
imbalances such as the increase in credit and leverage as well as the rise in asset prices 
accumulated  worldwide.  Developments  since  last  autumn  can  be  described  as  essentially 
the adjustment of the accumulated imbalances; in other words, the bursting of a global credit 
bubble. 
Nevertheless, world economic conditions have been showing signs of leveling-out since the 
spring  of  this  year.  That  is  because  the  global  financial  markets  have  gradually  started  to 
stabilize  because  the  provision  of  ample  liquidity  by  central  banks  around  the  world,  the 
aggressive  public  capital  infusion  and  debt  guarantees  by  the  governments  for  U.S.  and 
European  financial  institutions,  have  dissipated  market  participants’  extreme  anxiety.  The 
progress with inventory adjustments on a global basis due to large reduction in production, 
and the manifestation of the effects of large-scale economic stimulus measures implemented 
around the globe have also contributed. Thanks to such developments, a positive trend has 
been  emerging  in  Japan's  economy.  Exports  and  production  have  been  recovering, 
especially in the automotive and electronic parts industries. Fiscal measures including public 
investment have also been underpinning economic activity. 
As  for  the  economic  outlook,  the  upward  momentum  in  the  world  economy  is  likely  to 
continue for a while. The recent clear recovery of emerging economies is a reassuring factor. 
Against this background, Japan's economy is expected to start recovering from the second 
half of Japanese fiscal 2009. Of course, as I have previously mentioned, the world’s firms 
and  households  are  now  in  the  process  of  balance  sheet  adjustments.  Therefore,  the 
momentum  for  recovery  in  the  world  economy  greatly  depends  on  how  the  balance-sheet 
adjustments evolve, and Japan will not be immune from the influence of such developments. 
Consequently,  there  still  will  be  considerable  uncertainty  about  the  outlook.  The  Bank  of 
Japan, paying due attention to various risk factors, will continue to monitor carefully financial 
and economic developments both at home and abroad. 
Some remarks 
II.  
After  confirming  the  current  financial  crisis  and  large  swings  in  economic  activity,  I  have 
come up with several impressions or questions. First, how effective is the advancement of 
financial  technologies  in  controlling  risk?  Second,  how  to  solve  the  issue  that  prolonged 
benign market conditions can actually encourage economic entities and market participants 
to  engage  in  excessive  action,  and  thus  might  just  lead  to  future  large  swings  in  the 
economy. Third, is it possible to maintain high market liquidity even under any type of shock? 
And  fourth,  how  market  participants'  extreme  anxiety  can  be  controlled?  All  of  those 
questions  are  difficult  to  answer.  Today,  I  will  outline  my  thoughts  on  the  first  two 
interconnected questions as a basis for your discussion. 
Financial technology advancement and risk control – the importance of “self 
discipline” 
To  begin  with,  let  us  consider  if  the  advancement  of  financial  technologies  is  effective  in 
controlling risk, or has the experience of the current financial crisis proven it to be ineffective. 
Financial engineering, which has evolved rapidly in recent years, was first developed as a 
technique to control risks, that is, to break down and manage risks associated with financial 
products. Indeed, the advancement of financial technologies has made it possible to design a 
variety  of  financial  products  according  to  the  specific  risk  preference  of  various  investors, 
and, as a result, financial markets have become broader and more versatile. 
2 
 BIS Review 117/2009
Securitized products, which triggered the current financial crisis, included various innovations 
to control the risks associated with normal lending and securities investment. For example, 
the  bankruptcy  remoteness  of  cash  flows  obtained  from  underlying  assets  as  well  as  the 
creation of a risk buffer by setting multiple tranches enhanced the safety of investments and 
facilitated credit risk transfers. In addition, credit default swap transactions also allowed easy 
credit risk transfers. These methods were believed to be capable of controlling accurately the 
risks associated with securitized products. 
However, the reality was different. As turmoil actually occurred, massive risks surfaced, and 
it  became  clear  that  the  methodology  of  risk  control  initially  envisaged  did  not  work. 
Importantly, the root of the problem in fact lay in the loose assessment of simple risk factors, 
rather than the complex technology of securitization itself. Specifically, the basic standards of 
risk management, such as the credit risk of the original debtor, risk monitoring, liquidity risk of 
investment vehicles, and the degree of correlation between the risk factors, were neglected. 
In addition, we should not forget that there was a lack of preparedness for the tail risks that 
occurred  when  great  stress  was  imposed  on  the  financial  markets.  If  we  consider  the 
foregoing, the heart of the problem can be attributable to two elements: lax risk assessment 
due to a behavioral pattern of market participants who put the pursuit of profit first, and the 
so-called agency problem based on information asymmetry. 
Of  course,  the  resolution  of  the  problem  is  not  easy.  Strengthening  of  regulations  and 
introduction  of  further  advanced  financial  technology  cannot  control  all  the  risks  nor 
completely resolve the agency problem. In addition, as long as the pursuit of profit is a basic 
incentive for market participants, lax risk assessment under certain market conditions might 
result from human nature. 
While I do not deny the importance of enhancing risk management through the advancement 
of  financial  technology,  it  is  perhaps  difficult  to  control  human  nature  and  psychology  with 
financial technology. What is of the utmost importance is for market participants to avoid a 
deep sense of complacency in relying on financial technology for risk management, and to 
remain vigilant in maintaining the crucial risk awareness, that is known as “self-discipline”. In 
my view, the unsolved part of uncontrollable risks and agency problems might be somewhat 
solved by this “self-discipline”. We need to recognize again that regulations and advanced 
financial  technology  are  not  a  substitute  for  “self-discipline”.  In  that  regard,  future  financial 
supervision and regulation that are currently being discussed on a global basis, should be 
carefully crafted from the viewpoint of whether they would function to strengthen the internal 
“self-discipline”  of  market  participants,  rather  than  merely  being  an  externally  imposed 
compliance regime. 
Preempting excessive behavior of market participants – the sharing of “common 
sense” 
I will now turn to the issue of whether there are ways to preempt the excessive behavior of 
economic entities and market participants. 
As previously mentioned, the current financial crisis grew out of the need for an adjustment 
of  the  imbalances  that  accumulated  through  the  mid-2000s.  The  creation  of  financial  and 
economic  excesses  and  their  eventual  adjustment  is  a  cycle  that  has  been  repeated  over 
and  over  around  the  world.  In  each  of  those  cases,  the  causes  and  preventive  measures 
were seriously discussed, and necessary improvements were made in terms of system and 
regulation. Despite those efforts, we have allowed again the accumulation of imbalances and 
the occurrence of a financial crisis. 
Why  excessive  financial  and  economic  activities  recur?  It  might  be  true  that  humans  by 
nature  cannot  learn  from  history.  It  seems  that  each  time  a  state  of  benign  economy 
continued for a long time, plausible logic appeared to explain that “this time was different”. 
The  examples  include:  “Tokyo  is  becoming  a  global  financial  center”  used  during  the 
Japanese bubble of the 1990s, and the “advent of a new economy” used in the case of the 
BIS Review 117/2009 
 3
dot com bubble in the US; those examples go on and on. Each time it was extremely difficult 
to counter the new logic by merely relying on the lessons from history. Nonetheless, it would 
also be excessive to lay the onus solely on uncontrollable human nature. 
To  come  closer  to  the  heart  of  the  problem,  we  need  to  focus  on  the  market  participants' 
incentives under a capitalist economic system. Market participants pursue their own profits 
as their number one priority, and are not usually interested in how their actions influence the 
performance of the market as a whole and eventually the performance of the economy as a 
whole.  Even  if  those  actions  result  in  an  accumulation  of  excesses  in  the  economy  and 
cause considerable economic fluctuations when the excesses are eventually adjusted, those 
actions  are  deemed  rational,  at  least  in  the  short  term,  as  long  as  the  individual  market 
participants make profits. On the other hand, for the authorities in charge of setting policy, 
they do not arrest individual market participants' pursuit of profit. Their main incentive is to 
improve the performance of the economy as a whole. 
The  incentives  of  individual  market  participants  and  those  of  the  policy  authorities  may 
conflict  in  the  short  run,  but  should  be  compatible  over  a  longer  period.  Therefore,  what 
becomes important is how to align the incentives on both sides over a longer perspective and 
to have this alignment reflected in the actions of both the actual market participants and the 
policy authorities. 
Here again, it is not easy to give a correct answer. Nevertheless, in my view, if the lessons 
learned from the past financial crises could be shared broadly between the policy authorities 
and  market  participants  as  one  form  of  “common  sense”,  it  might  change  the  nature  of 
incentives and could reduce the excessive actions of market participants. When I say “the 
lessons”, they are not such dramatic ones. It can be as simple as “when benign financial and 
economic conditions continue for a long time, there is a possibility that various excesses will 
accumulate,  resulting  in  extremely  large  economic  fluctuations.”  Of  course,  it  is  easy  to 
anticipate that there will be difficulties in utilizing the lessons, or “common sense”, in actual 
policy  responses.  However,  whether  such  “common  sense”  is  shared  broadly  or  not  could 
make a big difference in the economic outcome. 
Recently,  the  idea  of  macro-prudence  has  been  discussed  as  a  methodology  for  crisis 
prevention. While specific system designing is a future challenge, I believe that the sharing of 
“common  sense”  between  the  policy  authorities  and  the  market  participants  could  be  a 
starting  point  for  the  discussion  of establishing  a  macro-prudence  system.  By  occasionally 
reminding  ourselves  of  the  lessons  from  the  financial  crises  and  sharing  the  lessons  as 
“common sense” with many people, we will ensure the flexibility of policy management and 
minimize the possibility of a future financial crisis. 
The Bank of Japan's measures to facilitate corporate financing 
In closing, turning to a different issue, I will briefly touch on the specific steps the Bank has 
taken  since  last  year  to  facilitate  corporate  financing.  In  response  to  the  substantial 
deterioration in corporate financing since the autumn of last year, the Bank has been taking a 
series  of  steps  such  as  outright  purchases  of  commercial  paper  and  corporate  bonds  and 
special  funds-supplying  operations  to  facilitate  corporate  financing.  While  those  measures 
were  extraordinary  as  a  central  bank's  policy  measures,  we  judged  it  appropriate  as 
temporary measures in light of the severe economic and financial conditions. As for how to 
treat those temporary measures, the Bank will decide by thoroughly examining the state of 
corporate financing and financial markets and considering the degree of their improvements. 
In  doing  so,  a  risk  that  the  prolonged  usage  of  temporary  measures  might  impair  an 
autonomous recovery in market functioning and result in a distortion of resource allocation, 
will also be taken into account. If the Bank can share such a risk as “common sense” with 
market  participants,  the  Bank  can  conduct  its  policies  in  a  timely  manner.  In  addition,  the 
incentives of the market participants and those of the policy authorities could be aligned in 
4 
 BIS Review 117/2009
the  context  of  achieving  stable  economic  and  financial  conditions  from  a  longer  term 
perspective. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 117/2009 
 5
