Jean-Claude Trichet: Hearing at the Economic and Monetary Affairs 
Committee of the European Parliament 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, 
Brussels, 28 September 2009. 
 Dear Madam Chair,  
Dear Members of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs,  
I very much appreciate the opportunity provided by this regular hearing to exchange views 
with you today, early in the new legislature. This is the 22nd time that I have appeared before 
this Committee: looking back, such frequent hearings have been instrumental in developing a 
very close relationship between the European Central Bank and the European Parliament. I 
hope  to  continue  and  to  further  deepen  this  relationship,  especially  in  times  that  are 
particularly demanding. 
Heute möchte ich mich auf zwei Themen konzentrieren. Zunächst möchte ich Ihnen unsere 
aktuelle  Einschätzung  der  wirtschaftlichen  Lage  im  Eurogebiet  mitteilen.  Ich  möchte  dabei 
auch auf die geldpolitischen Maßnahmen der EZB und ihre Wirkung eingehen.  
Dans un second temps, je souhaiterais aborder un sujet important et actuel : la réforme de la 
supervision  financière  en  Europe  et  plus  particulièrement  la  mise  en  place  du  Conseil 
européen  du  risque  systémique.  Je  m’efforcerai  d’être  le  plus  concis  possible  mais,  étant 
donné  que  la  dernière  audition  remonte  à  mars  et  que  l’actualité  a  été  très  chargée  ces 
derniers  mois,  la  matière  est  aujourd’hui  particulièrement  riche.  Je  serai  ensuite  à  votre 
disposition pour répondre à vos questions.  
Economic and monetary developments 
The  economic  situation  and  outlook  have  improved  since  the  previous  hearing  before 
Parliament on 30 March 2009. Inflation and inflationary pressures have remained low over 
recent months. As expected, inflation turned into negative territory over the summer period, 
due  to  the  large  decline  in  oil  prices  since  last  year.  In  August,  annual  inflation  was  still 
slightly  negative,  at  -0.2%,  after  a  reading  of  -0.7%  in  July.  Looking  ahead,  inflation  is 
expected  to  turn  positive  again  within  the  coming  months  and  to  remain  subdued,  within 
positive  territory,  over  the  policy-relevant horizon. This also reflects the fact that economic 
activity is expected to recover at a very gradual pace. The risks to the inflation outlook are 
broadly balanced. Indicators of inflation expectations over the medium to longer term remain 
firmly anchored in line with the Governing Council’s aim of keeping inflation rates below, but 
close to, 2% over the medium term. 
Following the “free fall” in economic activity that we witnessed around the turn of the year, 
the  euro  area  economy  shows  signs  of  stabilisation.  After  the  strongly  negative  readings 
recorded  earlier,  economic  activity  in  the  second  quarter  of  2009  is  estimated  to  have 
declined by 0.1%, compared with the previous quarter. In the period ahead, we expect to see 
a  very  gradual  recovery.  This  expectation  remains  surrounded  by  high  uncertainty,  while 
risks to the outlook remain broadly balanced. On the upside, the impact of macroeconomic 
stimulus  packages  and  other  policy  measures  may  be  stronger  than  expected,  confidence 
may  improve  more  quickly,  and  foreign  demand  may  prove  to  be  stronger  than  currently 
foreseen. On the downside, the negative feedback between the real economy and the still 
strained financial sector may be stronger or more protracted than expected. Concerns also 
relate  to  potential  renewed  commodity  price  rises,  further  protectionist  pressures  and 
persistent global imbalances. 
BIS Review 117/2009 
 1
The assessment of low inflationary pressures over the medium term is also confirmed by our 
monetary  analysis.  In  this  context,  we  note  in  particular  that  money  and  credit  expansion 
continues  to  decelerate.  The  annual  growth  rate  of  the  broad  monetary  aggregate  M3 
declined  to  2.5%  in  August,  the  lowest  reading  since  the  launch  of  the  euro.  As  regards 
lending to the private sector, the annual growth rate of loans virtually stalled in August (at 
0.1%). To a large extent, this development reflects the fall in production and trade and the 
ongoing uncertainty regarding the business outlook which has affected demand for financing. 
Given that the pick-up in loans to enterprises typically lags the recovery in economic activity, 
further weak developments in loans to enterprises in the coming months appear likely. At the 
same time, lower market interest rates continue to be passed on in lower bank lending rates. 
This has led to a gradual improvement in financing conditions, which in turn is expected to 
support the demand for credit in the period ahead.  
It is against this background that the Governing Council views the current level of key ECB 
interest rates as appropriate.  
In addition, we have implemented five “non-standard” measures to enhance credit support, 
taking into account the major role played by banks in funding the euro area economy.  
First, we have fully accommodated banks’ liquidity needs at fixed interest rates.  
1. 
Second, we have further expanded the list of assets eligible as collateral.  
2. 
3. 
Third, we have further lengthened the maturities of our refinancing operations.  
Fourth,  we  have  provided  liquidity  in  foreign  currencies,  notably  the  US  dollar,  to 
4. 
address the need of euro area banks to fund their dollar assets. 
Fifth, and finally, we have launched a direct covered bonds purchase programme to 
support financial markets.  
5. 
for  ever.  We  have 
Overall,  these  non-standard  measures  support  the  flow  of  credit  to  firms  and  households 
above and beyond what could be achieved through policy interest rate reductions alone.  
Let me emphasise two important points in this respect.  
First,  the  strong  intervention  of  the  Eurosystem  in  the  euro  area  money  market  cannot  be 
maintained 
introduced  exceptional  measures  under  exceptional 
circumstances. We will have to phase them out once the rationale for these measures fades 
away and the situation normalises. The Governing Council of the ECB considers that it would 
be premature to declare the crisis over. Now is not the time to exit. However, at some point in 
time exit strategies will have to be implemented. The ECB has an exit strategy and stands 
ready to put it into action when the appropriate time comes. Our exit strategy is an integral 
part of our overall monetary policy strategy. This means, in particular, that if we judge that 
the non-standard measures trigger risks to price stability, we will unwind them. As in the past, 
the ECB is determined and able to act decisively whenever the need arises. It has both the 
operational flexibility and the institutional independence to implement the desirable course of 
action.  
The second point I would like to emphasise concerns the relationship of liquidity and price 
stability.  Some  commentators  ask whether  our  bold  programme  of  liquidity  provision  could 
ultimately trigger inflation in the future. Let me explain why this fear is unfounded. To start 
with,  it  should  be  noted  that  although  the  liquidity  provided  by  the  ECB  has  increased 
substantially, this has not led to an increase in monetary aggregates. This would have been 
the  case  in  normal  times  when  banks  use  an  increase  in  our  liquidity  provision  to  create 
credit to households and enterprises. However, at present this does not appear to be taking 
place on any significant scale. As I mentioned earlier, the growth in monetary aggregates – 
an overall important measure of liquidity expansion in the economy – is at its lowest level for 
at  least  a  decade.  Furthermore,  it  should  be  noted  that  the  ECB  has  all  the  instruments 
required  to  promptly  withdraw  its  liquidity  support  if  necessary,  to  counter  the  possible 
emergence of upside risks to price stability. It helps in this context that most non-standard 
2 
 BIS Review 117/2009
measures  are  being  phased  out  naturally,  as  the  operations  stop  at  maturity,  unless  we 
decide to extend them.  
Macro-prudential supervision in Europe and the role of the ECB  
Let me now turn to the second main issue, the role of macro-prudential supervision and the 
envisaged European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB).  
The  financial  crisis  has  shown  that  the  present,  highly  sophisticated  globalised  financial 
markets  and  interconnected  financial  institutions  are  prone  to  systemic  risk.  Systemic  risk 
concerns  the  possibility  that  the  functioning  of  the  financial  system  can  be  threatened  or 
materially  impaired  as  a  result  of  the  collective  behaviour  of  market  participants,  investors 
and financial institutions; it derives, in particular, from their interactions in financial markets 
and  from  the  close  links  between  the  supply  of  credit  and  the  macro-economy.  Systemic 
risks  can  emerge  even  when  financial  institutions  manage  their  risks  in  a  way  that  looks 
appropriate  from  their  individual  perspective.  Given  the  interconnectedness  in  highly 
developed financial systems, the behaviour of financial institutions – especially systemically 
important ones – can have an impact on other financial institutions and the financial system 
as a whole. Macro-prudential supervision has to take account of these externalities and focus 
on the interconnectedness of financial institutions, markets and infrastructures. Therefore it 
contributes to an important public good – namely systemic financial stability.  
Coping  with  systemic  risks  will  continue  to  be  of  the  essence,  especially  in  view  of  the 
increasing sophistication of global finance that, in turn, is facilitated by the rapid technological 
progress. Against this background, it is the right step to set up a body specifically responsible 
for macro-prudential oversight at the European level in the form of a European Systemic Risk 
Board.  
The envisaged composition of the Systemic Risk Board is appropriate. In terms of output, the 
Board’s  focus  on  the  identification  of  risks  and  the  provision  of  early  warnings,  where 
necessary, and of appropriate recommendations, is equally pertinent. Let me emphasise that 
such warnings and recommendations will have to be more than mere words. The suggested 
provisions  requiring  addressees  to  take  remedial  action  or,  otherwise,  to  justify  why  they 
have not acted, should give the necessary “traction” to the deliverables of the Systemic Risk 
Board. The principle of “comply or explain” is the right one.  
The ESRB will have very close links with the ECB. The members of the General Council of 
the  ECB  will  be  voting  members  of  the  ESRB,  together  with  the  three  heads  of  the 
supervisory  authorities  and  a  member  of  the  Commission;  the  members  of  the  General 
Council of the ECB will elect the chair and vice-chair of the ESRB; and the ECB will provide 
analytical, statistical, administrative and logistical support to the ESRB, as suggested by the 
de Larosière group, communicated by the Commission, decided by the ECOFIN Council and 
approved by the European Council in June this year. As I mentioned to your Committee, the 
ECB  stands  ready  to  place  the  necessary  resources  and  expertise  at  the  service  of 
supporting the ESRB, in very close collaboration with the national central banks. 
The  new  institutional  set-up  for  the  ESRB,  and  the  ECB’s  role  in  it,  must  rest  on  solid 
institutional and legal foundations. The ECB is closely and constructively participating in the 
ongoing legislative process on the establishment of the ESRB. The ECB’s contribution in this 
process focuses on establishing in Europe the most effective and robust set-up for macro-
prudential supervision possible. Given the dramatic consequences of the current crisis, we 
cannot afford for Europe to be ill-equipped and powerless to prevent and mitigate systemic 
risks.  
Let me conclude with a remark on accountability. The fact that the link between the ECB and 
the  ESRB  is  very  close  does  not  mean  that  the  reporting  to  your  Committee  and  to  the 
Parliament will be merged. The reporting will remain – and must remain – in the form of two 
separate  accountability  exercises  because  the  mandates  are  clearly  distinct.  As  for  the 
BIS Review 117/2009 
 3
European Central Bank, the Treaty states in Article 105.1 that “The primary objective shall be 
to maintain price stability”. As regards financial stability, the Treaty speaks of a “contribution”, 
in  Article  105.5,  stating  that  the  ECB  shall  “contribute  to  […]  the  stability  of  the  financial 
system”. As for the European Systemic Risk Board, the current legislative proposal foresees 
that  “The  ESRB  shall  be  responsible  for  the  macro-prudential  oversight  of  the  financial 
system  within  the  Community  in  order  to  prevent  or  mitigate  systemic  risks  within  the 
financial  system”  (Article  3).  The  tasks  include  the  following:  “identify  and  prioritise  such 
risks; issue warnings where risks are deemed to be significant; and issue recommendations 
for remedial action where appropriate.”  
Thank you very much for your attention, I am now at your disposal for questions. 
4 
 BIS Review 117/2009
