Jürgen Stark: Monetary policy before, during and after the financial crisis 
Speech by Mr Jürgen Stark, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
University Tübingen, Tübingen, 9 November 2009. 
 Monetary policy before the financial crisis of 2007 
1  
Before I start with the discussion of the ECB’s monetary policy before the financial crisis of 
2007, let me briefly recall the key features of the ECB’s monetary policy strategy. First of all, 
in  order  to  provide  a  yardstick  against  which  the  ECB  can  be  held  accountable,  the 
Governing  Council,  in  line  with  its  definition  of  price  stability,  aims  to  keep  inflation  rates 
below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. 
In addition, the two-pillar structure of our analytical framework plays a major role in assessing 
the risks to price stability over the medium term. There are two pillars because it consists of 
economic and monetary analysis. The economic analysis is especially suitable for detecting 
short to medium-term risks to price stability. The monetary analysis plays a prominent role in 
identifying  inflationary  trends  over  extended  horizons.  It  takes  into  account  the  long-term 
relationship between money and prices. This helps to ensure the medium-term orientation of 
the ECB’s monetary policy. In this sense, the monetary analysis serves as a means of cross-
checking  the  short  to  medium-term  signals  from  the  economic  analysis  from  a  medium  to 
longer-term perspective. 
Keeping our strategy in mind, let me discuss the economic environment that prevailed before 
the  financial  turmoil  started  in  August  2007,  for  it  is  vital  to  understand  the  causes  of  the 
financial crisis and, hence, the role of monetary policy in the run-up to the crisis. 
If I were to characterise the years since the inception of the euro in 1999 until the start of the 
financial tensions, from the perspective of an economist, with a few words, most observers 
would  probably  agree  that  “globalisation”  and  “deregulation”,  as  well  as  “technological  and 
financial  innovation”,  are  among  the  elements  I  should  mention.  In  addition,  “stock  and 
housing  market  bubble”  and  “global  current  account  imbalances”  would  figure  prominently 
among  those  with  a  more  negative  connotation.  Needless  to  say,  this  list  is  by  no  means 
complete. 
With  the  exception  of  the  cyclical downturn  following  the bursting  of what  many  observers 
have called the “dot-com bubble” in 2000/01, the world economy had been enjoying a period 
of robust growth since 1999. World trade had increased to unprecedented levels during that 
period, and international economic and financial integration had deepened considerably. 
At  the  same  time,  emerging  economies,  especially  in  Asia,  endowed  with  the  memory  of 
recent currency crises, had started to build up foreign exchange reserves, partly driven by 
the desire to hedge against the volatility of international capital flows. What was necessary 
for  this  accumulation  of  reserves  were  large  and  persistent  current  account  surpluses,  i.e. 
these countries were consuming less than they actually produced in each year, while some 
others, mainly advanced economies, were doing just the opposite. These latter countries had 
been  living  beyond  their  means.  In  some  of  these  advanced  countries,  the  strong 
consumption growth was driven mainly by increasing household indebtedness. 
As this had continued unabated over the years, significant global imbalances developed and, 
until late 2007, a strong global trend of increasing imbalances prevailed in full. 
This  period  was  also  characterised  by  a  widespread  tendency  of  deregulation  and  the 
emergence of financial innovations, which were insufficiently regulated. In fact, these trends 
were closely connected to the strong forces of globalisation. 
BIS Review 141/2009 
 1
As one example of such innovations in the financial sector during that time, let me mention 
securitisation.  This  concept,  which  had  been  known  in  the  United  States  since  the  late 
1970s, relates to the repackaging of assets that sit on financial institutions’ balance sheets 
into marketable slices, i.e. securities, with the aim of selling these new securities in financial 
markets. This sale frees up capital in banks, which can then, in turn, increase their lending. A 
glance on some US figures serves to illustrate the steep increase in securitisation over the 
last few years before the turmoil. The outstanding amount of US asset-backed commercial 
paper,  which  is  only  a  fraction  of  the  total  of  the  assets  generated  through  securitisation, 
increased  from  around  USD 500  billion  in  August  2004  to  over  USD 1.2  trillion  just  three 
years  later.  Although  total  issuance  of  asset-backed  securities  by  banks  between  January 
2005 and August 2007 was more than seven times higher in the United States than in the 
euro area, monthly issuance in the euro area still reached EUR22 billion, on average. This 
shows  that,  although  more  pervasive  in  the  United  States,  excess  lending  due  to 
insufficiently regulated securitisation activities also affected the euro area. 
It  is  easy  to  recognise  the  huge  benefits  of  securitisation  for  growth,  but  there  are  also 
substantial downsides. The significant increases in sub-prime  mortgage lending from 2005 
onwards, for example, were only possible with the help of securitisation. I do not think that it 
is too far-reaching to claim that much tighter financial market regulation is needed in order to 
reap only the positive benefits of securitisation. 
How  are  these  developments  connected  with  monetary  policy,  especially  with  monetary 
policy in advanced economies? 
My answer to this question is that the current financial crisis has shown that there are many 
linkages indeed. 
First  of  all,  the  dynamics  of  globalisation  have  certainly  made  the  central  banks’  task  of 
analysing  the  inflation  process  more  complicated.  This  may  have  caused  potential  output, 
which  is  a  crucial  input  for  the  economic  analysis  of  risks  to  price  stability,  to  have  been 
overestimated. In other words, some of the strong growth we had experienced in that period 
may have been unsustainable in the first place. 
Second,  the  build-up  of  global  imbalances  arguably  contributed  to  a  distortion  in  relative 
asset  prices,  resulting  in  a  systematic  under-pricing  of  risk  in  financial  markets.  Indeed, 
looking at financial market data from periods as recent as the first half of 2007, you will find 
embedded credit risk premia, for example for unsecured interbank loans, that are very close 
to  zero  and  appear  amazingly  low.  Yet  central  banks  have  to  rely  on  functioning  financial 
markets,  since  they  are  essential  for  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy  signals  to  the 
economy. 
Third, insufficient regulation for financial innovations, as in the case of securitisation, led to 
the creation of whole asset classes, e.g. sub-prime mortgages, whose economic basis was 
less than sound. This contributed to the build-up of substantial risks to financial stability, as 
cash  flows  in  these  asset  classes  would  be  extremely  vulnerable  to  stagnating  or  even 
declining house prices. 
Taking all this into account, it can probably be argued that central banks around the world 
had, to differing degrees, contributed to fuelling asset price bubbles by keeping policy rates 
at  very  low  levels  for  a  protracted  period  of  time  in  an  environment  of  robust  economic 
growth, ample global liquidity, continued low inflation rates and low default risks. 
Before I turn to the renewed debate on whether or not central banks should address asset 
price bubbles, I would like to say a few words about the monetary policy of the ECB, and the 
central role of its monetary analysis in the pre-crisis period. 
Indeed,  the  euro  has  been  a  remarkable  success,  and  the  ECB  has  delivered  what  it  is 
expected to deliver under its mandate, namely the maintenance of price stability in the euro 
area. I think there is broad consensus as regards this observation. First of all, with inflation 
averaging  only  slightly  above  2%,  the  euro  area  has  witnessed  a  decade  of  relative  price 
2 
 BIS Review 141/2009
stability, despite a number of severe upside price shocks. In addition, medium and long-term 
inflation expectations have, judging by all available measures, remained firmly anchored at 
around  2%.  Such  anchoring  reflects  favourably  on  the  smooth  functioning  of  the  ECB’s 
monetary policy and its high degree of credibility, which is based on the principles for sound 
central banking. 
Analysing  risks  to  price  stability  using  our  two-pillar  approach  served  us  well  during  these 
times. Let me give you some specific examples of the impact of signals from our monetary 
analysis on our actions. 
As  you  are  aware,  in  the  aftermath  of  the  bursting  of  the  dot-com  bubble  and  faced  with 
receding  inflationary  pressures,  the  ECB  lowered  its  policy  rate  to  2%.  It  was  because  of 
signals from the monetary analysis that we stopped lowering rates still further. 
In  the  same  vein,  when  the  ECB  decided  in  late  2005  to  start  increasing  its  policy  rates 
again, it was mainly because our monetary analysis indicated upward risks to price stability. 
At the time, the signals from the economic analysis were rather mixed, and I remember that 
we were widely criticised for our decision. In retrospect, I would say this decision appears to 
have  been  well-timed,  given  the  strength  of  the  economic  upturn  that  followed  from  2006 
onwards. 
Finally,  using  signals  from  the  monetary  analysis,  we  continually  reminded  market 
participants during those times that risk premia in financial markets were extraordinarily low 
and that the strong growth in credit aggregates implied future risks to financial stability. On 
various occasions in 2006 and 2007, we voiced concerns and warned markets to prepare for 
the unavoidable correction. 
You all know what happened. The repricing of risks did indeed occur, although in a much 
more  dramatic  way  than  anticipated.  There  was  virtually  nobody  who  foresaw  a  financial 
crisis of such abruptness and swift progression, nor its severity. The complex interaction of 
the factors that I outlined earlier had created enormous risks for financial stability. 
Monetary policy in times of financial crisis 
2 
Let  me  now  give  you  a  detailed  account  of  what  have  been  –  and  continue  to  be  –  very 
challenging times for the conduct of monetary policy. I will concentrate on the most important 
cornerstones  of  the  current  financial  crisis,  from  the  perspective  of  a  European  central 
banker, of course. 
The start of the crisis: fine-tuning money markets 
2.1  
On  9  August  2007,  short-term  money  markets  rates  such  as  the  overnight  rate  suddenly 
started  to  surge.  The  ECB  was  the  first  central  bank  in  the  world  to  react,  and  did  so 
immediately,  calming  the  markets,  first,  with  a  technical  announcement  via  the  relevant 
Reuters pages and, later in the course of the day, with the provision of unlimited central bank 
liquidity with overnight maturity at the prevailing policy rate. 
The demand of banks turned out to be extraordinarily strong, totalling EUR95 billion. Over 
the next two days, further liquidity-providing fine-tuning operations were conducted, so that 
tensions in short-term euro area money markets abated to some extent. 
This series of fine-tuning operations turned out to be the starting point of the first phase of 
policy responses to the financial crisis, a phase that lasted until September 2008. During that 
time,  the  ECB  addressed  tensions  in  euro  area  money  markets  within  its  operational 
framework, mainly by “frontloading” credit extended via its main refinancing operations within 
the reserve maintenance period, while at the same time keeping the overall supply of central 
bank  liquidity  unchanged.  Put  simply,  “frontloading”  means  that  the  ECB  provided  higher 
amounts of credit at the beginning and lesser amounts of credit at the end of each relevant 
BIS Review 141/2009 
 3
period, the reserve maintenance period, instead of always extending the same amounts of 
credit in each operation. 
Further important measures that fall into the early phases of the crisis were the lengthening 
of  the  average  maturity  of  our  liquidity  provision  by  conducting  supplementary  refinancing 
operations with maturities of three and six months, the provision of US dollar liquidity against 
euro-denominated collateral, on the basis of a swap agreement with the US Federal Reserve 
System,  and  the  conduct  of  a  two-week  full-allotment  tender  in  the  penultimate  main 
refinancing  operation  of  2007  in  order  to  address  especially  elevated  funding  concerns  of 
banks over the year-end of 2007. 
Until the end of August 2008, all these measures – which were taken within the Eurosystem’s 
operational  framework  –  proved  broadly  sufficient  to  align  short-term  money  market  rates 
with  our  policy  rate,  although  the  volatility  in  money  market  rates  was  higher  than  before 
August 2007 and money market spreads at longer maturities remained elevated. 
Overall, during that time, the monetary policy implementation framework of the ECB proved 
extremely robust and suitable to address the challenges. In particular, our measures allowed 
the  determination  of  the  monetary  policy  stance  to  be  kept  separate  from  the  way  it  is 
implemented, i.e. the ECB’s management of the liquidity in the euro area money market. The 
interest rate hike of July 2008 is an example of the application of the separation principle. We 
took this step at the time, which is fully in line with our primary objective of maintaining price 
stability,  to  prevent  second-round  effects,  with  a  view  to  avoiding  the  dis-anchoring  of 
inflation expectations, even in times of money market tensions. 
2.2  
Extraordinary times and measures: extraordinary rate cuts and enhanced 
credit support 
In September 2008, conditions in financial markets worsened dramatically. The bankruptcy of 
Lehman Brothers led to the emergence of a full-fledged financial crisis and this, in turn, was 
accompanied by a rapid deterioration of economic conditions in most major economies of the 
world. 
The ECB reacted decisively and swiftly on two fronts. First, consistent with its mandate of 
maintaining price stability over the medium term and, specifically, in view of rapidly receding 
inflationary pressures, the policy rate was cut by 325 basis points and now stands at 1%. 
Second,  the  ECB  engaged  in  what  we  refer  to  as  enhanced  credit  support  and  I  will 
elaborate  a  bit  more  on  this  in  what  follows.  After  the  bankruptcy  of  Lehman  Brothers, 
interbank money markets simply stopped working. Banks did not trust each other any longer, 
since  nobody  was  sure  just  how  risky  it  really  was  to  lend  to  another  bank.  In  terms  of 
economic theory, one could say that information asymmetries had become too large, with the 
result of a market breakdown. And economic theory also tells us that a market breakdown is 
justification for public sector intervention. 
Two  of  the  main  functions  of  interbank  money  markets  are  the  intermediation  of  liquidity 
shocks and the provision of short term funding for financial institutions. In other words, the 
financial  sector  cannot  work  without  these  markets,  cannot  fulfil  its  role  of  supplying  the 
economy with credit. Consequently, in the case of the euro area, these functions had to be 
taken over by the ECB. To achieve this, a number of actions were taken. 
The ECB switched to fixed-rate tenders with full allotment in all liquidity-providing operations 
in October 2008. In practical terms, this was a change in the way the ECB “sells” its loans to 
the financial sector, away from a competitive auction to a fixed-price offer without limitations 
on the quantity. This change guaranteed banks access to as much central bank liquidity as 
they needed, provided they possessed sufficient eligible collateral. The term collateral refers 
to an asset that the financial institution temporarily deposits with the ECB in exchange for the 
loan it receives. If the institution pays back its loan, the asset is returned. Indeed, all loans 
4 
 BIS Review 141/2009
that financial institutions receive from the ECB are fully collateralised and, hence, take the 
form of secured lending. 
In  connection  with  this  change,  as  a  further  safeguard,  the  already  relatively  broad  set  of 
eligible  collateral  was  expanded  further,  taking  into  account  market  developments  and 
making  sure  that  collateral  would  not  be  the  limiting  factor  for  banks.  In  general,  the  ECB 
accepts  only  high-quality  assets  as  collateral,  such  as  government  bonds,  covered  bonds 
and  some  asset-backed  securities,  all  of  which  need  to  posses  a  certain  minimum  rating. 
Furthermore, we discount the value of the collateral banks post with the ECB, according to 
the  risk  of  the  asset,  in  order  to  protect  the  ECB  from  the  default  risk  of  the  borrowing 
financial institution. 
In  addition,  the  maturity  spectrum  at  which  the  ECB  offered  refinancing  operations  was 
broadened, with operations covering the full length of the maintenance period and, in May 
2009, one-year longer term refinancing operations being added. In enhancing the “menu” of 
maturities at which banks can obtain liquidity, the ECB supported the financial sector further 
as it made the refinancing of banks up to a certain horizon more predictable and, at the same 
time, less costly. 
Finally, also in May 2009, we added a covered bond purchase programme. Covered bonds, 
known as “Pfandbriefe” in Germany, are long-term debt securities that are issued by banks to 
refinance  loans  to  the  private  and  public  sector,  often  in  connection  with  real  estate 
transactions.  Although  covered  bonds  are  low-risk  assets  and  are  tightly  regulated  via 
specific  laws,  markets  for  these  bonds  were  nevertheless  strongly  affected  by  the 
intensification of the financial crisis in September 2008. Supporting these markets, therefore, 
amounted  to  bolstering  the  long-term  refinancing  options  of  the  financial  sector,  and  to 
helping  to  overcome  fundamentally  not  justified  liquidity  problems  in  an  otherwise  sound 
asset class. 
As you will certainly have noticed, all these measures were designed specifically to support 
the vital role financial markets play as intermediaries with respect to providing credit to the 
economy.  In  the  euro  area,  this  role  is  mainly  assumed  by  banks.  The  enhanced  credit 
support, therefore, is aimed mainly at supporting banks in the fulfilment of their role. 
The  importance  of  bank  financing  for  the  euro  area  economy  also  helps  to  explain  the 
differences  between  the  tools  employed  by  the  US  Federal  Reserve  and  the  ECB.  In  the 
euro area, more than 70% of financing for corporations is provided by banks, while this share 
is about 20% in the United States. This means that the transmission of monetary policy in the 
euro area relies to a considerable extent on banks, unlike the situation in the United States 
where  financial  markets  are  more  important  in  that  respect.  Therefore,  the  US  Federal 
Reserve engaged in large-scale outright purchases of, and guarantee schemes for, private 
sector debt securities, in actual fact providing life support for several key financial markets, 
while the ECB could resort to the more focussed enhanced credit support for banks. 
In this respect, in order to better understand the ECB’s monetary policy, especially in these 
extraordinary circumstances, it is important to consider not only the actions that we took. It is 
equally  important  to  also  look  at  measures  that  we  did  not  take.  In  particular,  we  did  not 
engage  in  large-scale  outright  purchases  of  debt  securities.  Most  of  our  liquidity  provision 
rests  on  refinancing  operations,  which  have  the  character  of  repurchase  agreements,  and 
are  thus  temporary  loans.  This  will  greatly  facilitate  the  phasing-out  of  our  exceptional 
support.  Nor  did  we  engage  in  buying  government  securities.  This  would  amount  to  the 
monetisation of government debt, a sure road towards inflation over the medium term, with 
adverse effects on our independence and credibility. All our actions were constantly guided 
by our mandate under the Treaty, which is to safeguard price stability. 
BIS Review 141/2009 
 5
Understanding central bank interventions: a view on the balance sheet 
2.3  
Another, instructive way of looking at all these measures is to use the balance sheet of the 
ECB. In an extremely stylised version, the balance sheet of the ECB resembles that of any 
other central bank. On the asset side are its reserves (foreign currency holdings and gold) 
and its own financial assets without reserve status. On the liability side, you will find its own 
currency, the euro. Some of the euro amounts on the liability side take the form of reserve 
requirements,  so  that  banks  are  actually  obliged  to  hold  them.  The  larger  proportion, 
however,  are  accounted  for  by  physical  euro,  i.e.  banknotes  and  coins,  which  are  held  by 
economic  agents  in  the  euro  area  and  abroad,  as  well  as  by  other  central  banks.  It  is 
important to note that the willingness of economic agents to hold these liabilities ultimately 
constitutes  the  capital  of  the  central  bank.  This  willingness  is  very  closely  related  to  the 
reputation of the central bank and to the confidence economic agents have in the institution. 
The  demand  of  banks  for  the  currency  needs  to  be  refinanced;  technically,  banks  borrow 
currency from the ECB and deposit collateral to secure the loan. These loans take the form 
of  refinancing  operations  and  can  be  found  on  the  asset  side  of  the  balance  sheet  of  the 
ECB. 
Using  this  rather  technical  approach  helps  to  distinguish  the  two  phases  of  the  financial 
crisis. 
During the initial phase of financial tensions, i.e. until September 2008, the balance sheet of 
the  ECB  did  not  change  much.  In  fact,  overall  liquidity  provision  was  more  or  less 
unchanged.  There  is  one  notable  exception  to  this  statement,  namely  the  provision  of 
unlimited  liquidity  for  two  weeks  over  the  turn  of  year  2007/2008,  which  resulted  in  a 
temporary expansion of the ECB’s balance sheet. 
After September 2008, the balance sheet grew considerably in size. There are a number of 
reasons for this. First of all, the volumes of refinancing operations increased as a result of the 
procedure providing for fixed-rate tenders with full allotment, in which banks can themselves 
determine the amount of liquidity they obtain. To the extent that these amounts were larger 
than the underlying liquidity needs, banks simply left the liquidity in a special account with the 
ECB, which is called the deposit facility. In effect, both sides of the balance sheet of the ECB 
increased.  Second,  the  covered  bond  purchase  programme  leads  to  an  increase  in  the 
assets of the ECB, which is paid for with currency. And, lastly, there was also more demand 
for  banknotes  and  coins,  an  increase  of  the  liabilities  –  which  leads  to  higher  volumes  in 
refinancing operations on the asset side. 
Technically  speaking,  you  could  say  that  the  ECB  used  its  balance  sheet  to  grant  banks 
access to liquidity that was no longer available in the interbank market. Seen from a more 
philosophical  perspective,  the  ECB  employed  the  trust  euro  area  citizens  have  in  the 
institution  and  its  currency  to  overcome  a  situation  in  which  trust  was  scarce  and  badly 
needed.  With  trust  comes  responsibility  to  use  it  only  for  worthy  causes.  The  ECB  is  well 
aware of this enormous responsibility, and its decisions are guided by it. The decision to buy 
covered  bonds,  for  example,  was  based  on  the  insight  that  this  asset  class  deserved  our 
support as its underlying incentive structure was, and is, sound and it economic basis robust. 
Using the structure of central banks’ balance sheets also allows the ECB’s actions during the 
crisis  to  be  compared  with  those  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve.  In  the  United  States,  as 
mentioned earlier, the financing for corporations is provided by banks to a far lesser extent 
than  in  Europe.  Most  of  the  programmes  enacted  by  the  US  Federal  Reserve  were, 
therefore, aimed at directly stabilising key financial markets, which it did mainly via outright 
purchases of debt securities and guarantee programmes for such securities. Since required 
reserves of banks are much smaller in the United States, the resulting excess liquidity was 
enormous,  which  caused  the  Federal  Reserve  to  start  paying  interest  on  these  excess 
reserves in October 2008. In the case of the ECB, such a mechanism was already in place. 
Required reserves of banks are remunerated at the average marginal rate of the refinancing 
operations, and excess liquidity is remunerated with the rate of the deposit facility. Again, this 
6 
 BIS Review 141/2009
recent  experience  suggests  that  the  ECB’s  operational  framework  provides  a  suitable  and 
robust toolkit for the implementation of monetary policy, even in difficult times. This view is 
also increasingly being shared by other central banks. 
Finally, I would like to address one particular question that I am often asked in connection 
with  the  growth  of  our  balance  sheet:  what  are  the  consequences  of  this  process  for  the 
possible emergence of inflationary risks? 
Again, knowledge of the ECB’s balance sheet helps to answer this question. First of all, it is 
important  to  note  that  the  “excess  liquidity”,  the  amount  of  base  money  that  exceeds  the 
reserve requirements and currency in circulation, does not stay in the market. Rather, it flows 
back to the ECB via the deposit facility. So, from this perspective, our liquidity policy has no 
inflationary impact. The abundant liquidity, however, has the effect of lowering money market 
rates and, hence, impacts the price of capital. Here, our economic and monetary analyses 
come  into  play  in  determining  whether  such  rates  are  consistent  with  our  mandate  of 
maintaining price stability and, at the moment, we have come to the conclusion that they are. 
Although the liquidity provided by the ECB has increased substantially, this has not led to an 
increase in monetary and credit aggregates. On the contrary, credit flows remain weak and 
loan demand has not yet picked up. 
This will, however, change at some point in the future, so that we are constantly monitoring 
the situation. Again, you could gain an understanding of the dynamics of a pick-up in credit 
demand and supply via the ECB’s balance sheet. If banks increase their lending activities, 
their  reserve  requirements  would  rise.  All  other  things  being  equal,  that  would  reduce  the 
amount of “excess liquidity”, thereby transforming the balance sheet expansion of the ECB 
into credit and economic growth, both of which entail inflationary risks. From this reasoning it 
becomes  clear  that  the  timing  will  be  crucial  for  the  withdrawal  of  the  enhanced  credit 
support, and that a strategy is needed to guide this process. Let me now turn to this topic. 
Phasing out the enhanced credit support 
2.4  
There can be no doubt that the ECB’s monetary policy currently provides substantial support 
to  the  banking  sector  and  the  euro  area  economy  as  a  whole.  I  would  characterise  our 
current monetary policy stance as accommodating, which is appropriate in view of the fact 
that neither the economic analysis nor the monetary analysis point to risks for price stability 
at this stage. 
It  is  clear,  however,  that  our  exceptional  support  cannot  last  for  too  long  a  period  of  time 
since there are negative side effects. 
• 
The  money  market  yield  curve  is  currently  strongly  influenced  by  the  abundant 
liquidity  in  the  market,  i.e.  short  term  money  market  rates  are  to  some  extent 
distorted. If this situation persists for too long, it may contribute to a misallocation of 
capital. 
There is a clear risk of creating a dependency of banks on central bank refinancing, 
while the intention of the current policy is only to “help banks to help themselves”. It 
may  also  slow  down  necessary  structural  adjustments  to  the  balance  sheets  of 
banks and, ultimately, to the business models of some financial institutions. 
Risks to price stability will ultimately emerge from having this exceptional support in 
place for too long a period of time. 
  For all these reasons, the ECB has an exit strategy in place to guide the process of phasing 
out  our  enhanced  credit  support.  This  strategy  can  be  activated  at  any  time.  Let  me 
elaborate. 
Consistent with its mandate, the ECB needs to act if risks to price stability should emerge. In 
other words, we have to avoid keeping policy rates at their current historically low levels for 
too long. Changing policy rates does not necessarily entail a phasing-out of all the measures 
BIS Review 141/2009 
 7
of enhanced credit support. At the same time, our liquidity measures will not all be required 
to  the  same  extent  as  has  been  the  case  thus  far.  In  particular,  as  mentioned  earlier,  we 
should  avoid  setting  wrong  incentives  by  fostering  banks’  dependence  on  the  ECB’s 
substantial  liquidity  support.  This  calls  for  our  starting  to  phase  out  the  enhanced  credit 
support as soon as money market conditions permit us to do so. 
Let  me  use  this  reasoning  to  illustrate  our  exit  strategy  on  the  basis  of  two  highly  stylised 
scenarios.  Should  money  market  conditions  improve  before  upside  risks  to  price  stability 
emerge, the enhanced credit support can be gradually withdrawn before we start changing 
policy rates. This would not imply a change in the stance of our monetary policy as long as 
the liquidity support would not be needed to the extent it has been so far. In this respect, we 
will  have  a  first  opportunity  to  review  the  typology  and  modalities  of  our  refinancing 
operations  at  our  first  meeting  in  December.  In  case  money  market  tensions  persist  while 
upside risks to price stability emerge, some elements of the enhanced credit support would 
need to remain in place. At the same time, policy rates could already be changed.  
It is also important to stress that all measures of the enhanced credit support were designed 
with the clear view to facilitating their phasing-out. 
Let me reassure you that, not least thanks to our political independence and credibility, we 
are well-equipped to act in a timely and prompt manner when the need arises. We continue 
to  monitor  the  stabilisation  of  the  economic  activity  and  financial  markets  very  closely. 
However, I would like to reiterate that not all our liquidity measures will be required to the 
same extent as they have been necessary thus far. 
After the storm: the future of monetary policy 
3  
What  lessons  can  we learn  from  the  causes of  the  crisis  and  the  crisis  itself  for  monetary 
policy? Let me mention three key elements. 
First of all, it seems that a central bank, especially in difficult times, is served well by having a 
clear  and  unambiguous  mandate,  a  robust  strategy  and  a  principles-based  approach  to 
communication. 
Second, the ECB does not need to change either its mandate or its strategy. Our mandate is 
well-communicated and understood by the markets, while our strategy is suitable for fulfilling 
this  mandate  and  has  proved  to  be  robust.  In  particular,  the  ECB’s  strategy  is 
comprehensive.  It  includes  the  analysis  of  money,  credit  and  asset  prices.  As  such,  it 
provides a useful model for a monetary policy strategy that allows the medium-term risks to 
price  stability  to  be  identified  that  result  from  imbalances  in  both  domestic  and  global 
markets. 
This ties in with my third and final “lesson”. A well-known topic is back on the agenda: the 
role of asset prices for the conduct of monetary policy. 
A long series of booms and busts in asset markets – occurring with increasing intensity and 
frequency – over the last 40 years has shown that unsustainable trends in asset values can 
pose  serious  threats  to  macroeconomic  stability  and,  by  implication,  to  price  stability.  The 
current financial crisis – coming at the end of a long and tumultuous boom – has revived a 
long-standing debate on the role that asset prices should play in the monetary policy strategy 
of  price  stability-oriented  central  banks.  In  one  camp  of  academics  and  experts  are  those 
who  claim  that  central  banks  should  target  asset  prices  and  should,  most  notably, 
incorporate some form of an asset price index into the price indicator that they use for their 
respective definition of price stability. In the opposite camp are those who argue that it is too 
difficult to extract “fundamental” dynamics from asset prices, to detect bubbles in real time 
and, eventually, to devise an appropriate policy response with so blunt a tool as the policy 
rate.  According  to  this  latter  camp,  monetary  policy  could,  and  should,  deal  only  with  the 
eventual consequences of the bursting of a bubble. 
8 
 BIS Review 141/2009
Let me immediately say that the recent financial crisis has called into question the credibility 
of  the  second  position.  One  of  the  main  lessons  of  the  crisis  is  that  central  banks  cannot 
simply  neglect  asset  price  developments  on  the  tacit  understanding  that  –  no  matter  how 
large  and  unsustainable  price  trends  might  become  –  they  will  be  able  to  intervene  in  the 
aftermath  of  a  crash  to  sweep  up  the  pieces.  The  crisis  has  shown  how  costly  this 
understanding can be in terms of, first, distorting the incentives of asset market participants 
in the boom phase and, second, tolerating the build-up of financial imbalances that can grow 
so  large  that  their  eventual  unwinding  is  close  to  impossible  to  tackle  ex  post  with  the 
conventional tools of monetary policy. 
What about the first camp’s view, the belief that the “cost-of-living” index that central banks 
monitor in their pursuit of price stability should include asset prices? This belief rests on the 
notion that such a complex measure of the purchasing power of economic agents would be 
more encompassing and therefore superior. However, this notion overlooks the deficiencies 
of asset prices as measures and indicators of future goods prices. An asset is a claim on 
future goods. So, in theory, the value of an asset today could be viewed as an indicator of 
prices that will be set in the future for the goods that the asset will purchase then. But the 
reality of asset markets departs from this abstraction in several ways. First, not all assets like 
human  capital  and  consumer  durables  have  a  market  on  which  a  price  is  formed. 
Furthermore,  as  we  all  know,  asset  price  developments  can  be  determined  by  market 
dynamics that have little to do with expectations of future goods prices. We know that price 
dynamics  in  asset  markets  are  very  often  driven  by  expectations  of  future  changes  in  the 
price of the asset itself – what we call a bubble – rather than by expectations of the price of 
future  goods.  In  these  conditions,  central  banks  would  face  a  formidable  challenge  in 
distinguishing the “fundamental” value of the asset – namely that part of the asset price that 
reflects expectations about future inflation – from the “non-fundamental” part. However, this 
operation  would  be  essential  in  order  to  extract  the  relevant  signals  on  the  underlying 
inflation dynamics. 
So,  where  do  all  these  reflections  lead  us?  Let  me  explain  why  and  how  the  strategic 
approach adopted by the ECB is a balanced and secure option for monetary policy-makers 
dealing with the possibility of recurrent instability in financial markets. 
Our framework rests on the fundamental principle that if the central bank is successful and 
credible in stabilising “current” consumer prices, and is expected to do so in the future, it will 
firmly anchor inflation expectations as well. 
How do we stabilise inflation in the current period? Well, to start with, a central bank needs a 
sufficiently broad and reliable strategic framework that can analyse and detect risks to price 
stability in a timely fashion. This strategic framework should include – with a prominent role – 
indicators that can signal macroeconomic and financial imbalances when they are forming. 
For  example,  when  an  unsustainable  asset  boom  is  inflating,  fuelled  by  excess  credit 
creation,  the  strategic  framework  should  encourage  the  central  bank  to  “lean  against  the 
wind” of financial exuberance. “Leaning against the wind” means the following in this case: 
the central bank should try to compensate for the excess ease with which speculators can 
secure  credit  to  finance  their  speculative  positions  in  asset  markets  with  a  stance  of 
monetary policy that is more restrictive than the one they would implement in less perturbed 
financial conditions. 
In  this  respect,  the  conviction  is  growing  within  the  central  banking  community  that 
comprehensive monetary policy strategies that include a prominent role for money and credit 
considerations  are  better  suited  to  “lean  against  the  wind”  in  the  sense  that  I  have  just 
indicated.  By  giving  more  prominence  to  money  and  credit  in  their  strategy,  central  banks 
can better identify the emergence of medium-term risks to macroeconomic stability that result 
from  imbalances  in  both  domestic  and  global  markets.  By  incorporating  money  and  credit 
conditions in their policy in a systematic way, central banks can adopt a somewhat tighter 
policy stance in the face of an inflating asset market than they would otherwise pursue if they 
BIS Review 141/2009 
 9
had been confronted with a similar macroeconomic outlook under more normal asset market 
conditions. 
Of course, critics object that it is difficult to detect bubbles anyway, and that the instrument of 
policy is too blunt to resist an asset price bubble. 
But central bankers face signal extraction problems everywhere! Monetary policy-making to a 
large extent involves extracting trends from noisy statistics. At the end of the day, monetary 
authorities  always  work  in  an  uncertain  environment  and  have  to  take  “risk-adjusted” 
decisions. 
And central banks should not underestimate the potency of monetary policy. For example, it 
is true that in most cases a small change in the policy rate may not be sufficient to slow down 
those  asset  price  bubbles  that  develop  on  the  –  false  –  expectation  of  very  large  future 
capital  gains.  However,  recent  research  suggests  that  there  are  other  channels  through 
which changes in interest rates can affect asset prices. The first is the profitability of financial 
institutions  that  systematically  borrow  short  and  lend  long.  These  so-called  leveraged 
institutions  are  credit  companies  that  borrow  by  issuing  short-term  liabilities  and  use  the 
proceeds of their borrowing to lend over the longer term, or to purchase assets that have a 
longer  maturity.  They  use  their  capital  as  a  partial  –  very  partial  –  guarantee  for  their 
business. They are called “leveraged” because, as I have said, their capital finances only a 
small  fraction  of  their  lending  activity.  The  larger  proportion  of  their  lending  is  financed  by 
borrowing. Confronted with even marginal increase in the short-term borrowing costs, due to 
the  increase  in  the  policy  rate,  these  institutions  are  forced  to  wind  down  their  leveraged 
positions. In other words, they would have to borrow less and pay back their previous debt 
because the thin margins from which they profit would become even thinner or negative. In 
doing  so,  they  would  probably  have  to  sell  the  assets  that  they  had  purchased  on  the 
expectations  of  future  price  gains.  In  the  end,  the  “deleveraging”  process  triggered  by  the 
policy-induced restriction would ultimately exert a dampening effect on asset price growth.1 
Changes  in  policy  rates  –  in  combination,  eventually,  with  appropriate  central  bank 
communication  –  can  also  serve  as  a  signalling  device  from  central  banks  and  break  the 
private sector herding behaviour that fuels the bubble. 
Needless  to  say,  “leaning  against  the  wind”  cannot  be  translated  into  an  automatic  rule. 
Policy action is always the outcome of a decision that takes into account a complex situation. 
The  monetary  pillar  is  there  to  uncover  the  complexity  of  the  shocks  that  drive  monetary 
aggregates,  and  to  alert  us  on  the  channels  of  influence  through  which  these  shocks  can 
interact  with  financial  trends  and  pose  risks  to  price  stability  over  the  medium  term.  As 
mentioned earlier, the monetary pillar is not an automatic rule that translates money growth 
into a policy decision. I have already mentioned one episode in the summer of 2004, when 
we decided to stabilise the policy rate at 2%, and, thereafter, in late 2005 when we started to 
tighten  the  stance  of  policy.  At  the  time,  the  decision  to  tighten  was  based,  among  other 
elements, on the consideration that the  combination of strong money  and credit growth in the 
euro  area  in  a  context  of  already  ample  liquidity  –  with  the  excessive  asset  price  growth 
being  fuelled  by  an  unsustainably  low  risk  premium  –  posed  risks  to  price  and 
macroeconomic stability over the medium term. We decided to act on strong money growth 
because our monetary analysis at the time indicated that the rapid creation of money was 
due  to  a  rapid  expansion  of  the  supply  of  liquidity  by  monetary  financial  intermediaries.  That 
signal was very different from the signal that monetary analysis was sending in the preceding 
period of strong money growth – in the aftermath of the collapse of the stock market in 2001-
2002  –  when  the  root  causes  of  the  rapid  monetary  growth  were  different  and  due  to  an 
expansion of the demand for money by households who wanted to diversify their portfolios 
away  from  the  stock  market  and  toward  safer  instruments.  As  you  can  see,  monetary 
                                                 
1   T. Adrian  and  H.S. Shin.  “Liquidity,  monetary  policy,  and  financial  cycles”,  Current  Issues  in  Economics  and  Finance, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, January 2008. 
10 
 BIS Review 141/2009
analysis is deep enough to identify the risk signal on the basis of the underlying shocks that 
drive monetary dynamics. 
The  2005  experience  represents  an  example  of  how  the  monetary  pillar  of  the  ECB’s 
strategy could help integrate asset price developments – and their eventual misalignments – 
into an overall framework directed towards the attainment of our goal: price stability. While 
asset prices had started the last phase of their tumultuous run-up, which eventually led to the 
crash, money and credit were strong and this signalled lax credit conditions. In the event, we 
were proved to have been right in ignoring those indicators and the signals we could extract 
from our economic analysis, which did not at the time indicate any need for a tightening in 
policy. 
Monetary analysis is in progress. The signal extraction problem that it helps solve is not an 
easy  task.  It  requires  a  substantial  amount  of  work  and  continuous  efforts  on  the  part  of 
central banks’ staff to improve and update the analytical tools and techniques. In particular, 
the  speed  of  innovation  in  global  financial  markets  and  their  increasing  interlinkages 
contribute to changing the landscapes where central banks operate. The Governing Council 
has  promoted  a  complex  process  of  enhancement  of  these  tools  and  techniques  along 
several  avenues.  The  ECB  has  always  been  at  the  forefront  of  research  in  monetary 
analysis.  We  expect  that,  as  this  process  of  tool  enhancement  comes  to  completion,  our 
leading  position  in  this  field  –  which  is  so  important  for  central  bank  analysis  –  will  be 
strengthened further. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. I have talked about the challenges for monetary policy over time, especially 
in the light of the current financial crisis. Naturally, I have focussed mainly on the experience 
of the ECB. I would see three main messages. 
The  first  is  on  our  mandate  and  monetary  policy  strategy.  We  are  fully  committed  to  our 
mandate,  which  is  to  safeguard  price  stability  in  the  euro  area.  To  this  end,  our  two-pillar 
monetary policy strategy has served us well, both with respect to internal decision-making 
and  in  terms  of  our  external  communication.  This  has  helped  the  ECB  to  ensure,  in 
particular, that its monetary policy remains consistent, credible and effective. 
The  second  message  is  about  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  during  the  financial  crisis.  In 
response to the crisis, the ECB has taken forceful and timely action. In particular, it did not 
shy  away  from  taking  some  highly  unusual  but  appropriate  measures  with  the  aim  of 
supporting banks in the fulfilment of their major role, which is to provide credit to the euro 
area  economy.  Nevertheless,  all  these  measures  have  been  fully  consistent  with  our 
overarching  objective  of  ensuring  price  stability.  We  are  prepared  for  a  timely  exit  and  to 
gradually phase out all the extraordinary measures that we currently have in place. 
Finally, there are the lessons to be learnt from the financial crisis as regards the role of asset 
prices in the conduct of monetary policy. In this respect, our monetary analysis has proven 
robust in difficult times. In particular, taking into account developments from broad monetary 
and  credit  aggregates  is  suitable  and  useful  in  shaping  a  strategy  of  “leaning  against  the 
wind”. Such an approach will help to prevent another financial crisis.  
BIS Review 141/2009 
 11
