Masaaki Shirakawa: Recent economic and financial developments and 
the conduct of monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Masaaki  Shirakawa,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the  Kisaragi-kai 
Meeting, Tokyo, 4 November 2009. 
 Introduction 
I am privileged to have an opportunity to speak before such a large audience. 
I addressed you the last time in the beginning of November 2008, which was about a month 
and a half after the failure of Lehman Brothers, and the financial crisis was growing serious. 
As you remember vividly, the global economy deteriorated rapidly and simultaneously as if 
falling  off  a  cliff  due  to  the  turmoil  in  the  financial  markets.  The  policy  responses  by  the 
governments  and  central  banks  around  the  world  to  cope  with  such  a  situation  were  also 
unprecdentedly  bold  and  massive.  Thanks  mainly  to  the  effects  of  those  measures,  the 
global financial markets have increasingly been showing signs of improvement since around 
this  spring,  and  economic  activity  has  also  been  heading  for  improvement  at  home  and 
abroad.  At  the  same  time,  there  are  still  many  challenges  to  meet.  While  it  is  too  early  to 
summarize the current crisis, what countries around the world experienced in the past year 
undoubtedly will become an important event in the history of finance and economics, like the 
Great Depression in the 1930s. In my speech today, based on the developments in the past 
year, I will discuss the financial and economic developments at home and abroad, as well as 
the thinking of the Bank of Japan's conduct of monetary policy. 
I. 
Developments in the global economy 
Background of economic downturn 
I will begin by discussing the developments in the global economy. 
There are two important points to note. The first point is how to understand the background 
of  the  current  global  economic  downturn.  And  the  second  point  is  how  to  understand  the 
differences in the pace of recovery between advanced economies and emerging economies, 
which has recently become marked.  
I will start with the first point. While the global economy was growing at a high rate of around 
5  percent  for  four  consecutive  years  up  to  the  mid-2000s,  in  retrospect,  the  nature  of  the 
growth  was  largely  an  economic  boom  against  a  backdrop  of  the  massive  credit  bubble 
mainly in the United States and Europe. In that situation, households and firms substantially 
increased  their  debts  to  make  excessive  spending.  The  essence  of  the  current  global 
economic downturn is, put simply, balance-sheet adjustments in the course of unwinding of 
such  excessive  financial  and  economic  activity.  Inevitably,  firms  and  households  have  to 
restrain investment and consumption in order to repay the debts. Such compression of debts, 
namely, a move referred to as de-leveraging, leads to the contraction of aggregate demand 
and a decline in asset prices. Financial institutions are also forced to tackle the restoration of 
balance  between  overly  increased  assets,  overly  shouldered  risks,  and  the  capital.  In  that 
process, a forward-looking risk-taking activity such as making new lending will simply need to 
be  deferred.  While  such  balance-sheet  adjustments  are  an  unavoidable  process  for  the 
global  economy  to  return  to  a  sustainable  growth  path,  it  should  be  noted  that  downward 
pressure on the economy will be imposed as long as the adjustments continue. 
Another  point  in  understanding  the  background  of  the  economic  downturn  is  the  panicked 
contraction  of  financial  and  economic  activity  stemming  from  the  liquidity  crisis  since  the 
BIS Review 138/2009 
 1
autumn  of  2008.  Triggered  by  the  failure  of  Lehman  Brothers  in  September  2008,  fund 
providers such as financial institutions and institutional investors became extremely cautious 
about  the  creditworthiness  of  their  counterparties.  Nagging  suspicions  spread  in  many 
markets, and transactions became extremely inactive. Consequently, the funds necessary for 
economic activity did not circulate easily, and this, together with heightened anxiety among 
firms and households, reduced rapidly the global demand. If the balance-sheet adjustment is 
one  cause  of  protracted  "chronic  illness,"  the  liquidity  crisis  since  the  autumn  of  2008 
additionally brought a strong "acute pain" to the global economy. 
The global economy has been picking up recently, and that is because the acute pain has 
been dissipating for the following three reasons. First, thanks to the ample liquidity provision 
by  central  banks  around  the  world,  financial  markets  have  gradually  restored  stability. 
Policies  implemented  in  the  United  States  and  Europe  such  as  government  guarantee  of 
financial institutions' debts as well as expansion of deposits to be protected have also staved 
off  further  turmoil  in  the  financial  markets.  Second,  in  response  to  the  plunge  in  demand, 
prompt  economic  stimulus  measures  also  from  the  fiscal  front  have  been  carried  out.  A 
typical  example  was  the  policy  to  enhance  purchases  of  new  automobiles  implemented  in 
many countries. And third, as a result of the private firms' significant cutbacks in production, 
inventory adjustments have progressed at a rapid pace.  
However,  the  level  of  economic  activity  in  the  advanced  economies  is  substantially  low 
compared  with  that  prior  to  the  failure  of  Lehman  Brothers.  In  addition,  the  effects  of 
demand-boosting  public  measures  and  inventory  restocking  will  not  last  forever.  For  the 
economic growth to gain momentum, the key is whether a self-sustained recovery of private 
demand will successfully takeover these effects before they wane. What we should not forget 
here is the effects of the balance-sheet adjustments that I have mentioned earlier. For the 
recovery  of  private  demand  to  gain  momentum  in  the  future,  balance-sheet  adjustments 
should progress smoothly and the drag on the economy should be removed. However, given 
the  magnitude  of  the  economic  bubble  in  the  mid-2000s,  the  size  of  the  adjustments  also 
appears  to  be  extremely  large.  According  to  an  estimate  by  the  Global  Financial  Stability 
Report of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) released at the end of September, banks' 
losses  stemming  from  the  current  crisis  have  only  been  provisioned  or  written-off  for  60 
percent in the United States and 40 percent in Europe, and thus the adjustment of balance 
sheets  is  only  half  way  through.  Based  on  those  observations,  the  pace  of  growth  in  the 
global economy as a whole is likely to remain moderate for some time. 
Advanced economies and emerging economies 
The  balance-sheet  adjustments  I  have  explained  are  mainly  a  problem  of  advanced 
economies in the United States and Europe. It can be said that emerging and commodity-
exporting economies basically do not face such a problem this time. As the second point in 
understanding the global economy, let me touch on the difference in the pace of economic 
recovery  between  the  advanced  economies  and  the  emerging  economies  and  the 
relationship between the two. 
The global liquidity crisis since the autumn of 2008 not only affected gravely the advanced 
economies but also the emerging and commodity-exporting economies. With the turmoil in 
global financial markets, capital inflows to the emerging economies rapidly contracted, and 
the world-wide decline in demand hit the emerging economies through the decline in exports. 
However, with such acute pain receding, the emerging and commodity-exporting economies 
are recovering faster than envisaged around early spring. The real GDP growth rate for the 
April-June quarter of 2009 was high in many countries including South Korea, Taiwan, and 
Brazil.  China  and  India  have  also  been  regaining  high  growths.  Going  forward,  those 
countries  are  expected  to  maintain  relatively  high  growth  rates.  According  to  the  World 
Economic Outlook of the IMF released in early October 2009, the year-on-year growth rate of 
the  advanced  economies  for  2010  remained  at  1.3  percent,  while  that  of  the  emerging 
economies was at 5.1 percent, and that of Asian emerging economies was particularly high 
2 
 BIS Review 138/2009
at  7.3  percent.  The  commodity-exporting  countries  have  also  been  experiencing  a  rapid 
recovery in economic activity and a substantial rise in housing prices, and Australia, followed 
by Norway, decided last month to raise the policy interest rate.  
There are several reasons for the economic recovery in the emerging economies. First, the 
underlying  trend  in  domestic  demand  in  the  emerging  economies  is  strong  to  start  with, 
supported mainly by boosted consumption owing to an improvement in the standard of living 
as well as need to improve social infrastructure. Those countries, typically China, are likely to 
potentially have strength to achieve high economic growth. Second, the emerging countries 
themselves  have  also  implemented  aggressive  stimulative  measures  in  response  to  the 
current crisis. Unlike the advanced countries, the emerging economies were not facing the 
problem of balance-sheet adjustment and potential demand was strong to start with, thus the 
multiplier  effects  of  fiscal  stimulus  might  have  been  significant.  Third,  the  effects  of 
accommodative  monetary  policy  in the  advanced  economies  have  spread  to  the emerging 
economies. Market participants often use the term "dollar carry trade." There was a period 
when "the yen carry trade" was talked about, and this time, as many advanced economies 
are adopting low interest rate policy, funds obtained in the most deep U.S. dollar-fund market 
are  flowing  into  emerging  economies  again,  and  investors  are  starting  to  take  risk.  In 
addition,  since  many  emerging  economies  are  adopting  a  fixed  foreign  exchange  policy 
pegging own currency to the U.S. dollar, that also seems to have brought about monetary 
easing effects. Those developments have improved significantly the financial environment in 
the emerging economies mainly through an increase in credit provisioning and a rise in asset 
prices, thereby underpinning their economic recovery.  
As such, there are at present two groups of economies in the world, namely the advanced 
economies  that  are  strongly  affected  by  the  balance-sheet  adjustments,  and  the  emerging 
and commodity-exporting economies that are not facing such a problem and are gradually 
becoming a growth engine for the global economy. As explained earlier, the difference in the 
pace  of  recovery  between  the  two  groups  has  enhanced  the  capital  inflows  from  the 
advanced  economies  into  the  emerging  economies,  and  those  capital  inflows  are  likely  to 
contribute to boosting economic activity in the emerging economies for some time. However, 
if such a situation continues too long, it could lead to overheating of the economy or turmoil 
in  the  financial  markets,  which  could  lead  to  an  ensuing  economic  downturn.  That  is  not 
desirable  for  the  advanced  economies  either.  As  economic  globalization  progresses  and 
economies  further  strengthen  their  interconnectedness,  there  will  neither  be  a  de-coupling 
between the emerging economies and the advanced economies nor a complete coupling of. 
While it is a common-sense answer, the conclusion lies somewhere in between. What would 
be important for the global economy is that both the advanced economies and the emerging 
economies  grow  together  in  a  well-balanced  and  sustainable  manner  without  relying  too 
much on each other.  
II.  
Developments in Japan's economic activity and prices 
Economic activity  
Based on those developments in the global economy, let me turn to Japan's economy. 
Japan's economy was affected by the effects of global acute pain since the autumn of 2008 
and  significantly  deteriorated.  One  characteristic  of  Japan  is  that  the  industries  related  to 
durable consumer goods and capital goods, such as automobiles, electronic machinery, and 
general  machinery,  have  a  significant  share  in  the  economy.  Not  a  few  goods  of  those 
industries are exported to the advanced economies in the United States and Europe directly 
or through assembly bases in Asian countries. However, due to the rapid plunge in the global 
economy  since  the  autumn  of  2008  and  heightened  uncertainty  for  the  future,  households 
and firms around the world rushed to display defensive behavior of curtailing their spending 
on expensive durable goods consumption as well as machinery and equipment. In addition, 
BIS Review 138/2009 
 3
the  decline  in  the  functioning  of  global  credit  markets  contracted  consumer  credits  and 
further reduced the appetite for purchasing mainly durable consumer goods. That is one of 
the major reasons Japan's exports rapidly declined and production plunged. 
This suggests that the recovery in Japan's exports should start once the effects of acute pain 
wane  in  the  United  States  and  Europe.  In  addition,  a  faster-than-expected  recovery  in  the 
emerging economies including China has contributed significantly to the increase in Japan's 
exports. As a result, exports and production turned upward around this early spring and have 
been  increasing.  Against  such  a  backdrop,  business  sentiment  especially  at  large 
manufacturing  firms  has  also  been  improving.  As  such,  although  Japan's  economy 
experienced a sharp downturn, it has been improving at a faster pace than other advanced 
economies. However, we should bear firmly in mind that the level of economic activity is still 
low, with the GDP remaining at slightly above 90 percent, according to the latest available 
figure of the April-June quarter, and the level of September industrial production remaining at 
slightly  above  80  percent  of  that  immediately  before  the  failure  of  Lehman  Brothers, 
respectively. The Bank of Japan uses a somewhat cautious phrase that "Japan's economy 
has started to pick up" in expressing the current state of Japan's economy, and that reflects 
also the judgment with respect to the levels I have just mentioned.  
Let  me  turn  to  the  outlook  for  the  economy.  The  Bank  issued  last  week  the  Outlook  for 
Economic  Activity  and  Prices  (the  Outlook  Report)  and  presented  the  outlook  for  Japan's 
economy through fiscal 2011. The baseline scenario is that, in the second half of fiscal 2009, 
the  economy  is  likely  to  improve  gradually  on  the  back  of  improvements  in  overseas 
economies  as  well  as  the  effects  of  economic  policy  measures.  Going  forward,  such 
tendency is expected to be maintained in fiscal 2010. However, since the pace of recovery in 
the global economy is likely to remain moderate and also, in Japan, pressure for adjusting 
employment  and  wages  is  likely  to  remain  while  the  effects  of  demand-boosting  policy 
measures wane, the pace of improvement in Japan's economy is likely to be moderate until 
around  the  middle  of  fiscal  2010.  Thereafter,  as  balance-sheet  adjustments  in  the  United 
States and Europe make fair progress, the improvements in the corporate sector originating 
from exports are likely to spill over to the household sector. Therefore, in fiscal 2011, Japan's 
economic growth rate is likely to clearly increase. 
However, the outlook is accompanied by various uncertainties. What worries me the most is 
the possible consequences of balance-sheet adjustments in the United States and Europe, 
as  well  as  developments  in  the  emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies.  Besides, 
there are downside risks to the economy such as developments in firms' medium- to long-
term  expectations  of  future  economic  growth.  However,  given  that  the  emerging  and 
commodity-exporting economies are likely to continue growing at high rates, risks have been 
becoming  balanced,  compared  with  a  situation  in  early  spring  when  risks  were  generally 
tilted downside.  
Prices 
Based  on  the  developments  in  the  economy  I  have  explained,  I  will  now  turn  to  the  price 
developments in Japan. 
Since 2008, the consumer price index (CPI) in Japan has been subject to a large swing due 
mainly to the changes in the prices of petroleum products. The year-on-year growth rate of 
the CPI (excluding fresh food) was on a declining trend following its peak at 2.4 percent in 
the  summer  of  2008  and  became  negative  after  March  2009.  The  pace  of  decline 
accelerated thereafter due mainly to the base effect from last year's high petroleum product 
prices, and the CPI (excluding fresh food) marked a record decline of 2.4 percent in August, 
year-on-year, and declined by 2.3 percent in September. 
The Bank views the outlook for prices as follows. The pace of year-on-year rate of decline in 
the CPI (excluding fresh food) is expected to slow down significantly in the second half of 
fiscal 2009. That is because the base effect from last year's high petroleum product prices 
4 
 BIS Review 138/2009
will dissipate. Thereafter, the CPI (excluding fresh food) is expected to be basically subject to 
the development in the aggregate supply and demand balance. From fiscal 2010 onward, the 
rate  of  decline  in  the  CPI  (excluding  fresh  food)  is  likely  to  continue  to  moderate,  as  the 
economy picks up as well as the aggregate supply and demand balance improves gradually. 
However, downward pressure on prices is likely to remain for a relatively long period, given 
that the negative output gap, which underlies this projection, is larger than ever and that the 
pace of economic recovery is likely to be moderate. Since the current plunge in demand was 
as sharp as no country experienced for a long period, it is commonly considered also in the 
United States and Europe that it will take a considerable period for inflation rates to recover 
to the past levels. 
In those circumstances, what is important is whether, as a future baseline scenario, Japan's 
economy returning to a sustainable growth path with price stability is in sight. It is an issue for 
those who worry about the effects of price decline, whether the continued decline in prices, 
albeit modestly, will postpone spending, leading to further acceleration in price declines. 
What might serve as a reference here is Japan's experience in the first half of the 2000s. 
While there were many arguments about deflation at that time, eventually Japan's economy 
started to recover amid the continued modest decline in prices. The year-on-year growth of 
the CPI had been slightly negative, at around just under minus 3 percent on a cumulative 
basis,  for  seven  years  from  fiscal  1998  to  2004.  Meanwhile,  despite  the  price  decline,  the 
economy continued to recover from fiscal 2002 to 2007. While that has been a puzzle to one 
who worries about deflation, such a situation has been drawing interest from the overseas 
policy authorities and economists. In this regard, a difference from the global economy in the 
1930s, when deflation was a grave problem, might give us a clue. Unlike Japan in the early 
2000s,  prices  plunged  by  more  than  20  percent  on  a  cumulative  basis,  or  more  than  30 
percent in some countries, in the global economy in the 1930s. Moreover, in the 1930s, the 
authorities could not come up with effective policy measures in response to successive bank 
failures and the financial system became extremely unstable, leading to a situation in which 
firms  facing  funding  difficulties  rushed  to  sell  off  their  own  products.  In  contrast,  although 
Japan  did  face  difficult  problems,  it  succeeded  in  managing  to  avoid  financial  system 
instability due to such measures as ample liquidity provision by the Bank of Japan.  
Looking at the current phase while bearing those episodes in mind, Japan's financial system 
has been generally stable, and, in terms of cumulative decline in prices, the level of the CPI 
as  of  September  returned  to  the  level  of  August  2007,  just  before  the  surge  in  petroleum 
products  started.  Firms'  and  households'  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  are 
considered to be stable so far, according to various surveys and developments in long-term 
interest rates. Based on those observations, the Bank judges that, at present, it is unlikely 
that the decline in prices will induce downward pressure on economic activity.  
Of course, like the outlook for economic activity, the outlook for prices is also accompanied 
by uncertainty. As explained earlier, year-on-year changes in prices in Japan rose to around 
2.5 percent in the summer of 2008 due mainly to the surge in prices of petroleum products, 
and  this  year,  because  of  the  base  effect,  prices  have  been  declining  by  more  than  2 
percent, year-on-year. Several years ago, there were not many people who could forecast 
that such changes in prices would take place, including those in the Bank and international 
institutions, as well as economists. As such, it is the reality that the accuracy in predicting 
price changes during a phase of a large economic swing is not high. Therefore, we believe 
that it is important to maintain a stance of examining all available data, without having any 
prejudgment about the outlook.  
The financial environment  
So far I have explained the developments in economic activity and prices. I will now turn to 
Japan's financial environment. 
BIS Review 138/2009 
 5
The turmoil in global financial markets since autumn 2008 spread over to Japan's financial 
markets,  especially  CP  and  corporate  bond  markets  where  large  firms  raise  funds.  The 
issuance rates of CP and corporate bond soared, and the corporate bond market was in an 
abnormal situation that issuance virtually stopped. Together with a deterioration in economic 
activity, funding conditions of large firms became increasingly tight. The worsening financial 
environment  for  large  firms  affected  funding  conditions  at  small  firms  mainly  through  two 
channels.  First,  since  large  firms  that  faced  malfunctioning  of  CP  and  corporate  bond 
markets  had  shifted  their  funding  sources  to  borrowing  from  banks,  banks  responded  by 
using  much  of  their  remaining  lending  capacity.  And  second,  the  worsening  of  funding 
conditions at large firms had contracted business-to-business credit for trading partners and 
affiliated  firms.  As  a  result,  in  the  March  2009  Tankan  (Short-Term  Economic  Survey  of 
Enterprises in Japan), the diffusion index of funding conditions plunged to the lowest level in 
about 10 years since 1998, regardless of firm size. 
Subsequently, thanks to the regained stability in global financial markets and the effects of 
various policy measures in Japan, Japan's financial environment has been showing signs of 
improvement. In particular, the issuing conditions of CP and corporate bonds have improved 
markedly. In the CP market, issuance spreads for even low-rated firms have declined to a 
level below those before the failure of Lehman Brothers and the Bank judges that the market 
has already come back to a normal state. In addition, the corporate bond market has also 
restored favorable issuing conditions as a whole, as seen in the fact that credit spreads have 
declined and the total value of issuance in the first half of fiscal 2009 marked a record high. 
Nevertheless,  we  should  not  forget  that  there  is  still  lingering  severity  in  Japan's  financial 
environment.  In  particular,  the  improvement  in  funding  conditions  at  small  firms  has  been 
limited, compared with that of large firms. That would basically be attributable to the severe 
profit environment for small firms, as shown in the moderate pace of improvement in their 
business  sentiment,  albeit  underpinned  to  some  extent  by  the  emergency  guarantee 
program. The Bank will continue to examine corporate financing as a whole including that of 
small firms, through various surveys such as the Tankan as well as interviews through the 
Bank's branch network.  
Conduct of monetary policy  
III. 
I  have  explained  the  developments  in  the  economies  at  home  and  abroad  as  well  as  the 
developments  in  prices.  Based  on  those  developments,  I  will  finally  explain  the  Bank's 
thinking behind the conduct of monetary policy.  
The  Bank  reduced  the  policy  rate  to  0.3  percent  in  October  2008  and  to  0.1  percent  in 
December 2008 and has been maintaining the level unchanged since then. To address the 
rapid contraction of financial markets triggered by the failure of Lehman Brothers, the Bank 
implemented  various  temporary  measures,  including  extraordinary  ones  for  a  central  bank 
such  as  outright  purchases  of  CP  and  corporate  bonds.  At  the  Monetary  Policy  Meeting 
(MPM) held on October 30, the Bank made a decision on the policy rate and those various 
measures. 
The policy rate was decided to be maintained at the extremely low level of 0.1 percent. As 
mentioned earlier, the recovery in Japan's economy has just started, and it is likely to take 
some  time  for  the  economy  to  fully  return  to  a  growth  path.  The  Bank  will  maintain  the 
extremely  accommodative  financial  environment  and  thereby  provide  steady  support  for 
Japan's economy to return to a sustainable growth path with price stability. 
Next I will explain the management of various temporary measures. At the MPM, we decided 
on  specific  handling  of  measures  from  a  perspective  of  what  might  be  the  most  effective 
method  that  conforms  to  the  degree  of  improvement  in  the  acute  pain,  and  will  ensure 
financial market stability and thereby facilitate corporate financing.  
6 
 BIS Review 138/2009
It  was  decided  that  special  funds-supplying  operations  to  facilitate  corporate  financing  will 
remain  in  effect  until  the  end  of  March  2010  and  will  expire.  This  is  a  measure  to  supply 
funds  at  a  fixed  interest  rate  of  0.1  percent  with  a  term  of  three  months,  for  an  unlimited 
amount  against  the  value  of  private  corporate  debt  pledged  as  collateral.  While  the 
operations  contributed  to  stabilizing  financial  markets,  the  similar  effects  could  be  mostly 
achieved by the existing money market operations since the stability of financial markets has 
been  restored.  Nevertheless,  we  decided  that  the  operations  would  remain  in  effect  until 
March 2010 to further ensure financial market stability toward the end of the fiscal year. From 
April 2010 onward, the Bank will be prepared to provide ample liquidity by further utilizing the 
existing  money  market  operation  measures,  which  accept  a  wider  range  of  collateral  and 
have more flexibility in setting terms. We have clarified our intention after April at this point 
since we thought giving market participants a certain preparation period before the transition 
to a new system would facilitate smooth transition without any confusion. 
The Bank's outright purchases of CP and corporate bonds will expire at the end of 2009 as 
scheduled. As issuing conditions in the CP and corporate bond markets improve, actual bids 
in the auction of outright purchase of CP has been zero for four consecutive auctions since 
mid-September.  The  bids  for  the  outright  purchase  of  corporate  bonds  have  also  been 
declining.  As  seen  in  those  improvements,  the  Bank  considers  that  the  purpose  of  the 
purchases to restore market functioning in the impaired CP and corporate bond markets has 
fully  been  achieved.  Meanwhile,  a  distortion  of  market  functioning  has  recently  been 
becoming prominent, as witnessed by the issuance rates of CP becoming lower than yields 
on government bills and, as a result, investors are increasingly becoming fewer. The Bank 
thus made the decision that the termination of the purchases would be useful in achieving 
the smooth flow of funds.  
In  addition,  the  Bank  decided  that  the  complementary  deposit  facility  introduced  in  the 
autumn of 2008, to which interest is paid on part of financial institutions' deposits at the Bank, 
would remain in effect for the time being. While I will not go into technical details, the facility 
is  a  mechanism  for  avoiding  substantial  changes  in  market  interest  rates  under  ample 
liquidity provision by the Bank and thereby ensure stable interest rate formation. Upon this 
extension,  an  important  infrastructure  for  the  smooth  conduct  of  money  market  operations 
while providing ample funds will continue to be secured. 
As  central  banks  around  the  world  have  been  striving  to  ensure  the  stability  of  financial 
markets  and  financial  systems  through  ample  liquidity  provision,  demand  for  central  bank 
funds  is  expected  to  recede  as  each  country's  financial  environment  further  stabilizes  with 
the dissipation of the acute pain. As a result, funds supply by central banks might decline. 
Looking at the size of major central banks' balance sheets and reserves since the autumn of 
2008, they have been changing, reflecting the extent of impairment of financial market and 
financial system of each individual country. For example, since Japan's financial markets and 
financial system have been stable, compared with those in the United States and Europe, the 
balance  sheet  of  the  Bank  has  not  been  expanding  that  much.  In  contrast,  in  the  United 
States where the current financial crisis was originated, the amount of excess reserves at the 
Federal Reserve rose to above 6 percent of nominal GDP, which is a level slightly above the 
peak of the Bank of Japan's excess reserves of 5.8 percent at the time of quantitative easing 
policy. When balance-sheet adjustments have been progressing, massive liquidity provision 
by central banks has not been affecting the rate of inflation, but has contributed substantially 
to restoring stability in the financial system. Going forward, the Federal Reserve's balance 
sheet is likely to shrink as the financial environment further improves, and even in that case, 
it is an evidence that financial markets have further stabilized, rather than signaling a change 
in central banks' accommodative monetary policy stance. 
I reiterate that, in the conduct of monetary policy, the Bank will provide steady support for 
Japan's economy to return to a sustainable growth path with price stability, by maintaining 
the extremely accommodative financial environment. That means that the Bank will underpin 
Japan's  economy  so  that  it  will  be  able  to  exert  its  potential  strength.  A  more  critical 
BIS Review 138/2009 
 7
challenge  for  Japan  is  to  raise  "the  potential  strength,"  or  put  it  differently,  the  long-term 
growth  path  itself.  On  this  point,  I  will  add  that  the  key  will  be  to  improve  profitability  in 
investment and productivity of the economy as a whole through active efforts of private firms. 
Closing remarks  
In closing, I will share with you what I have in my mind based on the experience of the past 
year.  
Those  thoughts  all  relate  to  the  role  of  a  central  bank.  First,  the  importance  of  decisively 
taking action upon accurately recognizing the role expected of a central bank. In any country, 
a  central  bank  is  an  organization  to  carry  out  policies  and  business  operations  by  highly 
valuing  a  self-sustained  market  mechanism.  Nevertheless,  when  being  confronted  with  a 
crisis that the financial system might collapse, a central bank will do its utmost to prevent the 
collapse  of  the  financial  system  by  using  all  central  bank  functions,  including  outright 
purchases of CP and corporate bonds, or sometimes creating new measures. While those 
actions will be carried out to protect the markets, it will indeed be a significant intervention 
against the market mechanism. Therefore, it sometimes becomes quite difficult for a central 
bank to draw the clear line between what it "should do" and "should not do." A central bank 
will be required to implement decisively even extraordinary measures if necessary, within a 
range  allowed  by  law,  to  achieve  the  objective  of  a  central  bank  to  ensure  economic  and 
financial stability. At the same time, however, because a central bank is the sole organization 
that has a privilege of issuing interest-free debt, there will be considerable adverse effects of 
continuing the extraordinary measures to intervene in the markets after they have become 
unnecessary. In that regard, I am of the view that a central bank's proper actions are critical 
both during and after a crisis, and keeping this in mind, I believe that the Bank will fulfill the 
missions of a central bank.  
And the second point concerns the prevention of a crisis. While the current crisis is not over 
yet,  various  efforts  have  been  made  to  prevent  the  recurrence  of  a  crisis,  based  on  the 
lessons  learned.  For  example,  as  a  framework  for  preempting  crisis,  discussions  are 
underway on the capital adequacy ratio and review of financial regulations and supervisory 
system. Moreover, a perspective of macroprudence, through which the existence of risks are 
checked  and  assessed  upon  reviewing  the  financial  system  as  a  whole,  has  been  widely 
recognized. 
However, the cause of a bubble will eventually boil down to the human nature such as bullish 
expectations in a benign financial and economic environment or a decline in self-discipline 
against risks. That itself raises a difficult issue of how a central bank should deal with such 
an elusive problem. I have discussed earlier the dollar carry trade, and the fact that people 
are able to easily take risk without geographical and time constraints, thanks to the recent 
financial and economic globalization and progress in information technology, has made the 
responses of a central bank all the more difficult. What is obvious is that a crisis will always 
come in a new form. By exchanging views with the policy authorities at home and abroad, 
market participants, and academics, and continuing to learn humbly, the Bank of Japan will 
meet such new challenges.  
Thank you. 
8 
 BIS Review 138/2009
