Yves Mersch: Credit developments in Luxembourg 
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Governor of the Central Bank of Luxembourg, at the Gala CFO 
World 2009, Luxembourg, 25 November 2009. 
 Introduction 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure for me to be here today and I very much appreciate the opportunity to 
talk  about  credit  developments  in  Luxembourg.  In  times  like  these  the  issue  could  not  be 
more  pertinent.  Bank  lending  constitutes  one  of  the  most  important  sources  of  external 
financing. To many small- or medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) in particular, bank loans are 
the only means of external financing available; rather than raising funds directly, for instance 
through  the  issuance  of  bonds  or  shares,  they  have  to  go  through  a  bank  to  obtain  the 
necessary funds to finance their activities. The importance of credit intermediation cannot be 
overstated, and a healthy and well-functioning financial sector is therefore part and parcel of 
a healthy and well-functioning economy.  
It goes without saying that a central bank, or a system of central banks, has a keen interest 
in credit developments. Indeed, credit growth is tightly interlinked with economic activity and 
inflation developments. Before I talk about actual credit developments in Luxembourg, let me 
say a few words about the main monetary policy transmission channels involving banks. 
Monetary policy transmission channels involving banks 
While  most  monetary  policy  transmission  channels  go  through  the  banking  sector,  either 
through the price of credit or through credit volumes, central banks can affect the supply of 
loans as well as the demand side.  
Take the traditional interest rate channel. Cuts in the policy rate affect the investment and 
consumption  decisions  of  businesses  and  households  only  to  the  extent  that  they  are 
actually  passed  on  through  the  banking  sector.  Banks  determine  the  extent  of  the  pass-
through  and  their  lending  rates  in  turn  impinge  on  the  demand  for  loans  from  firms  and 
households. Note that it is the real rather than the nominal interest rate which matters in this 
decision-making  process.  The  underlying  assumption  is  that  some  prices  and  wages  are 
inflexible  (or  “sticky”)  in  the  short  run.  This  implies  that  the  aggregate  price  level  adjusts 
slowly over time, entailing that falls in the nominal interest rate also lead to falls in the real 
interest  rate.  This  is  an  important  distinction,  as  it  provides  a  mechanism  that  enables 
monetary policy to stimulate the economy even if nominal interest rates hit their zero lower 
bound. Indeed, an expansion in the money supply can raise expected inflation, thus lowering 
the real interest rate and providing further stimulus to the economy through the interest rate 
channel.  
Adjustments  in  short-term  interest  rates  are  also  transmitted  to  long-term  rates,  which 
ultimately  determine 
investment  decisions  and  decisions  about  durable  consumer 
expenditure.  The  expectations  hypothesis  of  the  term  structure  of  interest  rates  is but  one 
mechanism which explains how short-term interest rates may affect long-term rates, namely 
through an average of expected future short-term rates.  
While  the  interest  rate  channel  largely  affects  loan  demand  through  the  price  of  credit, 
monetary  policy  can  also  influence  loan  supply  through  the  so-called  credit  channel.  The 
credit  channel  proceeds  from  the  assumption  that  there  are  frictions  in  financial  markets, 
such as asymmetric information and moral hazard. A key function of banks is to overcome 
such information and incentive problems by screening and monitoring borrowers. The credit 
BIS Review 155/2009 
 1
channel is made up of two sub-channels. The first is the bank lending channel and works 
through the liability side of banks’ balance sheets, which in turn triggers certain adjustments 
on the asset side. Thus, an expansionary monetary policy tends to increase loan supply by 
raising the availability of funds for banks. The empirical evidence on the existence of a bank 
lending channel in the euro area is rather mixed though.  
However, the bank lending channel can also work through banks’ capital positions. Cuts to 
the policy rate and a steepening yield curve can raise banks’ net interest income, which in 
turn  affects  profitability  and  hence  bank  capital.  The  available  evidence  indicates  that  this 
only holds for countries where banks lend predominantly at fixed long-term rates, however. In 
fact, the opposite effect is found in countries where banks lend largely at floating or short-
term rates. In this context, it should be mentioned that corporate loans in Luxembourg are by 
and large floating rate loans (or loans with an interest fixation period up to one year), as are 
mortgage  loans;  only  consumer  loans  are  primarily  granted  at  fixed  rates.  However,  asset 
price rises following a reduction in policy rates may also raise bank capital through positive 
valuation effects on banks’ trading books. 
The second sub-channel of the credit channel is called the balance sheet channel and works 
through  changes  in  the  quality  of  the  borrower.  Through  its  impact  on  cash  flows  and 
collateral values, monetary policy can affect borrowers’ net worth, which is inversely related 
to  their  external  finance  premium.  Owing  to  the  pro-cyclicality  of  net  worth,  the  external 
finance premium is thus counter-cyclical and therefore magnifies the impact of changes in 
short-term rates on credit availability. This spills over into consumption and investment, and 
finally into economic growth. This mechanism is also known as the “financial accelerator” 
A final monetary policy transmission channel involving banks I wish to allude to is the risk-
taking  channel.  Low  interest  rates  and  abundant  liquidity  may  decrease  risk  aversion  and 
encourage  risky  investments,  as  well  as  leading  to  laxer  credit  standards.  This  raises  the 
supply of bank loans and can have a significant impact on credit growth.  
The evolution of credit volumes 
So  much  for  the  theoretical  background.  Let  me  now  move  on  to  how  corporate  credit 
volumes have actually evolved in Luxembourg, and how those developments tie in with those 
at the euro area level. My intention is not to identify the workings of the different monetary 
policy  transmission  channels  in  Luxembourg  –  this  would  be  a  Herculean  undertaking! 
However,  it  is  helpful  to  keep  the  theoretical  underpinnings  in  mind  when  looking  at  the 
actual credit developments and the potential underlying explanatory factors. 
As you can see in the chart, the underlying trend developments in Luxembourg and at the 
euro area level coincide, despite the higher volatility in the Luxembourg data. Most notably, 
corporate credit dynamics rose continuously up until 2008, when they began to unwind rather 
rapidly, first in the euro area at large and shortly thereafter also in Luxembourg. The pace 
and magnitude of the decline in the loan dynamics are particularly worrying, with below or 
near  zero  growth  rates  in  the  third  quarter  2009.  It  is  worth  emphasising  that  roughly  one 
year  ago,  in  September  2008,  the  annual  progression  of  corporate  loan  volumes  in 
Luxembourg peaked at 54%!  
As  for  credit  to  households,  the  annual  progression  of  mortgage  lending  has  been  on  a 
downward  trend  since  2006,  long  before  the  crisis.  However,  this  downward  trend 
accelerated  considerably  and  the  annual  growth  rate  recently  stabilised  just  under  6%. 
Consumer  credit  has  been  progressing  steadily  since  2008,  which  represents  a  trend 
inversion compared to the preceding years. All in all, household loan dynamics have been 
much more benign than corporate credit developments. 
This raises the question as to how and why the corporate credit cycle could take such a rapid 
U-turn.  While  the  obvious  answer  is  that  banks  refuse  to  grant  loans  in  the  wake  of  the 
financial crisis, this is but one side of the coin.  
2 
 BIS Review BIS Review 155/2009
Disentangling demand and supply 
Indeed, the Bank Lending Survey or BLS – a euro area-wide bank survey on quarterly credit 
developments – strongly indicates that the sharp slowdown in corporate credit expansion is 
owing to both supply- and demand-side factors.  
The graph plots the net unweighted responses provided by the participating banks from the 
Luxembourg BLS sample. A positive “net percentage” indicates that, relative to the preceding 
quarter, banks have tightened their credit standards or reported higher loan demand by firms. 
Conversely,  if  the  respective  line  is  below  zero,  this  points  to  an  easing  of  banks’  credit 
standards or a fall in loan demand. 
As  you  can  see  in  the  chart,  the  survey  results  suggest  that  banks  have  been  tightening 
credit standards since the onset of the financial crisis, making it more difficult for companies 
to  finance  their  activities;  lending  standards  have  been  tightened  in  particular  for  large 
enterprises. At the same time, however, the period of high loan demand ended shortly after 
the onset of the financial crisis, and net demand even turned negative on several occasions. 
The slowdown in loan dynamics is therefore owing to the combined impact of tighter credit 
standards on the one hand and a deceleration or fall in loan demand on the other.  
You may have noticed that the slowdown in loan dynamics is lagging the tightening cycle: 
while the progression of loans to companies peaked in the third quarter 2008 before it slowed 
down rather rapidly, the BLS suggests that banks were already tightening credit standards 
since the early stage of the crisis in the second half of 2007. In other words, the information 
on credit standards from the BLS serves as a lead indicator. While the correlation between 
loan  growth  and  credit  standards  is  not  perfect,  the  available  evidence  suggests  that  loan 
growth will stabilise shortly and subsequently pick up in the course of 2010.  
This  prediction  is  in  line  with  an  ad  hoc  survey  we  carried  out  very  recently.  The  survey 
questionnaire was sent to four banks with a combined share of roughly 50% of the corporate 
credit  market  in  Luxembourg.  In  one  of  the  questions,  the  four  participating  banks  were 
asked  how  they  expect  corporate  lending  volumes  to  evolve.  For  consistency,  the  BLS 
methodology  has  been  used  and  the  results  are  thus  expressed  as  net  percentages. 
However,  the  results  of  the  ad  hoc  survey  have  been  weighted  according  to  the  sample 
shares of the individual banks, while the BLS results are unweighted owing to methodological 
reasons. 
As  you  can  see  in  the  chart,  the  survey  results  point  to  a  moderate  pickup  in  lending 
volumes, while lending to SMEs is even likely to accelerate considerably in the second half of 
2010.  New  lending  is  expected  to  be  the  main  driver  behind  the  pickup  in  overall  lending 
volumes, which also encompass loan repayments and write-downs. Banks do not expect a 
substantial change in loan redemptions over the forecast horizon. As for write-downs on loan 
portfolios,  they  do  anticipate  a  rise  in  write-downs  in  Q4  2009  and  H1  2010,  but  their 
mitigating  impact  on  loan  dynamics  is  expected  to  dissolve  entirely  in  the  second  half  of 
2010. Of course, given that banks’ expectations pertain to lending volumes rather than credit 
standards per se, the expected rise in corporate lending should be seen as the interplay of 
demand and supply.  
Some  information  on  the  demand  side  more  specifically  is  also  available  from  this  ad  hoc 
survey, though. It should be borne in mind that demand is rather difficult to predict, however; 
moreover,  it  is  worth  emphasising  that  the  survey  was  addressed  to  loan  officers  and 
therefore naturally reflects the assessment of the lender rather than the borrower’s point of 
view. Be that as it may, as you can see in that same chart the four sample banks also expect 
the number of loan applications from new customers to rise, in particular as regards large 
enterprises. Loan applications from new SME customers, however, are not expected to rise 
significantly until the second half of 2010.  
There is little doubt that the corporate credit outlook is improving. Nevertheless, it remains 
legitimate to ask why banks have tightened their credit standards in the first place. First of all, 
BIS Review 155/2009 
 3
not all banks have. In the BLS, the highest net percentages recorded in one single quarter 
have not exceeded 50%, the equivalent of 3 banks. Second, the results from the BLS are not 
weighted  by  bank  size  –  in  line  with  the  methodology  applied  at  the  euro  area  level  – 
otherwise you would see that the tightening is in fact not nearly as broad-based as it seems. 
But  of  course  the  question  remains  as  to  why  some  banks  are  tightening  their  lending 
standards,  thereby  reducing  the  supply  of  loans  to  enterprises.  It  is  tempting  to  blame  the 
tightening entirely on the financial crisis. In a way, this is also correct. However, the impact of 
“pure” supply-side constraints is not nearly as large as one would think. In other words, while 
it is true that a number of banks are more reluctant to grant loans to companies, this is not 
solely  attributable  to  market  access  or  to  the cost  of  funds  and  balance  sheet  constraints. 
Indeed,  as  the  next  slide  shows,  the  major  reason  banks  have  become  more  reluctant  to 
grant loans to firms is that their risk perceptions have risen sharply. 
Since the onset of the financial crisis in 2007, the various explanatory elements pertaining to 
the banks’ cost of funds and balance sheet constraints (represented by the red, orange and 
yellow bars in the chart) have indeed contributed to tighter lending standards. However, it is 
obvious  from  the  chart  that  the  role  of  these  explanatory  factors  is  secondary,  while  it  is 
banks’ risk perceptions (represented by the blue and green bars) that have played a key role. 
Risk  perceptions  pertaining  to  the  industry-  or  firm-specific  outlook  in  particular  have 
contributed to more stringent lending standards. If banks have chosen to restrict lending, it is 
therefore largely because of the economic downturn; admittedly, “pure” supply-side elements 
which constrain banks and thereby leave them no choice but to decrease lending volumes 
also played a role, but a much smaller one than is commonly believed. This evidence can 
easily be linked up to the theoretical background on monetary policy transmission channels 
expounded earlier: “pure” supply-side factors pertain to banks’ availability of funds, i.e. to the 
bank lending channel, whereas risk perceptions relate to the quality of the borrower, i.e. to 
the balance sheet channel. 
How  have  banks  implemented  their  tighter  credit  standards?  The  available  evidence 
indicates that banks have strongly cut their lending rates, seemingly suggesting that tighter 
credit  standards  have  been  implemented  through  an  adjustment  of  non-price  rather  than 
price conditions.  
The  chart  plots  the  evolution  of  lending  rates  in  Luxembourg,  available  through  the 
Eurosystem reporting framework since 2003. The data indicate that loans to enterprises are 
usually floating rate loans (or loans with an interest fixation period up to one year); the chart 
therefore  plots  flexible  (or  short-term)  lending  rates  on  new  business.  Moreover,  interest 
rates  may  differ  substantially  depending  on  the  size  of  the  underlying  loan  granted  to  the 
counterparty,  which  is  why  the  reporting  framework  requires  banks  to  distinguish  between 
small  and  large  loans.  As  you  can  see  in  the  chart,  there  was  a  substantial  reduction  in 
corporate lending rates – for both small and large loans – in line with the monetary policy 
easing in the euro area. Peak-to-trough, lending rates on small loans have fallen from 6.24% 
to  2.42%  in  the  twelve  months  up  to  September  2009;  lending  rates  on  large  loans  have 
fallen from 5.55% in September 2008 to 1.93% in September 2009.  
However,  the  reporting  framework  provides  no  breakdown  by  geographical  origin  of  the 
counterparty; this is unfortunate given that the lending rates are volume-weighted and that 
about  three  quarters  of  outstanding  corporate  loan  amounts  granted  to  companies  in  the 
euro area are actually granted to non-domestic enterprises.  
The  available  information  does  suggest,  however,  that  corporate  lending  rates  have  come 
down sharply, while banks have at the same time reported tighter credit standards. How can 
this  information  be  reconciled?  Were  the  stricter  lending  standards  implemented  through 
non-price  factors,  such  as  loan  covenants  or  collateral  requirements?  Once  again,  the 
answer comes from the BLS. The survey does not point to a substantial tightening of non-
price  lending  conditions,  but  rather  to  higher  margins.  Most  notably,  banks  have  signalled 
higher  margins  on  riskier  loans.  This  scores  well  with  the  rise  in  risk  perceptions  already 
4 
 BIS Review BIS Review 155/2009
noted  earlier  in  the  context  of  explanatory  factors  underlying  the  tightening  of  lending 
standards.  Moreover,  it  is  consistent  with  non-survey  data:  margins,  as  given  by  the 
difference  between  lending  rates  and  three-month  EURIBOR  rates,  have  risen  since  late-
2008.  
I have talked extensively about the supply of loans. This is because central banks collect a 
lot of information from the banking sector, either through statistical reporting requirements or 
in the framework of voluntary surveys banks participate in. Information on the demand side is 
sparse, which is why I have only mentioned it cursorily, in the context of the BLS and the ad 
hoc survey we carried out. The BLS does encompass further demand-side questions which 
are  worth  looking  at  in  more  detail  though.  Further  to  this,  the  next  chart  plots  the  key 
explanatory factors underlying the evolution of loan demand.  
You  will  remember  that  loan  demand  began  to  slow  down  in  2008.  The  chart  shows  that 
there  are  various  elements  pulling  loan  demand  in  opposite  directions.  As  shown  by  the 
orange  and  red  bars,  financing  needs  pertaining  to  fixed  investment  and,  most  notably,  to 
mergers  and  acquisitions  and  corporate  restructuring,  have  exerted  strong  downward 
pressure on loan demand. At the same time, financing needs pertaining to inventories and 
debt restructuring have pulled loan demand in the opposite direction, as shown by the yellow 
and green bars. Because there are countervailing factors, the evolution of loan demand is 
somewhat volatile; however, there is no questioning the fact that generally loan demand has 
come  down  since  the  onset  of  the  financial  crisis,  in  spite  of  some  quarter-on-quarter 
fluctuations.  
Conclusion 
To conclude, let me emphasise that the slowdown in corporate loan dynamics is at this stage 
not fully demystified. What we know for a fact is that loan volumes have ceased to expand at 
double-digit rates. Although the pace at which loan growth rates have come down is startling, 
the annual progression of corporate credit has mostly remained positive for now. Moreover, 
the available information suggests that corporate lending should recover soon and pick up 
pace in the course of 2010. 
I have focused on the supply side because, as a matter of fact, central banks have much 
more information on lenders than on their counterparties. However, I also underscored that 
the  tightening  in  credit  standards  is  not  as  broad-based  as  the  underlying  data  would 
suggest.  This  leaves  the  demand  side,  but  comprehensive  and  reliable  information  on  the 
borrower is notoriously difficult to come by. Perhaps this gap can to some extent be filled at 
today’s conference. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 155/2009 
 5
Charts 
The main monetary policy transmission channels involving banks 
Chart 1 
Chart 2  
Corporate credit developments in Luxembourg 
and in the euro area, annual growth rate (in %) 
 6 
  BIS Review BIS Review 155/2009
Household credit developments in Luxembourg, annual growth rate (in %) 
Chart 3 
Chart 4 
The evolution of credit standards and 
loan demand in Luxembourg (net percentages) 
  BIS Review 155/2009 
 7
Chart 5 
Expectations regarding lending volumes and loan 
applications from new customers (weighted net percentages) 
Chart 6 
Explanatory factors underlying the tightening 
of credit standards (net percentages) 
  8 
 BIS Review BIS Review 155/2009
Chart 7 
Floating (or short-term) corporate lending rates 
on new business in Luxembourg 
Chart 8 
Explanatory factors underlying the evolution 
of loan demand (net percentages) 
  9
BIS Review 155/2009 
 