Caleb M Fundanga: Consolidated supervision 
Remarks by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the Joint MEFMI-FSI 
Regional Seminar or on consolidated supervision, Lusaka, 19 October 2009. 
 The Executive Director of MEFMI, Dr. Elias Ngalande 
The FSI, Senior Financial Sector Specialist, Mr Amarendra Mohan 
The Director, Financial Sector Management Programme of MEFMI, Mr Alphious Ncube 
Distinguished Resource Persons, 
Participants, 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
It is my honour and privilege to officiate at this regional seminar on Consolidated Supervision 
jointly  organised  by  the  Financial  Sector  Management  Programme  of  MEFMI  and  the 
Financial Stability Institute of the Bank for International Settlements. 
May I also take this opportunity to welcome and thank our distinguished resource persons, 
for accepting invitations to come for this important seminar. It is my hope and trust that their 
participation will enrich the deliberations of this seminar. 
Before I delve into the intricacies of the seminar, I would like to applaud MEFMI, and the FSI 
for consistently working together in the region to upgrade the banking supervisory skills. I am 
reliably informed that at least once every two years, the two organisations organise a high 
level  seminar  on  a  topical  issue.  It  is  therefore  befitting  for  me  to  commend  the  two 
institutions for the work well done. 
Ladies and gentlemen, to some, it would not be a surprise to note that the seminar comes 
shortly after the first anniversary of the collapse of Lehman Brothers, one of the first banks to 
fail  in  a  series  of  cascading  defaults  of  major  international  banks,  which  precipitated  the 
onset of the current global financial crisis and the resultant worldwide economic recession. 
The case of Lehman Brothers is just one of the many that highlights apparent weaknesses in 
the global regulatory and supervisory environment. 
To  this  end,  market  practitioners  and  academics  are  still  analysing  and  discussing  the 
causes, prudential supervision frameworks, problem bank resolutions and strategies to avoid 
future systemic challenges.  
As the current global financial crisis has demonstrated, critical deficiencies still remain in risk 
management systems. Areas in need of critical enhancements include identifying key risks 
both within and across borders; assessing these risks, including stress testing and macro-
prudential analysis to determine the impact on the financial system; monitoring, developing 
coordination  protocols,  reviewing  the  regulatory  frameworks,  adopting  appropriate  risk 
management frameworks and adopting international accounting standards. 
While  these  structural  deficiencies are  not  new,  the  current  crisis  has brought  them  to  the 
fore.  The  speed  at  which  the  crisis  has  spread  across  the  globe  indicates  that  the 
development of coherent and rigorous frameworks for maintaining financial stability came too 
late for several countries, leading to adhoc and inconsistent policy responses.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  over  the  years,  we  have  witnessed  a  process  of  change  that  has 
allowed  many  financial  organisations  worldwide  to  adopt  more  flexible  structures  whereby 
they  have  established  a  wide  range  of  subsidiaries  and  affiliates  that  are  engaged  in 
business  lines  different  from  the  core  business  of  the  parent  financial  institution.  We  have 
seen  banking  activities,  asset  management  or  insurance  activities  that  previously  were 
conducted on a stand-alone basis now being provided within one financial group. This trend 
BIS Review 132/2009 
 1
has steadily gained momentum in the Eastern and Southern African financial sector. Some of 
these financial groups operate businesses across borders. 
The main economic and financial benefit which encourages the formation of such groups is 
the  enhanced  ability  to  achieve  economies  of  scale  and  capture  synergies  across 
complementary  financial  services  business  lines.  These  synergies  result  in  improved 
operational  efficiency  and  effectiveness  due  to  lower  costs,  reduced  prices,  and  improved 
innovation  in  products and  services.  At  the  same  time  the  emergence  of  such  groups  has 
brought  complex  linkages  and  relationships  among  economic  agents.  Consequently,  they 
have  also  necessitated  a  paradigm  shift  in  supervisory  approaches  in  order  to  identify, 
manage and monitor risks. 
It  is  evident  in  our  various  jurisdictions  that  current  legislation  and  regulatory  tools  are  not 
adequate to effectively address the potential risks that threaten the safety and soundness of 
our respective financial sectors posed by activities emanating from such financial groups. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, I do not want to dwell much on what should be addressed by this 
seminar.  I  am  glad  that  MEFMI  and  the  FSI  are  conducting  this  seminar  on  Consolidated 
Supervision for the region at a time that our region is also exploring these topical issues. It is 
my hope that this seminar will equip participants with relevant skills as senior examiners to 
develop appropriate policies for their jurisdictions with respect to Consolidated Supervision 
as  well  as  prepare  them  for  the  daunting  challenge  of  actually  implementing  Consolidated 
Supervision in our various jurisdictions. 
It is also my expectation that you will leave this forum after three days, with a new mindset 
and  a  renewed  commitment  to  practice  what  you  will  have  learned  so  that  you  could 
contribute  to  improving  supervisory  frameworks  in  our  various  countries.  I  trust  that  the 
seminar  will  also  provide  you  with  an  opportunity  to  network  and  establish  durable  and 
valuable professional contacts within the region. 
I wish to take this opportunity, on behalf of the MEFMI board and indeed on my own behalf, 
to  thank  the  FSI  for  their  continued  support  to  MEFMI  activities  over  the  years.  As  our 
cooperating partners, they have always shown willingness to go an extra mile in providing 
the necessary expertise that helps to sharpen our skills and groom the MEFMI Fellows on 
gratis terms. 
I have looked at the programme planned over the next three days. It has a comprehensive 
list  of  topics,  which  I  believe  will  enable  you  to  broaden  and  deepen  your  knowledge  and 
skills. I have also been reliably informed that you will get information from seasoned financial 
sector  practitioners  and  supervisors  who  will  provide  you  with  valuable  insights  on  the 
subject of Consolidated Supervision and associated risk management processes. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  allow  me  now  to  express  my  gratitude  to  the  Federal  Deposit 
Insurance  Corporation  (FDIC),  Central  Bank  of  Nigeria,  Reserve  Bank  of  South  Africa, 
Reserve  Bank  of  India,  Standard  Chartered  Bank  Zambia  Plc  and  the  Reserve  Bank  of 
Zimbabwe  for  releasing  officials  from  their  institutions  to  come  and  participate  in  this 
important seminar and share their experiences and expertise with us. 
Chairperson, may I also take advantage of my position on the podium to ask you all to join 
me  in  thanking  them  with  a  hand  of  applause.  I  wish  to  urge  them  to  continue  supporting 
MEFMI as the capacity needs of the region are yet to be fully met. 
To  the  participants,  I  urge  you  to  fully  participate  in  the  discussions  and  use  every 
opportunity  to  tap  from  the  vast  experience  and  expertise  represented  here.  Sustainable 
capacity  building  in  the  region  can  only  be  achieved  through  sharing  of  ideas  and 
experiences on both international and regional perspectives. 
Finally, I wish you all the best during your stay in Lusaka. I hope that you would make some 
time to visit some of the beautiful spots that our city and country has to offer. 
With these remarks, I now declare this workshop officially opened. I thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 132/2009
