Tarisa Watanagase: Setting a balanced regulatory reform agenda – the 
global challenge and an emerging market perspective 
Keynote  address  by  Dr  Tarisa  Watanagase,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the 
Symposium of SEANZA Forum of Banking Supervisors 2009 "Global Crisis: Challenges for 
Risk Management and Regulatory Framework”, Phuket, 31 October 2009. 
 Distinguished Colleagues,  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure to join all of you here at the Symposium of SEANZA Forum of Banking 
Supervisors 2009. I am honoured to have the opportunity to share with you my thoughts on 
the  global  crisis,  and  challenges  it  poses  for  risk  management  and  regulatory  framework, 
particularly from emerging market perspectives. 
Despite  the  recent  indication  of  increasing  stabilisation  of  the  global  financial  markets,  the 
extent  of  the  impact  of  this  crisis  and  prospect  of  sustainable  recovery  still  face  many 
uncertainties.  This  financial  crisis  has  been  the  most  severe  in  modern  time.  Not  only  in 
terms  of  width  and  depth  of  its  impact  globally,  but  more  importantly,  it  has  brought  into 
question  the  very  tenet  of  modern  capitalism,  the  trust  in  market  mechanism,  and  the 
rationale for regulation. In short, it ushers in a new paradigm in global financial landscape 
and regulation. 
The forces unleashed by the crisis are very powerful, and will continue to drive fundamental 
changes  going  forward.  We  witnessed  a  widespread  collapse  of  financial  institutions 
worldwide, the apparent demise of certain business models, such as the investment bank, 
and  retrenchment  of  critical  markets  such  as  mortgage  securitisation  market.  In  short,  a 
reshaping  of  global  financial  landscape.  Moreover,  the  extraordinary  macroeconomic  and 
prudential measures deployed to stabilise the market, while having been vital and successful, 
have left a legacy. 
There has been a shift in global financial landscape, as rescue and intervention operations 
led to the redistribution of asset ownership, between state and private sector, and between 
nations, further complicating the intricate linkages within the global economic and financial 
system. These forces will, no doubt, have important bearing for systemic risk, cross-border 
supervisory coordination, and financial stability going forward.  
These  are  the  dynamics  of  structural  change  that  unleash  a  new  paradigm  for  financial 
market and regulation. At the core of this force is the public demand for greater assurance of 
stability, through stronger mandate for governance and accountability of financial institutions 
and regulators. The response to this has been a sweeping reform package championed by 
the leader of G20 that will reshape the global supervisory standards. 
Ladies and gentlemen,  
The  key  challenge  for  regulators  in  emerging  markets  such  as  the  Bank  of  Thailand  is  to 
deploy strategies that help to ensure that emerging global standards remain aligned with risk-
based principle, consistent with emerging markets’ national contexts, and that our adoption 
of new reforms are based on those measures and reform agendas which are relevant and 
practical in our context.  
Equally  important,  banks  in  emerging  markets  such  as  in  Thailand  also  need  to  further 
strengthen  risk  management  to  handle  changes  in  global  landscape,  uncertainty,  and 
strengthened regulatory framework that emerges as a result of this crisis. I believe these are 
the  key  strategic  policy  agenda  facing  the  leadership  of  banks  and  regulators  alike,  and  I 
BIS Review 146/2009 
 1
believe a forum such as SEANZA will become even more important going forward in tackling 
such challenges together. 
In this spirit, the key parts of my talk today will look at 
• 
First, the key features of this new paradigm. 
Secondly, strategic agenda of emerging markets, such as Thailand in dealing with 
• 
these challenges, that is, how to seek a balanced reform agenda.  
My  core  message  today  is  that,  with  a  growing  role  of  emerging  markets  and  their 
interdependence  with  major  financial  markets  and  economies,  the  agenda  for  global 
regulatory  reforms  should  pay  adequate  attention  to  economic  and  financial  context  of 
emerging markets. Regulators in emerging markets, such as ourselves, therefore have been 
and will endeavour to take more proactive role in helping to shape such reform agenda, at 
key  forums  such  as  the  BIS,  and  in  regional  groupings  such  as  EMEAP,  SEACEN,  and 
SEANZA.  
In  this  regard,  we  welcome  the  BIS’  strengthened  initiative  in  this  direction,  with  greater 
representation  of  emerging  markets  in  various  working  groups.  Through  such  means,  we 
look  to  putting  increased  emphasis  on  ensuring  that  the  policy  option  and  implementation 
process  are  strengthened  and  fit  the  local  context,  while  adhering  to  best  risk-based 
supervision principles. This will have implication not only for local banks, but also for global 
banks’ operations in emerging markets. 
Thus, I would like to use this opportunity today to highlight key areas which require attention 
and leadership of top policy makers at supervisory agencies as well as banks, to ensure not 
only soundness of individual banks, but also guard against systemic risk as a whole.   
Let me now turn to the first part of my talk: Key Features of New Paradigm 
What is driving the changing global financial landscape?  
The  failure  of  several  financial  giants,  and  with  many  still  in  retrenchment,  led  to  market 
space being taken up by surviving global banks, some have become state-owned via rescue 
programme. Their systemic importance has risen further along with their market power, and 
regulation must rise up to the challenge. The interdependence of the financial sustainability 
of  these  financial  giants  and  sovereign  risks  have  become  increasingly  linked,  while 
perception  of  state  guaranty  of  such  institutions  may  distort  local  or  even  global  markets, 
creating un-level playing-field. 
The  demand  for  accountability  for  public  bail-out  money  puts  pressure  on  managing  such 
banks, which have now become “public institutions”. Thus, the intervening authorities face a 
strong risk of having to micro-manage the institutions, and with this the associated risks, not 
least reputational and legal. Timely exit is important for the reason cited. Exit policy however 
could also be complicated, for example if recovery value of bailed-out fund is under pressure 
from  weak  market  conditions.  Most  importantly,  it  is  important  to  observe  that,  the 
precedence set by the actions regulators took in such intervention could have a long-term 
implication. We may very well be setting a new expectation, standard and text-book for bank 
resolution, and it may not be the standard we want to set going forward. Moral hazard and 
time inconsistency are always difficult subjects. 
For financial institutions in the SEANZA region, many regional financial institutions, thus far 
unaffected  directly  by  the  crisis,  are  also  moving  into  new  markets,  such  as  expanding 
regionally.  Indeed,  there  is  some  indication  of  search  for  yield,  as  managed  funds  start  to 
flow  overseas  to  markets  which  have  attractive  risk-return  prospects,  for  example  due  to 
prospect of faster recovery, or due to some distortion created from implicit risk-guaranty on 
certain asset classes as a consequence of rescue package. In some countries, certain asset 
classes such as real estate may be benefiting from ample liquidity, giving rise to concern on 
asset bubble.  
2 
 BIS Review 146/2009
All  these  spell  potential  for  increased  volatility  and  demand  increased  vigilance  on 
management of risks, not only for those arising from country risk and market risk exposures, 
but also to exposures from counterparty and liquidity risks arising, for example, from hedging 
positions in OTC markets. Some of these risks, such as country risk, may have hitherto been 
marginal for regulators in emerging markets, but going forward things may change quickly. 
Moreover, with credit-play still a very risky and expensive business, with lending subdued by 
low  demand  for  loans,  treasury  return  could  be  a  potential  profit  centre,  especially  with 
various liquidity support in interbank markets globally. This potential trend, of course, would 
also depend on accounting standard and a regulation on fair valuations, which itself is still 
under much debate.  
Thus,  strengthening  of  risk  management  and  supervision  is  important.  Indeed,  the 
importance of this is highlighted by the rebound in many regional stock markets as well as 
upward pressure on the currencies. I have also observed from some reports that, within the 
many financial centres, the recent return generated by FX traders have been strong, while 
hedge funds, thought to have seen end of days, are starting to come back to life. We may be 
heading in for a sporadic period of increased risk-appetite.  
At  the  same  time,  many  corporate  borrowers,  particularly  the  large  conglomerates  which 
used  to  fund  from  global  market,  may  switch  to  domestic  market,  due  to  retrenchment  of 
international debt market, as well as still heightened risk-aversion and retrenchment of global 
banks.  This  would  be  at  the  same  time  as  increasing  issuance  of  local  sovereign  debt  to 
finance stimulus package. In the early stage of recovery, risk of crowing-out may not yet be 
high,  but  even  at  this  stage,  the  investment  portfolio  of  local  financial  firms  may  shift 
significantly, and may likely see increasing concentration risk due to increased exposure to 
major  conglomerate  which  used  to  source  overseas  funds.  But  as  momentum  of  recovery 
gathers pace, competition for funds and risk of crowding-out rises. 
Therefore,  even  abstracting  from  challenges  of  reshaping  regulatory  framework,  managing 
the  risks  from  the  current  market  environment  is  demanding.  Uncertainty  and  risk  remains 
high, and I believe there are four key risk factors we need to focus on. 
First,  sustainability  of  nascent  “green  shoot”  global  recovery  remains  a  subject  of  financial 
market speculation, and will continue to drive trading position and volatility. 
The  sign  of  recovery  in  global  economy  appears  to  be  revealed  as  “green  shoots”  after  a 
deep  recession.  This  recovery  is  credited  to  a  wide  range  of  public  intervention  in  major 
economies, which has boosted the subdued private demand as well as reduced uncertainty 
especially in the financial markets. However, the sustainability of the nascent recovery is yet 
to be confirmed, as the financial systems in major economies have not been fully repaired. 
Secondly, the timing and speed of the unwinding process of public stimulus packages have 
yet to be settled, the so-called “exit policy.” 
Thirdly,  the  difference  in  speed  of  recovery  between  major  economies  and  emerging 
economies may also have important implications for cross-border capital flows, and financial 
market  volatility,  particularly  exchange  rate.  The  unstable  differentials  caused  by  rocky 
recovery paces, can give rise to large and volatile capital flows, which may have a tendency 
to be short-term and foot-loose. 
And fourth, uncertainty regarding global regulatory reform. In the immediate aftermath of the 
crisis,  it  is  natural  to  observe  the  growing  sentiment  towards  re-regulation,  coupled  with 
nationalisation of problem banks, the trend towards re-regulation has picked up momentum. 
Therefore,  it  is  important  to  ensure  that  we  do  not  swing  from  unquestioned  faith  in  the 
market  to  unquestioned  faith  in  the  regulation.  A  balanced  approach  is  needed.  Just  as 
market failures cause inefficiencies and instability, regulations too can be a two-edge sword, 
it  could  correct  market  failures  and  distortions,  or  it  can  be  the  cause  itself  if  not  well 
designed.  The  task  of  such  design  to  avoid  regulatory  gap  and  arbitrage  is  all  the  more 
difficult,  given  the  shifting  financial  landscape,  shifting  regulatory  landscape  as  countries 
BIS Review 146/2009 
 3
embark on their own reform agenda at different speed. This is why a forum such as the BIS 
is all the more critical.  
The key lesson that we should learn from this and past crises is that the financial system is 
always vulnerable to the unobserved and unmeasured. It is not that our tenet of risk-base 
supervision is flawed, but rather we overestimate our ability to understand and manage such 
risks.  In  response  to  the  calls  for  strengthening  of  regulation,  G20  leaders  and  finance 
ministers  have  committed  to  strengthening  of  regulation.  The  comprehensive  regulatory 
reform package being proposed is aimed to address the key weaknesses such as excessive 
leverage,  under  capitalisation  and  underestimation  of  risk,  weakness  in  standards  of  risk 
management  for  liquidity  risk  for  complex  products  and  markets,  and  macro-prudential 
measures.  
The  range  of  policy  proposals  that  have  been  supported  by  G20  leaders  and  finance 
ministers, the Financial Stability Board, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, and 
international  accounting  standards  setters,  include  calls  for  strengthening  of  micro-  and 
macro-prudential  regulations  that  aim  at  capturing  risks  of  individual  institutions  and  risk 
arising from interconnectedness of the financial system, as well as more robust governance 
framework.  
The  shift  in  policy  paradigm  from  this  crisis  has  been  the  increasing  recognition  of  the 
concept of macro-prudential policy in dealing with the problem of systemic risk posed by the 
interconnectedness within the financial system, as well as between the financial system and 
the real economy.  
The key macro-prudential policies are, for example, a proposal on build-up of capital buffer 
and the introduction of a simple leverage ratio as a supplement measure to the BIS ratio. We 
look forward to the BCBS’ proposals on these measures by the end of this year.  
While  vital,  this  is  a  tall  order,  and  demanding  on  supervisory  capacity,  especially  in 
emerging markets.  
Let me highlight some of these challenges. 
The standards being discussed are complex, with still many unresolved issues on technical 
aspect such as calibration. Among the new guidelines, some key coefficients may be base 
on data of developed markets, and therefore might not be representative of emerging market 
conditions. Both  calibration  and  actual  implementation  will  require  adequate  data, which  is 
often a constraint in emerging markets. This data constraint could also become an issue for 
some  developed  markets,  given  a  structural  break  in  data  due  to  the  financial  crisis  and 
market dislocation.  
On top of these, there is the issue of level playing-field, as the structure of bank asset and 
liability in emerging and developed countries may be significantly different. We have found 
several policies that may have impact on level playing-field, between countries and business 
models of banks. An example is the application of a simple leverage ratio, which does not 
take  into  account  inherent  risk,  because  this  would  tend  to  penalise  banks  in  developing 
countries that generally hold less risky assets compared to developed countries. 
In  addition,  macro-prudential  measures,  such  as  leverage  ratio,  could  likely  have  a 
macroeconomic impact, possibly similar to use of liquidity reserve requirement as per classic 
monetary policy tool, and thus coordination with macroeconomic policy is  vital. For central 
banks  with  dual  role,  this  is  less  of  a  challenge,  but  for  separated  regulators,  the  issue  of 
organisation structure once again comes into play.  
Turning to the Bank of Thailand’s involvement on these regulatory debates through various 
international  forums  –  such  as  the  bi-monthly  BIS  Governor  Meetings,  the  Standard 
Implementation  Group  of  BCBS,  of  which  we  are  a  member  –  we  have  proposed  that 
developing countries be invited to participate in the formulation of new standards right at the 
beginning,  rather  than  to  be  included  at  the  later  stage  of  implementation.  Recently,  a 
4 
 BIS Review 146/2009
number of countries, including Thailand was invited to take part in the newly created Basel 
Consultative  Group,  or  the  BCG,  which  met  for  the  first  time  during  28  to  29  October  this 
year.  
Now, let me turn your attention to the second part of my talk. The Bank of Thailand’s view on 
strategy to achieve “a balanced reform agenda”. Going forward, it will be useful to focus on 
three key areas. 
First, we need to balance between emerging market issues and developed economy issues 
in the global reform agenda.  
Development of key policy proposals such as building-up capital and reserves buffer should 
recognise  constraint  of  emerging  markets  in  terms  of  data  and  institutional  capacity. 
Therefore,  prudent  but  practical  standards  for  SA  banks  that  are  the  core  in  emerging 
economies in addition to IRB banks should receive high priority. At the same time, with rapid 
development  of  local  financial  markets,  IRB  challenges  will  become  our  issues  tomorrow, 
and a balanced approach means emerging markets need to set strategy to build data and 
capacity.  
In  this  regard,  we  believe  the  BIS  can  play  a  vital  role  in  increasing  resource  to  policy 
research,  standard  development,  and  supervisor  capacity  building  for  SA  banks.  The  BIS 
regional office has played a strong leadership role, and we strongly support this trend. 
A similar issue arises in terms of the principles stipulated in Pillar 2 of Basel II. It is desirable 
that  banks  have  good  risk  management  system  with  an  ICAAP  that  covers  all  significant 
risks.  However,  this  entails  cost  to  both  banks  and  supervisors,  in  terms  of  a  much  more 
detailed  and  comprehensive  process,  with  methodological  guidelines  as  well  as  a  more 
challenging on how to achieve an effective implementation. We then believe it is important to 
balance and align complexity and timeliness of supervision with complexity and risk faced by 
emerging market.  
Second,  we  also  need  to  balance  between  supervision,  on  the  one  hand,  and  market 
discipline and good governance in the following key areas.  
On  the  issue  of  bank  capital  regime,  appropriate  implementation  of  macro-prudential 
measures  such  as  leverage  ratio  as  supplement  to  Basel  II  risk-weight  asset  system  is 
important. However, the key question is how to integrate appropriately additional non risk-
based  measures,  with  the  existing risk-based regulatory framework, as it might  weaken or 
lessen clarity of risk monitoring, and consequently risk management. We believe further work 
are  needed  in  terms  of  refining  the  framework  such  as  setting  definition  and  coverage, 
including  treatment  of  off-balance  sheet  items,  as  well  as  the  trigger-point  for  enhanced 
surveillance or to take supervisory action.  
On the issue of valuation and leverage. The use of fair value, when significant uncertainty 
exists,  may  reflect  current  market  expectation,  and  yet,  lead  to  volatile  balance  sheet  and 
difficulty  in  marking-to-market  during  market  stress  or  breakdown.  The  BOT  supports  the 
IASB’s solution on reclassification of financial assets in “rare circumstance” as it offers more 
discipline than currently. However, this, in turn, raises some concern on how to justify “rare 
circumstance”. Again, implementation is a challenge, and no doubt you would have valuable 
discussions here. 
As for the efforts to mitigate procyclicality, various models have been proposed for the build-
up  of  reserves  and  capital  buffer.  Each  model  has  its  pros  and  cons.  On  the  capital  side, 
there are proposals to increase capital charge for securitisation product and market risk, as 
well as harmonising the definition of capital. We agree that the banks’ capital buffers need to 
be  improved  both  quantitatively  and  qualitatively.  However,  timing  of  implementation  of 
guideline  on  definition  of  capital  is quite  crucial,  and  must be  carefully  considered.  On  the 
provisioning side, the current discussion is on which approach to be used as an alternative to 
the incurred loss model. The Bank of Thailand supports the principle of expected loss and 
dynamic provisioning, although it will be technically challenging to implement. As a regulator, 
BIS Review 146/2009 
 5
we  need  to  weight  the  balance  on  pros  and  cons  of  various  models  proposed  as  well  as 
consider if it fits the national context.  
Turning now to the third dimension where a balanced approach is required. The balance in 
relationship  and  responsibility  of  home  and  host  regulators,  and  a  balanced  voice  of 
emerging  markets  on  cross-border  systemic  risk.  This  is  all  the  more  important  now,  as 
regulatory reform across countries can create regulatory gaps and un-level playing-filed, that 
could  cause  instability  down  the  road.  The  principle  of  so-called  “insignificant  host”,  as 
viewed from home supervisor’s perspective, may contradict with the agreed principle of the 
need  for  the  host  to  oversee  systemically  important  institutions.  Thus,  a  host  supervisor 
should  receive  better  information  and  even  be  included  in  supervisory  colleges  by  home 
supervisor,  if  the  global  bank  branch  operations  are  systemically  important  to  the  host 
economy. 
Colleagues, ladies and gentlemen,  
This  is  a  challenging  time,  with  new  paradigm,  and  therefore  leadership  by  all  of  us  is 
required  to  ensure  that  we  set  a  balanced  agenda  in  our  reforms  going  forward.  I  believe 
SEANZA forum would become all the more valuable in the future in cementing our network 
and friendship. 
Thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS Review 146/2009
