Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: A case for rapid euro adoption 
Introduction for panel discussion by Ms Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell, Member of the Executive 
Board of the European Central Bank, at the Austrian National Bank Conference on European 
Economic Integration on “The Euro’s Contribution to Economic Stability in CESEE”, Vienna, 
16 November 2009. 
 Ladies and gentlemen,1
It is a pleasure to be at this conference among such distinguished panellists to speak about 
the European economic integration and the adoption of the euro. For us at the ECB, the topic 
of the optimal timing of euro adoption for the EU countries in Central and Eastern Europe 
(CEE) that have not yet done so is very important. According to the Maastricht Treaty, all EU 
countries are called upon adopting the euro at some stage. So it’s not a question of if, but 
rather on when to join.  
However,  to  ensure  that  the  monetary  union  is  working  smoothly,  it  is essential – and  the 
Maastricht Treaty has foreseen this – that the countries joining the euro area have achieved 
a sufficient degree of sustainable convergence. This is first of all in the interest of the country 
concerned. Moreover, sustainable convergence is a cornerstone of the European Monetary 
Union on which the success story of the euro is built. Since its introduction back in 1999, the 
euro has become one of the major currencies of the world. The low inflation environment in 
the  euro  area  can be  largely  attributed  to  the well  anchored  inflation expectations  and the 
high  credibility  of  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  strategy  to  ensure  price  stability  over  the 
medium-term. During the global financial crisis, it became apparent that the euro has been 
an important shelter for the euro area countries to protect them against what otherwise may 
have  resulted  in  an  exchange  rate  and  balance  of  payments  crisis.  This  led  to  the 
widespread perception that the euro area is a safe haven.  
Let me in the following speak about the economic situation in the CEE countries and their 
prospect on joining the euro.  
The CEE countries have been strongly hit by the financial crisis 
Following the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers, the CEE countries have been strongly hit by 
the global financial crisis, although at varying degrees across countries. Due to the slump in 
global  activity,  heightened  risk  aversion  by  international  investors  and  a  de-leveraging  by 
financial  institutions,  most  CEE  countries  have  seen  a  significant  weakening  of  export 
demand  and  a  substantial  worsening  of  their  external  financing  conditions.  It  seems  that 
financing difficulties have been particularly severe in those countries that had accumulated 
large  imbalances  during  pre-crisis  times  and  whose  debt  structure  was  characterised  by 
significant  currency  and  maturity  mismatches.  In  some  countries  balance  sheet  effects 
associated with large exchange rate depreciations posed a risk to financial stability. 
                                                 
1  
I would like to thank Carolin Nerlich and Eva Katalin Polgar for their valuable input to the preparation of this 
intervention. 
BIS Review 144/2009 
 1
   The  financial  crisis  reversed  some  of  the  impressive  progress  that  the  CEE  countries  had 
already made in terms of convergence. In the years preceding the crisis most CEE countries 
were  growing  rapidly.  However,  excessive  credit  growth,  substantial  wage  increases  and 
house price bubbles, contributed to the overheating of some of the economies. This in turn 
2 
 BIS Review 144/2009
led to a widening of the positive output gap and a non-sustainable deterioration of the current 
account  position.  Moreover,  the  overheating  pressures  in  some  countries  translated  into 
rising inflation and led to a real appreciation of their currencies, which in turn aggravated the 
external imbalances further.  
  3
BIS Review 144/2009 
 To  dampen  the  impact  of  the  crisis,  national  authorities  have  adopted  a  number  of  policy 
measures, which however differed significantly across countries, depending on the room for 
manoeuvre to adopt supportive monetary and fiscal policies in the various countries.  
Substantial EU and ECB support to weather the crisis 
Also  the  international  and  European  community  provided  substantial  financial  support  to 
some countries in the region. The EU supported some CEE countries via the medium-term 
financial  assistance  (MTFA)  facility,  in  conjunction  with  the  IMF  programmes.  This  MTFA 
facility  was substantially  increased during  the  crisis  and  also  the  EU  structural  funds  have 
helped to cushion the impact of the crisis. 
Let me also emphasize the support from the ECB, contributing to the stabilisation of financial 
markets  in  the  region.  Many  banks  in  the  CEE  countries  are  owned  by  euro  area  banks. 
Therefore,  the  CEE  countries  benefited  strongly  from  the  ECB’s  enhanced  credit  support 
policy and the unlimited provision of liquidity to euro area banks. On top of this, the ECB has 
offered some of the national central banks repo lines to meet euro liquidity needs. 
Overall,  we  can  say  that  European  authorities  and  institutions  have  supported  the  CEE 
countries to weather the crisis. 
Need to return to a sustainable convergence process  
The financial crisis has clearly shown how important it is generally for any country in the EU 
to  embark  on  policies  aimed  at  sustainable  growth  paths.  This  includes  sound  economic 
policies, enhanced economic flexibility and the building-up of fiscal buffers in normal times. 
Also the regulatory framework for financial markets has to be adjusted at the national and 
supranational level such as to ensure economic and financial stability.  
The need for such policies and the need for pursuing a regulatory reform agenda, certainly 
applies  to  all  EU  countries,  not  just  the  CEE  countries.  That  said,  there  have  been  some 
proposals that a rapid euro adoption could help the CEE countries to overcome the impact of 
the crisis more quickly. On this, let me stress that policies to overcome the financial crisis 
and the adoption of the euro are two distinct issues that need to be clearly separated.  
On  the  one  hand,  policies  to  overcome  the  crisis  –  such  as  large  fiscal  measures  –  were 
clearly  needed  and  have  been  put  in  place  in  all  EU  countries.  Now  that  the  worst  of  the 
financial crisis seems to be over, we have to return to sustainable policies and must advance 
with the regulatory reform agenda as spelled out by the G20. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  financial  crisis  has  not  changed  anything  with  respect  to  the 
procedure governing the euro adoption process. Before joining the euro area, countries need 
to ensure that the right accompanying policies are implemented and that the structure of their 
economies ensures a high shock absorption capacity. In particular, the economies need to 
be  sufficiently  flexible  to  cope  with  the  more  limited  range  of  economic  policy  instruments 
once they enter the euro area. While the CEE countries have already made good progress in 
this respect before the crisis, further efforts are needed. The financial crisis has hit the CEE 
countries in a severe way and, therefore, required a forceful policy response. Once the crisis 
is  over,  a  return  to  sustainable  policies  is  absolutely  essential  for  the  further  convergence 
process. A sufficient degree of sustainable convergence is crucial for the CEE countries, to 
be able to reap the full benefits of euro area membership. Otherwise, the single monetary 
policy of the euro area might not be suitable, thereby bearing the risk of boom-bust cycles 
and high inflation volatility in the country concerned.  
All this underlines the importance of a credible euro adoption strategy. I should emphasize 
that  entering  the  euro  area  prematurely  –  that  is  before  reaching  a  sufficient  degree  of 
convergence  and  economic  flexibility  –  would  not  be  a  panacea  for  the  CEE  countries  to 
4 
 BIS Review 144/2009
overcome  the  crisis  impact.  On  the  contrary,  a  premature  entry  into  the  euro  area  would 
deprive  the  countries  from  important  adjustment  tools  and  would  therefore  not  be  in  the 
interest of the country joining.  
A credible euro adoption strategy is important 
A credible euro adoption strategy helps stabilising the economies, as it provides an important 
anchor  for  policymakers.  As  already  mentioned  before,  a  credible  strategy  requires  in 
particular responsible macroeconomic policies and advancements in structural reforms.  
One essential element of the countries’ euro adoption strategies relates to the credibility of 
timetables. At the time of EU accession most countries had announced to join the euro area 
as  soon  as  possible.  We  all  know  that  this  was  based  on  assumptions  at  the  time  of  the 
accession.  The  recent  financial  crisis  has  impacted  the  convergence  progress  and  has 
moved  the  euro  adoption  further  into  the  future.  Therefore,  individual  countries’  timetables 
have to be carefully looked at and adjustments may be necessary.  
Let  me  emphasise  that  an  overly  ambitious  timetable  for  adopting  the  euro  can  be  rather 
costly  for  the  country  concerned.  This  may  encourage  market  participants  to  pursue 
strategies which may prove to be risky if the timetable turns out not to be achievable. We 
observed  this  in  some  CEE  countries,  which  for  example  allowed  the  emergence  of 
unsustainable credit growth and a large share of loans denominated in euro. 
A look beyond the EU borders 
The financial crisis also took its toll outside EU borders. Many non-EU emerging European 
economies, including EU candidate and potential candidate countries, recorded a strong fall 
in  external  and  domestic  demand,  amid  mounting  concerns  over  financial  stability  and 
increased uncertainty about the availability of external financing. 
While policymakers in these countries currently focus rather on the entry into the EU and not 
on euro adoption, the need for sustainable convergence is still high on their agenda. Overall, 
non-EU  emerging  European  economies  are  in  the  early  stages  of  catching-up  in  income 
levels with those of the EU. Ensuring a smooth process of real and nominal convergence is 
therefore  a  key  priority  in  the  region.  Moreover,  the  risks  of  boom-bust  cycles  in  credit  or 
asset prices have been amply illustrated by the recent developments, whereby countries with 
sounder  fundamentals  were  generally  less  affected  by  the  crisis.  Rapid  and  determined 
international policy actions, including support from European institutions via Macro-Financial 
Assistance (MFA) and Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance (IPA) funds have contributed 
to bringing confidence back. 
Moreover, I have to mention an issue of relevance for some economies in the region, namely 
the official, unilateral use of the euro. As you all know, unilateral euroisation is not in line with 
the provisions of the Treaty. And as the recent intensive financial pressures experienced by 
the  unilaterally  euroised  economies  (in  particular  Montenegro)  have  also  illustrated,  the 
unilateral  adoption  of  the  euro  is  not  the  magic  tool  that  automatically  provides  protection 
against the impact of external shocks. 
Concluding remarks 
Let  me  conclude  my  remarks.  The  CEE  countries  have  already  made  significant  progress 
with respect to their catching-up with the euro area. However, some of the countries have 
been  severely  hit  by  the  financial  crisis.  This  clearly  has  an  impact  on  the  state  of  the 
convergence process of the CEE countries and has potentially moved euro adoption further 
into  the  future.  The  timetables  of  the  euro  adoption  have  to  be  carefully  assessed,  given 
BIS Review 144/2009 
 5
particularly  the  large  uncertainties  that  are  associated  with  the  current  economic  and 
financial situation. 
One thing, however, needs to be very clear. The financial crisis has not changed our policy 
for  adopting  the  euro.  Therefore,  to  prematurely  adopt  the  euro,  in  particular  if  not 
accompanied by a sufficient degree of sustainable convergence, is certainly not a solution to 
overcome the impact of the crisis. Only a credible euro adoption strategy helps stabilising the 
economies, also with respect to the crisis impact. Achieving sustainable convergence can be 
seen as an important anchor and an opportunity for the CEE countries to adopt economic 
policies that will eventually lead to the successful adoption of the euro, hopefully not in the 
too distant future. 
6 
 BIS Review 144/2009
