Daniel K Tarullo: State of the banking industry 
Testimony  of  Mr  Daniel  K  Tarullo,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve System, before the Subcommittee on Financial Institutions, Committee on Banking, 
Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, Washington DC, 14 October 2009. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website.  
 Chairman Johnson, Ranking Member Crapo, and members of the Subcommittee, thank you 
for your invitation to discuss the condition of the U.S. banking industry. First, I will review the 
current  conditions  in  financial  markets  and  the  overall  economy  and  then  turn  to  the 
performance  of  the  banking  system,  highlighting  particular  challenges  in  commercial  real 
estate  (CRE)  and  other  loan  portfolios.  Finally,  I  will  address  the  Federal  Reserve's 
regulatory and supervisory responses to these challenges.  
Conditions in financial markets and the economy 
Conditions and sentiment in financial markets have continued to improve in recent months. 
Pressures in short-term funding markets have eased considerably, broad stock price indexes 
have  increased,  risk  spreads  on  corporate  bonds  have  narrowed,  and  credit  default  swap 
spreads  for  many  large  bank  holding  companies,  a  measure  of  perceived  riskiness,  have 
declined.  Despite  improvements,  stresses  remain  in  financial  markets.  For  example, 
corporate bond spreads remain quite high by historical standards, as both expected losses 
and risk premiums remain elevated. 
Economic  growth  appears  to  have  moved  back  into  positive  territory  last  quarter,  in  part 
reflecting  a  pickup  in  consumer  spending  and  a  slight  increase  in  residential  investment  – 
two components of aggregate demand that had dropped to very low levels earlier in the year. 
However, the unemployment rate has continued to rise, reaching 9.8 percent in September, 
and is unlikely to improve materially for some time. 
Against this backdrop, borrowing by households and businesses has been weak. According 
to the Federal Reserve's Flow of Funds accounts, household and nonfinancial business debt 
contracted  in  the  first  half  of  the  year  and  appears  to  have  decreased  again  in  the  third 
quarter.  For  households,  residential  mortgage  debt  and  consumer  credit  fell  sharply  in  the 
first half; the decline in consumer credit continued in July and August. Nonfinancial business 
debt  also  decreased  modestly  in  the  first  half  of  the  year  and  appears  to  have  contracted 
further  in  the  third  quarter  as  net  decreases  in  commercial  paper,  commercial  mortgages, 
and bank loans more than offset a solid pace of corporate bond issuance.  
At depository institutions, loans outstanding fell in the second quarter of 2009. In addition, the 
Federal Reserve's weekly bank credit data suggests that bank loans to households and to 
nonfinancial  businesses  contracted  sharply  in  the  third  quarter.  These  declines  reflect  the 
fact that weak economic growth can both damp demand for credit and lead to tighter credit 
supply conditions.  
The results from the Federal Reserve's Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending 
Practices indicate that both the availability and demand for bank loans are well below pre-
crisis  levels.  In  July,  more  banks  reported  tightening  their  lending  standards  on  consumer 
and  business  loans  than  reported  easing,  although  the  degree  of  net  tightening  was  well 
below  levels  reported  last  year.  Almost  all  of  the  banks  that  tightened  standards  indicated 
concerns about a weaker or more uncertain economic outlook, and about one-third of banks 
surveyed cited concerns about deterioration in their own current or future capital positions. 
The  survey  also  indicates  that  demand  for  consumer  and  business  loans  has  remained 
BIS Review 126/2009 
 1
weak. Indeed, decreased loan demand from creditworthy borrowers was the most common 
explanation given by respondents for the contraction of business loans this year. 
Taking a longer view of cycles since World War II, changes in debt flows have tended to lag 
behind changes in economic activity. Thus, it would be unusual to see a return to a robust 
and sustainable expansion of credit until after the overall economy begins to recover. 
Credit losses at banking organizations continued to rise through the second quarter of this 
year, and banks face risks of sizable additional credit losses given the outlook for production 
and  employment.  In  addition,  while  the  decline  in  housing  prices  slowed  in  the  second 
quarter,  continued  adjustments  in  the  housing  market  suggest  that  foreclosures  and 
mortgage loan loss severities are likely to remain elevated. Moreover, prices for both existing 
commercial  properties  and 
land,  which  collateralize  commercial  and  residential 
development loans, have declined sharply in the first half of this year, suggesting that banks 
are  vulnerable  to  significant  further  deterioration  in  their  CRE  loans.  In  sum,  banking 
organizations  continue  to  face  significant  challenges,  and  credit  markets  are  far  from  fully 
healed. 
for 
Performance of the banking system 
Despite these challenges, the stability of the banking system has improved since last year. 
Many financial institutions have been able to raise significant amounts of capital and have 
achieved  greater  access  to  funding.  Moreover,  through  the  rigorous  Supervisory  Capital 
Assessment  Program  (SCAP)  stress  test  conducted  by  the  banking  agencies  earlier  this 
year, some institutions demonstrated that they have the capacity to withstand more-adverse 
macroeconomic conditions than are expected to develop and have repaid the government's 
Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP) investments.1 Depositors' concerns about the safety 
of  their  funds  during  the  immediate  crisis  last  year  have  also  largely  abated.  As  a  result, 
financial institutions have seen their access to core deposit funding improve. 
However, the banking system remains fragile. Nearly two years into a substantial recession, 
loan quality is poor across many asset classes and, as noted earlier, continues to deteriorate 
as lingering weakness in housing markets affects the performance of residential mortgages 
and construction loans. Higher loan losses are depleting loan loss reserves at many banking 
organizations,  necessitating  large  new  provisions  that  are  producing  net  losses  or  low 
earnings. In addition, although capital ratios are considerably higher than they were at the 
start  of  the  crisis  for  many  banking  organizations,  poor  loan  quality,  subpar  earnings,  and 
uncertainty  about  future  conditions  raise  questions  about  capital  adequacy  for  some 
institutions. Diminished loan demand, more-conservative underwriting standards in the wake 
of the crisis, recessionary economic conditions, and a focus on working out problem loans 
have also limited the degree to which banks have added high quality loans to their portfolios, 
an essential step to expanding profitable assets and thus restoring earnings performance. 
These developments have raised the number of problem banks to the highest level since the 
early  1990s,  and  the  rate  of  bank  and  thrift  failures  has  accelerated  throughout  the  year. 
Moreover, the estimated loss rates for the deposit insurance fund on bank failures have been 
very  high,  generally  hovering  near  30  percent  of  assets.  This  high  loss  level  reflects  the 
rapidity with which loan quality has deteriorated during the crisis and suggests that banking 
organizations may need to continue their high level of loan loss provisioning for some time. 
Moreover,  some  of  these  institutions,  including  those  with  capital  above  minimum 
requirements,  may  need  to  raise  more  capital  and  restrain  their  dividend  payouts  for  the 
                                                 
1   For more information about the SCAP, see Ben S. Bernanke (2009), "The Supervisory Capital Assessment 
Program," speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta 2009 Financial Markets Conference, held 
in Jekyll Island, Ga., May 11. 
2 
 BIS Review 126/2009
foreseeable  future.  Indeed,  the  buildup  in  capital  ratios  at large  banking  organizations  has 
been  essential  to  reassuring  the  market  of  their  improving  condition.  However,  we  must 
recognize  that  capital  ratios  can  be  an  imperfect  indicator  of  a  bank's  overall  strength, 
particularly in periods in which credit quality is deteriorating rapidly and loan loss rates are 
moving higher. 
Comparative performance of banking institutions by asset size 
Although  the  broad  trends  detailed  above  have  affected  all  financial  institutions,  there  are 
some  differences  in  how  the  crisis  is  affecting  large  financial  institutions  and  more  locally-
focused  community  and  regional  banks.  Consider,  for  example,  the  50  largest  U.S.  bank 
holding  companies,  which  hold  more  than  three-quarters  of  bank  holding  company  assets 
and now include the major investment banks in the United States. While these institutions do 
engage in traditional lending activities, originating loans and holding them on their balance 
sheets like their community bank competitors, they also generate considerable revenue from 
trading  and  other  fee-based  activities  that  are  sensitive  to  conditions  in  capital  markets. 
These firms reported modest profits during each of the first two quarters of 2009. Second-
quarter  net  income  for  these  companies  at  $1.6  billion  was  weaker  than  that  of  the  first 
quarter, but was still a great improvement over the $19.8 billion loss reported for the second 
quarter of last year. Net income was depressed by the payment of a significant share of the 
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation's (FDIC) special deposit insurance assessment and a 
continued high level of loan loss provisioning. Contributing significantly to better performance 
was  the  improvement  of  capital  markets  activities  and  increases  in  related  fees  and 
revenues. 
Community  and  small  regional  banks  have  also  benefitted  from  the  increased  stability  in 
financial  markets.  However,  because  they  depend  largely  on  revenues  from  traditional 
lending activities, as a group they have yet to report any notable improvement in earnings or 
condition  since  the  crisis  took  hold.  These  banks  –  with  assets  of  $10  billion  or  less 
representing  almost  7,000  banks  and  20  percent  of  commercial  bank  assets  –  reported  a 
$2.7  billion  loss  in  the  second  quarter.  Earnings  remained  weak  at  these  banks  due  to  a 
historically narrow net interest margin and high loan loss provisions. More than one in four of 
these banks reported a net loss. Earnings at these banks were also substantially affected by 
the FDIC special assessment during the second quarter. 
Loan quality deteriorated significantly for both large and small institutions during the second 
quarter. At the largest 50 bank holding companies, nonperforming assets climbed more than 
20 percent, raising the ratio of nonperforming assets to 4.3 percent of loans and other real 
estate  owned.  Most  of  the  deterioration  was  concentrated  in  residential  mortgage  and 
construction  loans,  but  commercial,  CRE,  and  credit  card  loans  also  experienced  rising 
delinquency rates. Results of the banking agencies' Shared National Credit review, released 
in  September,  also  document  significant  deterioration  in  large  syndicated  loans,  signaling 
likely  further  deterioration  in  commercial  loans.2  At  community  and  small  regional  banks, 
nonperforming  assets  increased  to  4.4  percent  of  loans  at  the  end  of  the  second  quarter, 
more than six times the level for this ratio at year-end 2006, before the crisis started. Home 
mortgages and CRE loans accounted for most of the increase, but commercial loans have 
also shown marked deterioration during recent quarters. Importantly, aggregate equity capital 
for the top 50 bank holding companies, and thereby for the banking industry, increased for 
the third consecutive quarter and reached 8.8 percent of consolidated assets as of June 30, 
2009. This level was almost 1 percentage point above the year-end 2008 level and exceeded 
                                                 
2   See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, FDIC, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and 
Office of Thrift Supervision (2009), "Credit Quality Declines in Annual Shared National Credits Review," joint 
press release, September 24. 
BIS Review 126/2009 
 3
the pre-crisis level of midyear 2007 by more than two percentage points. Risk-based capital 
ratios  for  the  top  50  bank  holding  companies  also  remained  relatively  high:  Tier  1  capital 
ratios  were  at  10.75  percent,  and  total  risk-based  capital  ratios  were  at  14.09  percent. 
Signaling  the  recent  improvement  in  financial  markets  since  the  crisis  began,  capital 
increases  during  the  first  half  of  this  year  largely  reflected  common  stock  issuance, 
supported  also  by  reductions  in  dividend  payments.  However,  asset  contraction  also 
accounts for part of the improvement in capital ratios. Additionally, of course, the Treasury 
Capital  Purchase  Program  also  contributed  to  the  increase  in  capital in  the  time  since  the 
crisis emerged. 
Despite  TARP  capital  investments  in  some  banks  and  the  ability  of  others  to  raise  equity 
capital, weak earnings led to modest declines in the average capital ratios of smaller banks 
over the past year – from 10.7 percent to 10.4 percent of assets as of June 30 of this year. 
However, risk-based capital ratios remained relatively high for most of these banks, with 96 
percent maintaining risk-based capital ratios consistent with a "well capitalized" designation 
under prompt corrective action standards. 
Funding for the top 50 bank holding companies has improved markedly over the past year. In 
addition  to  benefiting  from  improvement  in  interbank  markets,  these  companies  increased 
core deposits from 24 percent of total assets at year-end 2008 to 27 percent as of June 30, 
2009.  The  funding  profile  for  community  and  small  regional  banks  also  improved,  as  core 
deposit funding rose to 62 percent of assets and reliance on brokered deposits and Federal 
Home Loan Bank advances edged down from historically high levels. 
As already noted, substantial financial challenges remain for both large and small banking 
institutions. In particular, some large regional and community banking firms that have built up 
unprecedented  concentrations  in  CRE  loans  will  be  particularly  affected  by  emerging 
conditions  in  real  estate  markets.  I  will  now  discuss the  economic  conditions  and  financial 
market dislocations affecting CRE markets and the implications for banking organizations. 
Current conditions in commercial real estate markets  
Prices  of  existing  commercial  properties  are  estimated  to  have  declined  35  to  40  percent 
since  their  peak  in  2007,  and  market  participants  expect  further  declines.  Demand  for 
commercial property has declined as job losses have accelerated, and vacancy rates have 
increased.  The  higher  vacancy  levels  and  significant  decline  in  the  value  of  existing 
properties have placed particularly heavy pressure on construction and development projects 
that  generate  no  income  until  completion.  Developers  typically  depend  on  the  sales  of 
completed projects to repay their outstanding loans, and with the volume of property sales at 
especially  low  levels  and  with  prices  depressed,  the  ability  to  service  existing  construction 
loans has been severely impaired. 
The negative fundamentals in the CRE property markets have caused a sharp deterioration 
in  the  credit  performance  of  loans  in  banks'  portfolios  and  loans  in  commercial  mortgage-
backed  securities  (CMBS).  At  the  end  of  the  second  quarter  of  2009,  approximately  $3.5 
trillion of outstanding debt was associated with CRE, including loans for multifamily housing 
developments.  Of  this,  $1.7  trillion  was  held  on  the  books  of  banks  and  thrifts,  and  an 
additional  $900  billion  represented  collateral  for  CMBS,  with  other  investors  holding  the 
remaining balance of $900 billion. Also at the end of the second quarter, about 9 percent of 
CRE loans on banks' books were considered delinquent, almost double the level of a year 
earlier.3  Loan  performance  problems  were 
for  construction  and 
development loans, especially for those that finance residential development. More than 16 
the  most  striking 
                                                 
3   The CRE loans considered delinquent on banks' books  were non-owner occupied  CRE loans that  were 30 
days or more past due. 
4 
 BIS Review 126/2009
percent of all construction and development loans were considered delinquent at the end of 
the second quarter. 
Almost $500 billion of CRE loans will mature each year over the next few years. In addition to 
losses caused by declining property cash flows and deteriorating conditions for construction 
loans,  losses  will  also  be  boosted  by  the  depreciating  collateral  value  underlying  those 
maturing  loans.  These  losses  will place  continued  pressure  on  banks'  earnings,  especially 
those of smaller regional and community banks that have high concentrations of CRE loans.  
The  current  fundamental  weakness  in  CRE  markets  is  exacerbated  by  the  fact  that  the 
CMBS  market,  which  had  financed  about  30  percent  of  originations  and  completed 
construction  projects,  has  remained  virtually  inoperative  since  the  start  of  the  crisis. 
Essentially no CMBS have been issued since mid-2008. New CMBS issuance came to a halt 
as  risk  spreads  widened  to  prohibitively  high  levels  in  response  to  the  increase  in  CRE-
specific risk and the general lack of liquidity in structured debt markets. Increases in credit 
risk have significantly softened demand in the secondary trading markets for all but the most 
highly rated tranches of these securities. Delinquencies of mortgages backing CMBS have 
increased  markedly  in  recent  months.  Market  participants  anticipate  these  rates  will  climb 
higher  by  the  end  of  this  year,  driven  not  only  by  negative  fundamentals  but  also  by 
borrowers' difficulty in rolling over maturing debt. In addition, the decline in CMBS prices has 
generated significant stresses on the balance sheets of financial institutions that must mark 
these securities to market, further limiting their appetite for taking on new CRE exposure. 
Federal Reserve activities to help revitalize credit markets 
The Federal Reserve, along with other government agencies, has taken a number of actions 
to strengthen the financial sector and to promote the availability of credit to businesses and 
households.  In  addition  to  aggressively  easing  monetary  policy,  the  Federal  Reserve  has 
established a number of facilities to improve liquidity in financial markets. One such program 
is  the  Term  Asset-Backed  Securities  Loan  Facility  (TALF),  begun  in  November  2008  to 
facilitate the extension of credit to households and small businesses. 
Before the crisis, securitization markets were an important conduit of credit to the household 
and business sectors; some have referred to these markets as the "shadow banking system." 
Securitization markets (other than those for mortgages guaranteed by the government) have 
virtually  shut  down  since  the  onset  of  the  crisis,  eliminating  an  important  source  of  credit. 
Under  the  TALF,  eligible  investors  may  borrow  to  finance  purchases  of  the  AAA-rated 
tranches  of  certain  classes  of  asset-backed  securities.  The  program  originally  focused  on 
credit for households and small businesses, including auto loans, credit card loans, student 
loans,  and  loans  guaranteed  by  the  Small  Business  Administration.  More  recently,  CMBS 
were added to the program, with the goal of mitigating a severe refinancing problem in that 
sector. 
The TALF has had some success. Rate spreads for asset-backed securities have declined 
substantially,  and  there is  some  new  issuance that  does  not  use  the  facility.  By  improving 
credit market functioning and adding liquidity to the system, the TALF and other programs 
have provided critical support to the financial system and the economy. 
Availability of credit 
The Federal Reserve has long-standing policies in place to support sound bank lending and 
the  credit  intermediation  process.  Guidance  issued  during  the  CRE  downturn  in  1991 
instructs examiners to ensure that regulatory policies and actions do not inadvertently curtail 
BIS Review 126/2009 
 5
the  availability  of  credit  to  sound  borrowers.4  This  guidance  also  states  that  examiners 
should  ensure  loans  are  being  reviewed  in  a  consistent,  prudent,  and balanced  fashion  to 
prevent  inappropriate  downgrades  of  credits.  It  is  consistent  with  guidance  issued  in  early 
2007 addressing risk management of CRE concentrations, which states that institutions that 
have  experienced  losses,  hold  less  capital,  and  are  operating  in  a  more  risk-sensitive 
environment are expected to employ appropriate risk-management practices to ensure their 
viability.5
We  are  currently  in  the  final  stages  of  developing  interagency  guidance  on  CRE  loan 
restructurings and workouts. This guidance supports balanced and prudent decisionmaking 
with respect to loan restructuring, accurate and timely recognition of losses and appropriate 
loan  classification.  The  guidance  will  reiterate  that  classification  of  a  loan  should  not  be 
based solely on a decline in collateral value, in the absence of other adverse factors, and 
that loan restructurings are often in the best interest of both the financial institution and the 
borrower. The expectation is that banks should restructure CRE loans in a prudent manner, 
recognizing the associated credit risk, and not simply renew a loan in an effort to delay loss 
recognition. 
On  one  hand,  banks  have  raised  concerns  that  our  examiners  are  not  always  taking  a 
balanced approach to the assessment of CRE loan restructurings. On the other hand, our 
examiners have observed incidents where banks have been slow to acknowledge declines in 
CRE  project  cash  flows  and  collateral  values  in  their  assessment  of  the  potential  loan 
repayment.  This  new  guidance,  which  should  be  finalized  shortly,  is  intended  to  promote 
prudent CRE loan workouts as banks work with their creditworthy borrowers and to ensure a 
balanced and consistent supervisory review of banking organizations. 
Guidance issued in November 2008 by the Federal Reserve and the other federal banking 
agencies  encouraged  banks  to  meet  the  needs  of  creditworthy  borrowers,  in  a  manner 
consistent  with  safety  and  soundness,  and  to  take  a  balanced  approach  in  assessing 
borrowers'  ability  to  repay  and  making  realistic  assessments  of  collateral  valuations.6  In 
addition,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  directed  examiners  to  be  mindful  of  the  effects  of 
excessive  credit  tightening  in  the  broader  economy  and  we  have  implemented  training  for 
examiners  and  outreach  to  the  banking  industry  to  underscore  these  intentions.  We  are 
aware  that  bankers  may  become  overly  conservative  in  an  attempt  to  ameliorate  past 
weaknesses in lending practices, and are working to emphasize that it is in all parties' best 
interests to continue making loans to creditworthy borrowers. 
Strengthening the supervisory process 
The recently completed SCAP of the 19 largest U.S. bank holding companies demonstrates 
the effectiveness of forward-looking horizontal reviews and marked an important evolutionary 
step  in  the  ability  of  such  reviews  to  enhance  supervision.  Clearly,  horizontal  reviews  – 
                                                 
4   See  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System,  Division  of  Banking  Supervision  and  Regulation 
(1991), "Interagency Examination Guidance on Commercial Real Estate Loans," Supervision and Regulation 
Letter  SR  91-24  (November  7);  and  Office  of  the  Comptroller  of  the  Currency,  Federal  Deposit  Insurance 
Corporation, Federal Reserve Board, and Office of Thrift Supervision (1991), "Interagency Policy Statement 
on  the  Review  and  Classification  of  Commercial  Real  Estate  Loans  (814  KB  PDF),"  joint  policy  statement, 
November 7. 
5   See  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System,  Division  of  Banking  Supervision  and  Regulation 
(2007),  "Interagency  Guidance  on  Concentrations  in  Commercial  Real  Estate,"  Supervision  and  Regulation 
Letter SR 07 1 (January 4). 
6   See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, FDIC, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and 
Office of Thrift Supervision (2008), "Interagency Statement on Meeting the Needs of Creditworthy Borrowers," 
joint press release, November 12. 
6 
 BIS Review 126/2009
reviews of risks, risk-management practices and other issues across multiple financial firms – 
are  very  effective  vehicles  for  identifying  both  common  trends  and  institution-specific 
weaknesses. The SCAP expanded the scope of horizontal reviews and included the use of a 
uniform set of stress parameters to apply consistently across firms. 
An outgrowth of the SCAP was a renewed focus by supervisors on institutions' own ability to 
assess  their  capital  adequacy  –  specifically  their  ability  to  estimate  capital  needs  and 
determine available capital resources during very stressful periods. A number of firms have 
learned  hard,  but  valuable,  lessons  from  the  current  crisis  that  they  are  applying  to  their 
internal processes to assess capital adequacy. These lessons include the linkages between 
liquidity  risk  and  capital  adequacy,  the  dangers  of  latent  risk  concentrations,  the  value  of 
rigorous stress testing, the importance of strong governance over their processes, and the 
importance of strong fundamental risk identification and risk measurement to the assessment 
of capital adequacy. Perhaps one of the most important conclusions to be drawn is that all 
assessments  of  capital  adequacy  have  elements  of  uncertainty  because  of  their  inherent 
assumptions,  limitations,  and  shortcomings.  Addressing  this  uncertainty  is  one  among 
several reasons that firms should retain substantial capital cushions. 
Currently,  we  are  conducting  a  horizontal  assessment  of  internal  processes  that  evaluate 
capital  adequacy  at  the  largest  U.S.  banking  organizations,  focusing  in  particular  on  how 
shortcomings  in  fundamental  risk  management  and  governance  for  these  processes  could 
impair  firms'  abilities  to  estimate  capital  needs.  Using  findings  from  these  reviews,  we  will 
work with firms over the next year to bring their processes into conformance with supervisory 
expectations. Supervisors will use the information provided by firms about their processes as 
a  factor  –  but  by  no  means  the  only  factor  –  in  the  supervisory  assessment  of  the  firms' 
overall capital levels. For instance, if a firm cannot demonstrate a strong ability to estimate 
capital  needs,  then  supervisors  will  place  less  credence  on  the  firm's  own  internal  capital 
results and demand higher capital cushions, among other things. Moreover, we have already 
required some firms to raise capital given their higher risk profiles. In general, we believe that 
if firms develop more-rigorous internal processes for assessing capital adequacy that capture 
all the risks facing those firms – including under stress scenarios – and maintain adequate 
capital based on those processes, they will be in a better position to weather financial and 
economic shocks and thereby perform their role in the credit intermediation process. 
We  also  are  expanding  our  quantitative  surveillance  program  for  large,  complex  financial 
organizations  to  include  supervisory  information,  firm-specific  data  analysis,  and  market-
based  indicators  to  identify  developing  strains  and  imbalances  that  may  affect  multiple 
institutions,  as  well  as  emerging  risks  to  specific  firms.  Periodic  scenario  analyses  across 
large firms will enhance our understanding of the potential impact of adverse changes in the 
operating environment on individual firms and on the system as a whole. This work will be 
performed by a multidisciplinary group composed of our economic and market researchers, 
supervisors, market operations specialists, and accounting and legal experts. This program 
will  be  distinct  from  the  activities  of  on-site  examination  teams  so  as  to  provide  an 
independent supervisory perspective, as well as to complement the work of those teams. As 
we adapt our internal organization of supervisory activities to build on lessons learned from 
the current crisis, we are using all of the information and insight that the analytic abilities the 
Federal Reserve can bring to bear in financial supervision. 
Conclusion 
A  year  ago,  the  world  financial  system  was  profoundly  shaken  by  the  failures  and  other 
serious  problems  at  large  financial  institutions  here  and  abroad.  Significant  credit  and 
liquidity problems that had been building since early 2007 turned into a full-blown panic with 
adverse  consequences  for  the  real  economy.  The  deterioration  in  production  and 
employment, in turn, exacerbated problems for the financial sector. 
BIS Review 126/2009 
 7
It will take time for the banking industry to work through these challenges and to fully recover 
and serve as a source of strength for the real economy. While there have been some positive 
signals of late, the financial system remains fragile and key trouble spots remain, such as 
CRE.  We  are  working  with  financial  institutions  to  ensure  that  they  improve  their  risk-
management and capital planning practices, and we are also improving our own supervisory 
processes in light of key lessons learned. Of course, we are also committed to working with 
the other banking agencies and the Congress to ensure a strong and stable financial system. 
8 
 BIS Review 126/2009
