Donald L Kohn: The economic outlook 
Speech by Mr Donald L Kohn, Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve  System,  at  the  National  Association  for  Business  Economics,  St  Louis,  Missouri, 
13 October 2009. 
 I'm pleased to be here at the National Association for Business Economics. Most of you are 
in  the  business  of  making  or  using  economic  forecasts  to  inform  the  strategies  of  your 
organizations  as  they  try  to  meet  their  objectives.  So  am  I,  and  I  thought  this  would  be  a 
good  opportunity  to  discuss  my  view  of  the  outlook  and  the  implications  that  I  draw  for 
monetary  policy.  I'll  start  with  a  brief  overview  of  recent  developments  and  the  near-term 
outlook. Then I'll turn to a few of the issues that bear on the medium to longer-run outlook. I 
emphasize that the views you are about to hear are my own and not necessarily those of my 
colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee.1  
In broad terms, the data that we have in hand indicate that economic activity turned up in the 
third quarter. To some extent, the pickup in activity in recent months reflects the dissipation 
of some of the forces that had been exerting downward pressure on the economy during the 
preceding several quarters. Perhaps the most important of these downward forces was the 
turmoil in financial markets that began in late 2007, which not only tightened credit availability 
and  reduced  wealth,  but  also  undermined  confidence,  especially  when  conditions  took  a 
decided  turn  for  the  worse  in  the  fall  of  2008.  The  stabilization,  and  more  recently  the 
improvement, in risk appetites and financial conditions, in part responding to actions by the 
Federal Reserve and other authorities, has been a critical factor in allowing the economy to 
begin to move higher after a very deep recession.  
A turn in the inventory cycle is another key element in the recent firming in aggregate activity. 
During the second half of 2008, many firms were apparently surprised at the sharp falloff in 
demand.  In  response  to  a  buildup  of  unwanted  inventories,  they  began  aggressively 
liquidating stocks by slashing production well below the level of sales. The pace of liquidation 
intensified through the middle of this year. More recently, however, with inventories now less 
burdensome, firms have begun boosting production to slow the pace of inventory destocking 
and bring output into closer alignment with expected final sales. This process is particularly 
evident in the motor vehicle industry, where the stock of cars and trucks on dealers' lots had 
become extremely lean, prompting increases in assemblies from the very low levels seen at 
midyear. More broadly, the slower pace of inventory liquidation likely provided an appreciable 
boost  to  manufacturing  production  in  July  and  August,  and  should  continue  to  push  up 
factory output further in the near-term. 
But, more importantly for sustained recovery, final sales began to stabilize earlier this year 
and have shown some tentative signs of picking up more recently. Improvement has been 
most  evident  in  the  housing  sector.  After  three  years  of  steep  declines  in  residential 
construction, the recent news on housing has been encouraging, given the central role that 
this sector has played in the recession. Sales of new and existing homes have been on an 
uptrend since early this year, and the rise in sales has pared the inventory of unsold new 
homes substantially. As demand has strengthened and inventories of new homes have come 
down, construction of single-family homes has risen markedly in recent months. Meanwhile, 
several  measures  of  house  prices,  after  tumbling  for  the  past  two  to  three  years,  have 
increased in the past few months. Moreover, survey data suggest that an increasing number 
of  potential  homebuyers  seem  to  think  that  house  prices  are  near  their  bottoms  and  will 
                                                 
1   Larry Slifman and Joyce Zickler of the Board's staff contributed to these remarks. 
BIS Review 125/2009 
 1
increase over the coming year. And, based on prices from admittedly thinly traded futures, 
financial market participants appear to have become more optimistic about house prices as 
well. In light of these developments, I expect housing starts to continue to improve gradually 
in coming months.  
In  the  consumer  sector,  spending  fell  sharply  in  the  second  half  of  2008  as  households 
raised their saving in response to reduced net worth, tighter credit conditions, and increasing 
uncertainty about job and income prospects. Following the steep declines in spending late 
last year, outlays were essentially flat on average during the first half of this year, and the 
saving rate leveled out. Expenditures appear to have increased in the third quarter, boosted 
during July and August by the cash for clunkers program and by increased dealer incentives. 
In addition, the latest figures suggest that real outlays for other consumer goods and services 
rose considerably in August. The recent firming of consumer spending likely has been aided 
by  the  fiscal  stimulus  package,  which  lowered  taxes  and  increased  transfer  payments. 
However,  with  the  labor  market  still  quite  weak  and  income  gains  subdued,  advances  in 
consumption spending in the coming months likely will be muted. 
In  the  business  sector,  fixed  investment  plummeted  late  last  year  and  early  this  year  as 
current and expected sales tumbled – the typical accelerator effect – and credit conditions 
tightened.  Lately,  however,  real  spending  on  equipment  and  software  appears  to  be 
stabilizing. The improvement is particularly visible for business purchases of cars and trucks. 
But the demand for high-tech equipment also appears to have firmed, while demand for other 
types of equipment seems to have flattened out. New orders have been choppy, but, in sharp 
contrast  to  their  plunge  over  the  preceding  year,  they  seem  to  have  improved  on  balance 
since the spring.  
In contrast to spending for equipment and software, the contraction in business outlays for 
most  types  of  nonresidential  structures  –  for  example,  office  and  commercial  buildings  – 
appear  to  have  fallen  sharply  over  the  first  three  quarters  of  the  year.  The  widespread 
weakness reflects high and rising vacancy rates, an extremely tight financing environment, 
and sinking property prices that reduce the expected profitability of new projects. Because of 
the lumpy nature of these investments and the long time that it takes to plan and develop 
new  projects,  movements  in  outlays  for  nonresidential  structures  often  lag  movements  in 
overall output, and, given the strong headwinds in this sector, I expect that any recovery in 
this area will be particularly slow to emerge. 
The  recession  was  global,  and  so  too  have  been  the  recent  signs  of  recovery.  As  a 
consequence, the demand for U.S. exports has been increasing lately after falling sharply in 
the first half of the year. However, with the firming of domestic demand, imports have also 
begun to increase, and, on net, the external sector appears to be a roughly neutral influence 
on overall economic activity at present. 
All told, I expect that the recovery in U.S. economic activity will proceed at a moderate pace 
in  the  second  half  of  this  year  before  strengthening  some  in  2010.  As  we  move  into  and 
through  next  year,  inventory  investment  is  likely  to  play  a  smaller  role  in  supporting  the 
growth of output, and aggregate activity should increasingly be propelled by stronger gains in 
final demand for reasons that I will discuss shortly. 
Recovery  in  the  labor  market  typically  lags  that  in  output,  and  the  employment  situation 
remains  quite  weak.  Although  the  contraction  in  payroll  employment  has  lessened  since 
earlier in the year, monthly losses in private-sector jobs still averaged more than 200,000 per 
month last quarter. And, while the unemployment rate has not been rising as rapidly since 
midyear as it did over the preceding year, it could well reach 10 percent by early 2010. The 
difficult conditions in labor markets and the consequent implications for household incomes 
are  important  reasons  for  my  expectation  that  the  recovery  in  overall  economic  activity 
moving into next year will be restrained. 
The substantial rise in the unemployment rate and the plunge in capacity utilization suggest 
that  the  margin  of  slack  in  labor  and  product  markets  is  considerable.  The  resulting 
2 
 BIS Review 125/2009
competitive  pressures  on  workers  and  firms  have  contributed  to  a  substantial  decline  in 
inflation,  with  both  headline  and  core  personal  consumption  expenditures  (PCE)  prices 
decelerating significantly over the past year. Although this year's backup in energy prices has 
boosted headline consumer price inflation, the levels of broad measures of consumer prices 
are still below where they were a year ago. Core PCE prices are estimated to have risen 1.3 
percent during the 12 months ending in August, compared with an increase of 2.7 percent 
over the preceding 12 months. To be sure, this deceleration has probably been exaggerated 
by a sharp decline in the so-called nonmarket component of PCE prices, which tends not to 
be a reliable indicator of inflation trends. But market-based price increases have also moved 
lower in an environment of weak demand. 
At the same time, businesses have been aggressively cutting costs not only by eliminating 
jobs,  but  also  by  cutting  back  increases  in  labor  compensation.  For  example,  the 
employment cost index – a broad measure of wage and benefit costs in private industry – 
rose at an annual rate of just 3/4 percent over the six months ending in June. An alternative 
measure  –  nominal  hourly  compensation  for  the  nonfarm  business  sector  –  is  reported  to 
have  actually  fallen  at  an  annual  rate  of  2-1/4  percent,  on  average,  during  the  first  half  of 
2009. Moreover, businesses have been so aggressive in cutting labor input that productivity 
rose noticeably in the first half of the year. As a consequence, unit labor costs fell sharply in 
recent quarters.  
Meanwhile, shorter-term inflation expectations have risen and fallen with recent fluctuations 
in actual inflation. But longer-term inflation expectations – whether measured in surveys of 
households and economists or inferred from financial markets – have been quite stable. 
Even as the economy begins to recover, substantial slack in resource utilization is likely to 
continue to damp cost pressures and maintain a competitive pricing environment. I expect 
that  the  persistence  of  economic  slack,  accompanied  by  stable  longer-term  inflation 
expectations, will keep inflation subdued for some time. Indeed, if inflation expectations were 
to begin to ratchet down toward the actual inflation rates that we have experienced recently, 
inflation could move appreciably lower.  
Having done this quick tour of the recent economic news, I would now like to address a few 
broader  macroeconomic  questions.  First,  why  do  I  expect  a  gradual  strengthening  of 
economic  activity?  The  fiscal  stimulus  program  enacted  earlier  this  year  is  likely  playing  a 
role, and it will continue to do so for a while as the states spend their stimulus funds to pay 
for infrastructure projects, hire more teachers, and finance other types of spending. But what 
will support economic activity as fiscal stimulus wanes? 
Most  importantly,  support  for  private  demand  should  come  from  a  continuation  of  the 
improvements  we've  seen  lately  in  overall  financial  conditions.  Low  market  interest  rates 
should continue to induce savers to diversify into riskier assets, which would contribute to a 
further reversal in the flight to liquidity and safety that has characterized the past few years. 
As  the  economy  improves  and  credit  losses  become  easier  to  size,  banks  will  be  able  to 
build  capital  from  earnings  and  outside  investors,  making  them  more  able  and  willing  to 
extend credit – in effect, allowing the low market interest rates to show through to the cost of 
capital for more borrowers. A more stable economic environment and greater availability of 
credit  should  contribute  to  the  restoration  of  business  and  household  confidence,  further 
spurring spending. 
An  encouraging  aspect  of  the  improvement  in  economic  and  financial  conditions  in  recent 
months has been the firming in house prices that I mentioned earlier. House prices can affect 
economic activity through several channels. One channel is through the influence of house 
prices on the net worth of households and, thereby, on consumer spending. Another channel 
is through the effect of anticipated capital gains or losses from investing in residential real 
estate  on  the  demand  for  housing.  Finally,  greater  stability  in  house  prices  should  help 
reduce the uncertainty about the value of mortgages and mortgage-related securities held on 
the  balance  sheets  of  banks  and  other  financial  institutions,  which  should  have  a  positive 
BIS Review 125/2009 
 3
effect on their willingness to lend. This circumstance should nourish a constructive feedback 
loop between the financial sector and the real activity. 
Given this possibility, another reasonable question might be, Why do I expect the economic 
recovery to be so moderate? To be sure, many times in the past, a deep recession has been 
followed by a sharp recovery. But, for a number of reasons, I don't think a V-shaped recovery 
is the most likely outcome this time around. First, although financial conditions are improving 
and market interest rates are very low, credit remains tight for many borrowers. In particular, 
the  supply  of  bank  credit  remains  very  tight,  and  many  securitization  markets  that  do  not 
enjoy  support  from  the  Federal  Reserve  or  other  government  agencies  are  still  impaired. 
Consumers as well as small and medium-sized businesses are especially feeling the effects 
of constraints on credit availability. Banks are still rebuilding their capital positions, and their 
lending will be held back by the need to work through the embedded losses in their portfolios 
of  consumer  and  commercial  real  estate  loans.  Over  time,  as  I  already  have  noted,  bank 
balance sheets should improve, and the supply of bank credit should ease. But the financial 
headwinds are likely to abate slowly, restraining the economic recovery. 
In addition, I do not anticipate that the recovery in homebuilding will exhibit its typical cyclical 
pattern.  Even  though  the  decline  in  residential  construction  began  well  in  advance  of  the 
overall  contraction  in  real  activity,  the  sector  continues  to  have  an  oversupply  of  vacant 
homes. To be sure, by August, the inventory of unsold, newly built single-family houses had 
fallen appreciably from its peak level in the summer of 2006. Nonetheless, when compared 
with  still  low  levels  of  sales,  the  supply  of  new  houses  remains  elevated.  In  addition,  the 
overhang  of  vacant  houses  on  the  market  for  existing  homes  is  sizable,  and  the  pace  of 
foreclosures  is  likely  to  remain  very  elevated  for  a  while,  which  should  further  add  to  that 
overhang. Thus, even with affordability quite favorable and house price expectations brighter, 
I anticipate a relatively subdued pickup in housing starts over the coming year. 
In the business sector, the extraordinary amount of excess capacity is likely to be another 
factor tempering the rate of recovery. In manufacturing, the utilization rate currently is below 
67  percent  –  noticeably  less  than  the  low  points  reached  in  prior  post-World  War  II 
recessions. I expect that the wide margin of unused capacity, combined with the tight credit 
conditions  faced  by  firms  that  have  to  rely  primarily  on  bank  lending,  will  lead  many 
businesses to be quite cautious about the pace at which they increase their capital spending. 
In  part,  the  gradual  pace  I  expect  in  the  recovery  of  the  economy  toward  full  employment 
reflects  the  process  of  shifting  the  composition  of  aggregate  demand  and  the  way  it  is 
financed in response to the events of the past few years. In particular, consumers probably 
will do more saving out of their income, reflecting the likelihood that household net worth will 
be lower relative to income than over the past decade or so and that credit, appropriately, will 
be  somewhat  less  available  than  during  the  boom  that  preceded  the  crisis.  In  addition, 
housing is almost certainly going to be a smaller part of the economy than it was earlier in 
this decade, as financial institutions maintain tighter underwriting standards that also more 
adequately  reflect  underlying  risks.  Such  an  increase  in  private  saving  propensities  and  a 
reduced demand for residential capital should prompt movements in relative prices and other 
factors that will, in turn, make room for a larger role for business investment and net exports 
in overall economic activity. 
The transition to full employment and the complete emergence of this new configuration will 
take  time,  in  part  because  the  rebalancing  of  the  economy  involves  repairs  to  balance 
sheets, the movement of capital and labor across sectors of the economy, and shifts in the 
global  pattern  of  production  and  consumption  –  adjustments  that  are  likely  to  be  gradual 
under any conditions. Current circumstances, however, may slow the re-equilibration process 
more  than  might  otherwise  be  the  case  because  of  the  essential  role  of  changes  in  the 
relative  cost  of  finance  in  the  adjustment  process.  But  with  the  nominal  federal  funds  rate 
essentially constrained at zero, and spreads in markets already having narrowed, reductions 
in  the  effective  cost  of  capital  will  mainly  take  place  as  conditions  at  financial  institutions 
4 
 BIS Review 125/2009
improve and lenders ease borrowing standards, which as I have already discussed I expect 
to happen gradually. 
As noted earlier, I expect that inflation will likely be subdued, and that, for a while, the risk of 
further declines in underlying rates of inflation will be greater than the risk of increases. That 
outlook  rests  importantly  on  two  judgments:  First,  that  the  economy  will  be  producing  well 
below  its  potential  for  some  time,  which  will  directly  restrain  production  costs  and  profit 
margins; and second, that inflation expectations are more likely to fall than rise over time as 
the  level  of  real  activity  remains  persistently  less  than  its  potential  and  actual  inflation 
remains low. 
We can never directly observe the level of economic potential – it is largely inferred from the 
behavior  of  related  variables,  like  output,  productivity,  costs  and  prices.  In  that  regard,  a 
widely discussed upside inflation risk is the possibility that as a result of the financial turmoil 
and  deep  recession,  the  extent  of  economic  slack  in  the  economy  is  not  as  great  as  is 
commonly  estimated.  One  possibility  is  that  the  steep  drop  in  investment  has  caused  a 
decline in capital services that could damp the rise in productivity. Another possibility is that 
the  needed  reallocation  of  resources  away  from  a  number  of  sectors  –  including  finance, 
construction, and motor vehicles – will have a restraining influence on potential output for a 
time.  In  addition,  prolonged  periods  of  unemployment  could  have  adverse  effects  on  the 
skills of workers and their attachment to the labor force.  
The financial crisis may also have affected potential output by reducing the ability of financial 
markets to effectively lubricate the flow of credit throughout the economy – and to allocate 
capital resources to their most productive uses. The deterioration in the health of the financial 
system  conceivably  may  have  disrupted  the  credit  allocation  system  enough  to  seriously 
impair the efficiency of business operations, and this impaired efficiency could show up at 
some point in more meager gains in productivity. And, some have argued, as governments 
seek to build more stable financial and economic systems, they may impede innovation and 
efficiency. 
Each of these arguments contains a grain of truth, and they are worthy of further research. 
But in my view, the cumulative reduction in aggregate demand has been much greater than 
any possible cutback in potential supply. The unemployment rate has risen by 5 percentage 
points in a very short period, and capacity utilization in industry hovers just above its lowest 
level  in  the  history  of  the  series,  dating  back  to  1948.  The  downward  pressures  on  both 
prices and labor compensation reinforce my impression that our economy is operating well 
below its productive potential. And, if anything, productivity has been surprisingly strong, not 
weak, in recent quarters.  
The improving picture for financial markets and the economy since last spring has meant that 
the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has not undertaken any new initiatives to ease 
financial  conditions  and  stimulate  demand  at  its  past  several  meetings.  We  have  left  the 
unusually accommodative posture of policy – in terms of our plans for our balance sheet and 
the level of our policy interest rates – in place. It's important to judge this posture against how 
the  economy  is  likely  to  evolve  against  our  objectives  in  the  future.  Importantly,  our 
objectives in the Federal Reserve Act are in terms of levels – the level of inflation relative to 
effective price stability and the level of output relative to the economy's potential to produce 
over the long run. Right now, smoothing through the short-run fluctuations in energy prices, 
inflation seems to be running a little below the 2 percent objective for PCE prices that I have 
seen as best promoting our dual mandate of maximum employment and stable prices. And, 
as I indicated, employment and output seem to be substantially below plausible estimates of 
their potential. 
But  it's  not  the  current  level  of  inflation  or  of  output  that  figure  into  our  policy  decisions 
directly – rather, it is the expected level some quarters out, after the lags in the effects of 
policy actions have worked themselves out. In that regard, the projection of only a gradual 
strengthening of demand and subdued inflation imply that that these gaps – of inflation and 
BIS Review 125/2009 
 5
output  below  our  objectives  –  are  likely  to  persist  for  quite  some  time.  In  these 
circumstances, at its last meeting, the FOMC was of the view that economic conditions were 
likely to warrant unusually low levels of interest rates for an extended period. 
This  assessment  and  my  outlook  do  not  mean  that  my  colleagues  and  I  will  not  also  be 
looking  carefully  at  any  evidence  that  portends  a  potential  pick  up  of  inflation.  Uncertainty 
about the course of the economy is a lot lower than it was just a few short months ago. But 
we cannot lose sight that this uncertainty remains quite high; we are still in largely uncharted 
waters when it comes to fully understanding how our economy will recover from the severe 
recession  and  financial  disruptions  of  the  past  several  years  and  how  that  recovery  and 
inflation will be affected by the extraordinary actions we took. We need to base policy on our 
best estimate of the evolution of inflation and output relative to our objectives, but we also 
need to be ready to adjust our plans if events don't turn out as predicted in either direction. 
We have the tools to exit our unusual policies when the time comes. And we must act well 
before demand pressures or inflation expectations threaten price stability. 
In  circumstances  like  these,  we  will  be  carefully  watching  the  forecasts  and  economic 
evaluations of people like yourselves – indeed, perhaps as carefully as you will be watching 
the  evolution  of  our  thinking.  In  that  regard,  I'm  glad  to  have  had  the  opportunity  to  share 
some thoughts on these issues with you today. 
6 
 BIS Review 125/2009
