Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Supporting overseas workers thru lower 
remittance fees 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas),  on  the  occasion  of  the  PHILPASS-ABROI  MOA  signing, 
Manila, 2 December 2009. 
 Magandang umaga sa inyong lahat!  
On  behalf  of  the  Members  of  the  Monetary  Board  and  my  fellow  central  bankers,  I 
congratulate all the institutions and all those involved in this important undertaking for making 
this a reality.  
This is important because with our signing ceremony today, we take another significant step 
forward in our continuing program to support millions of our overseas workers. Together, we 
shall  be  able  to  lower  the  fees  paid  by  our  overseas  workers  to  send  money  to  their 
beneficiaries.  
The principal players who collaborated with the Bangko Sentral’s Department of Economic 
Statistics  and  the  Payments  and  Settlements  Office  on  this  project  are  the  Association  of 
Bank  Remittance  Officers,  Inc.  more  popularly  known  as  ABROI,  and  the  different  bank 
organizations  including  the  Rural  Bankers  Association  of  the  Philippines,  the  Chamber  of 
Thrift Banks, and the Bankers Association of the Philippines. Let us acknowledge them with 
a well-deserved round of applause.  
In particular, we commend ABROI under the leadership of its president Carmelita Araneta 
and  its  11 member  banks,  in  alphabetical  order:  Allied  Bank,  Asia  United  Bank, Banco  de 
Oro,  Bank  of  Philippine  Islands,  China  Bank,  Development  Bank  of  the  Philippines,  Land 
Bank of the Philippines, Metrobank, Philippine National Bank, RCBC and Union Bank. Ladies 
and gentlemen, let us give them a well-deserved round of applause. 
Under our agreement, the 11 member banks of ABROI who handle remittances of overseas 
Filipino workers will use the Bangko Sentral’s real-time gross settlement system – which we 
call PhilPass – as their link to send remitted money to the beneficiaries’ accounts in other 
banks. 
As  a  payments  system  infrastructure,  PhilPass  primarily  settles  high  value  payments  from 
accounts maintained by banks with the Bangko Sentral, thereby eliminating settlement risks. 
With  our  MOA,  PhilPass  will  also  serve  as  a  local  clearing  facility  for  the  settlement  of 
remittances for credit to other banks.  
Given the delays as well as incidents of theft and robbery involving some couriers used by 
banks  to  deposit  remittance  funds  to  beneficiary  accounts,  PhilPass  emerges  as  a  safer, 
faster, and more efficient option for remitting overseas workers.  
Another  highlight  of  this  project  is  the  agreement  by  participating  banks  to  charge  a 
significantly lower standard back-end processing fee of 50 pesos per remittance transaction. 
The back-end processing fee normally charged ranges from a low of P100.00 to a high of 
P550.00 per transaction.  
In  other  words,  overseas  Filipinos  will  be  saving  at  least  P50  to  P500  per  transaction  in 
remittance  fees  whenever  ABROI  members  forward  the  money  to  beneficiary  accounts  in 
other banks.  
Estimates  indicate  that  remittance  transactions  average  66  million  per  year,  of  which 
transmission  through  “credit-to-other  banks”  accounts  for  8%  or  an  average  of  more  than 
BIS Review 159/2009 
 1
5,000 transactions daily. This means savings of at least P75 million in annual remittance fees 
for overseas Filipinos. At least P75 million.  
For  our  overseas  workers,  this  represents  additional  money  that  can  benefit  their  families 
and other beneficiaries. For the Bangko Sentral and our banks, this represents yet another 
way for us to express our support for our overseas workers who continue to play a pivotal 
role in keeping our economy sound and stable.  
I  understand  that  systems  integration  of  ABROI  member  banks  with  the  Bangko  Sentral’s 
PhilPass will be completed before the end of this year, with test runs expected to begin in 
January 2010. Given this timeline, the PhilPass-ABROI linkage should be fully operational by 
late February or early March next year.  
Once again ladies and gentlemen, I thank everyone involved in this important undertaking 
that will benefit millions of our overseas Filipino workers and their families. Let us consider 
this as our joint Christmas gift to them.  
Mabuhay ang ating overseas workers! Mabuhay ang Pilipinas! Maraming salamat sa inyong 
lahat. 
2 
 BIS Review 159/2009
