Masaaki Shirakawa: Reforming the framework of financial regulation and 
supervision – an international and Asian perspective 
Speech by Mr Masaaki Shirakawa, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Central Bank of 
Malaysia  –  Bank  for  International  Settlements’  High  Level  Seminar,  Kuala  Lumpur, 
11 December 2009. 
 Introduction 
1. 
I  am  very  much  honored  to  have  this  opportunity  to  speak  before  such  distinguished 
participants, including those from central banks, at this High Level Seminar co-organized by 
Bank Negara Malaysia and the Bank for International Settlements. 
Today,  I  would  like  to  offer  my  reflections  on  the  lessons  from  the  current  global  financial 
crisis.  However,  under  this  theme,  many  issues  have  already  been  raised  and  numerous 
discussions held. I myself have participated in many such discussions at many international 
forums and, I have to confess, I have been wondering about some piece missing in these 
discussions. Thinking about why this has been the case, I came to realize one of the reasons 
I feel this way is that such discussions have been mostly conducted under the designation of 
“global financial crisis”, despite the fact that Asian financial systems, including that of Japan, 
have  remained  relatively  stable.  Sufficient  consideration  has  not  been  extended  to  such 
aspects as regional diversity and differences in the structures of financial intermediation. In 
this regard, I would like to express my views on the lessons of the global financial crisis, from 
both an international and an Asian perspective, as the financial structure in Asia differs from 
those  in  the  United  States  and  Europe.  I  will  first  present  some  ideas  as  to  why  financial 
systems  in  the  Asian  region  remained  relatively  stable  under  the  current  crisis,  compared 
with those in the United States and Europe. Then, I would like to talk about how we should 
make use of the lessons we have learned from the current crisis, from such a perspective1. 
2. 
Relative stability of financial systems in the Asian region during the current 
crisis 
To  begin  with,  let  us  consider  how  we  should  assess  the  performance  of  the  financial 
systems  in  the  Asian  region  during  the  current  crisis.  A  fair  assessment,  in  my  own  view, 
would be as follows. 
First, Asian financial systems obviously could not be immune to the global financial turmoil, 
and have indeed been seriously impacted. 
Second, compared with what happened in the United States and Europe, financial systems 
in  Asia  remained  relatively  robust,  and  here  I  need  to  stress  the  word  “relatively”.  For 
example,  between  the  collapse  of  the  Lehman  Brothers  in  September  last  year  and  early 
2009,  the  share  price  of  Asian  financial  institutions  plummeted  by  30  to  40  percent, 
depending on jurisdiction. In most Asian economies, the prices have now recovered to pre-
Lehman  levels,  and  in  some  economies  have  even  exceeded  that  level  by  more  than 
30 percent. The performance of financial shares matches that of average indices covering all 
sectors. On the other hand, the rebound in the U.S. and European banking sectors is clearly 
                                                 
1   See  Masaaki  Shirakawa,  “Preventing  the  Next  Crisis:  The  Nexus  between  Financial  Markets,  Financial 
Institutions and Central Banks”, speech at the London Stock Exchange (May 2009), and “International Policy 
Response to Financial Crisis”, remarks at the Symposium Sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas 
City,  Jackson  Hole,  Wyoming  (August  2009),  for  discussions  on  reforming  the  framework  of  financial 
regulation and supervision based on the lessons from the current financial crisis. 
BIS Review 165/2009 
 1
weaker, recovering only to 70 to 80 percent of pre-Lehman levels, while indices of all sectors 
have recovered to roughly 90 percent. The difference of performances between Asian and 
U.S./European financial institutions is also reflected in their respective balance sheets. While 
the ratio of non-performing loans has recently shown a steep rise in the United States and 
Europe, it remains stable at a low level here in Asia. Bank lending growth has decelerated 
sharply in the United States and Europe and recently turned negative in some countries. In 
most Asian jurisdictions, it has also decelerated in recent periods but remained positive, and 
even accelerated in China. 
Likewise, Japan’s financial system has enjoyed relative robustness compared with the U.S. 
and  European  systems.  Libor-OIS  spread2,  which  directly  reflects  the  stress  in  a  funding 
market, widened in the aftermath of the Lehman shock until the end of last year, as it did in 
the  United  States  and  Europe.  However,  in  yen  funding  market,  the  spread  remained 
relatively narrow, and is currently back to August 2007 levels. 
Third, the impact of the current crisis in the Asian region has been smaller than that of the 
Asian financial crisis of 1997 to 1998. The Asian financial crisis led to sovereign debt crises, 
and  some  economies  were  compelled  to  seek  financial  support  from  the  International 
Monetary Fund. The situation this time is not nearly as serious. 
Backgrounds to the robustness of Asian financial system 
3. 
This begs the question: How could Asian financial systems remain relatively robust this time? 
In my view, the main reason is that the memory of the previous severe financial crisis was 
still fresh in our minds, and the lessons learned from that crisis were put to good use, even if 
not perfectly. 
There  were  a  variety  of  factors  behind  the  Asian  financial  crisis,  and  they  were  combined 
with each other in a complex way. The key factor that directly precipitated the crisis was the 
double  mismatch  of  currency  and  maturity  formation  in  the  asset  and  liability  structures  of 
financial institutions, creating a downward feedback loop between currency risk and liquidity 
risk. With this bitter experience in mind, many Asian economies endeavored to increase the 
robustness of their financial systems. 
First,  financial  institutions  themselves  took  measures  to  improve  risk  management. 
Mismatches were reduced, although further effort seems necessary. Moreover, most Asian 
financial  institutions  adopted  a  cautious  approach  towards  the  complex  securitization 
products  in  their  investment  decisions,  as  memories  of  the  Asian  financial  crisis  were  still 
fresh in their minds. This led to the comparatively lower credit costs this time. 
Second,  the  Asian  regulatory  and  supervisory  authorities  made  efforts  to  enhance  the 
resilience  of  their  financial  systems.  They  used  a  variety  of  measures  to  enhance  the 
robustness as well as the transparency of the financial systems, including attracting foreign 
capital  and  facilitating  mergers.  Moreover,  with  the  enactment  of  laws  and  regulations 
concerning  deposit  insurance  and  prompt  corrective  action,  the  financial  systems  were 
provided with safety-nets to ensure stability in times of crisis. 
Third,  following  on  from  the  previous  point,  liquidity  backstops  were  put  in  place  in 
preparation  for  turmoil  in  the  financial  and  foreign  exchange  markets.  Central  banks  have 
been  equipped  with  market  operation  tools  and  standing  facilities  to  ensure  liquidity  in 
domestic  funding  markets.  A  regional  network  of  currency  swap  arrangements  was 
expanded  under  the  Chiang  Mai  initiatives  to  ensure  liquidity  in  foreign  currency  markets. 
                                                 
2   Libor-OIS  spread  is  the  difference  between  the  Libor  and  the  overnight  index  swap  rate,  which  could  be 
considered as an indicator of counterparty credit risk and liquidity premium. 
2 
 BIS Review 165/2009
Enhanced  foreign  reserves,  flexible  foreign  exchange  mechanisms,  and  stringent  fiscal 
discipline also contributed to reducing concerns over sovereign risk. 
Learning from past crisis experience 
4. 
And yet, even if we learn all the lessons past crises have to teach us, can we guarantee the 
resilience of the Asian financial system in the future as well? I must say, I refrain myself from 
being optimistic in this respect. 
I have my doubts because, first, it is difficult for any of us to truly learn from the experience of 
others. Since the bursting of the bubble and the subsequent financial crisis in Japan, there 
has  been  much  discussion  of  the  so-called  “lost  decade”  by  academics  and  policymakers 
abroad. However, I must say that the implications of our experience, such as the severity of 
liquidity crisis and balance sheet adjustments, have not been fully taken to heart3. Even if the 
lessons of a crisis are correctly understood by outside observers, it is often difficult for those 
to implement necessary measures in their jurisdictions without actually experiencing a crisis. 
For instance, it was only by facing so many failed financial institutions after the bursting of 
the bubble that Japan learned the importance of an infrastructure whereby failed institutions 
can be resolved in an orderly manner. We had to overcome so many difficulties before we 
finally introduced the resolution regimes we are equipped with today. After the outbreak of 
the current financial crisis, I was rather surprised to learn that resolution regimes were not yet 
fully introduced in many European countries. Thus, I realized again how difficult it is to learn 
from  the  experience  of  others  and  to  translate  that  into  one’s  own  action.  The  financial 
systems in Asian economies were relatively stable during the current crisis, but we need to 
recognize that by feeling less pain, we in the Asian region may have missed something that 
we were supposed to learn during this new experience. 
Second, memories fade with time and as generations pass. I mentioned earlier that Asian 
financial institutions, including Japan’s, were cautious in investing in complex securitization 
products,  but  there  is  no  guarantee  that  they  will  remain  prudent  in  the  future.  History 
provides  us  with  so  many  examples  of  one  success  leading  to  complacency:  the  bubble 
economy of Japan in the late 1980s, the East Asian Miracle of the early 1990s, and the Great 
Moderation of the mid-2000s, to name just a few. 
Third, since crises emerge in different guises depending on the stage of development and 
the structure of the economy, the way we respond to a crisis should also evolve. In order to 
maintain  financial  stability,  the  mechanism  of  financial  institutions’  governance  and  the 
safety-net  of  the  economy,  or  indeed  of  society  in  general,  are  of  crucial  importance. 
However, there is no governance mechanism or safety-net arrangement that is appropriate 
for all societies at all times. The Asian crisis taught us the downside of free capital flows if a 
country  is  not  equipped  with  the  appropriate  bank  supervision  and  regulation.  In  the 
arguments over the so-called crony capitalism, the Asian financial system was once criticized 
for its opacity, which was considered to be the result of favoritism based on family and local 
ties. It is beyond my ability to judge whether such criticism was justified or not, but it is quite 
possible that at some stage of economic and social development, factors, such as long-term 
customer  relationships  and  mutual  assistance,  do  have  a  role  to  play  in  the  governance 
mechanism. The exact form of governance mechanism still varies across societies even in 
the age of globalization. In reviewing policies and systems, including financial regulation and 
supervision, it is very important that each jurisdiction strives to find an answer that best fits its 
own financial and economic structures. 
                                                 
3   See Masaaki Shirakawa, “Way Out of Economic and Financial Crisis: Lessons and Policy Actions”, speech at 
Japan Society in New York (April 2009) for discussion on the so-called “lost decade”. 
BIS Review 165/2009 
 3
Towards better financial regulation and supervision 
5. 
Vigorous discussions are currently being held in a variety of international forums, including 
the  Financial  Stability  Board  and  the  Basel  Committee,  with  a  view  to  reforming  the 
framework  of  financial  regulation  and  supervision.  Although  the  Asian  financial  system 
remains relatively stable, it cannot be guaranteed immunity from global financial crises, and 
has actually been significantly impacted by the current crisis. A robust global financial system 
is a public good that benefits the whole world. This cannot be over-emphasized. In order to 
prevent another financial crisis, each country should be well aware of this common objective 
in  the  first  place.  Efforts  should  then  be  made  to  organize  an  internationally  consistent 
regulatory and supervisory framework. 
In making such efforts, we must be very cautious that the reforming of the financial regulatory 
and  supervisory  framework  is  conducted  in  a  well-balanced  manner.  When  we  talk  about 
regulation  and  supervision,  we  should  not  confine  the  discussion  within  the  sphere  of 
regulation and supervision itself. We should rather keep our eyes on its wider context. When 
we embark on regulatory and supervisory reform, I believe, it is very important to strike the 
right balance in a number of dimensions as follows. 
Balance between macroeconomic policy and financial regulation and supervision 
First, balance is needed between macroeconomic policy, particularly monetary policy on the 
one hand, and financial regulation and supervision on the other. In recent years, there has 
been  a  growing  tendency  among  academics  and  central  bankers  to  draw  a  clear  line 
between  the  role  of  monetary  policy  and  that  of  supervision  and  regulation:  namely, 
monetary policy should aim at price stability, and regulation and supervision should aim at 
financial  system  stability.  However,  what  we  actually  witnessed  during  the  credit  booming 
period was an unwelcome combination of asset prices increase, rapid credit expansion, and 
subdued inflation. As a result, debate has been often framed in terms of a trade-off between 
price stability and financial system stability. However, the true trade-off is not between price 
stability and financial system stability, but it exists intertemporally between economic stability 
of the present and that in the future. Although ensuring the soundness of individual financial 
institutions  through  regulation  and  supervision  is  surely  important,  the  sound  management 
efforts at a micro level may not be sufficient to guarantee the financial system stability. From 
a  macro-perspective,  however,  if  we  maintain  a  monetary  policy  that  accommodates 
excessive leverage and maturity mismatches over the longer term, someone will eventually 
take excessive risk, and this will lead to an erosion of financial system stability. That is why 
monetary  policy,  too,  should  be  conducted  with  a  macro-prudential  perspective,  aiming  at 
sustainable price stability in the longer term. At the same time, we must avoid strengthening 
regulatory framework becomes an impediment to macroeconomic stability. In this sense, we 
must  carefully  assess  the  condition  of  global  economy  to  determine  the  timing  for 
implementing the strengthened capital standards. For this, as declared in the Statement of 
the  G20  Pittsburgh  Summit  in  September,  it  is  necessary  for  us  to  take  an  approach  that 
strengthening  of  the  capital  standards  should  be  implemented  as  economic  recovery  is 
assured. 
Balance between regulation and self-discipline 
Second,  balance  is  needed  between  regulation  applied  to  financial  institutions  on  the  one 
hand, and management and self-discipline by financial institutions themselves on the other. 
Financial  markets  are  ever-changing  and  business  models  differ  across  institutions.  Given 
the limited resources of supervisors and regulators, it is impossible to supervise or regulate 
every  inch  of  the  activities  of  financial  institutions.  Moreover,  given  the  limited  liability  of 
shareholders,  the  myopic  behavior  of  shareholders  and  managers  cannot  be  restrained 
simply by enhancing minimum capital ratio standards or through other regulations. Before the 
emergence of the subprime loan problem, most financial institutions were well-capitalized in 
4 
 BIS Review 165/2009
terms  of  the  regulatory  definition  of  capital.  Of  course,  we  can  say  this  is  owing  to  the 
deficiency of the current capital regulation. That is, risks are not adequately captured in the 
calculation  of  the  capital  ratios.  At  the  same  time,  however,  this  seems  to  suggest  how 
intrinsically difficult it is to capture risk correctly in a timely manner. After all, the first line of 
defense  of  a  financial  institution  is  its  managers  whose  task  is  to  properly  identify  and 
manage risks to ensure the financial soundness of their institutions. 
On a related issue, the mechanism and factors that govern the self-discipline exercised by 
managers varies from country to country. A typical example is the compensation scheme for 
managers. If you check the disclosure journals of U.S. and Japanese financial institutions, 
you  will  notice  a  huge  difference  between  the  two  countries  in  terms  of  the  level  of 
compensation  for  managers.  In  its  recent  report,  the  Financial  Stability  Board  describes  a 
number of attributes required of a desirable scheme and level of compensation. For my part, 
I  would  just  like  to  emphasize  that  managers’  appropriate  judgment  on  strategic  issues  is 
crucially important. 
Balance between regulation and supervision 
Third,  balance  is  needed  between  regulation  and  supervision.  There  is  a  non-negligible 
difference among countries in terms of financial and economic structures, as well as in terms 
of the business models of financial institutions. A minimum set of common rules is needed to 
be applied to internationally active financial institutions. At the same time, however, it is also 
important to leave a certain amount of room for local regulators and supervisors to adapt to 
the local situation. For example, the appropriate method of liquidity management can differ 
according  to  the  business  model  of  a  particular  financial  institution.  When  considering 
liquidity regulation, the first item that comes to many people’s mind as qualified liquid assets 
would be government bonds. However, in some Asian jurisdictions, outstanding amounts of 
government bonds issued are small, as a result of fiscal discipline. For such jurisdictions, a 
uniform liquidity regulation could even be harmful. 
In Japan, supervisory authorities are monitoring the liquidity positions of financial institutions 
in a more detailed manner on a routine basis. Thus, at the time of the Lehman shock, the 
Bank of Japan was in a position to know on a daily basis the funding activities of financial 
institutions,  including  foreign  banks  and  securities  firms.  This  type  of  information  was 
particularly valuable when the Bank of Japan conducted open market operations in such a 
stressed  situation.  This  is  one  of  the  reasons  why  Japan’s  financial  system  was  able  to 
remain relatively stable at that time. Of course, not all countries can afford to conduct such 
monitoring on a regular basis. Thus, the best way of addressing these issues may be more 
or  less  different  across  jurisdictions,  and  it  might  be  difficult  to  always  establish  an 
internationally uniform hard-wired standard. 
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  I  strongly  believe  in  the  necessity  of  internationally  common  rules. 
That said, it is hard to draw a clear line between those areas where internationally common 
rules should be applied, and those where domestic rules should be applied. The same holds 
for  determining  whether  supervision  or  regulation  should  play  the  main  role  in  a  particular 
area. I would like to emphasize the importance of both; that is, internationally common rules 
on the one hand, and due respect for the differences among countries and institutions on the 
other. 
Balance between preventing crisis and containing ripple effects 
Fourth, balance is needed between policies aimed at preventing crisis and those aimed at 
containing the ripple effects of a crisis that has already occurred. Even if all the efforts I have 
mentioned were made, including macroeconomic policies, regulation, supervision, and self-
discipline, there will always remain the possibility of financial institution failure. Recognizing 
this harsh reality, we have to redouble our efforts to construct a financial infrastructure that is 
resilient to shocks. Challenges abound in this sphere, but I would like to stress the crucial 
BIS Review 165/2009 
 5
role  of  the  smooth  transfer  of  liquidity  across  currencies,  time  zones,  and  jurisdictional 
boundaries.  It  is  the  lack  of  liquidity,  rather  than  the  lack  of  capital,  that  directly  causes 
failures  of  financial  institutions.  Therefore,  we  should  endeavor  to  prevent  the  crisis 
contagion triggered by concerns over a lack of liquidity. In this regard, for example, currency 
swap  arrangements  and  cross-border  collateral  arrangements  could  both  be  effective 
liquidity supplement tools. Enhancing the infrastructure of financial transactions, including the 
shortening of settlement periods, is also an important issue. 
Concluding remarks 
6. 
As  I  have  argued,  striking  the  right  balance  in  a  variety  of  dimensions  is  important  for 
realizing  financial  system  stability.  I  would  like  to  conclude  my  remarks  with  a  few  words 
mentioning  that  in  order  to  attain  the  kinds  of  balance  I  have  outlined,  it  is  crucial  for  the 
relevant organizations and personnel themselves to have a balanced and broad perspective 
on the issues at hand. 
The Japanese financial crisis was a result of the bursting of the bubble that emerged in the 
late 1980s. During this bubble era, I was working in the monetary policy area. For several 
years  after  the  bursting  of  the  bubble,  I  was  involved  in  the  resolution  of  failing  financial 
institutions and in developing the necessary framework to carry out such resolutions. In the 
late 1990s, I moved over to work on international financial markets, and in the several years 
just before and after the Asian financial crisis, I was involved in the work carried out by the 
Committee  on  Global  Financial  Systems  hosted  by  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements. 
After  that,  I  returned  to  the  monetary  policy  area  until  the  mid-2000s,  covering  a  period 
identified with a number of keywords, including the bursting of the IT bubble, deflation, and 
the Yen carry trade. 
Looking back, I believe the knowledge and intuition that I gained through this experience has 
been  extremely  valuable  in  making  policy  decisions  in  the  face  of  the  recent  crisis.  Such 
personal  experience  has  led  me  to  emphasize  the  importance  for  people  involved  in  the 
world of financial stability to have as broad a perspective as possible, rather than confining 
themselves in a silo, and for staff to experience a variety of jobs in rotation. It is also quite 
important for the management of central banks and regulators to foster such an institutional 
culture. 
International human networks are also a vital element in developing a broader perspective. 
The  recent  crisis  has  reminded  us  of  the  significance  of  international  networks  and 
cooperation. From such a viewpoint, I would like to express my gratitude once again to Bank 
Negara Malaysia and the Bank for International Settlements for organizing this fruitful event, 
which has made a most valuable contribution to widening our perspectives. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
6 
 BIS Review 165/2009
