Daniel K Tarullo: International cooperation to modernize financial 
regulation 
Testimony  of  Mr  Daniel  K  Tarullo,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve System, before the Subcommittee on Security and International Trade and Finance, 
Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, Washington DC, 30 September 2009. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website. 
 Chairman  Bayh,  Ranking  Member  Corker,  and  other  members  of  the  Subcommittee,  I 
appreciate  the  opportunity  to  testify  today  on  the  role  of  international  cooperation  in 
modernizing financial regulation. International cooperation is important for the interests of the 
United  States  because,  as  has  been  graphically  illustrated  in  the  past  two  years,  financial 
instability can spread rapidly across national boundaries. Well-devised international financial 
regulatory standards can help encourage all nations to maintain effective domestic regulatory 
systems.  Coordinated  international  supervisory  arrangements  can  help  ensure  that  every 
large, internationally active financial institution is effectively supervised. Both these forms of 
international  cooperation  can,  at  the  same  time,  promote  at  least  a  roughly  equivalent 
competitive environment for U.S. financial institutions with those from other nations.  
In  my  testimony  this  afternoon,  I  will  review  the  responses  of  key  international  regulatory 
groups  to  the  financial  crisis,  including  both  substantive  policy  responses  and  the 
organizational changes in membership and working methods in some of those groups. Next I 
will describe specifically the role of the Federal Reserve's participation and priorities in these 
international  regulatory  groups.  I  will  conclude  with  some  thoughts  on  the  challenges  for 
international regulatory cooperation as we move forward from the G-20 Pittsburgh Summit 
and the exceptionally active international coordination process that has preceded it. 
The response of international regulatory groups to the crisis 
Over  the  past  few  decades,  international  cooperation  in  financial  regulation  has  generally 
been  pursued  in  a  number  of  groups  that  bring  together  national  authorities  with 
responsibility for regulating or supervising in a particular area, or that served as venues for 
informal discussion. Several of the functional regulatory groups have undertaken initiatives in 
response to the recent financial crisis. During this period, the Financial Stability Board (FSB) 
shifted from being more of a discussion forum to serving as a coordinator of these initiatives. 
The FSB was also the direct line of communication between these groups and the G-20. 
The Federal Reserve actively participates in the FSB as well as in the following international 
groups: 
- 
In the Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems, we work with other central 
banks to promote sound and efficient payment and settlement systems.  
In the Committee on the Global Financial System, we work with other central banks 
to  monitor  developments  in  global  financial  markets,  reporting  to  the  central  bank 
governors of the G-10 countries.  
In  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  (Basel  Committee),  we  and  the 
other  U.S.  bank  supervisors  work  with  other  central  banks  and  bank  supervisory 
agencies to promote sound banking supervision by developing standards for bank 
capital requirements and bank risk management, and by promulgating principles for 
effective  bank  supervision.  The  Basel  Committee,  which  doubled  its  membership 
  BIS Review 118/2009 
 1
   earlier  this  year,  now  includes  supervisors  from  27  jurisdictions,  including  both 
advanced and emerging markets.1  
In  the  Joint  Forum,  we  and  other  U.S.  financial  regulators  –  including  bank, 
securities,  and  insurance  regulators  –  work  with  financial  regulators  from  other 
countries to enhance financial regulation that spans different financial sectors.  
In the Senior Supervisors Group, we and other U.S. supervisors have worked over 
the  past  few  years  with  the  supervisors  of  other  major  financial  firms  to  share 
information and sponsor joint reviews of risk management and disclosure.  
In  bilateral  and  regional  supervisory  groups,  we  have  discussed  regulatory  issues 
with  Europe,  China,  India,  Japan  and  other  supervisors  from  the  Western 
Hemisphere. 
Some of these groups have quite a long history. Both the Committee on the Global Financial 
System  and  the  Basel  Committee  date  back  to  the  1970s.  These  groups  are  not  formal 
international  organizations.  They  have  operated  with  only  a  modest  support  staff  –  often 
provided, along with a location for meetings, by the Bank for International Settlements (BIS). 
The bulk of their activity is conducted by officials from the national regulators themselves. 
The  FSB  is  a  relatively  new  group,  established  in  the  wake  of  the  Asian  financial  crisis  in 
1999  as  the  Financial  Stability  Forum,  with  a  broad  mandate  to  promote  global  financial 
stability.  The  FSB  is  an  unusual  combination  of  international  standard-setting  bodies 
(including  those  mentioned  above)  and  a  range  of  national  authorities  responsible  for 
financial stability: treasury departments and ministries of finance, central banks, and financial 
supervisory  agencies.2  Major  international  organizations  such  as  the  BIS  and  the 
International Monetary Fund (IMF) also participate.3 At the request of the G-20 in April 2009, 
the  Financial  Stability  Forum's  name  was  changed  to  the  Financial  Stability  Board,  its 
membership  was  expanded  to  add  the  emerging  market  countries  from  the  G-20,  and  its 
mandate was strengthened. 
The  financial  crisis  has  underscored  the  importance  of  the  original  motivation  for  creating 
what  is  now  the  FSB.  The  connections  among  financial  market  sectors,  and  between 
macroeconomic  policy  and  financial  markets,  mean  that  efforts  to  ensure  international 
financial  stability  must  incorporate  a  breadth  of  perspectives  and  include  communication 
among  the  various  international  groups  in  which  regulatory  cooperation  takes  place.  In  its 
work  to  increase  international  financial  stability  and  to  promote  financial  regulatory  reform, 
the  FSB  has  tried  to  identify  priorities  and  agree  upon  high-level  principles.  It  has  then 
requested that the relevant standard-setting bodies formulate detailed proposals and report 
back to the FSB. 
All  these  international  groups,  including  the  FSB,  operate  by  consensus.  Although  this 
institutional  feature  can  create  significant  challenges  in  reaching  agreement  on  complex 
2  
                                                 
1   The  Basel  Committee's  members  come  from  Argentina,  Australia,  Belgium,  Brazil,  Canada,  China,  France, 
Germany,  Hong  Kong  SAR,  India,  Indonesia,  Italy,  Japan,  Korea,  Luxembourg,  Mexico,  the  Netherlands, 
Russia, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, the United Kingdom, and 
the United States. 
International standard-setting bodies participating in the FSB are the Basel Committee, the Committee on the 
Global Financial System, the Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems, the International Association of 
Insurance Supervisors, the International Accounting Standards Board, and the International Organization of 
Securities Commissions. 
The jurisdictions represented on the FSB are: Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Canada, China, France, Germany, 
Hong Kong SAR, India, Indonesia, Italy, Japan, Mexico, the Netherlands, Russia, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, 
South Africa, South Korea, Spain, Switzerland, Turkey, the United Kingdom, and the United States. 
International organizations in the FSB are the BIS, the European Central Bank, the European Commission, 
the IMF, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, and The World Bank. 
3  
 2 
 BIS Review 118/2009
topics, it also serves as a check on potentially undesirable policy directions. The process of 
developing proposals in the standard-setting bodies allows a variety of ideas to be explored 
and  exposed  to  critical  examination  by  expert  staff.  Like  any  other  process,  alternative 
viewpoints emerge and dissenting opinions are voiced. Once a consensus is reached, it is 
then up to individual members to implement any statutory changes, administrative rules, or 
guidance under local law. 
As already noted, the FSB has played a leading role in guiding the official response to the 
crisis.  In  April  2008,  it  made  a  range  of  recommendations  to  increase  the  resiliency  of 
financial  markets  and  institutions.  These  recommendations  are  broadly  consistent  with 
similar principles articulated by the President's Working Group on Financial Markets here in 
the United States. The FSB has acted upon priorities identified by the G-20 leaders and has 
delivered  to  those  leaders  a  series  of  proposals  that  have  been  adopted  by  them,  most 
recently at the Pittsburgh summit last week. With its role now expanded and in the process of 
being  formalized  in  a  charter,  the  FSB  will  have  the  ongoing  mandate  of  identifying  and 
addressing emerging vulnerabilities in the financial system. 
The activities of some other groups have also broadened in response to the crisis. The Basel 
Committee  was  formed  in  1974  in  an  effort  by  national  authorities  to  fill  supervisory  gaps 
exposed  by  problems  in  a  number  of  internationally  active  banks.  Beginning  in  the  late 
1980s,  its  focus  shifted  to  setting  capital  standards  for  internationally  active  banks.  That 
emphasis  continues  today,  notably  with  respect  to  strengthening  capital  requirements  for 
securitization  exposures  and  trading  book  exposures  as  well  as  disclosure  requirements 
related to these areas. The Basel Committee has now begun to address a wider range of 
issues  aimed  at  improving  standards  for  capital,  liquidity,  cross-border  bank  resolution, 
leverage, and macroprudential supervision.  
In March 2008, the Senior Supervisors Group released its first report on risk-management 
practices.4  The  report,  based  on  extensive  discussions  with  large  financial  institutions, 
provided  near-real-time  analysis  of  the  major  failures  in  risk  management  and  internal 
controls  that  led  to  outsized  losses  at  a  number  of  firms,  and  highlighted  distinctions  in 
practices that may have enabled some other institutions to better withstand the crisis. The 
group  is  now  in  the  final  phases  of  preparing  a  second  report  that  will  focus  on  the 
challenges that emerged as particularly critical last year, notably related to management of 
liquidity  risk,  and  present  the  results  of  the  self-assessments  by  the  largest  financial 
institutions  regarding  their  responses  to  the  risk-management  and  internal  control  issues 
highlighted by the crisis. 
International regulatory and supervisory bodies have been actively engaged in addressing a 
wide range of issues, many of which have been highlighted by the recent financial crisis. Let 
me  now  discuss  in  more  detail  a  few  of  the  areas  that  are  most  important  from  the 
perspective of the Federal Reserve. 
Capital 
The  financial  crisis  has  left  little  doubt  that  capital  levels  of  many  financial  firms,  including 
many in the United States, were insufficient to protect them and the financial system as a 
whole.  The  FSB  has  called  for  significantly  stronger  capital  standards,  to  be  agreed  upon 
now and phased in as financial and economic conditions improve. The communiqué issued 
Friday  by  the  G-20  leaders  echoed  and  amplified  the  need  for  improvements  in  both  the 
quantity and quality of capital. 
                                                 
4   See Senior Supervisors Group (2008), Observations on Risk Management Practices during the Recent Market 
Turbulence  (Basel:  SSG,  March  6),  available  at  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  (2008),  "Senior 
Supervisors Group Issues Report on Risk Management Practices," press release, March 6. 
BIS Review 118/2009 
 3
One critical area for improvement is that of increasing capital requirements for many forms of 
traded  securities,  including  some  securitized  assets.  Some  work  has  already  been 
completed. We place a high priority on undertaking a comprehensive review and reform of 
these requirements. The Basel Committee is also working on proposals for an international 
leverage ratio to act as a supplement to risk-based capital ratios. The FSB has also devoted 
considerable energies to exploring sources of procyclicality in the financial system, which are 
those  practices  and  structures  that  tend  to  amplify  rather  than  dampen  the  cycles 
characteristic  of  financial  markets,  and  to  identifying  possible  strategies  to  reduce  their 
effects, which were often quite visible during the recent crisis. One such strategy is to include 
a countercyclical capital buffer in the capital requirements for financial firms. Work on such a 
buffer  is  under  way,  though  the  technical  challenges  of  devising  an  effective  buffering 
mechanism are significant.  
It  will  be  important  for  the  international  regulatory  community  to  carefully  calibrate  the 
aggregate effect of these initiatives to ensure that they protect against future crises while not 
raising  capital  requirements  to  such  a  degree  that  the  availability  of  credit  to  support 
economic growth is unduly constrained. The Basel Committee plans a study of the overall 
calibration of these changes for early next year. 
Liquidity 
Liquidity  risk  is  another  key  international  agenda  item.  Although  the  Basel  Committee  had 
historically  focused  on  capital  standards,  the  crisis  clearly  demonstrated  that  adequate 
capital was a necessary but not always sufficient condition to ensure the ability of a financial 
institution to withstand market stress. We were reminded that the liquidity of a firm's assets is 
critical to its ability to meet its obligations in times of market dislocation. In particular, access 
to  wholesale  financing very  quickly  became  severely  constrained  for many  institutions  that 
had grown  quite dependent on it. The Basel Committee  promulgated general guidance on 
liquidity  risk  management  in  June  2008  and  is  now  in  the  process  of  incorporating  those 
broad principles into specific quantitative requirements. 
Cross-border bank resolution 
In the area of cross-border resolution authority, there is broad international agreement that 
existing frameworks simply do not allow for the orderly resolution of cross-border failures of 
large  complex  banking  organizations  and  that  changes  are  needed.  Current  frameworks 
focus on individual institutions rather than financial groups or the financial systems at large. 
These frameworks have proven problematic even at the national level. Policy differences and 
legal obstacles can magnify these shortcomings at the international level. 
The  Basel  Committee's  Cross-Border  Bank  Resolution  Group  has  developed  10 
recommendations  for  national  authorities.5  The  recommendations,  which  aim  at  greater 
convergence  of  national  resolution  frameworks,  should  help  strengthen  cross-border  crisis 
management.  One  key  recommendation  requires  systemically  important  firms  to  have 
contingency  plans  that  will  allow  for  an  orderly  resolution  should  that  prove  necessary. 
Implementation  of  these  recommendations  is  likely  to  require  heightened  cooperation 
throughout the international community. 
Accounting standards for financial institutions  
The FSB and the Basel Committee have an important role in supporting improved accounting 
standards for financial institutions. For example, the FSB has developed recommendations 
                                                 
5   See  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  Cross-Border  Bank  Resolution  Group  (2009),  Report  and 
Recommendations of the Cross-Border Resolution Group (Basel: Basel Committee, September). 
4 
 BIS Review 118/2009
for  improving  the  accounting  for  loan  loss  provisions.  The  Basel  Committee  consults 
frequently with those who set international accounting standards on these and other topics 
and provides comments on important accounting proposals affecting financial institutions.  
Future initiatives 
A number of other initiatives are at an earlier stage of policy development. A good deal of 
attention right now is focused on mitigating the risks of systemically important financial firms. 
Two of the more promising ideas are particularly worth mentioning. One is for a requirement 
for contingent capital that converts from debt to equity in times of stress or for comparable 
arrangements  that  require  firms  themselves  to  provide  for  back-up  sources  of  capital.  The 
other is for a special capital or other charge to be applied on firms based on their degree of 
systemic importance. Many of these initiatives still require much work at the technical level 
before policy proposals will be ready for a thorough vetting in the national and international 
regulatory community. 
How the Federal Reserve pursues our objectives in international groups 
The  Federal  Reserve  promotes  U.S.  interests  in  these  international  groups  by  actively 
participating and by coordinating with other U.S. participants. 
The international groups that I mentioned earlier all hold regular meetings. The FSB meets at 
least  twice  a  year,  and  the  Basel  Committee  typically  meets  four  times  a  year.  Between 
meetings of the main groups, subgroups of technical experts meet to discuss proposals and 
lay  the  groundwork  for  issues  to  be  discussed  at  the  main  groups.  The  Federal  Reserve 
actively participates in both the main groups and the subgroups. For practical purposes, not 
all  members  of  a  group  can  sit  on  each  subgroup,  although  the  United  States  is  well 
represented on all major topics and chairs important subgroups. 
We have found that success in pursuing our objectives in these groups depends upon having 
well-developed ideas. One important basis for leadership in international groups is the quality 
of  the  intellectual  and  policy  contributions  that  an  organization  can  offer.  To  this  end,  we 
have tried to use the extensive economic and research resources of the Federal Reserve, as 
well as our regulatory experience, to produce well-considered proposals and useful feedback 
on the proposals of others. 
International groups operate on the basis of consensus. Policies are endorsed only when all 
members voice their support. This approach can make it challenging to come to agreement 
on complex topics. But international groups are made up of regulatory agencies or central 
banks,  and  they  have  particular  responsibilities  based  on  their  own  national  laws. 
International groups are not empowered to create enforceable law, and agreements need to 
be implemented by member countries in the form of statutory changes, administrative rules, 
or  supervisory  guidance.  Thus,  the  consensus  orientation  of  the  international  policy 
development process is necessary to respect the domestic legal structures within which the 
various regulatory agencies operate.  
The President's Working Group on Financial Markets is the primary forum in which regulatory 
issues are discussed among the principals of the U.S. financial regulatory agencies. These 
discussions often cover the same issues being discussed in international groups. We strive 
to  maintain  a  degree  of  intellectual  rigor  and  collegiality  in  these  discussions  where 
consensus  is  again  the  norm,  despite  the  sometimes  different  perspectives  of  the  various 
agencies. In the past, there were some notable instances of significant disagreement among 
the U.S. agencies, but my observation since being appointed to the Federal Reserve is that 
the coordination process is working quite well. Indeed, it can sometimes be an advantage to 
have  multiple  U.S.  agencies 
the 
complementary expertise we each bring to bear. In addition, at the international level, having 
multiple U.S. agencies at the table provides an appropriate counterweight to our European 
international  processes  because  of 
involved 
in 
BIS Review 118/2009 
 5
counterparts, who for historical reasons are usually overrepresented in international groups 
relative to their weight in the global financial system. 
Like other central banks, the Federal Reserve did not participate in the G-20 summit, which 
is attended by heads of state and finance ministers. However, we are involved in a significant 
part  of  the  relevant  preparatory  and  follow-up  work,  both  through  the  FSB  and  in  joint 
meetings of the G-20 finance ministers and central banks.6 In preparation for the Pittsburgh 
summit, as well as for the previous G-20 summits in London and Washington, the Federal 
Reserve  has  also  collaborated  with  other  U.S.  financial  regulatory  agencies  in  considering 
the financial regulatory issues on the agendas for these meetings. 
Challenges for international financial cooperation 
The testimony that my colleagues and I have offered this afternoon reflects the breadth and 
depth of the tasks associated with improved regulation and supervision of financial markets, 
activities,  and  firms.  An  ambitious  agenda  has  been  developed  through  the  interactions  of 
the  G-20,  the  FSB,  and  international  standard-setting  bodies,  and  much  work  toward 
completing  that  agenda  is  already  under  way.  At  the  same  time,  there  will  inevitably  be 
challenges as we all intensify and reorient the work of these groups. I will now discuss four of 
those challenges. 
First,  for  all  the  virtues  of  the  consensus-based  approach  involving  the  relevant  national 
authorities, some subjects will simply be very difficult to handle fully in this fashion. Cross-
border resolution may prove to be one such issue. Although there is undoubtedly potential for 
achieving  improvement  in  the  current  situation  through  the  international  processes  I  have 
described,  the  complexities  involved  because  of  the  existence  of  differing  national 
bankruptcy and bank resolution laws may limit what can be achieved. 
Second,  there  will  likely  be  a  period  of  working  out  the  relationships  among  the  various 
international  bodies,  particularly  in  light  of  the  increased  role  of  the  FSB.  We  will  need  to 
determine how extensively the FSB and its newly constituted committees should themselves 
develop  standards,  particularly  where  an  existing  international  standards-setting  body  has 
the expertise and mandate to address the topic. Similarly, while simultaneous consideration 
of the same issue in multiple international bodies can sometimes be a useful way to develop 
alternative  proposals,  there  may  also  be  potential  for  initiatives  that  are  at  odds  with  one 
another. 
Third,  the  significant  expansion  in  membership  of  many  of  the  more  important  of  these 
bodies may require some innovation in organizational approaches in order to maintain the 
combination of flexibility and effectiveness that the FSB and some of the other groups have, 
at their best, possessed in the past. The substitution of the G-20 for the G-8 at the level of 
heads of government is the most visible manifestation of the salutary trend toward involving a 
number  of  emerging  market  economies 
regulatory 
arrangements.  As  I  mentioned  earlier,  the  FSB  and  the  Basel  Committee  have  recently 
expanded their membership to the entire G-20. Important as this expansion is for the goal of 
global  financial  stability,  the  greater  number  of  participants does  have  an  impact  upon  the 
operation of those groups, and we will need to adapt accordingly. I hasten to add that this is 
not at all a comment on the capacities of the new members. On the contrary, I have been 
impressed with the quality of the participation from the new emerging market members.  
Finally,  the  financial  crisis  has  understandably  concentrated  the  attention  and  energies  of 
many of these international regulatory groups on the new standards that will be necessary to 
international 
financial 
in  key 
                                                 
6   The FSB prepared three documents that were presented to G-20 leaders at the summit: "FSB Principles for 
in 
Sound  Compensation  Practices,"  "Improving  Financial  Regulation,"  and  "Overview  of  Progress 
Implementing the London Summit Recommendations for Strengthening Financial Stability." 
6 
 BIS Review 118/2009
protect  financial  stability  in  the  future.  Combined  with  the  enlarged  memberships  of  these 
groups, however, this focus on negotiating standards may unintentionally displace some of 
the  traditional  attention  to  fostering  cooperative  supervisory  practices  by  the  national 
regulators  who  participate  in  these  international  bodies.  It  is  important  that,  even  as  we 
represent  our  national  interests  in  these  bodies,  we  also  promote  the  shared  interests  we 
have in effective financial supervision. 
Conclusion  
Participating  in  international  regulatory  groups  has  helped  the  Federal  Reserve  and  other 
U.S. agencies begin to shape an effective global regulatory response to the financial crisis. 
We  look  forward  to  continuing  our  collaboration  in  pursuit  of  effective,  efficient  financial 
regulation. 
Thank you for inviting me to present the Board's views on this very important subject. I look 
forward to continuing dialogue with the subcommittee on these issues. I would be pleased to 
answer any questions you may have. 
BIS Review 118/2009 
 7
