Budi Mulya: Managing risk in the new landscape 
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  Budi  Mulya,  Deputy  Governor  of  Bank  Indonesia,  at  the  Banker 
Association  for  Risk  Management  (BARa)  seminar  on  “Managing  Risks  in  an  Uncertain 
World”, Jakarta, 26 October 2009. 
 Chairman, Board members and members of the Indonesian Bankers Association and Banker 
Association and Risk Management, Distinguished Speakers, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is such a great honore to be here today, especially to join in a dialog amongst experts and 
practitioners,  on  risk  management.  The  risk  management  topic,  has  become  an  important 
subject to be seriously addressed, considering on what we have observed during the most 
recent global financial crisis. 
The  impact  of  the  crisis  that  emerged  back  in  September  2008,  has  spread  deeply  and 
widely  through,  both  financial  market  and  real  economic,  in  particular  passing  through 
international trade channel. Since then, we all have witnessed that over the past year, there 
has been dramatic change, in many aspects of the economy and financial market globally. 
The magnitude impact of the crisis into individual country differs, depending on how, and to 
what extent the economy of individual country, and its financial institutions is linked into the 
global  market.  Yet,  there  is  no  single  country  immune  from  the  recent  turbulence.  This  is 
mostly because at the first stage the financial turmoil which started in the US financial market 
has triggered panic amongst financial market players, in face with high uncertainty, and this 
behavior was spreading almost instantly worldwide. 
To that respect I would like to emphasize, that such market behavior has much to do with risk 
management,  more  specifically  in  the  weakness,  of  its  implementation  in  the  real  world. 
Thus, the recent crisis shows somewhat in contrast of the fact that during the last decade risk 
management  has  become  one  important  topic  in  discussion.  As  a  management  tool,  the 
practice of risk management so far, has failed to change human being behavior that tends to 
be easily trapped in complacency. That is, a tendency of not assessing risk properly in good 
time, partly covered by expected high return, but then reacting so extremely in reverse when 
thing goes in the opposite direction. 
However, as we observed from the ongoing public debate with regard to the cause of the 
recent  turmoil,  the  similar  phenomenon  can  be  found  within  the  authority’s  or  regulator’s 
perspective.  In  particular,  on  how  they  perceived  risk  in  setting  policy  and  in  regulating 
financial industry. More specifically on the assumption that market discipline will always work 
properly. 
One highlight that we can derive from what has been happening so far, is that the financial 
industry  must  always  be  closely  linked  with  the  real  sector  activities,  the  fundamental 
economic. 
The Indonesian economy and financial industry during turmoil 
As in some emerging economies, Indonesia essentially has quite a strong fundamental, and 
much  better  compare  to  what  was  during  1997/98  Asian  crisis.  However,  as  I  previously 
mentioned the crises that caused global economic growth slump and the international trade 
volume squeeze, as well as a high degree of uncertainty that surrounded the international 
financial market has also weakened the domestic economic activities. Yet, the economy is 
still  able  to  expand.  The  Indonesia’s  economy  grew  at  6.1%  in  2008.  The  Indonesian 
economic growth reached the bottom in quarter II 2009 at 4%, a 0.4% drop from previous 
quarter of 4.4%. We expect that the Indonesian economy will grow at 4.0 to 4.5% in 2009, 
higher  than  previously  estimated.  The  domestic  economic  growth  is  mainly  supported  by 
BIS Review 136/2009 
 1
domestic demand which contribute more than 60% of GDP and natural resources export. In 
2010,  we  expect  the  economy  will  grow  at  5%  to  5.5%.  Along  with  declining  domestic 
economic activities in 2009, inflation rate has also descended. As of September 2009, the 
year to date inflation rate is 2.28%. Inflation is expected back to its normal pattern in 2010 at 
5 +/-1 % as economic activities start accelerating.  
In  addition,  the  domestic  banking  industry  is  also  in  relatively  sound  condition  and  well 
capitalized.  The  average  capital  adequacy  ratio  (CAR)  is  around  17%  and  the  gross  non-
performing loan (NPL) ratio is below 5%. 
Those  facts  show  that  the  Indonesian  economy  is  relatively  sheltered  from  the  biggest 
turbulence since the world’s war II. However, foreign investors tend to undermine those facts, 
and perceived risks exaggeratedly on the Indonesian economic fundamental. Despite that, it 
was  true  that  the  crisis  caused  panic  and  lost  of  confidence,  in  particular  post  Lehman 
Brothers  collapsed  on  15  September  2008,  which  led  to  the  phenomenon  of  holding  cash 
alike  and  safe  haven  assets,  it  has  put  significant  pressure  on  Indonesian  economy  and 
increasing  volatility  in  the  domestic  financial  market.  Risk  perception  on  the  Indonesian 
financial market has been so high as shown in the hike of CDS spread, that reach a peak of 
around 1000 bps in October 2008, the highest spread amongst countries within the region. 
Further, the exodus from emerging market financial assets, led the government bond (SUN) 
price index (IDMA index) to fall to its lowest level ever at 67.11 in October 2008, which mean 
that across the board yield of SUN, has hike to above 15%. The IDR exchange rate again US 
Dollar, has also weakened dramatically from around 9.200 levels, to reach its peak at 12.000 
levels in November 2008. 
However,  the  above  symptoms  of  increasing  counterparty  and  credit  risk  also  could  be 
observed in domestic market. The inter-bank money market indicators also revealed similar 
shape, to those found in global market during the crisis. The spread of JIBOR 1 month over 
BI Rate for instance, has widened significantly to around 250 bps, despite that the interest 
rate was in a declining trend, while in normal condition it is always below 50 bps. Further, 
there was also a tendency that banks prefer to hold their reserve, in shorter maturity of Bank 
Indonesia’s OMO instruments (FASBI and short-term deposit collection, the so-called FTK). 
These,  along  with  nervous  as  observed  in  the  banking  industry  with  regard  to  its  funding 
source, public or third parties deposit that led to unhealthy competition amongst banks, has 
showed that, there was some potential liquidity risk in the domestic banking sector. 
To cope with the above mention situation, the Government and Bank Indonesia took some 
necessary measures to safeguard the domestic economy. Government has provided fiscal 
stimulus to secure the real sector activities, as well as to prevent the deterioration purchasing 
power  of  the  poor.  Meanwhile,  the  monetary  policy  stimulus,  took  form  in  accommodative 
stance, as inflation has fallen, by reducing BI Rate 300 bps since November 2008, from 9.5% 
to 6.5%. In addition, from the operational level, Bank Indonesia has also undertaken some 
measures  aimed  at  addressing  market  liquidity  concern,  by  providing  and  ensuring  the 
supply of liquidity in cash money market, both in US Dollar and in Rupiah. 
In  US  Dollar  market,  Bank  Indonesia  reduced  the  required  reserve  ratio,  from  3%  to  1%, 
lengthening  the  maturity  of  swap  operation,  and  ensuring  the  US  Dollar  liquidity  need  for 
domestic  corporations  via  banks,  by  providing  window  for  rediscounting  export  underlying 
instrument. Meanwhile, in the rupiah money market, Bank Indonesia took similar measure, 
such  as  providing  window  for  “repo”  transaction,  using  underlying  assets  of  government 
bonds,  and  certificate  of  Bank  Indonesia  (“SBI”),  for  various  maturity,  recently  up  to  3 
months, through an auction mechanism. The auction mechanism is also aimed at averting, 
the  negative  “stigma”  from  banks’  perspective  in  dealing  with  the  central  bank  to  obtain 
temporary liquidity in fair market price. 
All those measures, which in essence is similar to those taken by major authorities globally, 
even though differ in scale and instrument variety, has so far help the Indonesian economy 
and financial sector, in passing by the most challenging episode during the crisis. Along with 
2 
 BIS Review 136/2009
improvement  in  global  economy  and  financial market,  those  indicators  have  move  back  to 
their more normal level. The spread of JIBOR 1 month over BI Rate, for instance, has decline 
significantly at around 15 bps. Yield of SUN has declined to 10%-11% for the 10 years SUN 
and longer maturity. The CDS spread has also dropped to below crisis level of below 200 
bps, close to the pre crisis level. Meanwhile, the IDR exchange rate has also recovered and 
hover around 9,400 recently, despite still at higher volatility compare to the pre crisis period. 
However, the policy transmission into the real sector has been slowing down as uncertainties 
remain. The banks’ lending, needed to support the economic growth, is still quite slow. The 
year to date banks’ lending growth up to September 2009 is still below 5%. In addition, the 
lending rate also does not decline as expected. Despite that, this is sensible, in face with the 
declining economic slowdown and uncertainty, but is also closely linked with the way banking 
implement risk management. For some extent, this reflects, that they tend to avoid risk rather 
than, properly identifying and manage risk accordingly. 
We also observe that the way financial investors globally, do not show any change in their 
behavior, as mainly reflected in the high volatility of stock market. They tend to over react on 
every single news and data announcement, which indicates their eagerness, to try to recover 
their  lost  during  the  crisis,  and  nervousness  of  potential  lost.  This  behavior,  is  potentially 
threatening the sustaining economic recovery.  
The risks and challenge ahead 
There are now more signs of global economic recovery and improvement in the prospect of 
financial  market.  However  it  is  still  too  early  to  conclude,  that  the  recovery  path  will  be 
smooth and sustainable, since as I previously mention, the lag of policy transmission tend to 
lengthen  and  uncertainty  remains.  In  addition,  issues  concerning  the  implication  of 
extraordinary measures, that has been taken by major authorities, such as the widening of 
fiscal  deficit  in  major  countries,  and  the  “exit  policy”  of  quantitative  easing  taken  to  fight 
deflationary  pressure  in  those  countries  has  started  to  emerge.  To  cope  with  this  issue, 
authorities have intensified their policy communication, to convince that all needed measures 
and tools have been prepared. Yet, it seems that all of those are not convincing enough, as 
at this stage, the political involvement in every country tends to increase. 
With the above background, we have to keep optimistic, but still have to be cautious. From 
the  risk  management  perspective,  the  challenge  in  the  period  ahead,  is  in  identifying  the 
potential risk appropriately, which is the key in risk management. The recent turbulence has 
changed  the  global  economy  and  financial  market  landscape.  Consequently  the  standard 
indicators,  both  in  financial  market  and  real  economic,  might  have  also  changed,  and  we 
cannot rely on their empirical behavior. In face with this situation, we all have to widen the 
indicators to be considered, including qualitative indicators. 
The recent development has also lead the authority, to adjust and shift their paradigm and 
approach in setting the macroeconomic policy, and supervising as well as regulating financial 
sector. In addition, authorities globally have been challenged, with a more serious dilemma. 
On one side, their need to maintain sustainable economic recovery process, which means 
need to be expansionary or accommodative. While on the other side, they need to maintain 
financial  system  stability,  mainly  by  strengthening  regulation  and  supervision  and  improve 
the  balance  sheet  structure  of  financial  industry,  banking  in  particular,  and  its  risk 
management as well as to avoid the potential inflation in the medium to long term horizon. 
Striking the optimal balance between these two situations will be challenging and dynamic. 
The  situation  we  have  in  Indonesia  is  considerably  better  than  those  faced  by  developed 
countries, but we have to always be aware, that we are in an integrated world, and that there 
is structural changes. Hence, more prone to external shock. In this regard, Bank Indonesia 
always commit, in achieving a balance between financial stability and monetary stability, in 
BIS Review 136/2009 
 3
order to maintain low and stable inflation needed to safeguard a healthier and sustainable 
economic growth.  
The situation I just described, should always be taken into account in conducting business in 
a  more  challenging  period  ahead,  more  specifically  in  the  risk  management  practice.  For 
banking industries, considering their important role in the economy, and the severe impact in 
the  society  when  they  fail,  I  hope  there  will  be  more  professional,  and  more  proper 
implementation  of  risk  management,  and  in  particular  a  more  efficient  asset  and  liabilities 
management. 
From today’s seminar, I hope we will have a better insight in risk management area and a 
fruitful discussion to enhance our understanding and more importantly to increase confidence 
in implementing it.  
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 136/2009
