Duvvuri Subbarao: Financial inclusion – challenges and opportunities  
Remarks by Dr Duvvuri Subbarao, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Bankers’ 
Club, Kolkata, 9 December 2009. 
 1. 
Being in Kolkata, this city of joy, is always a heart warming experience. Being here 
in  the  pre-Christmas  season  is  a  particular  delight,  and  for  me  personally,  a  nostalgic 
memory. My special thanks to the Bankers’ Club for inviting me to speak here this evening. I 
recall our meeting at this Club last year when we were in the thick of the deepest financial 
crisis  of  our  time,  and  all  of  us  were  anxious  and  uncertain  about  the  immediate  future.  I 
believe the worst is behind us. Attention around the world and here in India too is shifting 
from managing the crisis to managing the recovery. As that happens, we are also returning 
to addressing our enduring challenges – of lifting nearly half a billion people out of poverty. 
There  are  many  things  we  need  to  do  to  accomplish  that  gigantic  task.  One  of  them  is 
financial  inclusion.  I  would  like  to  focus  my  comments  this  evening  on  the  challenges  and 
opportunities of financial inclusion.  
 Financial inclusion – a thousand flowers blooming 
2. 
If  you  will,  let  me  begin  with  a  couple  anecdotes.  In  rural  Maharashtra,  where 
people,  like  everywhere  else  in  the  country,  face  the  daily  challenges  of  water,  sanitation, 
electricity and transportation, a number of women have improved their lives, and the lives of 
their families, by becoming entrepreneurs, all because they could take a bank loan. 
• 
Take Aruna Gaikwad. Aruna, a farm labourer, began selling excess produce at the 
local market. An astute observer of the laws of supply and demand when it came to 
pricing fruit and vegetables, she soon saw an uptick in business. To expand, she 
needed to borrow money so that she could build her own vegetable stand. The loan 
helped  her  establish  a  thriving  vegetable  vending  business,  allowing  her  to  shift 
away from the back-breaking work tending other people’s fields. Her former hand-to-
mouth  existence  had  given  way  to  a  new  reality,  one  which  includes  savings  and 
checking accounts at the bank, and the credit needed to keep her kids in school – a 
good fortune she herself never had. 
And then there is Lakshmi Shellar. Widowed at 17, Lakshmi helped form a local self-
help group. She spoke up and spoke out at meetings, and inspired other women in 
the group to take their future into their own hands. Meanwhile, she brought banking 
services  to  them.  And  she  provided  evening  literacy  classes.  The  177  women  of 
Lakshmi’s self-help group have all borrowed and repaid their loans. 
3. 
Aruna and Lakshmi are just two of the millions of women across the country who 
have demonstrated what is possible if only rural women can have access to basic financial 
services. This is what financial inclusion is all about – giving people an opportunity to build 
better lives for themselves and their children. That impulse, if given a chance, can contribute 
to sustained improvements in the quality of life at the community level and foster growth and 
poverty reduction at the national level.  
4. 
But there remain tremendous barriers to unleashing this “fortune at the bottom of the 
pyramid.”  Chief  among  them:  financial  exclusion.  This  is  a  confluence  of  multiple  barriers: 
lack  of  access,  lack  of  physical  and  social  infrastructure,  lack  of  understanding  and 
knowledge,  lack  of  technology;  lack  of  support,  lack  of  confidence,  among  others. 
Overcoming these barriers is, in a nutshell, the challenge of financial inclusion. 
BIS Review 163/2009 
 1
Why is financial inclusion important? 
5. 
Why is financial inclusion important? It is important simply because it is a necessary 
condition  for  sustaining  equitable  growth.  There  are  few,  if  any,  instances  of  an  economy 
transiting from an agrarian system to a post-industrial modern society without broad-based 
financial inclusion. As people having comfortable access to financial services, we all know 
from  personal  experience  that  economic  opportunity  is  strongly  intertwined  with  financial 
access. Such access is especially powerful for the poor as it provides them opportunities to 
build  savings,  make  investments  and  avail  credit.  Importantly,  access  to  financial  services 
also  helps  the  poor  insure  themselves  against  income  shocks  and  equips  them  to  meet 
emergencies  such  as  illness,  death  in  the  family  or  loss  of  employment.  Needless  to  add, 
financial inclusion protects the poor from the clutches of the usurious money lenders. 
There is another benefit of financial inclusion which we have yet to fully appreciate 
6. 
let alone exploit. Financial inclusion will make it possible for governments to make payment 
such  as  social  security  transfers,  National  Rural  Employment  Guarantee  Programme 
(NREGA)  wages  into  the  bank  accounts  of  beneficiaries  through  the  “Electric  Benefit 
Transfer” (EBT) method. This will minimize transaction costs including leakages. In parts of 
the  country  where  such  EBT  has  already  taken  off,  the  results  are  impressive  and  the 
experience of both payers and recipients extremely satisfying. 
7. 
There are enormous benefits at the aggregate level too. The first and more obvious 
benefit is that financial inclusion provides an avenue for bringing the savings of the poor into 
the  formal  financial  intermediation  system  and  channel  them  into  investment.  Second,  the 
large number of low cost deposits will offer banks an opportunity to reduce their dependence 
on  bulk  deposits  and  help  them  to  better  manage  both  liquidity  risks  and  asset-liability 
mismatches. 
Financial exclusion – the big picture 
8. 
Effort at financial inclusion is not new; both the Government and the Reserve Bank 
have  been  pursuing  this  goal  over  the  last  several  decades  through  building  the  rural 
cooperative  structure  in  the  1950s,  the  social  contract  with  banks  in  the  1960s  and  the 
expansion of bank branch networks in the 1970s and 1980s. These initiatives have paid off in 
terms of a network of branches across the country. 
9. 
Yet the extent of financial exclusion is staggering. Out of the 600,000 habitations in 
the country, only about 30,000 have a commercial bank branch. Just about 40 per cent of the 
population across the country have bank accounts, and this ratio is much lower in the north-
east of the country. The proportion of people having any kind of life insurance cover is as low 
as  10  per  cent  and  proportion  having  non-life  insurance  is  an  abysmally  low  0.6  per  cent. 
People having debit cards comprise only 13 per cent and those having credit cards only a 
marginal 2 per cent. 
10. 
The  National  Sample  Survey  data  reveals  that,  in  2003,  out  of  the  89.3  million 
farmer households in the country, 51 percent did not seek credit from either institutional or 
non-institutional sources of any kind. 
11. 
These statistics, staggering as they are, do not convey the true extent of financial 
exclusion.  Even  where  bank  accounts  are  claimed  to  have  been  opened,  verification  has 
shown  that  these  account  are  dormant.  Few  conduct  any  banking  transactions  and  even 
fewer  receive  any  credit.  Millions  of  people  across  the  country  are  thereby  denied  the 
opportunity to harness their earning capacity and entrepreneurial talent, and are condemned 
to marginalization and poverty. 
12. 
But  there  is  a  brighter  side  to  the  story.  Remember  that  illustration  they  give  in 
business  strategy  courses.  A  business  executive  of  a  shoe  company  was  sent  to  a  large 
developing country to assess the market potential there. What he saw was millions of people 
2 
 163/2009
going  without  shoes.  He  came  back  and  reported  to  the  management  that  there  was  no 
business potential there because no one wears shoes. A few months later, a strategist of a 
rival  company  went  and  saw  the  same  picture.  He  came  back  and  reported  to  his 
management  that  there  is  tremendous  business  potential  in  that  country  because  of  the 
number of shoes they can sell. Ultimately, it is a question of mindset. 
13. 
opportunity at the bottom of the pyramid and move into financial inclusion in a big way. 
Banks  must  see  the  picture  like  the  second  business  strategist,  look  at  the 
RBI’s efforts 
14. 
Let me briefly outline the efforts pursued by the Reserve  Bank to further financial 
inclusion. Our approach to financial inclusion aims at “connecting people” with the banking 
system and not just opening accounts. This includes meeting the small credit needs of the 
people, giving them access to the payments system and providing remittance facilities. This 
has led to some notable developments: 
(i) 
No frills accounts: In November 2005, RBI asked banks to offer a basic banking 
“no-frills”  account  with  low  or  zero  minimum  balances  and  minimum  charges  to 
expand the outreach of such accounts to the low income groups. 
Easier  credit  facility:  Banks  were  asked  to  introduce  a  General  Purpose  Credit 
Card  (GCC)  facility  up  to  Rs.  25,000.  However,  total  number  of  GCCs  issued  by 
banks as at end-March, 2009 was only 0.15 million. 
Simpler KYC norms: In order to ensure that people belonging to the low income 
groups, both in urban and rural areas, do not encounter difficulties in opening bank 
accounts,  the  “Know  Your  Customer”  (KYC)  procedure  for  opening  accounts  was 
simplified  for  those  accounts  with  balances  not  exceeding  Rs  50,000  and  credits 
thereto not exceeding Rs 100,000 in a year. 
Use of information technology: Banks have been urged to scale up IT initiatives 
for  financial  inclusion  speedily  while  ensuring  that  solutions  are  highly  secure, 
amenable to audit, and follow widely-accepted open standards to ensure eventual 
inter-operability among the different systems. Two of the important initiatives are:  
• 
Smart  cards  for  opening  bank  accounts  with  biometric  identification.  These 
help the customers get banking services near their doorstep. 
Link  to  mobile  hand  held  electronic  devices  for  banking  transactions.  In 
October  2008,  the  RBI  advised  banks  on  issues  relating  to  technology, 
security standards, and customer protection.  
 EBT through banks: The Reserve Bank is in consultation with state governments 
to encourage them to adopt Electronic Benefit Transfer (EBT) by banks. 
100% financial inclusion drive: The Reserve Bank launched a financial inclusion 
drive targeting one district in each state for 100% financial inclusion. In the light of 
the  experience  gained,  coverage  has  been  extended  to  other  areas/districts.  We 
carried out an external evaluation of the quality of 100% financial inclusion reported 
by banks. On that basis, in January 2009, we advised banks to: (i) ensure provision 
of banking services nearer to the location of the no-frills account holders through a 
variety of channels; (ii) provide GCC/small overdrafts along with no-frills accounts to 
encourage  the  account  holders  to  actively  operate  the  accounts;  (iii) conduct 
awareness drives of the facilities offered to the no-frills account holders; (iv) review 
the extent of coverage in districts declared as 100 per cent financially included; and 
(v) efficiently  leverage  on  the  available  technology  enabled  financial  inclusion 
solutions. 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
BIS Review 163/2009 
 3
Business correspondent model 
15. 
Possibly the most important initiative of the Reserve Bank has been the Business 
Correspondent  (BC)  model.  The  BC  model  ensures  a  closer  relationship  between  poor 
people and the organized financial system. Recognizing this, in 2006, we permitted banks to 
use the services of non-governmental organizations, micro-finance institutions, retired bank 
employees, ex-servicemen, retired government employees, Section 25 companies, and other 
civil  society  organisations  as  Business  Correspondents  in  providing  financial  and  banking 
services.  
16. 
Even  as  the  BC  model  has  taken  off,  it  needs  to  be  fine  tuned  and  monitored 
appropriately  to  improve  its  efficacy,  including  by  better  training  BCs.  Recently,  we  have 
further  enlarged  the  scope  of  the  BC  model  by  permitting  banks  to  appoint  individual 
kirana/medical/fair price shop owners, individual Public Call Office (PCO) operators, agents 
of  Small  Savings  schemes  and  insurance  companies,  individuals  who  own  petrol  pumps, 
retired teachers and self-help groups linked to banks as BCs. With a view to ensuring the 
viability  of  the  BC  model,  banks  have  also  been  permitted  to  collect  reasonable  service 
charges from the customer in a transparent manner. Going forward, the Reserve Bank will 
endeavour  to  give  complete  flexibility  to  banks  to  appoint  BCs  with  only  a  negative  list  of 
entities that would not be eligible. 
Bank branch and ATM expansion liberalized 
17. 
Last year, the Reserve Bank totally freed location of ATMs from prior authorization. 
In the October 2009 Policy Review, the RBI took a further big step by freeing branch opening 
in towns and villages with population below 50,000. Domestic scheduled commercial banks 
(other than RRBs) are now free to open branches in towns and villages with less than 50,000 
population  and  are  enjoined  to  ensure  that  at  least  one-third  of  such  branch  expansion 
happens in the underbanked districts of underbanked states. This will be one of the criteria in 
the  Reserve  Bank’s  consideration  of  proposals  by  banks  to  open  branches  in  major  city 
(tier 1 and tier 2) centres. 
Expansion of banks in the north-east 
18. 
To improve banking penetration in the north-east, the Reserve Bank asked the State 
Governments and banks to identify centres where there is a need for setting up either full 
fledged  branches  or  those  offering  forex  facilities,  handling  government  business  or  for 
meeting currency requirements. We have also offered to fund the capital and running costs 
for  five  years  provided  the  State  Government  concerned  is  willing  to  make  available  the 
premises and put in place appropriate security arrangements. Meghalaya has been the first 
off the block, and eight centres have been allotted to three public sector banks, following a 
bidding process. The Reserve Bank is working with other states in the north-east to institute 
similar arrangements. 
Project financial literacy 
19. 
Let me say a few words on the Reserve Bank’s drive for financial literacy. Financial 
literacy  is  a  stepping-stone  toward  financial  inclusion.  Moreover,  as  financial  markets  are 
becoming  increasingly  complex  with  serious  problems  of  information  asymmetry,  the  need 
for financial literacy has become even more acute. The Reserve Bank has initiated a “Project 
Financial Literacy” with the objective of disseminating information regarding the central bank 
and  general  banking  concepts  to  various  target  groups.  Our  website  is  also  available  in 
13 languages. 
20. 
Our “Financial Education” web site link offers basics of banking, finance and central 
banking  for  children  of  all  ages.  In  a  comic  book  format,  we  simplify  the  complexities  of 
4 
 163/2009
banking,  finance  and  central  banking,  with  the  goal  of  making  the  learning  fun  and 
interesting. 
Financial literacy and credit counselling 
21. 
We have advised the convenor-bank of each State Level Bankers’ Committee to set 
up a financial literacy-cum-counselling centre in any one district on a pilot basis, and based 
on that experience, to extend the facility to other districts in due course. So far, 154 credit 
counselling  centres  have  been  set  up  in  various  states  of  the  country.  These  centres  are 
expected to provide free financial education to people in rural and urban areas on the various 
financial  products  and  services,  while  maintaining  an  arm’s-length  relationship  with  the 
parent bank. 
Financial curriculum in schools and colleges 
22. 
The Reserve Bank is furthering the financial literacy drive by collaborating with state 
governments across the country to include financial literacy curriculum in the school syllabus. 
We have launched a pilot in Karnataka. We gave material on banking, personal finance as 
well  as  on  the  Reserve  Bank  to  the  State  Government.  The  Karnataka  Government  has 
adapted,  translated  and  included  much  of  this  material  in  the  curriculum  for  high  school 
classes and this is slated to go on stream next academic year starting June 2010. Based on 
this experience, we want to mainstream this initiative across the country. 
Financial inclusion – challenges and opportunities 
23. 
Let me now turn to challenges to financial inclusion and the potential opportunities. 
The question we should ask ourselves is this: despite the rural policy-push, why are so many 
bankable people unbanked? There are barriers to access financial services emanating from 
both demand side and supply side factors. 
24. 
From the demand side, the big barriers are the lack of awareness about financial 
services and products, limited literacy, especially financial literacy of the populace, and social 
exclusion. Many of the generic financial products are unsuitable for the poor and there is not 
much of an effort to design products suitable to their needs. The unfriendly and unempathetic 
attitude  of  the  banks  to  the  customers  also  plays  an  important  role  in  undermining  the 
demand for financial services. On top of that, exorbitant and oftentimes non-transparent fees, 
combined  with  burdensome  terms  and  conditions  attached  to  the  financial  products,  also 
dampens the demand. 
25. 
From  the  supply  side,  the  main  barrier  is  the  transaction  costs  that  the  bankers 
perceive. Because of current low volumes, banks find that extending financial services is not 
cost effective. Furthermore, lack of communication, lack of infrastructure, language barriers 
and low literacy levels all raise the cost of providing services and inhibit bankers from taking 
initiative from the supply side. 
26. 
A  couple  of  weeks  ago,  the  Reserve  Bank,  in  collaboration  with  the  Boston 
Consulting Group, organized a workshop on financial inclusion in our College of Agricultural 
Banking in Pune. The express purpose of the workshop was to listen to frontline managers 
operating  in  the  field  about  the  opportunities  and  challenges  to  financial  inclusion. 
Accordingly, we invited to the workshop, bank branch managers, including from rural areas, 
and  representatives  of  microfinance  institutions  and  some  NGOs.  The  chairmen  of  some 
large public sector and private banks were also present. 
I must say that listening to the participants at the workshop was an enormously rich 
27. 
learning  experience.  The  big  take  away  from  that  workshop,  for  the  Reserve  Bank  as  an 
institution and for me personally, was that even as there are problems to extending financial 
BIS Review 163/2009 
 5
inclusion, these are not insurmountable. If the Reserve Bank and the commercial banks put 
their minds, and more importantly their hearts, together these problems can be resolved. 
28. 
According to what we heard at the workshop, the three big challenges are: (i) cost; 
(ii) lack  of  robust  technology;  and  (iii) lack  of  awareness.  Some  of  these  challenges  are 
clearly being exaggerated and others can be easily redressed. 
29. 
Cost, of course, is the main consideration. It is nobody’s case that each of the over 
500,000 villages in the country can each be covered through a brick and mortar branch. That 
is  clearly  not  a  “bankable”  proposition.  We  need  to  go  through  the  low  cost  Business 
Correspondent model and leverage technology to deliver financial services. 
30. 
The Reserve Bank has encouraged banks to use IT-enabled financial inclusion by 
leveraging  on  the  smart  cards/mobile  technology.  Business  Correspondents  of  banks  are 
making  extensive  use  of  hand  held  devices/mobile  phones  to  reach  banking  services  to 
remote villages, and especially for Electronic Benefits Transfer of NREGA wages and social 
security  payments.  This  has  been  very  successful  in  Andhra  Pradesh,  and  a  state-wide 
project has recently been kicked-off in Orissa. In addition, pilot projects are underway in most 
states of the country. 
31. 
As a village-to-village robust electronic remittance system is presently not available 
in the country, it can be enabled by building suitable infrastructure to connect the systems of 
various banks which are presently involved in Electronic Benefit Transfer (EBT) through the 
medium of Business Correspondents. A robust switch similar to the National Financial Switch 
(NFS)  located  for  the  purpose  in  the  National  payments  Corporation  of  India/Institute  for 
Development  Research  in  Banking  Technology  may  fulfil  a  long  felt  requirement  of  a 
nationwide  remittance  system  for  the  country.  This  will  make  the  remittance  system  more 
efficient, and therefore, more attractive. 
32. 
I also want to emphasize that there is tremendous opportunity on the way forward 
for  reducing  costs  by  increasing  volumes.  Let  me  elaborate  a  bit.  First,  there  is  the 
demographic profile – the labour force in the 15–64 age group is going to increase. As job 
opportunities grow and these people start earning, their incomes provide a large and growing 
source of deposits for banks. Banks that are ahead of the curve in establishing a presence in 
the  vast  hinterland  of  the  country  will  have  a  first  mover  advantage  in  exploiting  this 
potentially  huge  opportunity.  Second,  there  is  the  opportunity  of  capturing  remittances. 
Although  there  are  no  firm  figures, I  have  been  told  that  thousands  of crores  of  rupees  of 
remittances  take  place  across  the  country  today,  predominantly  from  migrant  labour,  and 
over ninety per cent of this happens through non-formal channels. If banks can capture even 
half of this into their fold, they will not only reduce costs for the labour making remittances but 
they will also have the advantage of an enormous, permanent float. 
33. 
Third, EBT, the electronic benefit transfer, is another big opportunity. I believe banks 
are  inhibited  about  pushing  this  forward  because  of  the  fear  of  the  unknown:  they  are  not 
certain  that  the  business  can  be  cost-effective.  Banks  are  clearly  underestimating  the 
potential.  If  indeed,  all  or  even  most  government  payments  to  rural  people  are  captured 
through  the  EBT  mode,  this  again  can  give  banks  a  large  float  and  make  it  an  attractive 
business proposition. So far there has been a sharing of the costs between banks and state 
governments with regard to EBT. As EBT mode expands and becomes universal, banks will 
find that this is a viable business model even without any service charges. 
It  is  also  relevant  here  to  acknowledge  the  potential  of  the  Unique  Identification 
34. 
Number (UID) that Nandan Nilekani and his team are working on. The UID will be a powerful 
instrumentality for helping poor people establish their identity to meet the banks’ KYC norms. 
I believe, this is going to reduce cash and non-cash transaction costs both to the banks and 
to the potential customers. The UID is another powerful illustration of harnessing technology 
to the benefit of the poor. 
6 
 163/2009
The Reserve Bank has made a commitment to bank-led model of financial inclusion 
35. 
and  will  support  banks  in  their  financial  inclusion  initiatives  by  way  of  information 
dissemination, sharing of best practices and also through regulatory incentives. However, I 
want  to  add  that  our  commitment  to  a  bank  led  model  is  not  irrevocable.  There  are  other 
models  of  financial  inclusion  that  are  being  experimented  elsewhere  in  the  world.  Should 
banks  fail  to  come  forward  and  exploit  this  opportunity  of  financial  inclusion,  the  Reserve 
Bank will not hesitate to explore other models of furthering financial inclusion. 
36. 
A  word  also  to  microfinance  institutions  (MFIs).  Many  banks  have  partnered  with 
microfinance institutions that provide financial services to relatively high risk segments of the 
population.  Microfinance  has  provided  access  to  finance  to  an  entire  sector  of  people  left 
behind by the formal financial sector – and micro finance has demonstrated how these low-
income categories are indeed a “bankable” proposition. But cost remains an issue. Interest 
rate charges – at 24–30 percent – seem too high. Compared to the informal sector, perhaps 
the rates are lower, but there are questions about whether these rates are affordable. Ideally, 
the rate of interest charged should not be out of alignment with the cost of funds, transaction 
costs, risk costs and a certain margin, and in any case, there is a need for transparency in its 
determination and fairness in its application. 
Way forward 
37. 
On the way forward, the Reserve Bank will push three targets. First, the lead bank in 
each district has been asked to draw a roadmap by March 2010 for ensuring that all villages 
with  a  population  of  over  2,000  will  have  access  to  financial  services  through  a  banking 
outlet, not necessarily a bank branch, by March 2011. As an aside, let me also tell you that 
many consumer goods companies have unveiled specific strategies that target villages with a 
population of less than 5,000 as micro-markets. It seems to me that as bankers, you can also 
follow  your  clients  to  their  markets.  Second,  all  commercial  banks  –  public  sector  banks, 
private banks and foreign banks – are going to be asked to come up with their specific Board 
approved plans for financial inclusion by March 2010. These plans are intended to be rolled 
out  over  the  next  three  years.  We,  in  the  Reserve  Bank,  have  refrained  from  deliberately 
imposing  a  uniform  model  on  the  banks  because  we  wanted  each  bank  to  build  its  own 
strategy  in  line  with  its  business  model  and  comparative  advantage.  This  will  hopefully 
ensure  better  ownership.  The  Reserve  Bank  is  consulting  the  Indian  Banks  Association  in 
this  regard.  Third,  we  learnt  from  the  frontline  managers  in  the  Pune  workshop  that  top 
managements of banks do not sufficiently emphasize, much less reward, efforts at financial 
inclusion.  To  remedy  this,  we  are  going  to  ask  all  banks  to  include  criteria  on  financial 
inclusion in the performance evaluation of their field staff. 
38. 
The  Reserve  Bank  values  two-way  communication.  By  listening,  we  learn  to 
appreciate people’s needs and aspirations. This pushes us to be more sensitive, innovative 
and responsive. One of our initiatives in our Platinum Jubilee year is reaching out to remote 
villages  –  with  a  focus  on  financial  education  –  spreading  awareness  about  the  economy, 
emphasizing the role the Reserve Bank plays in everyday life and making the general public 
aware  of  the  financial  services  that  the  banks  offer  and  the  benefits  of  using  the  banking 
services. The outreach programme is a simultaneous effort to educate low income groups to 
demand financial services and to encourage banks to supply financial services needed by 
the  poor.  I  must  say  that  experience  to  date  from  the  outreach  programme  has  been 
immensely rewarding and fulfilling. I want to thank the commercial banks which are actively 
cooperating with us in this outreach programme. 
39. 
Last week, I visited Jalanga village in Orissa as part of the outreach programme. I 
was very impressed by the self-help groups – groups of usually women who get together, 
pool their savings and give loans to members – and how these groups have empowered the 
women by giving them financial independence and thereby confidence. More than just hope, 
BIS Review 163/2009 
 7
these  women  have  the  vision  to  imagine  how  they  can  take  advantage  of  the  slightest 
opportunities and to work hard to make it happen. 
Conclusion 
40. 
Let me conclude by reiterating, even at the cost of being clichéd, that banking on the 
poor can actually be a rich banking proposition. Financial inclusion is a win-win opportunity 
for the poor, for the banks and for the nation. Because of growing incomes, and improving 
awareness levels, aspirations of the poor are on the rise. We will not be forgiven if we do not 
rise up to meet these aspirations if only because of poverty of imagination. It is for the banks 
to convert what they see as a dead-weight obligation into an exciting opportunity and move 
on aggressively on financial inclusion. 
8 
 163/2009
