Miguel Fernández Ordóñez: Recent developments in the Spanish 
economy 
Testimony  of  Mr  Miguel  Fernández  Ordóñez,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Spain,  before  the 
Parliamentary Budget Committee, Madrid, 6 October 2009. 
 to  offset 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
I appear before this Committee as part of the parliamentary discussion of the State Budget 
for 2010. For the first time in the past two years, we are at a juncture where incipient signs 
are emerging that the global economic and financial crisis is stabilising. This can be deduced 
from  the  macroeconomic  projections  by  various  international  agencies  in  recent  weeks, 
which indicate that the dynamic of successive downward revisions of GDP growth has come 
to a halt, and that in some areas there have even been upward revisions.  
Part  of  this  improvement  is  in  response  to  the  aggregate  demand  stimulus  and  financial 
system  support  policies  which,  undoubtedly,  have  acted 
the  enormous 
contractionary impulses experienced and to stabilise the financial markets. Notwithstanding, 
uncertainty over economic and financial developments in the coming quarters remains high.  
At times like the present, the task of economic policies becomes vitally important to ensure 
that  the  recovery  has  sufficiently  sound  foundations.  In  the  Spanish  economy  this  task  is 
particularly  significant,  since  although  recent  data  also  point  to  an  easing  in  recessionary 
trends, both the downturn in employment and the rapid deterioration in public finances shape 
a  situation laden  with  challenges  and  difficulties.  We  are  at  a  crossroads  where  economic 
policy action may be decisive in setting us once more on a path of growth and increasing 
well-being.  
My testimony today, as part of the Parliamentary discussions on the Budget, offers me an 
opportunity to analyse the role budgetary policy should play and the need for this policy to be 
underpinned  by  a  series  of  structural  reforms  that  remove  the  obstacles  to  a  recovery  in 
economic activity, in employment and in public finances. I shall begin with a brief reference to 
the international setting and to the economic outlook for the euro area. It is well known that 
these settings determine the behaviour of monetary policy. Regarding this latter point, allow 
me to remind you that the ECB Governing Council will meet later this week; accordingly, my 
appearance  here  is  during  what  we  call  purdah  period,  and  my  comments  should  not  be 
interpreted, under any circumstances, as a prelude to or anticipation of the monetary policy 
discussions or decisions at this meeting.  
After several quarters of continuous deterioration which led the world economy to the biggest 
contraction  since  the  Second  World  War,  the  latest  economic  indicators  are  beginning  to 
point to a pick-up in activity and in international trade, which is more evident in the emerging 
than in the more advanced economies, where the signs of improvement are somewhat more 
incipient. 
These  signs  are  not  unconnected  to  the  swift  and  resolute  intervention  by  the  public 
authorities,  which  has  proven  effective  in  checking  the  growing  perception  of  risks  on 
financial  markets  and  in  increasing  agents'  confidence,  thereby  playing  a  valuable  role  in 
containing this crisis.  
But it is precisely now when the results of the measures are coming to fruition that it is most 
important to shun complacency and untimely and excessive optimism, which might curtail the 
process.  The  latest  forecasts  from  the  IMF  and  from  many  other  supranational  institutions 
admittedly  include  upward  revisions  of  world  output  growth  rates  in  2010;  but  they  also 
emphasise  the  persistence  of  a  high  degree  of  uncertainty.  This  applies  in  particular  to 
financial market developments, where certain tension indicators still remain at high levels.  
BIS Review 124/2009 
 1
It  seems  reasonable  under  these  conditions  that  the  most  immediate  objectives  of  the 
economic authorities should continue to focus primarily on restoring the orderly working of 
financial markets and on maintaining the aggregate demand stimulus policies until economic 
recovery takes firm root, as was recently reiterated at the Pittsburgh G-20 Summit. Further 
ahead, however, the main challenge will be to identify the appropriate time for withdrawing 
the  exceptional  measures  that  have  been  adopted  in  the  financial,  fiscal  and  monetary 
realms, avoiding both a premature withdrawal that might undermine what has been achieved 
and an unnecessary prolongation that might ultimately generate dynamics that are difficult to 
reverse,  and  that  are  harmful  to  growth  and  well-being.  The  complexity  of  such a  process 
means  it  is  necessary  to  design  forthwith  efficient  exit  strategies,  so  that  they  may  be 
implemented when the time is right.  
The euro area also shares, albeit to a lesser extent than other zones, these signs of incipient 
improvement.  The  latest  economic  data  have  been  less  adverse  than  expected  and  the 
quantitative and qualitative indicators coming to light point to a stabilisation of activity in the 
very  short  term  which,  according  to  the  ECB's  projection  exercises,  will  be  followed  by  a 
presumably slow recovery that will not be free from difficulty.  
Public finances have deteriorated considerably as a result of the operation of the automatic 
stabilisers, the discretionary measures to stimulate aggregate demand and action to shore 
up the financial system. In turn, the financial crisis and the fall-off in activity have severely 
affected certain European banks, which depend in part on public sector support and which 
remain subject to a deleveraging process whose scope is still not readily discernible.  
On the prices front, the risks of deflation have diminished substantially. Although the strong 
easing in commodities prices until mid-year meant that inflation turned negative, there is a 
broad  consensus,  of  which  the  ECB  is  part,  that  anticipates  inflation  will  resume  positive 
levels towards the end of the year. Such levels would, however, be moderate for a relatively 
lengthy  period,  against  a  background  marked  by  considerable  slackness  in  productive 
capacity which will help contain potential inflationary pressures.  
The benchmark interest rate in the euro area, at 1% since last May, has proven appropriate 
in a setting in which inflation expectations have remained anchored and in which the effects 
on the economy have been complemented,  moreover, by those of the various exceptional 
measures  adopted  by  the  ECB  Governing  Council  since  October  2008.  Such  measures 
included  most  notably  the  unlimited  provision  of  liquidity  to  the  banking  system  at  terms 
extending up to one year and a programme for the outright purchase of mortgage bonds and 
other similar securities issued in the euro area.  
Moving now to the Spanish economy, it is clear that the acute international financial crisis 
and  recession  in  the  main  areas  of  the  world  fed  through  with  great  intensity  to  Spain, 
exacerbating  the  correction  of  the  real  estate  market  that  had  begun  previously  and 
prompting  rapid  job  destruction.  The  fact  that  the  powerful  external  contractionary  trends 
coincided with the internal adjustment needed after a long expansionary phase has led to a 
decline in economic activity that is unprecedented in recent decades.  
On the data available, output fell by 4.2% year-on-year in the second quarter of 2009 as a 
result of the marked sluggishness of national demand, particularly private spending. Only the 
public-sector components of demand have held at positive growth rates, and in the case of 
public  investment  this  was  due  above  all  to  the  roll-out  of  the  Local  Investment  Plan  last 
April.  The  strong  contractionary  impact  of  the  decline  in  domestic  spending  on  economic 
activity has been cushioned, however, by external demand. That said, the positive effect of 
foreign trade has been the consequence, above all, of the substantial cut in imports, since 
exports  –  despite  improving  their  market  share  –  have  also  been  affected  by  the  sharp 
decline in world trade. 
Fortunately, the latest figures for the Spanish economy indicate that, as in the euro area and 
in the rest of the world, the sharpest phase of the contraction is now behind us. The decline 
in activity in the second quarter was still substantial (1.1%), but more moderate than in the 
2 
 BIS Review 124/2009
first quarter (1.6%). As in other areas, the main conjunctural indicators are beginning to show 
signs of more modest declines or of stabilisation, suggesting that the virulence of the crisis 
has continued to abate in the third quarter of this year.  
The recession is also correcting some of the main imbalances that built up in the Spanish 
economy during the boom period, mainly high private-sector debt, the excessive weight of 
the real estate sector and a persistent inflation differential, which translated into a growing 
external deficit.  
The  growth  rate  of  credit  to  the  private  sector  has  fallen  substantially  and  will  probably 
continue to do so in the coming quarters. Such developments in lending correspond to what 
might  be  expected  –  in  circumstances  like  the  present  –  of  its  usual  cyclical  pattern, 
exacerbated by the tension on international financial markets. Conceivably, household and 
corporate debt ratios, which increased rapidly during the expansionary phase, will continue 
the  adjustment  on  which  they  have  embarked  in  recent  quarters,  and  this  requires  that 
agents' debt should grow for some time at a rate below that of income generated.  
The strong concentration of resources in the real estate market is also being corrected, with 
a very swift decline in new housing starts, although this has not prevented the emergence of 
a sizeable housing overhang and downward pressure on prices as the fall in demand has 
also been very sharp. Nonetheless, cuts in interest rates and in house prices have placed 
housing  affordability  indicators  at  more  moderate  levels,  which  will  help  boost  house 
purchases.  
Similarly noteworthy is the reduction in the inflation rate in Spain in recent months, which is 
proving  more  marked  than  in  the  euro  area.  This  decline  is  underpinned  not  only  by  the 
greater effects induced by the course of oil prices but also by the fall in the prices of industrial 
goods and in the notable easing in services prices, which are growing below 2%, after having 
held at a persistent rate of increase of around 4% for many years. It would be most beneficial 
for  the  economy  to  seize  this  opportunity  to  make  the  appropriate  reforms  to  services 
markets, so that this pattern in moderation may be maintained when household expenditure 
picks up. 
The strong adjustment in spending is also manifest in a rapid reduction in the external deficit, 
which  may  have  halved  by  2009  from  its  level  of  close  to  10%  of  GDP  in  2007.  Ideally, 
however,  the  spillover  effect  of  the  weakness  of  national  demand  on  imports  should  be 
reinforced  by  a  strengthening  of  the  export  base  through  the  improved  competitiveness  of 
our companies.  
But  we  should  not  lose  sight  of  the  fact  that  the  correction  of  these  imbalances is coming 
about  through  a  severe  contraction  in  output  that  is  exerting  a  most  adverse  effect  on 
employment, as a result of the problems present in the functioning of the labour market, and 
on public finances.  
Job  destruction,  which  was  concentrated  in  the  second  half  of  2008  in  construction, 
subsequently spread both to industry and to market services, affecting temporary contracts 
most especially. After the sharp drop in employment in the closing months of 2008 and early 
2009, the pace of job destruction has slackened, largely due to the effects of the launch of 
the Local Investment Plan. And since the dynamism of the labour force has held up well into 
2009, the unemployment rate has skyrocketed from 8% in 2007 to almost 18% in the second 
quarter  of  the  current  year.  The  sharp  employment  adjustment  has  prompted  a  rise  in 
apparent labour productivity from a rate below 1% in 2007 and the previous years to more 
than 3% in the second quarter of 2009. Unfortunately, these productivity figures are not the 
outcome of genuine improvements in the efficiency of productive processes, meaning they 
will hardly be sustainable in the medium term. 
The  fact  that  labour  costs  are  still  growing  at  a  high  rate  in  this  situation  (on  National 
Accounts figures wages increased by 4.6% in the second quarter of 2009) while employment 
BIS Review 124/2009 
 3
was  declining  at  a  rate  of  over  7%  and  inflation  was  negative,  reveals  once  more  the 
persistence of serious inefficiencies in the behaviour of our labour market.  
The  outlook  for  the  Spanish  economy  remains  highly  uncertain,  albeit  less  so  in  recent 
months in light of the likely recovery in the world economy in 2010. The Spanish economy 
will probably continue posting declines in output in the second half of this year, in contrast to 
the modest pick-up in activity expected in the euro area. Bearing on this different behaviour 
will be the marked weakness of investment, not only in the case of housing, given the supply 
overhang,  but  also  probably  in  that  of  corporate  investment,  since  low  capacity  utilisation 
allows  increases  in  demand  to  be  addressed  without  having  to  undertake  new  investment 
projects. Nor will it seem feasible to increase public investment in 2010, following the intense 
effort  made  in  2009,  linked  largely  to  the  above-mentioned  Local  Investment  Fund  for 
Employment.  
How  private  consumption  will  fare  is  much  more  difficult  to  predict.  Although  the  main 
determinants – such as the behaviour of employment – will not be favourable, the high level 
of the household saving rate makes it conceivable that, if the factors of uncertainty were to 
progressively dispel, consumption might recover significantly. 
The main factor underpinning activity in 2010 should therefore be the external sector. The 
fact  that  the  recovery  in  the  Spanish  economy  lags  that  in  the  other  European  countries 
somewhat  may  provide  for  more  expansionary  behaviour  of  exports,  whose  trajectory  has 
been reasonably positive. 
Foreseeably, then, a gradual growth phase based on recovery in the external sector and on 
the progressive extension of its impulses to business investment and employment will begin 
over the course of next year, laying the bases for a demand-led expansion. However, as a 
result of the spillover effect of the negative 2009 rates, average growth in 2010 might post a 
moderate decline.  
This trajectory of slow recovery in activity broadly matches the government’s macroeconomic 
projection that acts as a basis for the State Budget for 2010. Yet as I said, there is a risk that 
business investment may perform somewhat worse than foreseen in this scenario.  
But in my view, what is most important at present is not the exact date on which activity will 
begin  to  post  a  positive  rate  or  whether  its  rate  of  increase  will  be  greater  or  less  than 
forecast in 2010; rather, it is the scale of the medium-term challenges involved in exiting the 
most complicated situation the Spanish economy has faced in recent decades. To entrench 
the recovery will necessarily require absorbing large numbers of unemployed; the reversal of 
unemployment’s  harmful  effects  on  confidence  and  public  finances;  restoring  health  to  the 
financial position of households and firms; and, in sum, the restructuring of a growth model 
that  was  not  sustainable,  especially  under  the  new  conditions  created  by  the  international 
crisis.  And,  as  I  have  reiterated  on  many  occasions,  to  do  this  it  will  be  vital  to  adopt 
ambitious measures and reforms.  
The  economic  policies  pursued  since  the  start  of  the  crisis  have  focused,  logically,  on 
countering  the  contractionary  forces  at  play,  and  the  efforts  deployed  have  contributed  to 
lessening their impact. But now the slump phase has bottomed out and there are signs of a 
possible  stabilisation,  we  must  adopt  an  approach  geared  to  absorbing  the  most  negative 
effects  of  the  crisis,  such  as  the  high  level  of  unemployment  and  of  the  budget  deficit,  by 
addressing  the  structural  problems  of  the  Spanish  economy  so  as  to  restore  its  growth 
potential  and  to  prevent  the  risk  of  a  scenario  of  prolonged  economic  slackness  from 
materialising.  
The demand-side policies pursued to combat the economic crisis have been very energetic. 
The cuts in official interest rates by the ECB have fed through to interbank markets and to 
credit transactions, and although borrowing conditions remain very tight, as a result of the 
upward  revision  of  credit  risk,  the  decline  in  interest  rates  is  undoubtedly  contributing  to 
alleviating  the  financial  pressure  on  the  private  sector.  Moreover,  these  measures  will 
4 
 BIS Review 124/2009
continue to have significant effects in Spain in the coming quarters, given the prevalence of 
floating rates, which will continue alleviating the burden of debt for households and firms.  
Fiscal policy has also contributed to cushioning the decline in activity by means of a most 
substantial budgetary drive, one greater than that in other developed countries. The effect of 
the  numerous  activity-supporting  measures  adopted  in  the  past  two  years,  along  with  the 
impact  on  public  finances  of  the  far-reaching  cyclical  downturn  and  with  the  loss  of  the 
extraordinary tax revenue from the real estate boom during the expansionary phase, have 
prompted a most rapid and sharp increase in the budget deficit. On the latest official figures 
announced by the government, the budget deficit could climb to around 10% of GDP at the 
end of this year, an unprecedented level in our recent history. 
And  the  outlook  for  the  deficit,  in  the  absence  of  ambitious  measures,  is  a  complex  one. 
True,  some  of  the  budgetary  measures  adopted  were  designed  to  be  temporary,  meaning 
that once the period they are in force expires, the budgetary situation ought to improve. Yet 
the cyclical change will take time to exert positive effects on public finances, as the path of 
recovery of activity in 2010 will still be weak. But what is important is to realise that the deficit 
generated  over  these  two  years  has  a  significant  structural  component,  given  that  current 
primary  public  spending  has  maintained  a  high  growth  rate  and  the  sizeable  extraordinary 
revenue linked to the real estate sector has been lost for good.  
The deterioration in the fiscal position is manifest in a strong increase in public debt. As our 
own  experience  shows,  the  dynamic  of  rising  indebtedness  can  prove  difficult  to  break, 
especially when it is inconceivable that we can count in the future on some of the factors that 
significantly  helped  reduce  debt  in  the  past,  such  as  interest-rate  cuts  and  high  economic 
growth over a very lengthy period. 
Overall, all these factors increase the risk that, in the absence of corrective measures, the 
fiscal position will continue to worsen. Further, they lead to the conclusion that the room for 
budgetary policy to expand has been completely exhausted, and that it is vital that a credible 
strategy of budgetary consolidation be adopted for the medium term. If not, the increase in 
public debt and its influence on the net borrowing costs of our economy, and even on the 
very soundness of the financial system and its capacity to properly channel resources, may 
become a very heavy weight holding back our possibilities of recovery.  
Given the fiscal imbalance that has built up, the scale of adjustment needed is most sizeable 
and will therefore require the adoption of highly ambitious measures on all budgetary fronts. 
It  will  be  constantly  necessary  to  strike  a  difficult  balance between  appropriately  signalling 
the  commitment  to  budgetary  stability  and,  at  the  same  time,  not  curbing  the  path  of 
economic recovery. Past experience shows that the success of fiscal consolidation strategies 
hinges largely on their composition, so that cuts in public spending, especially non-productive 
spending,  play  an  essential  role  in  reducing  the  deficit.  Unproductive  spending,  both  on 
consumption and investment, should therefore be particularly scrutinised and monitored. In 
any event, when structural distortions have become considerable, certain elements of the tax 
structure have inevitably to be revised. Here it is vital to fully preserve efficiency in agents' 
saving and investment decisions, so that long-term growth prospects are not compromised. 
Selecting  tax  measures  is  never  easy,  and  less  so  when  the  tax  base  is  being  eroded; 
consequently,  tax  instruments  that  cause  least  distortion  should  be  used.  In  any  case,  we 
should ensure that increases in tax revenue are actually earmarked to reducing the budget 
deficit and not to financing potential spending slippages. 
The government has announced its intention to resume deficit levels compatible with stability 
in 2012, in line with the horizon defined by the European authorities in the application of the 
rules of the Stability and Growth Pact. The State Budget for 2010, the first to be prepared 
under  this  general  consolidation  strategy,  confirms  this  commitment.  It  is  along  the  lines 
required to give credibility to the process, although to ensure that the budgetary targets are 
realistic, all economic agents must be convinced that, in the event of deviations occurring, all 
necessary measures will be taken to achieve such objectives. Lastly, and more clearly than 
BIS Review 124/2009 
 5
on any other occasion, I must reiterate what I have said in all my previous Budget-related 
appearances:  given  the  high  degree  of  decentralisation  of  the  State  in  Spain,  it  is  of 
paramount importance that the territorial tiers of government should also commit themselves 
to reducing the deficit through compliance with the provisions laid down in budgetary stability 
legislation. 
The  attention  I  have  given  to  budgetary  policy,  in  step  with  the  rationale  behind  this 
appearance, should not however obscure one particular fact. This is namely that, at present, 
the  main  instrument  available  to  the  national  economic  authorities  to  address  the  crisis, 
strengthen the chances of recovery and push through fiscal consolidation plans are supply-
side  and  structural  reform  policies,  geared  primarily  to  improving  employment-generation 
capacity,  facilitating  change  in  the  weight  of  productive  activities  and  increasing  the 
economy's efficiency and productivity. The future of the Spanish economy will turn to a great 
extent on these policies, not just in the long run but more immediately, where the structural 
strengths and weaknesses of the different economies inside and outside the euro area will 
be highlighted.  
And what has become obvious, given the present scale of public spending derived from the 
deterioration  in  employment,  is  that  the  viability  of  any  credible  budgetary  consolidation 
strategy in the Spanish economy depends on swift and far-reaching changes to the trends 
currently prevailing in the labour market. Without a significant reduction in unemployment it 
will be very difficult to reverse the course of public spending and ensure a sustained recovery 
in the tax authorities’ capacity to raise revenue. The downturn in employment and the rise in 
unemployment  are  the  most  serious  problem  facing  the  Spanish  economy,  and  that  most 
hampering  the  recovery  and  fiscal  consolidation.  Unavoidably,  then,  reforms  to  labour 
institutions must be promptly undertaken that draw our unemployment rate closer to that of 
the more developed countries, thus checking flows to unemployment and enabling workers 
who have lost their jobs to return as soon as possible to an active working life.  
in  hiring 
The  reforms  should  encompass  a  wide  range  of 
arrangements  is  needed  to  provide  for  maximum  job  creation.  We  must  rectify  the 
pronounced  segmentation  currently  characterising  a  labour  market  with  a  high  temporary 
employment  ratio,  with  most  adverse  consequences  for  job  stability  and  for  efficiency  and 
fairness in the economy. In turn, collective bargaining needs reforming. This is so as to allow 
wage  settlements  to  be  tailored  to  a  greater  extent  to  each  company  and  to  the  business 
cycle, but also to equip companies with the necessary flexibility to increase productivity and 
wages wherever possible. All these developments will help soften the impact of the crisis on 
employment,  reallocate  surplus  labour  towards  more  productive  sectors  and  raise  our 
economy’s potential growth rate. And there are more reforms recommended by analysts: the 
re-directing of support policies to the unemployed, so greater importance is given to active 
policies such as training, improvements to the intermediation capacity of public employment 
services, etc.  
In addition to the reform of labour institutions, there are other areas where action should not 
be delayed, even though the effects will be over a longer term. This is the case primarily of 
education,  which  is  pivotal  for  ensuring  a  continuous  increase  in  human  capital  and  for 
reinforcing one of the main sources of improving productivity. And, of course, there is a long 
list  of  reforms  outstanding  to  increase  competition  in  many  industries,  such  as  services, 
energy, rail freight transport, etc., to which I have repeatedly referred.  
Lastly,  the  soundness  of  the  financial  system  is  essential  for  ensuring  the  financial  flows 
needed to restore economic dynamism. The Spanish financial system has weathered very 
well  the  direct  and  indirect  effects  of  the  international  financial  crisis  thanks  to  a  series  of 
widely known factors that I shall not repeat here. However, the intensity of the adjustment the 
Spanish  economy  is  undergoing  in  a  setting  of  prolonged  financial  tension  further 
compounds the pressure on the financial system in terms of asset impairment, increased bad 
debts,  narrower  banking  margins  and  the  gradual  reduction  in  the  buffers  built  up  by  the 
institutions. 
Innovation 
6 
 BIS Review 124/2009
system.  Not  all  institutions  are  equally  prepared  to  face  these  factors.  Accordingly, 
appropriate mechanisms – such as, in the current circumstances, the Fund for the Orderly 
Restructuring  of  Banks  –  are  crucial  for  tackling  the  necessary  restructuring  processes, 
without  that  entailing  a  distortion  in  credit  flows  that  may  hamper  the  economy's  path  of 
recovery.  
To conclude, the Spanish economy is at a decisive crossroads where many challenges must 
be addressed to prevent the situation leading to a long period of economic weakness and to 
be  able  to  embark  on  a  new  growth  path  based  on  a  more  productive  and  sustainable 
pattern.  This  is  not  the  first  time  in  our  recent  history  that  we  find  ourselves  in  such  a 
position.  We  emerged  from  similar  situations  in  the  past  with  major  advances  and  with 
vigorous  growth  once  the  necessary  decision-making  machinery  had  been  geared  up  to 
undertake far-reaching reforms. This time need be no different. Only through medium-term 
stability strategies and ambitious and well-structured reforms can we overcome these difficult 
circumstances, paving the way for a new phase of dynamism and job creation that will further 
the outstanding trajectory of the Spanish economy in recent decades. 
BIS Review 124/2009 
 7
