Ewald Nowotny: The euro – a stability anchor in turbulent times1
Speech by Mr Ewald Nowotny, Governor of the Austrian National Bank, at the John Hopkins 
University, Bologna, 10 September 2009. 
 When  the  euro  was  created  a  little  more  than  ten  years  ago,  many  doubted  whether  a 
common  currency  would  be  appropriate  for  the  diverse  economies  of  the  euro  area.  The 
financial crisis has tested the new institutions severely. As this contribution argues, the ECB 
and  the  euro  have  passed  the  test  very  well.  Having  a  common  currency  proved  to  be  a 
valuable asset, preventing additional strains that would have resulted from pressure on fixed 
exchange rates, capital flight and exchange rate volatility. The paper portrays the measures 
taken by the Eurosystem to stabilize financial markets, encourage bank lending, support the 
real  economy  and  ensure  price  stability.  By  delivering  a  common  response  to  the  crisis, 
monetary  policy  provided  an  anchor  of  stability  for  the  European  Union.  This  positive 
assessment, however,  should not blind to the challenges posed by diverging trends within 
the euro area, e.g. in terms of competitiveness or imbalances in the current account. Turning 
the  focus  on  the  euro’s  perspectives  in  the  next  ten  years,  the  final  section  discusses  the 
enlargement process and concludes on the future international role of the euro. 
Proving the sceptics wrong? 
1. 
When a bit more than ten years ago, on 1 January 1999, eleven EU member states adopted 
the euro as single currency, they not only undertook a major step in the process of European 
integration  whose  importance  is  difficult  to  underestimate.  They  also  embarked  on  a  bold 
experiment  in  monetary  policy  that  in  important  aspects  was  unprecedented  in  monetary 
history.  Never  before  had  so  many  countries  decided  to  voluntarily  share  sovereignty  and 
create a new currency from scratch. 
It is therefore not surprising that the birth of the euro was preceded by years of lively debates 
among academic economists on whether a European monetary union would be desirable or 
even viable. There were many sceptics: It can’t happen, It’s a bad idea, and It can’t last, as 
Rudiger  Dornbusch  has  nicely  summed  up  the  arguments  of  the  critics  (Jonung  and  Drea 
2009). The intellectual tool at the heart of the discussion on monetary union was the theory 
of optimum currency areas (OCA), which goes back to Mundell (1961). The argument is well 
known: Countries or regions facing asymmetric shocks need different monetary policies and 
an adjustment in the exchange rate. As the vocal euro-sceptic Martin Feldstein put it: 
“A  single  monetary  policy  for  a  group  of  heterogeneous  countries  that 
experience different shocks cannot be optimal – the problem is that, when it 
comes to monetary policy, one size cannot fit all.” (Feldstein 2009). 
If  heterogeneous  regions  do  share  a  common  currency,  they  need  alternative  adjustment 
mechanisms like flexible wages, mobile factors, both labour and capital, and fiscal transfers. 
The better these alternative adjustment mechanisms work, the lower is the cost to go for a 
common currency. Introducing a common currency or joining a monetary union then comes 
down  to  comparing  the  costs  with  the  benefits  (De  Grauwe  2007).  In  the  euro  area  the 
bottom  line  is  negative,  according  to  the  sceptics.  The  crucial  alternative  adjustment 
mechanisms  are  too  weak,  raising  the  costs  of  a  common  currency  beyond  the  expected 
benefits (Feldstein 1997). 
                                                 
1   Cut off date for data end of August 2009. 
BIS Review 121/2009 
 1
This simplistic OCA approach has been criticized from several angles. In particular the set-up 
is static, neglecting the dynamics that the introduction of a common currency sets in motion. 
In fact, monetary unification is an evolutionary process, where the use of a common currency 
provokes a number of structural changes in the participating economies. A group of regions 
that  could  not  be  considered  an  OCA  ex  ante,  before  the  introduction  of  the  common 
currency, might thus evolve to become an OCA ex post (Frankel and Rose 1998). In fact, 
intra-euro area trade has increased since the introduction of the euro, rising from a quarter of 
GDP ten years ago to one third today. Available estimates attribute half of this increase to 
the elimination of exchange rate volatility brought by monetary union (EC 2008). Rose (2008) 
argues  that  more  trade  means  better  synchronized  business  cycles,  thus  facilitating  a 
common monetary policy. Structural breaks are not confined to trade in physical goods. As 
thanks  to  the  common  market  trade  was  already  high  among  today’s  euro  area  countries 
even before the inception of the common currency, the integration of financial markets was 
probably more important in the case of EMU. In fact, there is strong empirical evidence for 
the  boost  in  financial  integration  brought  by  the  introduction  of  the  common  currency  (EC 
2008, Lane 2008). Ideally, integrated financial markets encourage the movement of capital 
towards its best uses, promote diversification, diminish the risk of local credit crunches and 
smooth  local  cycles  by  financing  temporary  current  account  disequilibria  between  different 
regions within a monetary union. 
Overall,  ten  years  into  the  life  of  the  euro  there  are  strong  arguments  to  believe  that  the 
importance of asymmetric shocks or at least their harmful side-effects have diminished and 
will diminish further, especially if structural policies foster the convergence in productivity and 
living standards between EMU member states. Most studies published on the occasion of the 
tenth  anniversary  agreed  that  the  euro  had  performed  well  in  terms  of  macroeconomic 
stability, low and stable inflation and employment growth (EC 2008, Pisani and Posen 2008). 
However, unexpected to most, the tenth anniversary of the euro fell in the middle of a severe 
financial  market  crisis  that  ushered  in  the  worst  recession  the  world  has  faced  since  the 
1930s. For the euro, the crisis represented a test that neither its advocates nor its detractors 
would  have  imagined  a  couple  of  years  ago.  This  paper  will  argue  that  the  euro  and  the 
European  institutions  have  weathered  the  challenge  relatively  well.  In  fact,  the  financial 
turmoil highlighted a number of advantages of a single currency that the OCA framework had 
tended  to  disregard.  In  the  OCA  argument  the  implicit  alternative  to  monetary  union  is 
national  autonomy  in  determining  the  monetary  policy  stance,  in  particular  autonomous 
setting  of  interest  and  exchange  rates.  In  reality,  however,  as  has  been  underlined  by  the 
financial dimension of the current crisis, floating exchange rates can hardly be considered a 
viable  alternative  for  many  countries  of  the  European  Union.  In  addition,  while  the  supra-
national  structure  of  the  European  Central  Bank  has  been  often  portrayed  as  a  source  of 
conflict  and  paralysis,  the  existence  of  a  well-established,  credible  institution  on  the 
European level has allowed a fast and coordinated policy response. In both dimensions, the 
speedy  coordination  on  a  coherent  policy  response  and  the  stability  provided  by  a  large 
monetary area, the euro has proved to be an anchor of stability in critical times. 
The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 portrays the measures taken by the European 
System of Central Banks. As will be seen, the Eurosystem has reacted swiftly, timely and in 
a  manner  well  adapted  to  the  specific  needs  of  the  euro  area  economy.  Various  financial 
market  indicators  show  that  ECB  policy  effectively  eased  the  strains  in  money  and  capital 
markets and contributed to restoring the proper functioning of the financial system. While the 
policy of the Eurosystem can thus already be considered a success, the true value of having 
a  single  central  bank  and  a  common  currency  really  becomes  apparent  when  the 
counterfactual  scenario  of  a  European  Union  without  common  currency  is  considered. 
Section 3 gives some hints on the amount of pressure EU member currencies would have 
felt in an ERM-style regime and the costs in terms of higher interest rates and/or distortion 
brought  by  competitive  devaluations.  Still,  there  is  little  room  for  complacency.  The  most 
important challenge for monetary union is the risk of diverging developments between euro 
2 
 BIS Review 121/2009
area countries, which are discussed briefly in Section 4. Section 5 attempts a look into the 
future of the project euro. The euro area is set to take in additional members. While a long-
term benefit both to the existing union and the new members, care has to be taken that the 
new  members  do  not  build  up  harmful  financial  imbalances.  The  paper  concludes  with  an 
outlook on the international role of the euro. 
Speedy, adapted, determined – ECB policy during the crisis 
2.  
The chronology of the financial turmoil that started in August 2007 is well known (BIS 2008, 
2009).  Unexpected  losses  in  US  subprime  securities,  a  small  segment  of  the  international 
financial markets, rapidly spread to the entire financial system, as risk was repriced for all but 
the  safest  asset  classes.  In  the  process  significant  uncertainty  arose  about  the  size  and 
location  of  losses.  The  lack  of  information  and  doubts  about  the  liquidity  and  solvency  of 
counterparties acted to amplify the effects of the initial losses. August 2007 saw a new type 
of  bank  run,  not  by  depositors  (who  are  protected  by  deposit  insurance  schemes)  but  the 
wholesale  market.  The  premium  on  liquidity  in  the  interbank  markets  shot  up.  The 
impossibility to roll over short term financing forced banks and special purpose vehicles to 
dispose  off  assets.  In  order  to  regain  public  confidence  and  create  buffers  against  further 
unexpected  losses,  the  financial  sector  strove  to  maintain  or  even  raise  capital  ratios. 
Reasonable from an individual point of view, the collective effort to reduce leverage pushed 
asset prices further down, provoking additional rounds of write-downs. In the first phase of 
the  crisis  turmoil  was  relatively  contained  in  the  financial  sector  and  real  growth  held  up 
reasonably  well,  especially  in  the  emerging  economies.  In  the  wake  of  the  collapse  of 
Lehman in September 2008, however, worries about a severe financial crisis led to dramatic 
falls in the stock markets and a collapse in consumer and firm confidence. GDP growth fell 
sharply worldwide and turned strongly negative in the major western economies. 
Reacting to the crisis – a classification of central bank measures 
2.1.  
Economic  policy  reacted  by  trying  to  short-circuit  the  mechanisms  that  had  amplified  the 
initial losses and propagated their impact through the entire economy (Blanchard 2009). The 
threat  of  insolvency  was  countered  by  private  and  public capital  injections  for  systemically 
important  financial  institutions.  Additional  liquidity  was  provided  to  accommodate  higher 
liquidity demand. When the crisis spilled over from the financial sector into the real economy, 
a package of measures was taken to support demand and revert the broad shrinking of GDP. 
Within this policy mix central banks entered on several fronts. The measures taken by central 
banks can be broadly classified in two categories: 
1. 
The  lowering  of  policy  rates.  The  setting  of  the  policy  rate  is  the  standard  tool  of 
monetary policy. Central banks around the world slashed interest rates, in particular 
after  output  started  to  contract  in  late  2008  and  inflationary  pressures  receded  in 
parallel.  Currently,  key  policy  rates  are  historically  low  in  all  major  western 
economies – currently the ECB refinancing rate is lower than ever before in the ten 
year  history  of  the  institution,  the  same  applies  to  the  Bank  of  England,  which  is 
more than three hundred years old (figure 1).2  
In  parallel  as  well  as  independently  of  lowering  interest  rates,  central  banks  took 
additional  steps,  which  have  been 
the  heading 
“unconventional measures”. These measures can be considered unconventional in 
the sense that they altered dimensions of monetary policy which are normally not 
subject to change. Unconventional measures concerned changes in the way liquidity 
together  under 
lumped 
2. 
                                                 
2   Whereby  the  absolute  interest  rate  level  cannot  be  used  to  rank  monetary  areas  according  to  monetary 
stance. The way the policy rate is transmitted to the economy differs between monetary areas. See below. 
BIS Review 121/2009 
 3
interest  rates 
was provided as well as the direct targeting of variables outside the traditional focus 
of  monetary  policy  implementation  like  the  quantity  of  money  or  credit  as  well  as 
various 
like  mortgage  rates  or  yields  on  corporate  bonds. 
Unconventional measures had two main purposes. First, to support the functioning 
of  financial  markets  and  institutions  so  that  lower  policy  rates  were  effectively 
passed  on  to  the  economy.  Second,  in  case  that  the  official  interest  rate  had 
reached  a  lower  bound,  to  provide  additional  stimulus  to  the  economy.  These 
remarkable measures will be the focus of the remainder of section 2. 
Figure 1
Policy rates
in %
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
01/07
04/07
Euro area
07/07
USA
10/07
Japan
Source: Central banks.
01/08
04/08
07/08
10/08
01/09
04/09
07/09
UK
 Eurosystem frontrunner in liquidity provision 
2.2.  
Generally  speaking,  all  major  central  banks  implement  monetary  policy  by  setting  a  very 
short-term  interest  rate  (Borio  1997).3  While  such  a  very  short-term  rate  does  not  play  an 
direct  role  in  spending  and  investment  decisions,  the  short-term  interest  rate  and 
expectations  about  its  future  course  determine  the  level  of  longer  term  rates,  thereby 
influencing  consumption  and  investment  and  ultimately  the  central  banks’  strategic  targets 
like inflation (ECB 2004). The transmission of monetary policy impulses on the economy thus 
relies very much on well functioning money and capital markets. 
The first element in the transmission mechanism, the money market, came under significant 
stress in August 2007. Concerns about sudden liquidity needs and caused banks’ demand 
for funds to rise sharply, while doubts about counterparties’ solvency led supply to drop. As a 
result the premium on unsecured and on longer-term loans rose sharply, the volume of funds 
traded  declined,  and  there  were  signs  of  rationing.  With  the  collapse  of  Lehman  in 
September 2008 developments in the money market took a further turn for the worse. The 
central  banks  reacted  by  making  it  easier  for  banks  to  access  central  bank  liquidity  along 
several  dimensions  in  order  to  support  their  capacity  to  lend  to  the  private  sector.  The 
                                                 
3  
In most cases, this is the overnight rate – the interest rate at which banks lend immediately available funds, 
namely their deposits or balances with the central bank, to other banks. 
4 
 BIS Review 121/2009
Eurosystem was the first on August 9, 2007, to provide banks with additional liquidity. Other 
central  banks  soon  followed  while  the  Eurosystem  extended  its  liquidity  measures  step  by 
step in the two following years. The measures of the Eurosystem can be grouped under four 
headings: 
2.2.1.   Fixed rate tenders with full allotment 
Before  the  summer  2007,  the  Eurosystem  provided  the  bulk  of  liquidity  through  tender 
operations where banks bid a variable interest rate for a fixed amount of liquidity set by the 
ECB. Under this arrangement the Eurosystem ensures that on aggregate liquidity demand 
and  supply  are  balanced.  The  distribution  of  liquidity  however  is  left  to  the  market 
mechanism,  leaving  the  individual  bank  uncertain  whether  it  will  receive  funds  in  the  ECB 
tender operation or whether it will have to procure funds from other banks in the market. With 
interbank  markets  impaired  in  the  crisis,  this  uncertainty  became  very  costly.  As  a 
consequence  the  Eurosystem  changed  the  tender  procedure  to  full  allotment  at  a  fixed 
interest rate, i.e. the Eurosystem stood ready to provide against eligible collateral as much 
liquidity as the individual banks desired and did so at a fixed rate. The new tender procedure 
removed  any  vestiges  of  uncertainty  about  liquidity  management  for  banks.  The  operation 
mode was first used on 9 August 2007, then again before year end 2007 and has become 
the standard procedure for all tender operations from mid-September 2008 onwards. Figure 
2 shows how allotted amounts increased in autumn 2008 as the Eurosystem accommodated 
the risen liquidity demand of the banking sector. 
2.2.2.   Lengthening of maturities 
As  of  September  2009,  the  Eurosystem  not  only  provides  unlimited  amounts  of  liquidity,  it 
also  does  so  at  longer  maturities  than  before  the  crisis.  Longer  maturities  give  banks 
additional  security  in  their  liquidity  management.  After  having  introduced  a  new  six-month 
facility, the Eurosystem took in June 2009 the additional step of providing one-year funds. 
Demand in the first one-year operation was huge, leading to a record amount of 442 billion 
EUR  being  supplied  to  the  euro  area  banking  system.  The  facility  should  encourage  bank 
lending to the economy by reducing the maturity mismatch between the investment and the 
funding  side  of  the  balance  sheet.  In  figure  2,  the  progressive  lengthening  of  maturities  in 
ECB refinancing operations is well visible. 
BIS Review 121/2009 
 5
Maturity composition of liquidity provided in the euro area
in billion EUR
1000
800
600
400
200
0
-200
-400
01/07
04/07
07/07
10/07
01/08
04/08
07/08
10/08
01/09
04/09
07/09
Source: ECB
Figure 2
Lending facility
Other liquidity operations
Main refinancing operation
(1W)
1M
3M
6M
12M
Deposit facility
Liquidity needs (autonomous
factors + minimum reserves)
Net liquidity
 2.2.3.   Collateral framework and counterparties 
In  order  to  obtain  central  bank  liquidity  banks  have  to  be  eligible  counterparties  in  central 
bank  operations  and  they  need  securities  that  the  central  bank  accepts  as  collateral,  e.g. 
government  securities  (Chailloux  et  al.  2008;  ECB  2007).  On  both  dimensions  the 
Eurosystem  entered  the  turmoil  period  with  a  very  flexible  system  already  in  place.  In  the 
euro  area,  in  principle  all  institutions  subject  to  reserve  requirements  are  eligible  to 
participate  in  open  market  operations.4  The  list  of  eligible  collateral  was  also  defined  very 
widely before the outbreak of the crisis already, including, besides government securities, a 
range of private sector securities and loans. The list was further enlarged in autumn 2008. As 
a  result,  the  total  value  of  eligible  securities  is  currently  equivalent  to  about  130%  of  euro 
area GDP, giving banks plenty of choice when obtaining funds from the Eurosystem. As will 
be  discussed  in  section  2.4  below,  other  central  banks  had  to  adapt  their  frameworks 
profoundly to achieve the same results as the Eurosystem.  
2.2.4.   Foreign currency 
The dysfunctions in the interbank market were not limited to a single monetary area, but also 
affected foreign exchange markets  (Baba et al. 2008). European banks found it especially 
difficult  to  obtain  U.S.  dollar  funding.  In  December  2007,  reciprocal  swap  agreements 
between  the  Fed  and  the  ECB,  BoE  and  SNB,  respectively,  were  concluded  to  provide 
European banks with U.S. dollar funding through the Eurosystem. Since the aggravation of 
the turmoil in September 2008, the tenders were equally operated with full allotment. In turn, 
the  ECB  signed  swap-agreements  with  several  European  central  banks  outside  the  euro 
area to provide euro funding to non-euro area banks. 
                                                 
4   Before the crisis, only quick tenders were executed with a restricted set of counterparties. Since October 2008 
all Eurosystem counterparties admitted to the main refinancing operations can also take part in quick tenders. 
6 
 BIS Review 121/2009
Additional measures: covered bonds purchase program 
2.3.  
In May 2009 the Eurosystem added a further tool to its set of unconventional measures: the 
outright purchase of covered bonds. Again, the objective was to support the flow of credit to 
the  economy  through  the  banking  sector.  Covered  bonds  are  used  by  banks  to  refinance 
their portfolios of long-term mortgage loans and loans granted to the public sector. Initially 
strongly  anchored  in  Germany,  in  recent  years  covered  bonds  have  become  an  important 
refinancing  instrument  for  banks  all  over  Europe.5  The  crisis  hurt  the  primary  market  for 
covered  bonds  badly,  making  it  more  difficult  for  banks  to  refinance  and  thereby  reducing 
their willingness to grant longer-term loans. After fostering bank lending on the shorter end 
through  the  unlimited  provision  of  one-year  funds,  the  Eurosystem  decided  to  support  the 
markets  necessary  for  more  long-term  refinancing  by  buying  covered  bonds  outright.  The 
purchases  should  help  revive  the  market  in  terms  of  liquidity,  spreads  and  ultimately 
issuance. The purchase program has a volume of 60 billion EUR and will be executed over 
the coming year. Purchases started on 6 July 2009 and by 31 August the Eurosystem has 
acquired bonds worth 9.2 billion EUR. 
How do the measures of the Eurosystem compare to those of the Fed? 
2.4. 
Like the Eurosystem other major central banks like the Fed or the Bank of England reacted 
to the financial market crisis and economic slowdown with measures outside their usual tool 
kit.  Especially  the  Fed  created  numerous  new  programs  that  came  to  be  known  by  their 
acronyms (TAF, TSLF, etc.). 
The  multitude  of  programs  and  technical  detail  complicate  the  direct  comparison  between 
central banks. In terms of their objectives, however, it appears that the Eurosystem and the 
Fed  are  very  similar:  stabilize  the  transmission  channel  from  its  starting  point  –  interbank 
markets – to its end point – the effective flow of finance to the real economy. The apparent 
differences  between  the  measures  adopted  can  in  turn  be  explained  to  a  large  degree  by 
dissimilarities between the US and the euro area economies, both with respect to the pre-
crisis  framework  for  monetary  policy  implementation  as  well  as  to  more  fundamental 
differences in the structure of the financial system. 
2.4.1.   Operational frameworks 
The central banks entered the crisis with different operational frameworks in place. In normal 
times  these  differences  were  inconsequential.  As  the  crisis  unfolded,  however,  it  became 
necessary  to  adapt  the  frameworks  in  order  to  provide  sufficient  liquidity  to  the  money 
markets  (Jobst  2009).  As  already  pointed  out  above,  the  framework  of  the  Eurosystem 
proved  very  flexible,  necessitating  a  minimum  a  changes.  One  example  is  the  range  of 
counterparties.  The  Eurosystem  always  operated  with  a  large  number  of  counterparties, 
while the Fed hat to create a number of new facilities to grant more banks access to Fed 
funding.6  A  similar  phenomenon  was  observed  in  the  area  of  collateral.  Both  the  Bank  of 
England the Fed entered the turmoil period with a narrowly defined list of admitted securities, 
                                                 
5  
Investors consider covered bonds a relatively safe investment because they bear both the guarantee of the 
issuing bank and are backed up by a designated asset pool. From a financial stability perspective covered 
bonds  are  attractive  because  they  don’t  suffer  from  the  downsides  of  another  class  of  securities  used  to 
refinance  mortgages,  i.e.  asset-backed  securities  (ABS).  In  the  case  of  ABS,  the  underlying  assets  are 
typically removed from the balance sheet of the originating bank and credit risk is transferred to the holders of 
the ABS. This so-called originate-and-distribute business model of banking has come under severe criticism in 
the course of the crisis. Covered bonds are crucially different as the credit risk remains with the issuing bank, 
preserving the incentives for prudent risk monitoring. 
6   The Term Auction Facility (TAF) and the Primary Dealers Credit Facility (PDCF) served to broaden access to 
CB  facilities,  as  before  the  crisis  regular  open  market  operations  had  been  conducted  with  20  investment 
banks, the primary dealers, only. 
BIS Review 121/2009 
 7
basically  treasury  bills  and  bonds.  When  this  proved  too  restrictive,  both  created  swap 
facilities where banks could exchange previously ineligible securities, e.g. corporate bonds, 
against government securities (Fleming et al. 2009). In the euro area such programs were 
not necessary, as the Eurosystem already accepted a wide range of publicly and privately 
issued  assets.  To  sum  up,  the  different  measures  often  reflected  different  starting  points. 
Overall, operational frameworks converged in many dimensions towards the ECB standard.7
2.4.2.   Structural differences between the US and the EA financial systems 
Turning  to  the  more  downstream  segments  of  the  transmission  channel,  policies  differed 
again.  Here  the  main  reason  lies  in  the  profound  differences  how  households  and  in 
particular firms are financed in the euro area and in the US. The euro area economy is to a 
large degree financed through banks. Bank financing accounts for 145% of GDP in the euro 
area while only slightly above 60% in the US. In the US, market-based funding sources like 
shares and bonds amount to more than 300% of GDP, more than double the share in the 
Euro area (ECB 2009a). The importance of banks is underscored by the key role played by 
small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) in the euro area. Typically these are too small to 
access financial markets. While in recent months some large companies have switched from 
bank  to  market  based  finance  to  circumvent  bottlenecks  in  bank  financing,  SMEs  are 
excluded from this alternative funding source. A second structural difference that influenced 
the design of the policy response is the relative importance of housing for the US economy, 
both in general as well as in the current crisis. In the US declining house prices have been 
the trigger for the crisis and have been an important drag on household balance sheets and 
consumption. In Europe, housing has played a much more minor role. 
Figure 3
Size of capital market related to the private sector
percentages of GDP; end of year
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
debt securities issued by the private sector
quoted shares issued
bank loans to the private sector
Euro area
USA
Source: ECB (2009a).
 In  order  to  be  effective,  central  bank  measures  in  the  two  economic  areas  had  to  target 
different segments of the financial sector. Given the importance of markets in the financing of 
the US economy, the Fed concentrated its efforts on key financial markets that were frozen 
                                                 
7   Other  examples  include  the  increased  use  of  repos  in  liquidity  provision,  the  introduction  of  remunerated 
reserves at the Fed, equivalent to the deposit facility of the ECB, and reforms of the lending facility. 
8 
 BIS Review 121/2009
or  characterized  by  excessive  risk  premia.  Specific  programs  targeted  the  market  for 
commercial  paper  and  residential  mortgages.  Additionally,  the  Fed  strove  to  drive  down 
interest rates on residential mortgages by buying up government bonds. These traditionally 
serve as benchmark for mortgage interest rates and by lowering government bond rates the 
Fed  hoped  to  lower  consumer  lending  rates  as  well.  That  the  Fed  bought  government 
securities for this purpose is linked in turn to the fact that treasury notes and bonds made up 
a large share of the Fed balance sheet already before the crisis. Using treasuries to influence 
interest rate was thus a measure in line with previous Fed practice. To highlight the central 
role of financial market prices for its policy, the Fed has labelled its approach “credit easing”. 
The effectiveness of monetary policy in the euro area depends much more on a functioning 
banking system. Therefore the focus of the Eurosystem has been on stabilizing the funding 
situation of banks. As described above, the important measures were longer maturities and 
full  allotment  in  its  repo  operations.  Again,  the  emphasis  on  repos  rather  than  outright 
purchases  is  linked  to  the  traditional  importance  of  repos  for  liquidity  provision  in  the  euro 
area. In this respect the purchase program for covered bonds was a very innovative step for 
the Eurosystem. In terms of its objective, however, the target was again the banking system. 
Reviving  the  covered  bonds  market  was  a  means  to  foster  the  lending  capacity  of  banks. 
Consequently,  the  Eurosystem  has  branded  its  measures  “enhanced  credit  support”, 
underlining the crucial role of bank intermediated lending in the euro area. 
 Limits to monetary policy 
2.5. 
The  valiant  intervention  of  the  Eurosystem  to  prevent  a  liquidity  shortage  in  the  banking 
system,  to  restore  the  functioning  of  the  transmission  mechanism  and  to  stimulate  the 
economy  through  lower  interest  rates  should  not  blind  to  the  inherent  limits  of  monetary 
policy, however. In order to be successful, monetary policy had to go in tandem with fiscal 
measures. In particular, while in their traditional role as lenders of last resort central banks 
can  alleviate  a  temporary  liquidity  shortage  of  principally  sound  banks  and  other  financial 
institutions, monetary policy cannot be used to recapitalise banks. ECB measures had thus 
to be coupled with government programs aimed at restoring the balance sheet of the banking 
system  through  capital  injections  and  guarantees.  Equally  important  was  the  coordinated 
fiscal  stimulus  to  support  consumption  and  investment  when  confidence  was  too  low  to 
sustain spending through interest rate cuts alone. 
Coordination is also required with financial regulation. In the short term monetary policy can 
and at this time does help ease the process of resolving the financial imbalances that were at 
the  source  of  the  current  crisis.  When  it  comes  to  preventing  the  recurrence  of  similar 
imbalances in the future, however, the principal tool of monetary policy, the interest rate, is 
not the instrument of choice. The principle objective of monetary policy is price stability and 
using the same policy tool to achieve other targets creates potential conflicts in the setting of 
the  policy  stance.  To  ensure  stability  of  the  financial  system  monetary  policy  has  to  be 
complemented by a better and more encompassing regulatory regime. 
Evaluating success 
3.  
It is still early for a definite evaluation of the policy measures the Eurosystem has taken over 
the  course  of  the  crisis.  Yet  even  with  more  distance  the  assessment  of  policy  will  prove 
difficult. To gauge the impact of central bank measures a counterfactual scenario is needed 
that  describes  what  would  have  happened  in  the  absence  of  the  measures  taken  by  the 
central banks. However, we do not possess an encompassing model of the financial system 
that could take care of all the very complex yet highly relevant interactions. During a financial 
crisis  in  particular,  dynamics  are  highly  non-linear,  as  the  sudden  worsening  of  conditions 
after the collapse of Lehman has dramatically shown. Simply extrapolating pre-intervention 
developments  is  unlikely  to  do  full  justice  to  central  bank  policy,  if  the  real  alternative 
scenario had been a systemic breakdown. 
BIS Review 121/2009 
 9
3.1.   Money and financial markets 
Still, some insights can be gleaned from looking at specific segments of money and capital 
markets. It has to be kept in mind, however, that such analysis is necessarily limited to partial 
equilibria  that  neglect  possibly  important  general  equilibrium  effects.  The  methodology  is 
simply to look for breakpoints in time series around the introduction of new policy measures. 
The  pressure  on  money  market  has  manifested  itself  among  others  in  rising  spreads 
between rates on longer-term unsecured lending, e.g. three months, and expected overnight 
rates  over  the  same  period  of  time.  The  spread  reflected  two  factors.  First,  banks  worried 
about future funding stress, which boosted their demand for longer-term funding. At the same 
time,  banks  were  concerned  about  counterparties’  creditworthiness,  which  reduced  their 
willingness to lend, in particular for longer periods of time.8 The spread went up considerably 
in summer 2007, before the year end 2007 and again sharply in September 2008 (figure 4). 
Term lending rates and overnight index swaps
in %
6
Figure 4
in basis points
200
5
4
3
2
1
0
01/07
04/07
07/07
10/07
01/08
04/08
07/08
10/08
01/09
04/09
07/09
Spread (rh axis)
3M EURIBOR (lh axis)
rate in MRO (lh axis)
3M EONIA swap (lh axis)
Source: ECB, Thomson Reuters.
150
100
50
0
 Unsecured  interbank  rates  play  an  important  role  as  benchmark  for  interest  rates  paid  on 
loans to households and firms in the euro area. Thus high spreads between the ECB policy 
rate  and  money  market  rates  increased  financing  costs  of  the  broad  economy  above  the 
level desired by the ECB. In other words, the pass-through of policy rates to the economy 
was impaired. As described above, the Eurosystem took a host of measures to restore the 
proper  functioning  of  interbank  markets.  As  seen  in  figure  4,  three  month  interbank  rates 
declined by 450 basispoints since their peak in October 2008. A large part of this decline is 
due to the lowering of the policy rate by 325 basispoints, but an additional decline came from 
lower risk spreads linked to the ECB liquidity measures. 
Moreover,  as  a  brief  analysis  in  ECB  (2009b)  points  out,  the  introduction  of  a  fixed  rate 
tender with full allotment has contributed to stabilize the funding situation of the euro area 
banking  system  and  sustain  the  necessary  flow  of  credit  to  households  and  non-financial 
companies.  Figure  5  shows  the  importance  of  central  bank  lending  in  the  final  quarter  of 
2008, when international flows reversed and funding from other euro area monetary financial 
                                                 
8   Distinguishing between credit and liquidity risk is difficult empirically; see Michaud and Upper (2008). 
10 
 BIS Review 121/2009
institutions (MFIs) dried up. In this situation, ECB funding provided a buffer, allowing even 
liquidity constrained banks to provide new lending or at least to roll over existing loans. 
 
 
Figure 5: Funding sources of euro area credit institutions by counterpart sector 
(three-month flows; EUR billions) 
 Source: ECB. 
 
Further down the transmission mechanism, it was important to see that lower money market 
rates  have  fed  through  to  lending  rates  paid  by  households  and  firms.  The  pass-through 
typically takes some time to materialize. Evidence on lending rates so far suggests that the 
historic  relationship  between  money  market  rates  and  lending  rates  has  continued  to  hold 
(ECB 2009c, Jobst and Kwapil 2008). As a result rates on new loans for house purchases 
and  to  non-financial  corporations  have  come  down  broadly  in  line  with  reductions  in  the 
policy rate, providing some needed stimulus to investment and consumption (figure 6). 
BIS Review 121/2009 
 11
Bank lending rates in the euro area
in %
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
01/07
Source: ECB.
04/07
07/07
10/07
01/08
04/08
07/08
10/08
01/09
04/09
Figure 6
households consumption
households other
purposes
households housing
non-financial companies
< 1 million EUR
non-financial companies
> 1 million EUR
 Another market, where a calming influence of central bank policy can be documented, is the 
international market for US dollar. Over the past decade European financial institutions had 
built up a structural shortage of US dollar (Mc Guire and Peter 2009) and depended heavily 
on  FX  swaps.  With  the  onset  of  the  turmoil  in  the  money  markets  in  August  2007,  the 
imbalance  between  US  dollar  demand  and  supply  and  the  perceived  counterparty  risk  of 
European banks led to illiquidity and marked deviations from covered interest rate parity, i.e. 
the implicit USD interest rate paid in FX swap contracts came to exceed the onshore USD 
rate significantly (Baba et al 2008). The failure of Lehman led to a global scramble for US 
dollar.  The  swap  lines  established  in  a  joint  action  by  the  Fed,  ECB,  SNB  and  BoE 
contributed to calm the foreign exchange markets, reducing deviations from covered interest 
parity by about 30 basis points, which is quite considerable given that average deviations at 
the beginning of 2009 were about 50 basis points (Baba and Packer 2009). 
Finally, the newly inaugurated covered bond purchase program equally seems to bear first 
fruits. The announcement of the ECB program in May 2009 has led to a significant pick-up in 
the  primary  market  that  had  seen  only  few  new  emissions  after  September  2008. 
Remarkably,  new  bonds  have  not  only  been  issued  in  countries  with  traditionally  large 
markets for covered bonds like Spain, France or Germany, but also in the Netherlands, Italy 
and Portugal where covered bonds had so far played a limited role only.9
The purchase programme also impacted on prices. Between 2000 and 2007 spreads on 3-5 
year German covered bonds over German government securities have fluctuated around 20 
basis points. In early 2009 spreads peaked at over 140. The announcement of the covered 
bond  program  led  to  a  first  drop  in  spreads  (figure  7).  With  the  implementation  of  the 
purchases,  spreads  have  declined  further.  Spreads  between  German  covered  bonds  and 
covered bonds of other euro area countries, which have similarly increased over the course 
of the crisis, have equally come down recently. 
                                                 
9   See the monthly reports on the Eurosystem’s covered bond purchase program on the ECB’s website. 
12 
 BIS Review 121/2009
German covered bonds - spreads over Bunds
spreads in basis points. iBoxx indices, euro denominated
160
Figure 7
6 July: purchases start
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
2007
3-5 years
7-10 years
Source: Thomson Reuters.
2008
2009
7 May: covered bond 
purchase program 
announced
 Thinking about a counterfactual 
3.2.  
While  a  general  evaluation  of  specific  central  bank  programs  remains  elusive  given  the 
complexity of the underlying dynamics, it might still be insightful to step back and think about 
a very general counterfactual scenario – namely what would have happened to the euro area 
economies without EMU in place. 
Such  a  scenario  is  not  wide  of  the  mark.  The  euro  was  introduced  only  ten  years  ago. 
Before,  the  European  Community  tried  to  ensure  stable  exchange  rates  via  the  Exchange 
Rate Mechanism (ERM). Exchange rate stability was perceived an important element of the 
common market as it provides a reliable basis for the trade in goods and services between 
the  different  member  states.  ERM  had  been  haunted  by  repeated  devaluations  and 
exchange rate crises, the most notorious episode occurring in 1992/1993. In the absence of 
EMU,  the  2007/2008  financial  crisis  would  have  brought  such  a  system  under  severe 
pressure, as doubts about the liquidity and solvency of specific banks would have combined 
with a drying up of funding in the interbank and foreign exchange markets, concerns about 
government  budgets  and  doubts  about  the  willingness  to  defend  fixed  exchange  rates  in 
particular if this meant raising official interest rates in the face of economic slowdown. 
The  experience  of  Denmark,  an  EU  country  that  has  opted  out  of  the  common  currency, 
provides  a  glimpse  on  what  could  have  happened.  While  the  fundamentals  of  the  Danish 
economy  and  banking  system  were  no  particular  source  of  concern,  the  Danish  currency 
came  under  pressure  when  the  financial  crisis  intensified  in  September  2008  (Danmarks 
Nationalbank  2008).  As  foreign  exchange  market  interventions  were  unable  to  prevent  a 
weakening of the krone, Danmarks Nationalbank had to raise its lending rate on 7 October 
2008,  at  a  moment  when  the  ECB,  the  Fed  and  the  BoE  started  to  slash  policy  rates  to 
counter financial market turmoil and the dramatic fall in GDP growth. The result is visible in 
figure 8: The spread between interbank rates in Denmark and the Euro area shot up from 
below 50 basis points to about 200 basis points at the end of 2008. As pressure subsided in 
the  following  months,  Danmarks  Nationalbank  managed  to  reduce  the  spread  to  currently 
about 100 basis point, which still implies a burden for the Danish economy through higher 
lending rates. 
BIS Review 121/2009 
 13
Interest rate spread Denmark - Euro area
Interbank rates, in basispoints
300
Figure 8
250
200
150
100
50
0
-50
01/07
04/07
07/07
10/07
01/08
04/08
07/08
10/08
01/09
04/09
07/09
O/N (2 weeks moving average)
3M
Source: Thomson Reuters.
  
For the members of the euro area itself, a scenario of exchange rate pressure resulting from 
a  flight  to  safety  and  liquidity  can  be  constructed  using  alternative  financial  market  prices. 
One  is  the  price  of  a  previously  obscure  instrument  that  the  evolving  crisis  gave  sudden 
prominence: credit default swaps (CDS) on government bonds, i.e. the insurance premium 
paid to protect against sovereign default. At times mirroring, at times leading developments 
in government bond yields, CDS premia of different euro area members started to diverge 
widely  and  became  a  much  observed  indicator  of  the  health  of  the  banking  system  of  the 
various countries and the fiscal outlook. The developments evident in figure 9 give an idea of 
the  strains  countries  would  have  been  exposed  to  in  the  absence  of  a  common  currency. 
Some  countries  would  have  probably  been  forced  off  fixed  exchange  rates  or  could  have 
avoided devaluation only at high costs for the domestic economy. While a common currency 
supports smaller or more fragile economies (or at least economies that are perceived to be 
more  fragile),  large  or  hard  currency  countries  profit  equally  from  monetary  union  as  it 
protects  them  from  the  competitive  disadvantages  following  a  devaluation  of  the  weaker 
currencies. 
14 
 BIS Review 121/2009
Credit default swaps on Euro area government bonds
in basispoints
400
Figure 9
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
01/08
03/08
05/08
07/08
09/08
11/08
01/09
03/09
05/09
07/09
Interquartile range
Minimum - maximum
Euro area average, unweighted
Source: Thomson Reuters.
 Beyond  these  two  illustrative  examples  of  euro’s  role  as  guarantor  of  stability,  the  euro 
provided  stability  by  its  simple  existence.  In  some  policy  areas  economic  pressure  led 
governments  to  pay  more  attention  to  national  interests.  While  understandable,  such 
behaviour at term risked a slowdown or even reversal of the European integration process. 
Within this context, the euro represented the most visible symbol of European unification. 
4.  
Monetary union as work in progress – ensuring convergence within the euro 
area 
Section  3  has  illustrated  the  advantages  of  the  common  currency  and  the  success  of  the 
Eurosystem  in  providing  stability.  Still,  the  financial  crisis  has  also  highlighted  some  more 
problematic developments within the euro area. A particular area of concern is the relative 
competitive  position  of  the  euro  area  members  and  developments  in  the  intra-euro  area 
current account positions. 
A recent study by the European Commission (2009) traces various measures of the external 
performance of the members of the euro area. Real effective exchange rates, a measure for 
price  and  cost  competitiveness,  have  diverged  widely  since  1999.  While  large  differences 
have  been  observed  occasionally  before  1999  as  well,  divergence  has  become  more 
persistent  since,  as  changes  in  the  nominal  exchange  rate  cannot  anymore  correct 
misaligned  real  exchange  rates.  Price  competitiveness  in  turn  goes  a  long  way  towards 
explaining trade performance. Divergence in price and cost competitiveness has also been 
associated with a steady widening of current account differences within the euro area (see 
figure 10). In contrast to earlier years, current account deficits also exhibit high persistence, 
leading to the accumulation of large negative net foreign asset positions. 
BIS Review 121/2009 
 15
Current account positions of euro area member states
in % of GDP
15
Figure 10
10
5
0
-5
-10
-15
EL
CY
PT
ES
MT
SK
IE
SI
FR
IT
BE
AT
FI
DE
NL
LU
1996/98
2006/08
projected 2010
Source: European Commission.
 As such, divergent developments in real exchange rates and current account position need 
not  reflect  structural  imbalances  in  the  economies.  Changes  in  real  exchange  rates,  for 
instance, might be a sign of different positions in the economic cycle. Current account deficits 
can reflect capital flows from capital rich to catching-up economies, where returns on capital 
are  higher.  Financial  market  integration,  supported  by  the  introduction  of  a  common 
currency, could be a catalyst in this process. In these cases policy would have no reason to 
intervene. 
However,  analysis  by  the  European  Commission  (2009)  shows  that  not  all  divergence  in 
external  performance  indicators  can  be  attributed  to  such  benign  causes.  In  fact,  while 
countries  with  real  GDP  per  capita  below  euro  area  average  typically  run  large  current 
account deficits, these countries show little signs for catching up with higher GDP countries 
(EC 2008). A reason might be that capital imports often ended up in household consumption 
or  housing  with  a  limited  positive  effect  on  productivity  at  best.  Apparently  capital  inflows 
were  not  put  to  the  most  productive  use.  Instead,  by  removing  financing  constraints  on 
private  households,  they  contributed  to  sharp  increases  in  real  estate  prices  in  several 
countries. Historically, such developments do not come as a surprise. Innovation or sudden 
liberalization  in  the  financial  sector  often  leads  to  excessive  leverage  coupled  with  an 
overshooting in asset prices. Decline in interest rates together with the removal of constraints 
on  the  current  account  brought  by  membership  in  the  euro  area  are  most  likely  a  driving 
factor behind the financial imbalances that can today be observed in Greece or Spain. 
According  to  recent  projections,  the  ongoing  financial  crisis  will  bring  about  some 
convergence  in  current  accounts.  Deficit  countries  will  see  falling  domestic  demand  and 
rising  household  savings  rates,  while  surplus  countries  face  a  decline  in  exports.  A  first 
indication for the process of rebalancing is declining credit growth in those countries that had 
enjoyed  buoyant  credit  markets  in  recent  years  (Fig  11).  At  the  same  time,  current 
projections see little movement in real exchange rates. While current account imbalances will 
diminish nevertheless, adjustment through quantities instead of prices is economically costly 
in  terms  of  unemployment  and  underutilisation  of  capital.  The  size  of  costs  will  depend 
crucially  on  the  speed  with  which  resources  can  be  shifted  between  the  traded  and  non-
traded sectors, in particular out of the oversized housing sector. 
16 
 BIS Review 121/2009
Loans to the private sector in the different EMU-member countries
selected countries, annual growth in %
40
Figure 11
30
20
10
0
-10
-20
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
90% quantil - 10% quantil
minimum - maximum
Euro area average
Countries included: BE, AT, DE, ES, FI, FR, GR, IE, IT, NL, PT.
Source: ECB.
 Divergence in the external position of member countries associated with financial imbalances 
is  a  serious  concern  for  monetary  policy  as  these  developments  render  the  setting  of  a 
common  policy  stance  more  difficult.  At  the  same  time  they  pose  a  significant  risk  to  the 
economic development in deficit countries if imbalances were to be reversed abruptly. Given 
the growing interdependence of euro area economies such corrections in individual countries 
could  spill  over  to  the  rest  of  euro  area  and  threaten  economic  stability  more  widely. 
Economic policy therefore has to watch for unsustainable imbalances and react accordingly. 
Key  elements  are  improvements  in  the  functioning  of  product  and  labour  markets  and 
measures to increase productivity in the traded and particularly also in the non-traded sector. 
While  capital  flows  to  catching-up  economies  are  potentially  advantageous,  the  built-up  of 
excessive debt and asset price bubbles has to be avoided. This is in line with the general 
need to improve macroprudential supervision. 
The next ten years – perspectives beyond the crisis 
5.  
The immediate urgency of the financial crisis over, the attention of monetary policy has to 
return to ensuring the long-term success of the common currency. The most important task is 
to  restore  a  positive  role  of  the  financial  system  in  the  distribution  of  resources  and  risk 
management.  This  challenge  is  very  similar  for  all  developed  economies.  In  addition, 
monetary policy in the euro area has to deal with the further development of the monetary 
union, enlargement and the international role of the euro. 
5.1.   Managing enlargement 
Since its creation the euro area has grown from eleven to sixteen countries. In addition, the 
euro  plays  an  inofficial  yet  important  role  in  many  countries,  in  particular  in  neighbouring 
Central, Eastern and Southeastern Europe (CESEE). The euro is used there for savings, to 
BIS Review 121/2009 
 17
denominate debts and even as means of payment.10 Over the coming years the euro area is 
set  to  welcome  further  members.  According  to  the  EU  treaties,  all  member  states  are 
required to adopt the euro as soon as they fulfil the criteria set out by the Maastricht treaty. 
Only the UK and Denmark have an opt-out clause. 
In addition to the legal obligation, the events of the last two years have made the advantages 
of  being  member  of  the  euro  area  plain  to  see.  In  an  initial  phase,  the  crisis  had  been 
confined  to  the  advanced  economies  of  Western  Europe,  as  the  financial  systems  of  the 
CESEE countries were little affected by toxic assets and financial innovation. Following the 
collapse  of Lehman  Brothers  in  September  2008,  however,  financial  market  turmoil  spilled 
over  to  the  CESEE  region.  The  countries  were  hit  by  a  loss  of  investor  confidence  and  a 
flight to quality that led to rising risk premia on bonds, falling stock markets and, depending 
on the exchange rate regime, currency depreciation. In this situation EU membership alone 
already  provided  an  important  boost  to  stability  for  the  CESEE  countries.  Membership 
enhanced  the  credibility  of  local  governments,  provided  indirect  support  to  local  banks  via 
their  euro  area  parent  companies,  and  secured  access  to  international  financial  markets 
through  EU  participation  in  multilateral  lending  and  repurchase  agreements  between  the 
ECB  and  CESEE  central  banks.  Membership  in  the  monetary  union  would  have  provided 
additional  benefits  by  ruling  out  potentially  destabilizing  movements  of  the  exchange  rate, 
bringing  access  to  ECB  liquidity  policy  and  helping  swift,  effective  and  coherent  economic 
policy coordination. For countries considering to join EMU, these advantages in a period of 
crisis come on top of the more general benefits offered by membership of the euro area like 
lower transactions costs, increased competition, stronger real and financial integration and 
last but not least a credible monetary policy targeted towards price stability. 
In order to allow countries to fully reap the benefits of EMU membership, acceding countries 
have  to  fulfil  the  convergence  criteria  laid  down  in  the  Maastricht  treaty.  The  convergence 
criteria are important to ensure that the fixed exchange rate implied by a common currency is 
in  fact  sustainable  for  the  new  member  country.  While  EMU  membership  is  greatly 
advantageous in the long-term, choosing the right moment to join and the best way towards 
membership  depends  on  the  specific  situation  of  every  individual  country,  as  the  future 
members  differ  in  their economic  structure,  their  current  exchange  rate  regime,  integration 
with the euro area and the degree of nominal and real convergence already achieved. 
The crisis has put the limelight on the role of financial factors in the convergence process. 
Capital  flows  from  Western  to  Eastern  Europe  have  been  an  important  factor  driving  the 
catching-up. The sustainability of these flows has now been put into doubt. Euro membership 
would  certainly  help  countries  to  continue  importing  the  capital  necessary  for  further 
development. At the same time the crisis has also exposed the risks associated with financial 
imbalances. An early entry into the euro area before price levels have reasonably converged 
bears the risk that higher inflation rates in the acceding country lead to too low real interest 
resulting in harmful boom-bust cycles. As in the well-developed western economies financial 
regulation will have to play a stabilising role. The proper timing of the enlargement process 
remains a tricky issue. 
The future role of the euro as international currency 
5.2.  
In the last ten years the euro has acquired a significant position not only in the neighbouring 
countries but on an international scale as well (ECB 2008). At the same time, mounting US 
indebtedness has fuelled a debate on the future of the dollar as the leading world currency. 
The discussion was stimulated recently by concerns that the measures taken in the US in the 
wake  of  the  financial  crisis  –  looser  monetary  policy,  sharp  increase  in  public  debts  – 
                                                 
10  The Oesterreichische Nationalbank regularly conducts surveys in Central, Eastern and Southeastern Europe 
on the use of the euro. For the results of the latest wave see Dvorsky, Scheiber, Stix (2009). 
18 
 BIS Review 121/2009
increase  long-term  inflation  risks  and  make  the  dollar  as  reserve  currency  less  attractive. 
Officials of China, which is the largest foreign holder of US assets, have called for changes in 
the world monetary order and a move to a new global reserve currency. The final chapter 
considers  the  challenges  of  international  currency  status  and  the  euro’s  prospects  on  the 
international stage. 
Being the issuer of an international currency brings potentially significant advantages. As the 
market for assets denominated in a leading currency is liquid, external imbalances can be 
managed much more easily. The issuing country profits not only from more elastic demand 
but also lower interest rates. Over the past twenty years, the US has turned to from a lender 
to large debtor vis-à-vis the rest of the world. Still, its income balance has stayed positive as 
the  US  earns  a  higher  return  on  its  foreign  assets  than  it  pays  on  its  foreign  liabilities. 
Estimates put the annual benefits to the United States of the dollar’s key currency role at 2 
percent  of  US  GDP  (Gourinchas  and  Rey  2007).  Key  currency  status  also  serves  as  an 
insurance  policy  in  case  of  economic  and  financial stress.  If  a crisis  provokes  a  fall in  the 
exchange  rate,  foreign  liabilities  denominated  in  domestic  currency  lose  in  value  while 
foreign assets in foreign currency appreciate (Lane and Milesi-Ferretti 2005). 
However, international currency status comes along with challenges to economic policy as 
well. When foreigners hold significant amounts of domestic currency assets, the exchange 
rate becomes highly sensitive to shifts in foreign investor sentiment. Any attempt of foreign 
investors  to  reduce  their  holdings  of  the  anchor  currency  risks  triggering  a  plunge  in  the 
currency’s value. If some of the international holders are large players, interesting strategic 
questions arise, as for China today. While China would have to take large losses in case of a 
USD  devaluation,  effects  on  the  US  would  also  be  far  from  benign.  International  currency 
status is therefore a double edged sword. 
What determines the international role of a given currency? International currency status has 
several  related  yet  distinct  dimensions.  When  looking  at  the  determinants  of  international 
currency  status  and  the  likely  future  evolution  of  the  euro,  it  is  useful  to  distinguish  a 
currency’s role as store of value, e.g. in the form of foreign exchange reserves, from its role 
as  unit  of  account  and  means  of  payment,  e.g.  to  denominate  bonds  or  invoice  trade. 
Overall, as international currencies both the US dollar and the euro punch above their weight 
measured as e.g. share of world GDP or world trade (figure 12). This reflects the well-known 
economies  of  scale  in  international  monetary  relations.  When  looking  in  more  detail  at 
different metrics the euro has shown variable performance relative to the US dollar however. 
The euro has a prominent role as denomination of international bond issues. As a transaction 
medium and international reserve currency, its role is more limited. Evidently, depending on 
the  function  under  consideration  different  factors  drive  the  attractiveness  of  international 
currencies. 
BIS Review 121/2009 
 19
International role of the euro
2007 values, in %
100%
75%
50%
25%
0%
14
29
21
16
43
32
43
19
64
27
GDP at PPP 1)
World trade 1)
Outstanding international
debt securities 2)
Foreign exchange market
turnover 3)
Foreign exchange reserves
4)
Quelle: Source: IMF WEO spring 09, IWF DOT, ECB (2008), BIS Triennial survey.
1) Share of currency areas
2) Excluding home currency issuance
3) Scaled to 100: 19% means that euro is present on the buying or the selling side in 19% x 2 = 38% of all foreign exchange transactions.
4) Only reserves with disclosed currency composition (63.7% of total reserves)
Figure 12
Other currencies
Yen
US dollar
Euro
 financial  markets  are 
As  a  transactions  medium,  a  currency  will  be  more  attractive  the  more  potential  trading 
partners  use  it.  This  is  true  for  international  trade  but  also  the  use  of  currencies  as 
investment or financing instruments. The size of the issuing country as well as the size and 
liquidity  of 
therefore  crucial  determinants  of  currency  status 
(Kindleberger  1967).  The  euro  area  is  of  comparable  size  to  the  US  and  therefore,  in 
principle, the euro should have the same potential as the USD. However, an implication of 
the size argument is that because use by other parties increases the value of transacting in a 
given  currency  there  is  scope  for  strategic  externalities  that  support  the  leading  currency 
(Krugman  1980;  Rey  2001).  As  a  consequence  currency  rankings  are  characterized  by  a 
high  degree  of  inertia.  New  or  rising  currencies,  as  the  euro  today,  have  a  difficult  time 
against  the  incumbent.  Similar  phenomena  have  been  documented  empirical  for  earlier 
historical  episodes,  e.g.  the  late  19th  century  when  despite  a  large  and  fast  growing  US 
economy the pound sterling continued to dominate (Flandreau and Jobst 2009). The same is 
true  today,  as  there  is  significant  shortfall  between  the  actual  role  of  the  euro  in  trade 
invoicing  and  financial  flows  and  what  could  be  expected  because  of  the  size  of  the  euro 
area (Pisani and Posen 2008). 
While  widespread  use  as  transaction  medium  and  the  size  and  liquidity  of  underlying 
financial markets also sustain a currency’s use as store of value, reserve currency status has 
additional,  potentially  more  volatile  determinants,  including  expectations  about  future 
monetary and fiscal policy as well as strategic considerations epitomized in China’s "dollar 
trap”. Further factors are geopolitical influence and the quality of the political, economic and 
judicial system. A historic example for the vagaries of reserve currency status is the fate of 
the US dollar and pound sterling in the interwar years. Recent research has shown the two 
currencies  changing  their  relative  standing  as  reserve  currency  repeatedly  between  1920 
and 1938, mainly driven by political factors rather than economic fundamentals (Eichengreen 
and Flandreau 2008). 
Looking  ten  years  into  the  future,  it  is  highly  improbably  that  the  euro  will  eclipse  the  US 
dollar as world leading currency. Instead the international monetary geography is much more 
likely to evolve towards a multipolar world both in terms of transaction media as with respect 
to reserve holdings. Within the Euro area the challenge will be to ensure macroeconomic and 
20 
 BIS Review 121/2009
financial stability to support confidence in the euro as investment asset. On the international 
level, the coexistence of two or more large international currencies creates new challenges 
for policy coordination and the management of volatility between the main currencies areas. 
The euro has the potential to provide a significant contribution to world financial stability. This 
opportunity has to be seized by European politics. 
References 
6.  
Baba,  Naohiko,  Frank  Packer  and  Teppei  Nagano  (2008):  The  spillover  of  money  market 
turbulence to FX swap and cross-country swap markets. BIS Quarterly Review (March), 73-
86. 
Baba, Naohiko and Frank Packer (2009): From turmoil to crisis: dislocations in the FX swap 
market before and after the failure of Lehman Brothers. BIS Working Papers No 285 (June). 
BIS (2008): 78th Annual report. 
BIS (2009): 79th Annual report. 
Blanchard,  Olivier  (2009):  The  crisis:  Basic  mechanism  and  appropriate  policies.  IMF 
Working Paper 09/08. 
Borio,  Claudio  (1997):  The  Implementation  of  Monetary  Policy  in  Industrial  Countries:  A 
Survey. BIS Economic Paper 47. 
Chailloux,  A.,  S.  Gray  and  R.  McCaughrin.  (2008):  Central  Bank  Collateral  Frameworks: 
Principles and Policies. IMF Working Paper 08/222. 
Danmarks Nationalbank (2008): Monetary Review. 4th Quarter. 
De Grauwe, Paul (2007): The economics of monetary union. 7th edition. Oxford: Clarendon. 
Dvorsky, Sandra, Thomas Scheiber and Helmut Stix (2009): The 2008 fall wave of the OeNB 
euro survey – A first glimpse of households’ reactions to the global financial crisis. Focus on 
European Economic Integration Q2, p. 67-77. 
ECB (2004): The Monetary Policy of the ECB. 2nd edition. Frankfurt. 
ECB (2007): The collateral frameworks of the Federal Reserve System, the Bank of Japan 
and the Eurosystem. ECB Monthly Bulletin 2007(10). p. 85–100. 
ECB (2008): The international role of the euro. 
ECB  (2009a):  The  external  financing  of  households  and  non-financial  corporations:  A 
comparison of the euro area and the United States. ECB Monthly Bulletin 4 p.69-84. 
ECB  (2009b):  The  implementation  of  monetary  policy  since  August  2007.  ECB  Monthly 
Bulletin 7 p.75-89. 
ECB (2009c): Recent developments in the retail bank interest rate pass-through in the Euro 
area. ECB Monthly Bulletin 8 p.93-105. 
Eichengreen, Barry and Marc Flandreau (2008): The rise and the fall of the dollar, or when 
did the dollar replace sterling as the leading international currency?  NBER Working Paper 
14154. 
European  Commission  (2008):  EMU@10.  Successes  and  challenges  after  ten  years  of 
Economic and Monetary Union. European Economy 2. 
European  Commission  (2009):  Special  report.  Competitiveness  developments  within  the 
euro area. Quarterly Report on the Euro Area I p. 20-51. 
BIS Review 121/2009 
 21
Feldstein,  Martin  (1997):  The  political  economy  of  the  European  economic  and  monetary 
union: political sources of an economic liability. Journal of Economic Perspectives 11(4) p. 
23-42. 
Feldstein,  Martin  (2009):  Reflections  on  Americans’  views  of  the  euro  ex  ante.  NBER 
Working Paper 14696. 
Fleming,  M.,  W.  Hrung  and  F.  Keane  2009.  The  Term  Securities  Lending  Facility:  Origin, 
Design,  and  Effects.  Current  Issues  in  Economics  and  Finance.  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
New York. 15(2) February. 1–10. 
Flandreau,  Marc  and  Clemens  Jobst  (2009):  The  empirics  of  international  currencies: 
Historical evidence. The Economic Journal 119 (April). 
Frankel, Jeffrey and Andrew Rose (1998): The endogeneity of the optimum currency criteria. 
The Economic Journal 108 (July) p. 1009-25. 
Gourinchas,  Pierre-Olivier  and  Hélène  Rey  (2007):  From  World  Banker  to  World  Venture 
Capitalist: US External Adjustment and the Exorbitant Privilege. In Richard Clarida (ed.) G-7 
Current Account Imbalances: Sustainability and Adjustment. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press. 
Jobst,  Clemens  and  Claudia  Kwapil  (2008):  The  interest  rate  pass-through  in  Austria  – 
effects of the financial crisis. Monetary Policy and the Economy Q4 p. 54-67. 
Jobst,  Clemens  (2009):  Monetary  Policy  Implementation  during  the  Crisis  2007  to  2008. 
Monetary Policy and the Economy Q1 p. 53-77. 
Jonung, Lars and Eoin Drea (2008): The euro: It can’t happen, It’s a bad idea, It won’t last. 
US economists on the EMU, 1989-2002. Prepared for the session Reflections on American 
Views of the Euro Ex Ante: What We Have Learnt 10 years Ex Post, American Economic 
Association meeting, San Francisco 2009. 
Kindleberger,  Charles  (1967):  The  Politics  of  International  Money  and  World  Language 
(Essays in International Finance No. 61), Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
Krugman,  Paul  (1980):  Vehicle  currencies  and  the  structure  of  international  exchange. 
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 12(3) p. 513-26. 
Lane,  Philip  (2008):  EMU  and  financial  market  integration.  OeNB:  36th  Economics 
Conference “Towards the first decade of Economic and Monetary Union: Experiences and 
perspectives” p. 91-95. 
McGuire, P and G von Peter (2009): The US dollar shortage in global banking. BIS Quarterly 
Review (March) p. 47-63. 
Michaud, F-L and Ch Upper (2008): What drives interbank rates? Evidence from the Libor 
panel. BIS Quarterly Review (March) p. 47-58. 
Mundell, Robert (1961): A theory of optimum currency areas. American Economic Review. 
Pisani-Ferry,  Jean  and  Adam  Posen  (2008):  The  euro  at  ten:  the  next  global  currency? 
Bruegel. 
Rey, Hélène (2001): International trade and currency exchange. Review of Economic Studies 
68(2) p. 443-64. 
Rose,  Andrew  (2008):  EMU,  trade  and  business  cycle  synchronization.  OeNB:  36th 
Economics  Conference  “Towards  the  first  decade  of  Economic  and  Monetary  Union: 
Experiences and perspectives” p. 97-106. 
22 
 BIS Review 121/2009
