Jean-Claude Trichet: Systemic risk 
Text of the Clare Distinguished Lecture in Economics and Public Policy by Mr Jean-Claude 
Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, organised by Clare College, University of 
Cambridge, Cambridge, 10 December 2009. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I  am  delighted  to  have  been  invited  by  Clare  College,  Cambridge,  to  give  this  lecture  in 
economics and public policy. 
One  of  the  greatest  challenges  for  economics  and  public  policy  at  this  time  is  to  restore 
financial and economic stability, and to improve the future functioning of financial systems. A 
pre-condition for meeting this challenge is a deep understanding of the nature of systemic 
risk. And that is the topic I have chosen for this lecture. 
Systemic risk in Europe’s financial system is a very important issue for the European Central 
Bank. And as an institution of the 27, through its General Council in particular, the ECB is 
one  of  the  continent’s  guardians  of  economic  stability.  We  are  charged  in  particular  with 
maintaining  price  stability  in  the  euro  area  over  the  medium  term.  But  the  ECB  is  also  an 
active  participant  in  the  new  agenda  of  financial  stability.  As  you  will  be  aware,  restoring 
financial stability and containing systemic risk in the future are at the heart of the supervisory 
and regulatory reforms currently being discussed here in Europe and elsewhere.  
I  am  particularly  pleased  to  give  this  lecture  at  Cambridge  University,  which  has  been  an 
intellectual  “powerhouse”  for  centuries.  It  is  said  that  the  university  has  more  Nobel  Prize 
winners associated with it than any other institution.  
Perhaps  the  most  well  known  Nobel  Laureate  from  Clare  College  is  James  Watson,  who, 
together  with  Francis  Crick,  derived  the  structure  of  DNA.  DNA  incorporates  the  building 
blocks of life. As the recent instability illustrates, we economists still need to achieve as clear 
an  understanding  of  the  building  blocks  of  financial  systems  –  not  simply  the  institutions 
small and large that populate them, but also the fundamentals of the rules and incentives that 
drive their behaviour; and, particularly, how they combine and interact with each other in the 
presence of amplification mechanisms stemming from leverage and other forces.  
Let  me  mention  two  more  recent  Nobel  laureates  in  economics  whose  work  relates  to  my 
topic  today.  In  1996,  James  Mirrlees  of  Trinity  College  won  the  Nobel  Prize  for  his 
contributions  to  the  economic  theory  of  incentives  under  incomplete  information.  In  2001 
Joseph Stiglitz, who spent time in Cambridge in the 1960s, won the Prize for his analysis of 
the functioning of markets when information is asymmetrically distributed.1 I shall argue in my 
lecture  that  such  information  problems  and  the  incentives  that  they  provide  for  economic 
behaviour are one important element in the phenomenon of systemic risk, and therefore in 
the wide transmission of financial instability.  
The nature of systemic risk 
So what is systemic risk? In the context of our natural environment, it is the threat that the 
actions  of  millions  of  individuals,  all  acting  in  pursuit  of  their  own  interests,  can  cause  a 
breakdown  of  the  world’s  ecosystem,  a  global  catastrophe  which  will  ultimately  damage 
                                                 
1   Stiglitz, J.E. and A. Weiss (1981), “Credit rationing in markets with imperfect information”, American Economic 
Review. 
BIS Review 165/2009 
 1
everyone. This, of course, is the topic of the international climate change negotiations this 
week and next in Copenhagen. 
Similarly, in the context of our economic environment, it is the threat that developments in the 
financial  system  can  cause  a  seizing-up  or  breakdown  of  this  system  and  trigger  massive 
damages  to  the  real  economy.  Such  developments  can  stem  from  the  failure  of  large  and 
interconnected  institutions,  from  endogenous  imbalances  that  add  up  over  time,  or  from  a 
sizable unexpected event. A seizing-up of the financial system ( or large parts of it ( is what 
we  experienced  last  autumn.  The  consequence  was  an  economic  freefall,  a  surge  in 
unemployment and a massive increase in public debt.  
So what is it about financial systems that make them prone to systemic risk? 
The  financial  system  is  composed  of  intermediaries,  markets  and  the  infrastructure  of 
payment,  settlement  and  trading  mechanisms  that  support  them.  Intermediaries  are 
connected with each other through direct transactions, as in interbank markets, and through 
similar investment and financing decisions with third parties such as other intermediaries or 
end investors.  
Financial  markets,  in  turn,  are  connected  with  each  other  through  the  trading  activities  of 
financial intermediaries and through end investors active in more than one market. Systemic 
risk within the financial system relates to the risk that these inter-connections and similarities 
render emerging financial instability widespread in the system. Even if the original problem 
seems more contained, important amplification mechanisms can be at work.  
This complex network of financial connections is extended through the savings and financing 
needs of all economic sectors, notably non-financial firms, households and the government. 
By reallocating savings from individuals and sectors with a surplus of funds to individuals and 
sectors  in  need  of  funds,  the  financial  system  plays  a  central  role  in  the  economy.  So, 
systemic  risk,  in  a  broader  sense,  relates  to  the  risk  that  widespread  instabilities  in  the 
financial  system  translate  into  adverse  effects  on  growth  and  welfare  in  the  economy  at 
large. 
How is it that financial instability can be triggered by initially self-contained events, which are 
then transmitted so widely that the fallout ultimately reaches systemic dimensions?  
ECB research by Philipp Hartmann and others, which has investigated systemic risk for at 
least a decade, suggests that there are three particularly important ways in which this can 
happen.2  
The first is contagion. The failure of one financial intermediary can lead to failures of other 
financial intermediaries, even when the latter have not invested in the same risks and are not 
subject to the same original shock as the former.3  
Second, widespread financial imbalances can build up over time and then unwind abruptly. 
Hyman  Minsky  described  how  in  good  times  consumption  and  investment  increase, 
generating income, which fuels the financing of more consumption and investment but also 
the neglect of increasing risks. Even small events can then lead to a re-pricing of risk and an 
                                                 
2   See de Bandt, O. and P. Hartmann (2000), “Systemic risk: A survey”, ECB Working Paper, no. 14, November, 
de Bandt, O., P. Hartmann and J. Peydro (2009), “Systemic risk in banking: An update”, forthcoming in ECB 
Working  Papers  and  Berger,  A.,  P.  Molyneux  and  J.  Wilson  (eds.),  Oxford  Handbook  of  Banking,  Oxford 
University Press, 2009, and the references therein. 
3   Allen, F. and D. Gale (2000), “Financial contagion”, Journal of Political Economy; Freixas, X., B. Parigi and 
J.C. Rochet (2000), “Systemic risk, interbank relations and liquidity provision by the central bank”, Journal of 
Money, Credit and Banking; Chen, Y. (1999), “Banking panics: The role of the first-come, first-served rule and 
information externalities”, Journal of Political Economy. 
2 
 BIS Review 165/2009
the  credit  boom,  which 
then  adversely  affects  many 
endogenous  unravelling  of 
intermediaries and markets at the same time.4  
Third,  negative  aggregate  shocks  can  adversely  affect  intermediaries  and  markets 
simultaneously.  Historical  research  has  shown  that  many  banking  crises  were  related  to 
economic  downturns.5  Note  that  the  three  mechanisms  can  happen  independently  or  they 
can reinforce each other.  
There  are  a  number  of  features  of  financial  systems  that  make  them  particularly  prone  to 
these forms of systemic risk. Let me just highlight three key ones.  
The first pervasive feature of financial systems is what we call externalities. They particularly 
relate to the complex and dynamic network of exposures among major intermediaries. What 
in tranquil times is an efficient mechanism to share risk, can, in times of stress, become a 
dangerous  channel  for  transmitting  instability.  Two  contracting  parties  do  not  have  an 
incentive to take account of the effects of their risk-taking on third parties. As a consequence, 
the risk at the level of the system may be higher than the sum of individual risks.  
The  second  key  feature  of  financial  systems  is  asymmetric  information.  Financial  systems 
allocate  funds  from  agents  who  have  them  but  possess  no  specific  knowledge  about 
promising investment opportunities, to agents who have knowledge about the opportunities 
but  not  the  funds  to  engage  in  them.  This  creates  an  agency  problem  between  the  two 
parties, which may be handled more or less well through the underlying financial contracts. If 
contracts are incomplete and negative news arrive on some of the investment projects, but 
information  asymmetries  do  not  allow  lenders  to  judge  whether  this  also  affects  other 
investment projects, funding may evaporate for all projects alike.  
The special nature of financial systems is not simply characterised by the presence of these 
two imperfections. Externalities and information problems are also present in other economic 
sectors.  The  additional  problem  in  the  financial  system  is  that  they  can  result  in  the  third 
feature:  powerful  feedback  and  amplification  mechanisms,  which  render  their  implications 
more  severe  and  widespread.  Illiquid  assets,  maturity  mismatches  between  assets  and 
liabilities and leverage amplify the force with which problems of one intermediary are pushed 
through the complex network of exposures. Sizable amounts of debt relative to capital and 
short-term funding have more dramatic effects in situations of stress.  
For example, intermediaries’ losses can trigger “fire sales” of already largely illiquid assets, 
which  reduce  their  values  and  cause  losses  to  other  intermediaries,  as  for  example 
described  in  research  on  contagion  by  Hyun  Shin  and  his  co-authors.6  Moreover,  funding 
and market illiquidity can reinforce each other, leading to vicious liquidity spirals multiplying 
the initial shocks.7 
These  effects  are  further  amplified  due  to  asymmetric  information.  In  the  aggregate,  they 
lead to the nonlinear adjustments that are so characteristic of financial instability. The fact 
that  such  adjustments  are  nonlinear  is  particularly  important  for  research  and  makes 
                                                 
4   Minsky,  H.  (1977),  “A  theory  of  systemic  fragility”,  in  Altman,  E.  and  A.  Sametz  (eds.),  Financial  Crises: 
Institutions  and  Markets  in  a  Fragile  Environment,  Wiley;  Kindleberger,  C.  (1978),  Manias,  Crashes  and 
Panics: A History of Financial Crises, Macmillan. 
5   See, for example, Gorton, G. (1988), “Banking panics and business cycles”, Oxford Economic Papers. 
6   Cifuentes,  R.,  H.  Shin  and  V.  Ferrucci  (2005),  “Liquidity  risk  and  contagion”,  Journal  of  the  European 
Economic Association. 
7   Brunnermeier, M. and L. Pedersen (2009), “Market liquidity and funding liquidity”, Review of Financial Studies. 
BIS Review 165/2009 
 3
modelling extremely difficult.8 Such adjustments may cause violent regime changes, pushing 
the system from a state of tranquillity to a state of turmoil.  
One  key  element  in  phases  of  turmoil  and  crisis  is  speed.  The  rapidity  of  unfolding 
developments  is  often  not  modelled  explicitly,  but  it  is  one  of  the  greatest  challenges  for 
policy  makers.  Financial  crises  are  by  no  means  new  phenomena,  but  the  speed  of  their 
transmission has accelerated tremendously over the past few decades. While the unfolding 
of  the  sovereign  debt  crises  in  the  1980’s  occurred  over  the  course  of  years,  the  Asian 
Financial crisis developed, at its peak, over months rather than years. The last intensification 
of the present crisis, starting in mid-September last year, has spread around the globe in the 
course of half-days. Many factors have contributed to this acceleration, including the process 
of  global  financial  integration,  the  increasing  leverage  in  institutions,  the  technological 
advancements  that  allow  for  an  instantaneous  transmission  of  information  world-wide  and 
the accumulation over a long period of time of unsustainable global imbalances. 
In  the  eco-systems  of  our  natural  environment,  feedback mechanisms  are  often prevalent, 
too. As soon as one part of the system is adversely affected, this can take the form of an 
adverse feedback look destabilising the system as a whole.  
Amplification effects are not only important in the transmission of instability, but also in the 
build-up of imbalances that sow the seeds of systemic risk. A very important phenomenon in 
this  regard  is  herd  behaviour  in  investment.  For  example,  investment  managers  and  loan 
officers  may  sometimes  ignore  valuable  private  information  in  order  to  mimic  others  when 
their  own  evaluation,  their  own  remuneration  or  their  own  external  reputation  depends  on 
their performance relative to the rest of the market.9 
This  behaviour  is  individually  rational  but  socially  wasteful.  Here  at  the  University  of 
Cambridge,  the  famous  analogy  that  John  Maynard  Keynes  made  between  newspaper 
beauty contests and financial market behaviour comes to mind.10 I am also convinced that 
one of the main reasons behind herd behaviour in financial markets in general, particularly in 
times of crisis, is a lack of transparency. The fostering of transparency as concerns financial 
institutions, financial markets and financial products is therefore one essential policy lesson 
from the present crisis. 
Our latest experience with systemic risk 
Let me now apply the relevant elements of this framework on how to think about systemic 
risk to the present crisis. A particularly relevant source of systemic risk was the build-up of 
widespread  financial  imbalances  –  the  second  form  of  systemic  risk  I  described  –  in  the 
period of 2003 to 2007. The years prior to 2007 were characterised by low financial market 
volatility and risk premia, rapid financial innovation in credit markets, low interest rates across 
the maturity spectrum and ample liquidity conditions.  
In particular, rapid financial innovation led to securitisation techniques with thus far unknown 
complexities and to long and uncontrollable chains of intermediaries between originators and 
final investors. Ratings agencies gained global power as the pricing of securitisation tranches 
was largely based on their assessment, while leverage mounted ever higher and a shadow 
banking system developed up largely unregulated.  
                                                 
8   For a recent example, see O. Castrén and  I. Kavonius (2009),  who study  non-linear adjustments in  a risk-
based network of exposures based on euro area flow of funds data (“Balance sheet interlinkages and macro-
financial risk analysis in the euro area”, ECB working paper, no. 1124, December). 
9   Scharfstein, D., and J. Stein (1990), “Herd behaviour and investment”, American Economic Review. 
10   He noted that competitors did not have to pick “those faces, which he himself finds prettiest, but those that he 
thinks  likeliest  to  catch  the  fancy  of  the  other  competitors”  (Keynes,  J.M.  (1936),  “The  General  Theory  of 
Employment, Interest and Money”, Macmillan Cambridge University Press). 
4 
 BIS Review 165/2009
At the same time, mark-to-market accounting rules became increasingly widespread, while 
unsustainable external deficits and surpluses in some major economies paved the way for 
macroeconomic  imbalances  at  the  global  level.  Information  began  to  flow  instantaneously 
around the globe and raised competitive pressure on all financial market participants.  
In this environment, banks and other investors engaged in a “search for yield” with the help 
of the new credit products and investment vehicles, circumventing existing regulations. The 
pace of this herd behaviour into ever more complicated forms of securitisation far exceeded 
the market’s capacity to solve a number of open issues of valuation, risk management and 
incentives.  
The result were widespread financial potential instabilities in the form of a highly complex, 
opaque and – as it turned out later – illiquid system of credit risk distribution. Many investors 
were either ignorant or imprudent with regard to the risks that they had acquired. Contrary to 
conventional  wisdom,  this  distribution  led  to  much  less  diversification  than  thought  and  to 
some  surprising  concentrations  of  risks  in  a  number  of  large  and  complex  financial 
institutions. While mortgage market exposures, including those in US sub-prime mortgages, 
were part of the problem, it later turned out that the problem of bad assets was much more 
widespread.  
The underlying risks started to materialise when house prices declined, delinquencies in US 
sub-prime  mortgage  markets  rose,  and  the  so-called  “special  purpose  vehicles”  that  held 
highly  concentrated  exposures  to  these  markets  came  under  pressure.  In  June  and  July 
2007, credit default swap premia started to increase sharply, rating agencies downgraded a 
large number of asset-backed securities and collateralised debt obligations. Even AAA-rated 
CDO index tranches declined below par value.  
The  eventual  instability  became  systemic  for  the  first  time  when  money  markets  became 
impaired in early August 2007. The re-pricing of risks made the major intermediaries active in 
interbank markets aware that they might experience further losses in the future and that the 
same  might  apply  to  their  counterparties.  Given  the  lack  of  transparency  of  the  credit  risk 
distribution  system,  asymmetric  information  was  omnipresent.  It  became  difficult  for 
intermediaries to distinguish good assets and counterparties from bad ones.  
This  led  banks  to  hoard  liquidity  as  a  protection  against  the  risk  of  their  own  assets  and 
counterparties  becoming  illiquid,  rather  than  lending  available  funds  in  money  markets.11 
Such malfunctioning of the interbank markets makes the problem immediately systemic, as 
all  major  banks  depend  on  those  markets.  For  central  banks,  there  was  no  alternative  to 
making sizable liquidity interventions aimed at keeping the system afloat.  
While this first phase of what we described at the time as “market turmoil” was indeed very 
challenging,  the  dramatic  transition  to  a  full-blown  systemic  crisis  happened  in  September 
2008. The failure of a very large US investment bank, in conjunction with other news and a 
series  of  events  that  increased  uncertainty,  led  to  a  widespread  loss  of  confidence  in  the 
financial system.  
As a consequence, the economic outlook worsened dramatically. The economic models in 
use  were  not  able  to  predict  the  sharp  downward  revisions  of  growth figures  that followed 
over the subsequent seven months.  
The  events  of  September  2008  clearly  showed  that  in  economic  policy,  we  have  no  good 
understanding of the very rapid transition to an eventual systemic crisis. In this sense, we 
                                                 
11   See, for example, Cassola, N., M. Drehmann, P. Hartmann, M. Lo Duca and M. Scheicher (2008), “A research 
perspective on the propagation of the credit market turmoil”, ECB Research Bulletin, no. 7, June; Heider, F., 
M.  Hoerova  and  C.  Holthausen  (2008),  “Liquidity  hoarding  and  interbank  market  spreads:  The  role  of 
counterparty  risk”,  November,  forthcoming  ECB  Working  Paper;  and  various  issues  of  the  ECB  Financial 
Stability Review. 
BIS Review 165/2009 
 5
were  left  alone.  Policy-makers  had  to  rely  on  informal  information,  real-time  data  releases 
and their own wisdom and judgements on how the situation was evolving.  
What have we learned from this experience in terms of identifying those structural trends in 
financial systems that are important for systemic risk?  
First,  we  need  much  more  analysis  of  the  implications  of  the  business  models  of  major 
intermediaries  for  the  system  as  a  whole.  Some  of  the  crucial  factors,  whose  relative 
importance  has  shifted  over  time,  include  originate-to-distribute  models,  rising  maturity 
mismatches and the combination of proprietary trading and investment advice.  
Second, in line with previous experiences we have been reminded that the very fast growth 
of innovative financial instruments and new financial intermediaries, in particular off-balance 
sheet vehicles, can imply significant risks.  
Third, financial integration needs to be accompanied by reform of supervisory and regulatory 
approaches and institutions. Major reforms in this area are currently being discussed in the 
European  Council  and  European  Parliament,  including  the  establishment  of  a  European 
Systemic Risk Board.12  
Fourth, advancing financial consolidation raises the question of how to regulate and, in the 
event, wind down large and complex financial intermediaries whose disorderly failure could 
pose systemic risks.  
Fifth and finally, as financial sectors develop, households may take greater risks, for example 
in mortgage markets and, more broadly, in their pension investments. While this also raises 
issues  of  consumer  protection,  from  a  systemic  perspective,  it  becomes  increasingly 
important  to  know  how  resilient  the  household  sector  and  consumption  can  be  in  such  a 
situation.13  
Macro-prudential supervision: a policy response to systemic risk  
I  have  discussed  the  nature  of  systemic  risk  and  our  latest  experience  of  it in  the present 
crisis. Let me now turn to the question of how policy-makers can respond to systemic risk. 
Today, I want to focus particularly on the challenges for policy-makers of detecting risks of 
systemic instability materialising in the future, and of then containing these risks.  
Detecting  systemic  risks  early  is  the  task  of  macro-prudential  supervision.  I  would  like  to 
focus  on  the  analytical  issues  underlying  this  policy  and  stress  three  approaches,  linking 
them to the three forms of systemic risk I discussed at the start of my lecture.  
First, there are large and complex financial intermediaries, or like-minded clusters of financial 
institutions,  that  play  prominent  roles  in  the  financial  system.  We  can  describe  them  as 
particularly important “nodes” in the financial network, which stand out through their risk, size 
and interconnectedness.14 The full understanding of their individual on- and off-balance sheet 
exposures and their lending and borrowing to each other is a crucial element in assessing 
and containing risks of contagion.  
                                                 
12   High-level  Group  on  Financial  Supervision  in  the  EU  (2009),  “Report”, Brussels,  25  February  (de  Larosière 
Report); EU Commission (2009), “Proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and the Council on 
Community  macro  prudential  oversight  of  the  financial  system  and  establishing  a  European  Systemic  Risk 
Board”, 23 September. 
13   Ferguson,  R.,  P.  Hartmann,  F.  Panetta  and  R.  Portes  (2008),  “International  financial  stability”,  9th  Geneva 
Report on the World Economy, November, discuss the structural trends that preceded the crisis. 
14   See Leitner, Y. (2005), “Financial networks: Contagion, commitment, and private sector bailouts”, Journal of 
Finance, for an application of network theory to the problem of financial contagion. 
6 
 BIS Review 165/2009
Second, the extent and diversity of investment practices across all segments of the financial 
system  requires  particular  attention.  For  example,  fast-growing  credit  to  similar  sectors  or 
regions  could  be  a  sign  of  vulnerabilities  building  up.  The  imbalances  might  become 
unsustainable  later  and  unravel  in  a  disorderly  fashion.  This  risk  requires  looking  at  early-
warning signals in current market data. For example, aggregate credit might grow at a pace 
that  is  disproportionate  to  the  credit  required  to  finance  sustainable  investment  and 
consumption.  The  complete  set  of  important  intermediaries,  markets  and  instruments  also 
needs to be checked for early-warning signals, since similar risks could be hidden in different 
parts of the financial system.  
Third,  current  market  data  may  not  give  the  full  picture  of  all  relevant  future  scenarios. 
Detecting systemic risks early also requires stress-testing the system against extreme events 
and  shocks  that  would  surprise  markets.  Such  macro-stress  tests  help  to  make  an 
assessment of the resilience of financial systems against shocks that have a low probability 
but a highly destabilising power.15 
Compared to the vision of systemic risk that I have outlined so far, two weaknesses of the 
supervisory and regulatory approach that we had before the crisis stand out. 
For  one  thing,  the  old  approach  focused  too  much  on  individual  risks  and  too  little  on 
interconnections across intermediaries and markets. 
For another thing, it generated a lot of information about some types of intermediaries but 
much  less  on  others  (including  the  shadow  banking  system).  This  made  it  difficult  to 
understand fully the pro-cyclical behaviour of the system in the aggregate.  
Even  if  we  understand  the  nature  of  systemic  risk  and  know  the  basic  approaches  for 
detecting  its  different  forms,  there  are  very  important  challenges  for  macro-prudential 
supervisors. 
One challenge is to be able to collect all the information that is necessary to identify systemic 
risks  early.  It  requires  combining  some  micro-level  data  with  and  aggregate  data  from 
components of the financial system. This means covering major types of intermediaries, in 
particular  large  and  complex  ones,  key  markets  and  wholesale  market  infrastructures.  To 
contain systemic risk, macro-prudential supervisors need to have a good understanding of all 
parts  of  the  financial  system  that  are  relevant  for  the  risks  of  contagion,  the  endogenous 
build-up and unravelling of widespread imbalances and macro shocks. 
Some of these data are more difficult to compile and bring together than others. There are 
some financial sectors about which considerably less is known than about others. Compare, 
for  example,  banks  or  insurance  companies  with  non-listed  highly  leveraged  institutions. 
Although  nowadays  individual  hedge  funds  do  not  seem  to  be  a  source  of  significant 
systemic risk, it is very important that the relevance of this industry for the overall cyclicality 
of  the  financial  system  is  assessed.  A  particularly  complicated  topic  is  measuring  the 
interconnectedness among the systemically most important intermediaries.  
The implication is that an effective exchange of information between the functions of macro-
prudential supervision and micro-prudential supervision is an essential element of identifying 
and containing systemic risk. There will be strong demands on micro and macro-prudential 
supervisors to ensure smooth exchange of information under the post-crisis regulatory and 
supervisory regime we are striving to establish.  
Another  challenge  is  more  of  an  analytical  nature.  The  economic  models  we  have  at  our 
disposal at present do not capture necessarily all relevant dimensions of systemic risk. For 
example,  despite  progress  in  developing  macro-stress  testing  frameworks,  there  are  still 
                                                 
15   Sorge,  M.  (2004),  “Stress-testing  financial  systems:  An  overview  of  current  methodologies”,  BIS  Working 
Paper, no. 165, July. 
BIS Review 165/2009 
 7
limitations  in  how  economic  analysis  captures  the  two-sided  interaction  between  financial 
instability and the performance of  the broader economy.  Standard macroeconomic models 
often do not have a well developed financial sector and are linear in nature. As I have noted, 
systemic  instability  involves  major  nonlinearities  and,  in  any  case,  cannot  be  analysed 
without proper representation of the financial sector.16  
There  are  many  good  finance  approaches  to  the  topic  of  financial  instability,  but  they  are 
often not aggregate enough to capture realistic features of the macroeconomy, including for 
example the conduct of monetary policy. Speaking here in the intellectual “powerhouse” of 
the University of Cambridge, I therefore call on the academic research community to make 
major  efforts  towards  a  better  integration  of  financial  and  macroeconomic  analyses  to 
address these limitations.17 
A final challenge is given by the policy instruments available to contain systemic risks beyond 
monitoring  and  warning  about  them.  Macro-prudential  regulation  is  a  relatively  new  policy 
area.  We  have  much  experience  of  how  micro-prudential  regulation  affects  the  stability  of 
financial intermediaries and markets. A much more complex matter is using regulatory tools 
to stabilise the financial system as a whole.  
Having said that, I nevertheless see very encouraging discussions and progress on this front. 
For  example,  the  2009  Geneva  Report  on  the  World  Economy  on  “The  fundamental 
principles  of  financial  regulation”  points  the  way  to  how  regulators  can  determine  higher 
capital  requirements  for  financial  intermediaries  that  exhibit  features  enhancing  systemic 
risk.18  Additional  capital  for  interconnectedness,  leverage,  maturity  mismatch  and  asset 
growth will limit the scope for the externalities I was discussing before.  
New initiatives are also under way to enhance the transparency of financial activities. These 
will  help  to  limit  the  adverse  effects  of  imperfect  and  asymmetric  information  on  systemic 
stability. Overall, a great deal of work is going on at the Financial Stability Board, the Basel 
Committee on Banking Supervision and at other competent bodies to strengthen the macro-
prudential dimension of financial regulation. 
As  with  climate  change,  an  effective  policy  response  demands  international  coordination. 
Global warming has been called the biggest market failure ever; the present crisis has been 
perhaps the biggest financial market failure ever. We know from basic theory and practice 
that  addressing  market  failure  requires  a  major  and  coordinated  policy  response,  both 
immediate and in the longer term.  
Systemic risk and macroeconomic stabilisation policies  
I  have  identified  the  endogenous  build-up  and  subsequent  unravelling  of  financial 
imbalances,  as  driven  for  example  by  herd  behaviour  in  investment,  leverage  to  finance 
investment exposures and complex and opaque financial contracts, as a particularly relevant 
                                                 
16   It should be mentioned that the macroeconomic currency contagion literature discussed the transmission of 
breakdowns of fixed-exchange rate regimes with some nonlinear elements. See, for example, Eichengreen, 
B.,  A.  Rose  and  C.  Wyplosz  (1996),  Contagious  currency  crises:  First  tests,  Scandinavian  Journal  of 
Economics; Buiter, W., G. Corsetti and P. Pesenti (1998), “Interpreting the EMS crisis: Country-specific and 
systemic issues”, Princeton Studies in International Finance; Masson, P. (1999), “Contagion: Macroeconomic 
models  with  multiple  equilibria”,  Journal  of  International  Money  and  Finance;  Drazen,  A.  (2000),  “Political 
contagion  in  currency  crises”,  Krugman,  P.  (ed.),  Currency  Crises,  National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research 
and Chicago University Press. Exchange rate surveillance as such, however, is typically outside the scope of 
macro-prudential supervision. 
17   The Economist (2009), The state of economics, 16 July; Krugman, P. (2009), “How did economists get it so 
wrong?”, New York Times, 2 September. 
18   Brunnermeier, M., A. Crockett, C. Goodhart, A. Persaud and H. Shin (2009), The fundamental principles of 
financial regulation, 10th Geneva Report on the World Economy, July. 
8 
 BIS Review 165/2009
form  of  systemic  risk.  While  macro-prudential  supervision  is  at  the  forefront  of  preventing 
severe asset bubbles from emerging, this may not be sufficient, given the macroeconomic 
components  of  cycles.  Therefore,  macroeconomic  stabilisation  policies  need  to  make  their 
contribution to reducing pro-cyclicality.19 
Macroeconomic authorities have faced the challenge posed by financial booms and busts in 
two ways.  
First and foremost through solid institutions: the pre-emptive arm against system instability. 
Stability-oriented  macroeconomic  frameworks  have  ensured  price  stability  and  economic 
prosperity  in  all  developed  countries  for  the  last  quarter  of  a  century.  Demand  and  real 
incomes have grown steeply, but steadily. Their steady course has instilled a wide sense of 
security in investors and savers.20 The European stability culture can be seen as vindicated 
by the crisis.  
However, macroeconomic stability has not been a sufficient condition for financial stability. It 
cannot eliminated systemic risk altogether. Macroeconomic authorities have therefore been 
frequently called on to provide remedial action, once booms have turned into busts. The aim 
of their action has been precisely to avoid the transformation of individual financial risks into 
systemic risk.  
Ex  post  remedial  action  has  often  been  activated  as  soon  as  the  financial  firestorm  has 
threatened the stability of the economic system. But such action risks raising expectations 
that  macroeconomic  policy  will  always  insure  against  tail  risks,  no  matter  how  large. 
Expectations  of  this  sort  can  contribute  to  an  under-pricing  of  financial  risk  in  subsequent 
phases of the financial cycles. They can encourage concentration of market positions in the 
financial scene.  
At the same time, the instruments of counter-cyclical policy have been used so intensely – 
and  more  so  from  one  financial  cycle  to  the  next  –  that  authorities  might  have  tested  the 
extremes  of  their  control  procedures.  I  am  borrowing  here  from  dynamic  control  theory. 
Repeated attempts to fine tune a mechanical or electronic system after a shock sometimes 
leads  to  “instrument  instability”  that  makes  the system  spiral  out  of  manageable bounds.21 
Economic  and  financial  systems,  I  suspect  could  have  some  structural  similarities  with 
physical systems, leading to the same kind of “instrument instability”.  
Moral  hazard  and  policy  instrument  instability  pose  questions  to  which  we  are  not  in  a 
position to a firm answer at this point in time. I would like to see these questions studied and 
debated in eminent academic institutions like this. 
Turning to actual developments, as I mentioned already, we saw perhaps the most appalling 
manifestation  of  such  a  threat  in  the  autumn  of  2008.  In  the  early  phase  of  the  present 
financial  crisis,  precautionary  hoarding  of  liquidity  brought  to  a  complete  seizure  of  many 
segments  of  the  market  for  credit.  At  the  same  time,  panic  sales  of  assets  made  market 
liquidity disappear. Market liquidity is high when traders can easily find a price, and that price 
                                                 
19   See also Viñals, J. (2009), “On Monetary and Financial Stability – Past, Present And Future”, keynote speech 
delivered at the at the 28th SUERF Colloquium on “The Quest for Stability” at the Utrecht University School of 
Economics. 
20   I have discussed the two-way interactions between steady macroeconomic conditions and trends in financial 
prices  elsewhere.  See  Trichet,  J.-C.  (2008),  “Risk  and  the  Macro-economy,”  keynote  address  at  the 
Conference “The ECB and its Watchers X,” Frankfurt, 5 September 2008. 
21   I  am  referring  in  particular  to  control  theory  as  applied  to  economics  by  the  engineer  A.  W.  Philips  in  the 
1950s.  See  Philips,  A.W.  (1957),  “Stabilisation  policy  and  the  time  form  of  lagged  responses,”  Economic 
Journal, 67, 265–277. But I do not forget that a very early attempt to import the phase transition notion into 
social  science  resulted  in  Friederick  Engels’  famous  “law  of  the  transformation  of  quantity  into  quality”, 
described  in  his  (circa  1883)  work  Dialectics  of  Nature,  which  provides  some  insight  into  early  attempts  to 
grapple with concepts now considered reasonably well understood. 
BIS Review 165/2009 
 9
is very close to what every other trader pays for the same asset at the same time. In early 
October 2008 the market could simply not find a value for many of those securities that had 
been so highly priced only few weeks before.  
To  avoid  a  cascade  of  counterparty  defaults,  governments  offered  generous  financial 
guarantees and injected fresh capital into the system. Central banks increased their lending 
to replace the withdrawal of private lending – in interbank transactions and, sometimes, in 
the  broader  market  for  capital.  This  concerted  intervention  very  much  attenuated  the 
downward part of the cycle and blocked channels of financial contagion. In short, it provided 
catastrophe insurance.  
There  is  no  doubt  that  macroeconomic  policy-makers’  interventions  have  had  a  stabilising 
effect. Market compensation for risk has gradually returned to more normal levels. The free-
fall  of  the  economy  has  been  halted  and  turned  around.  The  financial  crisis  has  not 
precipitated the extreme spiral of falling prices, rising debt burdens and chain bankruptcies 
that some economists had feared.  
For what concerns monetary policy, conditions are now stable enough that we can start to 
withdraw some of the excess support that is now not needed to the same extent as it was in 
the past.22  
including 
those  of  economists,  supervisors, 
Concluding remarks 
Let me draw to a close. An English proverb, echoed in many other languages, warns that 
sometimes, “you can’t see the wood for the trees”. Systemic risk is about seeing the wood, 
and not only the trees. Macro-prudential supervision, supposed to detect systemic risk and 
propose  remedial  action,  has  been  devised  because  in  a  highly  integrated  and  complex 
financial  system,  micro-prudential  supervision  alone  can  no  longer  guarantee  financial 
stability.  The  main  challenge  in  systemic  risk  analysis  is  therefore  to  integrate  all  relevant 
perspectives, 
regulators,  accountants, 
securitisation experts, rating experts, risk managers and many others to take a holistic view 
on the system, its dynamics and its interlinkages.  
As we have seen, small things can make a big difference and seemingly self-contained initial 
events can lead to a system collapse. We therefore need a detailed understanding of each 
part of the financial system. At the same time, their complex interactions mean that we need 
to keep the big picture in sight, too. We must not allow the understandably narrow focus of 
detailed knowledge to hamper insight into the system as a whole. Like researchers on the 
climate and the natural environment, we need to combine the micro and macro perspectives. 
The academic research community can make a significant contribution in supporting policy-
makers to meet these challenges. It can help to improve analytical frameworks for the early 
identification and assessment of systemic risks. And it can contribute to discussions on the 
further identification and optimal use of macro-prudential regulatory instruments.  
Macro-prudential  supervision  is  an  important  tool  to  contain  systemic  risks  and  thereby 
contribute to sustainable growth and prosperity. The proposed establishment of a European 
Systemic Risk Board next year is a very important initiative in this regard. Ensuring systemic 
stability will also alleviate undue pressures on monetary and fiscal policies to extend financial 
safety nets. The standard macroeconomic stabilisation policies can then focus more clearly 
                                                 
22   I have drawn out the ECB’s strategy in the face of the financial crisis and our strategic plans on the way back 
to normalisation on several occasions in the past few months. On the ECB’s approach to the crisis, see for 
example  my  keynote  address  at  the  University  of  Munich,  “The  ECB’s  enhanced  credit  support,”  Munich, 
13 July 2009. On the phasing out, see my speech entitled “The ECB’s exit strategy,” at the ECB Watchers 
Conference, Frankfurt, 4 September 2009. 
10 
 BIS Review 165/2009
on their primary objectives and thereby make their own best contribution to growth and well-
being. 
Thank you very much for your kind attention. 
BIS Review 165/2009 
 11
