Mario Draghi: The social market economy and the solutions to the global 
financial and economic crisis 
Remarks by Mr Mario Draghi, Governor of the Bank of Italy and Chairman of the Financial 
Stability  Board,  for  the  European  People’s  Party  high-level  policy  debate  on  "The  social 
market economy and the solutions to the global financial and economic crisis", EPP Statutory 
Congress, Bonn, 9 December 2009. 
 I am very pleased to be here to talk about progress in finding and implementing solutions to 
the global financial crisis. You have decided to focus today and tomorrow on issues that are 
critically  important  to  our  economies  and  our  citizens.  And  I  am  honoured  to  have  this 
opportunity to speak about where we are in terms of financial regulatory reform, what has 
been achieved to date and the priorities ahead. 
One year after the climax of the financial crisis, market conditions have eased significantly 
and  a  degree  of  confidence  in  the  financial  system  has  returned.  However,  the  market 
reaction to Dubai’s woes is a reminder that they remain unusually vulnerable to shocks.  
The crisis has implied a massive transfer of debt from the private to the public sector. Fiscal 
positions have deteriorated across the board at an unprecedented pace. Public deficits in the 
G7  countries  have  surged  from  2%  of  GDP  in  2007  to  10%  today.  The  limits  set  by  the 
Stability  and  Growth  Pact  will  be exceeded  until  2014  at least  for  the  euro  area.  Although 
necessary and unavoidable, those extraordinary borrowing needs, combined with long-term 
fiscal challenges on healthcare, pension systems and climate change, will lead to public debt 
in excess of 100% of GDP in OECD countries in 2010 (up from 74% in 2007).  
It is no surprise therefore that markets have been recently more sensitive to accumulating 
debt  burdens  in  government  and  quasi-government  sectors.  Sovereigns  represent  an 
increasing share of transactions in credit protection markets (CDS), as market participants 
challenge the assumption that they are risk-free. Government auctions have faced from time 
to time unsatisfactory demand, even for highly-rated issuers. Sovereign CDS premia remain 
volatile  and  elevated.  Markets  also  show  more  discrimination  across  countries.  While 
developed countries come under funding pressure, emerging countries with low debt levels 
are now able to issue long term, as shown by the recent 50-year bond of China, sometimes 
at fixed rate and in local currency, which was unimaginable just a few years ago. So there is 
a  way  out,  but  governments  need  to  communicate  credibly  their  medium-term  plans  to 
restore  fiscal  sustainability,  in  order to  limit  upward  pressure  on  their  funding  costs  and  to 
retain  their  ready  access  to  global  markets.  That  is  important  not  only  to  deliver  fiscal 
prudence, but also to avoid adverse spill-over to the rest of the financial system given their 
pivotal benchmark status.  
On  the  funding  front,  there  are  also  heightened  risks  of  crowding  out.  Global  refinancing 
needs  are  firmly  skewed  towards  shorter  term  maturities.  Estimates  differ,  but  bank  and 
corporate bond redemptions hover around USD 3 to 4,000 billon annually from 2010 to 2012, 
double the annual amount of the mid-2000s. Roll-over of government debt will come on top 
of  those  needs.  Leveraged  borrowers  such  as  high-yield  companies  also  face  refinancing 
pressure. And securitization markets are thawing only very slowly. 
Overall, markets will need to refinance higher debt levels with lower average quality and with 
a  reduced  tolerance  towards  leverage,  in  a  time  window  when  support  schemes  will 
progressively unwind. Such absorption pressure may well lead to higher and more volatile 
funding  costs.  Therefore,  it  is  now  time  that  financial  institutions  and  corporates  engage 
proactively in lengthening their debt profile and tapping global markets in an orderly fashion 
given the risk that they may otherwise be forced to raise funds under less attractive terms.  
BIS Review 164/2009 
 1
Amidst these challenges, restoring a well functioning market-based economy also requires 
exiting  from  the  exceptional  financial  sector  support  measures  introduced  since  2007. 
Clearly, the timing, speed and modalities of exit involve important trade-offs, and judgment 
will  need  to  be  used.  Implementing  exit  strategies  will  require  striking  an  uneasy  balance 
between exiting too early and too late. This underscores how important it is that we resolve 
the regulatory issues in front of us, which will be part and parcel of our ability to exit this crisis 
with confidence in the resilience of our financial system. 
Bolstering  the  resilience  of  the  financial  system  is  a  broad  project  encompassing  a 
considerable  number  of  related  measures.  It  involves  multiple  layers  of  policy  authorities 
across  countries  and  sectors.  And  it  requires  coordination  and  a  joined-up  international 
response,  both  for  making  our  policies  effective  and  for  establishing  a  level  playing  field. 
Driving forward a coordinated global regulatory response has been the key role of the G20 
Leaders and of the Financial Stability Board, which I have the honour to chair. 
Much  policy  development  has  been  achieved  –  more  than  meets  the  eye  –  that  when 
implemented, will result in a very different financial system than the one that brought us this 
crisis: a more resilient, disciplined, less procyclical and less leveraged system; one where the 
perverse incentives to excessive risk taking – with private gains and socialised losses – that 
characterised the recent past will have been removed. Substantial progress has been made 
on  a  very  broad  front,  and  we  have  now  not  only  a  consensus  internationally  on  the 
objectives of the reform agenda, but a broad commitment to consistent implementation at the 
national levels. 
To name just a few of the significant changes that have already occurred: we have closed 
loopholes and corrected shortcomings in the bank capital and liquidity frameworks; we have 
addressed weaknesses in accounting standards; improved risk management and disclosure 
standards  for  financial  institutions;  introduced  new  standards  and  principles  on  sound 
compensation; and we have enhanced oversight of credit rating agencies and hedge funds.  
But we are far from done. Work is underway in critical areas, and implementation of the full 
set of needed reforms will require political will and perseverance. We simply must take the 
steps that are needed to ensure we can exit this crisis confident that we have put in place a 
much stronger system for the future. 
A lot of what needs to be done requires international consistency because finance is global. 
It is therefore of critical importance that, as we set out a constructive path for reform in our 
respective constituencies, we work to ensure that this takes place with a view to preserving 
the  advantages  of  integrated  global  financial  markets  and  a  level  playing  field  across 
countries and sectors. The Financial Stability Board takes this very seriously. 
Completing  and  implementing  financial  reform  thus  remains  a  key  imperative  –  both 
nationally  and  internationally.  Let  me  now  speak  to  some  of  the  areas  where  critical 
decisions in the months ahead will determine whether credible reform is achieved. I will leave 
aside the issues of reform of national and regional oversight structures, and focus on bank 
capital and liquidity, compensation, accounting, derivatives, and addressing the moral hazard 
posed by institutions that are too big to fail.  
• 
Improving bank capital is clearly the single most important project to build greater 
resilience into the system. Through the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, 
we have now agreed the key measures needed to strengthen the capital framework 
–  raising  the  quality  and  quantity  of  capital;  introducing  a  leverage  ratio  that  will 
constrain bank leverage; and requiring banks to create countercyclical buffers that 
can be drawn down during bad times. Proposals on the first two will be developed 
by the end of this year and on the last by the middle of next year. A comprehensive 
impact  study  and  the  calibration  of  the  overall  capital  level  will  be  undertaken  by 
end-2010, looking at the cumulative effect of all the reforms and how they interact. 
In  other  words,  there  will  be  no  simplistic  layering  of  the  different  elements.  The 
2 
 BIS Review 164/2009
     changes to Basel II will be substantial, and they will be phased in over an extended 
period so as avoid any adverse interaction with current conditions. 
Regulation  is  being  substantially  enhanced  on  bank  liquidity  as  well.  The  Basel 
Committee will issue for comment early next year a new minimum liquidity standard 
directed  at  ensuring  global  banks  hold  sufficient  high-quality  liquid  assets  to 
withstand  a  stressed  funding  scenario  specified  by  supervisors.  This  too  will  be 
subject to an impact assessment. 
On  compensation,  countries  are  taking  actions  to  implement  the  FSB  standards 
issued in Pittsburgh and others will be following shortly. These standards address 
the structure and governance of compensation; they also call on firms – on public 
policy  and  prudential  grounds  –  to  restrict  compensation  levels  so  long  as  this  is 
needed to retain and build the necessary level of capital. This is an area in which it 
is  absolutely  essential  that  authorities  take  robust  collective  steps  if  they  are  to 
dispel expectations that business can go on as usual. The FSB is now launching a 
review  of  the  actions  taken  by  authorities  and  firms,  focusing  on  consistency  and 
effectiveness  at  achieving  the  intended  results,  and  will  propose  additional 
measures as needed.  
On accounting, we have seen progress in the revamping of financial instruments 
accounting.  But  we  are  quite  some  distance  from  achieving  the  objectives  of 
improved, converged standards that are less complex and less prone to amplifying 
economic  cycles.  This  is  a  difficult  area  that  we  are  pursuing  vigorously  through 
dialogue between the accounting standards setters, prudential regulators and other 
stakeholders.  But  we  must  do  so  in  way  that  respects  the  integrity  and 
independence of the standards setting process.  
Last but not least, we must reduce the moral hazard posed by institutions that are 
too large, or too complex, or too interconnected to fail. The large-scale support we 
provided in this crisis to stave off systemic collapse has materially worsened moral 
hazard  risks.  Why  should  our  financial  firms  now  believe  that  authorities  will  not 
stand behind them if conditions were to turn again to the worse? Moreover, many of 
our  banks  have  become  larger,  not  smaller  as  a  result  of  crisis-related  mergers. 
Moral hazard risks pose a large prospective burden for taxpayers and are a serious 
threat to the maintenance of a market-based system. So what is to be done? 
At the Pittsburgh Summit, the G20 Leaders called on the FSB to propose by end-
October 2010 possible measures to reduce these problems. We are now evaluating 
approaches  under  three  headings,  while  recognising  that  there  will  be  no  silver 
bullet or a one-size-fits all solution in this area:  
– 
First,  reducing  the  probability  and  impact  of  failure  of  a  systemically 
important  institution.  The  aim  is  to  link  capital  and  liquidity  charges  more 
closely  to  the  externality  or  spill-over  costs  of  failure.  Here,  we  will  be 
investigating a capital surcharge for systemic importance, as well as what role 
new  capital  instruments,  such  as  contingent  capital,  or  other  insurance 
schemes  could  play.  We  will  also  consider  options  to  incentivise  structures 
and business models that support effective supervision. 
Second,  improving  resolution  capacity,  by  establishing  credible  resolution 
frameworks  for  large  interconnected  financial  institutions  –  frameworks  that 
have the ability and funding to preserve the continuity of a failing institution’s 
core  functions,  and  the  authority  to  impose  losses  on  shareholders  and 
unsecured  creditors  Work  is  also  underway  to  improve  ex  ante  crisis 
preparedness  and  resolution,  including  through  the  use  of  “living  wills”.  We 
must recognise, at the same time, that achieving effective resolution of cross-
border entities will ultimately require addressing very difficult issues – such as 
 BIS Review 164/2009 
 3
 recognition and harmonisation of resolution regimes, and how to share across 
borders the costs of a resolution.  
Third,  strengthening  the  core  financial  infrastructures  and  markets  to 
reduce contagion risks, including by moving over-the-counter derivatives onto 
exchanges  or  central  clearing  platforms.  Action  in  this latter  area  can  shrink 
the  risk  exposures  arising 
to 
authorities  having  no  choice  but  to  bail  out  systemically  important  financial 
institutions.  
interconnectedness 
that  contribute 
from 
Let me conclude with two general remarks.  
First, effective work to strengthen the global financial system requires policies that are well 
designed and will be robust over the long run. This necessarily takes time. It is important, 
therefore, that governments send a strong message that they are determined to see these 
reforms  through.  Where  international  policy  development  is  ongoing,  it  needs  continued 
support; where such policy work has concluded, we need commitment to consistent national 
implementation.  
Second,  given  the  commitment  G20  Leaders  have  made  to  coherent  approaches  as  we 
improve financial regulation, we must strive to overcome inconsistencies in final rule-making 
and implementation at the national and regional level so as to achieve a level playing field. 
The FSB will monitor this by undertaking regular peer reviews among FSB members – both 
country-by-country,  and  by  topic  across  the  entire  membership.  The  fundamental  value  of 
our peer reviews will be the dialogue and constructive engagement of our members towards 
the common objective of a well regulated, open, and market-based financial system.  
In a global context, it is of course critically important that standards are raised everywhere. In 
the FSB, we have embarked on a process to identify the non-co-operative jurisdictions that 
fail to implement internationally agreed standards in the prudential and regulatory area. We 
are  developing  a  toolbox  of  measures  that  will  incentivise  adherence  to  reforms  in  these 
jurisdictions. 
We are working closely with the IMF in these areas, which has a key role in surveillance of 
the  global  financial  system,  and,  together  with  the  World  Bank,  are  well-established 
assessors of authorities’ implementation of key financial sector policies and standards. We 
will also collaborate closely with the new European Systemic Risk Board and the European 
financial  supervisory  structures  that  have  now  been  put  in  place.  Our  shared  goal  is  a 
stronger  and  more  resilient  international  financial  system  in  which  threats  to  stability  are 
engaged  earlier,  are  better  cushioned  when  they  materialise,  and  where  protections  are 
adequate to give our citizens and countries confidence in an open and integrated financial 
system. 
4 
 BIS Review 164/2009
