Arnór Sighvatsson: Guidelines issued to financial institutions due to 
non-binding clauses linking loans to the exchange rate 
Introduction by Mr Arnór Sighvatsson, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Iceland, about 
guidelines  issued  to  financial  institutions  due  to  non-binding  clauses  linking  loans  to  the 
exchange rate, Reykjavík, 1 July 2010. 
 This morning the Central Bank and the Financial Supervisory Authority issued guidelines to 
financial  undertakings  in  order  to  instruct  them  on  how  to  respond  to  the  Supreme  Court 
judgement  on  non-binding  exchange  rate  linkage  clauses.  With  these  guidelines,  the 
supervisory bodies concerned declare that their unequivocal understanding of the situation 
resulting from this Supreme Court decision is that, in cases involving loan agreements that 
have  been  ruled  unlawful,  the  settlement  and  repayment  of  those  agreements  shall  take 
account of Articles 4 and 18 of the Act on Interest and Price Indexation, no. 38/2001, unless 
the parties agree otherwise. The guidelines are intended to create stability in financial market 
transactions and promote a secure and effective financial system. The Financial Supervisory 
Authority and the Central Bank are required by law to ensure financial system stability, which 
is  a  matter  of  vital  public  interest.  With  the  issuance  of  the  present  guidelines,  these 
institutions are acting in accordance with the legal obligation resting on them.  
The guidelines are based on the above-specified supervisory bodies’ considered opinion that 
there is no legal or substantive rationale for the maintenance of the previous interest rates 
(which  were  determined  with  reference  to  foreign  interbank  rates)  after  the  portion  of  loan 
principal bearing such interest has been uncoupled from the exchange rate of the currency 
concerned by means of the recent Supreme Court decision. The supervisory bodies are of 
the opinion that such an interpretation of the Supreme Court judgement, were it implemented 
to the fullest extent possible, would represent such a heavy blow to financial undertakings’ 
equity that the Treasury would be forced to contribute substantial new capital to them. That 
expense would ultimately be borne by other members of society.  
The method recommended by the Central Bank and the Financial Supervisory Authority will 
preserve  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  even  in  the  event  that  a  majority  of  loan 
agreements with exchange rate linkage clauses are deemed unlawful, although it could take 
quite a long time to determine this conclusively. Financial undertakings’ equity will sustain a 
considerable blow in any case, if judgements by the Supreme Court ultimately extend to a 
large portion of their loan portfolios. Offsetting this is the fact that uncertainty will have been 
eliminated,  which  could  provide  an  opportunity  to  re-evaluate  economic  capital  at  a  later 
time. The financial system should therefore remain sound. 
Many borrowers with foreign-denominated loans are in an extremely difficult position. Their 
anger and disappointment are understandable. It is appropriate to point out, however, that 
although the method stipulated in the Act on Interest and Indexation is not as beneficial to 
borrowers with foreign-denominated loans as the continued application of the foreign interest 
rates  set  forth  in  the  original  loan  agreements  –  which  some  have  demanded  –  it  still 
improves the position of borrowers considerably, compared to the exchange rate linked loan 
agreements.  Implementation  according  to  the  Act  on  Interest  and  Indexation  therefore 
represents  a  compromise:  it  offers  borrowers  a  more  advantageous  result  than  under  the 
original  loan  agreements  while  protecting  both  the  public  interest  and  the  interests  of  all 
debtors and taxpayers, who would have to bear the expense if the most extreme demands of 
some groups were to be met. The main point is, however, that this approach is enshrined in 
the  law,  in  the  opinion  of  the  supervisory  bodies  concerned,  and  is  necessary  in  order  to 
preserve financial stability.  
BIS Review 91/2010 
 1
Risk is always present in any nation’s financial system, and it can never be totally eliminated. 
Uncertainty  about  the  interpretation  of  this  Supreme  Court  decision  represents  substantial 
additional risk. The positive side of the situation is that supervisory bodies, the Government, 
and the legislature can limit this risk to a considerable extent if they respond appropriately.  
To  simplify  somewhat,  it  can  be  said  that  the  economic  programme  pursued  by  the 
Government with the support of the International Monetary Fund aims to restore trust: trust in 
the sustainability of public sector finances, trust in the stability of Iceland’s financial system, 
and trust in the stability of the Icelandic króna. These three elements of trust are so closely 
intertwined  that  if  one  of  them  fails,  the  other  two  are  unlikely  to  remain  intact.  The  past 
several months have seen a number of positive developments. The króna has appreciated, 
broad-based fiscal consolidation plan has been implemented, and the reconstruction of the 
financial  system  is  proceeding  apace.  We  must  not  sacrifice  these  improvements  for 
momentary popularity. Consequently, supervisory bodies, governmental authorities, and the 
legislature  must  do  everything  in  their  power  to  ensure  that  these  achievements  are  not 
squandered.  
There is good reason to take a closer look at what is at stake. Many of the world’s nations 
are on the brink of a sovereign debt crisis. Iceland has been among them but is well on the 
way  out  of  those  difficulties.  The  work  this  requires  is  painful  but  necessary.  Substantial 
additional cost to the Treasury due to a new financial system shock, due to lack of action, 
would  jeopardise  the  progress  that  has  been  made.  It  would  undermine  the  Treasury’s 
creditworthiness  and  delay  access  to  foreign credit  markets,  both  for  the  Treasury  and  for 
Icelandic companies, or – at the very least – would affect the terms offered. Access to foreign 
credit is a prerequisite for export-driven growth. Moreover, deterioration in the banks’ position 
would  adversely  affect  terms  in  the  domestic  credit  market.  Lending  rates  could  rise  and 
deposit rates could decline, impeding investment and delaying economic recovery. As soon 
as confidence in the Treasury and the financial system erodes, Iceland’s currency will suffer 
as well. In that instance, we would not be able to lift the capital controls as planned, after the 
Third  Review  of  the  IMF  programme.  Furthermore,  the  financial  system  would  be  poorly 
equipped to tolerate possible instability associated with capital account liberalisation. Finally, 
it is appropriate to bear in mind that financial undertakings’ scope to meet the needs of other 
individuals and firms would be drastically reduced.  
All of these factors show how vital it is to the public interest that the Central Bank and the 
Financial Supervisory Authority set forth general guidelines so as to maintain stability while 
matters of legal uncertainty are being settled. Other authorities and the legislature must also 
assess  whether  further  measures  must  be  adopted  in  order  to  remove  all  doubt. Ensuring 
stability  is  in  our  hands  –  all  of  our  hands.  We  hope  and  expect  that  all  parties  will  work 
together to achieve that goal. 
2 
 BIS Review 91/2010
