Njuguna Ndung’u: Nakuru as a financial actor and upcoming currency 
centre 
Keynote speech by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, to the 
Nakuru Business Association, Nakuru, 11 June 2010. 
 Hon. Lee Kinyanjui, Assistant Minister for Roads and MP for Nakuru Town; 
His Worship the Mayor, Councillor John Kitilit; 
The Regional Commissioner, Central Rift, Mr. Amos Gathecha; 
The District Commissioner, Nakuru, Mr. Kangethe Thuku; 
Mr. Boniface K. Muhia, Chairman, Nakuru Business Association; 
Mr. Thomas Kaberi, Chief Executive Officer, Nakuru Business Association; 
Governing Council Members; 
Business Leaders; 
Distinguished Guests; 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
I am pleased to join Nakuru Business Association in this meeting. I am here today because I 
was  extremely  impressed  with  the  areas  of  interest  to  the  businessmen  and  women  of 
Nakuru  that  I  was  asked  to  address.  This  is  quite  timely  with  the  support  the  business 
community  was  given  by  the  Minister  for  Finance  in  the  Budget  presentation  yesterday. 
Nakuru being centrally located in Kenya has the potential of achieving a higher growth rate 
than other towns based on its locational advantage. 
I was asked to talk to you today on broadly two topical issues; Nakuru as a financial actor 
and the upcoming currency centre in Nakuru, that will contribute to ease of doing business. 
But I will want to pick a few important additions from the budget policies read yesterday. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  Under  Vision  2030,  Kenya  aspires  to  become  an  international 
financial  hub.  In  this  regard,  I  am  aware  that  efforts  are  currently  underway  towards  the 
realisation of this objective. On the same note, it may be a high time to consider establishing 
smaller financial enclaves within Kenya as we build towards the aspired international status. 
We  do  know  that  expanding  cities  and  towns  increases  productivity  growth  and  overall 
hinterland growth. As a result, the thought by Nakuru Business Association of making Nakuru 
a financially vibrant town is not misplaced. What you need to do is to concretize your ideas 
into  a  plan  of  course  drawn  from  the  Vision  2030,  and  to  expand  the  city  to  provide  a 
diversified economy. 
To assist in this line, it is necessary to know what the prerequisites of a strong financial town 
are;  several  factors  have  been  cited  as  being  prerequisites,  however,  the  paramount 
prerequisites include: 
 
 
 
 
Financial infrastructure: Banks, Insurance, brokerage firms, outlets, agents etc; 
Adequate human resource skills and a flexible labour market; 
A transparent and effective regulatory framework; 
A critical mass of vertically integrated financial institutions in one location operating 
in a conducive business environment; and 
Observing rules of the game. 
 
As Nakuru aspires to become a vibrant financial town, you will need to assess whether the 
prerequisites  indicated  above  exist  and  if  not  what  steps  need  to  be  taken  to  put  them  in 
place.  All  the  prerequisites  can  only  be  put  in  place  with  a  unity  of  purpose  among  all 
stakeholders. 
BIS Review 85/2010 
 1
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  The  linkage  of  any  form  of  business  and  banking  need  not  be 
overemphasized. Business and banking complement each other. The banks’ role of financial 
intermediation  takes  place  through  various  forms.  As  banks  allocate  resources  (mainly 
deposits),  they  focus  on  productive  sectors  of  the  economy  whose  potential  to  default  is 
minimal.  This  demonstrates  the  fact  that  economic  growth  can  only  be  achieved  through 
efficient resource mobilization and allocation in the economy. Banks are bestowed with the 
ability  to  undertake  this  function.  They  collate  savings  and  deposits  from  micro-savers  to 
investors.  They  allow  access  to  finance  where  their  customers  accumulate  capital  through 
savings and affordable credit. However, resource mobilization and allocation is not an end in 
themselves.  Economic  growth  can  only  be  realised  if  businesses  efficiently  utilise  the 
resource towards the desired results. The financial sector is therefore in place to encourage 
a cycle of savings and investment. 
Credit risks are declining as witnessed by declining non-performing loans in banks. We need 
to take advantage of this. Over the last ten years, the trend has drastically changed with a 
continued  drop  in  the  level  of  non-performing  loans  from  as  high  as  38  percent  of  gross 
advances in 2002 to 7 percent as at March 2010. This is an indication of improved resource 
management in Kenyan businesses and perhaps the efficiency of screening and monitoring 
the role the banks have invested in. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: Over the last 5 years, Kenya has witnessed significant growth in 
the outreach of Kenyan banks. The number of bank branches have increased from 534 in 
2005  to  996  in  2009;  a  growth  of  87  percent.  The  increase  is  mainly  attributed  to  intense 
competition among banks and their desire to venture into new territories which are deemed 
unsaturated.  Banks  have  also  seen  the  benefit  of  banking  the  unbanked  and  removing 
barriers  to  entry.  Nakuru  has  greatly  benefited  from  this  expansion.  Over  the  period,  the 
number of bank branches in Nakuru has increased from 18 in 2006 to 27 in 2009 but even 
more in its hinterland. This increase explains the prevailing business potential in Nakuru town 
and its environs. 
The  increase  in  the  number  of  banks  in  Nakuru  is  in  line  with  Central  Bank’s  desire  of 
promoting  financial  inclusion.  As  per  the  Financial  Access  Survey  of  June  2009,  only 
23 percent of the Kenyan population aged above 18 years is banked. This state of affairs is 
not acceptable and we expect the level to increase significantly by the year 2012 given the 
various efforts Central Bank and its partners have put in. 
These include: 
 
The  licensing  of  deposit  taking  microfinance  institutions,  whose  focus  is  the  lower 
end of the market, which is concentrated in the rural and peri-urban areas. 
The  licensing  of  credit  reference  bureaus,  which  provides  an  opportunity  for 
individuals and businesses to rely on their information capital as an alternative form 
of collateral unlike the traditional physical collateral, to secure credit facilities from 
banks. 
Approval for banks to engage third parties to provide certain banking services. We 
believe that this will further increase the outreach of banks to most corners of the 
country. 
Flexible  space  for  banks  to  roll  out  very  incentivised  products  using  the  available 
technological platforms. 
Currency centres to reduce costs of doing business. 
 
Ladies and Gentlemen: The increase in the number of banks in Nakuru is an indication that 
the town is in the process of developing the requisite infrastructure necessary to support the 
activities of the banks. Banks have probably been attracted to Nakuru by its uniqueness of 
being  both  an  agricultural,  tourism  and  industrial  town.  Institutions  of  higher  learning  have 
also not been left behind in realizing the potential of Nakuru to create adequate employment 
   2 
 BIS Review 85/2010
opportunities for their graduates. Partnerships between businesses and such institutions of 
learning is one of the surest ways of developing relevant professionals to contribute to the 
town’s growth. 
Nakuru is thus ready for a vibrant business centre and to serve its hinterland. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  Allow  me  now  to  move  on  to  my  second  point  which  is  the 
upcoming  currency  centre  in  Nakuru.  The  cash  based  nature  of  our  economy  cannot  be 
overemphasized. The Central Bank has therefore been reviewing the currency management 
mechanism  to  ensure  availability  of  “clean  money”  at  a  reasonable  cost  to  Kenyans.  The 
Bank,  in  conjunction  with  the  Kenya  Bankers  Association  (KBA)  has  embarked  on  the 
establishment  of  currency  centres.  These  centres  are  expected  to  reduce  the  operational 
costs incurred by banks in moving cash to and from the existing Central Bank branches. This 
move is also expected to support the provision of “clean” notes and coins to Kenyans across 
the country. 
In conjunction with KBA, CBK identified Nyeri, Meru and Nakuru as the appropriate towns to 
pilot  currency  centres.  The  Nyeri  currency  centre  is  already  operational  and  progress 
towards  establishing  the  Nakuru  currency  centre  are  at  advanced  stages.  We  expect  the 
Nakuru  currency  centre  to  commence  operations  by  end  of  July  2010.  This  centre  will  be 
housed by KCB. 
Besides benefitting Nakuru residents by getting clean notes and coins, it is expected that the 
costs  saved  by  banks  from  the  lower  transportation  costs  will  translate  to  better,  cost 
effective and efficient services to the customers. 
I  must  emphasize  that  the  centres  are  a  joint  partnership  between  the  Central  Bank  and 
commercial banks via KBA. The centres should therefore not be confused with the Central 
Bank’s operated branches. In the case of currency centers, commercial banks provide the 
physical  infrastructure  while  CBK  provides  the  necessary  human  and  technical  support 
necessary.  In  the  long  run,  the  CBK  will  leave  currency  distribution  to  be  handled  by 
commercial banks. 
Finally, let me touch on three issues that featured in the budget and I think they are critical to 
our discussions today: 
 
The revamping of investment in infrastructure 
–  Complement private investment 
–  Public investment to reduce cost of doing business 
–  Residue binging constraints 
Empowering the youth to secure a future 
SME support through a revolving fund operated by bank on a 1 to 5 basis: that is, at 
the minimum this revolving fund will operate on “for each 1 shilling the government 
brings, banks will contribute 5 shillings” 
 Ladies and Gentlemen: As I wind down my remarks, I urge all businesses in Nakuru to take 
advantage  of  the  current  trend  of  falling  interest  rates  to  fully  exploit  the  potential  of  your 
businesses. The capacity of Kenyan banks to extend credit to all types of businesses has 
been  increased  following  the  increase  in  the  statutory  minimum  core  capital  from 
Ksh.250 million  to  Ksh.1  billion.  The  increase  took  effect  from  1st  January  2009  and  will 
progressively  be  increased  to  Ksh.1  billion  by  31st  December  2012.  The  increase  was 
informed  by  the  increasing  demand  for  funding  from  the  banks  beyond  what  they  could 
accommodate based on their capital levels. 
I also take this opportunity to urge all of you to exercise your rights while engaging with the 
banks.  You  must  demand  to  be  charged  a  fair  interest  rate  commensurate  to  your 
businesses  risk  profile  investment  proposals.  This  is  the  only  way  we  can  succeed  in 
BIS Review 85/2010 
 3
reducing the cost of credit and also grow your business. There is no other opportune moment 
for all businesses including banks to realise that success is sweeter when all players prosper 
and success begets success. 
With  these  remarks,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  it  now  remains  for  me  to  wish  all  the 
businessmen and women in Nakuru success in their endeavours towards prosperity of their 
businesses.  Successes  of  your  businesses  will  directly  contribute  towards  our  desired 
economic growth of becoming a middle income country as envisaged in Vision 2030. 
Thank you and God bless you all. 
4 
 BIS Review 85/2010
