Brian Wynter: Economic issues and short-term trends for Jamaica 
Speech by Mr Brian Wynter, Governor of the Bank of Jamaica, at the Quarterly Press Briefing, 
Kingston, 12 August 2010. 
 Good morning, Ladies and Gentlemen: 
Welcome  to  the  Bank  of  Jamaica.  Today  we  are  releasing  the  Quarterly  Monetary  Policy 
Report for the June 2010 quarter. The report covers the economic issues that occupied our 
attention in the review quarter as well as the Bank’s perspective on the short-term trends and 
economic outlook for Jamaica. Two special features are also included.  Box 1 looks at the 
recent  movement  in  the  domestic  exchange  rate  in  the  context  of  Jamaica’s  external 
competitiveness. Box 2 examines the adequacy of gross international reserves. 
When we last met, I indicated that Jamaica had embarked on a comprehensive programme 
of policy reforms. These reforms aim at transforming the economy from the vicious cycle of 
high interest rates, excessive debt, recurrent instability and low growth to a benign cycle of 
lower financing costs for the public and private sectors, more stable financial markets, less 
volatility  in  domestic  prices  and  sustained  growth.  During  the  June  2010  quarter,  we 
continued  to  see  signs  of  that  transformation.  In  particular,  the  perception  of  a  positive 
outlook  for  the  Jamaican  economy  has  been  strengthening.  This  is  manifested  in  the 
continued  appreciation  of  the  exchange  rate,  lower  market-determined  interest  rates,  a 
decline  in  inflation  expectations  and  strong  net  international  reserves.  It  is  against  this 
background that I will now speak to the issues outlined in the report. I will also share some 
thoughts  with  you  on  Bank  of  Jamaica  losses,  an  issue  that  has  recently  sparked  some 
interest. 
Monetary policy 
The  Bank  continued  to  ease  monetary  policy  in  the  context  of  the  positive  economic 
developments  in  the  review  quarter.  The  Bank’s  actions  were  also  supported  by  the 
strengthening of investor confidence, which was boosted by the announcement that Jamaica 
had  successfully  met  the  first  set  of  targets  under  the  Stand-by  Arrangement  with  the 
International Monetary Fund. These circumstances allowed Bank of Jamaica to reduce the 
interest rate on its 30-day open market securities by 100 basis points to 9.00 per cent during 
the quarter. 
In the context of buoyant Jamaica Dollar liquidity, the Bank continued sales of Government of 
Jamaica securities from its portfolio on the secondary market during the review period. All 
sales  were  above  par,  that  is,  the  Bank  received  a  premium  on  each  sale,  and  absorbed 
$14.8 billion. This absorption completed the permanent sterilisation of the funds advanced to 
the government in the December 2009 and March 2010 quarters. 
Financial markets 
The pace of appreciation of the exchange rate accelerated in the June quarter relative to the 
previous  quarter.  For  the  review  period,  the  weighted  average  selling  rate  appreciated  by 
4.1 per cent, continuing the appreciating trend that was observed in the second half of the 
March quarter. This was the sharpest quarterly appreciation since the June quarter of 1996. 
The  strongest  appreciation  occurred  in  June  when  the  exchange  rate  strengthened  by 
2.9 per  cent,  or  J$2.46,  influenced  largely  by  increased  investor  preference  for  Jamaica 
Dollar  assets.  The  preference  for  Jamaica  Dollar  assets  was  reflected  in  increased  net 
BIS Review 106/2010 
 1
private capital inflows the impact of which more than offset the demand for resources to meet 
current transactions. 
In  an  effort  to  smooth  the  pace  of  movement  in  the  exchange  rate,  the  Bank  purchased 
approximately US$54.0 million net from the market during the quarter. This contributed to an 
NIR stock at end-June of US$1 795.8 million, which was not only higher than the stock at 
end-March  but  was  also  above  the  end-June  target.  At  end-June  2010  the  Bank’s  gross 
reserves amounted to US$2 526.7 million, representing 19.7 weeks of projected goods and 
services imports, relative to the international benchmark of 12 weeks. 
Market-determined interest rates declined over the period in parallel with the appreciation of 
the value of the domestic currency during the quarter. The average yield on the benchmark 
180-day Treasury bill fell by 123 basis points to 9.26 per cent while the yield on the 90-day 
instrument fell by 166 basis points to 8.52 per cent. It went further at the July auction when 
the 180-day Treasury bill yield also fell below 9.00 per cent. Average yields on Government 
of Jamaica global bonds also continued to decline during the review quarter. Concurrent with 
the  lower  yields,  there  was  continued  narrowing  in  the  spreads  between  Government  of 
Jamaica global bonds and emerging market bonds and US Treasuries, respectively. Private 
money market rates also reflected this declining trend. 
Inflation 
Headline inflation fell to 2.6 per cent for the June 2010 quarter, close to the lower bound of 
the forecast range of 2.5 per cent to 3.5 per cent that I announced at the last press briefing. 
The decline in inflation occurred in spite of the significant impact of the increase in bus fares 
in April. Because of the increase in bus fares, Transportation accounted for 81.2 per cent of 
the 1.3 per cent inflation in April. 
The  moderation  in  inflation  over  the  quarter  was  influenced  by  lower  imported  commodity 
prices, the appreciation in the exchange rate and weak consumer demand. In particular, the 
price  of  crude  oil  fell  by  7.4  per  cent  during  the  quarter,  influenced  by  growing  concerns 
about the impact of a sovereign debt crisis in Europe on prices. Concurrently, the prices of 
soybean, corn and wheat fell in the context of high inventories and increased production. 
Real sector 
While there are signs of recovery, economic activity remained weak during the June quarter. 
Real  GDP  is  estimated  to  have  declined  in  the  range  of  0.0  per  cent  to  1.0  per  cent;  a 
marginally  slower  pace  of  contraction  than  the  reduction  of  1.0  per  cent  recorded  in  the 
March  2010  quarter.  Both  tradable  and  nontradable  industries  were  estimated  to  have 
recorded slower rates of contraction. The resumption of growth in Mining & Quarrying and 
Transport,  Storage  &  Communication  were  the  major  influences  on  this  improvement. 
However,  domestic  demand  remained  weak  as  a  result  of  increased  unemployment  and 
lower real income and continued to restrain growth. 
Outlook 
Although the outlook for growth in the global economy remains positive, there are concerns 
about  the  pace  of  recovery.  These  concerns  are  related largely  to  the  sustainability  of  the 
pace  of  recovery  in  the  United  States  as  well  as  the  health  of  the  European  economy, 
particularly  in  light  of  the  fiscal  austerity  measures  implemented  by  Greece,  Portugal  and 
Spain. 
Against  this  background,  the  Bank  estimates  that  there  will  be  weak  growth  in  the  
domestic economy in the range of 0.0 per cent to 1.0 per cent for fiscal year 2010/11. This 
growth  is  expected  in  the  latter  part  of  the  fiscal  year  with  the  first  expansion  since  the 
2 
 BIS Review 106/2010
September 2007  quarter  projected  to  occur  in  the  September  2010  quarter.  Already,  there 
has been resumption of production in the alumina industry which will contribute to growth in 
the mining sector. This will be complemented by growth in Agriculture, Forestry & Fishing, 
Transport,  Storage  &  Communication and Electricity & Water  Supply.  However,  weak 
demand will continue to have a moderating impact on domestic economic conditions. 
For  the  September  2010  quarter,  the  Bank  is  forecasting  further  deceleration  in  headline 
inflation  relative  to  the  March  and  June  2010  quarters,  to  a  range  of  1.5  per  cent  to 
2.5 per cent. The inflation forecast for the September quarter is also lower than the average 
rate  of  3.8  per  cent  for  the  previous  five  September  quarters.  Contributing  to  the  lower 
projected  inflation  out-turn  are  the  expectations  of  stable  capacity  conditions,  declining 
inflation expectations and stability in the foreign exchange market. 
The  Bank  expects  that  domestic  inflation  for  the  fiscal  year  2010/11  will  be  in  the  lower 
bound of the targeted range of 7.5 per cent to 9.5 per cent. The projection is underpinned 
by continued low consumer demand and a stable exchange rate. The risks to the inflation 
projection are balanced, as can be seen in the inflation forecast fan chart contained in the 
report.  The  upside  risks  include  adverse  weather  conditions  which  could  affect  domestic 
production. The downside risks include a greater than anticipated contraction in demand due 
to sharper than expected reductions in real incomes. 
On  01  July  2010,  the  Bank  reduced  the  cash  reserve  requirement  against  Jamaica  Dollar 
liabilities by 2.0 percentage points to 12.0 per cent. This was followed on 04 August 2010 by 
a reduction of 50 basis points to 8.50 per cent in the rate of interest payable on the Bank’s 
30-day certificates of deposit. The continued loosening of monetary policy was in the context 
of  slower  than  expected  expansion  in  money  supply  and  private  sector  credit  in  the  June 
quarter, which has kept underlying inflation stable. In addition, the impulses from imported 
inflation  are  expected  to  be  negligible  leading  to  a  benign  inflation  environment.  Going 
forward,  the  Central  Bank’s  policy  strategy  will  continue  to  be  guided  by  its  objective  of 
achieving low and stable prices. 
BOJ losses 
I will now speak briefly on Bank of Jamaica losses. The Bank is projected to sustain losses 
on its operations for FY 2010/11. It has increased its gross foreign assets through purchase 
of  the  proceeds  of  multilateral  loan  inflows,  repayment  by  financial  institutions  of  loans 
granted by the Bank in the context of significant margin calls in late 2008 and through net 
private  capital  inflows  associated  with  positive  investor  sentiment  about  the  Jamaican 
economy.  Interest  income  on  foreign  assets  will  continue  to  be  very  low,  reflecting  the 
monetary stance of central banks in the major developed countries. In addition, the Bank’s 
local  currency  income  from  Government  of  Jamaica  securities  has  been  reduced  with  the 
successful implementation of the JDX. 
Concurrently,  the  stock  of  open  market  liabilities  will  remain  relatively  high  and,  even  in  a 
declining interest rate environment, will continue to attract higher interest rates than is being 
earned on our assets. This is in a context where the liquidity emanating from the increased 
foreign currency inflows has to be sterilised. We will also be experiencing some exchange 
losses due to movements in the SDR/US exchange rate and the appreciation of the Jamaica 
Dollar relative to the US Dollar. However, the overall loss is not expected to have an impact 
on money supply or inflation as the Bank will manage its balance sheet to offset any such 
impulse. 
Conclusion 
Since  the  completion  of  the  Jamaica  Debt  Exchange  and  the  signing  of  a  Stand-by 
Arrangement with the International Monetary Fund, there has been a gradual improvement in 
BIS Review 106/2010 
 3
Jamaica’s macroeconomic fundamentals. All targets were met under the first review of the 
IMF Stand-by Arrangement and, from all indications, the targets under the second review will 
also  have  been  met.  In  addition,  no  financial  institution  requested  assistance  under  the 
Financial System Support Fund. These developments have boosted investor and consumer 
confidence as demonstrated in the JCC Conference Board survey of consumer and business 
confidence  and  our  own  survey  of  business  expectations.  The  sacrifices  being  borne  by 
businesses and individuals in terms of lower returns on investment and the cut in real wages 
are  already  producing  positive  results  by  setting  the  stage  for  private  sector-led  economic 
dynamism. The Bank of Jamaica remains committed to its mandate of maintaining a stable 
macroeconomic environment characterised by orderly financial markets and stable consumer 
prices.  These  are  the  necessary  macroeconomic  conditions  for  sustainable  growth  and 
development. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 106/2010
