Sada Reddy: E-Money Fiji Project 
Statement  by  Mr  Sada  Reddy,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji,  at  the  launch  of  the 
E-Money Fiji Project, Suva, 9 June 2010. 
 Distinguished Guests, ladies and gentlemen, 
Let me thank you for accepting our invitation to be part of the launch of the E-Money Project 
for Fiji.  
Introduction 
Some of  you may be  wondering what E-Money is about. Well, for our purpose today, it is 
money which can be transferred electronically from one person to another, one company to 
another, or from a person to a company or from Government to a person or company.  
A  popular  E-Money  device  or  instrument,  now  used  in  developing  countries,  is  the  mobile 
phone, commonly known as “mobile money”. 
Ladies and gentlemen, one of the RBF’s Missions is to develop an internationally reputable 
financial system. The extension of financial services to Fiji’s population is a critical element of 
this  Mission.  For  this  reason,  we  have  been  working  towards  the  introduction  of  mobile 
money  services  in  Fiji  since  2009.  A  National  Financial  Inclusion  Taskforce,  comprising 
representatives of the public and private sector , was formed early this year to drive initiatives 
such as this E-Money Project.  
Financial exclusion has been a problem for Fiji. Some recent studies indicate that access to 
financial services in Fiji is approximately 35–40 percent. In other words, most of the poor and 
rural and maritime dwellers do not have adequate financial services.  
Benefits of mobile money 
As  proven  in  other  parts  of  the  world,  mobile  money  is  seen  as  the new  way  of  providing 
financial  services  using  mobile  phone  technology  and  network.  It  is  a  form  of  branchless 
banking. This means that you do not necessarily have to build a bank in the remote areas for 
banking transactions. Basic banking transactions can also now be done through the mobile 
phone. 
There  are  other  benefits.  For  example,  a  farmer  in  the  interior  of  Vitilevu,  where  there  is 
mobile coverage, can sell his produce from the middle of his dalo plantation without having to 
travel to Suva. The buyer collects the produce from the farmer after transferring funds into 
his  mobile  account,  which  the  farmer  can  cash  out  at  an  established  agent  of  the  mobile 
phone company in their region. The cash in/cash out agents could include the village store, 
the Post Office, the supermarkets, the service station and other retail outlets. 
This will make life easier for our farmers, fisherman, handicraft makers, small and medium 
enterprises and micro-schemes as it will greatly reduce their operational costs, in particular 
travelling. Of course, with proper funds management, their savings should similarly increase. 
Some mobile service providers are linked up with banks in partnership, hence availing main 
stream  banking  services  to  all.  There  will  be  the  possibility  of  withdrawing  and  depositing 
money linked to bank accounts. 
There are more benefits ladies and gentlemen. Through mobile money, there can be transfer 
of  funds  between  persons.  It  means  that  a  “Bubu”  in  Lau  can  receive  funds  from  her 
grandchild working in Rakiraki. Likewise, Government and other agencies can use the mobile 
BIS Review 79/2010 
 1
phone to pay salaries and wages to their employees in the remote areas. And, you can pay 
your electricity, water, and other utility bills from the comfort of your living room or whilst out 
fishing. 
The  need  to  carry  cash  will  be  reduced  as  you  can  equally  pay  for  goods  and  services 
through  your  mobile  phone.  Therefore,  this  also  increases  safety  of  handling  and  keeping 
cash. Where for instance, theft of cash from tills etc is taking place, the customer can transfer 
money directly to the seller without the need for sales persons to handle cash. 
Role of the RBF 
The RBF’s commitment to the E-Money Fiji Project is because we realize the great potential 
this  development  will  have  in  extending  financial  services  to  the  unreached  areas.  More 
importantly,  that  in  the  process,  there  will  be  greater  economic  activity  in  the  remote  and 
maritime areas. Overall, it will improve the lives of our people in these regions. 
We have been working closely with the two mobile phone companies in Fiji to roll out this 
service. Following a provisional licence provided by the RBF early this year, mobile phone 
network operators have completed their pilot test phase on mobile money services and are 
now at the final stages of preparation for their commercial launch. 
It is important to note, that international remittances outward is not approved at this stage. 
Inward remittances from abroad however can be transacted using mobile phones, but this 
service will be available down the road. This, we hope, will further increase remittances into 
Fiji. 
I also wish to mention here that we would expect the mobile network providers to have their 
mobile money systems inter-operable as soon as possible. That is, a client of Vodafone for 
example  should  be  able  to  send  and  receive  funds  from  a  Digicel  handset  without  any 
restrictions. 
The  role  of  agents  is  very  critical  in  the  mobile  money.  It  is  the  agents  who  provide  cash 
when a person takes his mobile phone to receive cash. If the agent does not have money, 
then  the system  will  breakdown.  Therefore,  I wish  to  emphasise  here  that  the  selection  of 
agents  by  the  mobile  phone  companies  will  have  to  be  done  thoroughly  and  properly  to 
ensure that consumers’ interests are protected 
In order to facilitate rural people to participate in the mobile money, the Financial Intelligence 
Unit (FIU) reduced the requirements for opening of accounts. It means that, apart from birth 
certificates and passport, a letter from the village elder or church Pastor could be used in the 
remote areas to ID customers. 
The Reserve Bank is currently working on a best practice Payment Systems Legislation, to 
licence  and  regulate  all  providers  of  the  E-Money  services  in  Fiji.  The  legislation  will  be 
based on four general principles:  
i. 
safety (comprising safety of the electronic instrument and the IT-based processing 
system, as well as prudent behavior of the issuers); 
efficiency  at  the  national  level  (the  instrument  will  have  to  conform  to  a  certain 
industry-approved standard); 
equitable access to all users; and  
consumer protection. 
iii. 
iv. 
Having said this, we felt it appropriate to adopt a more flexible approach in our regulation of 
this  particular  payment  system  at  these  early  stages  to  allow  this  initiative  to  develop  and 
thrive. We will build up regulatory oversight as the market develops. 
ii. 
2 
 BIS Review 79/2010
Country experiences 
The launching of E-Money Project in Fiji is timely as developing countries such as Kenya, 
Uganda, Pakistan, and the Philippines have embraced E-Money initiatives to extend financial 
services  to  the  unbanked,  which  are  mostly  poor.  It  is  being  acknowledged  globally  as  an 
effective  tool  for  tackling  poverty,  thus  attracting  the  attention  of  donors  and  multilateral 
institutions alike.  
In some of these developing countries, penetration and uptake of mobile phone, ranges from 
45–60% across the population, which includes unbanked users.  
In Kenya, as of January this year, mobile money users were approximately 9 million, which is 
23%  of  Kenya’s  population  using  the  M-Pesa  services,  with  approximately  US$3.6  billion 
transfers being conducted. In the Philippines, at the same period, there were approximately 
9.2  million  mobile  money  users  or  9%  of  its  population  with  transaction  volumes  totaling 
approximately US$3.3 billion. This trend in Kenya and Philippines continues to grow as we 
speak.  From  this  penetration  rate  and  volume  of  transfers,  we  can  only  imagine  the  huge 
possibilities and positive impacts that mobile money services will have in our country. 
In  Fiji,  our  interest  in  the  capabilities  of  mobile  phones  is  exactly  this.  Penetration  or 
coverage rates of our local mobile phone network operators have been estimated to range 
from  80–90%  of  the  population.  Initially  though,  the  mobile  money  services  by  the  two 
companies will be introduced in phases. Whilst the main regions like Suva, Nausori, Nadi, 
Lautoka and Labasa will be covered at the early stages, it is expected that services will be 
extended to remote and outer islands gradually and to cover the whole region by the end of 
next year. 
the  European  Union  and 
Concluding remarks 
In summing up ladies and gentlemen, I wish to acknowledge the vital support that we have 
received from the Pacific Financial Inclusion Programme (PFIP). The PFIP is a Pacific-wide 
programme helping to provide sustainable financial services to low income households. It is 
funded by the United Nations Capital Development Fund (UNCDF), the Australian Agency for 
International  Development  (AusAID), 
the  United  Nations 
Development Programme (UNDP) and operates from the UNDP Pacific Centre. 
Recently,  I  was  fortunate  to  be  sponsored  by  PFIP  to  attend  the  GSMA  Mobile  Money 
Summit  in  Rio  De  Janeiro,  Brazil  where  over  640  leaders  around  the  world  in  the  mobile 
money industry, comprising mobile network operators, regulators, academics, financiers and 
donors met to network and learn about the latest international developments in the industry. I 
have benefited greatly from the attendance at this Summit. 
The  support  of  other  agencies,  such  as  the  Alliance  for  Financial  Inclusion  (AFI),  in 
developing mobile money services in Fiji is also acknowledged. 
I also commend the initiative and efforts of the mobile phone companies and their partner 
financial institutions. I hope that they would offer less costly and easily available financial and 
payment services to our people. 
We believe that technological advancements and developments such as E-Money, provide 
the ideal vehicle to reach the poor and less privileged in society. 
We  want  this  development  to  be  sustainable  and  have  therefore  established  a  High  level 
Taskforce  in  the  RBF  to  ensure  that  proper  guidance  and  support  is  provided  in  terms  of 
policy  development  that  will  reduce  transaction  costs  for  use  of  this  facility,  encourage 
development, mitigate risks and ensure consumer protection. This Taskforce is Chaired by 
Mr. Inia Naiyaga, Senior Adviser in my office. 
BIS Review 79/2010 
 3
We  have  an  exciting  development  before  us  and  I  am  certain  that  the  people  of  Fiji  will 
welcome this great initiative. We may be the first country in the South Pacific region to launch 
mobile money. 
With these words ladies and gentlemen, it is my privilege to officially launch the E-Money Fiji 
Project and wish the mobile network operators every success in the commercial launch of 
their financial service product in the near future. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 79/2010
