Mugur Isărescu: 130th anniversary of the National Bank of Romania 
Speech  by  Mr  Mugur  Isărescu,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Romania,  at  the  Gala 
Concert of George Enescu Philharmonic Orchestra, Bucharest, 5 September 2010. 
 Mister President of Romania  
Your Excellencies  
Distinguished audience  
Dear guests and friends of the National Bank of Romania  
Please allow me to welcome Mr Jean Claude Trichet, the President of the European Central 
Bank,  our  honoured  guest  here,  at  the  Romanian  Athenaeum,  to  the  final  act  of  our 
anniversary event. I would also like to greet President Ion Iliescu and Mr Emil Boc, the Prime 
Minister of Romania. I appreciate your honouring our invitation.  
My thanks go also to you all, governors, representatives of central banks and international 
financial institutions, and to all our Romanian and foreign guests. We are very happy to have 
you here with us this evening.  
We  celebrate  the  130th  anniversary  since  the  establishment  of  the  National  Bank  of 
Romania,  the  16th  central  bank  in  the  world,  according  to  the  most  widely  accepted 
chronology. The birthday of our institution is on 29 April 1880, a day on which the Law on the 
establishment of the NBR was published in the Official Gazette. The commissioning of the 
Bank required a longer process that spanned over the entire 1880. On 5 September 1880  
– precisely 130 years ago, the Bank’s Board held its first meeting. On this occasion, a string 
of scientific and cultural events covering the whole year was organised, namely conferences 
on monetary issues, banking history seminars, exhibitions, stamp and coin issues, as well as 
cultural  events  reunited  under  the  “The  Cultural  Days  of  the  NBR”  project  inspired  by  the 
excellent cooperation with the European Central Bank in 2009.  
At this moment in its historical development, when the National Bank of Romania celebrates 
its  130th  anniversary,  the  institution  enjoys  the  status  of  a  national  central  bank  in  the 
European Union. Our institution is a member of the European System of Central Banks and 
is currently making strenuous efforts for adopting the euro in the years ahead. If I were to find 
some key words to define the features of the National Bank of Romania, in fact what it stood 
for and what it still stands for today, these would certainly be the following: a sound, stable, 
trustworthy, reforming and dynamic institution.  
After 130 years, it is all the more relevant that the National Bank of Romania had its ups and 
downs,  similarly  to  the  history  of  Romania,  which  has  also  seen  peaceful  and  progress 
periods followed by dramatic moments. The common denominator of all these was the fact 
that the National Bank of Romania has always provided support to the country in order to 
overcome  the  trying  times.  The  institution  we  are  celebrating  today  bore  the  brunt  during 
World War One, having to cover all the related expenses. In the inter-war years, the NBR 
played a paramount role in Romania’s economic reconstruction.  
As  for  the  present,  it  is  difficult  to  provide  a  self-description.  Government  authorities  and 
public opinion might be in a better position to do that. Within the space of only two decades, 
the Romanian society underwent major changes. The future generations will judge what we 
did well and what we did wrong. During all these years, however, particularly since the start 
of  reintegration  and  reconnection  with  the  European  Union,  I  can  assure  you  that  the 
National  Bank  of  Romania  made  good  use  of  its  institutional  expertise  and  took  full 
advantage of the experience acquired ever since its establishment.  
I would like to mention that the NBR would not have managed to successfully accomplish its 
most complex tasks without the substantial contribution of its employees, namely the human 
BIS Review 114/2010 
 1
resources it has created itself: employees, experts, managers. This is the reason why I want 
to  extend  my  heartfelt  gratitude  to  both  present  and  former  members  of  this  high 
performance team for its professional qualities and integrity, as well as for their contribution 
to developing and enhancing the prestige of this institution, to the benefit of Romania.  
On  this  anniversary  occasion,  it  is my  duty  to  mention  that  the  far-reaching  and  beneficial 
reform  our  institution  has  undergone  for  the  past  two  decades,  the  reconnection  with  the 
European System of Central Banks, would not have been possible without the various types 
of  support  from  other  central  banks  and  international  financial  institutions.  During  its 
transformation  and  consolidation  process,  the  National  Bank  of  Romania  became  a  top 
ranking institution, capable of meeting the European standards and providing assistance to 
other central banks.  
Looking  further  ahead  and  taking  into  account  the  activity  it  has  performed  for  the  past 
130 years,  I  would  like  to  emphasise  that  the  National  Bank  of  Romania  stands  firmly 
committed to fulfilling its mandate as a guardian of price and financial stability in Romania. 
Our efforts will focus on committing ourselves, together with the Government of Romania, to 
pursuing  sound  and  stability-oriented  policies,  so  that  we  can  overcome  the  current 
challenges.  
Attracting European funds plays a major part in the sustainable development of Romania, as 
saving  will  remain  insufficient  in  our  country  for  a  rather  long  time.  The  National  Bank  of 
Romania will spare no effort and will make recourse to its entire expertise in order to speed 
up this process. In this context, what I would like to say is that the National Bank of Romania 
will  strengthen  its  historical  ties  with  the  Romanian  Academy  with  a  view  to  drawing  up 
extensive works, meant to be a “point of reference” inspiring strategies or programmes and 
entwining the visions and ideals of coexisting generations in contemporary Romania.  
Actually,  one  of  the  conclusions  revealed  by  the  troubled  130  year  history  of  the  National 
Bank  of  Romania,  as  well  as  by  the  universal  history  is  that  every  time  public  debate 
descends  from  the  field  of  free  confrontation,  among  scientific,  well-grounded  hypotheses, 
into an arena of noisy or authoritarian arguments, irrespective of the immediate outcome, it 
will eventually take its toll on all walks of life.  
The  current  global  economic  and  financial  crisis  has  given  us  a  warning  once  again  that 
there  is  no  valid  substitute  for  consistent  economic  policies.  Everywhere  in  the  world,  the 
correction of economic policy errors is painful and most of the time hard to understand by the 
general public and inherently tardy. The sustainable development of Romania hinges on the 
consistency of economic policies and the euro adoption strategy in the following years may 
represent a catalyst for achieving this coherence.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
In  1881,  the  year  when  the  National  Bank  of  Romania  actually  started  its  activity,  George 
Enescu, a music genius, was born. He was an outstanding composer and violinist boasting a 
brilliant international career. This evening, we will enjoy his wonderful music. The National 
Bank of Romania invites you to an anniversary concert performed by exceptional artists of 
the  “George  Enescu”  Philharmonic  Orchestra,  conducted  by  the  renowned  conductor 
Horia Andreescu. We will also be delighted by the talent and virtuosity of a young pianist, 
Andrei Licareţ. All these artists will give us a great joy in this splendid hall of the Romanian 
Athenaeum  with  a  programme  comprising  well-known  musical  compositions  from  the 
national  and  international  repertoire,  selected  from  the  “Eastern  flank”  of  the  European 
Union: Enescu, Smetana, Chopin, Bela Bartok, Grigoraş Dinicu.  
I thank you once again and I invite to take the floor Mr Jean Claude Trichet, the President 
of the European Central Bank, a close friend of the National Bank of Romania. 
2 
 BIS Review 114/2010
