Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Strengthening of regional integration in Asia 
Speech  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia,  at  the  Korea-
Malaysia Business Forum, Kuala Lumpur, 8 April 2010. 
 It is my great pleasure to be here this afternoon to speak at the “Korea-Malaysia Business 
Forum”, in conjunction with the 50th anniversary of diplomatic relations between Korea and 
Malaysia. 
The global economy is now on the path of recovery after the worst financial crisis in decades. 
This  recovery  is  however  uneven.  Several  of  the  advanced  economies  are  still  being 
confronted  with  unresolved  crisis-related  issues,  in  addition  to  structural  factors  that  will 
constrain their growth performance in the years to come. Emerging economies, in particular 
Asia, is leading the global recovery. The region is fast becoming the anchor of growth and 
stability in the world economy. 
New  growth  dynamics  are  already  at  work  to  reinforce  the  strength  of  Asia  over  the  next 
decade.  Increased  intra-regional  economic  and  financial  integration  and  other  structural 
factors are supporting this trend. While this trend will intensify, the future global environment 
is  going  to  be  fundamentally  different.  Asia  will  be  confronted  with  new  challenges  in  this 
changed  environment.  Asia,  therefore,  needs  to  be  well  positioned  to  effectively  manage 
these fundamental new global trends to ensure sustainability of our economic advancement. 
The business community and policymakers need to rise to the new challenges and build on 
our existing relationships. We can work together to forge a more integrated Asia in the areas 
of trade, investment and finance and thus, strengthen the potential of Asia. 
My remarks this afternoon will focus on three areas; the increasing regional economic and 
financial  integration  in  Asia,  the  implications  on  the  evolving  bilateral  relationship  between 
Korea and Malaysia and on Malaysia’s strategies for reforms to better position our economy 
to rise to the new challenges of the global economy.  
The emergence of the new Asia  
In  these  50  years,  Asia  has  undergone  several  phases  of  economic  transformation.  While 
individual  countries  have  embarked  on  their  own  strategies  and  achieved  tremendous 
individual  success,  today,  however,  as  the  world  becomes  more  interdependent,  the 
development  of  Asia  has  reached  a  new  phase  in  which  greater  economic  and  financial 
integration will contribute to unlocking our potential in the global economy. 
Over  the  years,  trade  and  investment  barriers  within  the  Asian  region  have  been 
progressively removed and capital mobility has been on the increase. Ties within Asia have 
strengthened  on  several  fronts,  from  trade  to  investment  and  financial  linkages,  as 
policymakers  recognise  the  importance  of  the  region  as  a  mutually  reinforcing  economic 
entity. As a group, Asia has now emerged as a global economic powerhouse with the share 
of GDP to world GDP amounting to 13.4% in 2009, about twice that in 1980. Going forward, 
the IMF projects that developing Asia will grow by 8.2% in the next five years, higher than the 
rate recorded in the period of 2000–2009. 
The strengths within Asia has been most evident in the recent global financial and economic 
crisis.  Asia  has  demonstrated  remarkable  resilience  in  the  face  of  the  unprecedented 
international  financial  crisis.  Most  regional  economies  have  seen  positive  growth  since  the 
second half of 2009, with prospects for a sustained recovery. The region has benefited from 
strong fundamentals and the financial reforms undertaken in this recent decade which has 
enabled the region to recover faster with a stronger performance. 
BIS Review 43/2010 
 1
Several  other  factors  have  contributed  to  this  early  recovery.  First,  the  region  had  policy 
flexibility  to  respond  to  the  consequences  of  the  international  financial  crisis.  Strong  fiscal 
positions, including relatively low public debt levels, have allowed many Asian governments 
to  implement  larger  fiscal  stimulus.  Second,  the  financial  sector  in  the  region  is  in  good 
health. Disruption to credit flows to the private sector have been avoided. Third, households 
and the corporate sectors in Asia are not over leveraged, and thus are in a better position to 
resume  consumption  and  business  activity  once  confidence  had  returned.  Fourth,  Asia  is 
also  not  plagued  with  wide  scale  unemployment.  Fifth,  increased  intra-regional  trade  has 
contributed  significantly  to  the  resumption  of  international  trade  in  most  of  the  regional 
economies. The strong surge in exports in the regional economies in the recent months is 
due primarily to the significant rise in intra-regional trade.  
Strengthening of regional integration  
Regional  integration  will  become  an  increasingly  important  factor  in  sustaining  the  future 
growth in the region. Despite Asia’s diversity in people, culture and traditions, the region has 
been able to come together as a group to achieve greater integration in the areas of trade 
and investment. 
While trade remains an important contributor to growth in the region, of importance is that the 
pattern of trade of the Asian economies has changed significantly. This decade has seen the 
rise in intra-regional trade. Intra-regional trade in Asia has risen from 32% of total exports in 
1995 to an average of 50% in 2008. Increasingly, as incomes rise in Asia, intra-regional trade 
will increase to meet the rising domestic demand of regional economies. More than half of 
the  world’s  population  resides  in  Asia  that  has  a  favourable  demographic  structure  that 
comprises  of  a  significant  young  and  dynamic  segment.  The  growing  middle  class  has 
altered the consumption and savings patterns in the region, providing the region cumulatively 
with a huge growing consumer market. Asia also has high savings which allows for higher 
consumption while still having surplus funds to finance regional investment activity. The rapid 
trade  liberalisation  across  Asia  has  improved  market  access,  creating  a  vast  market  for 
goods and services. In addition, bilateral and region-wide free trade agreements are set to 
expand further even as multilateral agreements continue to be pursued. 
The  growing  pace  of  intra-regional  investment  flows  has  also  gained  momentum  to 
complement  the  region’s  trade  integration.  Businesses  in  the  region  are  leveraging  on 
regional complementarities as well as taking the opportunity of the growing markets in the 
region. In Malaysia, almost half of foreign direct investment into our country originate from 
the  regional  economies.  In  addition,  Malaysian  corporations  have  also  in  recent  years 
increased substantially their presence in the region. The success of intra-regional investment 
reflects the competitiveness and dynamism of Asia. 
A more recent phenomenon is the increased financial integration. As this occurs, it will result 
in a more efficient recycling of Asian savings into investments within Asia. Given that Asia 
will  need  about  USD8  trillion  in  infrastructure  development  over  the  next  ten  years,  the 
effective channelling of Asia’s large pool of savings into productive uses within the region will 
be important to support growth and development in Asia. Deeper financial integration within 
Asia is already occurring as financial markets in Asia become more developed and mature. 
Regional efforts are being intensified to accelerate this process, including in developing the 
regional bond markets. 
Policymakers  in  Asia have  also  come  together  in  ASEAN+3  and  the  Executive  Meeting  of 
East Asia Pacific (EMEAP) groupings to promote greater cooperation in maintaining regional 
macroeconomic and financial stability. The more volatile and unstable international financial 
and  economic  conditions  have  called  for  the  need  for  greater  regional  surveillance  for  the 
early  detection  of  risks  to  the  region.  These  have  now  been  put  in  place  including 
mechanisms to enable the region to cope with rising uncertainties. Through EMEAP, regional 
collaboration  on  surveillance  has  been  enhanced  to  strengthen  the  region’s  vigilance  and 
2 
 BIS Review 43/2010
resilience  against  potential  crises.  The  ASEAN+3  member  countries  have  already  taken 
steps  to  multilateralise  the  Chiang  Mai  Initiative  towards  a  more  advanced  and  robust 
framework for the effective pooling and utilisation of liquidity support in the region.  
The bilateral relationship between Malaysia and Korea  
Malaysia’s economic relationship with Korea is very much part of this integration process in 
Asia. The bilateral trade and investment relationships between Korea and Malaysia over the 
recent years has continued to increase with trade now averaging RM45 billion per annum. 
Both  countries  have  already  benefited  from  the  growing  production  networks  within  the 
region as well as from the numerous trade and investment opportunities from an increasingly 
open and liberal business environment. 
Investment  linkages,  though  still  relatively  modest,  have  been  on  an  upward  trend  since 
2006.  Korean  investment  in  Malaysia  is  predominantly  in  the  manufacturing  sector, 
particularly the electrical and electronics sub-sector. The opportunity for further co-operation 
in  this  area  is  vast.  Korea,  as  a  nation  known  for  its  knowledge-based  and  innovative 
capabilities, can leverage on the liberal investment climate offered by Malaysia to diversify 
into new growth areas such as green technology and biotechnology. 
In the area of finance, Malaysia now has a well-developed financial system, with deep capital 
markets including a comprehensive system of Islamic finance. The Malaysian bond market is 
the fourth largest in Asia in terms of volume after Japan, China and Korea. More than 55% of 
the  outstanding  bonds  are  Shariah-compliant  and  the  sukuk  market  is  the  largest  in  the 
world. In 2008, the Export-Import Bank of Korea and Industrial Bank of Korea successfully 
raised  a  total  of  RM2  billion  via  bond  issuance  in  the  Malaysian  bond  market.  Moving 
forward,  the  sukuk  market  represents  an  important  channel  to  reinforce  regional  financial 
integration. It presents an opportunity for Korean corporations to raise financing and issue 
sukuks out of Malaysia. In addition, Korean investors can also participate in the wide range 
of Islamic financial instruments in the Malaysian financial markets, including from more than 
150  Islamic  unit  trusts,  Islamic  REITs,  wholesale  mutual  fund  products  and  other  Islamic 
structured products. 
In addition to robust economic ties and potential financial links, Korea and Malaysia enjoy a 
growing mobility of talents. With the rise in Korean investment in Malaysia, this has led to an 
increase  in  Korean  expatriates.  Koreans  are  also  coming  to  Malaysia  as  students  and  to 
participate  in  our  Malaysia  My  Second  Home  programme.  In  addition,  the  Korean  Wave, 
which spread to Malaysia in early 2000s, has contributed to make our country more aware of 
the Korean culture and traditions, thus promoting a better understanding between these two 
countries.  
Prospects for the Malaysian economy  
Malaysia is an economy that is transitioning into a new phase of development. In the current 
environment,  our  economy  is  now  firmly  on  the  recovery  path.  This  year,  the  Malaysian 
economy  is  projected  to  grow  in  the  region  of  5%  with  further  upside  potential.  Domestic 
demand is expected to become a major driver of growth as the private sector benefits from 
the  strong  macroeconomic  fundamentals,  healthy  balance  sheet  position  and  a  resilient 
financial  system.  Both  fiscal  and  monetary  policies  are  aimed  at  providing  an  enabling 
environment for sustainable growth. Monetary policy will remain supportive of growth, while 
attention will continue to be focused on ensuring that the private sector, in particular SMEs, 
have access to financing. In addition, the Central Bank is now in the process of formulating a 
new financial sector blueprint to chart the development of the Malaysian financial sector over 
the next decade so that the financial sector will reinforce transition of the Malaysian economy 
into a high value-added and high income economy. 
BIS Review 43/2010 
 3
As the Malaysian economy is gathering strength, the focus of policy has also shifted towards 
laying the foundations for the economy into a  high value-added, high income economy. In 
this  regard,  the  Government  has  recently  announced  the  New  Economic  Model,  which  is 
intended to accelerate Malaysia’s development into a high income economy by 2020. The 
broad  thrust  of  the  strategies  is  to  re-energise  the  private  sector  to  drive  growth.  This 
involves providing an enabling environment in which high productivity, competitiveness and 
innovation can take place. As part of these initiatives, further liberalisation of the economy 
and  the  privatisation  of  selected  Government-owned  corporations  are  undertaken.  This  is 
also  accompanied  by  the  Government  Transformation  Program  to  enhance  the  public 
sector’s efficiency. Throughout Malaysia’s more than 50 years of development, the country 
has demonstrated economic flexibility to successfully shift to the new areas of comparative 
advantage to the new areas of growth. I believe, with the foundations in place, Malaysia has 
every potential to transition into a high value-added, high income economy.  
Concluding remarks  
Asia’s  new  role  in  the  globalisation  process  has  only  just  begun.  The  continuous  dynamic 
evolution  of  Asia  as  greater  regional  economic  and  financial  integration  take  place  will 
contribute towards raising the standards of living in this region. In this context, the important 
partnership  between  the  Government  and  the  private  sector  remains  a  key  element  in 
ensuring stability and sustainable economic development in the future. 
4 
 BIS Review 43/2010
