 Mark Carney: Restoring faith in the international monetary system 
Remarks  by  Mr  Mark  Carney,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  the  Spruce  Meadows 
Changing Fortunes Round Table, Calgary, Alberta,10 September 2010. 
 In  particular,  broad 
Introduction 
We  are  three  years  into  the  global  financial  crisis,  and  its  dynamics  still  dominate  the 
economic  outlook. 
forces  of  bank,  household,  and  sovereign 
deleveraging  can  be  expected  to  add  to  the  variability  and  temper  the  pace  of  global 
economic  growth  in  the  years  ahead.  This  would  be  true  even  if  policy  were  optimal;  but 
globally, this is not the case.  
One  of  the  reasons  is  the  functioning  of  the  current  international  monetary  system.  It 
promoted the enormous build-up of debt that preceded the crisis and could complicate the 
necessary  process  of  balance-sheet  repair  in  its  wake.  It  is  fostering  deflationary  risks  in 
major advanced economies and asset-price inflation in emerging markets. For countries like 
Canada, the outlook and policy environment remain unusually challenging.  
It is in this context that the international monetary system is being re-examined. The question 
is  whether  to  change  the  system  or  to  change  policies  to  be  consistent  with  the  current 
system.  
I will argue today that there is no miracle cure. Faith is required, but not in a barbarous relic 
or a utopian global central bank. Rather, countries must restore their faith in the adjustment 
process  under  the  current  system.  Both  the  G-20  framework  and  its  financial  reforms  are 
necessary to restore that trust.  
The international monetary system and the crisis 
The  international  monetary  system  consists  of  (i)  exchange  rate  arrangements;  (ii)  capital 
flows; and (iii) a collection of institutions, rules, and conventions that governs its operation. 
These  core  elements  are  supplemented  in  two  important  ways.  Domestic  monetary  policy 
frameworks  are  essential  components  of  the  global  system.  The  international  monetary 
system is also closely related to the international financial system, which comprises financial 
markets and the institutions, rules, and regulations that govern them.  
The  international  monetary  system  is  an  increasingly  unstable  hybrid  of  fixed  and  floating 
regimes. Following the breakdown of Bretton Woods, there was a general move to a more 
market-based  system  with  an  increasing  number  of  countries  adopting  floating  exchange 
rates  and  steadily  liberalizing  their  capital  accounts.  Capital  flows  exploded,  rising  three 
times faster than the rate of growth of trade over the past three decades. In contrast, in the 
aftermath  of  the  Asian  crisis,  a  range  of  emerging  markets  became  increasingly  active 
managers of their exchange rates. As a by-product, with foreign exchange reserves built well 
beyond  prudential  levels,  these  countries  have  become  important  players  in  several  key 
asset markets.  
The  combination  of  these  official  assets  and  private  flows  has  created  huge  gross 
international  asset  positions,  which  has  important  implications  for  the  functioning  of  the 
international monetary system.1 This makes internationally coordinated financial supervision 
                                                 
1   M. Obstfeld, “Expanding Gross Asset Position and the International Monetary System,” Remarks delivered at 
the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City symposium on “Macroeconomic Challenges: The Decade Ahead,” 
Jackson Hole, Wyoming, 26–28 August 2010. 
BIS Review 116/2010 
 1
 and regulation a pre-requisite for system stability. It also increases the returns to deepening 
the liquidity of non-reserve currencies.  
Well-functioning  markets  have  clear  rules  of  engagement  and  robust  infrastructure.  That 
cannot  be  said  of  the  current  system.  Its  conventions  can  be  best  described  as  the 
occasional  observance  of  the  Articles  of  Agreement  of  the  International  Monetary  Fund 
(IMF). Its governance is diffuse and ineffective. The IMF is effectively without the power of 
sanction,  and  informal  governance  mechanisms  such  as  the  G-7  have  increasingly  lost 
legitimacy as global economic power has been transformed.  
Moreover,  events  of  the  last  few  years  exposed  the  frailties  of  the  international  financial 
system.  A  number  of  global  banks  were  woefully  under-capitalised;  participants  assumed 
markets would be liquid in all states of the world; and incentive problems led to a dramatic 
underpricing of risks. It is now clear that, in the run-up to the crisis, financial regulation was 
neither  well-conceived  nor  well-coordinated.  Implementation  was  uneven  and  peer  review 
non-existent.  
When the crisis hit, liquidity became concentrated in a handful of markets and one currency. 
In  the  wake  of  the  large,  negative  spillovers  we  have  all  just  experienced,  changes  are 
clearly required.  
This need is doubly important as unprecedented structural changes in the global economy 
are straining the international monetary system itself. The integration of one-third of humanity 
into  today’s  global  economy  dwarfs  the  shock  experienced  when  Canada  and  the  United 
States  emerged  at  the  turn  of  the  last  century  (Chart  1).  The  global  economy  is  rapidly 
becoming multi-polar. Emerging-market economies are now the main drivers of commodity 
prices, they represent almost one-half of the growth in all imports over the past decade, and 
currently account for about two-thirds of global growth.2  
Any  monetary system would be fragile in the face of these large, positive forces. There is 
cause for concern that the current system will repeat the failures of its predecessors.  
History  shows  that  international  systems  dominated  by  fixed  exchange  rates  seldom  cope 
well with major structural change.3 This failure is the result of two pervasive problems: the 
downward rigidity of nominal prices and wages and an asymmetric adjustment process. In 
the short run, it is generally much less costly, economically as well as politically, for countries 
with balance of payments surpluses to maintain them and accumulate reserves than it is for 
deficit countries to sustain deficits. Countries with deficits must either run down their reserves 
or deflate their currencies. The only limit on reserve accumulation for surplus countries is its 
ultimate impact on domestic prices. Depending on the openness of the financial system and 
the degree of sterilization, this impact can be delayed for a very long time.  
Such has been the case in recent years (Table 1). Indeed, given the scale of the economic 
miracle, it is remarkable that the currencies of the BRICs have only appreciated 5 per cent in 
real terms against the G-7 over the past decade (Chart 2).  
Another lesson from history is that major countries will not pursue policies that they do not 
perceive to be in their self-interest. Export-oriented growth strategies, supported in part by 
undervalued currencies, have proven effective catalysts in recent decades. Countries have 
generally been reluctant to adjust even long after demand needs to be rebalanced and the 
desire  to  self-insure  has  been  sated.  There  are,  however,  deeper  causes  of  the  inertia  of 
today’s  emerging-market  economies  (EMEs).  Governance  problems  in  the  international 
                                                 
2   Bank of Canada calculations. 
3   See  M.  Carney,  “The  Evolution  of  the  International  Monetary  System,”  Speech  to  the  Foreign  Policy 
Association, New York City, New York, 19 November 2009, available at: 
http://www.bankofcanada.ca/en/speeches/2009/sp191109.html. 
BIS Review 116/2010
 2 
  monetary system have discouraged co-operative solutions; and legitimate concerns over the 
resiliency of the global financial system have slowed financial liberalisation.  
Emerging  markets  have  also  been  somewhat  slow  in  realising  that,  as  they  grow  in 
importance, delayed adjustment is becoming self-defeating. Given the economic importance 
of emerging markets, their policy decisions are material for the stability of the international 
monetary system, and therefore for strong, sustainable and balanced global growth. In the 
end,  excessive  reserve  accumulation  represents  a  fallacy  of  composition.  These  efforts  to 
secure the stability of one country are now collectively reducing the stability of the system.4  
The flip side of large current account surpluses was large current account deficits in several 
advanced  economies,  notably  the  United  States.  The  combination  of  expansionary  U.S. 
monetary and fiscal policies following the 2001 recession and high savings rates in East Asia 
generated significant global imbalances, massive capital flows, and the “conundrum” of very 
low, long-term interest rates. These low, risk-free rates, in turn, fed the search for yield and 
excessive leverage across the system. The deregulation of housing and consumer finance 
reinforced a secular decline in private savings.  
Vulnerabilities  grew  from  the  combination  of  macro  imbalances  and  micro  failings  in  risk 
management,  supervision,  and  financial  regulation.  Policy-makers  in  advanced  economies 
were too slow to recognise and address the looming risks. The overall result was a period of 
increasingly unbalanced growth, without the real and financial signals necessary to promote 
timely and orderly economic adjustment.  
Three  years  ago,  the  pressures  became  overwhelming.  Financial  systems  in  advanced 
economies seized up; virtually every financial asset in the world was  repriced; and private 
demand in advanced economies collapsed.  
The policy response to the crash has been an unprecedented easing of fiscal and monetary 
policy. This has bought time for the necessary adjustments. But a durable solution requires a 
rebalancing  of  global  supply  and  demand,  which  will  not  happen  without  changes  to  the 
functioning of both the international monetary and financial systems.  
The challenges ahead 
Without the successful completion of G-20 reforms, the current recovery is at risk. Structural 
changes in the global economy will eventually yield important adjustments in real exchange 
rates. These would be most effectively achieved through movements in nominal  exchange 
rates,  allowing  relative  wages  and  prices  to  adjust  quickly  and  symmetrically  to  restore 
external balance.  
However, lacking confidence in the international monetary and financial systems, countries 
are resisting such nominal adjustments. As a result, real exchange rate adjustment is more 
likely  to  occur  through  changes  in  general  wages  and  prices.  The  implications  for  asset 
prices, output, and employment could be considerable.  
Already, inflationary pressures are rising in emerging economies (Chart 3). Given divergent 
growth  and  inflation  prospects,  monetary  policy  suitable  for  United  States  may  not  be 
appropriate for most other countries (Chart 4). However, those countries with relatively fixed 
exchange  rates  and  relatively  open  capital  accounts  are  acting  as  though  it  is.  If  this 
divergence in optimal monetary policy stance persists, the existing strains on the system will 
grow.  
In some major advanced economies, deflationary pressures are emerging. Given the fiscal 
constraints  and  scale  of  balance-sheet  repair  that  is  necessary,  these  economies  have  a 
                                                 
4   Obstfeld, 2010. 
BIS Review 116/2010 
 3
 diminished ability to expand domestic demand. External competitiveness needs to be rebuilt 
through changes to nominal exchange rates or, failing that lower domestic wages and prices.  
The  dynamic  is  perhaps  most  stark  in  peripheral  Europe  where  the  first  option  is  not 
available.  The  current  frustration  of  adjustment  by  surplus  countries,  if  perpetuated,  risks 
creating a similar dynamic on a global scale. History suggests that this process could take 
years, repressing global output and welfare in the interim.  
Against these difficult dynamics, the major economies are locked into what Larry Summers 
once termed “the balance of financial terror.”5 Reserves are highly concentrated by holder 
(the top five countries hold roughly 50 per cent) and currency (two-thirds are in U.S. dollars). 
Reserve accumulators trade exchange rate stability for exposure to large capital losses if the 
dollar were to depreciate. They confer the exorbitant privilege of lower financing costs to the 
United  States,  the  principal  supplier  of  reserve  currency.  The  United  States  faces  the  risk 
that this support is suddenly withdrawn, triggering a sharp adjustment.  
All  are  aware  that  the  decisions,  actual  or  perceived,  of  a  few  sovereigns  can  have  a 
disproportionate, disruptive impact on a range of asset prices and, ultimately, global output.  
What then should be done? 
First,  maintaining  an  open  global  financial  system  is  incredibly  important.  Sovereign 
borrowing  needs  and  business  investment  requirements  will  be  considerable.  It  would  be 
sheer incompetence to move from a world with a savings glut to one that is capital starved. 
One of the tail risks at present is the possible repeat of the Great Reversal of globalization in 
the aftermath of the crash of 1929.6 Rather than turning our backs on financial globalization, 
we  need  to  build  resilient  globalization  by  changing  the  design  and  operation  of  both  the 
international  monetary  and  financial  systems.  Buttressing  the  institutions  and  rules  that 
support cross-border finance is thus essential.  
Second, a new reserve asset is not required. Over the longer term, it is possible to envision a 
system  with  other  reserve  currencies  in  addition  to  the  U.S.  dollar.  However,  with  few 
alternatives ready to assume the role, the U.S. dollar can be expected to remain the principal 
reserve currency for the foreseeable future. Despite the exuberant pessimism reflected in the 
gold  price,  total  gold  stocks  represent  only  US$1  trillion  or  about  10  per  cent  of  global 
reserves and a much smaller proportion of global money supply.7 The renminbi’s prospects 
are moot, absent full convertibility and open capital markets, which would themselves likely 
do much to reduce pressure for a change.  
At  first  glance,  Special  Drawing  Rights  (SDRs)  would  be  an  intriguing  alternative  reserve 
asset.8 Using SDRs appeals to a sense of fairness, in that no one country would enjoy the 
exorbitant  privilege  of  reserve  currency  status.  Like  a  multiple  reserve  currency  system,  it 
may reduce the aggregate incentives of countries that supply the consistent currencies of the 
SDR  to  run  deficits.  In  addition,  there  appears  to  be  no  technical  reason  why  the  use  of 
SDRs could not be expanded.  
                                                 
5   L.H. Summers, “The United States and the Global Adjustment Process.” Stavros S. Niarchos lecture, Institute 
for International Economics, 23 March, 2004, available at: 
<www.iie.com/publications/papers/summers0304.htm>. 
 
6   For  a  description  of  that  process,  see  R.  G.  Rajan  and  L.  Zingales,  “The  Great  Reversals:  The  Politics  of 
Financial Development in the Twentieth Century.” Journal of Financial Economics 69 (2003): 5–50. 
7   Under the gold exchange standard, 40 per cent of money supply was backed by gold. 
8   See X. Zhou, “Reform the International Monetary System,” People’s Bank of China, Beijing, 24 May. 2009, 
available at <http://www.pbc.gov.cn/english/detail.asp?col=6500&id=178>. 
4 
 BIS Review 116/2010
 However, merely enhancing the role of the SDR would do little either to increase the flexibility 
of the system or change the incentives of surplus countries.9 Changes to reserve currencies 
would not increase confidence in the global financial system. More generally, alternatives to 
the  dollar  as  reserve  currency  would  not  materially  improve  the  functioning  of  the  system. 
While  reserve  alternatives  would  increase  pressures  on  the  United  States  to  adjust,  since 
“artificial”  demand  for  their  assets  would  be  shared  with  others,  incentives  for  the  surplus 
countries that have thwarted adjustment would not change.  
The common lesson of the gold standard, the Bretton Woods system, and the current hybrid 
system is that it is the adjustment mechanism, not the choice of reserve asset that ultimately 
matters.  
There is no silver bullet; a constellation of policies across major economic areas is required. 
The answer to the question I posed at the outset is not to change the current system, but 
rather to change policies to be consistent with it. Changing policies will require countries to 
change their macro policies and all countries to agree on a series of financial reforms.  
The G-20 framework and globally coherent policy 
With  the  burden  squarely  on  policy  dialogue  and  cooperation,  the  G-20  has  assumed  a 
central role.  
The  G-20  framework  stresses  countries’  shared  responsibility  to  ensure  that  their  policies 
support  strong,  sustainable,  and  balanced  growth.  Under  the  framework,  members  have 
agreed  to  a  mutual  assessment  of  their  monetary,  exchange  rate,  fiscal,  financial,  and 
structural policies.  
There are several reasons why this process has the potential to encourage action across a 
range  of  countries.  There  is  a  clear  timetable.  A  comprehensive  set  of  policies  are  under 
consideration.  Policy-makers  at  the  highest  levels  are  directly  involved,  supported  by 
international financial institutions. Finally, discussions are taking place at the G-20, where all 
major economies are present and where China has assumed a very constructive leadership 
role.  
As is often the case, the first step to solving a problem has been to admit that it exists. With 
growing recognition of the shared challenges, countries have agreed to do what is necessary 
to secure the global recovery in the short term and to facilitate adjustment over the medium 
term.  
More tangibly, at the Toronto leaders’ summit, advanced economies committed to complete 
fiscal stimulus programs and implement growth friendly fiscal consolidation. EMEs committed 
to  reduce  their  reliance  on  foreign  demand  and  boost  internal  sources  of  growth  by 
(i) targeting  infrastructure  spending;  (ii)  reducing  excessive  precautionary  saving;  and 
(iii) increasing exchange rate flexibility.  
Time will tell whether G-20 nations can better the underwhelming track record of the G-7 in 
coordinating policies. The area with the best prospects for success is in financial reforms.  
                                                 
9   SDRs could catalyze that change by facilitating any desired reserve diversification. Establishing an enhanced 
substitution account at the IMF, on a temporary basis, would allow large reserve holders to exchange U.S.-
dollar reserves for SDR-denominated securities, thereby diversifying their portfolios. With the IMF bearing the 
risk  of  changes  in  the  U.S.-dollar  exchange  rate,  an  appropriate  burden-sharing  arrangement  among  its 
members  would  have  to  be  agreed  upon.  A  substitution  account  would  create  considerable  moral  hazard, 
since reserve holders would be tempted to engage in further accumulation. In addition, a substitution account 
would not address the fundamental asymmetry of the adjustment process. Thus, it would appear essential that 
a  substitution  account  mark  the  transition  from  the  current  hybrid  system  to  an  international  system 
characterized by more flexible exchange rates for all systemic countries. 
BIS Review 116/2010 
 5
 Given  the  scale  of  international  asset  positions,  progress  on  financial  reforms  is  essential. 
These are also proceeding with a focus on three core issues:  
 
 
 
improving the resiliency of institutions (raising the quality and level of capital); 
building robust markets (improving infrastructure and enhancing transparency); and, 
reducing interconnectedness between institutions (macroprudential management of 
systemic risk). 
In  each  regard,  interim  measures  have  already  been  taken.  Most  notably,  China’s  recent 
decision to enhance the flexibility of its exchange rate is welcome and its full implementation 
would  contribute  to  strong,  sustainable,  and  balanced  global  economic  growth.  European 
countries  have  taken  measures  to  consolidate  their  fiscal  positions  and  have  conducted 
stress  tests  on  their  banks.  The  oversight  board  of  the  Basel  Committee  has  released  a 
broad detailed agreement on new definitions of bank capital and liquidity.  
With the macro analysis of tightening standards pointing to large net benefits, the calibration 
of these proposals will be decided shortly.  
Successful  implementation  of  the  G-20  financial  reform  agenda,  when  combined  with  the 
peer review process of the Financial Stability Board (FSB) and external reviews by the IMF, 
should  increase  actual  and  perceived  systemic  stability  and  thereby  reduce  incentives  for 
reserve accumulation. This is a necessary condition for a more open, flexible, and resilient 
international financial system.  
The  G-20  framework  will  be  buttressed  by  institutional  changes  currently  underway.  The 
G-20  is  now  the  premier  forum  for  international  economic  cooperation.  IMF  governance 
reforms will further enhance the Fund’s legitimacy and effectiveness. Over time, the FSB has 
the potential to become the fourth pillar of the Bretton Woods system. Its expertise and broad 
membership should yield comprehensive and integrated global financial regulations. This will 
be  essential  to  ensure  ongoing  cross  border  flows  and  to  limit  regulatory  arbitrage  and 
associated leverage.  
The final piece of the puzzle is the role of the IMF itself. The crisis exposed enormous strains 
caused by currency mismatches and large international gross asset positions. These are not 
best addressed by further building international reserve positions concentrated in the same 
currencies.  It  is  also  unrealistic  to  rely  on  the  Federal  Reserve  to  act  permanently  as  an 
international lender of last resort.  
The  IMF  can  enhance  its  role  as  a  contingent  supplier  of  liquidity.  In  recent  weeks,  it  has 
made  tangible  and  sensible  improvements  to  its  lending  programs  by  refining  its  Flexible 
Credit Line, and adopting new a crisis-prevention instrument, the Precautionary Credit Line. 
However,  there  are  limits  to  this  approach.  As with  lender  of  last  resort  to  private  entities, 
there can be moral hazard when lending to sovereigns. Why extend credit to countries that 
have already bought expensive insurance in the form of foreign-exchange reserves that they 
do not use? How do you “lend freely against good collateral” at the sovereign level?  
Countries can do most of the work themselves. Private currency mismatches can be reduced 
through  effective  supervision,  and  measures  to  enhance  the  liquidity  of  local  currency 
funding  markets  are  essential.  Ultimately,  sound  monetary  policy,  sustainable  fiscal  policy, 
and  robust  financial  supervision  and  regulation  are  the  best  defences  against  crises  and 
contagion.  
Conclusion 
The  world’s  economic  centre  of  gravity  is  shifting.  The  effectiveness  of  the  international 
monetary and financial systems will determine how rapidly this change will occur and how 
sustainable it will be.  
6 
 BIS Review 116/2010
 The  current  outlook  is  for  continuation  of  a  modest  global  recovery,  balancing  stronger 
activity  in  emerging  market  economies  with  weaker  growth  in  some  advanced  economies. 
However, there are non-negligible risks on the downside. In particular, the current functioning 
of  the  international  monetary  and  financial  systems  is  beginning  to  force  a  wrenching  real 
adjustment  across  major  economies.  Renewed  weakness  in  the  United  States  could  have 
important implications for the Canadian outlook. In this environment, the Bank will have to 
chart a careful course for Canadian monetary policy.  
Any further reduction in monetary policy stimulus would need to be carefully considered in 
light of the unusual uncertainty surrounding the outlook.  
A  few  months  ago,  the  Bank  of  Canada  analysed  the  potential  difference  between  a  co-
operative  path  for  the  global  economy  based  on  the  G-20  framework  and  one  in  which 
markets forced fiscal adjustment and little else is changed. We estimated a possible shortfall 
in global economic output of $7 trillion by 2015 (Chart 5). Since then, the Toronto Summit 
secured agreement on many of the right measures to make up this shortfall. However, the 
only measures that have actually been implemented have been consistent with the deflation 
path. While the other right promises have been made, conviction is required.  
Adjusting  to  the  current  forces  in  the  global  economy  requires  finishing  financial  reforms, 
implementing  greater  exchange  rate  flexibility,  and  putting  in  place  a  series  of  structural 
policies.  
G-20  nations  have  started,  but  completing  the  job  will  require  renewed  faith  in  an  open, 
flexible, and market-based international monetary system.  
BIS Review 116/2010 
 7
  8 
 BIS Review 116/2010
 BIS Review 116/2010 
  9
  10 
 BIS Review 116/2010
