Jean-Pierre Landau: International monetary arrangements 
Speech by Mr Jean-Pierre Landau, Second Deputy Governor of the Bank of France, before 
the Reinventing Bretton Woods Committee, Beijing, 6 September 2010. 
 Opinions expressed are solely mine and do not represent the views of Banque de France or the Eurosystem.  
International  financial  and  monetary  arrangements  are  currently  extensively  debated.  For 
many countries, both advanced and emerging, the crisis has shown that there is a close link 
between  internal  and  international  financial  stability.  In  addition,  rebalancing  of  the  world 
economy stands at the forefront of the G20 policy agenda and there is a perception it may be 
difficult to achieve under current arrangements.  
According to an apt definition, an international monetary system consists of (i) exchange rate 
arrangements;  (ii)  capital  flows;  and  (iii)  a  collection  of  institutions,  rules,  and  conventions 
that  govern  its  operation  (Carney,  2009).  Explicit  or  implicit  “rules  of  the  games”  form  the 
backbone of such a system.  
This  is  an  ambitious  approach  and  it  may  seem  too  normative  to  some.  But  it  has  a  long 
history,  starting  with  the  gold  standard,  from  which  the  phrase  “rules  of  the  games” 
originated.  The  Bretton  Woods  system  itself  was  built  around  an  elaborate  framework  of 
rules,  disciplines  and  support  mechanisms  aimed  at  ensuring  convertibility  for  the  current 
account  –  but,  crucially,  not  the  capital  account  –,  together  with  fixed  but  adjustable 
exchange rates.  
With  the  generalisation  of  flexible  exchange  rate  regimes,  the  normative  approach  to  the 
international monetary system was somehow weakened. Capital account liberalisation led to 
entrust  international  financial  markets  with  the  “disciplining”  function.  When  it  became 
apparent that the discipline could often lead to abrupt capital flows reversal and crisis, the 
international  community  attempted  to  strengthen  the  IMF  surveillance  and  develop  its 
facilities so as to pre-empt such shocks and make them more manageable. That is, basically, 
where we are today.  
Everything must be done to ensure that IMF surveillance works. But, like any “disciplinary” 
approach,  it  meets  with  three  essential  difficulties:  first,  diverging  interests  between 
countries; second, enforcement problems (the IMF has naturally more leverage on countries 
that  need  its  help  than  on  others).  Finally  there  is  a  perception  of  asymmetry  in  IMF 
surveillance; it may be compounded by a more fundamental and natural asymmetry between 
surplus  and  deficit  countries,  when  it  comes  to  implementing  adjustment  measures.  And, 
some  would  say,  there  might  also  be  a  de  facto  asymmetry  between  reserve  and  non 
reserve currencies, although, as I shall mention later, the situation is more subtle.  
These difficulties were apparent during the last part of the 20th century. But what makes the 
“disciplinary” approach almost impracticable today are the changes that have occurred in the 
world at the turn of the 21st century. The world today stands in stark contrast with both the 
Bretton Woods era and the period that followed immediately:  
 
The first – and most obvious – difference is the number of countries that are active 
participants  to  the  system  and  have  a  stake  in  its  functioning.  The  monetary  and 
financial  world  is  becoming  increasingly  “multipolar”.  While  the  current  system 
comprises three currency blocs, at least one (the Chinese RMB) and may be other 
additional systemic currencies will emerge in the future.  
Second, those participants are more diverse from the point of view of their economic 
structure, their demography, their level of development, and, more importantly, their 
social choices and preferences. For instance, different saving rates may be seen as 
resulting  from  divergent  time  preferences.  Likewise,  asymmetries  in  financial 
 BIS Review 120/2010 
 1
 development  may,  to  some  extent,  reflect  different  choices and  tradeoffs  between 
efficiency and stability in the organisation of capital markets and the architecture of 
financial systems.  
Finally,  linkages  between  economies,  whether  through  trade,  capital  or  more 
intangible “confidence” channels are continuously getting stronger as witnessed by 
the speed and amplitude of contagion of economic and financial shocks during the 
last eighteen months, which took everybody by surprise.  
Pending  some  economic  catastrophe,  these  characteristics  will  persist  over  time.  A  large 
number  of  different  countries,  with  different  preferences,  will  permanently  be  linked  and 
interdependent  through  active,  but  imperfect  capital  markets.  Any  future  international 
architecture  must  be  compatible  with  those  basic  features  of  today’s  world  which,  prima 
facie, create the potential for more complexity and, maybe, instability.  
Therefore, when discussing international monetary arrangements, one must try and take a 
different view, encompassing all aspects of the financial interrelationships between nations. 
To  a  large  extent,  international  monetary  arrangements,  as  well  as  current  account 
imbalances, are the by-products of policy choices made by countries on their capital account 
regimes and financial development. Here, I will focus on three topics: global imbalances, the 
provision of international liquidity and the newly emerging question of an international store 
of  value.  These  are  issues  of  joint  and  common  interest  for  all  countries,  Getting  to  a 
common  understanding  on  those  matters  would  help  in  making  progress  on  other,  more 
contentious questions, such as exchange rates regimes.  
Global imbalances and the policy agenda  
Current account imbalances have increased both in amplitude and durability during the last 
decade. In fact, they have become a permanent characteristic of our economic environment.  
Contemporary  analysis  point  to  “structural”  causes  behind  the  pattern  of  capital  flows  and 
global imbalances: 
 
According to the “Bretton Woods II” approach (Dooley et al. 2003, 2008, 2009), the 
pattern  of  capital  flows  results  from  a  mutually  beneficial  equilibrium  between  two 
groups of countries. On the one hand, emerging economies which follow an export-
led  development  strategy  and  seek  to  prevent  appreciation  of  their  real  exchange 
rates by constant foreign exchange intervention (together with capital controls). As a 
consequence,  they  accept  to  accumulate  increasing  stocks  of  liquid  assets 
denominated  in  dollars.  On  the  other  hand,  the  US  is  happy  to  get  both  reserve 
inflows  to  finance  their  deficits  and  cheap  imports  to  fuel  their  demand  for 
consumption  goods.  Such  equilibrium  is  stable  by  virtue  of  the  mutual  benefits  it 
brings  to  both  groups.  Moreover,  the  more  it  lasts,  the  more  it  is  impossible  to 
change since both group become mutually dependant through the stock of claims 
and debts they have reciprocally accumulated. Any significant break, for instance, in 
the allocation of reserves by surplus countries, would both trigger major exchange 
and interest rate volatility in deficit countries and lead to significant valuation losses 
in  surplus  countries.  This  “financial  balance  of  terror”  is  supposed  to  keep  the 
system in place for a long period of time. Implicit behind this doctrine, however, is 
the  assumption  that  the  creditor  country  can  live  with  the  risk  of  losses  on  its 
reserves and accept that possibility as a price to pay for the success of its growth 
strategy.  
A  more  recent  explanation  is  provided  by  the  “asset  shortage”  theory  (Caballero, 
2006),  which  helps  and  explains  why  asymmetries  in  financial  developments 
generate both payment imbalances and asset bubbles. According to the theory, the 
world  has  a  shortage  of  liquid  and  riskless  assets.  Moreover,  the  supply  of  those 
BIS Review 120/2010
 2 
 assets is asymmetrically distributed between regions, with the US providing a large 
chunk  of  the  total.  Hence,  there  is  a  structural  excess  demand  for  dollar 
denominated securities, which sustains permanent capital inflows in the US. To the 
extent that the US financial system does not generate enough “pure” safe assets, 
this creates an incentive for the financial sector to manufacture such assets from the 
securitization  of  lower  quality  ones,  but  at  the  cost  of  greatly  increased  financial 
fragility (Caballero, 2009).  
The policy consequences are important.  
1. 
First,  current  account  imbalances  will  likely  prove  more  resilient  than  expected  to 
exchange  rate  movements  or  inflexions  in  macro  policies.  If  the  causes  are 
"structural”, significant shifts in demand and relative prices between countries may 
well  lead  to  suboptimal  growth  and  excess  volatility.  In  the  immediate  future, 
“financing “ those imbalances should take precedence over their “adjustment”.  
Second,  global  imbalances  reflect  a  mix  of  different  national  preferences  and 
inflexions caused by public interventions. One important focus in the policy debate 
should be to disentangle those two types of structural causes, and eliminate pure 
policy induced distortions. Obviously, this is no easy task, but, in the end, a crucial 
one if imbalances are to be addressed and reduced.  
Finally,  financial  development  matters.  This  is  one  area  where  preferences  differ 
between nations and public policies have a huge impact. This is also a source of 
major  uncertainty  for  the  future.  In  a  more  diverse,  multipolar  world,  interactions 
between countries with different financial systems will become more complex and, 
as the crisis has shown, very destabilizing.  
2. 
3. 
Will there be a move towards liberalisation of capital accounts or will existing restrictions and 
controls  be  maintained  in  some  parts  of  the  world?  Opening  the  capital  account  exposes 
countries  to  increased  financial  volatility.  The  impact,  however,  is  different  for  capital 
importers and exporters. Capital importers face the possibility that flows would abruptly dry 
up,  thus  inflicting  damaging  shocks  to  their  financial  systems  and  national  economies. 
Capital  exporters  accumulate  claims  on  the  outside  world  and,  therefore,  run  the  risk  of 
valuation  losses  (through  exposure  to  country  and  exchange  rate  risk).  Ideally,  an 
international  open  capital  account  regime  would  protect  both  capital  importers  towards 
sudden  liquidity  shocks  and  capital  exporters  toward  abrupt  changes  in  the  value  of  their 
assets. These are potential avenues for progress and debate.  
International liquidity  
The crisis is a powerful reminder that liquidity – both domestic and international – can never 
be  taken  for  granted.  The  provision  of  international  liquidity  has  been  severely  disrupted. 
How will it be provided in the future, and by whom?  
These are not new questions. In the recent period, Governor Zhu, from the People Bank of 
China  has  raised  the  issue  of  reserve  currencies.  According  to  Governor  Zhu,  current 
arrangements  for  liquidity  provision  are  a  source  of  instability  and  have  played  a  role  in 
causing  the  crisis.  Governor  Zhu  has  mentioned,  in  particular,  the  intrinsic  contradiction 
embodied in the famous “Triffin dilemma”. Because the dollar is the major reserve currency, 
international liquidity supply depends on the US running a sufficiently large current account 
deficit which, by itself, aggravates global imbalances and creates instability. Governor Zhu 
suggested that the role and status of the SDR be enhanced, with the long term objective of 
creating a “super reserve” currency.  
However, the Triffin dilemma goes back to a period when international capital markets were 
poorly  developed.  By  then,  international  liquidity  was  limited  to  instruments  used  to  settle 
payments between official monetary authorities. It was represented by claims on such official 
BIS Review 120/2010 
 3
entities.  By  contrast,  in  today’s  world,  most  international  liquidity  is  privately  provided  and 
represented  by  claims  on  private  institutions.  Interbank  markets  play  a  crucial  role  in  this 
process.  The  more  capital  markets  become  integrated  at  the  short  end,  the  more 
international liquidity is provided by the private sector.  
As a consequence, there is a strong continuity and complementarities between domestic and 
international  liquidity.  Both  depend  on  the  willingness  of  counterparties  to  extend  credit  to 
each other. Both are subject to aggregate supply and demand shocks with sudden shifts in 
risk aversion or liquidity preference. Both result from leveraging and deleveraging by private 
institutions (Adrian and Shin, 2008). When markets seize, counterparty risk is perceived as 
excessive, uncertainty settles in, financial institutions deleverage their positions towards non 
residents, and then international liquidity dries up and disappears.  
When a shock occurs, public provision of liquidity has to substitute to private provision. In a 
domestic context, this is the function of the lender of last resort. But when the shortage is 
about foreign currency liquidity, this role has to be played by foreign exchange reserves.  
Foreign exchange reserves 
In  the  last  decade,  emerging  countries  have  constantly  sought  to  expand  their  foreign 
exchange reserves. The emerging markets’ average reserve ratio has more than quintupled 
from 4 percent to over 20 percent of GDP since 1990 (Obstfeld et al. 2009, Matteo y Lagos 
et al., 2009).  
One cannot assume, however, that equilibrium has been reached and that the demand for 
reserves will stabilize. On the contrary, there are strong indications that this trend will persist, 
or even be amplified, following the crisis.  
How  much  reserves  are  enough?  Theoretical  reasoning  would  balance  the  benefits  of 
holding reserves against their cost, with some notion that there is an optimum.  
On the benefit side, reserves can be detained or accumulated for a variety of motives:  
 
to smooth out the impact on consumption of shocks on the current account, which is 
the  most  basic  and  traditional  motive,  even  in  the  absence  of  international  capital 
flows  
as  a  result  or  by-product  of  foreign  market  intervention  to  prevent  exchange  rate 
appreciation. This is usually defined as a “mercantilist” motive.  
as precaution against possible abrupt capital outflows (the “sudden stop” syndrome)  
  
The costs of holding reserves are also well identified:  
 
there is a direct opportunity cost because foreign exchange reserves’ risk / return 
profile may be lower than for other, alternative, investments.  
finally,  as  reserves  accumulate,  countries  are  getting  increasingly  exposed  to 
exchange rate risk and face the possibility of significant valuation losses.  
 This traditional cost / benefit analysis seems less and less able, however, to account for the 
true behavior of reserve holders. 
During  the  crisis,  foreign  exchange  reserves  were  used  as  a  tool  for  internal  –  as  well  as 
external  –  financial  stability.  National  Central  Banks,  especially  in  Latin  America,  acted  as 
dollar lenders of last resort to their domestic banks. (Obstfeld et al. 2009).  
This  function  will  develop  in  the  future.  Financial  openness  and  integration  means  that 
domestic  banks  will  engage  more  and  more  into  foreign  currency  operations.  In  turn,  the 
expansion of their international balance sheets will increase the potential demand for liquidity 
support in case of shocks. This trend should be accepted as a normal consequence of open 
4 
 BIS Review 120/2010
capital markets and international banking, together with the predominance of a very limited 
number of currencies in international finance.  
It is bound to impact the demand for reserves and increase the need for self insurance. One 
characteristic  of  liquidity  shocks  is  that  the  net  demand  for  liquidity  may  become  almost 
infinite.  Ex  ante,  no  buffer  is  ever  big  enough.  No  amount  of  reserves  will  fully  protect  a 
financially open economy against a systemic shock. It is noticeable that countries, such as 
Korea,  which  possessed  very  important  amounts  of  reserves  prior  to  the  crisis  and  has  a 
flexible exchange rate regime, nevertheless felt the need to enter into currency swaps with 
the Federal Reserve.  
In a sense, countries face the same dilemma as private institutions. They need liquidity in 
times of stress but it is costly to hold in normal times. Their reactions, however, are opposite. 
Private institutions tend to underestimate their liquidity needs because, in case of shock, the 
Central Bank can step in as a lender of last resort. For countries, the bias goes in the other 
direction.  Provision  of  international  liquidity,  whether  private  or  official,  is  contingent, 
conditional and uncertain. With no international lender of last resort, financial stability motives 
could lead to unlimited accumulation of liquidity. Internationalisation of finance has created a 
fundamental indeterminacy in the demand for reserves. As a consequence, past benchmarks 
used  to  assess  the  adequacy  of  reserves  are  no  longer  valid.  Current  research  (Obstfeld 
et al.  2009  )  shows  that  broad  domestic  money  aggregates  may  be  the  best  explanatory 
factors for the amount of reserves. 
Multilateral provision of international liquidity: the search for financial safety nets  
The rationale for a multilateral source of liquidity provision is straightforward: stabilizing the 
demand for international reserves would bring huge benefits in terms of world welfare.  
At  the  moment,  reserve  accumulation  can  only  occur  through  a  conjunction  of  balance  of 
payment surplus and some degree of exchange rate intervention and creates externalities for 
other countries.  
Now, suppose there is “ex ante” an existing pool of reserve assets which countries could tap 
into  under  specific  circumstances.  If  access  to  this  pool  is  credible  and  predictable,  there 
would  be  no  need  for  getting  those  reserves  from  the  market.  This  would  reduce  the 
incentive for countries to conduct a whole set of policies such as:  
 
 
generating current account surpluses through active exchange rate management  
ring fencing pools of liquidity and capital in local subsidiaries, therefore creating a 
potential segmentation of international financial markets.  
implementing  “soft”  capital  controls  to  limit  the  impact  of  shocks  and  diminish  the 
need for reserves  
 All  countries,  therefore  have  a  common  interest  in  finding  ways  to  disconnect  reserve 
accumulation  from  exchange  rate  management  and,  more  generally,  from  balance  of 
payment situations and monetary policies. 
The need for national reserves could be reduced if credible mechanisms exist to provide for 
the supply of official liquidity on a multilateral basis. Significant progress has been achieved 
in this direction during the recent period. A dense network of forex swaps has been put into 
place between major Central Banks in the midst of the crisis. Other recent official initiatives 
include: the creation by the IMF of a new facility – the Flexible Credit Line – aimed at easing 
liquidity pressures on countries with no fundamental balance of payments difficulties; a new 
SDR allocation, the biggest ever, for the equivalent of 250 bn USD, which has been enacted 
by the IMF Executive Board.  
These are, however, revocable and limited sources of liquidity provision. Swap agreements 
can be (and have been) terminated. Out of the total, only a small part of the SDR allocation 
BIS Review 120/2010 
 5
will  benefit  countries  which  may  effectively  need  to  use  them.  More  may  be  needed  to 
substitute for national foreign exchange reserves as a permanent insurance mechanism.  
Contingent liquidity  
The search for new liquidity sources meets with an inescapable moral hazard problem. On 
the  one  hand,  to  be  equivalent  to  reserves  going  forward,  multilateral  liquidity  must  be 
available  ex  ante  and  without  condition.  On  the  other,  there  is  a  danger  that  fully 
unconditional liquidity be used to deal with fundamental “solvency” imbalances. In real life, 
this is not an easy distinction to make. The dilemma is solved, at the domestic level, by the 
provision  of  eligible  collateral.  This  may  prove  very  uneasy  for  international  liquidity: 
transferring ownership  of  substantial  amounts  of  sovereign  assets  between  countries  or  to 
international institutions would meet with huge legal and political difficulties.  
This  is  the  rationale  for  conditionality.  But,  of  course,  conditionality  creates  an  uncertainty 
which is incompatible with the purpose of instant supply of liquidity. A conditional facility will 
never be a perfect substitute for reserves. Many countries fully eligible to the Flexible Credit 
Line (FCL) have used foreign swaps instead. Anecdotal evidence suggests that swaps are 
often perceived as carrying less of a stigma effect.  
One way to deal with moral hazard would be to distinguish explicitly between two different 
risks facing each country: on the one hand idiosyncratic risk, created by national policies and 
country specific shocks; on the other hand, “systemic” risk stemming from aggregate liquidity 
shocks  occurring  on  a  broader  –  global  or  regional  –  scale.  Countries  would  self  insure 
against  idiosyncratic  risk  by  holding  a  sufficient  amount  of  reserves.  Protection  against 
systemic risk would come from a multilateral mechanism for international liquidity provision.  
Of  course,  the  distinction  between  idiosyncratic  and  systemic  risk  may  be  difficult  and 
involves a broad degree of judgment. But two basic rules should be guiding future work on a 
multilateral safety net: (1) conditions for access should be specified ex ante; and (2) those 
conditions should be fully delinked from the situation of individual economies. Rather, they 
should depend on the state of the global economy and international financial markets. From 
the point of view of an individual country, access should be fully unconditional, once global 
conditions are met.  
A  considerable  amount  of  work  is  currently  devoted  to  devise  instruments  of  contingent 
capital  for  financial  institutions  in  times  of  crisis.  The  same  intellectual  framework  can  be 
extended to liquidity. What is needed is contingent liquidity i.e. liquidity available to nations in 
times of aggregate shocks to the international financial system. This raises two questions: 
where would such liquidity come from? How could it be mobilized?  
As to the source, a possibility would be to create a process of periodic general allocation of 
SDRs,  according  to  a  predetermined  schedule.  Those  SDRs,  however,  would  not  be 
immediately  available  for  use  by  their  beneficiaries.  Rather,  they  would  be  “frozen”  and 
unblocked only in pre – specified circumstances (Landau, 2009). Criteria for use would not 
be  defined  on  the  basis  of  individual  countries’  situations,  but  on  consideration  of  the 
conditions  prevailing  in  the  global  economy  and  international  capital  markets.  If  properly 
constructed, such a scheme may provide, for no cost, the kind of insurance that countries are 
currently seeking by building excess reserves.  
How would countries access to this new source of liquidity? The traditional approach would 
allocate contingent liquidity to countries according to their quota shares in the IMF. However, 
those are very imperfect representations of countries’ liquidity needs especially in times of 
crisis.  Taking  inspiration  from  the  contingent  capital  literature,  one  could  imagine  that 
countries could “buy” the access to contingent liquidity in crisis times by paying, in normal 
times, a premium to the issuer (the IMF?). This could prove less costly than accumulating 
excess reserves. Going one step further, and transposing an idea from Caballero and Kurlat 
(2009), the IMF could issue tradable instruments giving access to contingent liquidity once it 
6 
 BIS Review 120/2010
has been activated. If broadly traded between public entities, the price of such instruments 
would  give  a  useful  indication  of  underlying  systemic  tensions  in  international  financial 
markets.  
Regional arrangements  
Another  approach  would  privilege  regional  arrangements  either  for  pooling  reserves  or 
redistributing  them  though  permanent  swap  agreements.  Asian  countries,  especially,  are 
working on and implementing progressively such schemes through the Chiang Mai initiative. 
It should be noted that regional pooling is efficient only when countries are facing asymmetric 
liquidity shocks within the region. Pooling brings no additional benefits when shocks occur on 
a global scale and all countries are hit simultaneously. Also, regional arrangements cannot 
avoid the moral hazard problem that all multilateral schemes are facing.  
Nevertheless, there seems to be considerable scope for regional arrangements to prosper in 
the  future.  First,  they  can  act  as  useful  complements  to  more  global  schemes  and  be 
articulated with (and supported by) IMF facilities. Second, one can expect regional financial 
integration to progress, especially in those parts of the world where huge pools of savings 
are  available  and  currently  intermediated  through  financial  systems  located  outside  the 
region.  With  deeper  financial  integration,  the  probability  of  significant  portfolio  shifts  inside 
one  region  increases  markedly,  creating  the  potential  for  asymmetric  liquidity  shocks.  The 
development  of  regional  liquidity  arrangements  may  appear  very  useful  to  underpin  the 
development of regional financial markets.  
Stores of value  
One consequence of the crisis has been to cast doubts on the ability of some assets, up to 
now  considered  as  riskless,  to  serve  as  reliable  stores  of  value.  The  ability  of  the  private 
sector  to  create  “safe”  assets  through  financial  innovation  has  proved  largely  illusory 
(Caballero,  2009).  So,  in  the  period  to  come  there  may  be  both  an  increased  demand 
worldwide for risk free assets and much less certainty on their future supply.  
The search for a liquid instrument which would also provide a reliable international store of 
value has been going on for many decades. When discussions were held to build the Bretton 
Woods system, Keynes proposed the creation of a new international currency, the “Bancor” 
which could serve both as a source of liquidity and a store of value. Thirty years ago, there 
was extensive discussion in the IMF on the creation of a substitution account. This was a 
mechanism through which countries could exchange their reserve currencies against SDRs, 
and get a protection against exchange rate risk. Most recently, Governor Zhu has reopened 
the debate and suggested, over the long run, the creation of a new “super reserve” currency, 
while, in the meantime, enhancing the role and status of the SDR.  
There  are  good  arguments  to  create  international  instruments  providing  a  reliable  store  of 
value:  
 
First, the safer investors feel about the risk-return profile of their holdings, the bigger 
the exposures they are prepared to accept. In that way, structural characteristics of 
the International Monetary System have an influence on the sustainability of global 
imbalances.  
Second,  once  uncertainty  on  relative  values  settles  in,  it  would  likely  be 
accompanied by extreme volatility as investors, whether public or private, constantly 
reshuffle  their  existing  portfolios  between  countries  and  currencies  in  order  to 
manage their exposure.  
Finally,  and  most 
face  an 
intertemporal  choice  between  extracting  resources  and  keeping  them  on  or  under 
important,  many  oil  and  commodity  producers 
  BIS Review 120/2010 
 7
However, there are also practical and conceptual difficulties:  
 
the  ground.  According  to  standard  economic  reasoning  (the  Hotelling  rule),  one 
important determinant is the return earned on financial assets, to be compared to 
the  expected  commodity  price  increase  over  the  long  run.  The  possibility  of  large 
valuation losses on financial assets makes it optimal to reduce the rate of extraction, 
which would durably lower the supply of oil and other commodities.  
A  choice  would  have  to  be  made  as  to  the  true  nature  of  the  “super  reserve 
currency”. Would it be a basket of existing monies or a new “fiat” currency? If the 
“super reserve” is a basket of existing currencies (such as the SDR today) it would 
basically serve as an instrument for diversification of foreign exchange reserves (or 
private  portfolios),  and  such  a  diversification  can  easily  be  achieved  by  using 
existing  currencies.  On  the  other  hand,  the  “super  sovereign”  could  be  issued  as 
such  as  a  fiat  currency.  Then,  the  international  community  would  have  a  basic 
choice.  Either  the  new  currency  could  be  made  “strong”  and  never  depreciate 
against any other major existing currencies, which probably  means that its supply 
would be severely restricted. Or, the “super sovereign” would be issued according to 
pre-specified  rules,  and  depreciation  against  existing  currencies  could  not  be 
excluded.  It  would  ensure  regular  supply  of  international  liquidity,  but  could  only 
provide  partial  protection  against  exchange  rate  volatility  and  valuation  losses. 
There  is  an  important  trade  off,  there,  which  is  the  essence  of  a  new  “Triffin 
dilemma”  and  which  cannot  be  avoided  when  looking  at  the  public  supply  of 
international liquidity, whether by one nation or within a multilateral framework.  
More fundamentally, a new currency which would provide a reliable store of value 
would, in fact, grant its holders a collective guarantee against exchange risk. That 
guarantee would benefit surplus countries and would be given by deficit countries. 
This issue was intensely debated when the substitution account was discussed and 
negotiated within the IMF, more than 25 years ago. It became clear, at the time that 
it  would  not  be  accepted  by  many  countries  unless  some  explicit,  binding  and 
symmetric  rules  on  balance  of  payment  adjustments  were  agreed  upon 
simultaneously.  Most  likely,  those  questions  would  be  raised  again  today  and  the 
creation of a new reserve currency would have to be part of a broader framework.  
 Conclusion and provisional policy lessons  
Looking at the next decade, one can project two alternative – and polar – scenarios for the 
evolution of the international financial system.  
First,  a  scenario  of  progressive  and  partial  fragmentation:  no  significant  capital  account 
opening  would  occur  in  many  parts  of  the  world.  On  the  contrary,  new  barriers  could  be 
erected either in the form of capital controls or through national regulations forcing financial 
institutions to ring fence local pools of capital and liquidity. There would be little convergence 
in  domestic  financial  systems  and  regulations.  Foreign  exchange  reserves  would  keep 
growing, both in absolute and in percentage of world GDP.  
This  scenario  may  be  seen  as  the  only  realistic  response  to  increased  diversity  in  a 
multipolar world. Such an evolution could also be defended on the ground that the assumed 
benefits of financial harmonization and integration have not really materialized (Rodrik et al. 
2008). Furthermore, the crisis has shown that no financial system can claim to be intrinsically 
superior and countries could feel justified in adopting and promoting their own models.  
The  systemic  consequences,  however,  are  not  clear.  In  such  a  world,  current  account 
imbalances  would  be  heavily  influenced  by  public  actions  and  policies.  Regulatory 
competition  would  dominate  the  localization  of  financial  activities  and  the  allocation  of 
savings. In the absence of some “rules of the game”, tensions would naturally arise between 
countries, most likely through conflicts about exchange rate regimes and policies.  
8 
 BIS Review 120/2010
An opposite scenario would see the progressive opening of all capital accounts, together with 
some (more or less intensive) convergence in financial systems and regulations. This would 
allow for the emergence of a unified world capital market, an efficient allocation of savings 
across  countries  and  a  smooth  financing  of  current  account  imbalances.  Such  a  scenario 
could prove attractive both for capital exporters (through better returns on excess savings) 
and  capital  importers,  which  may  not  have  the  option  of  isolating  themselves  from 
international capital markets anyway.  
Experience  shows,  however,  that  an  open  international  financial  system  is  not  inherently 
stable and, therefore, very dependent on a strong infrastructures and conditions. The move 
towards  a  financially  open  world  would,  at  the  very  least,  have  to  be  supported  by  robust 
arrangements on international liquidity provision.  
Pending ambitious reforms, a lot can still be done to provide investors with stable stores of 
value.  One  very  promising  avenue  would  be,  for  countries  which  have  surplus  savings,  to 
develop their own internal stores of value by expanding the range of safe and liquid financial 
assets  available  to  domestic  and  international  investors.  By  doing  so,  they  would  achieve 
several goals at the same time. They would bring more efficiency in the financing of their own 
domestic  needs.  They  would  provide  their  own  investors  with  a  broader  range  of  choices. 
They would also eliminate some of the currently existing incentives to export capital in order 
to protect its value. They would contribute to reduce the “asset shortage” with all its negative 
consequences,  including  international  imbalances  and  the  financing  of  asset  bubbles. 
Financial  development  in  many  countries  would  address  both  the  causes  of  international 
imbalances and some of the roots of the financial crisis.  
References 
Adrian, T. and H. S. Shin (2008), “Liquidity and Leverage”, Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York Staff Report No 328.  
Aizenman,  J.,  Y.  Jinjarak  and  D.  Park  (2010),  “Reserves  and  Swap  Lines  :  Substitutes  or 
Complements ?”, NBER Working Paper No 15804 March.  
Backus,  D.,  Henriksen,  E.,  Lambert,  F.  and  C.  Telmer  (2009),  “Current  Account  Fact  and 
Fiction”, NBER Working Paper, 15255, November.  
Baclet,  A.  and  Vidon  E.  (2008),  “The  World  Distribution  of  External  Imbalances:  Revisiting 
the Stylised Facts”, Banque de France Occasional Paper, 6, June.  
Bernanke,  B.  (2005),  “The  Global  Saving  Glut  and  the  U.S.  Current  Account  Deficit”, 
Remarks at the Sandridge Lecture, 19 March.  
Blanchard  O.,  Milesi-Ferretti  G.M.  (2009),  “Global  Imbalances:  In  Mid-Stream?”  IMF  Staff 
Position Note.  
Blanchard, O., F. Giavazzi and F. Sa (2005), “The U.S. Current Account and the Dollar”, MIT 
Department of Economics Working Paper, No 05–02 and NBER Working Paper No 11137, 
February.  
Bracke, T., M. Bussière, M. Fidora and R. Straub (2008), “A Framework for Assessing Global 
Imbalances”, ECB Occasional Paper No. 78, January 2008.  
Bussière, M., M. Fratzscher and G. Müller (2010), “Productivity Shocks, Budget Deficits and 
the  Current  Account”,  ECB  Working  Paper  No.  509,  August  2005,  forthcoming  Journal  of 
International  Money  and  Finance 
the 
Macroeconomics of Asset Shortages.  
Caballero R. (2009), “The ‘Other’ Imbalance and the Financial Crisis”, Paolo Baffi Lecture, 
Bank of Italy.  
(December  2010).Caballero  R. 
(2006),  On 
BIS Review 120/2010 
 9
Caballero R. and P. Kurlat (2009), “The ‘Surprising’ Origin and Nature of Financial Crises: a 
Macroeconomic Policy Proposal”.  
Caballero, R. (2009), “Sudden Financial Arrest”, IMF 10th Jacques Polak Annual Research 
Conference.  
Caballero,  R.,  E.  Fahri  and  P-O.  Gourinchas  (2008),  “An  Equilibrium  Model  of  Global 
Imbalances and Low Interest Rates”, American Economic Review, 98(1), 358–393.  
Caballero,  R.  and  A.  Krishnamurthy  (2009),  “Global  Imbalances  and  Financial  Fragility”, 
NBER working paper, 14688, January.  
Carney,  M.  (2009),  “The  Evolution  of  the  International  Monetary  System”,  Remarks  at 
Foreign Policy Association, New York, 19 November 2009.  
Chinn,  M.  and  H.  Ito  (2006),  “What  matters  for  financial  development?  Capital  controls, 
institutions, and interactions”, Journal of Development Economics.  
Dooley,  M.,  D.  Folkerts-Landau,  and  P.  Garber  (2003),  “An  Essay  on  the  Revived  Bretton 
Woods system”, NBER Working Paper No 9971. 
Dooley, M., D. Folkerts-Landau and P. Garber (2008), “Will Subprime be a Twin Crisis for the 
United States”, NBER Working Paper, 13978, May.  
Dooley  M.,  Folkerts-Landau  D.,  Garber  P.  M.  (2009)  –  “Bretton  Woods  II  Still  Defines  the 
International Monetary System”, NBER Working Paper, 14731, February.  
Eichengreen, B. and R. Hausmann (1999), “Exchange Rates and Financial Fragility”, in New 
Challenges  for  Monetary  Policy,  Kansas  City,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City, 
pp. 329–368.  Fisher,  S.  (1999),  “On  the  Need  for  an  International  Lender  of  Last  resort”; 
Paper prepared for the American Economic Association, January 3, 1999.  
Fisher, S. “A New Global Financial Architecture”, The trilateral commission (Europe); 32nd 
regional meeting Paris, 7–9 November 2008.  
Gertler, M. and K. Rogoff (1990), “North-South Lending and Endogenous Domestic Capital 
Market Inefficiencies”, Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol 26, pp. 245–66.  
Glick,  R  and  K.  Rogoff (1995), “Global versus country-specific productivity shocks and the 
current  account”,  Journal  of  Monetary  Economics,  Elsevier,  Vol.  35(1),  pp.  159–192, 
February.  
Gourinchas, P-O. and H. Rey (2007), “International Financial Adjustment”, Journal of Political 
Economy, 115(4). 
Hausmann,  Ricardo and Federico Sturzenegger (2005), “U.S. and Global Imbalances: can 
Dark Matter Prevent a Big Bang?”.  
Henriksen, E. and F. Lambert (2009), “Technology Shocks and Current Account Dynamics”, 
mimeo, New York University.  
Hausmann, Ricardo and Panizza, Hugo (2010), “Redemption or Abstinence ? Original Sin, 
Currency  Mismatches  and  Counter-Cyclical  Policies  in  the  New  Millennium”,  CID  Working 
Paper, Center for International Development, Harvard University, February 2010.  
Jeanne  O.  and  Ranciere  R.,  (200),  “The  Optimal  Level  of  International  Reserves  for 
Emerging Market Countries: Formulas and Applications”, CEPR Discussion Papers 6723.  
Kashyap, A. K., R. G. Rajan and J. C. Stein (2008), “Rethinking Capital Regulation”, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Kansas City Symposium, August 2008.  
Landau, J.P. (2009), Some Thoughts on International Monetary Reform. Remarks at the G20 
Workshop on the global economy: Causes of the Crisis: Key lLessons.  Mumbai 24–26 May 
2009. Available at : 
10 
 BIS Review 120/2010
http://www.g20.org/Documents/g20_workshop_causes_of_the_crisis.pdf?bcsi_scan_7B0403
5E3E2807B8=1 
Lucas,  R.  (1990),  “Why  Doesn’t  Capital  Flow  from  Rich  to  Poor  Countries?”,  American 
Economic Review, Vol. 80, No 2.  
Matteo  y  Lagos,  I.,  R.  Duttagupta  and  R.  Goyal  (2009),  “The  Debate  on  the  International 
Monetary System”, IMF Staff Position Note, SPN/09/26.  
Mendoza,  E.,  V.  Quadrini  and  J-V  Rios-Rull  (2006),  “Financial  integration  and  financial 
deepness and global imbalances”, NBER Working Paper No 12909 and Journal of Political 
Economy, Vol. 117, 3. 
Obstfeld,  M.  and  K.  Rogoff  (2004),  “The  Unsustainable  US  Current  Account  Position 
Revisited”, NBER Working Papers 10869, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.  
Obstfeld  M.,  Rogoff  K.  (2009),  “Global  imbalances  and  the  Financial  Crisis:  Products  of 
Common Causes”.  
Obstfeld, M., J. C. Shambaugh and A. M. Taylor (2009), “Financial Stability, the Trilemma 
and International Reserves”, NBER Working Paper 14826.  
Ostry, J. D., A. R. Ghosh, K. Habermeier, M. Chamon, M. S. Qureshi and D. B. S. Reinhardt 
(2010) ”Capital Flows : The Role Of Controls“, IMF Staff Position Note SPN/10/04.  
Rodrik  D.  and  A.  Subramanian  (2008):  “Why  Did  Financial  Globalization  Disappoint?”, 
http://www.iie.com/publications/papers/subramanian0308.pdf. 
BIS Review 120/2010 
 11
