Yandraduth Googoolye: Strengthening macro-prudential supervision in 
Mauritius  
Address by Mr Yandraduth Googoolye, First Deputy Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at 
the Signing Ceremony of the Memorandum of Understanding between the Bank of Mauritius 
and the Mauritius Revenue Authority, Port-Louis, 31 December 2009. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen 
After a comprehensive address by the Governor, I will not have much to add to what he has 
said. But, what I would do is to brief you about the salient features of the Memorandum of 
Understanding. But before doing so, I must say that after the global economic crisis, the buzz 
word all over is macro-prudential supervision. It is built on the clear lessons of the crisis that 
a set of financial institutions that are sound on a stand alone basis is not an assurance of 
financial stability. The real economy has to be treated as an endogenous part of the whole 
framework if systemic stability concerns have to be identified and mitigated.  
Why I am saying this is because the MoU that we are going to sign today is a critical part of 
our  effort  to  strengthen  macro-prudential  supervision.  Let  us  look  for  instance  one  of  the 
clauses  of  the  MoU.  It  says  that  MRA  will  communicate  to  the  Bank  aggregate  data  on 
various taxes collected with a view to allow the Bank to gauge activities in the real sectors of 
the economy. This is an important data input for macro-prudential supervision. In fact this will 
make  the  process  even  more  proactive  rather  than  a  reactive  one.  You  will  all  agree  that 
there is no alternative to being able to anticipate events and take remedial measures before 
a crisis assumes monstrous proportions. 
Let  me  turn  to  the  broad  features  of  the  MoU  now.  This  agreement  has  basically  three 
important aspects: 
First, it contains the ground rules for cooperation between the Bank and the MRA. The MoU 
emanates  from  the  respective  legislative  framework  governing  the  Bank  and  MRA.  It  is 
therefore subservient to it and furthers the objectives laid out in the respective Acts. 
Secondly,  it  sets  out  the  specific  areas  for  cooperation  by  detailing  broadly  the  nature  of 
information that one will provide to the other, areas in which they will collaborate with each 
other and underscores the need for use of technical expertise in one institution relevant for 
the effective discharge of responsibilities by the other. 
Thirdly,  it  provides  for  a  joint  committee  between  the  Bank  and  MRA  that  will  meet  at 
quarterly intervals to consider the implementation of the MoU and matters arising therefrom. 
I am sure that both the Bank and the MRA will be able to perform their responsibilities with 
better information than they would be able to without the MoU. We on our part will spare no 
efforts to reap the benefits of this arrangement for the overall good of the state in general and 
the economy in particular.  
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 2/2010 
 1
