Ardian Fullani: Responsible finance in Albania 
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  the  international 
conference “Responsible Finance in Albania”, jointly organized by the Bank of Albania, the 
Kreditanstalt  für  Wiederaufbau  (KfW)  Entwicklungsbank  and  the  European  Fund  for 
Southeast Europe (EFSE), Tirana, 23 March 2010. 
 It  is  with  great  pleasure  that  I  open  the  proceedings  of  this  important  forum  entitled 
“Responsible Finance”. This concept is being ever-increasingly mentioned in the discussion 
topics and macro finance debates, in particular following the 2008 events. Participation in this 
forum pushed me to find an accurate definition for this concept. “Responsible Finance” can 
be summarized as practices that are designed to create a fair balance of interests between a 
finance  institution  and  other  stakeholders.  In  fact,  my  search  made  me  realize  that  this 
concept  may  perhaps  best  describe  in  a  single  designation  the  wide-ranging  efforts  of  the 
Bank  of  Albania  in  the  last  3–4  years  with  respect  to  banking  and  financial  supervision, 
monetary policy and public education. 
Responsible  finance  is  an  encompassing  topic  that  affects  and  should  be  applied  by  all 
financial market players. It implies a phenomenon that goes beyond prudential supervision 
since it is a necessity to guarantee both the financial and macroeconomic soundness of an 
economy. 
This philosophy cannot be reduced merely to the best business principles and practices but it 
also summarizes the desire and goal to assist the poor groups of the population and remove 
poverty  by  providing  more  affordable  borrowing  and  prudence  that  guarantees  their 
economic  success.  Responsible  finance  focuses  on  guaranteeing  the  system’s  customers’ 
rights, however the requirements and practices of responsible finance are first and foremost 
a  guarantee  for  the  soundness  of  financial  institutions  and  therefore  of  the  entire  financial 
system. 
Responsible finance at the Bank of Albania has focused on three main directions: 
 
 
 
First, responsible finance cannot be understood as a phenomenon and responsibility to be 
left to the market players’ own initiative. It should be grasped not merely as a right but also 
as an obligation of all market players. 
If you agree to this principle, then you should be an advocate and promoter – indeed, this is 
the position of the Bank of Albania as far as this is concerned. 
From a central bank’s point of view, responsible finance begins with sound supervision of the 
banking and financial system. It constitutes an obligation for the central bank to provide the 
savers with the right of having financially strong financial institutions and to ensure that the 
latter conduct their operations in line with the best business principles. The Bank of Albania 
has  paid  particular  attention  to  financial  stability  by  exerting  an  effective  risk-oriented 
supervision  on  the  institutions  it  licences  and  supervises.  Moreover,  effective  supervision 
also  encompasses  the importance  given  to  the  promotion  of  competition  and  protection  of 
customer interests. 
And  last,  but  not  least,  the  principle  of  responsible  finance  has  been  applied  through 
prudential banking supervision and preservation of financial stability, harmonizing monetary 
Banking supervision 
Transparency and accountability 
Education 
BIS Review 36/2010 
 1
and fiscal policy. This principle has been considered as an integral and essential part in the 
monetary policy decision-making and harmonization with fiscal policy. 
Hence, the Bank of Albania guarantees that its monetary policy does not impair the financial 
soundness  of  banking  and  non-banking  institutions  and  that  of  individuals;  by  contrast  it 
supports these financial market players by making them part of the decision-making process. 
Allow me now to dwell upon the monetary policy decision-making transmission process to the 
public. This process is crucial to guaranteeing the maintenance of macro finance balances in 
an economy. In view of this, the Bank of Albania has committed to the economic and financial 
education  of  the  public,  viewing  the  undertaking  of  some  concrete  initiatives  for  the 
establishment  of  financial  culture  in  the  Albanian  society  as  a  necessity.  However,  this  task 
cannot  be  performed  alone;  guaranteeing  the  balances  requires  the  co-operation  of  the 
financial system, the private sector and the public at large in order for them to respond to the 
decision-making efficiently and rationally. The last two years’ events have pushed many people 
to discuss the consistency of efficient market theories and the ability of economic agents to be 
rational. Although it is yet too soon (and more time is needed) to make a full analysis of the 
causes behind the crisis, I have to bring to your attention some key elements that impaired the 
individuals’  ability  and  later  on  the  markets’  ability  to  be  efficient  and  rational.  This  is  not  to 
analyse the crisis but to understand the implications for responsible finance. 
It  holds  true  that  all  stakeholders  failed  in  terms  of  their  decision-making  and  they  made 
wrong, irrational and inefficient choices. But it also holds true that almost all borrowers did 
not  have  complete  information  on  the  types  of  credit  they  were  borrowing  or  the  financial 
instruments  they  were  purchasing,  or  they  were  unable  to  understand  the  financial 
implications of their financial and monetary commitments. They were also pushed to believe 
that  the  housing  prices  were  going  up  and  that  financial  risk  had  ceased  to  exist. 
Unfortunately, it cannot be said the same for banks which pushed people to borrow these 
types of loans. Did they explain to their customers that the interest rates were only extended 
in time and they were not forgiven, that prices swing and that they do not remain stable? Did 
they provide all the necessary information? If the answer to a few of these questions is “no”, 
then the agents did not have the entire information available to make rational choices. And 
when this happens, the entire economy and the financial system along with it are severely 
hit.  Against  this  backdrop,  transparency  does  not  only  represent  an  obligation  to  the 
customer’s right to know each and every detail of a transaction, but also an obligation to the 
soundness of the entire financial system. 
Lack of transparency encumbers the transmission of information and consequently, it does 
not  guarantee  the  proper  conditions  for  the  agents  to  be  rational  in  their  decision-making. 
Therefore, transparency and responsibility are needed. 
In order to enhance banks’ transparency to their customers in Albania, the Bank of Albania 
has approved the Regulations “On the minimum requirements for disclosure of information 
by banks and branches of foreign banks” and “On the transparency of banking and financial 
products and services”. 
I  would  like  to  note  that  the  lack  of  transparency  does  not  only  appear  in  the  form  of 
intentional concealing of information or simply as a result of negligence, but also as a result 
of wrong selection of tools and means of communication. The disclosure of information in the 
most prompt, the best, the most efficient and the most comprehensible way is a responsibility 
for  all  market  players,  both  for  the  institution  to  the  customer  and  the  customer  to  the 
institution. In this regard, it is with pity that I note that microcredit advertisements may be only 
found on the mileage boards or the amateur graffiti that smudge the national roads’ borders – 
the largest part of this information being the name of the institution. 
These institutions should build a clear communication strategy with the public with respect to 
the  products  they  offer,  the  lending  terms  these  products  are  offered,  and  –  what  is 
particularly  important  –  their  objectives.  Transparency  should  entail  their  competitive 
advantages against universal banks as regards the lending terms and  the assistance they 
2 
 BIS Review 36/2010
the  central  bank’s 
are  able  to  provide  considering  their  loan  portfolio  well-management.  Responsible  finance 
means that the donors should choose the best and most skilful partners to be involved in this 
activity, and exert their pressure so that the institutions they allocate their funds in guarantee 
the transparency and information required not only in memos and reports, but in the market, 
where it is evident and transparent for the target groups. 
Efficient  market  decision-making  also  needs 
transparency  and 
responsibility, therefore the Bank of Albania has paid a great deal of attention in this respect. 
However,  we  are  well-aware  that  transparency  in  information  and  decision-making 
represents a necessary but not a sufficient condition to guarantee an efficient response in 
economy. 
It often occurs – in particular in our economies – that financial illiteracy becomes a significant 
hindrance  to  market  efficiency,  since  the  economic  agents  may  not  be  able  to  accurately 
interpret  the  information  and  communication  of  the  decision-making  authorities  and  may 
respond  to  these  decisions  unpredictably.  This  situation  is  similar  to  giving  the  people  the 
appropriate tools to carry out a certain job without showing them first their function or how to 
operate with them. 
Consequently,  there  is no  responsible  finance without  education.  Using  this  reasoning,  we 
perceive education as an obligation of governmental and academic institutions to respond to 
the public right to educate. Market efficiency and rationality may be guaranteed only if the 
entire economy (not only the economists) enjoys a minimum level of economic education. 
Being educated implies comprehending and interpreting the information and responding to it, 
however this does not necessarily mean being able to resolve every economic and financial 
problem  by  yourself.  Being  financially  educated  means  knowing  when  it  is  necessary  to 
address to the expert (the economist) in order to make better choices, after being convinced 
of his transparency and responsibility. 
This means financial responsibility in the form of an obligation to personal and social right for 
a long-term economic and financial prosperity. This education should not be only limited to 
the institutions (universities or financial system) because we do not need only economists. 
Economic and financial education should be addressed to the entire public in the form of a 
public good for all the economic agents in all possible ways. As I noted above, we have tried 
to educate our public through some concrete initiatives such as the publication of educational 
booklets,  the  launch  of  educational  programmes  for  students,  training  seminars  for 
journalists, high school teachers of Economics and social workers. 
In  this  regard,  the  Bank  of  Albania  has  been  always  active  not  only  as  regards  the  public 
education, but also in its search for partners, because when it comes to financial education 
there is room for everyone, in particular for the academia. It is for this purpose that we have 
recently established the Banking Research Institute as an opportunity for co-operation with 
the academia. 
The Albanian public lacks the weekly economic-related columns in the press, the educational 
classes, the public lectures, the professional assistance to the public and other similar. 
These are normal activities of the academia and the educational institutions in a developed 
world, since their primary purpose is to create public goods for the society. Social return or 
the  social 
for 
profit-seeking financial institutions, while in our economy education is only limited to the strict 
and  traditional  classroom  teaching.  Analyses  and  comments  almost  always  approach  the 
criticism, and very rarely – not to say hardly ever – they approach explaining and interpreting 
a  certain  economic  phenomenon.  Against  this  backdrop,  responsible  finance  goes  beyond 
the  financial  system’s  boundaries;  it  stretches  to  all  the  players  that  can  and  it  is  their 
responsibility to guarantee it in all possible ways. 
I invite all the interested players to co-operate in order to guarantee financial responsibility, 
providing an active contribution according to their role in economy. 
impact  have  now  become  an  ever-increasingly 
important  objective 
BIS Review 36/2010 
 3
