Sada Reddy: Opening of the business resumption site as part of the 
overall risk management strategy 
Opening  speech  by  Mr  Sada  Reddy,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji,  at  the 
commissioning of the Business Resumption Site, Suva, 26 August 2010. 
 Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, and fellow colleagues of the Reserve Bank of 
Fiji.  
Let me warmly welcome you to the opening of the Bank’s Business Resumption Site. This is 
indeed a significant milestone in the on-going development of our institution.  
This  building  is  set  to  play  a  critical  role  in  the  Reserve  Bank’s  overall  risk  management 
strategies. It will ensure our ability to sustain critical business and IT functions, should access 
to our building in downtown Suva be lost due to any form of disaster or disruption of essential 
infrastructure. 
In view of the rise in the frequency and magnitude of disasters, both natural and man-made, 
occurring worldwide, robust business continuity plans are not only invaluable but increasingly 
essential. 
Let me touch briefly on the reasons why we saw it fit to invest resources in the construction 
and outfitting of such a building.  
One of our key roles is to ensure the stability and soundness of the financial system. Like 
any other organisation, the Reserve Bank, in performing its roles, faces a number of risks. 
These include operational, strategic, and reputational risks.  
Like most responsible organisations, we currently have in place, business continuity plans, to 
address any likely risks. We need to ensure critical operations can continue unabated under 
worst case scenarios. Any failure on our part could seriously jeopardise the functioning of the 
whole financial system. 
Since 2004, the Reserve Bank of Fiji has invested a lot of time and resources in establishing 
a  risk  management  structure,  indentifying  critical  processes  and  documenting  contingency 
plans. We clearly understand that a central bank has a unique position within a country and 
consequences of business continuity failure are unacceptable.  
The completion of this site, therefore, brings us further relief and confidence in our efforts to 
ensure business continuity will be maintained at a high level of resilience. 
We commenced planning the construction of this site in October 2006, following approval of 
the Reserve Bank of Fiji Board. The land was purchased back in March 1999 from the Fiji 
Red Cross Society. 
In 2007, a visit was made to the Reserve Bank of Australia’s Business Resumption Site, to 
gather  vital  information  on  their  experiences  in  this  area.  At  this  point,  I  would  like  to 
acknowledge with sincere gratitude the RBA’s assistance with regard to our own project.  
Ladies  and gentlemen,  it  has  taken us  nearly  4  years  from  the  Board  approval  in  2006  to 
what you see before you here today. This has been a long time coming, but it has been well 
worth the wait. 
Please  allow  me  to  further  highlight  the  benefits  of  having  our  own  Business  Resumption 
Site, or BRS, as it is often commonly referred to.  
In  simple  terms,  the  BRS  provides  the  Reserve  Bank  with  the  capability  to  restore  and 
continue all our essential operations should the Reserve Bank of Fiji building in central Suva 
be rendered inaccessible for one reason or another.  
BIS Review 111/2010 
 1
The benefits of such capability are quite clear. 
Firstly, given the critical nature of central bank’s operations it is not appropriate to rely solely 
on the facilities at our primary site in Suva. There is a need to avoid concentration of risk. 
The Bank will manage its business risks effectively by establishing a back-up site away from 
the primary location with diversity of supply of power and other utilities. 
Secondly, continuity of our operations is central to the protection against Systemic risk in the 
financial system. This is where failure of one institution to meet its required obligations when 
due, could bring down other similar institutions, thereby threatening the whole system.  
The central bank’s role is to ensure stability of the financial system at all times, hence we 
certainly cannot be the institution which fails! 
Thirdly, one of the key requirements for FIJICLEAR, our real time gross settlements system, 
is to have a parallel back-up of the system away from our primary site in Suva. The BRS will 
now be a fully fledged alternative site and will ensure continuity of all settlements between 
our banks.  
Let me touch briefly on the building design and specifications.  
The  criteria for  settling on  this site were  based  round  the premise  that  it  should  serve  the 
current and future needs of the Bank in the area of risk management. I am proud to say we 
have delivered what we set out to accomplish.  
In today’s environment we are all heavily dependent on IT and communication systems. This 
building  houses  a  highly  secure  data  centre  specified  to  international  standards  and  with 
adequate  room  for  expansion.  It  is  capable  of  fully  restoring  all  the  Reserve  Bank’s  IT 
services within a very short timeframe. 
Adequate space has also been provided to enable critical operations to be run efficiently and 
effectively.  This  includes  a  work  area  for  up  to  10  staff,  a  meeting  room,  an  office  and 
accommodation for a few staff with all the usual amenities. 
Ladies and gentlemen, within this new building we have also provided for the Reserve Bank 
of  Fiji’s  first  fully  fledged  archives.  We  are  grateful  to  the  National  Archives  for  their 
assistance  in  making  this  a  reality  and  we  look  forward  to  continued  cooperation  and 
assistance  in  maintaining  sound  record  management  practices  and  the  managing  of  our 
documents for national posterity. 
Our first fully fledged archives will meet our needs well into the future. 
This  site  is  linked  by  fibre  leased  line  to  our  primary  site  at  the  Reserve  Bank  Building  in 
Suva, allowing for a fast and reliable flow of data. There are added features to this link to 
enhance security of data.  
In addition to the usual utilities, we have stored water and there are two generators that will 
back up any loss of power to the building. The building is also well secured with the use of 
CCTV  cameras  which  are  linked  to  the  main  control  room  located  at  the  Reserve  Bank 
Building.  
In  terms  of  building  design  standards,  the  building  is  designed  to  withstand  most  severe 
cyclones and earthquakes. The design incorporates an appropriate level of augmentation of 
normal  loading  levels  allowed  by  the  respective  design  codes  and  fully  complies  with  the 
provisions  of  the  National  Building  Code  of  Fiji.  It  is  also  in  line  with  recognized  overseas 
standards. 
I  am  proud  to  say,  in  summary,  that  the  building  has  been  designed  to  provide  maximum 
resilience to disasters and has been equipped with very high level security controls. 
Finally, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to acknowledge and thank the numerous persons 
who have contributed to the successful completion of this project. These include:– 
2 
 BIS Review 111/2010
 The Reserve Bank of Fiji Board, for their foresight and continued support; 
Our in-house Project Team;  
Larsen,  Holtom,  Maybin,  in  particular  Colin  Radford,  the  Project  Architect  and 
Manager; 
Engineered Designs Limited, the structural engineers;  
Irwin Alsop, the building services engineers;  
Raghwan Construction, the main contractor; and 
to all sub-contractors,  
 
 
 
 
I extend the sincere gratitude of the Bank and thank you for your efforts. 
With these words I am proud to declare the Reserve Bank of Fiji Business Resumption Site 
operational! 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 111/2010 
 3
