Paul Tucker: Shadow banking, financing markets and financial stability
Remarks by Mr Paul Tucker, Deputy Governor for Financial Stability at the Bank of England, 
at a Bernie Gerald Cantor (BGC) Partners Seminar, London, 21 January 2010. 
 Many  thanks  for  input  to  Andrew  Bailey,  Michael  Cross,  Colin  Miles,  Victoria  Saporta,  and  for  earlier 
conversations  with  David  Rule  (now  FSA)  and  Bill  Winters.  For  background  work  to  Michael  Grady  and  for 
secretarial support to Sandra Bannister and Cheryl Feeney. 
This  should  be  the  crucial  year  in  establishing  a  framework  for  a  more  resilient  global 
financial system. Much of the authorities’ work is about how to do better in well-established 
areas of policy: bank capital requirements, liquidity requirements, supervision, and so on. But 
new  areas  are  being  debated,  or  revisited,  too.  Those  debates  are  more  profound.  They 
include whether we can develop macroprudential instruments and regimes for “taking away 
the punchbowl” from future financial-system parties before they get out of control. Whether 
we  can  develop  regimes  for  the  resolution  of  banks  and  other  key  financial  firms  that  can 
reinject market discipline into the financial system, while at the same time ensuring continuity 
of  essential  financial  services  to  the  economy  in  the  event  of  severe  distress  at  large, 
complex, cross-border firms. And whether the structure of the financial system needs to be 
constrained by the authorities.  
This evening I am going to focus on one part of the “structure” debate: shadow banking. It 
has  become  commonplace  that  shadow  banking  somehow  exacerbated  the  boom,  and 
complicated the rescue efforts of the authorities during the bust.1 That is true. But there has 
been relatively little discussion about what this means for policy.  
We do not need to get too bogged down in defining what is meant by “banking” here. I mean 
it simply to refer to firms that take on-demand or highly liquid deposits, and use those liquid 
savings to provide term loans to households, firms and other parts of the financial system. 
Banks are, therefore, absolutely central to the monetary and payment system; and they are 
also vital to the credit system. They are leveraged; they run maturity mismatches; and their 
net worth is often uncertain. So they are exposed to runs, with spillovers to the rest of the 
system and the economy more widely. Reflecting that, they have long functioned within the 
terms of an established social contract with the authorities.2 It has involved industry-financed 
deposit 
insurance  (and  now  special  resolution  regimes);  prudential  regulation  and 
supervision;  and  liquidity  insurance  from  central  banks.  That  regime  reflects  the  spillovers 
(“negative externalities”) that flow from bank failure. But precisely because the regime aims 
to  place  a  higher  weight  on  the  safety  and  soundness  of  banking  than  banks  and  their 
shareholders  would  themselves,  it  sets  up  incentives  for  some  types  of  business  to  be 
booked outside the banking system. Such “regulatory arbitrage” is problematic if the resulting 
non  bank  forms  of  financial  intermediation  replicate  the  systemic  risks  posed  by  banking 
itself. It is therefore of some importance that, during the crisis, elements of liquidity and de 
facto  solvency  support  were  extended,  especially  in  America,  to  a  number  of  non-bank 
                                                 
1   A good narrative of the events around “shadow banking” is the USA is provided by Kroszner and Melick in 
“The Response of the Federal Reserve to the Recent Banking and Financial Crisis”, presented at An Ocean 
Apart? Comparing Transatlantic Responses to the Financial Crisis, in Rome, 10-11 September 2009. See also 
William Dudley in “More lessons from the crisis”, remarks at the Center for Economic Policy Studies (CEPS) 
Symposium,  Princeton,  New  Jersey,  November  2009;  and  Adrian  T  and  Shin  H  S  (2009),  “The  Shadow 
Banking  System:  Implications  for  Financial  Regulation”,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  Staff  Report 
no. 382. 
2   See Tucker P M W (2009d), “Regimes for Handling Bank Failures: Redrawing the Banking Social Contract”, at 
the British Bankers’ Association’s Annual International Conference, London. 
BIS Review 6/2010 
 1
financial  intermediaries,  underlining  the  question  of  whether  the  perimeters  of  the  banking 
system had been in the right place. 
I  am  not,  therefore,  using  “shadow  banking”  to  refer  to  any  old  channel  for  credit 
intermediation  other  than  bank  lending.  The  corporate  bond  markets  do  not  amount  to  a 
shadow bank. Rather, I am interested this evening in those instruments, structures, firms or 
markets which, alone or in combination, and to a greater or lesser extent, replicate the core 
features of commercial banks: liquidity services, maturity mismatch and leverage. 
In  that  spirit,  I  will  say  something  about  money  market  mutual  funds;  finance  companies; 
Structured  Investment  Vehicles  and  Asset  Backed  Commercial  Paper;  and  securities 
dealers. I will also say something about some markets. In particular, the securities lending 
market;  but  also  how  the  RMBS/ABS  market  can  combine  with  repo  funding  to  create 
investment  structures  whose  leverage  and  liquidity  risk  creates  some  of  the  brittleness  of 
banking  systems.  It  is  not  intended  to  be  an  exhaustive,  systematic  survey.  And  beyond 
those interested in the details of how markets work, it is the general message that matters. 
Because some common threads are clear. Notably, maturity and credit transformation. Each 
of  the  vehicles,  instruments  or  markets  I  will  discuss  has  been  used  to  transform 
longer-maturity, less liquid assets (loans) into shorter maturity, more liquid liabilities. In each 
case we need to decide whether or not we want to set constraints around the operation of 
those forms of shadow banking. And we need some principles to guide us when, inevitably, 
we confront new variants of shadow banking in the future. I do not have all the answers to 
these questions, so my goal this evening is to push them up the agenda. As the Governor of 
the Bank has underlined, it is vital we debate the structure of the financial system.  
Money market mutual funds 
Money funds gained access to official liquidity and capital support during the crisis. Indeed, 
almost  any  history  of  the  past  few  years  will  give  money  funds  a  fairly  central  role.  The 
suspension of redemptions by a European “enhanced return” money fund was the proximate 
trigger for the money market liquidity crisis in early August 2007. And, just over a year later in 
September  2008  following  the  Lehman’s  bankruptcy,  the  “breaking  of  the  buck”  by  a  US 
money fund pushed funding markets into complete turmoil.  
Money  funds  began  life  in  the  US,  as  a  response  to  now  long  abolished  caps  on  interest 
rates  that  the  banks  could  pay  on  deposits.  They  have  become  a  gigantic  part  of  the  US 
financial system; at about $3trn, being roughly the same size as the transactions deposits of 
commercial banks. They are pretty big in Europe too – around $1½trn. They offer a bank like 
service: almost instant liquidity and purporting to be safe. Households (primarily in the US), 
institutional investors and corporate treasurers place liquidity with them. And they lend it out, 
purchasing commercial paper of various types as well as Treasury bills and providing repo 
financing. They are constrained by rules set by securities regulators (and rating agencies), 
although  during  the  boom  some  managed  to  circumvent  them  (or  at  least  their  spirit)  in  a 
search  for  yield  by  buying  ABCP  backed  by  illiquid  ABS,  which  would  probably  not 
themselves have been eligible for direct investment.  
On both sides of the Atlantic, many are so-called Constant Net Asset Value (CNAV) funds.3 
Stripping through the detail, this means that they promise to return to savers, on demand, at 
least as much as they invest. Just like a bank. And just like a bank, they are subject to runs. 
If I, an investor, lodge notice of redemption one day, typically I expect to be paid the following 
day. If my withdrawal is large, the fund may have to sell assets to meet the redemption. If 
investors  know  or  fear  that  a  lot  of  their  peers  will  also  be  redeeming,  then  they  have  an 
                                                 
3   See Baba N, McCauley R and Ramaswamy S (2009), “US dollar money market funds and non-US banks”, 
BIS Quarterly Review, March 2009. 
2 
 BIS Review 6/2010
incentive to (try to) get in first, in order to avoid the depletion in the value of the fund likely to 
flow from the forced asset sales. And, if a Constant-NAV fund’s value goes just a few basis 
points below par (100p in the £1), they effectively have to close, fuelling the incentive to run. 
If this sounds like a bank, it is because it is just like a bank.  
The  money  fund  industry  is  a  major  supplier  of  short-term  funding  to  banks.  So  its  own 
maturity mismatch masks the true liquidity position of the banking sector, and injects extra 
fragility into the financial system as a whole. This is no longer theoretical.4 When the Reserve 
Fund “broke the buck” after Lehman’s failure, there was a run by institutional investors. The 
industry  had  to  be  given  access  to  central  banks’  liquidity  facilities  to  contain  the  vortex. 
Many  banking  groups  running  supposedly  arms-length  money  funds  injected  “capital”  into 
their  funds  to  keep  them  afloat.  Yet  the  funds  had  not  been  consolidated,  and  their  bank 
sponsors had not had to hold capital against such implicit support. 
Echoing  the  concerns  that  Paul  Volcker  is  reported  to  have  expressed  at  internal  Federal 
Reserve meetings around thirty years ago,5 the Bank of England believes that Constant-NAV 
money  funds  should  not  exist  in  their  current  form.  They  should  become  either  regulated 
banks or, alternatively, Variable NAV funds that do not offer instant liquidity.  
Meanwhile, so-called “enhanced return" funds should surely have to make clear what they 
are  and  what  they  are  not.  Offering  300bp  (or  whatever)  over  LIBOR  is  to  offer  a  risky 
investment. There is nothing wrong with that. But securities regulators should ensure that the 
marketing and distribution is appropriate. “Money fund” does not seem to be quite the right 
label.  
For  both  those  riskier  funds,  and  Variable  NAV  money  funds,  investors  would  clearly  be 
exposed to risk, just as in mainstream equity and bond mutual funds.  
Finance companies  
My second example is so-called finance companies. They are prominent in, but by no means 
unique to, the US. Some operate globally. They are regular companies, which lend to firms 
and  households,  financed  by  issuing  bonds  and  short-term  commercial  paper  (CP)  rather 
than by taking deposits. It can be tempting for them to extract a term premium by increasing 
their maturity mismatch. Some did so during the boom years. In the US and UK during the 
crisis, alongside the CP market more generally, they were given access by central banks to 
what in effect were discount-window type liquidity-insurance facilities.  
It is not obvious to me that they should be regulated as commercial banks, as they do not 
provide monetary/payments services. But it is clear that this part of the credit system became 
fragile due to leverage and maturity mismatches. It relied on the CP market remaining open; 
and thus on money funds maintaining demand for corporate and finance-company CP; and, 
if that demand dried up, they relied on banks being able and willing to honour the committed 
lines that underpinned those CP programmes. But for too long and in too many countries, 
regulation did not adequately capture the associated credit and liquidity risk. The result was a 
shadow financing (or credit) system that was effectively dependent in adverse circumstances 
on  the  banking  system,  but  without  the  banks  being  ready  and  able  to  support  it  through 
systematic stress. 
                                                 
4   There  were  warnings  years  ago;  for  example  in  Edwards  F  (1996),  “The  New  Finance:  Regulation  and 
Financial Stability”, American Enterprise Institute. 
5   And as recommended in the recent Group of 30 (G30) Report, “Financial Reform: A Framework for Financial 
Stability”. 
BIS Review 6/2010 
 3
ABCP, and SIVs 
The  same  is  true  of  the  Asset-Backed  CP  market.  These  vehicles  are  similarly  reliant  on 
committed  lines  of  credit  from  commercial  banks  and,  furthermore,  in  many  cases  were 
sponsored and managed by a bank. The case of Structured Investment Vehicles was subtly 
different. Some were sponsored by banks but did not have committed lines from them. Other 
SIVs were independently managed. 
With  hindsight  one  fairly  obvious  solution  would  have  been  for  banks  to  consolidate,  for 
accounting and regulatory purposes, any such vehicles that they sponsored, managed and 
provided credit lines for. Looking ahead, banks should perhaps quit using such devices to 
move assets off balance sheet while retaining de facto control. Supervisors should be alert to 
such  devices  in  future.  They  might  consider  whether  consolidation  for  these  and  other 
vehicles could be avoided only where a sponsor had made it 100% clear that they would not 
provide any support in any circumstances. 
Securities dealers 
The  case  of  securities  dealers  is  different  –  in  that  they  were  real  businesses  which  had 
developed over many decades. After Big Bang – in the 1970s in the US, and a decade later 
in  the  UK  –  their  balance  sheets  grew.  The  authorities  had  always  been  clear  that  they 
competed  with  commercial  banks  in  credit  markets  (including  before  the  repeal  of  Glass 
Steagal),  but  they  were  not  regarded  as  monetary  institutions  and  so  they  did  not  have 
access  to  central  banks’  liquidity-insurance  facilities  and  were  not  regulated  alongside 
commercial banks.  
It  turned  out  that  this  was  a  misthink;  or,  rather,  that  over  time  it  was  overtaken  by 
developments in parts of their business.  
During the crisis, the big US securities dealers suffered a liquidity run on two fronts. Repo 
markets  closed  to  some  of  them;  I  shall  come  back  to  that  later.  Also,  hedge  fund 
prime-brokerage  clients  withdrew  surplus  balances  (and  transferred  trading  positions,  with 
the  associated  collateral,  to  banks).  Some  dealers  had  been  using  them  to  finance  their 
business, effectively on-lending “deposits” into the credit and securities markets. And some 
of them could not easily raise the funds to repay. As a sense of this spread, the demand for 
repayment inevitably intensified, into a panic.  
Whatever  the  details  of  the  law  in  the  US,  the  UK  and  elsewhere,  the  dealers’  prime 
brokerage  services  seem  to  have  taken  them  into  the  core  monetary  territory  of  banks. 
Lehmans was running a bank, perhaps without knowing it. The dealers, or at least their prime 
brokerage outfits, should have been banks, with access to the central bank’s Window and 
subject, at entity and group level, to US led bank regulation. Alternatively, they should not 
have been providing de facto demand deposit services and using those deposits to finance 
themselves.  
The lesson here is to look at the economic substance, not the legal form.  
Securities lending 
Most accounts of the crisis give a headline role to SIVs, money funds, securities dealers and, 
as  I  shall  come  on  to,  the  RMBS  market.  There  has  been  rather  less  daylight,  especially 
outside  the  US,  around  the  somewhat  obscure  but  very  significant  role  played  by  the 
securities lending markets.  
The  vanilla  securities  lending  market  is  straightforward  and  important:  it  intermediates  the 
loan of securities (equities, bonds or whatever) by asset managers to short sellers who need 
to  deliver  securities  to  settle  their  transactions.  Securities  lending  is  absolutely  vital  to 
effective  market  making,  and  thus  to  efficient  capital  markets.  Asset  managers  hold  their 
4 
 BIS Review 6/2010
securities with custodians and, ultimately, in Central or International Securities’ Depositaries. 
Many  enter  into  a  service  agreement  under  which  their  securities  can  be  lent  out  by  an 
agent. That provides the basis of a parallel, financing market. This is big, perhaps $3½trn6 
at its peak. Say a Treasury Bond is lent out not against collateral in the form of securities but 
against  cash,  as  is  normal  in  the  US  market  and  had  been  growing  in  Europe  before  the 
crisis.  The  cash  collateral  can  then  employed  in  the  market,  ie  it  is  lent  to  counterparties, 
usually secured. During the boom, risky assets, including ABS and CDOs, were increasingly 
accepted  as  collateral  via  so-called  triparty  repo  arrangements,  under  which  they  were 
sometimes  grouped  with  more  innocuous  securities  with  similar  ratings.  This  effectively 
financed the inventory of dealers and other leveraged investors. Demand was strong. The 
financing  tail  came  to  wag  the  securities-lending  dog.  I  doubt  whether  all  asset  managers 
understood  the  instruments  they  would  have  been  holding  outright  in  the  event  of  a 
counterparty default.  
But that is only the beginning. Some asset managers used the cash generated by securities 
lending  to  buy  risky  assets  outright.  AIG’s  escapade  in  and  massive  losses  from  the 
CDS and  CDO  business  is  well  known.  Less  remarked  upon,  although  public,7  is  that  the 
insurance parts of the group – not the derivatives part – lost enormous amounts of money 
from  securities  lending,  as  they  ended  up  reinvesting  vast  amounts  of  cash  in  securities. 
These  investments  had  maturities  of  years  not  months,  notwithstanding  that  a  securities 
lending contract typically gives the borrower as well as the lender (ie the underlying owner 
of the securities) a right to terminate the transaction on demand. Again, I suspect that many 
asset managers did not understand their exposures. They had leveraged up, and exposed 
themselves  to  liquidity  risk.  Securities  lenders  like  AIG  were  effectively  assuming  robust 
liquidity in the secondary market for their reinvestment securities. They were wrong. As the 
value of those assets fell, “securities lending” counterparties called their repos. In effect, to 
add to the problem of accumulating investment losses, AIG suffered a repo run – just like a 
bank run, in fact. 
And as the crisis progressed, our sense is that securities-lending-based financing of leverage 
was withdrawn, exacerbating the deleveraging in the system, the erosion of market liquidity, 
and falls in asset values. 
There  are  a  number  of  possible  lessons  here.  One  is  that  there  needs  to  be  greater 
transparency and integrity around key financing markets. In the particular case of securities 
lending, we should consider whether it might lend itself to central counterparty clearing; and if 
not,  as  may  well  be  the  case  for  some  types  of  security,  we  should  explore  whether 
transactions  could,  nevertheless,  usefully  be  registered  with  a  trade  repository,  with 
aggregate  data  published  –  along  the  lines  now  provided  for  the  CDS  market.  Second, 
regulators  should  consider  putting  restrictions  around  what  regulated  firms  can  take  as 
collateral  against  securities 
leverage, 
counterparty-credit  and  investment  risks  are  properly  disclosed  to  the  market.  Third, 
insurance regulators internationally should be sensitive to business lines that can leave an 
insurer leveraged and exposed to liquidity runs.8 Fourth, the custodians and ICSDs should 
review the basis on which they group different kinds of assets for use as collateral in various 
of  their  triparty  facilities.  It  should  be  obvious  to  a  lender  when  it  is  taking  risky  assets  as 
collateral. And conduct-of-business regulators should probably take a look at how custodians 
market  and  explain  their  services  to  their  clients.  In  the  UK,  the  Securities  Lending  and 
lending  or,  alternatively,  should  ensure 
that 
                                                 
6   Source: Data Explorers. 
7   Losses  in  AIG’s  securities  lending  business  were  reported  in  the  firm’s  2008  10-K  submission  to  the  SEC, 
pp 166–167. 
8   This issue may now be on the agenda of insurance regulators.  See the recent Joint Forum report, “Review of 
the Differentiated Nature and Scope of Financial Regulation”, January 2010. 
BIS Review 6/2010 
 5
Report Committee provides one forum for the different parts of the market and authorities to 
debate these issues.9  
RMBS, repo and shadow banking 
Perhaps  the  market  that  has  been  most  discussed  in  the  wake  of  the  crisis  has  been  the 
RMBS market. Right now, most of the discussion is about how to revive the mortgage-bond 
market, and the securitisation markets more generally, given their potential significance for 
the financing of households and firms. That eagerness is hardly surprising given the likely 
strain  on  the  Western  world’s  banking  system  if,  over  the  coming  few  years,  it  had  to 
reintermediate flows of credit that had previously gone through the ABS markets. 
Some have suggested that asset-backed-securities are yet another form of shadow banking. 
At  one  level,  this  seems  obvious.  Take  Northern  Rock.  When  it  ran  out  of  money,  the 
authorised  bank  had  a  balance  sheet  of  around  £50bn,  virtually  all  mortgages.  The  same 
management team was running the “Granite” securitisation vehicle; also with a balance sheet 
of  about  £50bn,  and  also  all  mortgages.  Granite  held  surplus  liquidity  with  its  sister  bank, 
which was not immaterial to Northern Rock’s funding. When the RMBS market closed and 
Granite could not continue to expand, the management team had a backlog of mortgages 
that  the  bank  was  temporarily  warehousing  but  was  likely  to  be  unable  to  finance 
permanently.  That  undermined  confidence  in  the  bank  itself.  And  if  the  bank  had  been 
downgraded, Granite might have had to pull its funding. So they were very inter-twined. For 
accounting  purposes,  Granite  had  to  be  consolidated.  For  regulatory  capital  purposes, 
Granite was largely off-balance sheet. The Basel Supervisors Committee is now reviewing its 
capital rules on securitisation. But another basic principle may commend itself; we should not 
allow  one  management  team  to  run  two  apparently  separate  and  significant  vehicles  in  a 
completely joined up way – one a de jure bank, the other a de facto bank – when the funding 
and risk interlinkages are so strong.  
Some commentators have argued that the extent to which the securitisation market has the 
economic characteristics of banking goes deeper than that.10 This account goes broadly as 
follows.  The  Lehmans  crisis  and  its  aftermath  had  at  its  core  a  run  on  repo  financing  of 
holdings of, amongst other things, RMBS and other ABS. The banking system had originated 
assets  and  issued  them  into  capital  markets  via  ABS.  But  the  same  banking  industry 
financed investors’ purchase and holding of those ABS; and then financed themselves via 
short-term  reverse-repo  of  those  assets.  In  other  words,  across  the  system  there  was  too 
great an element of banks (and dealers) having shed credit portfolios only so long as they 
could sustain their own repo financing. Meanwhile, firms such as AIG and funds of various 
kinds had bought ABS and CDOs financed by short-term repo, so that they held portfolios of 
household and  corporate  loans  financed  at  very  short  maturities  –  just  like  a  bank,  so  the 
argument goes. When the crunch came and ABS asset values fell, some of these firms and 
funds  could  not  rollover  their  funding.  In  the  case  of  some  dealers  and  AIG,  end  of  story. 
Indeed, towards their end, some could not even repo-out US Treasuries to raise cash! The 
chain of financing was too long and too fragile to prove resilient under stress.  
                                                 
9   The  Securities  Lending  and  Repo  Committee  is  a  UK-based  committee  of  international  repo  and  securities 
lending practitioners and representatives of trade organisations, together with bodies such as Euroclear UK 
and  Ireland,  the  UK  Debt  Management  Office,  the  London  Stock  Exchange  and  the  FSA.  It  is  chaired  and 
administered  by 
found  at: 
www.bankofengland.co.uk/markets/gilts/slrcterms.pdf. 
the  Bank  of  England.  The 
terms  of 
reference 
can  be 
10   For example, see Gorton G B (2009), “Slapped in the Face by the Invisible Hand: Banking and the panic of 
2007”, paper prepared for the 2009 Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Jekyll Island Conference. 
6 
 BIS Review 6/2010
What  are  the  lessons?  Part  of  the  problem  was  that  when  the  music  stopped,  just  as  the 
market was uncertain which banks were sound, investors and savers could not tell a sound 
ABS  from  an  unsound  ABS.  So  one  lesson  must  surely  be  that  securities  regulators  and 
exchanges, which admit ABS to listing, should set more exacting but also simpler standards 
for  transparency.  They  surely  have  a  clear  role  to  play  in  the  regime  for  the  issue  and 
distribution of such securities. IOSCO has been working on this.11  
A second lesson is that we have to be clearer about the nature and extent of risks retained 
by originators. The Basel Committee is focused on this.  
Other ideas are more radical. It has been suggested that, when combined with repo, the ABS 
market amounts to a major shadow banking system – portfolios of loans financed short term, 
so  with  maturity  mismatch  risk.  It  follows  from  this,  it  is  suggested,  that  the kind  of  social 
contract  that  applies  to  the  mainstream  banking  system  should  be  extended,  suitably 
adapted,  to  the  ABS  market.  On  that  view,  AAA  tranches  occupy  a  place  in  the  capital 
structure of a securitised shadow banking system equivalent to that of retail deposits in the 
capital structure of mainstream banks, and so should be guaranteed by governments or, in a 
closer analogy to retail-deposit protection, by industry-funded insurance schemes; and with 
issuers subject to authorisation criteria.12  
I am not at all endorsing those prescriptions here. Rather I mention them because they serve 
to highlight two things. First, understanding markets for financing leveraged holdings of risky 
securities  is  vital.  Second,  there  is  a  need  to  think  through  carefully  just  what  really 
comprises  shadow  banking,  and  how  the  regulatory  system  should  treat  its  different 
manifestations. The primary task of the “regulation and structure” debate is to make the core 
banking  system  safe  and  sound.  In  addition,  we  need  to  think  through  how  to  avoid  the 
problems of the past few years replicating themselves beyond the perimeter of the regulated 
banking  sector.  Banking  supervisors  cannot  sleep  safely  solely  on  the  basis  of  their  own 
work. The financial stability authorities need to attend to the dynamics of the overall system. 
But  we  must  also  keep  in  the  need  to  be  careful  to  avoid  seeing  “shadow  banking” 
everywhere and in all capital market innovations.  
Possible principles and some conclusions 
In the 1980s and 1990s there were active debates about non-bank banks.13 The ballooning 
of off-balance sheet finance in the mid-1980s provided the initial impetus for the first Basel 
Capital  Accord.  So  I  fear  that  we  have  been  here  before,  struggling  to  make  sense  of 
innovations and complexity.  
Market intelligence can surely help.14 But next time round we need better system-wide data 
on  the  flow  of  funds  and  the  flow  of  risk,  which  would  enable  us  to  put  some  hard  facts 
alongside  intelligence.  The  authorities  need  to  be  able  to  recognise  when  a  variant  of 
                                                 
11   See  the  International  Organization  of  Securities  Commission  Consultation  Report,  “Transparency  of 
Structured Finance Products, September 2009. Overall, it is surprising how little commentary there has been 
from the perspective of securities market regulators. An exception is Luigi Zingales, “The Future of Securities 
Regulation”, Chicago Booth School of Business Working Paper No. 08–27. While I do not necessarily support 
all  of  his  prescriptions,  the  paper  is  noteworthy  for  approaching  the  reform  agenda  from  the  perspective  of 
securities markets and regulation rather than solely that of bank soundness and prudential supervision. 
12   See Gorton, op cit. 
13   See Bank for International Settlements (1986), “Recent innovations in international banking”, prepared by a 
Study Group established by the Central Banks of the Group of Ten Countries, known as “the Cross Report”. 
14   For examples of market intelligence on innovations at the beginning of the latest cycle see, Rule D (2001), 
“Risk  transfer  between  banks,  insurance  companies  and  capital  markets:  An  overview”,  Bank  of  England 
Financial Stability Review, December 2001. 
BIS Review 6/2010 
 7
“shadowing  banking”  has  become  significant  to  sustaining  stability  in  the  provision  of 
essential  financial  services  to  the  broader  economy;  when  it  is  founded  on  liquidity  lines, 
incomplete risk transfer or other kinds of support from the core commercial banking system; 
and when it involves the provision of the liquidity or monetary functions of banking as well as 
credit intermediation.  
Running leverage and liquidity risk is not sufficient to make a firm or fund a de facto bank. I 
do not think AIG’s securities lending/credit spread business was really a bank. More like a 
hedge  fund.  But  the  risks  that  these  and  other  businesses  bring  to  the  system  certainly 
matter.  And  the  channels  through  which  this  crisis  spread  underline  the  need  for  more 
transparency around key financing markets. For example, too few realised the significance 
for the system of how the securities lending markets had developed. Central banks ought to 
be able to make a contribution to this, sitting as they do at the centre of the mainstream repo 
markets and through standing ready to discount a wide range of securities in their liquidity-
insurance facilities. But there is a key job for prudential supervisors and securities regulators 
in ensuring that leverage and maturity mismatch is understood and transparent.  
For  those  forms  of  financial  intermediation  that  are  dependent  on  banks  for  leverage  and 
liquidity, it may be that we can develop macroprudential instruments that could be deployed 
to restrain excess by influencing banks’ supply of credit to them. That is another major area 
of work.15  
But where a form of shadow banking provides an alternative home for liquid savings, offering 
de facto deposit and monetary services, then I think we should be ready to bring them into 
the  banking  world  itself.  In  the  latest  episode,  constant-Net  Asset  Value,  instant-access 
money funds and the prime brokerage units of the dealers seem to have been examples of 
that.  
We have not seen the last of regulatory arbitrage. So we need policies and principles that 
stand in the way of its weakening the resilience of the system, while allowing enterprise and 
our capital markets to flourish.  
                                                 
15   See the Bank’s recently published paper: “The role of macroprudential policy: A discussion paper” and Tucker 
P  M  W  (2009e),  “The  debate  on  financial  system  resilience:  Macroprudential  instruments”  at  the  Barclays 
Annual Lecture in London. 
8 
 BIS Review 6/2010
