Nils Bernstein: Recovering of the Danish economy and housing market 
developments 
Speech  by  Mr  Nils  Bernstein,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Denmark,  at  the  annual 
meeting of the Danish Mortgage Banks’ Federation, Copenhagen, 24 March 2010. 
 The  global  economy  is  on  the  mend.  The  upswing  is  fragile,  and  though  the  direction  of 
economic indicators are not clear, the recovery seems slightly stronger than expected in the 
autumn.  The  recovery  is  strongest  in  the  emerging  and  developing  economies,  while  it 
remains slightly more subdued in Europe. The overall picture is that the economic setback 
has  been  most  pronounced  in  regions  where  the  financial  sector  has  been  particularly 
exposed to inflated asset values. 
The development has not yet led to a reversal in labour markets in the USA and Europe. 
The rebound in the international economy is primarily the result of many countries’ still very 
expansionary fiscal and monetary policies. The extraordinary monetary policy measures are 
slowly being phased out. But few central banks have begun to raise interest rates. 
Public finances have deteriorated across industrial countries. And most EU member states 
are expected to run budget deficits exceeding 3 per cent of GDP this year. This means that 
they  hold  prospects  of  being  included  in  the  excessive  deficit  procedure  that  focuses  on 
consolidation  and  leaves  little  room  for  manoeuvre  in  supporting  the  economic  upswing 
further, if it turns out not to be self-sustaining. 
The situation in Greece is in a category of its own. Lack of confidence in Greece’s ability to 
get  its  public  finances  on  track  unaided  has  boosted  the  premium  on  loans  to  the  Greek 
government.  Ireland  and  Latvia  are  examples  that  illustrate  the  scale  of  the  measures 
needed to restore confidence. 
The  recovery  of  the  Danish  economy  is  also  expected  to  be  slow  and  hesitant.  The  road 
ahead  is  likely  to  be  bumpy.  This  year’s  growth  will  be  insufficient  to  halt  the  increase  in 
unemployment. The corporate sector has considerable spare capacity, and unemployment is 
expected to rise for yet another year. 
Denmark is a small open economy, and about one job in four is related to exports, directly or 
indirectly. Wage competitiveness therefore plays an important role in the Danish economy, 
and the crisis has resulted in weak export markets and hence weak selling opportunities. 
Erosion of wage competitiveness has led to loss of market shares. The loss has been quite 
substantial relative to those of many comparable countries. There is a clear tendency that 
countries  whose  competitiveness  has  deteriorated  the  worst  also  fare  worst  in  export 
markets. 
Collective  bargaining  has  been  finalised  in  a  climate  of  rising  unemployment  and 
considerable  uncertainty  about  the  economic  development.  There  are  prospects  of  lower 
wage inflation than in previous years. Which we welcome. But there are hardly prospects of a 
change in the competitive environment. Changing real wage expectations after a period with 
a strong labour market is an uphill struggle. And it also clearly highlights the problems arising 
when demand reaches unsustainably high levels. 
*** 
Financial  conditions  are  very  expansionary  amid  historically  low  short-term  interest  rates. 
Adjusted  for  tax  and  inflation,  the  real  interest  rate  on  an  adjustable-rate  mortgage  is 
currently very low. This supports the housing market. In our judgement, the housing market 
BIS Review 37/2010 
 1
is  slowly  recovering,  and  price adjustments  are  done  at the  current low  interest  rate  level. 
Budding optimism is seen among potential buyers. 
I usually refrain from official predictions of interest-rate developments. But today, I will make 
an  exception.  I  am  quite  sure  that  rates  on  1-year  adjustable  rate  mortgages  cannot  be 
sustained  at  the  current  low  level.  I  will  not  try  to  predict  when  it  will  rise.  But  I  advise 
homeowners  and  others  against  stretching  their  budgets  so  tight  that  they  can  only  make 
ends meet at the current very low interest rate level. 
Normalisation  of  interest  rates  and  rising  unemployment  may  present  a  certain  risk  to  the 
development.  If  the  low  growth  continues  in  the  euro  area  in  the  coming  period,  the 
normalisation  of  interest  rates  will  be  postponed.  By  contrast,  stronger  economic  growth 
could cause interest rates to rise, but in that case, unemployment will stabilise and perhaps 
begin to fall. 
Housing market developments and rising equity prices have caused household wealth to rise 
again. Combined with continued handsome growth in disposable incomes and more upbeat 
consumer  expectations,  this  means  that  we  take  a  more  positive  view  on  the  outlook  for 
private consumption. 
The decline in consumption during the crisis has been sharper in Denmark than in most other 
countries. Despite a fairly good rise in incomes. The consumption ratio has thus dipped and 
now  stands  at  a  very  low  level.  This,  together  with  general  stabilisation  of  the  economic 
development and the slightly positive sentiment, paves the way for the return of confidence 
and  for  households  to  spend  the  increase  in  disposable  incomes  on  consumption  and 
residential investments. However, indications for the first months of the year do not suggest a 
strong reversal. 
The  low  interest  rates  will  gradually  stimulate  the  economy  over  a  number  of  years. 
Therefore, interest rates will have an underlying expansionary effect on the economy in the 
years ahead. This also applies to fiscal policy as the expansionary stance of the past years 
has  not  yet  fully  shown  through.  Initial  fiscal  consolidation  is  thus  unlikely  to  change  the 
picture of an economy on a slow recovery path. 
The  fiscal  challenges  are  now  so  daunting  that  consolidation  is  necessary  in  the  coming 
years if we are to avoid an untenable increase in government debt. There is no avoiding it – 
even if there is still a great deal of spare capacity in the economy. 
Add to this the erosion of wage competitiveness, strong pressures on expenditure, a heavy 
tax  burden,  low  productivity  increases  and  a  limited  job  supply.  The  Danish  economy  is 
facing serious challenges far beyond cyclical factors. 
And now over to mortgage credit. 
The  international  financial  crisis  has  demonstrated  that  there  is  a  need  for  financial 
institutions having bigger capital buffers and larger and more stable liquidity reserves. Events 
deemed very unlikely by risk management models did actually occur. 
International work is going on in order to formulate and agree on new rules addressing the 
problems unveiled by the crisis. 
It  is  important  to  reach  agreement  across  national  borders  and  continents,  so  that  the 
conditions for financial business are largely the same irrespective of the location. 
For Denmark, it seems that our unique mortgage credit system can be facing challenges that 
we will have to deal with more or less on our own. It is therefore important that we carefully 
consider  where  to  concentrate  our  efforts  to  have  the  new  rules  adjusted  to  our  special 
conditions. 
Here I will focus on the most essential aspects as we see them today. 
2 
 BIS Review 37/2010
The liquidity regulation proposals include a classification of assets based on how liquid they 
are.  Government  bonds  and  claims  on  central  banks,  international  organisations  etc.  are 
considered  fully  liquid,  while  corporate  bonds  and  mortgage-credit  bonds  can  only  be 
included  up  to  a  maximum  of  50  per  cent.  Finally,  there  are  some  assets  that  cannot  be 
included. 
Denmark will seek to have mortgage-credit bonds included in the stock of fully liquid assets, 
provided  their  liquidity  is  comparable  with  that  of  government  bonds.  Liquidity  –  also  in 
stressful situations – should be the crucial point. 
We believe that we can prove that Danish mortgage-credit bonds are highly comparable with 
government bonds. And that’s what we intend to do. 
Another  aspect  concerns  adjustable-rate  mortgages  specifically.  During the  financial  crisis, 
financial institutions generally saw their funding sources in the market drying up. This was 
the reason why many governments found it necessary to issue state guarantees to financial 
institutions. 
The  rules  now  on  the  drawing  board  therefore  pose  requirements  on  stable  funding.  The 
definition of stable funding implies that Danish mortgage-credit bonds with a remaining term 
to maturity of less than one year cannot be included. Moreover, lending with a maturity of 
more than one year must be covered by stable funding. 
Such a rule highlights the risk associated with Danish adjustable-rate mortgages. These are 
30-year loans funded via short-term bonds, primarily with maturities of one year. Every year 
the issuing institute will have to refinance the loan. 
At first, the risk can be passed on to borrowers, if they can bear it. If not, it will invariably 
return to the lender. We cannot ignore that there is a real risk inherent in the design of the 
Danish  adjustable-rate  mortgages.  A  design  that  implies  that  loans  worth  more  than 
kr. 500 billion must be refinanced every year to finance 30-year loans. 
I  will  not  today  try  to  guess  whether  the  final  formulation  of  the  Basel  rules  will  make  it 
impossible to maintain the adjustable-rate mortgages as we know them today. 
In such a situation, I find that it will be constructive if the sector itself seeks other solutions 
more in line with traditional mortgage-credit lending. 
Finally, I will make a few remarks on the Danish discussions. 
I understand that work is going on to ease the requirements for Danish covered bonds, if the 
loan exceeds 80 per cent of the property value due to declines in property prices. The so-
called LTV rule. Today, the rule is that if the value of the property declines, and the covered 
bond  loan  then  exceeds  80  per  cent  of  the  property  value,  the  issuing  mortgage-credit 
institute has to find additional collateral for the mortgage. I see little likelihood that it will be 
possible  to  requirement.  And  I  doubt  that  it  would  benefit  Danish  mortgage  credit  in  the 
longer run. 
We should not introduce the slightest doubt about the quality of Danish covered bonds. 
The  legislation  on  covered  bonds  has  provided  the  banks  with  the  possibility  of  allowing 
investors in covered bonds to be secured creditors in respect of a number of assets in the 
banks’  balance  sheets.  This  arrangement  makes  covered  bonds  a  much  safer  asset  than 
senior  debt  issued  by  a  bank.  The  banks  can  therefore  use  covered  bonds  for  long-term 
funding without this becoming prohibitively expensive. The banks can use covered bonds as 
a tool for better matching maturities on the asset and the liability side and thus reduce their 
liquidity risk. Covered bonds are therefore a funding tool, which can for example help banks 
comply  with  future  liquidity  regulation.  Against  this  background,  Danmarks  Nationalbank 
does not support the idea of abolishing this possibility. 
On behalf of Danmarks Nationalbank, I hereby thank the Danish Mortgage Banks’ Federation 
for our successful cooperation during the past year. 
BIS Review 37/2010 
 3
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 37/2010
