Mervyn King: Monetary policy developments 
Speech by Mr Mervyn King, Governor of the Bank of England, at the University of Exeter, 
Exeter, 19 January 2010. 
 Some dates are easier to remember than others. 1789 and the French Revolution, 1989 and 
the fall of the Berlin Wall, 1929 and the Wall Street Crash are easily recalled. How will 2009 
be  remembered:  as  the  year  when  the  world  economy  fell  off  a  cliff  but  was  rescued  by 
government  and  central  bank  intervention  around  the  world?  Or  the  year  when  we  finally 
recognised  that  genuine  reform  to  the  international  monetary  and  banking  system  was 
essential to restore prosperity? Time will tell. 
The world economy is now coming out of recession. But the cost of the banking crisis has 
been  high.  After  an  unprecedented  period  of  sustained  growth,  total  output  in  the  United 
Kingdom has now fallen for six consecutive quarters. It contracted last year by around 5%, 
the largest fall in output since 1931. National income is around 10% below the level it would 
have reached in the absence of the financial crisis. 
Around  the  world,  governments  and  central  banks  put  a  massive  sticking  plaster  on  the 
wounds in the form of an extraordinary degree of monetary and fiscal stimulus. As a result, 
business confidence, orders and output, which all collapsed at the end of 2008, are gradually 
recovering. 
But  there  is  a  long  period  of  healing  ahead.  Although  quarterly  growth  rates  of  GDP  may 
soon turn positive in the United Kingdom, unemployment is likely to remain high. Fortunately, 
it has not increased to the 10% rate now experienced in both the United States and the euro 
area.  But  at  just  under  8%,  it  is  markedly  above  the  level  to  which  we  had  become 
accustomed during the period known as the “Great Stability”. 
The  sharp  monetary  squeeze  resulting  from  the  efforts  by  banks  to  contract  their  balance 
sheets is still casting a shadow over the future path of output and employment. Over the past 
year, broad money growth has slowed sharply to a virtual standstill in the United States, and 
it turned slightly negative in the euro area. In normal circumstances, we might expect annual 
rates of increase of between 5% and 10%. At home, annual broad money growth has slowed 
somewhat  less  sharply,  and  remains  positive.  The  unprecedented  actions  of  the Monetary 
Policy  Committee  to  inject  £200  billion  directly  into  the  economy  –  described  by  some  as 
“quantitative easing” – have averted a potentially disastrous monetary squeeze. 
The  headline  in  the  Racing  Post  of  29  December  said  it  all:  “Quantitativeasing  Maintains 
Perfect  Record”.  Its  Newbury  correspondent  reported  that  “Quantitativeasing  started  as  a 
red-hot favourite and had little trouble maintaining his unbeaten record. Ridden with plenty of 
confidence his task was made easier when Tail of the Bank came to grief at the second last. 
His trainer said ‘I was delighted with the way he went through that testing ground’”. Rather 
like the MPC, the owners of Quantitativeasing, winner of all three of his races in 2009, have 
yet to decide how many outings he will have in 2010. They are waiting for race conditions to 
become clearer.  
The bold action, taken both at home and abroad, helped to end the collapse in confidence 
and spending last year. But equally bold action will be needed to prevent a similar crisis from 
recurring. The origins of the crisis lay in our inability to cope with the consequences of the 
entry into the world trading system of countries such as China, India, and the former Soviet 
empire – in a word, globalisation. The benefits in terms of trade were visible; the costs of the 
implied capital flows were not.  
The  new  entrants  adopted  a  strategy  of  expanding  manufactured  exports  to  create 
employment.  High  rates  of  saving  depressed  domestic  demand.  So  substantial  trade 
BIS Review 4/2010 
 1
surpluses  were  required  to  keep  total  demand  in  line  with  supply.  Equally,  the  countries 
importing  those  manufactured  goods  ran  trade  deficits  and  required  low  saving  rates  to 
maintain  balance  in  their  economies.  Everyone  seemed  to  gain.  High-saving  countries 
created employment, and low-saving countries enjoyed faster consumption growth as cheap 
imports  meant  that  living  standards  rose  by  more  than  the  increase  in  production  –  worth 
around  half  a  percentage  point  a  year  in  the  United  Kingdom.  These  were  the  benefits  of 
greater trade. 
But  the  pattern  of  poor  countries  saving  a  lot  and  rich  countries  borrowing  was  not 
sustainable. The consequences of our inability to cope with these capital flows did not show 
up  in  the  usual  macroeconomic  indicators  such  as  growth,  unemployment  and  inflation. 
Overall balance in each of the major economies was maintained. Rather, the massive flows 
of capital from the new entrants into western financial markets pushed down interest rates 
and encouraged risk-taking on an extraordinary scale. Banks expanded their balance sheets 
and new instruments were created to satisfy the search for yield. In the five years up to 2007, 
the  balance  sheets  of  the  largest  UK  banks  nearly  trebled.  The  build  up  of  risk  came  to 
threaten the stability of the entire financial system. Capital flows provided the fuel which the 
developed  world’s  inadequately  designed  and  regulated  financial  system  then  ignited  to 
produce a firestorm that engulfed us all. 
To prevent another crisis will require reform to both the regulation and structure of banking 
and the international monetary system. I have spoken about the former on earlier occasions. 
Tonight I want to focus on the question of how we can reduce the imbalances in the world 
economy. 
Although  overall  growth  in  both  high  and  low  saving  countries  was  sustainable,  the 
composition  of  that  growth  was  not.  And  the  composition of  growth  reflects  the interaction 
between countries’ economic policy choices. No individual country faced strong incentives to 
alter its own choices, but the collective outcome was costly to everyone.  
The interdependencies between countries can be illustrated by a simple three by three table 
which I call “Sudoku for economists”, showing the composition of demand in, and the trade 
flows between, the high- and low-saving groups of countries. 
“Sudoku for Economists”: 2008 data 
Domestic 
Demand Net trade
GDP
18,000
1,000
19,000
28,500
-1,000
27,500
High-saving 
countries
Low-saving 
countries
Total
46,500
0
46,500
Source: IMF. 
Data for G20 countries, rounded to the nearest $500 billion. 
 The key point is that the entries in the table – corresponding to economic policy choices – 
are  interdependent  reflecting  economic  constraints.  Total  demand  or  GDP  is  the  sum  of 
domestic demand and net trade. And, assuming for simplicity that the world can be divided 
2 
 BIS Review 4/2010
into high- and low-saving countries, the trade surplus of one group is the deficit of the other. 
Just as in a sudoku puzzle, the nine numbers in the table cannot be chosen independently. 
Sudoku  for  economists  is  simpler  than  ordinary  sudoku  because  the  economic  adding-up 
constraints  mean  that  of  the  nine  numbers  in  the  table,  only  three  can  be  chosen 
independently. So, for example, if both groups of countries want to achieve full employment 
levels  of  GDP,  and  the  high-saving  group  targets  a  trade  surplus,  the  low-saving  group 
cannot target a reduction in its trade deficit. Either trade deficits must remain high, which is 
not likely to prove sustainable, or something else must give. That might involve a recession 
in the deficit countries, or an acceptance by the surplus countries that, one way or another, 
trade  imbalances  must  be  reduced.  Sudoku  for  economists  shows  that  countries  cannot 
pursue for long incompatible economic policy frameworks. 
The  reason  why  continuing  large  deficits  are  not  sustainable  indefinitely  is  that  for  every 
current  account  deficit  there  is  an  equal  net  capital  flow  in  the  opposite  direction.  Even  if 
those flows remain constant in size, they imply an ever increasing stock of international asset 
and liability positions. Today China alone has reserves of over two trillion dollars, and Japan 
another trillion dollars. Adding inexorably to the stock of international assets and liabilities is 
like  adding  one  brick  on  top  of  another  to  form  a  tower.  With  skill,  it  can  be  done  for  a 
surprisingly long time. But eventually the moment comes when adding one more causes the 
tower  to  fall  down.  If  countries  do  not  work  together  to  reduce  the  “too  high  to  last” 
imbalances, a crisis of one sort or another in financial markets is only too likely. We saw that 
following the first oil crisis in the 1970s when the attempt to “recycle petrodollars”, as they 
were  called,  led  to  defaults  by  a  number  of  emerging  market  economies  and  a  crisis  in 
western banks. And sudden shifts in capital flows have led to periods of remarkable volatility 
in  exchange  rates  between  the  world’s  major  currencies,  the  dollar,  yen  and  euro  (and, 
before 1999, the deutschmark). 
So  the  problem  of  global  imbalances  is  hardly  new.  It  was  behind  many  of  the  currency 
crises in the post-war period and exercised the participants at the Bretton Woods conference 
in  1944.  And  for  the  past  decade  it  was  a  regular  item  on  the  agenda  of  international 
meetings of finance officials at the IMF, G7 and elsewhere. But the incompatibility of different 
countries’ policy frameworks has proved difficult to resolve. 
At the Bretton Woods Conference, the British economist John Maynard Keynes identified the 
asymmetry of the obligations placed on surplus and deficit countries as the main source of 
the problem. He had argued that, 
“the process of adjustment is compulsory for the debtor and voluntary for the 
creditor.  If  the  creditor  does  not  choose  to  make,  or  allow,  his  share  of  the 
adjustment,  he  suffers  no  inconvenience.  For  whilst  a  country’s  reserve  cannot 
fall below zero, there is no ceiling which sets an upper limit.” 
Both the British and the Americans put forward proposals for a system with more symmetric 
obligations – but without success. For most of the post-war period, the obligations on debtor 
countries,  asymmetric  though  they  may  have  been,  prevented  the  imbalances  from 
becoming too big. More recently, the fact that the largest deficit country, the United States, 
was the issuer of the world’s reserve currency allowed the imbalances to continue for a long 
period, inducing a sense of complacency and threatening the stability of the global economy.  
So  the  challenge  of  designing  an  international  monetary  system  that  could  prevent  the 
emergence of “too high to last” imbalances remains. The financial crisis has reminded us all 
of the importance of solving this problem. Sudoku for economists shows that it is essentially 
a  political  and  not  a  technical  problem:  how  can  we  ensure  that  the  economic  policy 
frameworks of countries are consistent with each other? 
At  present  there  is  no  political  mechanism  for  achieving  that  consistency.  Finding  such  a 
mechanism is urgent. Having narrowed somewhat at the height of the crisis, the imbalances 
are now widening again. There is a risk that countries will, out of frustration, impose unilateral 
BIS Review 4/2010 
 3
and  ultimately  self-defeating  protectionist  responses.  Because  the  number  of  countries 
involved in the international trading system is now so large, and the countries so diverse, the 
idea  of  another  Bretton  Woods  conference  is  wholly  impractical.  The  IMF,  despite  the 
legitimacy bestowed by its membership of 186 countries, is too unwieldy without reform. The 
G7 omits some of the key players, such as China. Of more immediate promise is the G20 
group  of  countries,  which  produces  almost  90%  of  world  GDP.  Last  year,  under  the  UK 
Presidency, the G20 agreed to a new policy coordination framework which commits member 
countries to a process, using the expertise of the IMF, of assessing the consistency of their 
national  policies.  G20  Heads  of  Government  will  meet  twice  this  year,  in  June  and 
November, to discuss progress.  
So far the only specific agreement is to talk to each other. Concrete steps to reduce the scale 
of  global  imbalances  have,  to  date,  been  notable  by  their  absence.  Smiling  family 
photographs marking the attendance at international gatherings are no substitute for specific 
actions. Still, the G20 has laid its reputation on the line. It will be damaged if the framework 
comes to nought.  
Looking further ahead, the legitimacy and leadership of the G20 would be enhanced if it were 
seen as representing views of other countries too. That could be achieved if the G20 were to 
metamorphose  into  a  Governing  Council  for  the  IMF,  and  at  the  same  time  acquire  a 
procedure for voting on decisions.  
The  economic  message  from  the  crisis  is  clear:  low-saving  countries  will  reduce  their  net 
borrowing  from  abroad  and  so  will  no  longer  be  able  to  play  the  role  of  consumer  of  last 
resort. To maintain levels of economic activity, high-saving countries must expand domestic 
demand and allow their trade surpluses to shrink. This is easier said than done. It will require 
changes in prices and most obviously in real exchange rates – via either nominal exchange 
rates  or  domestic  price  levels.  In  themselves,  proposals  such  as  the  creation  of  a  new 
reserve currency do not solve the inconsistency puzzle unless they alter the desire of high-
saving countries to run imbalances that are too high to last. But the reason for hope, even if it 
has not yet triumphed over experience, is that, despite the short-term political considerations 
that  have  prevented  adjustment  so  far,  the  lesson  of  Sudoku  for  economists  is  that 
cooperation is better than conflict. There are potential gains for all in the longer term. That is 
why the UK Government put so much effort into the G20 process. It is, as they say, the only 
game in town.  
Working with our international partners will be important if we are to achieve reforms to the 
international monetary system. But, as one of the low-saving group of countries, we must not 
neglect the need for domestic policy actions. The need for a rebalancing of our economy has 
been apparent for some time; I spoke about it in a speech just along the coast in Plymouth 
ten years ago. The proportion of our domestic output that we save has fallen by around a 
third over the past decade, as the share of consumption, especially public consumption, has 
risen sharply. Looking ahead, monetary and fiscal policy together must help to bring about a 
switch  of  demand  from  private  and  public  consumption  to  net  exports  and  business 
investment as the recovery takes hold.  
A key element in raising the national saving rate is the elimination over time of the structural 
deficit  in  the  public  finances.  Of  course,  there  is  a  perfectly  sensible  debate  about  the 
appropriate  timing  of  the  withdrawal  of  the  temporary  fiscal  stimulus  as  the  economy 
recovers. Some has in fact already been withdrawn with the return of the standard rate of 
VAT  to  17.5%  at  the  beginning  of  the  month.  But  uncertainty  about  how  and  when  fiscal 
policy will respond has a direct bearing on monetary policy. And markets can be unforgiving. 
As Federal Reserve Chairman Bernanke said recently about the similar fiscal position in the 
United States, “near-term challenges must not be allowed to hinder timely consideration of 
the steps needed to address fiscal imbalances. Unless we demonstrate a strong commitment 
to fiscal sustainability in the longer term, we will have neither financial stability nor healthy 
4 
 BIS Review 4/2010
economic  growth”.  The  Chancellor  has  made  clear  that  the  Spring  Budget  provides  the 
opportunity to do precisely that.  
Over  the  past  year,  the  UK  economy  has  battled  against  the  headwinds  of  an  intense 
monetary squeeze and a sharp fall in world trade, supported by the tailwinds of a huge policy 
stimulus and a lower exchange rate. At this very early stage of the recovery, it is particularly 
difficult  to  judge  the  medium-term  prospects  for  the  economy.  Ten  years  ago,  I  described 
how  movements  in  macroeconomic  data  can  sometimes  bear  a  “resemblance  to  old-
fashioned  disco  dancing  –  sharp  movements  in  unpredictable  directions  creating  much 
excitement, accompanied by a good deal of noise”. Over the next few months, the data are 
likely to be dancing particularly vigorously under the influence of the reversal of the VAT cut, 
a turnaround in the stock cycle and even the effects of the recent cold weather. Added to 
that, the MPC is acutely aware that initial data releases are often later heavily revised, and 
there is uncertainty over the timing of fiscal consolidation.  
The  patience  of  UK  households  is  likely  to  be  sorely  tried  over  the  next  couple  of  years. 
There  is  little  scope  for  growth  in  real  take-home  pay,  which  may  remain  weak  even  as 
output recovers. It is clear that inflation is likely to pick up markedly in the first half of this 
year,  a  message  reinforced  by  this  morning’s  news  that  CPI  inflation  reached  2.9%  in 
December.  The  continuing  pass-through  of  the  earlier  significant  depreciation  of  sterling, 
while  part  of  the  necessary  rebalancing  of  our  economy,  is  offsetting  to  some  extent  the 
downward pressure on inflation from the large amount of spare capacity. And the rise in VAT 
back to 17.5% means that CPI inflation is likely to rise to over 3% for a while, or even higher 
for even longer were energy prices or indirect taxes to increase further. Although such price 
level  effects  do  not  constitute  a  continuing  source  of  inflation,  and  hence  should  be 
temporary, they remain in the official measure of inflation for a full year. Provided monetary 
growth  remains  well  under  control  –  and  remember  that  at  present  it  is  undesirably  low  – 
inflation should return to target in the medium term. I hope you will all remember that in both 
of the past two years inflation picked up as a result of temporary price level factors and then 
fell back, as the MPC had predicted.  
So how will 2009 be remembered? As I said at the outset, it is too early to tell. The full impact 
of the financial crisis has yet to be seen. And the national statisticians will take another two 
years or so before providing their best estimates of spending and output in the UK economy. 
More importantly, the question of whether basic reforms to the structure of banking and the 
international monetary system will be made before another crisis engulfs the world economy 
remains unanswered. 
BIS Review 4/2010 
 5
