Muhammad Al-Jasser: Overview of the Islamic banking industry  
Speech  by  Dr  Muhammad  Al-Jasser,  Governor  of  the  Saudi  Arabian  Monetary  Agency,  at 
The Fifth Conference for Islamic Banks and Financial Institutions, hosted by the Central Bank 
of Syria, Damascus, 15–16 March 2010. 
 In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful 
Let me first thank the Central Bank of Syria, the official sponsor of the Fifth Conference for 
Islamic Banks and Financial Institutions, and, in particular, I would like to thank the Bank’s 
Governor, His Excellency Dr. Adeeb Mayalah. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Islamic banking has grown widely in recent years and has extended to several international 
financial  centers,  which  invested  in  this  field,  reflecting  an  increasing  interest  in  financial 
Islamic  products  and  services.  Because  of  this  interest,  some  of  the  international  markets 
indices such as “Dow Jones” and “FTSE” have been launching indices for Shari’ah-compliant 
activities since 1999. According to the latest available data, the Islamic financial institutions’ 
assets exceeded $822 billion by end of 2009, and they are expected to exceed $1 trillion by 
end of 2010. In addition, issuance of Islamic Sukuk has risen fourfold over the last four years, 
exceeding $100 billion by end of 2009. 
Islamic  banks  and  financial  institutions  account  for  15  percent  of  the  Middle  East  top 
30 banks’ assets. There are more than 430 Islamic banks and financial institutions in more 
than 75 countries and about 191 conventional banks have Islamic windows. By the end of 
the  third  quarter  of  2009,  the  total  assets  of  Islamic  investment  funds  were  estimated  at 
about $ 27 billion, spread across 478 Islamic investment funds worldwide. 
Dear audience  
Islamic banking contributes to social and economic development through investment in 
areas related to the real economy such as production of goods and services and commerce. 
In addition, Islamic Banks and Institutions have proved their success in attracting savings, 
fulfilling customer’s needs and achieving their interests. Moreover, Islamic banking has made 
great strides in boosting banking business by introducing innovated products and tools 
and by adopting new financing forms such as Ijarah (leasing), Istisnaa and Salam, along with 
Mudarabah (profit and loss sharing) and Musharakah (partnership). Furthermore, a variety of 
Islamic  Sukuk  (Islamic  bonds)  has  emerged,  and  some  Islamic  banks  have  started  to 
arrange for syndicated financing transactions in accordance with Islamic forms, and others 
are managing Shari’ah-compliant investment funds. Every tool of the Islamic banking has its 
own  contractual  nature  and  features,  which  differ  from  other  tools  in  terms  of  risks, 
guarantees and pricing.  
Islamic banking services have not been confined to the activities mentioned earlier, but the 
scope of their transactions has been extended to include other services such as: providing 
joint  finance,  issuing  banking  bonds  and  opening  letters  of  credit.  Islamic  institutions  and 
banks provide a variety of finance and insurance methods for enterprises, management of 
financial  portfolios,  and  Tawarruq  assets  (assets  securitization).  Moreover, 
Islamic 
institutions  and  banks  have  played  an  effective  role  in  supporting  economic  reforms  and 
privatization  programs  in  countries  where  they  work  by  purchasing  shares  in  listed 
companies  and  financing  some  private  activities,  thereby  helping  in  supporting  the  basic 
infrastructure and financing of housing projects for low and middle income people. They have 
BIS Review 53/2010 
 1
also contributed to supporting small and craft projects, and indirectly helped in creating many 
job opportunities for citizens. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The  achievements  of  the  Islamic  banking  industry  over  the  last  three  decades  have 
necessitated  the  establishment  of  relevant  institutions  that  support  Islamic  banking 
such as: the Accounting and Auditing Organization for Islamic Institutions (AAOIFI) and the 
Islamic  Financial  Services  Board  (IFSB).  All  these  organizations  aim  at  creating  a  sound 
environment  for  collaboration  and  communication  among  Islamic  banks  and  financial 
institutions  by  introducing  and  applying  International  standards  to  improve  the  Islamic 
banking industry and ensure its soundness.  
Let  me  briefly  talk  about  the  necessary  requirements  to  ensure  the  sustainability, 
stability  and  soundness  of  Islamic  banking.  The  Islamic  Financial  Services  Board 
(IFSB)  plays  an  effective  role  in  abiding  by  supervisory  requirements  for  sustainability 
through issuing supervisory and control standards for the Islamic banking system, based on 
the best supervisory practices in line with Basel II standards, focused on: capital adequacy, 
risk  management,  internal  control,  institutions  management  controls,  transparency  and 
market discipline.  
The IFSB has urged the Islamic institutions to follow specified procedures for assessing their 
capital adequacy in terms of the nature of risks and pursue strategies to maintain their capital 
at required levels. It has also required supervisors to review and assess internal assessment 
measures  of  these  institutions’  capital  adequacy  and  ensure  their  compliance  with  the 
required capital level and take supervisory measures in case of non-compliance. In addition, 
the  Board  has  urged  supervisory  authorities  to  take  prudential  measures  to  prevent  the 
decrease of capital to lower than minimum level, and stipulate quick correcting measures in 
case of such a decrease. Stress tests are considered one of the prudential measures that the 
Islamic Financial Services Board (IFSB) is keen to emphasize, and it urges Islamic financial 
institutions to apply them, including the assessment of prudential and control steps to reduce 
qualitative and quantitative risks, apart from applying transparency and accounting disclosure 
in financial reporting.  
In the realm of coordination with the national supervisory authorities, the IFSB seeks to 
enhance work in the area of consolidated and effective supervision and ensure the stability of 
the  Islamic  financial  system  by  abiding  to  best  practices  for  risk  management  and 
transparency. In this vein, the IFSB organizes conferences and symposiums for supervisory 
authorities and those interested in this industry. The IFSB also endeavors diligently to work 
with  international  and  regional  institutions,  research  centers  and  educational  institutes  to 
promote this significant industry. 
Dear audience, 
In  Saudi  Arabia,  we  are  aware  of  the  importance  of  Shari’ah-compliant  banking  products 
and  services.  The  Saudi  Arabia  Monetary  Agency  (SAMA)  encourages  banks  operating  in 
Saudi  Arabia  to  meet  market  demands  and  provide  those  services.  Currently,  all  banks 
operating  in  Saudi  Arabia  provide  Shari’ah-compliant  services,  and  this  activity  is  rapidly 
growing. The size of this activity differs from one bank to another. Some banks only provide 
Shari’ah-compliant  products  and  services,  and  others  provide  such  services  and  products 
through some specific branches or units.  
We,  at  SAMA,  supervise  and  regulate  Shar’iah-compliant  activities  in  accordance  with  the 
same practices applied to conventional commercial banking businesses. Hence, standards of 
capital  adequacy,  liquidity,  and  other  supervisory  and  monitoring  requirements  apply  on 
Shari’ah-compliant  institutions  and  banks.  SAMA,  in  cooperation  with  Saudi  banks  and 
2 
 BIS Review 53/2010
financial  institutions,  has  deep-rooted  international  standards  (such  as  those  set  forth  in 
Basel II and those prescribed by the IFSB) for risk management, corporate governance and 
internal controls. 
Dear audience, 
There  are  many  challenges  posed  to  Islamic  banking  such  as  finding  new  and  various 
opportunities for development, innovation of new tools, boosting its human resources in all 
fields including in risk and liquidity management, promoting costumer service level, improving 
skills and expertise for promoting the understanding of Shari’ah teachings and applying them 
in  new  banking  and  finance  areas.  In  addition,  it  is  appropriate  for  Islamic  Financial 
Institutions  to  increase  efforts  to  train  human  resources  scientifically  to  enhance  their 
capabilities  and  to  conduct  further  studies  to  update  Islamic  services  and  products  and 
improve Islamic banking in the long run.  
Moreover, it is necessary to use uniform accounting and auditing standards to ensure safety 
and stability of Islamic banking. It is also encouraged that Islamic financial institutions merge 
to increase their capital and have more liquidity to finance their investments. Finally, Islamic 
financial  institutions  need  to  steer  efforts  towards  good  corporate  governance,  good  risk 
management, transparency, and financial disclosure. 
I  hope  that  the  Islamic  banking  industry  will  achieve  further  prosperity  and  success  in  the 
future.  Thanks  again  to  the  Central  Bank  of  Syria  for  hosting  this  conference  and  for  the 
interest  in  Islamic  banking,  and  I  think  it  is  timely  and  wise  to  choose  this  topic  for  the 
conference. I wish all success for this conference and the participants and I thank you all for 
your kind attention. 
Wassalmu Alikum Warahmatu Allah Wabarakatuhu. 
BIS Review 53/2010 
 3
