Njuguna Ndung’u: Bank regulation reforms in Africa: enhancing bank 
competition and intermediation efficiency 
Keynote address by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the 
12th Seminar by African Economic Research Consortium, Mombasa, 22 March 2010. 
 Prof. William Lyakurwa, Executive Director, African Economic Research Consortium; 
Senior Policymakers here present; 
Distinguished Guests; 
Ladies and Gentlemen; 
I  am  delighted  to  be  with  all  of  you  here  in  Mombasa  and  to  speak  on  Bank  Regulatory 
Reforms in Africa: Enhancing Bank Competition and Intermediation. But before I make 
my  remarks,  let  me  take  this  opportunity  to  thank  the  African  Economic  Research 
Consortium (AERC) for their invitation to give the keynote address at this seminar. This is 
indeed a timely topic as we continue to assess the effects of the global financial crisis and 
find long term solutions to mitigate and prevent recurrence. I am informed that approximately 
70  senior  policymakers  from  over  20  countries  in  Sub-Saharan  Africa  (SSA)  are  in 
attendance.  This  signals  the  importance  of  this  seminar  and  the  policy  spin-offs  it  will 
generate. 
At the outset, Ladies and Gentlemen, I would like to recognize the important role that AERC 
has  played  in  strengthening  local  capacity  for  managing  economies  within  Sub  Saharan 
Africa. The Consortium has contributed to advanced policy research and graduate training in 
economics. Most institutions of policy in Sub-Saharan Africa today are led by AERC alumni. 
I am happy to be part of this group myself. 
Ladies and Gentlemen; this seminar is taking place at a time when countries in Africa are 
taking stock of the second and third round effects of the global financial crisis. You will agree 
with me that the crisis which initially hit African countries with stronger financial linkages to 
international  capital  markets;  significant  trade  relations  with  the  Western  world  and  rich 
natural  resource  countries  set  the  stage  for  challenging  times  in  policy  making  and 
implementation.  
Africa’s prospects in the post-crisis period are contingent on the behaviour of policymakers. 
Indeed, there is need for better regulation that can readily identify emerging vulnerabilities; 
properly price risks; and strengthen incentives for prudent behaviour. It is tempting after the 
crisis to call for more regulation – but we should emphasize better regulation. Second, we 
should  emphasize  building  strong  institutions.  Globally,  the  remedial  actions  taken  by 
governments  to  deal  with  the  crisis  have  borne  fruit  and  the  green  shoots  of  recovery  are 
beginning to sprout. 
For  us  here  in  Kenya,  we  remain  committed  to  fostering  a  stable  market-based  financial 
system as mandated by law. An efficient financial system collects and collates deposits from 
micro-savers  and  channels  them  to  investors.  This  is  the  intermediation  process.  This 
process allows economic agents to evaluate the risks and prices in the market and align their 
investment portfolio and investment gestation. 
The  Kenyan  case  is  both  interesting  as  well  as  a  policy  strategy.  It  reflects  a  case  of 
segmented  markets.  But  the  cost  of  credit  and  interest  rates  spread  remains  high.  The 
spread  is  a  major  challenge  in  the  banking  sector  because  it  acts  as  an  impediment  to 
expansion  of  credit  and  development  of  financial  intermediation  and  signals  inefficiency  in 
the sector. 
The  challenge  for  a  policymaker  is  to  develop  a  financial  sector  that  answers  to  the 
challenges of the economy. In order to address market inefficiencies, the Central Bank and 
BIS Review 38/2010 
 1
other  stakeholders  have  undertaken  significant  reforms  for  the  banking  sector.  These 
reforms  include  the  operationalisation  of  the  credit  reference  bureaus,  payment  systems 
improvements, opening of new currency centres, automation of trading system for treasury 
bonds, and the activation of horizontal repos. I will spend the next few minutes to highlight 
these initiatives.  
Operationalisation  of  credit  referencing  mechanism:  The  Banking  (Credit  Reference 
Bureau)  Regulations  were  operationalised  on  2nd  February  2009.  This  will  facilitate  the 
sharing of credit information by institutions licensed under the Banking Act. This link will allow 
the industry to build information capital that is critical in the credit market. It will also enhance 
access  to  credit  by  SMEs  and  individuals  that  have  been  constrained  by  lack  of  physical 
collateral. Further, the Banking Sector will be able to address the problem of non-performing 
loans at the origination point as credit history of applicants will be taken into account during 
the credit appraisal process. 
Licensing  of  deposit  taking  microfinance  institutions:  The  Microfinance  Act  was 
operationalised  effective  May  2008.  Currently,  one  institution  has  been  licensed  and  eight 
applications  for  license  are  being  processed.  With  the  unique  business  models  of 
microfinance institutions mainly targeted at the lower end of the market, bringing them under 
the  purview  of  the  Central  Bank  will  not  only  give  them  a  legal  basis  in  dealing  with 
depositors but will also boost access to formal financial services by the populace. Deposit 
Taking Microfinance Institutions are free to be community-based or nationwide. 
The national payments system  sits  at  the  centre  of  the  financial  system.  It  is  imperative 
that  payments  systems  are  secure  and  efficient.  The  Central  Bank  continues  with  its 
initiatives  to  modernize  the  national  payments  system.  Accordingly,  from  1  October  2009, 
value capping was effected with all payments above Kshs.1 million being made through the 
Real  Time  Gross  Settlement  System  (RTGS).  This  initiative  enhanced  the  security  and 
efficiency of high value payments.  
The celebrated MPESA falls under this category of reforms. As we have seen this market 
unfolding,  MPESA  account  holders  have  soared  to  9  million,  total  transactions  surpassed 
Ksh.48 billion a month (or averaging Ksh.1.6 billion a day) and agents increased to 17,000 in 
the last 3 years. 
Ladies and Gentlemen; on the monetary policy front, the CBK has observed that despite 
signalling  efforts  by  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  to  bring  down  the  rates  of  interest  by 
lowering the Central Bank Rate (CBR), banks have not responded accordingly. Further, the 
failure of the banking system to extend the maturity of their loan products is a consequence 
of  the  characteristic  nature  of  their  deposits  which  are  largely  short  term,  but  also  their 
assessment  and  pricing  of  risk.  To  support  economic  development,  there  is  need  for  the 
development  of  banking  products  that  support  long  term  lending.  These  development 
banking products will play a significant role in influencing a downward trend in commercial 
banks  lending  rates.  The  Central  Bank  will  therefore  explore  how  development  banking 
products  can  be  introduced  into  the  market  to  enhance  the  monetary  policy  transmission 
mechanism and lengthen the maturity profile of commercial bank term loans. 
Developments  in  the  bond  market:  The  Central  Bank  has  successfully  raised  funds  for 
infrastructure  development  for  the  Government  through  infrastructure  bonds.  These 
infrastructure  bonds  have  not  only  facilitated  financing  of  the  Government’s  infrastructure 
program but also set the pace for the issuance of similar bonds by corporate entities such as 
KENGEN  and  Safaricom.  This,  coupled  with  automated  trading  in  the  Nairobi  Stock 
Exchange will be important for a vibrant bond market. In addition, to deepen and widen the 
bond market, the Central Bank implemented the following measures: 
 
Issuance  of  benchmark  bonds:  The  Bank  together  with  Market  Leaders  Forum 
adopted 2, 5, 10, 15 and 20 year maturities as benchmark bonds. This move has not 
2 
 BIS Review 38/2010
  only firmed up the yield curve, but has improved pricing, reflected through improved 
secondary market trading. 
Reopening  of  benchmark  bonds:  This  has  increased  trading  activities  in  the 
secondary market. 
The  shape  and  position  of  the  yield:  The  vibrant  bond  market  has  led  to  a 
downward  shift  in  the  Yield  Curve  with  an  upward  gentle  slope  reflecting  stability. 
This  has  created  reliable  pricing  benchmark  for  corporates,  many  of  who  raised 
required capital via issuance of corporate bonds in 2009/10. It is also a useful tool in 
pricing credit facilities as it signals the direction of interest rates. 
You will recall that the Central Bank of Kenya, the Nairobi Stock Exchange and the Capital 
Markets Authority collaborated in the automation of trading of Treasury Bonds through the 
NSE. The main objective of this initiative was to make bonds trading secure, efficient and to 
create  a  vibrant  market.  The  expected  improvement  in  market  activity  will  also  improve 
market liquidity and encourage more investors to participate in the bond market. 
Operationalisation  of  the  horizontal  repos:  We  have  introduced  the  Interbank  Master 
Repurchase  Agreement  otherwise  known  as  the  Horizontal  repo  which  is  aimed  at 
deepening the capital and money markets and enhancing the intermediation process. I am 
happy to note that the horizontal repo as a tool of redistributing liquidity in the market has 
also  provided  a  useful  barometer  on  the  status  of  liquidity  in  the  banking  sector.  The 
horizontal  repo  is  an  additional  facility  for  commercial  banks  to  use  alongside  the  vertical 
repo which is an instrument between commercial banks and CBK. 
Other  initiatives:  The  changing  market  dynamics  in  the  Kenyan  Banking  Sector  has 
necessitated  the  Central  Bank  to  reinvent  itself  and  become  proactive  in  detecting 
opportunities  and  threats  to  financial  sector  stability.  With  a  view  to  not  only  enhance 
intermediation and competitiveness of the banking sector but also to increase efficiency and 
access, the Central Bank has been in the forefront in encouraging various financial services 
providers e.g. 
 
 
 
mobile phone money transfer providers such as M-PESA and ZAP 
SACCOs and Agency Banking models 
Shariah  compliant  banking  products  –  we  have  seen  the  introduction  of  two 
Shariah compliant banks and growing interest in a number of institutions seeking to 
offer Shariah compliant products.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen;  we  have  now  started  to  realize  the  dividends  of  the  reforms  we 
have undertaken in the financial sector. Kenya now has a healthy, sound and strong banking 
system.  The  size  of  the  banking  system  has  been  enhanced  both  in  terms  of  deposits 
mobilised, credit growth and competition. Specifically: 
 
Deposit  accounts  have  increased  from  2.6  million  (end  2005)  to  8.4  million  (end 
2009)  and  deposits  have  doubled  from  Ksh.545  billion  (US$7.2  billion)  to 
Ksh.1,065 billion (US$14 billion) in the same period.  
Lowering  barriers  to  entry  –  via  removal  of  minimum  balances  has  supported 
financial reach. 
Banks have taken their services to the customers due to increasing competition and 
improvements in the delivery channels. Banks are opening and re-opening branches 
in areas with none or few branches.  
  Efficiency  is  achieved  when  there  are  strong  institutions  with  requisite  capacity  to  satisfy 
market needs while complying with statutory and prudential requirements.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  One  of  the  main  challenges  of  monetary  policy  has  been  the 
presence of currency outside banks. In March 2008, it was Ksh.9 billion above the Central 
BIS Review 38/2010 
 3
Bank target. However, in March 2010 it was Ksh.4.9 billion below CBK target as a result of 
banks increased coverage of rural and low income areas.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen;  Financial  sector  reforms  are  far  from  being  accomplished.  Given 
the changing dynamics of the economy and its growing complexities, the financial industry 
has to remain responsive and supportive of the broader economic ambitions and agenda. All 
the major players and stakeholders in the banking system will have to strive for continuity, 
broadening  and  deepening  of  reforms;  build  and  sustain  the  already  implemented  reforms 
and  fill  the  remaining  gaps.  The  growing  competition  along  with  increasingly  diversified 
services both across the regions and sectors, as well as improved access to customer-base 
on the back of progressive reliance on technology, are the harbingers of the changing and 
efficient intermediation role of banks in the days ahead.  
The  Central  Bank  is  committed  to  reforms  in  the  banking  industry  towards  enhanced 
competitiveness.  In  line  with  this,  the  Central  Bank  has  earmarked  amendments  to  the 
Banking Act and Microfinance Act going forward. The amendments to the Banking Act and 
Microfinance  Act  are  expected  to  further  enhance  efficiency  and  competitiveness  of  our 
financial  sector.  CBK  in  collaboration  with  the  Government  and  the  market  players  will 
enhance  its  efforts  in  addressing  other  structural  rigidities  that  contribute  to  market 
inefficiencies to take stock of developments as well as other emerging constraints.  
Before  I  conclude,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  let  me  once  again  take  this  opportunity  to 
reiterate  the  critical  role  of  the  financial  sector  in  Africa’s  economic  development.  This 
potential  can  only  be  realized  when  African  policymakers  implement  reforms  to  remove 
binding  constraints  in  the  sector.  I  am  sure  that  in  this  gathering  we  have  the  capacity  to 
identify those constraints to unleash Africa’s potential. 
Finally, I do hope that you will find time in your busy schedules to enjoy our world renown 
beaches. I wish you fruitful deliberations. 
Thank you! 
4 
 BIS Review 38/2010
