Mervyn King: Uncertainty in macroeconomic policy making – art or 
science? 
Lecture  by  Mr  Mervyn  King,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  at  the  Royal  Society 
conference on “Handling Uncertainty in Science”, London, 22 March 2010. 
Accompanying slides to this speech can be found on the Bank of England’s website. 
David  Aikman,  Philip  Barrett,  Sujit  Kapadia,  Mervyn  King,  James  Proudman,  Tim  Taylor,  
Iain de Weymarn and Tony Yates (Bank of England) contributed to this paper. 
 Uncertainty and public policy 
1. 
Most  questions  of  public  policy  relate  to  uncertainties.  Answers  depend  upon  an  ability  to 
understand and evaluate those uncertainties. Yet many commentators and members of the 
public  want  to  believe  in  certainties.  They  want  to  cut  through  the  thickets  of  caveats  and 
technical difficulties to the “bottom line”. We see this in economic policy, weather forecasting 
and the interpretation of secret intelligence. 
Five  years  ago,  the  Bank  of  England  and  the  Met  Office  held  an  informal  seminar  to 
exchange  ideas  on  how  to  communicate  measures  of  uncertainty  to  the  general  public. 
Although we failed to persuade broadcasters to explore the issues of economic and weather 
forecasting in more depth, the bilateral relationship which developed between the Bank and 
Paul  Hardaker,  who  moved  from  the  Met  Office  to  take  over  the  Royal  Meteorological 
Society, flourished. Today’s conference is a tribute to Paul’s persistence. It could hardly be 
more timely. At the heart of debates about climate change, the Chilcot Inquiry into the war in 
Iraq, and the speed of the necessary fiscal consolidation of our public finances, lie questions 
about how to evaluate and respond to considerable uncertainties.  
At that seminar in 2005, we discussed three questions. First, in modelling the phenomenon 
of interest, what is the right balance between simplifying assumptions and technical rigour? 
Second, how open should we be about what we don’t really know? Third, in communicating 
uncertainty, how can we prevent the intended audience from focussing excessively on one or 
two  parameters  of  the  underlying  distribution  at  the  expense  of  the  whole  picture?  The 
discussions compared the Bank of England’s fan charts for the outlook for inflation with the 
Met Office’s plume charts for forecasts of temperature. This paper updates that discussion, 
and presents some new ways of communicating uncertainty which are under evaluation by 
the Monetary Policy Committee. 
Reference  to  economics  and  meteorology  is  not  just  because  the  interests  of  some  of  us 
span  both.  They  are  two  disciplines  united  by  a  common  need  to  grapple  with  complex 
systems and communicate forecasts to a wide audience. It is not enough to explain only to 
experts. Much of the value of forecasts is in their being understood – in all their subtleties – 
by the general public, or at least sub-groups such as the agricultural industry in the case of 
meteorology and those involved in wage bargaining in the case of economics. 
The use or misuse of forecasts has caused problems for both the Bank of England and the 
Met Office in recent years. The Bank’s forecasts of inflation were criticised for overstating the 
size  of  confidence  intervals  during  the  period  from  1995  to  2007,  the  so-called  “Great 
Stability”, and then understating them once the financial crisis occurred. And the Met Office 
has recently announced that it will no longer publish forecasts for the weather in forthcoming 
seasons after it “failed” to predict the cold winter or the wet summer (in some parts of the 
country)  last  year.  The  seasonal  forecasts  will  be  replaced  by  monthly  predictions.  In  a 
statement, the Met Office said, “by their nature, forecasts become less accurate the further 
out we look. Although we can identify general patterns of weather, the science does not exist 
to  allow  an  exact  forecast  beyond  five  days,  or  to  absolutely  promise  a  certain  type  of 
BIS Review 36/2010 
 1
weather”.  But  to  publish  forecasts  only  when  the  outcome  is  virtually  certain  would  be  an 
admission of at least partial defeat. 
If descriptions of probability distributions are misinterpreted by the media or the public, how 
can we discover which messages are robust and which are too fragile to survive the process 
of communication to a wide audience? First, we need to consider how we should form a view 
of the likelihood of different outcomes. 
that  are  deterministic  rather 
Unpredictability in economics and science 
2. 
Unpredictability is a challenge faced by practitioners in many disciplines. As Kenneth Arrow, 
Nobel Laureate in Economics, said about his four-year experience as a weather officer in the 
US during World War II, “one thing I learned from meteorology is that being an actual science 
was no guarantee of exactness”. 
Economics  may  or  may  not  be  an  actual  science,  but  it  certainly  suffers  when  trying  to 
predict  the  future.  There  are  at  least  three  explanations  for  this  unpredictability  that  are 
common to economics and other scientific disciplines. 
First, assigning probabilities is particularly difficult for infrequent high-impact events such as 
financial crises, tsunamis, or climate change, for which there are few precedents. Because 
the samples of such events are so small, as we learn about these processes our assessment 
of their likelihood will change, possibly sharply. 
Second,  even  systems 
than  stochastic  can  be  very 
unpredictable.  Small  differences  in  starting  conditions  can  imply  very  different  outcomes. 
Weather systems display chaotic dynamics, so that small initial forecast errors may lead to 
large revisions to the forecast further out. Economists, in contrast, often rely on simple linear 
models, but with additive stochastic errors. In modelling any phenomenon there is a choice, 
and among the experts in the area often a live debate, about whether it is more useful to use 
deterministic but chaotic or stochastic models.1 But the motivation in both cases is to bring 
out the importance of unpredictability. 
Another feature that hinders predictability is that a priori indistinguishable shocks can have 
very different effects in some systems. If you drop a grain of sand randomly on a sand pile, 
drop a lit match at random in a forest, or infect a random person with a disease, it may have 
very minimal, localised effects or may lead respectively to an avalanche, wildfire or epidemic. 
The outcome depends on the state of the system when the shock hits (the steepness of the 
sand pile, dryness of the forest, or density of the population) and the precise point at which 
the system is hit.2 
Third,  systems  can  be  subject  to  sudden  transitions  between  locally  stable  states.  In  both 
economics and science, we can find examples of systems that have multiple stable states. 
And switches between these may be hard to predict. Models of the circulation pattern in the 
North  Atlantic  Ocean  suggest  that  it  can  either  be  vigorous,  helping  to  warm  the  northern 
hemisphere as water is transported from lower latitudes, or can shut down almost entirely. 
The  magnetic  properties  of  iron  provide  another  example  of  a  system  with  different  stable 
states. When exposed temporarily to an external magnetic field, iron retains its magnetism 
even  when  the  external  field  is  removed:  the  same  external  conditions  are  consistent  with 
                                                 
1   See, for example, Sugihara and May (1990). 
2  
In relation to the latter, key nodes or players may be instrumental in the spreading of shocks (Anderson and 
May, 1991). This thinking has been applied to the financial system showing that a priori identical shocks can 
have  differing  effects  depending  on  where  the  shock  hits.  And,  inspired  by  the  literature  on  sand  piles, 
Scheinkman  and  Woodford’s  (1994)  model  of  inventory  dynamics  shows  how  small  shocks  may  cause 
aggregate fluctuations. 
2 
 BIS Review 36/2010
different states of the system, depending on its history.3 Many economic systems also exhibit 
forms  of  hysteresis  or  path  dependence.  For  example,  changing  social  attitudes  towards 
personal  bankruptcy,  inflation  or  unemployment  may  affect  equilibrium  outcomes  for  those 
variables. 
Policy responses to unpredictability 
3. 
Predicting  the  precise  timing  and  dynamics  of  instability  in  all  of  these  settings  is  very 
difficult. It is, however, possible to identify a sand pile or forest as being prone to large scale 
instability  and  determine  the  factors  that  contribute  to  that  instability.  Analogously,  many 
people,  including  at  the  Bank  of  England,  did  identify  the  vulnerabilities  of  the  financial 
system before the crisis without actually being able to predict when or how the crisis would 
begin. 
Economists  have  been  able  to  learn  from  other  disciplines  about  how  to  cope  with  these 
types of instability. For example, insights from ecology and epidemiology have been applied 
to financial networks (for more discussion, see Haldane 2009), and economists have learned 
much from engineers about how to control dynamic systems. 
The key is for policymakers to focus on making the structure of the underlying system more 
robust to shocks. For example, in avalanche areas the snow may be “seeded” so that, by 
inducing  small  avalanches,  the  chance  of  a  large  avalanche  is  mitigated.  And  in  fire-risk 
areas, controlled burns or fire breaks are sometimes used to limit the risk of a large fire. In 
the  context  of  the  financial  system,  policymakers  could  impose  a  “Glass-Steagall”  style 
separation between the payments system network and risky activities. 
Actions can also be taken to mitigate the impact of a bad outcome. For example, this might 
mean  building  an  avalanche  net  or  fence;  funding  a  fire-fighting  service;  or  launching  a 
lifeboat. In the context of financial regulation, this might entail reducing the costs associated 
with resolving financial institutions, for example by requiring banks to develop resolution and 
recovery plans, or requiring forced subsidiarisation of foreign bank branches. 
As  always,  however,  there  is  the  risk  that  such  interventions  can  have  unintended 
consequences: shortly after the Titanic sank, a steamer, the S.S. Eastland, capsized on Lake 
Michigan, with the loss of around 850 lives, because it had been destabilised by the extra 
lifeboats required by post-Titanic regulations! 
Decision making under uncertainty and the role of beliefs 
4. 
The analogies between economics and science can be taken only so far. A key difference 
between economics and the physical sciences is the role played by active decision-makers  
–  such  as  households  and  businesses  –  whose  presence  complicates  substantially  the 
dynamics of the system. 
In particular, economic outcomes are sensitive to the way people behave under uncertainty, 
and  to  their  beliefs  about  the  past,  present  and  future.  Perceptions  of  uncertainty  affect 
behaviour. If enough people are uncertain about their future job prospects and save more as 
a precaution, that may lead firms to cut employment, so increasing the chance that jobs are 
indeed lost. But uncertainty about whether it will rain today does not change the weather. 
Beliefs  adapt  over  time  in  response  to  changes  in  the  environment;  and  this  in  turn  affect 
show economic systems behave. Because the surrounding environment can affect economic 
decision-making, there are probably few genuinely “deep” (and, therefore, stable) parameters 
                                                 
3   This particular example is fortuitous for earth science and biology, since it helps us date rocks and the fossils 
they contain and chart continental drift, based on the history of changes in the magnetic field of the earth. 
BIS Review 36/2010 
 3
or relationships in economics. In contrast, in many settings in the physical sciences there are 
stable “rules of the game” (e.g. the laws of gravity are as good an approximation one day as 
the next). 
The study of decision making under uncertainty has a distinguished ancestry in economics. 
Frank  Knight  (1921)  wrote  about  the  difference  between  risk  (where  frequencies  could  be 
used to calculate probabilities) and uncertainty (where there was no objective basis on which 
to derive probabilities). Of course, a true Bayesian would assume that people would be able 
to construct subjective probabilities, and their behaviour would be governed by those beliefs. 
But Keynes (1936) made much of the pervasive nature of uncertainty in his explanation of 
business cycles because of the instability of those subjective probabilities. Occasional sharp 
changes in expectations could, and did, result. That is exactly what happened in the Autumn 
of 2008, with the sudden and synchronous collapse in business confidence around the world. 
So the behaviour of economies depends in part upon the beliefs about future events held by 
the various players: consumers, businesses and governments. Outcomes are endogenous to 
beliefs  about  the  likelihoods  of  the  outcomes.  And  in  some  contexts  there  may  be  self-
fulfilling equilibria. 
Sudden  shifts  in  beliefs  are  particularly  relevant  when  many  decision-makers  interact.  The 
behaviour of a bank’s depositors has many equilibria, each of which depends upon beliefs 
about  whether  other  depositors  are  likely  to  run  on  the  bank.  Changes  in  perceptions  of 
uncertainty may be transmitted rapidly, and amplified, with the potential to affect behaviour in 
a coordinated way.4 A restaurant may be much busier than an identical competitor if the first 
customers  of  the  evening  dine  there  and  the  next  customers  suspect  the  first  may  know 
something they don’t, and so follow, with others subsequently joining the herd. The reverse 
may occur on the following evening. 
Disentangling the incremental role of shifts in beliefs is often difficult. For example, afire sale 
of assets by one bank may have a mechanical amplifying impact on other banks through its 
effect  on  market  prices,  but  could  simultaneously  affect  other  banks  via  confidence  and 
beliefs,  if  people  become  less  optimistic  about  valuations  of  other  assets  when  one  asset 
class is in distress.5 
The role of beliefs and behaviour in affecting outcomes means that there is a premium on 
understanding decision-making under uncertainty. In economics, broadly speaking there are 
two  approaches  to  modelling  decision  making  under  uncertainty:  the  standard,  “rational” 
approach  of  “homo  economicus”  which  assumes  that  beliefs  are  based  on  an  efficient 
processing  of  all  available  information,  and  the  “behavioural”  approach,  informed  by  the 
psychology  literature,  which  highlights  psychological  traits  that  violate  the  assumptions 
underlying the “rational” view. 
The two approaches yield different conclusions on both the desirability of policy intervention 
and the form it should take. In practice, the applicability of each approach depends on the 
context.  Rationality  may  be  a  reasonable  approximation  when  decisions  are  carefully 
considered  (perhaps  because  the  returns  to  a  “good”  decision  are  high).  But  behavioural 
economists  and  psychologists  contend  that  people  often  make  decisions  using  simple  or 
“fast  and  frugal”  heuristics  because  of  limited  time,  information,  and  cognitive  capacity 
(Gigerenzer and Todd 1999). 
                                                 
4   For  example,  Caballero  and  Krishnamurthy  (2008)  show  how  liquidity  shocks  in  the  presence  of  Knightian 
uncertainty can cause  investors to hoard liquid assets. This occurs  because all firms  assume a  worst-case 
scenario – that they will be unable to access liquidity when required – and this causes them to hoard liquidity. 
Alternatively when information is dispersed across a large number of people, each with a noisy signal about 
economic fundamentals, outcomes may be determined by an “information cascade”, the outcome of which is 
hard to predict (Banerjee, 1992; Bikhchandani et al, 1992). 
5   See May and Arinaminpathy (2010) for a model of the financial system which makes this distinction. 
4 
 BIS Review 36/2010
information  under  uncertainty,  and 
There is strong experimental evidence that people are subject to biases when collecting and 
processing 
that  such  processing  occurs  only 
intermittently.6  The  evidence  suggests  that  people  are  also  frequently  incoherent  in 
assessing,  assigning  and  processing  probabilities  –  even  in  highly  artificial  settings  where 
information is complete – and find it particularly difficult to assess probabilities which are very 
low or very high, partly because there is less scope for learning in these cases. There is also 
evidence  that,  when  making  complex  decisions  or  without  full  information,  such  as  when 
deciding  whether  to  have  eye  surgery,  people  often  use  rough  heuristics,  or  go  on  first 
impressions, appearances, gut instinct or intuition. 
We want to highlight four main aspects of the behavioural view: 
(i) 
Perceptions of risk have been shown to be unduly influenced by recent or personal 
experience. After an earthquake, demand for earthquake insurance at first increases 
and then declines, while the probability of the next large earthquake may grow over 
time.7  So-called  “Depression  babies”  seem  to  take  less  financial  risk  than  other 
generations.8 Such an effect may explain why the fear of financial crises declines 
over time as memories of the last crisis fade. 
Decisions under uncertainty have been shown to be sensitive to the way questions 
are presented. People understand probabilities better if they are expressed in terms 
of  natural  frequencies  (1  in  10,000)  rather  than  percentages  (0.01%).  This  is  one 
symptom  of  a  wider  confusion  over  probabilistic  concepts.  Research  by  Gerd 
Gigerenzer  and  others  shows  that  doctors,  for  example,  are  often  misled  by 
information  presented  in  the  form  of  probabilities  rather  than  sample  frequencies. 
The  statement  that  a  diagnostic  test  has  a  5%  probability  of  a  false  positive  is 
misinterpreted more often than the statement that 5 patients out of every hundred 
taking the test will show a false positive.9 And this is compounded by the fact that 
many forecasts are not of the kind where reference back to a sample frequency is 
informative. Forecasts made today of the weather or the inflation rate at some date 
in  the  future  are  unique;  they  are  not  the  outcomes  of  a  repeated  experiment. 
Decisions  about  saving  for  future  pension  provision,  for  example,  are  difficult  to 
make the subject of experimentation, although we can learn from the experience of 
others. 
People tend to follow the actions of others. That can be an effective strategy. For 
example,  on  the  game  show  “Who  Wants  To  Be  A  Millionaire?”,  the  “Ask  the 
Audience”  lifeline  has  a  91%  success  rate,  showing  that  there  can  be  wisdom  in 
crowds.10 But experiments also show that a substantial proportion of people choose 
a glaringly incorrect answer to a simple question when told it is the answer others 
have chosen (even though the same question is answered correctly in isolation).11 
In a sporting setting, goalkeepers facing penalties tend to dive, rather than stay in 
the  middle  of  the  goal,  more  than  the  direction  of  penalties  suggests  is 
appropriate.12 Such types of behaviour reflect the fact that people are unwilling to 
(ii) 
(iii) 
                                                 
6   See the collection of articles in Kahneman, D, Slovic, P and Tversky, A (1982). 
7   For example, see Palm (1995). She found that those most affected by earthquakes were most likely to take 
out insurance afterward. But this effect faded as time elapsed after an earthquake. 
8   For example, Malmendier and Nagel (2006) report that those who experience high stock returns during their 
life are more likely to hold stocks and report lower risk aversion; those who have experienced high inflation are 
less likely to hold bonds. 
9   See, for example, Gigerenzer, G and Edwards, A (2003). 
10   See Surowiecki (2004). 
11   See, for example, Asch (1951). 
12   See Bar-Eli et al (2007). 
BIS Review 36/2010 
 5
(iv) 
risk  failure by  pursuing  strategies  that  are  different  from  the  norm.  The  penalty  of 
failure may be less if others fail in the same way – as Keynes pointed out was true 
of banks. 
People have excessive faith in their own judgements and are subject to confirmation 
bias  and  wishful  thinking.  An  experiment,  well  known  in  the  literature,  asked 
respondents  to  report  90%  confidence  intervals  around  our  estimates  of  a  set  of 
unknown  quantities  (e.g.  the  diameter  of  the  moon).13  But  the  true  answer  lay 
outside  the  reported  confidence  intervals  half  of  the  time.  This  reflects  a  general 
result that people are overly confident in their own judgements. This effect suggests 
that there may be a tendency to understate uncertainty and could explain why the 
“severe” stress testing scenarios used by banks before the crisis were so mild. 
Policy implications 
5. 
These observations about decision making under uncertainty in economics have implications 
for policy along three dimensions. 
First, decision making under uncertainty affects the dynamics of the economy. Some of the 
psychological biases discussed above can offer an explanation for “herding” behaviour and 
“risk illusion” (a tendency to over/underestimate likelihoods of different type of events). Taken 
together,  these  biases  could  offer  an  explanation  for  periodic  bouts  of  exuberance  in  the 
economy  and  the  financial  system  in  particular.14  As  such  they  should  bear  on  our 
assessment  of  the  likelihood  of  the  range  of  possible  outcomes.  Our  ignorance  of  how 
people  behave  under  uncertainty,  together  with  the  presence  of  feedbacks  between 
behaviour,  outturns  and  beliefs,  highlights  some  of  the  difficulties  and  pitfalls  of  economic 
policy making. 
Second, the recognition that beliefs and behaviour play an important role in the dynamics of 
the system affects the type of policy actions that are desirable. Ensuring that panic did not 
spread is one reason why guaranteeing all bank deposits following the run on Northern Rock 
in September 2007 was necessary. 
Third, communication is part of the policy response to uncertainty. In this respect, economic 
and financial systems differ from physical systems. In the latter, there is no-one listening. The 
control strategy in a physical system is defined by a scheme that relates the settings of policy 
instruments to certain features of the environment (e.g. fire left booster rocket if rocket veers 
to left of target). But in an economic system – because people’s beliefs about future policy 
actions affect their behaviour today – the control strategy has to comprise not only a plan for 
setting  the  instruments  (e.g.  raise Bank  Rate  if  expected  inflation  rises)  but  also a  plan  to 
condition  beliefs  about  how  policy  makers  would  respond  in  future.  That  involves 
communication. 
Communication 
6. 
A communication strategy involves deciding how much information to communicate, and in 
what  form.  Revealing  information  entails  costs  and  benefits.  An  optimal  communication 
strategy balances those costs and benefits. 
Consider first the benefits. Information is valuable and can improve the quality of decisions. 
Many  government  agencies  have  valuable  information  that  private  citizens  cannot  easily 
                                                 
13   See Plous (1993). 
14   Tucker (2009) discusses how this might create a friction that could be countered through the use of so-called 
macroprudential instruments. 
6 
 BIS Review 36/2010
obtain  for  themselves.  An  example  is  the  information  collected  by  the  Office  for  National 
Statistics on the economy and social trends. Central banks, too, may have information about 
the shocks hitting the economy, or about how they will be propagated, or indeed about the 
way in which policy is likely to respond. Provision of information about these issues may help 
people to reduce their forecast errors and take more informed decisions. 
As  we  discussed  earlier,  complex  economic  systems  may  have  multiple  equilibria. 
Movements between them depend on expectations and beliefs about others’ beliefs. That is 
especially so if there are strategic complementarities where the benefits of a strategy depend 
on the choice of strategies by others. Communication might help to coordinate beliefs so that 
a good rather than bad equilibrium results. Suppose that private investors begin to doubt the 
health of a bank which the central bank knows to be fundamentally solvent. A signal from the 
central bank that the bank is solvent may help to change beliefs, thus ensuring the continued 
liquidity  and  hence  solvency  of  the  healthy  bank.  But  it  may  not  be  clear  that  the  bank  is 
solvent, and in practice there is often no smoke without fire. 
Communication may help to improve the credibility of public policy. Economic policymakers 
often confront the problem that a future policy setting that is optimal today is not likely to be 
the policy that it would be optimal to follow tomorrow. Before central bank independence, a 
problem for monetary policy was that a government promise to deliver low inflation was not 
credible. Wage and price setters knew that if contracts were based on the assumption that 
future inflation would be low, the government would not be able to resist the temptation to 
generate inflation higher than promised because that would temporarily boost employment 
and output. So the initial promise was not believed. Once expectations of high inflation were 
embedded into prices and wages, it was at that point rational for the government to tolerate 
high inflation, because the cost of reducing it would be a deep recession. The idea of giving 
central  banks  independent  control  over  monetary  policy  was  to  remove  this  temptation  to 
inflate.15 
Communication  is  a  potential  solution  to  the  credibility  problem.  If  policymakers  are 
transparent about the objectives of a policy – and the strategy to be followed in pursuit of 
those objectives – it will be easier to hold them accountable for their actions. This increases 
the incentives for policy makers to meet their objectives. 
Despite all these benefits, it does not always follow that more communication is beneficial. 
More communication can be costly and self-defeating. First, private participants face costs in 
collecting  and  processing  information  that  could  mean  important  messages  are  lost.  The 
Bank  of  England  could  publish  all of  the  many  documents  which  it  creates  internally  each 
month.  But  that  would  simply  make  it  harder  for  the  really  important  information  to  get 
through. Less can be more. We could have minute by minute revisions to weather forecasts 
or terrorism threat estimates, but that might overwhelm genuine flood or bomb warnings to 
which we want people to respond.16 
Second,  communication  can  sometimes  aggravate  market  failures.  Suppose  the  RSPB 
knows a secret location where rare birds are nesting. To preserve biodiversity, there may be 
a great benefit to ensuring the birds can nest undisturbed. If the RSPB reveals its secret, bird 
watchers  may  converge  on  the  location.  Here,  less  than  full  transparency  mitigates  the 
problem. 
An  example  in  the  same  spirit  is  whether  or  not  use  by  commercial  banks  of  the  Bank  of 
England’s  lending  facilities  should  be  concealed.  If  use  of  the  facility  were  made  public, 
                                                 
15   For  an  exposition  of  the  credibility  problem  in  monetary  policy,  see  Kydland  and  Prescott  (1977);  for  an 
account of the benefits of central bank independence, see Fischer (1994). 
16   This idea has received theoretical attention recently following the encouragement of Sims (2003). He sketches 
a model in which agents are “rationally inattentive”, focusing only on information which they diagnose makes 
an important contribution to minimising forecast errors. 
BIS Review 36/2010 
 7
depositors  would  ask  themselves  why  it  had  been  used:  if  they  attached  even  a  small 
probability  to  the  possibility  that  the  bank  was  in  trouble,  it  would  be  rational  for  them  to 
withdraw their deposits – triggering a run on the bank. Anticipating this reaction, there is a 
risk  that  banks  would  choose  not  to  use  the  facilities.  Further,  some  market  participants 
might use the information that the facilities were being used to spread malicious rumours in 
the  hope  of  profiting  from  the  market  reaction.  Such  rumour-spreading  would  be  privately 
beneficial  for  the  rumour-spreaders,  but  socially  harmful.  That  is  why  when  designing  its 
discount window lending facilities, the Bank decided only to disclose average usage over a 
quarter, and then only with a lag.17 
Communication of forecasts is not easy. Probabilities are hard to understand. Yet a forecast 
is  not  a  number  but  an  estimated  probability  distribution.18  And  we  cannot  assume  that 
people obtain information in a neutral form. Indeed for most people information is conveyed 
to  them  via  the  media  which  may  filter  out  or  reinterpret  information.  This  leads  to  an 
incentive problem. Instead of simply reporting the information about future prospects made 
available  in  the  forecasts,  there  is  an  incentive  to  summarise  the  prospects  in  a  single 
number or to describe one part of the probability distribution in a way that makes for a good 
story. That suggests there is merit in trying to communicate directly to the public. 
Forecasts,  or  probabilistic  statements 
in  general,  can  easily  be  misunderstood  or 
misinterpreted.  As  a  result,  forecasters  may  decide  to  withhold  information,  even  when, 
correctly understood, there is something useful in the forecast – a case in point being the 
recent Met Office withdrawal of medium term seasonal forecasts. 
When experts retire from the field, it is left wide open to quackery – and there is no shortage 
of quacks whether in medicine, economics or meteorology. So there is a major challenge in 
explaining that, although we may not have a precise prediction of the effects of a particular 
policy action, nor are we wholly ignorant of its consequences. Finding illuminating ways of 
expressing those judgements is difficult but important. We must not pretend to know more 
than we do, and we must avoid the delusion of spurious precision. 
Communication in practice: fan charts 
7. 
It is time to put some flesh on the bones of these abstract discussions. It is time in fact for a 
show – a slide show of the graphical representation of the uncertainty about future inflation 
which the Bank of England uses to communicate its views about the outlook. 
The Bank of England publishes a range of documents which describe the uncertainty about 
our  analysis  of  the  economy,  and  hence  the  uncertainty  inherent  in  setting  policy.  Our 
longest-running,  and  perhaps  the  best  known,  is  the  quarterly  Inflation  Report,  which  the 
Bank has been producing since 1993. In it, the Monetary Policy Committee communicates its 
views about an uncertain future using methods that draw on the ideas discussed above. 
In the Inflation Report, the MPC sets out its latest projections for key economic variables. 
The  most  important  of  these  is  the  projection  for  inflation.  The  Committee  has  a  clear 
                                                 
17   Morris and Shin (2002) study a case in which a central bank can only reveal a noisy signal. That signal, which 
is  unavoidably  inaccurate  (e.g.  a  central  bank  forecast),  is  given  an  inappropriately  high  weight  in  private 
decisions because each private participant expects others to use it, and each wants to ensure that his action 
is  not  too  far  out  of  line  with  others’.  This  is  an  example  where  a  public  communication  coordinates  on  an 
inferior equilibrium. Morris and Shin also show that public information can crowd out private information. By 
ensuring  that  all  agents  overweight  public  information  in  their  decisions,  that  means  that  other  agents 
observing those decisions can infer less from them about the private information others have that motivated 
them. In the limit, if everyone took decisions solely on the basis of public information, they could reveal nothing 
about some private information they may also have, but did not act on. 
18   Dale, Orphanides and Osterholm (2008) illustrate how welfare can fall if the private sector overestimates the 
accuracy of central bank forecasts. 
8 
 BIS Review 36/2010
is 
of 
its 
an 
fan 
chart 
example 
effect.  Here 
target to meet, set by government. Inflation, as measured by the change in the Consumer 
Price  Index,  should  be  2%  at  all  times.  But  because  interest  rates  take  time  to  affect 
inflation,  forecasts  of  inflation  are  integral  to  setting  monetary  policy.  And  because  the 
MPC’s  forecast  is  a  probability  distribution,  rather  than  a  single  number,  it  is 
communicated in a fan chart. That depicts the MPC’s view of the probability of a range of 
different  outcomes.  Each  forecast  covers  a  three  year  forecast  period,  because  that  is  
the  horizon  over  which  we  expect  the  current  stance  of  monetary  policy  to  have  
the  majority 
(see 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2010/speech432.pps).  It  shows  the 
inflation  projection  published  in  the  February  2010  Inflation  Report.  Each  fan  chart  is 
conditioned  on  a  particular  path  for  the  Bank’s  policy  instruments.  This  one  assumes  that 
Bank  Rate  will  follow  the  path  expected  by  financial  markets.  The  MPC  also  publishes 
another  fan  chart  conditional  on  a  different  policy  assumption,  namely  that  Bank  Rate 
remains at its current level throughout the forecast. 
We believe these charts have been helpful in communicating the big picture that the MPC 
needs  to  get  across.  The  fan  chart works  by  showing  what the  Committee  believes  would 
happen to inflation if today’s economic circumstances were repeated on 100 occasions. In 
any given quarter in the future, CPI should lie somewhere in the red shaded area on 90 out 
of 100 occasions: 10 times in the darkest red band, and 10 times in each pair of lighter red 
bands. The darker shades refer to increasing probability densities at any given point. Of the 
remaining 10 out of every 100 occasions inflation is expected to lie outside the shaded part 
of the fan altogether. But the distribution of these tail events is not explicitly specified, as to 
do so would require a spurious degree of precision on the part of the MPC. 
The fan chart is designed to communicate specific concepts important to policy. Next, we will 
illustrate these using the February fan chart. But first, let’s briefly recap the recent history of 
inflation. Here, you can see that over the past couple of years inflation has been volatile, first 
rising sharply to around 5% and then falling back recently [Slide 2]. Looking ahead, the MPC 
felt it was likely that inflation would rise again in the first quarter of this year [Slide 3]. You can 
see  that  in  this  projection  the  entire  90%  of  the  distribution  covered  by  the  shaded  fan  is 
higher than the last data point. Remember, though, with 10% of the distribution not specified, 
the MPC were not ruling out the possibility that inflation might have remained unchanged or 
fallen.  
Since this projection was published, new data have been released for inflation in January, 
shown by the green marker [Slide 4]. This showed that inflation had indeed risen. So it now 
looks even more likely that inflation in the first quarter of 2010 will be close to the middle of 
the MPC’s fan chart. Thereafter, the MPC expected that inflation was more likely than not to 
fall back and be below target for a period [Slide 5]. You can see that the most likely outcome, 
shown in the darkest band, was for inflation to stay below the target at the end of the forecast 
period. But the MPC also saw upside risks to that projection, stemming from the possibility 
that the current high level of inflation might become embedded in inflation expectations, so 
making inflation itself more persistent. To make these risks easier to discern, the MPC also 
makes available charts of the cross section of the probability distribution at particular points 
on the forecast horizon, like the one shown in [Slide 6]. The upside risks mean that at the 
end of the forecast horizon, the MPC judged that inflation was as likely to be above the target 
as below it. We can see this in the chart, because the narrower bands towards the left hand 
side mean that the mass below the vertical line marking 2% is about the same as the mass 
above it. 
But why do we show our projections like this? Many other economic forecasters publish their 
forecast  as  a  single,  most  likely  outcome.  In  our  view,  this  sort  of  forecast  is  not  very 
informative, as the actual probability of it being correct is very close to zero. In contrast, the 
whole  distribution  contains  much  more  information.  What  matters  for  policy  is  the  entire 
distribution of outcomes. The fan charts are useful because they contain information relevant 
to  the  likely  distribution  of  Bank  Rate.  To  explain  its  current  policy  setting,  and  to  provide 
BIS Review 36/2010 
 9
information on the likely path of policy, the MPC needs to communicate its judgement of the 
outlook as a whole. 
Most  other  central  banks  also  try  to  illustrate uncertainty  around  their  projections,  albeit  in 
slightly different ways. The European Central Bank, for example, presents its forecasts as a 
range defined as twice the mean absolute forecast error over the past [Slide 7]. 
The  Federal  Reserve  produces  projections  that  show  the  range  of  individual  [most  likely] 
forecasts – as viewed by each Federal Reserve Bank President and Governor. This is shown 
by the spread of the whiskers [Slide 8]. They also produce a measure of “central tendency” 
which truncates that distribution by excluding the three highest and three lowest forecasts, 
here  represented  by  the  boxes.  This  representation  of  the  differences  of  view  within  the 
Federal  Reserve  is  very  different  from  a  probability  distribution  of  future  outcomes.  In  our 
experience, communication of the uncertainty about future inflation is important in explaining 
monetary policy. 
The Swedish Riksbank adopts a similar approach to ours and use fan charts as their key tool 
for communicating views on the outlook. [Slide 9]. 
Looking  back,  we  can  see  how  our  communication  strategy  has  evolved  in  the  light  of 
experience over the past 17 years. [Slide 10] shows that even in the early days, we tried to 
get across uncertainty around our projections, illustrating this with a “trumpet” of uncertainty 
in the left hand panel. It was not until 1996 that we introduced the more sophisticated fan 
chart, on the right, as our main device for communicating about the outlook. 
As part of that evolutionary process, and to complement our projections for inflation, the MPC 
has  also  produced  fan  charts  for  activity  in  the  economy  –  specifically  GDP  –  since 
November 1997. Ordinarily, we have shown this as a projection for the four-quarter growth 
rate, which for most commentators, is the standard way of looking at GDP. [Slide 11] shows 
the recent data for GDP, portraying a sharp decline in output over the past two years. There 
are  two  points  to  highlight  with  this  chart.  First,  there  is  a  fan  around  the  historical  data 
[Slide 12].  That  reflects  the  fact  that  economic  data  are  frequently  revised  over  time  
– sometimes heavily. CPI, in contrast, is rarely revised. The chart shows that there is quite a 
lot of uncertainty about the past data. The MPC believes it is more likely than not that the 
current  vintage  of  data  will  be  revised  up  slightly.  But  the  big  picture  of  a  large  decline  in 
output is likely to remain even in the mature data. Uncertainty about the past is an important 
component of our uncertainty about the future, and is reflected in the forward-looking part of 
the GDP fan [Slide 13]. The second point is that the forecast part of the chart shows that a 
return to growth is likely. But if you just had this chart to look at you might feel that the MPC 
was  quite  optimistic,  and  after  a  painful,  deep  recession  it  was  expecting  the  economy  to 
rebound. 
In some ways, that is true. But by itself that would be a misleading inference. The reality is 
that  even  if  growth  rebounds,  the  level  of  activity  is  still  very  likely  to  remain  weak  for  a 
considerable period compared to the peak at the start of 2008. The economic environment is 
likely to continue to feel far from normal for some time. After all, it is ultimately the level of 
activity,  rather  than  its  growth  rate,  that  matters  for  employment  and  the  degree  of 
inflationary pressure. It was precisely to draw out this point that recent editions of the Inflation 
Report have included an extra chart [Slide 14]. This shows the level of output corresponding 
to  the  growth  chart.  In  practice,  we  have  found  that,  even  though  these  charts  show  the 
same information, the levels chart can be more effective at getting that big picture message 
across. 
Despite these efforts, there are still nuances that we have found challenging to communicate. 
The fan chart conveys a rich view of the uncertainties in the current forecast. But it does so 
at  the  cost  of  it  being  hard  to  see  how  the  distribution  has  changed  compared  with  the 
preceding forecast. So perhaps it is unsurprising that some commentators have found it hard 
to grasp the subtleties of our forecasts. That has led some to suggest that we publish tables 
10 
 BIS Review 36/2010
of key summary statistics on the same day as our forecasts – the mean, median and mode of 
the distribution. 
We fear that if we make such statistics available, all of our hard efforts to communicate the 
outlook as a whole get washed away in an extreme focus on point estimates. We do not want 
media commentators to summarise that outlook in a single number, preventing us getting the 
broader view across. 
As well as leading to over-simplification, publishing the information can also promote over-
interpretation  of  our  forecast.  Whilst  the  fan  chart  represents  the  Committee’s  probabilistic 
view of the future, it is important to recognise that it has only incomplete information on that 
distribution. We therefore should not overplay the particular parametric form of the chart. As 
a result, it makes little sense to place a lot of weight on particular summary statistics of the 
distribution.  Rather,  what  the  Committee  can  do  is  make  broad  statements  –  such  as 
“inflation is more likely than not to be above the target”. Being more precise risks overstating 
the MPC’s degree of knowledge about the distribution. 
So  the  MPC’s  concern  is  that  early  publication  of  the  numerical  parameters  risks  not  only 
trivialising the policymakers’ overall view of the economy, but misrepresenting that view by 
being overly precise. The fan chart is designed to strike the right balance between these two 
hazards,  by  giving  a  broad  brush  articulation  of  the  distribution  that  the  Committee  judges 
appropriate. 
But  there  is  always  room  for  improvement.  So  we  turn  to  some  of  the  ideas  we  have 
considered  for  providing  additional  information  on  particular  aspects  of  the  distribution,  to 
help  deal  with  some  of  these  difficulties.  For  example,  the  next  chart  shows  how  the 
distribution has changed since the previous forecast by placing the two distributions side by 
side, as in [Slide 15]. This chart shows that the most likely outcome in the dark red band has 
shifted down compared with the earlier forecast. But that change in the most likely outcome 
is not reflected to the same degree in the rest of the fan chart – and that is because there 
has  been  an  offsetting  upwards  shift  in  the  balance  of  risks.  This  is  most  clearly  seen  by 
noting how the dark line is flatter than the light one on the right hand side of the chart, and 
steeper than it is on the left. 
As  we  discussed  earlier,  the  aim  of  MPC  communication  is  to  convey  useful  information 
about the broad distribution, without being driven to spurious accuracy. There are many ways 
we can do this. One idea that we are investigating is to show charts of the MPC’s view of the 
probability that inflation will be above the 2% target at a particular point in time. This is shown 
in  [Slide  16].  Such  a  chart  does  speak  to  the  whole  distribution,  and  it  facilitates  easy 
comparison with the previous forecast round [Slide 17]. 
But it still has the problem that it assigns a precise probability to a given outcome. A solitary 
Bayesian policymaker may be comfortable with that. But in reality there is no unique answer 
that  encapsulates  the  collective  judgement  of  the  MPC.  In  the  Bank’s  experience,  MPC 
members find it more important to focus on distinguishing between the different broad orders 
of  magnitude  of  future  events,  and  are  less  interested  in  debating  whether  something  will 
happen 49 times out of 100 or 52 times. 
One  answer  to  this  tension  is  to  describe  the  problem  in  words.  But  that  carries  its  own 
difficulties.  An  alternative  is  to  design  a  graphical  device  which  prevents  the  illusion  of 
spurious precision. Simple graphical changes to the chart such as [Slide 18] emphasise that 
the  MPC’s  view  is  not  best  expressed  by  a  precise  numerical  for  the  probability.  But  a 
downside of this sort of representation is that it does not readily permit comparisons between 
successive forecasts. 
Instead, a further alternative that the MPC is considering is to present this as a “probability 
ribbon”  [Slide  19].  This  shows  a  range  estimate  of  the  probability  that  inflation  will  exceed 
target, defined by the edges of the relevant band of the fan chart. In doing so it preserves the 
broad impression of the Committee’s overall view, yet filters out the artificial accuracy. For 
BIS Review 36/2010 
 11
instance,  the  Committee  thought  that  the  chance  that  inflation  would  be  2%  or  higher  in 
2011Q1 was between 15% and 20%. 
We can once again use the February forecast to highlight a few of the key messages that the 
MPC  wanted  to  communicate.  In  the  early  part  of  the  forecast  period,  the  probability  of 
inflation being above the target is very high. This is because the data for inflation are well 
above  target  at  present,  and  also  because  the  fan  chart  here  is  relatively  narrow.  But  the 
projection for inflation falls over the  forecast period. This implies a fall in the probability of 
inflation being above target. Towards the final part of the projection, the probability of inflation 
being above the target rises back to being broadly one half. This chart emphasises that, in 
spite of the most likely outcome for inflation being below target, the nature of the distribution 
of risks implies that the probability of exceeding the target is about one in two. 
We can also combine the usual top-down fan chart with the information in the cross-sectional 
densities to produce a 3D fan chart [Slide 20]. The particular advantage of this chart is that it 
shows how the overall density changes over time. For instance, when the distribution is very 
narrow, such as at the start of the forecast period, the probability density at the centre of the 
fan is higher, simply because the MPC is more confident about its central forecast here. 
Overall, however, both from the point of view of how policy is determined, as well as how it is 
communicated, it is the broad distribution that matters. 
Conclusions 
8. 
Self-confidence  is  infectious.  It  can  also  be  dangerous.  How  often  have  we  drawn  false 
comfort  from  the  apparent  confidence  of  a  professional  advisor  promising  certain  success 
only to be disappointed by subsequent performance? Uncertainty pervades almost all public 
policy  questions.  Economics  and  many  other  disciplines  are  united  by  a  common  need  to 
grapple with complex systems. As the crisis of the autumn of 2008 showed, such systems 
can sometimes be subject to abrupt changes, the precise timing of which cannot easily be 
identified in advance. But policy-makers are often expected to anticipate the unpredictable. 
How  can  they  retain  the  trust  of  the  public  while  being  open  about  the  true  degree  of 
uncertainty?  Or,  to  put  it  another  way,  what  is  the  appropriate  bedside  manner  for  policy-
makers  when  dealing  with  complex  uncertain  problems  in  a  public  debate?  We  have 
explained how the Bank of England tries to deal with some of those challenges in the context 
of  monetary  policy.  We  are  sure  we  have  much  to  learn,  and  our  efforts  to  improve 
communication will continue for a long time to come. 
(1995), 
Interview  with 
“The  Region”  magazine, 
References 
Anderson,  R  and  May,  R  (1991),  “Infectious  diseases  of  humans:  dynamics  and  control.” 
Oxford University Press. 
Arrow,  K 
http://www.minneapolisfed.org/publications_papers/pub_display.cfm?id=3675. 
Asch,  S  E  (1951),  “Effects  of  group  pressure  upon  the  modification  and  distortion  of 
judgment”.  In  Guetzkow,  H  (ed.)  “Groups,  leadership  and  men”  Pittsburgh,  PA:  Carnegie 
Press. 
Banerjee,  A  (1992),  “A  Simple  model  of  herd  behaviour.”  Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics, 
107(3), 797–817. 
Bar-Eli,  M,  Azer,  O,  Ritov,  I,  Keidar-Levin,  Y,  Schein,  G  (2007)  “Action  bias  among  elite 
soccer  goalkeepers:  the  case  of  penalty  kicks”,  Journal  of  Economic  Psychology,  vol  28 
No 5, pp 606–621. 
available 
at 
12 
 BIS Review 36/2010
at 
(2009), 
available 
“Rethinking 
Bikhchandani, S. Hirshleifer, D. and Welch, I. (1992), “A theory of fads, fashion, custom and 
cultural change as informational cascades.” Journal of Political Economy, 100(5), 992–1026. 
Caballero, R and Krishnamurthy, A (2008) “Collective Risk Management in a Flight to Quality 
Episode.” The Journal of Finance Vol. 63 No. 5, October 2008. 
Dale,  S,  Orphanides,  A  and  Osterholm,  P  (2008)  “Imperfect  central  bank  communication 
versus distraction”, IMF working papers 08/60, IMF. 
Fischer,  S  (1994)  “Modern  central  banking”,  in  Capie,  F.  Fischer,  S.  Goodhart,  C.  and 
Schnadt, N. (eds) “The future of central banking”, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press. 
Gigerenzer,  G  and  Edwards,  A  (2003),  “Simple  tools  for  understanding  risks:  from 
innumeracy to insight”, British Medical Journal, vol 327, pp 741–744. 
Gigerenzer, G and Todd, PM (1999) Simple heuristics that make us smart, OUP, New York. 
Haldane,  A  G 
the  Financial  Network”, 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2009/speech386.pdf. 
Kahneman, D, Slovic, P and Tversky, A (1982), “Judgment under Uncertainty: Heuristics and 
Biases”, Cambridge University Press. 
Keynes,  JM  (1936)  “The  general  theory  of  employment,  interest  and  money”,  London: 
MacMillan (reprinted 2007). 
Knight, F (1921) “Risk, Uncertainty and Profit.” Houghton Mifflin, Boston. 
Kydland, F and Prescott, E (1977), “Rules rather than discretion: the inconsistency of optimal 
plans”, Journal of Political Economy, vol 85, pp473–490. 
Malmendier,  U  and  Nagel,  S,  (2007),  “Do  macroeconomic  experiences  affect  risk  taking”, 
mimeo. 
Met Office (2010), “Changes to Met Office forecasts”, Press Release, 5 March. 
Morris,  S.  and  Shin,  H.S.  (2002),  “The  Social  Value  of  Public  Information,”  American 
Economic Review 92, 1521–1534). 
May,  R.  and  Arinaminpathy,  N.  (2010),  “Systemic  risk:  the  dynamics  of  model  banking 
systems.” Journal of the Royal Society Interface. (In Press). 
Palm, R (1995) “Earthquake insurance: A longitudinal study of California Homeowners”. 
Plous,  S  (1993),  “The  psychology  of  judgment  and  decision  making”.  Philadelphia  Temple 
University Press. 
Scheinkman  and  Woodford  (1994),  “Self-Organized  Criticality  and  Economic  Fluctuations.” 
American Economic Review, Vol. 84, No. 2. 
Sims, C (2003) “Implications of rational inattention”, Journal of Monetary Economics, vol 50, 
no 3, pp 665–690. 
Sugihara, G and May, R (1990) “Nonlinear forecasting as a way of distinguishing chaos from 
measurement error in time series”, Nature, 344, 6268, 734–741. 
Surowiecki, J (2004), “The Wisdom of Crowds”. 
Tucker, P (2009) “The Debate on Financial System Resilience: Macroprudential Instruments” 
available at http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2009/speech407.pdf. 
BIS Review 36/2010 
 13
