Denny H Kalyalya: High performance leadership 
Opening speech by Dr Denny H Kalyalya, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at 
the Opening of the High Performance Leadership Workshop, Lusaka, 9 August 2010. 
 Chairperson
Workshop facilitators from MCA International
Directors and Assistant Directors
Other Participants
Ladies and gentlemen





On behalf of Bank of Zambia Senior Management and indeed on my own behalf, I wish to 
welcome you all to this important workshop, on High Performance Leadership, organized 
by our Human Resources Department in conjunction with MCA International. I commend the 
Human  Resources  Department  for  taking  the  initiative  to  organise  this  workshop,  which  is 
intended to facilitate exchange of information and views on appropriate leadership attributes 
to help us enhance our performance as leaders in our respective positions.  
Ladies and gentlemen, as you are aware, our key role as a central bank is to deliver low 
and  stable  prices  and  maintain  financial  system  stability.  In  spite  of  the  global  economic 
downturn,  our  country  is  enjoying  relative  economic  stability,  with  good  prospects  for  the 
future following the recent and on-going significant economic transformation of our economy.  
Due to implementation of appropriate macroeconomic policies:  
i.
The country has registered positive real GDP growth for the past 10 years and over
the last five years, real GDP growth rate has averaged 6% annually;
Inflation and exchange rates developments have also been favourable. In 2006, a
single digit inflation level was attained. Although inflation rose to double digit levels
at the end of 2008 owing to the effects of the global economic crisis, we have since
seen it return to single digit levels;
The 
tremendous  growth  since 
commencement of liberal economic and financial policies in the early 1990s; and
Equally, positive developments have been registered in the payment systems.
financial  sector  has  also 
recorded 
iv.
I must caution, though. that sustaining macroeconomic stability remains a key challenge in 
the face of limited resources, infrastructure and financial inclusion.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  as  you  participate  in  this  workshop,  allow  me  to  underscore  the 
importance, we in Senior Management attach to capacity building programmes for all Bank 
employees.  I  am  reliably  informed  that  during  the  workshop  you  will  cover  a  number  of 
important topics including the following:  
i.
ii.
iii.
iv.
v.
vi.
Self awareness;
Time management;
Action or goals required to achieve a vision;
Emotional intelligence and values;
Power to take action; and
Ability to manage direction successfully.
ii.
iii.
the
BIS Review 107/2010 
1
I am fully aware that some of the topics that you will be dealing with may not be entirely new 
to you, but I firmly believe that they may be necessary for purposes of reinforcing what you 
already know. You are all therefore implored to take keen interest in all the topics if you are 
to realise the full benefit of the workshop.  
Chairperson,  there  can  be  no  true  development  in  our  Bank  without  good  and  effective 
leadership.  Leadership  is  required  for  us  to  achieve  our  objectives.  We  live  in  a  dynamic 
world which calls for good leadership dedicated to hardwork, daily learning , fast thinking and 
acting swiftly and prudently at all times.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  you  will  recall  that  not  too  long  ago,  we  were  all  involved  in  the 
review of the Bank’s strategic plan and came up with the 2009–2012 Strategic Plan. In order 
to  fully  implement  the  goals  and  objectives  of  our  strategic  plan  we  need  to  enhance  our 
leadership skills. It is against this background that this workshop was organised. Our desire 
is to constantly upgrade our leadership skills for the attainment of our goals and objectives 
even in the face of daunting challenges.  
In  conclusion,  I  wish  to  urge  you  to  actively  participate  and  take  a  keen  interest  in  the 
deliberations of this workshop. It is our expectation that you will have an opportunity to carry 
out an appraisal of your individual leadership style and refine it in order to impact positively 
on policy and the way the Bank operates.  
With these few remarks, it is my pleasure to declare the workshop officially open and to wish 
you all fruitful deliberations.  
I thank you! 
2 
 BIS Review 107/2010
