Usha Thorat: Milestones of bank note production in India 
Welcome address by Ms Usha Thorat, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, and 
Chairperson of the Bharatiya Reserve Bank Note Mudran Private Limited (BRBNMPL), at the 
foundation stone laying ceremony of the Banknote Paper Mill, Mysore, 22 March 2010. 
 1. 
Hon’ble Finance Minister, Shri Pranab Mukherjee, Governor. RBI, Dr. Subba Rao, 
Members  of  Parliament,  Shri  A.  H.  Viswanath  and  Shri  Dhruv  Narayana,  Members  of 
Karnataka  Legislative  Assembly,  Mayor  of  Mysore  Shri  Purushotham,  Directors  on  the 
Boards of BRBNMPL and SPMCIL, distinguished guests and staff of the BRBNMPL – a very 
warm welcome to all of you to this traditional city of Mysore. 
2. 
It is my proud privilege to welcome this distinguished gathering on this occasion of 
laying of the foundation stone for a Banknote Paper Mill here in the premises of BRBNMPL. 
It is even more significant that this project is being inaugurated in the platinum jubilee year of 
the Reserve Bank of India. On behalf of Reserve Bank of India, BRBNMPL and SPMCIL, I 
warmly and respectfully welcome the Hon’ble Finance Minister who has kindly accepted our 
invitation  to  lay  the  foundation  stone  for  the  Banknote  Paper  Mill.  Sir,  we  are  greatly 
honoured  to  have  you  here  with  us  today.  Today  is  indeed  a  milestone  event  in  the 
indigenization  of  the  production  of  bank  notes  and  your  presence  here  is  a  source  of 
enormous strength and encouragement in ensuring the fruition of this dream. Our heartfelt 
thanks to you for having made it convenient to come. To us it reflects your commitment and 
support. We also recall with pride that it was during your tenure as Finance Minister in the 
mid 1980s that the proposal for the new note printing presses of RBI at Mysore and Salboni 
were approved. I may add that it is the first time any FM has visited the BRBNMPL.  
It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  welcome  Governor,  Dr.  Subbarao,  without  whose 
3. 
guidance and support this project could not have been possible. I also extend a warm and 
cordial  welcome  to  the  Members  of  Parliament,  the  Members  of  Karnataka  Legislative 
Assembly,  the  Mayor  of  Mysore,  senior  officials  from  Government  of  India,  Karnataka 
Government, Directors of SPMCIL and BRBNMPL, my colleagues from the Reserve Bank of 
India and the staff of the BRBNMPL, other dignitaries and each and every one of you who 
have honoured us by gracing this historical occasion.  
4. 
The Banknote Paper Mill is a joint venture between the BRBNMPL and the SPMCIL. 
Security Printing & Minting Corporation of India Ltd. (SPMCIL), a wholly owned company of 
the  Government  of  India,  was  incorporated  in  January  2006  and  represented  the 
corporatisation  of  all  the  security  printing  and  minting  activities  that  were  being  done 
departmentally.  Bharatiya  Reserve  Bank  Note  Mudran  Private  Limited  (BRBNMPL)  was 
established by Reserve Bank of India as its wholly owned subsidiary on 3rd February 1995 
for undertaking the production of bank notes in India. 
5. 
There are several advantages in this paper mill being set up in the premises of the 
BRBNMPL’s  press.  Besides  adequate  land,  basic  infrastructure  and  surplus  residential 
quarters  are  already  available  in  the  BRBNMPL’s  premises.  Cotton,  which  is  the  principal 
raw material is available nearby from and around Coimbatore. 
6. 
Going ahead, we are targeting to commission the first line with 6000 MT capacity by 
the latter part of 2012 and eventually achieve full capacity of 12000 MT in another year or so. 
The estimated pay back period is 4/5 years. With the cooperation of the Centre and State 
Government and others concerned, we are confident that these milestones can be achieved.  
BIS Review 35/2010 
 1
Today, I would like to recount the reassuring response of Shri Pranab Mukherjee to 
7. 
a query in an interview1 he had with “The Tribune” some years ago. On being asked as to 
what have been our (India’s) strong points, Shri Mukherjee replied: 
“We have built up a huge infrastructure, industrial and human. We have the largest number 
of technically and technologically competent personnel. We have the third largest reservoir of 
human talent in the world. In purchasing power parity we have the fifth largest economy …” 
We are encouraged and inspired by your confidence in the nation’s capabilities. We assure 
you  Sir,  this  Mill,  the  foundation  stone  of  which  you  are  laying  today  will  live  up  to  your 
expectations. With these words, I once again extend a warm welcome to the Hon’ble Finance 
Minister  and  to  each  one  of  you  and  seek  your  blessings  for  the  success  of  this  project. 
Thank you. 
                                                 
1  http://www.tribuneindia.com/50yrs/pranab.htm. 
2 
 BIS Review 35/2010
