A D Mminele: Insulating South Africa against global risks – challenges 
Address by Mr A D Mminele, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 
13th Southern Africa Internal Audit conference, Sandton, Johannesburg, 18 August 2010. 
 Introduction  
1.  
Good morning ladies and gentlemen, and thank you to the Institute of Internal Auditors for 
the invitation to speak at this 13th Southern Africa Internal Audit Conference.  
It has been well over three years since the onset of the global financial and economic crisis. 
As  with  any  crisis,  many  questions  have  been  asked.  Could  it  have  been  avoided?  What 
were the causes? What needs to be done to safeguard the financial system in the future? 
Blame was apportioned everywhere. Central banks were not spared the scrutiny, with some 
even  suggesting  that  central  banks  were  to  blame  for  having  a  too  narrow  focus  in  the 
fulfilment of their mandates. It is argued that low policy rates, as a result of low and stable 
inflation,  created  the  necessary  environment  for  excessive  risk  taking.  Others  blamed  the 
crisis on a lack of proactive risk management practices. While there is no risk management 
system that can provide absolute assurance that events such as the financial crisis will not 
occur, it certainly did heighten awareness about risk management practices of companies. 
There is little doubt that the expectations of the internal audit profession have been raised 
considerably since this crisis.  
In  my  remarks  today  I  shall  touch  on  the  evolution  of  the  crisis,  discuss  some  of  the  key 
global  risks  and  their  impact  on  South  Africa,  look  at  some  of  the  challenges  that  central 
banks  are  facing,  and  conclude  with  a  few  observations  around  what  we  need  to  do  to 
ensure that, as a country, we are resilient and better prepared for future challenges.  
From sub-prime debt to sovereign debt  
2.  
No  sooner  had  the  global  economy  emerged  from  recession  in  2009  that  it  seemed  there 
was yet another crisis brewing. Some have argued that we actually never emerged from the 
crisis and that we were dealing with a continuum and just moved into the next phase of it. 
Extraordinary policy measures implemented by governments and central banks around the 
world helped lift global output. However, in the process, there was also a significant transfer 
of debt from the private to the public sector as government spending in advanced economies 
was  ramped  up  and  substantial  tax  incentives  were  implemented.  The  combined  effect  of 
slower  growth  and  higher  spending  was  an  increase  in  budget  deficits  in  many  advanced 
economies,  to  levels  in  excess  of  10  per  cent  of  gross  domestic  product  (GDP).  The 
International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  projects  that  as  a  consequence,  public  debt  ratios  will 
most likely increase from around 70 per cent of GDP to average approximately 110 per cent 
of  GDP  in  2014.  While  credit  standing,  funding  conditions,  and  thus  the  degree  of 
vulnerability vary across countries, we have to remind ourselves that not too long ago, a debt 
to GDP ratio in excess of 60 per cent was viewed to be bordering on fiscal irresponsibility, 
much as we are facing exceptional circumstances that require exceptional solutions.  
As the European sovereign debt crisis intensified, it increased the likelihood of a systemic 
financial crisis. The solvency of European banks was questioned, given their large holdings 
of  debt  of  affected  countries.  At  the  end  of  2009,  European  bank  holdings  of  Portuguese, 
Spanish and Greek bonds totalled EUR1,2 trillion, with a high concentration of holdings by 
German  and  French  banks1.  The  credit  default  swap  (CDS)  spreads  of  European  banks 
                                                 
1   Europe’s sovereign debt crisis: no place to hide?, John Makin, June 2010. 
BIS Review 109/2010 
 1
moved in tandem with sovereign CDS spreads, reflecting the exposure of European banks to 
sovereign  debt.  Spillovers  between  sovereigns  and  the  banking  system  increased  market 
and liquidity risks during May 2010, and in some of the euro area countries, banks became 
less willing to lend to each other, risk appetite declined and asset prices in financial markets 
experienced  increased  volatility.  CDS  premia  in  respect  of  the  debt  of  certain  European 
sovereigns increased substantially.  
Market strains have receded somewhat since May 2010, largely due to the EUR750 billion 
package assembled by the European Union and the International Monetary Fund, and the 
results of the European banking sector stress tests, which indicated that the banking sector 
was in better shape than feared.  
Key global risks  
3.  
The rise in CDS spreads for various southern European countries, by and large did not affect 
emerging markets. The stability of emerging markets during the sovereign debt crisis can be 
ascribed to comparatively low government debt to GDP ratios, better growth prospects and a 
limited  use  of  countercyclical  fiscal  policy  during  the  global  recession.  Furthermore,  the 
prognosis looks good as the public debt ratios in emerging markets are expected to decline 
from around 60 per cent of GDP to 40 per cent over the next four years.  
Although  emerging  markets  came  away  relatively  unscathed  from  the  recent  debt  crisis  in 
Europe,  problems  in  advanced  economy  debt  markets  could  very  easily  spill  over  to 
emerging markets, as we have already seen on numerous previous occasions. A sharp rise 
in  investor  risk  aversion  could  lead  to  funding  strains  in  emerging  markets  as  European 
banks  withdraw  cross-border  credit  facilities.  Cross-border  bank  exposures  can  be  the 
conduit  for  spillovers  of  sovereign  risks  to  banks  and  for  this  to  spread  further  to  other 
banking systems in the region and beyond.  
Heightened  uncertainty  about  financial  sector  exposure  to  sovereign  risks  and  increased 
funding  costs  could  curtail  the  supply  of  bank  credit.  Lower  consumer  and  business 
confidence,  together  with  fiscal  consolidation,  could  suppress  private  consumption  and 
investment. The combination of these forces would derail global growth owing to substantial 
negative spillovers to other countries and regions due to financial and trade linkages.  
Even in the absence of an increase in risk aversion, the process of fiscal consolidation will 
place  most  of  the  burden  of  adjustment  on  monetary  policies,  implying  that  policy  rates  in 
advanced  economies  would  have  to  remain  “lower  for  longer”.  Indeed,  the  exit  from 
extraordinary fiscal, monetary and financial policies has become more complicated. We have 
already witnessed the Fed’s decision last week to plough proceeds from maturing mortgage 
bonds into government bonds, effectively implying a continuation of the quantitative easing 
policy. In contrast to a situation of heightened risk aversion, such a scenario would result in 
increased portfolio inflows to emerging markets, intensifying pressure on exchange rates to 
appreciate with potentially negative ramifications on growth, increasing the potential for asset 
price bubbles.  
Impact on South Africa  
4.  
The  financial  crisis  has  shown  us  that  countries  such  as  South  Africa  with  limited  or  no 
exposure  to  toxic  assets  were  also  severely  affected  by  developments  in  the  rest  of  the 
world.  While  a  stronger  budget  balance  and  lower  debt  ratio  did  allow  some  room  for 
countercyclical policy, the South African economy still contracted by 1,8 per cent in 2009 as 
compared  to  an  average  GDP  growth  rate  of  4,9  per  cent  achieved  during  the  preceding 
5 years.  
The South African economy emerged from recession in the third quarter of 2009, and growth 
has  since  accelerated  to  4,6  per  cent  in  the  first  quarter  of  2010.  Growth  was  fairly 
2 
 BIS Review 109/2010
widespread, with the manufacturing sector playing a strong role, together with commerce and 
mining  and  a  pick-up  in  household  and  government  consumption  expenditure.  While  the 
South  African  growth  trajectory  has  improved  considerably,  indications  are  that  second 
quarter  growth  is  likely  to  have  been  less  stellar.  The  Bank’s  latest  projections  show  that 
economic  growth  should  average  around  2,9  per  cent  during  2010,  with  the  uncertainties 
emanating from the global economy posing the main downside risks. CPI inflation has been 
inside  the  target  range  since  February  2010,  with  the  outlook  being  generally  favourable, 
although developments around wage settlements and administered price increases continue 
to pose upside risks.  
The  low  interest  rate  environment  prevailing  in  advanced  economies  has  resulted  in  a 
consistent  search  for  yield,  and  as  a  consequence,  South  Africa,  like  other  emerging 
markets,  has  attracted  significant  capital  inflows.  Since  the  beginning  of  the  year,  non-
residents have purchased over R75 billion worth of domestic bonds and equities.  
The  rand  exchange  rate  has  been  somewhat  volatile  and  in  the  past  two  months  the 
rand/dollar  exchange  rate  fluctuated  between  R8.10  and  R7.18.  After  declining  from 
45 per cent  in  October  2008  to  13  per  cent  in  April  2010,  historical  volatility  of  the  rand 
increased briefly to 18 per cent in May 2010, but has since eased from these levels. Much of 
the underlying volatility can be ascribed to changes in global risk aversion related to events 
in Europe in particular, with significant volatility experienced in the USD/EUR exchange rate. 
However, it is worth pointing out that the volatility in the exchange rate of the rand has been 
in  line  with  the  volatility  observed  in  respect  of  currencies  of  other  emerging  market  and 
developed countries.  
It  is  generally  accepted  that  currency  volatility  and  excessive  appreciation  unrelated  to 
economic fundamentals can have an undesirable effect on the domestic economy, through 
adverse impacts on both the export and import-oriented sectors. While the Bank is cognisant 
that  an  over-valued  exchange  rate  over  an  extended  period  can  be  very  costly  to  the 
economy,  it  also  needs  to  be  recognised  that  the  open  nature  of  our  economy  makes  us 
more  susceptible  to  all  kinds  of  spillovers  from  the  global  economy  and  financial  markets, 
making any attempts to seek to control the exchange rate at a particular level not feasible. 
Not  having  or  not  seeking  any  particular  target  for  the  exchange  rate,  however,  does  not 
imply that reasonable and responsible steps cannot be taken to manage abrupt adjustments. 
As we have said on numerous occasions, any actions would have to be consistent with the 
inflation target. While the rand exchange rate is a critical variable, we need to take a more 
holistic view to ensure that the overall policy mix is designed and implemented in such a way 
that  policies  are  complementary  in  order  to  raise  economy-wide  productivity,  growth  and 
employment while keeping inflation in check.  
New challenges for central banks?  
5.  
Over  the  past  two  decades,  central  banks  in  advanced  and  emerging  economies  adopted 
monetary  policy  frameworks  with  price  stability  as  the  primary  objective.  Monetary  policy 
worked  through  interest  rates  and  therefore,  only  influenced  current  and  future  expected 
short-term interest rates, which in turn, impacted on long-term interest rates and asset prices. 
Central banks were successful in bringing down inflation to levels not seen since the 1950s 
and  were  credited  with  contributing  to  an  exceptionally  long  period  of  stable  growth2. 
Through  focusing  on  price  stability,  monetary  policy  was  believed  to  have  contributed  to 
financial stability. The crisis has taught us that too narrow or single-minded a focus on price 
stability can contribute to unintended outcomes. Conventional monetary policy proved not to 
be  sufficient.  Exceptional  policy  actions  had  to  be  implemented  which  resulted  in  the 
                                                 
2   Central banking lessons from the crisis, International Monetary Fund, May 27, 2010. 
BIS Review 109/2010 
 3
expansion  of  central  bank  balance  sheets  in  advanced  economies,  in  certain  instances  to 
more than twice their pre-crisis size.  
A number of weaknesses were exposed in the process, in particular, the role of central banks 
in maintaining financial stability. It is clear that more attention needs to be given to macro-
prudential  policies  and  central  banks  can  bring  a  wealth  of  expertise  and  information  to 
increase  the  effectiveness  of  macro-prudential  policies.  Ineffective  macro-prudential  tools 
increase the onus on monetary policy to reduce the build-up of financial imbalances and can 
increase the likelihood that central banks have to provide emergency liquidity, which could 
ultimately  impair  their  balance  sheets  and  complicate  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  It  is 
argued that if macro-prudential policy had been able to increase the resilience of the system, 
and to moderate the supply of credit to the economy, the crisis could have been less costly.  
The debate as to whether central banks should lean against emerging financial imbalances 
by altering policy rates has therefore been reopened by the crisis. Previously, the argument 
was  that  such  an  approach  could  lead  to  inflation  volatility,  requiring  strong  interest  rate 
responses and therefore impose high output costs which may be counterproductive in small 
open economies where high interest rates can attract capital inflows3. However, the costs of 
the financial crisis appear to strengthen the case for using monetary policy to counter asset 
price bubbles, but much more work is needed on how monetary policy can best deal with the 
potential conflicts of attaining both financial stability and price stability. Monetary authorities 
are increasingly shifting towards the view that central banks should be in charge of the micro-
prudential  supervision  of  banks,  and  overseeing  systemic  risks.  However,  the  crisis  also 
exposed  the  weaknesses  in  central  bank  liquidity  management  and  the  need  for  more 
flexible frameworks.  
to  monitor  at  all 
Insulating South Africa  
6.  
Given this background, what is it then that South Africa can do to insulate itself against these 
global risks?  
Well-coordinated  and  sound  policies  are  required  going  forward.  South  Africa’s  macro-
economic policies have served us well and the need for fiscal consolidation, whilst important 
to ensure continued fiscal sustainability, is less pressing if one compares the country to other 
developed markets. It has already been noted that while countercyclical policy did prevent a 
more severe recession, our public debt ratio remains comparatively low while there is a clear 
medium-term plan to reduce the budget deficit.  
Policymakers  need 
financial  sector 
developments, understand linkages between global and domestic developments, and ensure 
that policies and regulations are calibrated to allow appropriate responses in a flexible and 
quick manner.  
One of the reasons for South African banks coming out of this crisis in good shape is due to 
the  prudent  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework.  The  G-20,  of  which  South  Africa  is  a 
member, continues to do much work on financial regulation, through the Financial Stability 
Board  (FSB)  and  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  (BCBS).  South  Africa  is 
represented  on  both  the  BCBS  and  the  FSB  as  well  as  various  working  groups. 
Consequently, the developments and discussions in international fora are closely monitored 
to  ensure  the  ongoing  alignment  of  the  South  African  framework  with  international 
developments where applicable and appropriate.  
South  Africa  is  also  an  active  participant  in  the  Mutual  Assessment  Process  (MAP),  a 
working group formed by the G-20 as part of its work to deal with the impact of the financial 
times  global  economic  and 
                                                 
3   Bank of England, 2009, The Role of Macro-prudential policy. 
4 
 BIS Review 109/2010
crisis. The MAP working group was formed to provide the G-20 with a framework for strong, 
sustainable  and  balanced  growth.  Global  co-ordination  and  global  responses  are  required 
given the nature of the challenges we are facing, but that does not necessarily always imply 
uniform measures and synchronised timing. Country-specific circumstances must continue to 
be taken into account.  
Conclusion  
7.  
Although the worst of the sub-prime crisis is behind us, it has left behind a legacy of indebted 
nations, which will complicate the future conduct of both fiscal and monetary policy. These 
challenges,  unless  adequately  addressed,  could  derail  the  nascent  global  economic 
recovery.  The  continued  recovery  in  emerging  markets  and  South  Africa  in  particular,  is 
dependent on how some of the key global risks unfold. Being a small and open economy, it 
is impossible to insulate ourselves against global risks, however, it is possible to manage the 
risks and minimise our exposure in such a manner that we are less affected by events such 
as  these.  The  events  of  the  past  two  years  have  exposed  an  essential  need  to  alter  the 
thinking on global risks and how they are managed.  
The financial crisis has determined that there will be “no return to business as usual”. The 
link  between  the  financial  sector  and  the  real  economy  is  now  considerably  stronger  than 
was  the  case  in  the  past.  The  attainment  of  financial  stability  is  heavily  dependent  on 
improved regulation and its effective implementation at both the domestic and international 
levels. The role of the audit profession in this process should not be underestimated.  
Thank you. 
BIS Review 109/2010 
 5
