Leasi Papali’i Tommy Scanlan: Samoa’s economy, interest rates and the 
expanded mandate of its central bank 
Address by Mr Leasi Papali’i Tommy Scanlan, Governor of the Central Bank of Samoa, on 
the induction of new graduates to the Samoa Institute of Accountants, Apia, 25 March 2010. 
 Distinguished Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Introduction 
1. 
At the outset, I want to thank the President and her Committee for inviting me to address you 
on this special occasion. It is indeed both a privilege and an honour for me to be here this 
evening. 
In 1970, when the Minister of Finance (Hon. Niko Lee Hang) and I attended form 4 at Saint 
Joseph’s  College,  we  were  told  that  a  number  of  students  in  our  class  will  need  to  take 
“physics” as an option, while the rest will take “accounting” or “bookkeeping”, as it was called 
in  those  days.  Physics  was  a  relatively  new  subject  at  that  time,  and  they  needed  some 
guinea pigs to continue their experiment with.  And, that was where we came in.  We were 
never given the chance to decide which subject to take. So, from 1970 to 1972, nine of us 
studied physics while the rest of our colleagues studied accounting. 
I can never forget what one of the best accounting teachers in the country in those days used 
to say to us. He said, “you can study physics all your life, but none of you will ever go 
to  the  moon”.  And,  this  teacher  continued,  “in  the  unlikely  event  that  you  physicists 
become  rich,  you  will  not  only  need  accountants  to  look  after  your  money  but  the 
accountants could also end up spending your money for you!” 
The  teacher’s  name  was  Brother  Conrad,  and  I  have  no  doubt  that  many  of  the  senior 
accountants here tonight will remember this very learned Marist Brother. 
Anyway, in 1973, seven of us from the “SJC Class of 1972” won scholarships to study in 
New Zealand to become a doctor, engineers, a teacher, a lawyer, an air traffic controller and 
a master mariner. No scholarships were offered for accountants or physicists! 
The  end  result  was,  the  Minister  (Niko  Lee  Hang)  and  most  of  our  other  class  mates 
eventually became Accountants, whilst one became an Economist and another an Engineer. 
I suppose because of Br. Conrad’s warning, there was no physicist from our group. 
And,  fortunately  for  me,  I  don’t  have  any  money  to  start  worrying  about  an  accountant 
spending it on my behalf! 
We have just witnessed the awarding of Certificates to those who have passed their “final 
qualifying exams” (or FQEs). And, later on this evening, we will also witness the Induction 
of New Members into the Samoa Institute of Accountants. 
On behalf of everyone here tonight, I wish to congratulate all of you on the achievement of 
these important milestones in your education and career lives. You have continued to make 
your  families  both  proud  and  happy.  But,  I  caution  you,  this  is  only  the  first  step  in  your 
careers as Accountants. Remember, “it is not what you learned, but how you use what 
you learned, that counts”. 
I  came  across  a  definition  of  an  Accountant  the  other  day.  It  said,  “an  accountant  is 
someone who solves a problem that you did not know you had, in a way that you don’t 
understand”! 
BIS Review 49/2010 
 1
I hope that tonight’s Graduates do not end up being one of these Accountants, who creates a 
problem first and then pretends to solve it. And, worse still, they end up charging the client 
for something that was not there in the first place! It’s almost like being a lawyer! 
The recent global financial crisis started from a liquidity shortfall in the United States. This 
liquidity  shortfall  resulted  from  many  loans  (especially  for  housing)  going  into  default,  and 
there were insufficient assets to cover these loans. 
As a result, many large banks and financial institutions went bankrupt. And, if it were not for 
the quick and substantial intervention by some major Governments and Central Banks, the 
global economy would have collapsed. 
Among  others,  the  Accountants  have  been  blamed  for  the  “financial  crisis”,  as  a  result  of 
their  “creative  accounting”  techniques,  which  contributed  to  inflating  the  values  of  the 
assets which were used as collateral for the many risky loans that were issued. 
As  well,  the  ability  of  many  accountants  to  hide  a  substantial  volume  of  very  large 
transactions  “off  the  balance  sheet”,  contributed  to  the  demise  of  many  of  these  large 
financial institutions. 
I mention this to highlight the critical roles that Accountants can play in maintaining financial 
stability in national economies and thereby the global economy as a whole. 
The stable economic environment that Samoa has enjoyed over the past many years is also 
partly due to the responsible way that the members of the Samoa Institute of Accountants 
have carried out their duties. And, I commend and thank you all for that. 
Let  me  now  say  something  about  our  economy,  interest  rates  and  a  bit  about  the 
Central Bank’s expanded mandate. 
2. 
Economic update for the first seven months of 2009/10 and outlook for the 
remaining five months 
Mainly, as a result of the Global Financial Crisis, the Samoan economy declined by close to 
5  percent  in  the  last  financial  year  which  ended  in  June,  2009.  So,  as  we  tried  to  get  our 
economy  out  of  recession,  through  the  introduction  of  expansionary  fiscal  and  monetary 
policies, the country was struck by the devastating tsunami in September. 
In  the  event,  Government  and  private  sector  resources  were  diverted  for  the  rehabilitation 
and reconstruction of tsunami affected infrastructure and other sectors, and thus putting on 
hold (albeit temporarily) a number of developments identified in the 2009/2010 budget. 
According to an assessment by the IMF Mission that visited Samoa earlier this month, about 
a quarter of the tourism sector’s capacity was destroyed by the tsunami. Beyond tourism, the 
IMF Mission noted that the widespread damage to physical infrastructure implies that other 
sectors such as commerce, transport, and communication have also been directly affected. 
In  the  seven  months  to  end  January  2010,  tourist  arrivals  increased.  On  the  surface,  any 
increase  is  good  news.  However,  a  significant  number  of  the  visitors  were  volunteers  and 
overseas  personnel  who  came  to  assist  with  the  tsunami  emergency  and  recovery  efforts. 
Many of these people stayed in makeshift camps in the tsunami affected areas, resulting in a 
reduction in paid hotel accommodation. This, combined with a general decline in the other 
categories of tourist expenditures, saw total tourism earnings in the period under review fall 
5 percent to $180 million. 
Private remittances, which is one of the major sources of income for our people, was also 
affected  by  the  recession  and  tsunami.  In  the  early  months  of  the  current  financial  year, 
private remittances were well on their way down, due to the global recession. However, the 
huge inflows following the tsunami outweighed the earlier reductions resulting in an overall 
increase to $215 million, in the first 7 months to end January. 
2 
 BIS Review 49/2010
Exports  rose  slightly  in  the  period  under  review,  reflecting  increases  in  exports  of  fish, 
coconut oil, copra meal, nonu fruit and bottled water. Weak demand and reduced global oil 
prices saw imports drop 20 percent. 
Our  balance  of  payments  recorded  an  overall  surplus  of  $102  million  at  end  January, 
compliments of increased revenues from telecommunication services, and the large inflows 
of tsunami related external assistance and loans. The substantial inflow of foreign exchange 
pushed  our  international  reserves  up  to  a  very  a  high  level  of  $362  million.  This  level  of 
reserves is sufficient to cover 8.0 months of imports, which is much higher than the 4 months 
cover in January 2009. 
An improvement was recorded in agriculture production with the overall volume of produce 
supplied to the Fugalei Market rising in the first seven months of 2009/10. This has helped to 
drive down the prices of produce sold at the Market. Apart from the reduction in their prices, 
there has also been a noticeable increase in the volume of produce sold on the streets and 
roadside stalls. 
This meant good news on the inflationary front, with the annual inflation rate decelerating to 
4.8 percent in January 2010 from a peak of 14.5 percent in June 2009. 
Revised macroeconomic outlook and monetary policy for the rest of 2009/10 
3. 
On  the  basis  of  the  economic  developments  so  far,  our  (pre-tsunami)  forecasts  for  the 
remaining months of 2009/10 have been revised downwards. 
Expectation for a sharp recovery in the economy, which was based on a record Government 
Budget deficit and continued strong growth in tourism in the financial year 2009/10, has been 
dashed by the September tsunami. 
The Central Bank’s latest forecasts now point to the economy recovering much slower than 
original expectations, with our real GDP growth rate struggling to make it past 1 percent. This 
is way down from the 3.0 percent growth anticipated in the Bank’s earlier forecasts. 
The recent IMF Article IV Mission has suggested that the economy may even decline further, 
by up to (negative) 3 percent in 2009/10, due mainly to the severe impact of the tsunami on 
the tourism sector. 
Our balance of payments, however, is expected to be in substantial surplus resulting in the 
level of our foreign exchange reserves being sufficient to still cover in excess of 7 months of 
imports. 
At the same time, our inflation rate is expected to decline further and is likely to remain close 
to zero for the remainder of the current financial year, on the back of lower global food and 
commodity prices as well as the recovery of domestic food supplies. 
Reflecting the relatively weak state of the economy, the Central Bank’s Board decided at its 
Meeting last month, for monetary policy to remain eased to help stimulate the economy. The 
current  deflationary  trend  and  the  substantial  level  of  international  reserves  have  made  it 
feasible for the Bank to pursue this monetary policy stance. 
In  the  remaining  months  of  2009/10,  therefore,  the  Central  Bank  will  aim  at  maintaining  a 
substantial amount of free liquidity in the financial system, to drive down market interest rates 
further. 
And,  in  line  with  this  objective,  foreign  investments  abroad  by  residents  have  been 
discouraged, to ensure that there are sufficient funds available for domestic investments. 
This stance of monetary policy will be reviewed when Government’s Budget for 2010/11 is 
finalized in June this year. 
Now let me say something briefly about interest rates. 
BIS Review 49/2010 
 3
Interest rates and bank fees 
4. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, in the past twelve months or so, there has been much criticism by 
the private sector and the public at large of our relatively high interest rate environment. This 
debate has been ongoing since the outbreak of the global recession two years ago. 
Reflecting the continued easing of monetary policy, the Central Bank’s official interest rates 
have  declined  steeply  to  record  low  levels.  Consequently,  the  commercial  banks’  deposit 
rates have also fallen sharply. 
In  the  event,  the  commercial  banks’  weighted  average  lending  rate  has  declined  to 
10.7 percent in January this year, from 12.5 percent in March 2008. 
The commercial banks have undertaken to effect further reductions in their lending rates in 
the near future. These further reductions reflect the maturity of several long term wholesale 
deposits which have been reinvested at lower rates. 
In  the  medium  to  long  term,  the  Central  Bank  is  aiming  at  reducing  the  interest  rates  in 
Samoa, to be closer to those of our major trading partners (such as Fiji). That way, our local 
industries  will  be  able  to  compete  on  a  more  equal  footing  against  their  rivals,  not  only  in 
relation to import prices but export prices as well. 
The momentum for more meaningful reductions in interest rates is well underway. This, in 
part, reflects the implementation of a credit friendly monetary policy stance over the past two 
financial  years.  Moral  suasion,  the  relatively  weak  state  of  the  domestic  economy  and  the 
large volume of excess liquidity are factors which have assisted in the Central Bank’s efforts 
to drive interest rates down. 
In addition, amendments to the Central Bank Act are currently being proposed to, amongst 
other  things,  allow  the  Central  Bank  to  extend  loans  to  non-bank  financial  institutions  for 
specific purposes, as well as regulating bank fees and charges. 
Expanding the Central Bank’s mandate 
5. 
Reflecting the leading roles increasingly played by many overseas central banks in driving 
financial  inclusion  in  their  economies,  the  Board  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Samoa  recently 
approved  for  the  Bank’s  mandate  to  be  expanded  to  include  financial  inclusion.  Financial 
inclusion refers to the extension of financial services to reach those that are classified as the 
“unbanked”. These people are either so poor, or live in very remote areas, that they cannot 
get access to basic financial services. 
The adoption of financial inclusion as part of our mandate will ensure that the Central Bank 
takes  on  a  more  holistic  approach  to  promoting  and  maintaining  financial  and  economic 
stability  for  Samoa.  Moreover,  it  would  lend  support  to  Government’s  efforts  for  the 
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals. 
In  this  connection,  plans  are  well  underway  to  implement  two  key  strategies  within  our 
financial inclusion mandate. They are mobile banking and financial literacy. 
The Bank believes that the introduction of mobile banking in the domestic economy will be 
hugely beneficial. It will allow better financial access to our low-income community in the rural 
and remote areas as well as to improve and speed up our payments system. Furthermore, it 
has great potential to address some issues specific to the economy of Samoa like the current 
relatively high costs of remittances. 
Conclusion 
6. 
In conclusion, I just want to say that when I first received the invitation from your President to 
be the guest speaker tonight, I asked myself the question, why me? 
4 
 BIS Review 49/2010
Is it because of my position as the Governor of the Central Bank for all these years? I think 
maybe not, judging from the bored looks on many faces after listening to that last part of my 
address on the economy. Central bankers are generally regarded as very boring anyway. 
Is the reason for my invitation due to my age, I asked? Most probably not, as there are others 
who are older and wiser than me. 
The answer was clear to me yesterday when I came across a definition of an “economist”, 
which is the term used for people in my profession! It said “an Economist is someone who 
did not have enough personality to become an Accountant”. 
I said to myself, maybe your President thought that by being here tonight among these many 
distinguished accountants, I could end up having some kind of personality after all. 
I wish you, the new Members of the Institute, all the very best as you embark on your careers 
as fully fletched Accountants. Your future is how you make of it. Work hard, be honest and 
avoid being “overly creative” in the way you keep and look after your clients accounts. 
Thank you for attention. 
BIS Review 49/2010 
 5
