José De Gregorio: The role of central banks after the financial crisis 
Keynote speech by Mr José De Gregorio, Governor of the Central Bank of Chile, delivered at 
the Bank of Korea International Conference 2010, 31 May–1 June 2010, Seoul, 1 June 2010. 
 I am very grateful to Luis F Céspedes and Kevin Cowan for insightful discussions and contributions. 
As  a  response  to  the  global  financial  crisis  of  2008–2009,  we  witnessed  a  period  of 
unprecedented  central  bank  activism.  Many  central  banks,  particularly  in  developed 
economies,  implemented  diverse  policy  actions.  Central  banks  around  the  world  reduced 
monetary policy rates to their lower bounds and announced their explicit commitment to keep 
these rates at that level for a prolonged period of time. Some of them went further, including 
the  purchasing  of  private  securities,  lending  to  financial  institutions  other  than  banks  and 
exchange rate interventions.  
All  these  actions  contrast  with  how  monetary  policy  was  conducted  during  the  so-called 
“great  moderation”,  which  extended  since  the  mid  1980s.  During  this  period,  most  central 
banks  relied  exclusively  on  short  term  interest  rate  management  in  order  to  achieve  their 
goals. This dramatic change of events has led many observers to argue that central banks 
forgot about a crucial task in their mandates – financial stability – and/or they were imprudent 
for  thinking  that  an  adequate  management  of  the  short  term  interest  rate  would  suffice  to 
secure price and financial stability at the same time. In either case, the argument goes, the 
global financial crisis should lead central banks to reevaluate their role in this new era.  
There is no doubt that we have the responsibility to carefully assess the recent events. We 
need to do it in order to improve our understanding of the economy and in order to improve 
our macroeconomic policy design, so as to avoid crises, but also handle them appropriately. 
In my view, many of the lessons will not be new, but they draw from lessons from previous 
experiences, but forgotten in academic and policy circles in industrialized countries. 
I will start my discussion on the new role for central banking after the recent financial crisis by 
discussing  the  factors  that  were  behind  it.  Understanding  these  factors  will  be  crucial  to 
analyze if and how the objectives of central banks should be modified and potential tradeoffs 
between  competing  objectives.  Finally,  I  will  discuss  the  interactions  between  price  and 
financial stability and the challenges for central banks in the new times. 
What caused the financial crisis? 
There  are  many  candidates  being  pointed  out  as  the  culprits  of  the  financial  crisis  of  
2008–2009. Many have blamed monetary policy. In my opinion, even though monetary policy 
may have played a role, it was a secondary one.1 The argument blaming monetary policy for 
the current crisis claims that low interest rates combined with large current account surpluses 
in emerging economies, particularly Asian and oil-exporting countries, created an abundance 
of  liquidity  that  triggered  excessive  increases  in  asset  prices  (that  is,  a  bubble).  This  was 
particularly acute in the housing market. When the bubble burst, the crisis erupted. 
This  argument  contends  that  monetary  policy  failed  to  act  in  a  timely  fashion  and  allowed 
severe  imbalances  to  accumulate.  Nonetheless,  soaring  asset  prices  do  not  necessarily 
result  in  a  crisis  like  this  one.  Moreover,  the  financial  systems  of  most  emerging  markets 
proved  to  be  resilient  despite  significant  monetary  loosening  before  the  crisis.  A  financial 
crisis requires the combination of two factors: a surge in the value of a set of assets that will 
                                                 
1   For further discussion on this issue, see De Gregorio (2010). 
BIS Review 76/2010 
 1
 eventually collapse, and vulnerability of the financial system to the collapse in these assets 
prices.  
In  the  recent  crisis  the  key  assets  where  houses  and  structured  credit  products.  The  key 
vulnerabilities arose from the exposure of highly leveraged institutions – many of which had a 
substantial maturity mismatch – to these assets. These factors combined led to a degree of 
vulnerability that neither markets nor regulators anticipated. Closer attention must therefore 
be paid to the financial fragility that accompanied this process – both to the factors that led to 
the distortions in asset prices and to the factors that amplified the crisis once the adjustment 
took place. Let me touch briefly on two of these factors: 
 
The first is financial innovation. Despite a lot of public debate and criticism I believe 
that  financial  innovation  is  essentially  welfare  enhancing.  However,  we  must  not 
forget that financial innovation can also become a form of circumventing regulation. 
The way some securitized assets where used was the clearest case of this abuse. 
They were structured in a way that only secure tranches remained in the balance 
sheets  of  banks,  and  the  others  were  sold,  many  times  to  off  balance  vehicles, 
allowing credit to expand with a weak capital base. The result was excess demand 
for  certain  securitized  assets,  and  excess  exposure  of  highly 
leveraged 
intermediaries to these assets. Moving forward, financial innovation needs to move 
in step with regulation to ensure that it adds value and is not just a form of evading 
regulation and aggravating financial fragility. 
The  second  is  liquidity  transformation.  Along  with  important  benefits,  liquidity 
transformation entails significant risks. We have known the vulnerabilities of liquidity 
transformation in the presence of aggregate shocks for a long time; in fact, many 
countries paid very dearly for this risk before central banks where set up to provide 
aggregate  liquidity.  However,  in  many  high  income  countries  central  banks  had 
centered on regulating and providing liquidity facilities for deposit banks, leaving out 
large fractions of the financial sector that saw substantial developments in non-bank 
liquidity transformation, such as SIVs, money market mutual funds and investment 
banks. When trust in the value of the underlying assets held by these intermediaries 
evaporated,  many  saw  themselves  suddenly  unable  to  service  their  obligations, 
forcing central banks in many countries not only to expand the terms and collateral 
of liquidity provision but also to seek ways to extend liquidity to non-banking agents. 
I am not suggesting that the optimal solution is simply to expand the liquidity safety net. This 
would entail serious moral hazard problems. I do think, however, that we need to be aware of 
which  agents  carry  out  this  role,  and  consider  prudential  regulation  and  ex-post  liquidity 
provision if they are deemed to be systemic (and if we have the mandate). In many emerging 
market  economies  (EMEs)  we  are  well  aware  of  the  risks  of  liquidity  transformation  –  in 
particular when it is done in foreign currency. As a precautionary tool, most EMEs have built 
up significant stocks of international reserves. 
Nor am I arguing that monetary policy cannot play a role in the creation of bubbles. It can, 
although not so much through the level of the interest rate as through the broad monetary 
policy  strategy  with  which  financial  turmoil  is  addressed.  I  am  referring  to  the  popularly 
known  Greenspan  put.  This  strategy  of  relaxing  monetary  policy  once  a  bubble  bursts 
certainly makes the creation of bubbles more likely. But while the mop-up strategy worked in 
some earlier episodes, it failed miserably during the biggest collapse in decades. I will return 
to this point below. 
In summary, financial fragility played a crucial role in explaining the origin and magnitude of 
the  crisis.  But  financial  fragility  was  related  to  poor  regulation  more  than  monetary  policy. 
Having  said  this,  it  can  be  still  argued  that  the  original  sin  in  this  case  was  a  “relaxation” 
(loosening) of their financial stability responsibilities by some central banks and the inability 
of the existing supervisory bodies to adequately monitor aggregate financial stability.  
2 
 BIS Review 76/2010
The objectives of central banks 
Given the magnitude of the financial crisis we faced, there is always a discussion on whether 
the  objectives  of  central  banks  were  the  right  ones  or  if  they  should  be  changed.  As  I 
mentioned before, the financial crisis was mainly related to a poor implementation of a key 
task  of  central  banking.  Nevertheless,  it  will  be  useful  for  the  ensuing  discussion  of  the 
challenges of implementation of central bank tasks to evaluate first their current objectives.  
Should the objective of price stability be changed? Broadly speaking the answer is no. For a 
start, central banks need to retain a clear mandate for price stability. Inflation is costly and 
should be avoided, and this has to be done by the monetary authority. On this issue let me 
refer  briefly  to  some  proposals  for  increasing  the  inflation  target  to  avoid  the  possibility  of 
hitting the lower bound of monetary policy and potentially falling into a liquidity trap. Our hard 
won experience indicates that we can have a relatively low inflation target (let’s say 2% or 
3%)  and  still  be  able  to  deal  appropriately  with  the  challenges  that  the  lower  bound  on 
interest rate imposes. Indeed, there was no emerging market that was limited by low inflation 
to undertake expansionary monetary policy. Indeed, the unprecedented monetary loosening 
in Latin America was possible precisely because of the conquest of inflation that took place 
in the last couple of decades. 
The critical issue when interest rates are at their lower bound is the credibility of monetary 
policy. If monetary policy is capable of committing to keep the interest rate low for all the time 
needed  to  stimulate  the  economy,  the  inflation  target  level  issue  becomes  less  relevant. 
Credibility  allows  for  higher  levels  of  flexibility.  Flexibility  in  this  case  includes  the  set  of 
actions that many central banks implemented in order to deal with the need for stimulating 
the economy once the monetary policy rate reached the lower bound.2 
One extra point regarding the prescription of having a higher inflation target. If the proposal 
for developed economies is having an inflation target of, say, 4%, the inflation target for an 
emerging market economy should presumably be somewhat higher, given the larger shocks 
that  affect  them.  But  with  an  inflation  target  of  4%  or  even  more,  we  cannot  exclude  that 
mechanisms that automatically recover purchasing power are going to be developed. It is not 
difficult  to  picture  a  scenario  in  which  we  could  end  up  having  more  wage  inertia  due  to 
indexation. In addition, inflationary expectations could become more volatile. This, in turn, will 
significantly reduce the gains of having a higher inflation target in the first place. 
A  credible  commitment  to  stable  inflation  also  generates  greater  stability  of  the  business 
cycle,  allowing  less  costly  unemployment  fluctuations.  Indeed,  a  reason  for  the  great 
moderation the global economy experienced for an extended period of time was in part due 
to a better management of monetary policy and not only to good luck.3 Therefore, a credible 
commitment to price stability increases welfare by reducing both, inflation and unemployment 
volatility. 
Despite the big consensus regarding the need to preserve price stability as a central goal of 
monetary  policy,  some  analysts  have  argued  that  such  a  concept  should  be  expanded  to 
include  asset  prices.  By  allowing  significant  deviations  of  asset  prices  from 
their 
“fundamentals”,  central  banks  planted  the  seeds  of  financial  crisis.  Therefore,  it  has  been 
argued  that  monetary  policy  should  respond  to  asset  prices.  I  think  this  approach  is  too 
narrow. As I already mentioned, the financial crisis was not only related to the burst in asset 
prices  but  mainly  to  its  interaction  with  financial  fragility.  Asset  price  bubbles  and  financial 
fragility are part of a more complete (and complex) concept: financial stability. Dealing with 
an asset price bubble with monetary policy is not that simple. 
                                                 
2   For  expositions  of  monetary  policy  implementation  at  the  lower  bound,  see  Bernanke  and  Reinhart  (2007), 
Bernanke (2009) and Murray (2009).  
3   For evidence in the U.S., see Galí and Gambetti (2009) and for emerging markets, De Gregorio (2008). 
BIS Review 76/2010 
 3
This view is particularly problematic in small open economies. The increase in valuation of 
asset prices in these economies is usually the result of a large exchange rate appreciation 
coupled with large capital inflows. Attempting to stabilize asset prices with monetary policy 
could  be  counterproductive,  since  an  increase  in  interest  rates  to contain  the  rise in  asset 
prices could induce greater inflows and carry trade operations that might end up appreciating 
the currency even further. 
As to the role of central banks in financial stability, the change should come not in the need 
to have this mandate but in how we define it and the priority given to it. We must bear in mind 
that  central  banks  have  played  a  historical  role  in  the  stability  of  deposit  taking  banks. 
However, the current crisis shows that we need to carefully revise this narrow definition of 
financial  stability,  or  at  the  very  least  recognize  that  it  is  impossible  to  safeguard  deposit 
taking  banks  without  ensuring  the  adequate  functioning  of  other  key  markets  or  financial 
intermediaries.  
Defining  and  monitoring  “financial  stability”  is  a  difficult  task.  Central  banks  have  been 
carrying out significant efforts in order to improve the monitoring of the financial sector in the 
form  of  financial  stability  reports.  Based  on  our  recent  experience  we  know  that  close 
monitoring of asset prices, credit flows and the current account deficit is required. Moreover, 
substantial work also needs to be done in monitoring the vulnerabilities of both bank and non 
bank  agents  – 
firms  and  households.  Finally, 
understanding interconnections in the financial system – be they via balance sheets, asset 
markets or risk perceptions – is also a key component of financial stability monitoring. The 
challenges  in  doing  all  of  this  are  both  conceptual  and  practical,  as  we  often  rely  on  a 
statistical  toolbox  best  aimed  at  capturing  macroeconomic  trends  and  less  suited  for  the 
analysis of the whole distribution and, in particular, tails risks, which are crucial for financial 
stability analysis. 
Although most central banks have an explicit financial stability objective, for some of them it 
was a secondary issue for many  years, as GDP was growing strong and banks and firms 
displayed  sound  balance  sheets.  Now  things  have  changed  dramatically.  As  of  last  year, 
financial stability became the key factor driving monetary policy management in developed 
countries. It should remain at the same level of priority as price stability in the future to avoid 
a repetition of recent events.  
intermediaries, 
including 
financial 
The interaction between price stability and financial stability 
I think that probably the main challenge that emerges from the recent crisis is in the conduct 
of  policies  by  central  banks  –  and  in  particular  in  the  interaction  between  the  two  key 
objectives I mentioned above, price stability (PS) and financial stability (FS). 
Let  me  begin  by  discussing  the  interaction  between  financial  and  price  stability  in  normal 
times,  that  is,  before  an  event  leading  to  a  period  of  financial  turmoil  like  the  one  we 
witnessed in late 2008. 
In  many  cases  there  is  no  conflict  between  setting  short  term  interest  rates  to  pursue 
financial  stability  and  price  stability.  For  example,  faced  by  a  change  in  future  income 
perception that leads to higher consumption, debt levels and rising inflation, rising rates will 
be conducive to both PS and FS. 
In several other cases, however, the optimal short term policy decision for FS and PS conflict 
and additional tools are required. I will argue that these cases fall into two broad categories. 
The  first  is  when  the  monetary  policy  framework  itself  can  amplify  financial  vulnerabilities. 
Financial  agents  take  the  distributions  of  asset  prices  into  account  when  determining  their 
risk  exposure,  and  as  such,  they  adjust  their  portfolios  according  to  the  policy  framework. 
The problem arises because policies cannot always bring stability when faced with unusual 
4 
 BIS Review 76/2010
shocks,  which  may  even  require  changes  in  the  policy  regime.  There  are  some  important 
examples of this. 
One example is currency mismatches. In the 1980s and 1990s, many emerging markets put 
in  place  exchange  rate  systems  that  limited  or  altogether  eliminated  perceived  foreign 
exchange rate risk. The objective was, in most cases, to reduce inflation. And in many cases 
the success was remarkable on this front. However, not surprisingly, firms, households and 
financial intermediaries were reluctant to hedge currency risk in this setting – accumulating 
liabilities in foreign currencies to finance assets in local currencies. When an external shock, 
or an increasing exchange rate misalignment, forced the countries to abandon the peg, the 
value  of  debts  skyrocketed  leading  to  very  severe  financial  crises,  as  in  Chile  1982  or 
Argentina 2002. Indeed, in these cases there is also a moral hazard issue, since currency 
mismatches  tend  to  be  exacerbated  under  the  promise  that  the  exchange  rate  will  remain 
fixed,  and  if  changes  occur,  the  authority  will  have  to  bail  out  those  who  believed  in  their 
commitment.  
The popularly known Greenspan put, is another example. This strategy of relaxing monetary 
policy once a bubble has burst – although fully consistent with price stability – encourages 
risk  taking  by  financial  intermediaries,  firms  and  households.  As  the  burst  of  the  housing 
bubble showed, this strategy is not always advisable. 
An  additional  example  of  the  role  of  central  bank  policies  on  risk  taking  is  the  “great 
moderation” itself. There is an interesting stylized fact across banks in different countries. In 
countries where GDP is more volatile, bank leverage is lower, and banks (by either choice or 
regulation) put more capital aside to deal with uncertainty.4 This being the case, it is not hard 
to  imagine  that  a  period  of  declining  volatility  in  prices  and  output  leads  to  increased  risk 
taking across several economies. 
By stating this, I am not suggesting that we should aim at higher volatility. However, we need 
to recognize the impact that price stability has on financial vulnerabilities (financial fragility), 
and adjust financial regulation accordingly. 
Let me now turn to a second source of conflict between interest rate policies that target PS 
and FS: an innovation that simultaneously leads to increased aggregate demand becoming a 
risk  for  FS  that  coincides  with  a  positive  aggregate  supply  shock.  Two  examples  come  to 
mind. The first is the current concern regarding capital inflows and financial stability. Many 
have  argued  –  rightly,  I  think  –  that  large  capital  inflows  could  simultaneously  lead  to 
increasing  financial  vulnerabilities  without  posing  an  inflationary  problem  because  of  the 
appreciation  of  the  local  currency.  The  correct  reaction  for  PS  –  keeping  loose  monetary 
conditions – is not necessarily the correct reaction from an FS standpoint. The second is the 
build up to the global financial crisis in the US and Europe. One of the reasons that monetary 
policy  did  not  react  to  rising  household  debt,  was  that  global  supply  factors  had  been 
contributing to drive prices down. 
Central banks need to oversee price stability and financial stability. One instrument (namely, 
the  interest  rate)  is  often  not  enough  for  pursuing  two  objectives.  More  generally,  the  two 
objectives should be addressed with more than one instrument. The choice of instrument will 
depend  on  both  the  cause  of  the  financial  fragility  and  the  institutional  setting  of  each 
country.  For  a  start,  central  banks  should  work  closely  with  “micro-prudential”  supervisors, 
communicating potential risks so that these can be incorporated into the supervision process 
or into changes in regulation. A regional house bubble would be a good example of this kind 
of coordination, with supervisors adjusting provisions accordingly. In addition, central banks 
                                                 
4   Chapter V, Financial Stability Report 1st half 2009, Central Bank of Chile. 
 
http://www.bcentral.cl/publicaciones/politicas/pdf/ief2009_1.pdf  
BIS Review 76/2010 
 5
should  consider  macro-prudential  regulation  that  adjusts  capital,  liquidity  or  asset  quality 
regulation through the cycle or in periods of higher risk taking.  
Finally, central banks should not discard using their balance sheet to “correct” the prices of 
financial  assets  when  these  asset  prices  are  leading  to  increased  vulnerabilities  in  the 
financial system. In EMEs this is typically the case of a boom where there are signs that the 
currency may be strengthening beyond its fundamentals, in which case a mechanism of self-
insurance, such as accumulation of reserves, may help to smooth the transition and to have 
the economy well-prepared for potential reversals of capital flows. In the case of Chile, we 
have intervened three times in the exchange rate market since the currency was allowed to 
float in 1999. In the first two cases (2001 and 2002) events in international financial markets 
led to rapid depreciations, unrelated to country fundamentals. In the last case – 2008 – we 
considered it prudent to build up reserves in a period in which the exchange rate was below 
fundamentals and global financial markets were under extreme stress. 
Let  me  now  refer  to  the  interaction  between  financial  and  price  stability  from  an  ex-post 
perspective, i.e. once a financial shock (crisis) has hit the economy. From an ex-ante point of 
view  I  discussed  that  there  are  occasions  in  which  these  two  objectives  may  not  be 
completely aligned. From an ex-post perspective, these objectives are in general consistent, 
which will reinforce the need for strengthening the ex-ante dimension of financial stability. 
Suppose  that  a  shock  in  financial  markets  (of  a  domestic  or  external  nature;  based  on 
fundamentals or simple contagion) hits the economy. This shock will result in an increase in 
the  cost  of  capital,  bringing  down  investment  and  aggregate  demand.  The  reduction  in 
aggregate  demand  reduces  output  and  therefore  also  reduces  inflationary  pressures.  This 
example  shows  that  dealing  with  this  “financial  shock”  is  usually  –  and  I  will  be  explicit 
regarding this conditionality – consistent with pursuing price and output stability. From this 
ex-post perspective, financial and price stability can be addressed simultaneously.  
The instruments that monetary policy can use to deal with these financial shocks will depend 
on  the  nature  of  the  financial  shock.  The  dose  will  depend  on  the  initial  conditions  of  the 
economy and the magnitude of the shock. A simple example is dealing with uncertainty in 
financial markets that increases demand for liquidity, which requires the provision of liquidity 
by the central bank. Is this consistent with price stability? Yes, indeed. If the financial shock 
consists  of  a  collapse  in  asset  prices  that  weakens  balance  sheets  and  leads  to  further 
declines in asset prices, the economic contraction can be substantial. The monetary policy 
response in this case will be to reduce interest rates, consistently with price stability (as in 
Bernanke and Gertler, 1999).  
In the aforementioned cases, policy interventions under financial stress, either lender of last 
resort (liquidity injections) or interest rate types, are consistent with PS and FS. But it may be 
the  case  that  the  magnitude  of  the  financial  shock  is  so  severe  than  neither  price  nor 
financial stability may be fulfilled. The problem is not that these two objectives are mutually 
inconsistent,  but  that  the  shock  is  too  large  to  be  addressed  with  the  standard  tools. 
Nevertheless, the fact that the targets may not be achieved within the “policy horizon” does 
not  mean  that  monetary  policy  cannot  be  effective  to  reduce  the  costs  of  the  crisis.  If 
something,  output  costs  associated  to  the  global  financial  crisis  have  been,  so  far, 
significantly 
in  previous  comparable  episodes. 
Macroeconomic policy has a lot to do with this. Let me now refer to what I call a new set of 
instruments and their consequences for monetary policy.  
So  far  I  have  assumed  that  dealing  with  financial  stress  involves  only  “traditional” 
instruments.  But  if  financial  stress  is  too  severe,  some  unconventional  actions  may  be  in 
order.  In  particular,  if  financial  stress  damages  financial  intermediation  substantially,  the 
channels  through  which  “traditional”  policy  responses  operate  will  be  shut  down.  This  is  a 
“financial crisis”: a severe disruption of intermediation in financial markets.  
The policy response in this case is going to depend crucially on the type of financial market 
we are operating in. During the recent financial crisis, we saw direct interventions of some 
the  ones  we  observed 
lower 
than 
6 
 BIS Review 76/2010
central  banks  in  financial  markets.  This  direct  policy  intervention  has  been  called  credit 
policy. Given that financial intermediation is severely impaired, central banks have stepped in 
to replace private financial intermediaries. In this way, central banks avoid a collapse of the 
economy  and  the  self-reinforcing  forces  of  deflationary  spirals.  In  economies  where  banks 
are the most important financial intermediaries, credit policy may be less effective. That may 
be  the  reason  why  in  some  emerging  market  economies,  state-owned  banks  apparently 
played an important role in mitigating the recent crisis. And also why in the past, a common 
policy action following a financial crisis was to intervene private banks. 
Coming back to credit policy, this policy has resulted in a significant increase in the balance 
sheets of central banks necessary to finance those operations. This increase in the balance 
sheets of central banks (reserves) has been pointed out as a source of inconsistency with 
future price stability. Increasing interest rates to secure price stability in the future will require 
undoing those operations, which could threaten financial stability. But central banks that are 
facing this challenge have an instrument that may be very useful in this situation: they have 
the ability to pay an interest rate on those reserves different from the monetary policy rate. 
This  additional  instrument  should  be  enough  to  secure  a  smooth  exit  from  their  current 
situation  without  affecting  price  stability  (see  Cúrdia  and  Woodford,  2010).  Again,  price 
stability and ex-post financial stability are mutually consistent.  
Nevertheless,  some  analysts  have  argued  that  if  some  unconventional  policy  interventions 
have  been  too  extended,  price  and  financial  stability  may  not  be  consistent  from  an 
intertemporal perspective. In effect, some dimensions of unconventional monetary policy, in 
particular  credit  policy,  involve  a  fiscal  dimension.  It  has  been  argued  that  those  fiscal 
aspects are likely to threaten monetary policy independence and therefore jeopardize price 
stability  (Goodfriend,  2010).  Although  these  concerns  are  relevant,  I  think  that  the  key 
solution to them will be strengthening independence of central banks and generating a more 
resilient financial system as discussed before.  
Let me close by addressing the conditionality statement that I made regarding dealing with 
financial  shocks  and  price  stability  a  while  back.  In  the  past,  some  emerging  market 
economies were incapable of implementing countercyclical monetary policy. The reason was 
that  a  countercyclical  policy  implied  a  depreciation  of  the  exchange  rate,  which  was 
perceived as destabilizing. In effect, if liabilities are denominated in a foreign currency due to 
some ex-ante inflexibility in the exchange rate, and if the exchange rate pass-through is high 
due  to  poor  credibility  of  monetary  policy,  a  depreciation  of  the  exchange  rate  increases 
inflation  and  reduces  output.  How  vulnerable  the  economy  is  (in  terms  of  a  currency 
mismatches and exchange rate pass-through in this example) will make a big difference in 
terms of the policy response. In a similar vein, ex-ante financial stability is crucial to reduce 
the vulnerability of the economy to shocks. It will be also crucial in reducing financial fragility.  
Final remarks 
The  world  economy  enjoyed  a  prolonged  period  of  stability  –  with  significant  associated 
benefits – until the global financial crisis erupted. While it lasted, growth was high and stable, 
and inflation was low. However, this period of stability also encouraged financial markets to 
engage  in  an  excessive  search  for  yield  without  proper  risk  management.  Such  periods, 
where  the  job  of  monetary  policy  becomes  easier,  pose  an  important  challenge  to 
policymakers, regulators and the private sector to carefully monitor the build up of financial 
vulnerabilities. 
In  emerging  markets  we  have  lived  through  periods  of  bonanza  that  have  led  to  severe 
imbalances that eventually culminated in costly crises and economic adjustment. Now it was 
the turn of industrial countries. We have learned the lessons, and our challenge now is to 
restore prosperity with more resilient financial systems. Central banks have an important role 
in this endeavor. 
BIS Review 76/2010 
 7
References 
Bernanke,  B.  and  M.  Gertler  (1999),  “Monetary  Policy  and  Asset  Price  Volatility”,  in  New 
Challenges  for  Monetary  Policy,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City,  Jackson  Hole, 
Wyoming, 26–28 August, pp. 77–128. 
Bernanke, B. and V. Reinhart (2007), “Conducting Monetary Policy at Very Low Short-Term 
Interest Rates”, American Economic Review, 94(2), pp. 85–90. 
Bernanke,  B.  (2009),  “The  Crises and  the  Policy  Response”,  Stamp  lecture  at  the  London 
School of Economics, 13 January 2009, London, England. 
Cúrdia, V. and M. Woodford (2010), “The Central-Bank Balance Sheet as an Instrument of 
Monetary Policy”, mimeo, Columbia University. 
De Gregorio, J. (2008), “La Gran Moderación y el Riesgo Inflacionario: Una Mirada desde las 
Economías  Emergentes”,  Estudios  Públicos,  N°  110,  pp.  5–20,  otoño.  English  version, 
Banco Central de Chile, Documento de Política económica No. 24. 
De  Gregorio,  J.  (2010),  “Monetary  Policy  and  Financial  Stability:  An  Emerging  Markets 
Perspective”, International Finance, 13(1), pp. 141–156. 
Galí, J. and L. Gambetti (2009), “On the Sources of the Great Moderation”, 
American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, vol. 1 nº1, pp. 26–57. 
Goodfriend,  M.  (2010),  “Central  Banking  in  the  Credit  Turmoil:  An  Assessment  of  Federal 
Reserve Practice”, mimeo, Carnegie Mellon University.  
Murray, J. (2009), “When the Unconventional Becomes Conventional – Monetary  Policy in 
Extraordinary  Times”,  Remarks  to  the  Global  Interdependence  Center,  Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania. 
8 
 BIS Review 76/2010
