Már Guðmundsson: Challenges for the Icelandic economy 
Speech  by  Mr  Már  Guðmundsson,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland,  at  the 
49th Annual General Meeting of the Central Bank of Iceland, Reykjavík, 25 March 2010. 
 Madame Prime Minister, Madame Chairman, honourable Ministers, honourable Ambassadors, 
ladies and gentlemen:  
As we gather here for this 49th Annual General Meeting of the Central Bank of Iceland, the 
Icelandic economy is still recovering from overheating and the shocks of the recent past. The 
contraction in the economy is a part of this process, but it is rooted in three things. First, it 
was inevitable that the enormous expansion characterising the Icelandic economy in 2005–
2007 should subside. In line with previous experience in Iceland and other countries, it was 
highly likely that this would occur through a sharp drop in exchange rate and asset prices, 
followed  by  a  temporary  contraction  in  business  activity  and  employment.  Second,  the 
Icelandic  economy  sustained  severe  blows  as  a  result  of  the  worldwide  recession  in  late 
2008 and early 2009. The third cause was the collapse of the Icelandic banks in the fall of 
2008. When the banks failed, assets were lost, and Iceland’s relations with the international 
financial system were severely damaged. They remain damaged to this day, as our capital 
controls bear witness.  
The  question  of  how  to  quantify  the  proportional  contribution  of  these  three  causes  to  our 
current  economic  hardships  is  a  persistent  one.  But  no  conclusive  answer  is  yet  on  the 
horizon – and certainly not now, when so much has yet to be revealed – as the contraction is 
not over and the effects of the currency crisis and banking collapse are still in evidence. It is 
clear, however, that 2009 and 2010 would have been difficult for the Icelandic economy in 
any  case,  whether  the  international  banking  operations  headquartered  in  Iceland  had 
developed  or  not.  This  is  a  most  necessary  reminder  that  we  must  not  only  clean  up  the 
financial market regulatory framework and improve supervision, as I will touch on later, but 
we  must  also  make  efforts  to  ensure  that  economic  policy  prevents  macroeconomic 
imbalances from developing once again.  
The  Icelandic  authorities  are  faced  with  a  host  of  challenges  that  are  rooted  in  the 
circumstances I have just described. I would like to focus on three of these. First, it is critical 
to  allow  the  economy  to  adjust  without  allowing  inflation  or  unemployment  to  become 
entrenched. The goal is a situation in which economic slack has disappeared, GDP growth is 
in line with growth in production, inflation is at target levels, and the external position of the 
economy is sustainable. Second, we must establish a financial system that serves Icelandic 
households and domestic business activities and is both economical and relatively secure. 
The  third  challenge  is  that  of  re-establishing  confidence  abroad  in  Iceland’s  institutional 
framework,  economy,  and  financial  system;  repairing  the  relationship with  the  international 
financial market; and ensuring that the Icelandic Government and Icelandic companies have 
access to foreign credit markets once again.  
I will touch on these three tasks later, but first I would like to shed some light on where we 
are in the adjustment period I mentioned earlier, and what the immediate future could have in 
store.  First,  the  contraction  in  GDP  to  date  has  been  less  pronounced  than  was  forecast 
early  in  2009.  The  same  can  be  said  of  unemployment.  On  the  other  hand,  the  króna 
depreciated  more  than  expected,  and  inflation  has  proven  more  persistent.  The  Central 
Bank’s January forecast assumed that GDP would contract by 10% between 2008 and 2009, 
while  the  most  recent  figures  indicate  a  contraction  of  6½%.  On  average,  the  króna  was 
some 15% weaker than was forecast at the beginning of the year. For this reason, among 
others,  inflation  was  higher  than  projected,  or  just  over  6%  in  the  first  quarter  of  2010, 
BIS Review 39/2010 
 1
excluding  tax  effects.  The  January  2009  forecast  assumed  that  we  would  already  have 
attained the 2½% inflation target by now.  
These deviations stem from a variety of sources other than normal forecasting errors. First of 
all, measures have been taken to support households, and these measures have reduced 
the contraction in private consumption. Among these measures are a significant increase in 
mortgage interest allowances, various measures to reduce debt service, and private pension 
fund  payouts  amounting  to  2½%  of  GDP.  Second,  a  lower  real  exchange  rate  stimulated 
exports,  as  well  as  the  sectors  that  compete  with  imports.  Third,  corporate  financial 
restructuring was delayed, and while this is negative for the long term, it delayed the side 
effects  that  often  accompany  such  measures  and  which  generally  emerge  in  a  temporary 
contraction  and  elevated  unemployment  levels.  Fourth,  it  can  be  expected  that,  under  the 
circumstances reigning for most of 2009, the Icelandic export business would have been at 
an  advantage.  When  uncertainty  paralysed  the  world’s  consumers  after  the  financial  crisis 
peaked in the fall of 2008, it was simply more advantageous to export aluminium, fish, and 
tourism than cars and flat screens. Elevated inflation was primarily due to a lower exchange 
rate and more robust domestic activity than had been expected.  
To an extent, these effects were temporary and will be reflected, in part, in less economic 
activity  in  2010  than  would  otherwise  have  been  the  case.  This  applies,  for  example,  to 
corporate  financial  restructuring  and,  to  some  extent,  pension  savings  payouts.  In  this 
context, it is important that fiscal consolidation measures will be implemented this year, while 
automatic fiscal stabilisers were allowed to work largely unhindered in 2009. As a result, it is 
assumed that GDP will contract year-on-year in 2010. How much it will contract is uncertain, 
however, particularly because investment remains undetermined, largely due to uncertainty 
about access to foreign credit.  
The adjustment following the overexpansion of recent years has run its course, for the most 
part, and in some areas it has overshot the mark. If we include the Central Bank’s forecast 
for 2010, public expenditure has contracted by nearly one-third since 2007, which is virtually 
unparalleled in other countries, as other countries did not experience the overheating Iceland 
did.  Iceland’s  huge  current  account  deficit  has  turned  to  a  surplus,  excluding  calculated 
interest in the estates of the failed banks, which may not be paid. The plunge in the currency 
has  been  arrested,  and  other  things  being  equal,  inflation  will  fall  sharply  in  the  next  few 
months.  The  latest  inflation  measurements,  published  earlier  this  week,  change  nothing  in 
this regard, as they were foreseen by the Central Bank, and because the year-on-year rise in 
inflation is due largely to the drop in the CPI in March 2009.  
A  number  of  economic  variables  have  now  overshot  the  mark,  as  often  happens  when 
imbalances like those in Iceland correct themselves. The most important of these is the real 
exchange  rate  of  the  króna,  which  is  currently  one-third  below  its  historical  average  and 
probably considerably below its long-term equilibrium. The real exchange rate will therefore 
rise  in  the  quarters  to  come.  It  is  the  role  of  monetary  policy  to  ensure  that  the  nominal 
appreciation of the króna as a share of the real exchange rate rise is conducive to bringing 
inflation down to target by the time the adjustment is over.  
 The economic policy framework is determined by the collaboration between the authorities 
and the International Monetary Fund (IMF). According to the IMF programme, the main task 
of  monetary  policy  at  the  outset  was  to  arrest  the  fall  of  the  króna  and  then  promote 
exchange rate stability, but without formally resorting to a fixed exchange rate regime, as it 
was  considered  desirable  that  the  króna  should  appreciate  afterwards.  This  strategy  was 
triggered  by  the  currency  crisis,  which  has  sent  the  exchange  rate  far  below  the  levels 
previously thought likely, let alone desirable, and by the large share of exchange rate-linked 
loans  in  private  sector  debt.  The  problem,  however,  was  that  achieving  exchange  rate 
stability  with  conventional  tools,  such  as  interest  rates  and  foreign  exchange  market 
2 
 BIS Review 39/2010
intervention,  would  require  astronomical  interest  rates  and/or  larger  foreign  exchange 
reserves than Iceland had, partly because of foreign investors’ large holdings in krónur. As a 
result, it was decided to impose temporary capital account restrictions, in the hope that they 
would provide monetary policy with the elbow room to base its decisions on the slack in the 
economy while establishing exchange rate stability. Another goal was to create some shelter 
for private sector debt restructuring.  
This strategy has delivered considerable results. The króna has been relatively stable since 
mid-2009 and has actually appreciated a bit in recent weeks, although it has slid somewhat 
in the past few days. At the same time, the Central Bank stepped down its sales of foreign 
currency  in  support  of  the  króna  and  has  not  intervened  in  the  FX  market  since  early 
November.  In  part,  this  is  due  to  the  fact  that  the  króna  was  already  very  weak,  and  the 
underlying trade surplus has since provided the króna with a stronger foundation. But one 
cannot ignore the most important explanation: with the changes to the capital controls that 
were  announced  in  end-October/early  November  2009,  and  the  expansion  of  the  Capital 
Controls Surveillance Unit staff, the controls are finally working as originally planned. Most 
important here is the fact that the link between the onshore and offshore markets for krónur 
has been largely disconnected.  
This also appears in a significant drop in inflation. In the first quarter of 2009, price levels 
excluding tax effects had risen by nearly 17% year-on-year. The corresponding figure for the 
first quarter of 2010, however, is just over 6%. In the absence of further shocks that weaken 
the króna once more, there is a very good chance that inflation excluding tax effects will be 
close to target by the end of the year. The Central Bank has cut interest rates substantially. 
The Central Bank interest rate that made the greatest impact on other rates was 17% a year 
ago, when the Bank held its 2009 Annual General Meeting. As of today, the corresponding 
interest rate – the average of current account rates and the highest CD rates – is just over 
8%.  
But  although  interest  rates  have  fallen  significantly,  it  cannot  be  denied  that  they  are  still 
higher than desirable in view of the slack in the national economy, and they could be lower if 
the  inflation  outlook  were  the  only  criterion.  This  is  the  price  we  pay  for  the  currency  and 
banking  crisis,  the  lack  of  credibility  in  foreign  capital  markets,  and  the  limited  access  we 
have to those markets. Simply put, Icelandic interest rates include a large risk premium. If the 
capital controls are effective, as they appear to be at present, they obviously provide some 
scope to look beyond this risk premium. But the controls have not yet been tested by sharp 
and deep reductions in interest rates and a smaller interest rate differential with abroad than 
currently exists. Until now, there has been no occasion to take interest rate decisions based 
on the assumption that no steps will be taken to lift the capital controls in the near future. We 
hope no such circumstances develop.  
Strictly  speaking,  monetary  policy  in  Iceland  is not  following  the  inflation  target  at  present. 
But as the weight of exchange rate-linked items in domestic balance sheets declines, and as 
confidence rises and the foundations for the exchange rate itself are strengthened, monetary 
policy can devote greater attention to the slack in the economy and the inflation outlook. In 
this context, three factors are most important: returning domestic financial institutions to full 
functionality,  converting  foreign-denominated  debt  to  domestic  currency,  and  restoring 
access to foreign credit and financial markets.  
It  is  important  to  enhance  the  effectiveness  of  the  Central  Bank’s  monetary  policy 
instruments and improve the transmission mechanism of monetary policy. While confidence 
in the financial market remains limited, the Central Bank’s policy instruments will not be fully 
effective  because,  under  these  circumstances,  financial  institutions  have  every  reason  to 
consider  it  more  beneficial  to  do  business  with  the  Central  Bank  than  among  themselves. 
The Central Bank has set a framework for the money market, foreign exchange market, and 
bond  market,  thereby  contributing  to  their  resurrection,  in  co-operation  with  the  authorities 
and  the  financial  institutions.  At  this  point  in  time,  it  is  primarily  the  bond  market  that  has 
BIS Review 39/2010 
 3
shown  signs  of  recovery.  However,  financial  institutions’  conduct  still  shows  that  they  are 
uncertain  about  the  future,  and  the  premises  for  trading  are  distorted  to  some  degree. 
Finding a solution to this will be an important task in the coming months.  
At present, investment in Iceland is close to a post-WWII low. According to the most recent 
forecast, it can be assumed that investment as a share of GDP will be under 14% in 2010, 
the lowest ratio since the end of the War. Exports can drive GDP growth for a while, but a 
lasting recovery and stable growth require a reinstatement of investment in value-generating 
commercial  activities.  Domestic  interest  rates  have  been  blamed  for  the  sluggishness  of 
investment  activity,  and  certainly,  financing  costs  are  an  important  factor  in  investment. 
Under  current  circumstances,  however,  it  would  be  fantasy  to  maintain  that  a  sizeable 
interest  rate  cut  would  catalyse  a  turnaround  in  investment.  Considering  how  strong 
investment was during the upswing years, the Bank’s surveys show that current investment 
trends  in  Iceland  are  similar  to  those  in  other  countries  that  have  experienced  financial 
crises. Furthermore, it should be borne in mind that business investment is minimal in most 
industrial nations at present, even though their interest rates are very low. Risk aversion in 
the wake of financial crisis and economic recession, together with uncertainty about future 
demand, are hurdles to investment. The Central Bank’s studies and informal surveys indicate 
that  the  same  situation  prevails  here  in  Iceland.  Added  to  this  are  heavy  indebtedness, 
uncertainty about companies’ future operational environment, and limited access to foreign 
credit. Consequently, it will require more than interest rate cuts to stimulate investment.  
Decisions  on  the  level  of  monetary  policy  restraint  are  always  taken  under  conditions  of 
uncertainty – about the current economic situation and probable future developments, and 
whether  monetary  policy  instruments  will  be  effective  at  any  given  time.  This  is  why 
responsible  and  well-informed  parties  can  easily  disagree  on  what  is  the  best  course  of 
action at any time. In the Central Bank’s Annual Report, which is available for perusal here, 
you can see how individual members of the Monetary Policy Committee voted at the various 
meetings  in  2009.  The  minutes  of  the  MPC  meetings  reflect  the  in-depth  coverage  of 
economic affairs at each meeting and the issues the Committee deals with at any point in 
time.  I  take  the  liberty  of  asserting  that  all  MPC  members  vote  as  they  deem  most 
appropriate  in  view  of  current  circumstances  and  the  Committee’s  objectives.  Moreover,  I 
strongly  doubt  that  interest  rate  decisions  based  on  some  other  arrangement,  where 
professional views are less important and transparency less, would yield better results.  
Under the current circumstances, however, decisions on the level of monetary policy restraint 
are more complex than they generally have been in the past. That complexity stems in part 
from the fact that it is not clear where we are headed in the immediate future. Will access to 
credit markets be restored in the near future, so that we can strengthen our foreign exchange 
reserves and begin lifting the capital controls soon, without jeopardising the exchange rate of 
our currency or worrying about upcoming payments on the Treasury’s foreign loans in the 
winter  of  2011–2012?  Or  are  we  faced  with  a  situation  where  access  to  foreign  credit 
remains limited and the capital controls must stay in place much longer than we had hoped? 
It will then become critical to eliminate this uncertainty.  
If the conclusion is that we must maintain the capital controls longer than originally intended, 
and if access to further foreign credit is not forthcoming except at usurious rates, we will have 
to  draft  an  economic  policy  that  takes  account  of  these  circumstances.  In  that  instance, 
strong emphasis would be placed on preventing the nation’s foreign exchange reserves from 
becoming dangerously depleted following payments on Treasury loans in the winter of 2011–
2012. Fiscal policy would have to be tighter than is currently planned. As regards monetary 
policy, two factors would tend to offset one another: the economy would be weaker, but the 
exchange  rate  would  be  lower.  The  more  effective  the  capital  controls  are,  however,  the 
lower  interest  rates  can  be.  This  could  also  mean  that  the  Central  Bank  would  purchase 
foreign  currency  in  the  market  in  order  to  strengthen  its  reserves  in  advance  of  the  loan 
payments, and that, in turn, would mean a lower exchange rate. Because we have a certain 
4 
 BIS Review 39/2010
amount of time on our side, it is not likely that this will occur in the next few weeks unless the 
króna begins appreciating markedly.  
On  the  other  hand,  it  is  difficult  to  see  how  such  a  programme  could  continue  without 
collaboration  with  the  International  Monetary  Fund  and  others,  as  the  capital  controls  are 
based on emergency authorisations in the EEA Agreement and are contrary to the spirit of 
Iceland’s agreement on OECD membership and Article 8 of the IMF Articles of Agreement, to 
which Iceland has agreed. Furthermore, it must not be forgotten that collaboration with the 
IMF  bolsters  foreign  markets’  confidence,  and  Iceland  has  benefited  greatly  from  the 
technical assistance of the Fund’s staff during the course of the economic programme.  
It is my view that, if the requisite conditions develop in the near term, we should try to lift the 
capital controls as soon as possible. They have played an important role in the progress that 
we have made. The associated cost has probably been lower than they might have been until 
now because other factors have obstructed trade and international co-operation. But as time 
passes, the cost – in terms of all sorts of disadvantages and lost business opportunities – will 
rise.  
 I have expounded at length on monetary policy, the capital controls, and the IMF programme, 
as these topics have been at the forefront of public discussion recently. But am I painting too 
black a picture? What is the outlook for Icelanders’ foreign debts and re-financing needs in 
the  next  few  years?  This  subject  has  been  discussed  repeatedly  in  the  recent  past,  and 
opinions vary. Some go so far as to maintain that the economy will collapse under the weight 
of  its  debt  and  the  Treasury  will  become  insolvent.  Fortunately,  a  careful  analysis  of  the 
available information reveals this turn of events to be unlikely.  
There  is  still  considerable  uncertainty  about  what  the  Icelandic  economy’s  net  external 
position will be once the air clears after the fall of the banks. Currently underway is a process 
involving  writing  down  the  private  sector’s  external  assets  and  liabilities,  with  offsetting 
transactions  in  many  instances  because  of  bankruptcy  proceedings.  According  to  official 
balance of payments figures, Iceland’s net external liabilities amounted to 5.6 trillion krónur at 
the  end  of  2009,  or  nearly  four  times  GDP,  and  about  0.4  trillion  krónur  without  the  failed 
banks, or just under one-third of GDP.  
The  underlying  position  that  can  be  expected  to  emerge  once  the  dust  has  settled  will 
probably lie somewhere between the position excluding the failed banks and the position that 
reigned in Iceland during the decade before the crisis. The exact result will depend, among 
other things, on the distribution of domestic and foreign creditors in the creditor group and 
the  classification  of  the  old  banks’  assets  as  domestic  and  foreign.  The  Central  Bank  has 
made  regular  efforts  to  assess  this.  In  December  2009,  the  Bank  issued  an  opinion 
concluding that the underlying net external position could be around 90% of GDP. The most 
recent  surveys  indicate  figures  closer  to  80%,  including  the  most  recent  estimate  of  the 
Treasury’s  net  obligations  due  to  minimum  deposit  insurance  for  British  and  Dutch  online 
branches of Landsbanki; however, because no contractual agreements have been finalised, 
this is still subject to uncertainty.  
This is lower net debt than Iceland has had since late 2005, and is certainly manageable. But 
this figure is still subject to uncertainty. Central Bank staff members will therefore continue to 
clarify the picture and are currently at work on a report on the Icelandic economy’s foreign 
assets and liabilities.  
Net  debt  is  important  in  the  assessment  of  an  economy’s  debt  sustainability  and  in 
comparisons with other countries’ indebtedness. On the other hand, gross debt is important 
as  well,  especially  as  regards  re-financing  needs  and  potential  pressure  on  the  exchange 
rate of the króna. In this context, it is important to consider whether the debt is generated by 
the private sector or the Treasury, or by firms with a Treasury guarantee. Significant private 
BIS Review 39/2010 
 5
sector re-financing needs that cannot be funded with new loans can exert pressure on the 
exchange  rate,  which  in  turn  can  have  a  negative  effect  on  other  debtors  with  foreign-
denominated debt, but they will not cause national insolvency. If households or businesses 
cannot pay their foreign-denominated loans, they become bankrupt, and the debt is written 
down at the expense of the foreign creditor. If the Treasury ends up in that position, however, 
it could have serious repercussions for the nation’s access to foreign credit markets and the 
financing  terms  available  for  the  long  term.  It  is  important  to  avoid  this,  and  it  should  be 
possible, even if Iceland’s access to foreign credit remains limited. In this context, it is of key 
importance  that  the  foreign  exchange  reserves  be  large  enough  to  support  the  Treasury’s 
upcoming  loan  payments,  which  amount  to  roughly  1½  billion  euros  in  the  winter  of  
2011–2012.  
The  Central  Bank’s  foreign  exchange  reserves  totalled  just  over  480  b.kr.,  or  2.8  billion 
euros, at the end of 2009. This amount has changed little since then. The reserves amounted 
to nearly one-third of GDP and just over 14 months’ worth of imports. By that measure, these 
are the most sizeable foreign exchange reserves that Iceland has “owned” since the end of 
World War II. “Owned” is perhaps not the right word, however, because our current foreign 
reserves  consist  largely  of  borrowed  funds,  while  we  owned  our  post-WWII  reserves 
debt-free. In all, loans taken in the past few years for the express purpose of strengthening 
the reserves, plus the Central Bank’s foreign exchange deposits owned by parties other than 
Government entities, total 3.8 billion euros, or 1 billion euros more than the reserves.  
The  resolution  committees  of  the  failed  banks  have  Central  Bank  deposits  totalling  nearly 
1 billion euros. Those balances will be paid out in the months and years to come. If they are 
deducted from the reserves, together with other funds that will likely be withdrawn in the next 
12 months, there are 1.4 billion euros left. This is sufficient to cover the instalments that must 
be  paid  on  the  Treasury’s  foreign  loans  in  the  winter  of  2011–2012,  which  total  1.4  billion 
euros. But the foreign exchange reserves would then be exhausted, and the situation would 
be  difficult,  to  say  the  least.  On  the  other  hand,  this  will  not  be  allowed  to  happen.  In  my 
opinion, if such a situation appears imminent, we must take action according to Plan B, which 
I discussed earlier. In addition, it is highly likely that we will be successful in realising some of 
the foreign claims held by Central Bank of Iceland Asset Management.  
I would like to take this opportunity to announce for the first time that, in recent months, the 
Central  Bank  has  purchased,  on  the  secondary  market,  bonds  from  the  series  maturing 
during the winter of 2011–2012. The purchase has a nominal value of 116 million euros and 
was executed on favourable terms. Because of this transaction, the reserves can now cover 
the loan payments. Furthermore, it will end up reducing the Treasury’s foreign debt at lower 
expense than would have been achieved otherwise.  
If we gain access to the remainder of the loans from the IMF and the Nordic countries, it will 
be possible to strengthen the reserves by another 2½ billion euros. The reserves would then 
amount  to  3.9  billion  euros,  almost  half  of  GDP  and  nearly  21  months’  worth  of  imports, 
before the loan payments. Of course, this is a much larger reserve fund than we need for the 
long term, and it will be costly. For this reason, we will continue to refine our projections of 
how much, and when, we need these supplemental loans. In this context, we must also bear 
in mind that we will only need maximum foreign reserves for a short period of time, while we 
are  setting  the  stage  to  lift  the  capital  controls  and  getting  beyond  these  large  loan 
instalments.  
The Central Bank has decided, in connection with its macroeconomic forecast this coming 
May, to prepare a new balance of payments estimate for next year, as circumstances have 
changed  somewhat  since  the  last such  estimate  was  prepared  in  connection  with  the  IMF 
economic programme. Then it will be easier to assess what kind of pressure instalments and 
interest payments from all Icelandic parties could place on the króna in the months to come if 
nothing else changes, and our need for foreign exchange reserves will be further clarified as 
6 
 BIS Review 39/2010
well. One thing is clear, however: for a period of time, we will need to maintain larger foreign 
reserves than we currently do.  
 The  resurrection  of  the  financial  system  is  well  advanced,  and  the  capital  base  and 
ownership structure of the new banks have been determined. The next step is to complete 
the financial restructuring of the savings bank system. The Minister of Economic Affairs has 
presented  a  bill  of  legislation  on  financial  undertakings,  which  addresses  a  number  of  the 
shortcomings that emerged in their operations during the run-up to the crisis, including large 
exposures, related party lending, and owner eligibility. A number of projects must be tackled 
afterwards. The banking system is still too large for domestic needs. Our financial institutions 
are operating in the shelter of capital controls, and the future arrangements for their links to 
foreign  financial  markets  are  still  undetermined.  Furthermore,  many  domestic  financial 
institutions have sizeable currency mismatches between their foreign assets and liabilities. 
This  is  risky  and  increases  their  need  for  capital.  The  financial  institutions  themselves  will 
have to work diligently in order to reduce the imbalances in their currency composition, but 
because  the  hedge  market  is  not  functioning  properly  at  present,  it  is  possible  that  the 
Central Bank might assist them in repairing their foreign exchange balance through swaps 
with institutions that have an opposite mismatch. In addition, the Bank will soon review its 
precautionary rules on financial institutions’ liquidity and foreign exchange balance, in light of 
recent events.  
The Central Bank of Iceland has collaborated with savings banks and the Ministry of Finance 
on a solution to the recapitalisation of the savings banks. The solution involves settlement of 
a  large  portion  of  the  claims  that  the  Central  Bank  received  as  compensation  for  deposits 
transferred to it, in accordance with the decision of the Financial Supervisory Authority (FME) 
on the disposal of assets and liabilities of Sparisjóðabanki Íslands hf. (SPB) in March 2009. 
The settlement of the compensation has not been finalised, however, and the matter is still 
being  considered  by  the  Financial Supervisory  Authority.  The  Central  Bank  has concluded 
agreements  with  eight  savings  banks  concerning  the  settlement  of  claims,  and  the 
agreements  will  be  finalised  soon  after  the  Financial  Supervisory  Authority  and  other 
creditors  have  confirmed  them.  I  realise  that  it is  painful  for  guarantee  capital  owners  and 
creditors to lose these assets, which were deemed quite valuable before the crash and were 
perhaps purchased recently with borrowed money. Nonetheless, it is necessary to face facts 
and  try  to  salvage  the  value  that  remains.  I  have  always  viewed  the  savings  banks  as  an 
important part of a healthy financial system, as they have a certain advantage in assessing 
local opportunities and risks and are generally trusted in their home communities. But this 
makes it important that the savings banks limit their activities to the areas where they can 
compete,  and  not  extend  into  risky  investment  banking  operations.  With  the  financial 
restructuring currently underway, it will be possible to strengthen the foundations of important 
savings banks. Many of them will remain in operation, and their guarantee capital owners will 
have  an  opportunity  in  the  future  to  repurchase  a  stake  in  them  from  the  Government. 
Although writing down guarantee capital now is painful, it is a far less drastic measure than 
the  shareholders  of  the  failed  banks  were  faced  with.  On  this  occasion,  I  would  like  to 
encourage  all  savings  bank  investors  and  employees  to  take  this  opportunity  to  begin 
building their savings banks for the future.  
For the most part, domestic payment intermediation withstood the shocks of 2008 and 2009, 
but  the  same  cannot  be  said  of  cross-border  payment  intermediation,  as  Icelanders 
discovered in the fall of 2008. The Central Bank plans to work with financial institutions and 
the appropriate authorities in the next few weeks, with the aim of reducing risk in payment 
intermediation.  Furthermore,  it  is  necessary  to  consider  strengthening  infrastructure  and 
separating infrastructure from competitive operations.  
 BIS Review 39/2010 
 7
Honoured guests. This is neither the time nor the place to conduct an in-depth analysis of the 
Icelandic  financial  crisis.  We  are  now  awaiting  the  release  of  the  report  from  the 
Parliamentary Special Investigative Commission, which presumably will generate extensive 
discussion.  We  hope  that  discussion  will  aim  at  getting  to  the  bottom  of  the  matter: 
determining what went wrong and suggesting improvements. Although a great deal remains 
unknown  about  what  happened  in  the  financial  institutions  that  collapsed  and  in  the 
preparation  of  Government  responses  before  and  after  the  crisis  struck,  we  also  know  a 
great deal about what was lacking in regulatory framework and supervision – particularly the 
elements that Iceland shares with many other countries. In the international arena, there has 
been extensive discussion of the flaws in regulation and supervision, and improvements are 
being implemented already. The Central Bank of Iceland is keeping close track of this work, 
not least through its membership to the Bank for International Settlements in Basel and its 
collaboration in European and Nordic fora.  
To  my  mind,  the  most  important  weaknesses  in  this  regard  –  and  they  are  not  limited  to 
Iceland – are the following:  
First, too much attention was paid to risks in individual institutions, while a comprehensive 
assessment  of  risk  in  the  financial  system  as  a  whole  was  much  less  developed.  The  old 
adage – that the whole is greater than the sum of its parts – was forgotten.  
Second,  the  institutional  framework  was  flawed,  in  that  it  did  not  promote  such  a 
comprehensive  assessment  of  risk.  It  was  unclear  who  was  responsible  for  responding  to 
systemic  risk,  and  there  were  too  few  tools  for  addressing  it,  such  as  variable  capital 
requirements and other restrictions to combat lending and asset bubbles and set limits on 
risk appetite.  
Third,  liquidity  risk  was  underestimated,  not  least  risk  related  to  liquidity  management 
between currencies and financial institutions’ re-financing in foreign currency.  
Fourth, actual equity in the financial system proved too little to offset the indebtedness and 
other risk that had accumulated.  
Fifth, the regulatory framework for cross-border banking operations was deeply flawed, not 
least in the European Economic Area.  
Sixth, there is significant risk associated with building a relatively large banking system with 
cross-border operations based on a small country and small currency.  
These problems remain more or less unaddressed here in Iceland, and as a result, there is 
little in the regulatory environment to prevent the problems Iceland had before the crisis from 
developing once again, although it is unlikely that this will happen in the next few years, as 
our financial systems are still recovering and risk awareness is keen. Now is the time to solve 
these problems because, if we wait until operations have resumed their full pace, it might be 
too  late,  and  the  will  and  incentive  to  take  action  will  be  lacking.  The  Central  Bank  is 
determined to set policy on these matters during the current year, and to contribute to joint 
policy-making  with 
the  one  hand, 
macroprudential rules – that is, rules that reduce systemic risk and obstruct the development 
of  credit  and  asset  bubbles,  and  on  the  other,  it  involves  institutional  elements,  not  least 
possible forms of closer collaboration or merger between the Central Bank and the Financial 
Supervisory Authority.  
And monetary policy will be reviewed as well. There is a practical reason for such a review: 
we  need  to  formulate  the  monetary  policy  that  will  take  over  from  the  IMF  programme 
because the current arrangement will not suit once the capital controls have been lifted and 
Iceland has re-established its financial links with other countries. But there are also lessons 
to be learned from monetary policy implementation during the upswing and in the run-up to 
the  financial  crisis.  The  inflation  target  and  the  floating  exchange  rate  did  not  cause  the 
banks to collapse; after all, if they had, many more banking systems around the world would 
have  fallen.  But  monetary  policy  was  part  of  the  chain  of  events  here  in  Iceland,  and  a 
the  Government.  This  process 
involves,  on 
8 
 BIS Review 39/2010
number of difficulties emerged in monetary policy implementation under the conditions then 
reigning. There will be opportunities to discuss this in greater depth later, but in my view, the 
inflation  target  as  such  was  not  the  problem,  as  studies  show  that  countries  with  inflation 
problems are likelier to be hit by banking crises, and fare worse in the event of such a crisis, 
than  their  counterparts  without  problem  inflation.  The  problem  was  rather  that  the  various 
elements of economic policy did not interact as they should have, and it has come to light 
that implementing a floating exchange rate regime is complex and difficult in very small, open 
economies with strong financial ties to other countries. It will be necessary to reassess ideas 
based  on  clear  boundaries  between  monetary  policy  and  financial  stability  policy,  and 
consider more deeply the particular risks associated with a small, unstable currency. All of 
these  points  will  be  considered  with  an  open  mind,  and  the  Bank  intends  to  examine  two 
options  thoroughly:  the  first  is  participation  in  the  European  Monetary  Union.  The  other 
focuses on the monetary policy options available to Iceland if it remains outside the EU and 
the  EMU.  The  latter  of  these  could  also  be  useful  during  preparation  for  EU  and  EMU 
membership,  if  it  comes  to  pass.  The  Bank  aims  to  complete  an  interim  report  early  this 
summer, and an in-depth report early in 2011.  
This  re-examination  of  policy  pertaining  to  financial  and  monetary  stability  could  require  a 
review of the Central Bank Act, which I think is needed in any case. Consequently, I welcome 
the Minister of Economic Affairs’ statement, earlier in this meeting, that he intends to push for 
a comprehensive review of the Central Bank Act. I consider it critical that attempts be made 
to achieve as much multipartisan consensus as possible about that review.  
 Honoured guests: The affairs of the Central Bank of Iceland were administered by the Prime 
Minister’s  Office  until  this  past  fall.  I  would  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  thank  the  Prime 
Minister and the Prime Minister’s Office for successful collaboration during that period. I would 
also like to thank the Minster of Economic Affairs and his Ministry for successful co-operation 
in recent months. I want to extend my thanks to other Ministries and institutions as well, not 
least  the  Financial  Supervisory  Authority  and  the  Ministry  of  Finance.  Other  collaborators, 
including  financial  institutions  and  non-governmental  organisations,  and  the  staff  of  the 
International Monetary Fund, also deserve thanks for their co-operative efforts. And last – but 
certainly not least – I would like to thank the employees of the Central Bank for their work. 
Without them, there would not be much wind in my sails today.  
And in closing, I wish to say this: Iceland has been faced serious economic difficulties in the 
recent past, and there are certain dangers ahead. But we have the power to steer clear of 
them. We could be at the bottom, poised to rise up again and move forward, if we play our 
cards  right.  But  we  must  ensure  that  we  avoid  turbulent  waters  and  establish  long-term 
stability.  In  order  to  do  so,  we  must  demonstrate  the  patience  and  resilience  to  allow  the 
recovery of the economy and the financial system to play out. History teaches us that pride 
goeth before a fall – but it also teaches us that the darkest hour is just before the dawn. Let 
us bear that in mind as we welcome the spring. 
BIS Review 39/2010 
 9
