Malcolm Edey: Competition and regulation in the card payments market 
Speech by Mr Malcolm Edey, Assistant Governor (Financial System) of the Reserve Bank of 
Australia,  at  the  15th  annual  conference  “Cards  &  Payments  Australasia  2010”,  Sydney, 
15 March 2010. 
 It’s  a  pleasure  to  join  you  today  for  this  15th  annual  conference  of  Cards  and  Payments 
Australasia.  
As a newcomer to this event, I want to take the opportunity to talk about the economics of the 
card  payments  industry,  how  it  differs  from  other  markets,  and  also  about  the  Reserve 
Bank’s approach to card payments regulation.  
Card payments are an important part of the infrastructure of a modern economy. All of us 
here today, I’m sure, appreciate the convenience of being able to pay by plastic. More to the 
point,  card  payments  account  for  a  big  slice  of  spending  in  the  retail  economy.  There  are 
currently roughly 40 million debit cards on issue in Australia, and around 20 million credit and 
charge cards. On those cards, nearly 10 million transactions are made every day, with a daily 
value  of  around  one  billion  dollars.  To  put  this  in  some  sort  of  perspective,  the  value  of 
spending on personal cards is about half the size of household consumption.  
Card payments are a big proportion of the number of non-cash payments in the economy, 
but only a small proportion of their value. More card payments are made in Australia than the 
other  main  means  of  non-cash  payments  –  that  is,  direct  debits  and  credits,  BPAY  and 
cheques – combined. And yet, in terms of value, they make up less than three per cent of the 
total. This illustrates that, while card payments have few implications for the overall stability 
of the financial system, they have significant implications for its efficiency.  
In this context, efficiency includes not just the efficiency of the processes by which payments 
are made, but also the way in which price signals function to allocate resources and guide 
decisions. The RBA has a mandate to use its regulatory powers, where needed, to promote 
that broader efficiency goal through its Payments System Board.  
I’ll  talk  more  about  the  Board’s  activities  in  a  moment.  But  let  me  start  with  some 
observations about the economics.  
One  of  the  first  things  I  learned  when  I  started  to  work  on  card  payments  is  that  the 
economics of this industry are not simple. In the simplest markets, we can think of supply 
and demand as being determined by a set of independent decisions made by producers and 
consumers.  People  will  base  their  decisions  on  factors  like  price,  quality  and  the  cost  of 
production. If it’s a competitive market, we’d expect it to have certain characteristics, such as 
that: other things equal, a lower price means more demand; producers compete to offer the 
product at the lowest price they can; and the price mechanism promotes efficiency by guiding 
resources to their best use. 
In practice, no market will meet those conditions perfectly. But the card-payments market has 
some  particular  qualities  that  make  it  very  different  from  the  stylised  description  I’ve  just 
given.  
First, the card payments market is subject to network externalities, which is another way of 
saying that the cost-benefit decisions made by the various players are highly interdependent. 
The value of the service I get from being part of a card network depends, in part, on the size 
of the network. Cardholders value having a particular card in their wallet because they know 
the card is widely accepted. And merchants value the capacity to accept a card because it’s 
widely  held.  This  aspect  of  the  market  adds  a  level  of  complexity  to  the  pricing  strategy, 
because the suppliers of card services will want to take those externalities into account. They 
have an incentive to adopt pricing strategies that promote the size of their networks.  
BIS Review 29/2010 
 1
The second difference is that card payments services are a joint product. The purchaser of 
the service, in any given transaction, is not the only one who benefits from it. When a card is 
used to make a payment, it delivers a service jointly to both the payer and the receiver of the 
funds.  
Thirdly, the card payments market, particularly in the credit cards space, has evolved in such 
a  way  as  to  have  a  very  unusual  characteristic.  That  is,  that  the  decision-maker  in  a 
transaction – the person who decides which payment method to use – is generally not the 
person  who  is  on  the  receiving  end  of  the  price  signal.  To  be  specific,  it  is  typically  the 
purchaser who decides whether to use a card (and which card to use), but it’s the merchant 
who, in the first instance, pays the fee associated with that decision.  
So, in a world where cards are widely held and widely accepted, the effective demand for the 
service is determined mainly by the cardholders, while the price is charged to the merchants. 
This is where, in the four-party card schemes, interchange fees play a key role, because they 
are typically passed on to the merchant, and they therefore set the base for the merchant 
service fee.  
It’s this third characteristic that, to my mind, most clearly distinguishes card payments from 
other markets. We can think of examples of other markets with complex network effects, or 
of other markets where there are jointly-produced outputs. But I can’t think of any example of 
a  market  where  the  separation  of  decision-making  power  from  the  price  signal  is  such  an 
integral part of the structure – the cardholder makes the decision, but the merchant pays the 
fee.  And,  in  the  pre-reform  days,  they  were  restricted  from  passing  on  that  fee  to  the 
customer making the decision.  
It remains true, of course, that merchants do have some decision-making power of their own. 
They can, for example, choose not to accept a card – that is, to stay outside a card network if 
they think it’s too expensive. But this is where a fourth characteristic of the market comes into 
play.  The  card  market  is  highly  concentrated.  In  credit  cards,  for  example,  the  two  major 
schemes  in  Australia  have  a  combined  market  share  of  more  than  80  per  cent  of 
transactions.  They  have  high  levels  of  penetration  of  the  potential  cardholder  market,  and 
high rates of acceptance among merchants. These conditions can make it very unattractive 
for an individual merchant to stay outside a given card network, particularly in a world where 
the merchant doesn’t know which cards a customer might be carrying. I don’t say any of that 
as  a  criticism  of  the  card  schemes  –  it  wouldn’t  be  fair  to  blame  them  just  for  being 
successful – but it is an important feature of the market that has a bearing on competition 
and efficiency.  
One of the consequences of the industry structure that I’ve just described is that competitive 
discipline  on  interchange  fees  has  been  weak.  As  I  said  before,  in  conventional  markets, 
competition puts downward pressure on prices, because if you raise your price you will lose 
market share. But in card payments, there are significant pressures going the other way – a 
rise in the interchange fees charged to acquirers can allow issuers to increase their reward 
points to cardholders, thereby encouraging use of the card.1 In other words, a rise in price 
can  lead  to  an  increase,  rather  than  a  decrease,  in  the  effective  demand  for  the  service. 
Again, I can’t think of any other significant market where that is the case.  
This principle creates a natural tendency for average interchange fees to drift upwards over 
time.  Within  each  scheme,  there  are  multiple  cards  with  differing  interchange  fees,  and 
market share tends to shift towards those cards with the higher fees. It’s an illustration of the 
                                                 
1   The acquirer is the bank that services the merchant. The issuer is the bank that issued the credit 
card to the cardholder. In a typical credit card transaction, the acquiring bank pays an interchange 
fee to the issuer. 
2 
 BIS Review 29/2010
principle that, in these rather unique conditions, competition for market share tends to push 
the average price up rather than down.  
What I’ve just set out is obviously not a complete description of the cards market. But I think 
it  captures  those  features  that  are  particularly  distinctive,  and  which  raise  at  least  the 
potential for concerns about efficiency and the adequacy of competition.  
With that background, I’ll turn now to the RBA’s involvement in card payments regulation.  
The  origin  of  that  involvement  was  the  decision  by  the  Federal  Government,  in  1997,  to 
implement  the  Wallis  recommendations  by  giving  regulatory  oversight  of  the  Australian 
payments  system  to  the  RBA.  The  Act  set  up  a  Payments  System  Board  of  the  Reserve 
Bank,  with  responsibility  for  payments-system  efficiency  and  stability.  Among  other  things, 
the Act gives the Board the power to designate a payments system and, where a system has 
been  designated,  to  set  regulatory  standards  with  respect  to  such  things  as  fees  and 
operating rules.  
The  Board’s  first  major  study  in  this  area  was  conducted  jointly  with  the  ACCC,  and  was 
released in October 2000. That study raised a number of concerns about market practices in 
the industry, particularly the setting of scheme interchange fees and a range of other matters 
related to competition and the efficiency of price signals. Since industry attempts to address 
ACCC  concerns  about  interchange  fees  had  failed,  and  given  that  the  Payments  System 
Board  had  a  clear  mandate  in  this  area,  the  Board  then  moved  into  a  process  of  reform, 
starting with the credit card schemes.  
After  a  period  of  consultation,  the  first  package  of  credit  card  reforms  was  announced  in 
August 2002. That package had three main elements, which were:  
 
 
 
But  the  Bank  was  always  of  the  view  that  reform  of  the  payments  system  needed  to  be 
holistic. So over the next few years, the reform process added a number of other elements, 
which covered both credit and debit cards. Some of the key ones were:  
 
A cost-based standard on interchange fees;  
Disallowance of no-surcharge rules; and  
Rules to expand access to the network. 
A  restriction  on  the  honour-all-cards  rule  to  allow  merchants  to  make  separate 
decisions for credit and debit cards; 
A  cap  on  Visa  debit  interchange  (which  was  also  voluntarily  adopted  by 
MasterCard); 
A reduction in interchange fees for EFTPOS; 
Agreement by the three-party schemes to remove no-steering rules; 
Access regimes for a number of card-payment systems; and  
Increased transparency of interchange fees and merchant service fees.  
 
 
 
 
Taken together, this expanded package of reforms was in place by the beginning of 2007.  
These developments have been closely watched both by regulators and market participants 
around the world, because Australia was the first major country to begin reforms in this area. 
Subsequently, a number of other countries have taken steps of a similar nature, and some 
are considering the case to do so.  
The sequence of reforms I’ve just outlined obviously has a lot of detailed elements to it. But, 
at a strategic level, it can be thought of as addressing the concerns about efficiency in two 
ways.  
 BIS Review 29/2010 
 3
In  the  first  place,  the  Board  took  the  view  that,  left  to  itself,  the  market  was  delivering 
interchange fees that were too high. Hence they took direct action to regulate them lower. As 
a result, average credit card interchange fees have fallen from around 95 basis points before 
the reforms to around 50 basis points now. Merchant service fees associated with the large 
credit  card  schemes  have  correspondingly  fallen  (in  fact  by  more  than  the  reduction  in 
interchange  fees),  and  this  in  turn  has  put  downward  pressure  on  fees  for  the  three-party 
schemes. Interchange fees for scheme debit and EFTPOS have also been reduced by direct 
regulation.  
Secondly, the various other elements of the reform package can be thought of as working to 
improve the alignment between price signals and decision-making power – the issue that I 
spoke about earlier. One very important aspect of that is the disallowance of no-surcharge 
rules. It’s important to be clear on the rationale for that. We’re not saying that surcharging is 
an  end  in  itself,  or  that  it’s  going  to  be  right  for  all  circumstances.  But  rules  against 
surcharging represent a restriction on the flow of price signals to the main decision-maker, 
and so the option to surcharge needs to be there. And where surcharging reflects the costs 
incurred in the provision of the payment service, it should contribute to efficient outcomes.  
Another  way  of  improving  this  alignment  has  been  to  remove  restrictions  on  the  ability  of 
merchants to influence the choice of payment method at the point of sale. Examples of such 
measures were the regulation to allow separate acceptance choices on scheme debit and 
credit, and the dropping of no-steering rules. These things give the fee-payer greater scope 
to respond to the relative prices that are being charged.  
Finally,  moves  to  increase  transparency  have  helped  to  provide  more  information  to 
merchants  and  make  them  aware  of  the  costs  of  accepting  payment  instruments.  This 
transparency has supported the other elements of the reforms that have provided merchants 
with more competitive leverage.  
I don’t claim that perfection can be achieved on any of these fronts, but these were all areas 
where improvements needed to be made. The general principle is that, if you’re paying a fee, 
there should be some commensurate degree of influence over the decision to incur that fee. 
Without that, price signals will be ineffective, and competitive pressure to keep fees down will 
be weak.  
I’ve  gone  through  that  history  in  order  to  convey  the  overall  sweep  of  card-payments 
regulation, and the general economic basis for it. Having done that, let me move on to look at 
the current position.  
The  immediate  background  at  this  point  is  the  review  of  card-payments  reforms  that  the 
Board undertook in 2007–2008. In thinking about the approach taken in that review, it’s worth 
keeping  in  mind  that  the  Reserve  Bank  has  described  itself  as  a  reluctant  regulator.  Our 
general mandate with respect to the payments system is to promote efficiency and stability. 
For  reasons  that  I’ve  already  described,  that  includes  taking  measures  to  stop  fees  from 
rising  too  far  above  efficient  levels.  But  our  preference  is  to  do  that,  when  we  can,  by 
promoting competition rather than by direct regulation of fees.  
The results of the Board’s review were presented in September 2008. 
What did it find?  
First of all, it found that the reforms to date had delivered clear benefits, in the form of lower 
costs  to  merchants  and  increased  competition.  In  addition,  it  found  that  price  signals  had 
been  strengthened,  transparency  enhanced,  access  improved,  and  that  the  competitive 
environment was more soundly based than it had been five years earlier. But the Board also 
concluded that more needed to be done. Specifically, it concluded that:  
 
at 50 basis points, credit card interchange fees were still too high;  
4 
 BIS Review 29/2010
 it also concluded that, even with the various reforms to date, competitive pressures 
were  still  not  strong  enough  to  put  downward  pressure  on  those  fees  if  the 
regulation were removed.  
Against that background, the Board set out two possible approaches for the next stage of its 
regulatory strategy.  
The first possible approach would be to step back from interchange-fee regulation, if it could 
be  reasonably  satisfied  that  this  was  not  going  to  result  in  the  fees  going  back  up  again. 
Within that broad approach, the Board saw two ways that this objective might be met through 
action by the payments industry. Those were:  
 
by strengthening competition from alternative payment methods, particularly through 
development  of  industry-based  EFTPOS  and  online  payments  schemes,  coupled 
with  further  changes  to  honour-all-cards  rules  and  increased  transparency  of 
scheme fees;  
and by voluntary undertakings from the credit card schemes that interchange fees 
would not rise.  
 The second possible approach put forward in the 2008 review was to maintain interchange 
regulation on credit card schemes, and to make a further reduction to 30 basis points. The 
Board indicated it would follow this path if progress on the first track was unsatisfactory.  
As you know, the Board undertook to make an assessment of that in August 2009.  
As you also know, the decision at that point was deferred. The Board took the view that good 
progress was being made by the industry, but that it wasn’t yet enough to provide sufficient 
confidence that fees would be held down in the absence of direct regulation. So the decision 
was  to  allow  some  further  time  to  assess  developments.  In  the  meantime,  the  Board  did 
make  one  further  change  of  a  more  limited  nature,  which  was  needed  to  put  the  new 
EFTPOS scheme on a comparable regulatory footing to scheme debit. That announcement 
was made in November.  
I know that many of you involved in the industry would like me to give some predictions or 
clues about what the Board’s next decision on these matters might be. I’m not in a position to 
make that kind of prediction today, but I hope I’ve conveyed some of the principles that are 
important. To reiterate:  
 
The Reserve Bank is a reluctant regulator. We’d prefer to see fees being held down 
by competition than by direct regulation.  
We believe there’s been good progress in promoting competition over recent years. 
But it’s not yet clear whether that will be sufficient.  
And hence, the Board’s announcement in August last year explicitly left on the table 
both of the two broad approaches that I outlined earlier.  
  Let me conclude on a somewhat different note. I’ve talked mainly today about the Payments 
System  Board’s  regulatory  approach.  But  obviously  there’s  more  to  the  card  payments 
industry  than  just  interchange  fees  and  regulation.  This  is  an  industry  that’s  rapidly 
innovating, developing new ways to offer services, and also facing continuing challenges like 
fraud and security. I expect you’ll be focusing mainly on those wider issues over the next few 
days and I wish you every success with the rest of the conference. 
BIS Review 29/2010 
 5
