Mark Carney: Fortune favours the bold 
Remarks by Mr Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Greater Charlottetown 
Area Chamber of Commerce, Charlottetown, Prince Edward Island, 16 June 2010. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website.  
 It is a pleasure to be here. In this birthplace of Confederation, courageous decisions were 
made here to found our great nation. Similar boldness, both in Canada and globally, is again 
required. 
To  explain  why,  I  would  like  to  touch  upon  the  recent  past,  the  present  outlook,  and  our 
challenging future. 
The recent past: the recession in context 
From  the  end  of  2008  to  the  middle  of  last  year,  Canada  experienced  a  short,  sharp 
recession. With the exception of government spending, all major components of aggregate 
demand  declined,  and  industrial  production  dropped  15  per  cent.  Canadian  exporters 
suffered particularly, owing to the sharp fall in the components of U.S. economic activity that 
matter most for Canada. For example, U.S. demand for motor vehicles fell by more than half 
and housing starts by two-thirds. Partly as a result, several major Canadian industries are 
now undergoing deep restructurings. 
The  recession  had  a  considerable  impact  on  employment.  Some  400,000  Canadians  lost 
their jobs, and our unemployment rate spiked by almost 3 percentage points to its highest 
level  in  more  than  a  decade.  Although  the  labour  market  is  clearly  improving,  with  three-
quarters of the jobs lost now recovered, too many Canadians who want to work are still out of 
a job, and many of those still employed are working fewer hours than they would like (see 
Appendix Chart 1). 
As  painful  as  our  recession  was,  Canada  suffered  less  than  most  other  advanced 
economies.  Consumption,  housing,  and  employment  in  Canada  all  held  up  substantially 
better than in the United States. The cumulative fall in Canadian real GDP of 3.3 per cent 
compares with declines of 3.6 in the United States, about 5 per cent in the euro area, and 
more than 8 per cent in Japan. 
Canada’s better performance can be explained by two factors. First, with a highly credible 
monetary policy and the strongest fiscal position in the G-7, Canadian policy-makers were 
able  to  respond  swiftly  and  effectively  with  extraordinarily  accommodative  measures.  The 
Bank of Canada began cutting interest rates in December 2007 and pursued an aggressive 
series of reductions until our policy rate reached one-quarter of one per cent in April of last 
year, the lowest it can effectively go. The Bank then provided exceptional guidance on the 
likely path of interest rates necessary to achieve the inflation target in order to maximize the 
monetary stimulus from its actions. 
Second, Canada entered the recession with notable advantages, including a well-functioning 
financial system, strong corporate balance sheets, and relatively healthy household finances. 
We will have to draw on these advantages during the recovery. While the global downturn 
was  synchronous,  economic  performance  across  markets  and  sectors  is  likely  to  be 
increasingly uneven. For some Canadian businesses, the recovery may prove as challenging 
as the downturn. 
Do  not  be  misled.  This  was  the  Great  Recession.  To  claim  otherwise  with  simplistic 
comparisons  to  prior  downturns  is  to  ignore  both  the  rapidity  and  the  scale  of  the  policy 
BIS Review 83/2010 
 1
response, as well as the likelihood that the aftershocks from the crisis will persist for years.1 
In particular, the Bank expects that: 
 
the pace, composition, and variability of global growth will be substantially different 
across economies;  
the level and volatility of commodity prices will be higher;  
the nature of the global financial system will be radically altered; and  
the openness of global markets for goods and capital can no longer be assured. 
 
 
 
Canada  is  not  a  bystander  in  this  global  upheaval.  We  can  influence  policies  and  focus 
reforms.  Our  businesses  can  anticipate  and  take  advantage  of  emerging  trends.  But  the 
efforts required of all of us will be heroic, and hesitation will be costly. 
For  both  policy-makers  and  businesses  at  this  juncture,  Virgil’s  adage  applies:  fortune 
favours the bold. 
The present 
The  current  economic  outlook  is  neither  as  robust  as  recent  data  indicate  nor  as  dire  as 
current headlines scream. 
The global economic recovery is proceeding, but it is increasingly uneven across countries. 
There  is  strong  momentum  in  emerging-market  economies;  some  consolidation  of  the 
recoveries  in  the  United  States,  Japan,  and  other  industrialized  economies;  and  the 
possibility of renewed weakness in Europe. 
Global growth is now projected to average slightly above 4  per cent a year through 2012. 
Few, apart from the Bank of Canada, thought that possible at this time last year. The Bank 
continues to hold the view that, led by domestic demand, Canadian growth will likely be the 
strongest among the G-7 nations over the next two years. 
Recent activity in Canada is unfolding largely as expected. The economy grew by a robust 
6.1 per cent in the first quarter, led by housing and consumer spending. Employment growth 
has resumed. Household spending is expected to decelerate to a pace more consistent with 
income growth. The anticipated pickup in business investment will be important for a more 
balanced recovery. 
This  outlook  is  subject  to  considerable  uncertainties.  In  most  advanced  economies,  the 
recovery  remains  heavily  dependent  on  monetary  and  fiscal  stimulus.  The  required 
rebalancing of global growth has not yet materialized. In general, broad forces of household, 
bank,  and  sovereign  deleveraging  have  barely  begun  and  will  add  to  the  variability,  and 
temper the pace, of global growth as they proceed. 
Recent  tensions  in  Europe  are  likely  to  result  in  higher  borrowing  costs  and  more  rapid 
tightening  of  fiscal  policy  in  advanced  economies.  As  I  will  discuss  shortly,  without 
countervailing policies, this could lead to a more protracted recovery. 
Nothing is easy 
The reality of a policy-led, multi-speed recovery is that the global economy is now bumping 
up against three limits. 
                                                 
1   P. Cross, “Year-end review of 2009.” Canadian Economic Observer, Statistics Canada Catalogue No. 11-010-X, 
23, No. 4, April 2010. 
2 
 BIS Review 83/2010
The first is the supply response in commodities. With emerging-market economies’ share of 
global growth now two-thirds, rather than the one-half it was at the start of the millennium, 
global  growth  is  more  commodity-intensive.  In  our  April  forecast,  the  Bank  projected  an 
additional 30 per cent increase in the prices of non-energy commodities over the next few 
years. 
The second limit relates to the challenges of derivative monetary policy. Owing to managed 
exchange  rates,  many  emerging-market  economies  are  acting  as  if  U.S.  monetary  policy 
were appropriate to their circumstances. Despite strong capital inflows, these countries are 
resorting  to  a  series  of  measures  of  unproven  effectiveness  to  address  overheating 
pressures.  Capital  controls,  restrictions  on  loan-to-value  ratios  on  mortgages,  and  higher 
reserve requirements are all stop-gap measures in the face of broader forces. 
While these measures will have some impact, ultimately, there are only two possibilities in 
emerging-market economies: either higher interest rates or higher inflation. 
The third limit is fiscal stimulus. Reflecting the massive fiscal response and the recession, the 
International Monetary Fund projects that advanced economy debt will rise from about 80 per 
cent of GDP in 2008 to 110 per cent by 2015. 
Major efforts will be required to stabilize the situation. The canary in the coal mine, Greece, 
faces  one  of  the  largest  primary  adjustments  ever  undertaken.  Moreover,  as  with  other 
European countries, Greece cannot expect to benefit from lower interest rates, depreciation, 
or  export  growth  to  facilitate  adjustment.  It  will  require  significant  wage  reductions  and 
productivity enhancements to restore competitiveness and growth. 
The  possible  responses  of  other  countries  to  the  situation  are  denial  or  conviction.  In  the 
former  case,  growing  public  debt  will  push  up  global  interest  rates,  crowding  out  private 
investment and lowering potential growth.2 
Given  the  scale  of  the  fiscal  challenge,  it  is  perhaps  not  surprising  that  some  eminent 
economists  are  looking  for  an  “easier”  way  out.  This  form  of  denial  is  to  allow  temporarily 
higher inflation in order to inflate away public debt. 
To the Bank, this is a siren call. 
Those most in need of fiscal consolidation are often those with debt portfolios of the shortest 
duration.  The  “surprise”  would  have  to  be  very  sudden  and  very  large  to  have  a  material 
impact. Of course, if temporary inflation becomes built into expectations, real rates may well 
increase, rather than fall, thereby exacerbating debt dynamics. Moreover, in the past, it has 
proven devilishly hard to keep inflation high temporarily. Would it be credible to have a one-
off increase in the inflation target? 
Central banks have worked for decades to get inflation down to levels consistent with price 
stability. We should not risk these hard-won gains. 
The second, more positive, and more likely, response to the fiscal challenge is conviction. 
We  have  seen  that  conviction  in  recent  weeks.  The  European  financial  stabilization  plan, 
announced  in  May,  is  a  bold  step  towards  accelerated  fiscal  consolidation.  The  plan  has 
been followed by a series of concrete actions. Spain announced measures totalling 1.5 per 
cent  of  GDP  in  additional  fiscal  consolidation,  while  Portugal  introduced  consolidation 
measures amounting to 1 per cent of GDP for 2010. Greece has passed the key elements of 
                                                 
2  
In  a  simulation  that  assumes  that  advanced  countries  do  not  make  any  fiscal  adjustments  to  stabilize  their 
debt dynamics, the Bank found an increase of 175 to 300 basis points in advanced-economy yields, given the 
scale of the debt burden. See K. Beaton, C. de Resende, R. Lalonde, and S. Snudden, “Prospects for Global 
Current  Account  Rebalancing,”  Bank  of  Canada  Discussion  Paper  No.  2010-4.  April  2010,  available  at: 
<http://www.bankofcanada.ca/en/res/dp/2010/dp10-4.pdf>. 
BIS Review 83/2010 
 3
its  austerity  package,  and  the  United  Kingdom  is  planning  for  an  early  and  tough  budget. 
Similar measures are likely in other countries in the coming weeks. 
However,  the  coming  “Age  of  Austerity”  carries  its  own  risks.  Fiscal  policy  that  is  tighter, 
sooner  for  all  could  create  deficient  demand  in  the  global  economy.  The  Bank  of  Canada 
estimates  that,  in  the  absence  of  real  exchange  rate  adjustment  and  higher  domestic 
demand elsewhere, the shortfall in global GDP could reach $7 trillion by 2015.3 
To recoup this enormous sum, both the public and private sectors must be bold. 
Public boldness: the G-20 agenda 
At the Pittsburgh summit last September, the G-20 claimed that “It worked.” Well, it isn’t over. 
The  G-20’s  agenda  is  comprehensive  and  radical,  but  we  need  to  implement,  as  well  as 
propose. 
As a consequence, Canada’s priorities for the upcoming G-20 Leaders Summit are: 
 
To  make  concrete  the  G-20  framework  for  “strong,  sustainable,  and  balanced 
growth.”  This  stresses  the  shared  responsibility  of  countries  to  make  up  that 
$7 trillion shortfall I just highlighted.  
This  will  require  changes  in  behaviour  and  policy  adjustments  on  several  fronts, 
including: 
– 
– 
sustained and credible fiscal consolidation in the advanced countries; 
structural  and  financial  reforms  that  will  increase  domestic  demand  in  major 
emerging-market economies; 
increased  real  exchange  rate  flexibility  in  emerging-market  economies  to 
facilitate the adjustment from external demand to domestic demand; and 
structural  reforms  to  enhance  productivity  and  potential  growth  in  advanced 
economies. 
    To  move  forward  on  the  core  G-20  financial  reform  agenda.  There  are  two  main 
approaches to reform: to protect the banks from the cycle and to protect the cycle 
from the banks. Both are necessary. 
– 
Protecting  the  banks  from  the  economic  cycle  means  making  each  bank, 
individually, more resilient. This will require more capital, higher liquidity, and 
better risk management, complemented by stronger supervision. While there 
is still much to be done, in general, these types of measures will make global 
financial institutions look more like their Canadian peers. 
Protecting  the  cycle  from  the  banks  means  making  the  system  as  a  whole 
more resilient. This requires building a system that can withstand the failure of 
any single financial institution. These measures (including contingent capital, 
better infrastructure for key markets, and new resolution authorities) are new 
and will change how our financial system operates.4 
                                                  
3   See M. Carney, “The Virtue of Productivity in a Wicked World,” Speech delivered to the Ottawa Economics 
Association,  24  March  2010,  available  at:  <http://www.bankofcanada.ca/en/speeches/2010/sp240310.html>, 
and Beaton, de Resende, Lalonde, and Snudden (2010). 
4   See  M.  Carney,  “The  G-20’s  Core  Agenda  to  Reduce  Systemic  Risk,”  Speech  delivered  to  the 
(IOSCO),  10  June  2010,  available  at: 
International  Organization  of  Securities  Commissions 
<http://www.bankofcanada.ca/en/speeches/2010/sp100610.html>. 
4 
 BIS Review 83/2010
 Finally, to ensure that business can operate, as much as possible, in an open and 
stable trade and regulatory environment. We must live up to the G-20 commitment 
to resist trade and financial protectionism. 
Private boldness: thriving in a multi-polar economy 
And  what  of  private  boldness?  With  so  much  uncertainty,  isn’t  now  the  time  for  corporate 
caution? 
Waiting  on  the  sidelines  ignores  both  the  scale  of  the  challenge  and  the  opportunities 
presented  by  both  our  historic  underperformance  and  the  transformation  of  the  global 
economy. 
We  should  recognise  that  Canada  is  not  as  productive  as  it  could  be.  Our  productivity 
ranking  has  dropped  from  third  of  the  20  countries  in  the  Organisation  for  Economic 
Co-operation and Development (OECD) in 1960 to 15th of the current 30 members.5 After 
some promising signs in the late 1990s, average labour productivity growth has since slowed 
dramatically. 
A small part of this could be due to measurement errors (which will be corrected over time) 
and a bit more reflects lags associated with the economy’s adjustment process, but most of 
this yawning gap between us and our peers reflects fundamental shortcomings. Addressing 
these will require more concerted efforts on the part of business and government since: 
 
Canada underinvests in machinery and equipment (M&E), training, and innovation – 
in fact, all of the underlying drivers of productivity.  
Canadian workers have about half the amount of information and communications 
technology of their American counterparts.  
Canada  is  16th  among  the  member  countries  of  the  OECD  in  the  intensity  of 
business research and development.  
Even when we do invest, we are mediocre. Our poor multifactor productivity growth 
indicates that Canadian firms do not effectively use the capital that they purchase. 
   In general, while there is more to do, governments have put in place many of the conditions 
for a productivity revival. Our tax competitiveness has improved dramatically. Comparatively, 
Canada invests the largest proportion of GDP in primary research. Tariffs on machinery-and-
equipment  investment  are  being  eliminated,  and  we  have  sound  macro  policies  and 
generally effective regulation. Governments will need to maintain the reform momentum, but 
they cannot be expected to will individuals and companies to take risks. 
Business will need to step up. Productivity growth fell in the latest recession, the first time 
this  has  happened  in  three  decades.  Despite  the  availability  of  capital,  relatively  strong 
balance sheets, and improving economic conditions, business investment has been subdued 
compared  with  past  downturns  and  the  scale  of  the  challenge  (see  Chart  2).  Investment 
intentions for 2010 remain modest and largely driven by the public sector. 
This needs to change for a balanced recovery and a more competitive economy. 
This  is  not  just  a  challenge  for  our  largest  corporations.  Our  small-  and  medium-sized 
enterprises are, in many respects, the engines of our economy. The rapidly changing global 
economy will mean that more, too, will be asked of them. 
                                                 
5   Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, Compendium of Productivity Indicators, 2006 and 
2008. 
BIS Review 83/2010 
 5
The imperatives for Canadian businesses appear clear. New suppliers need to be sourced; 
new  markets  opened;  a  new  approach  to  managing  for  a  more  volatile  environment 
developed. 
The  relatively  slow  recovery  expected  in  our  most  important  trading  partner,  along  with 
ongoing  sectoral  adjustments,  means  that  Canadian  firms  have  to  find  new  markets.  The 
global economy is increasingly multi-polar. Emerging-market economies currently account for 
about two-thirds of global growth. They represent almost one-half of the growth in imports 
over the past decade, particularly of capital goods. They are the main drivers of commodity 
prices and are therefore important determinants of our terms of trade. More fundamentally, 
they  are  increasingly  thought  to  be  leaders  and  innovators  in  public  policy  and  business.6 
Canada needs to become fully engaged with these emerging centres of economic power. 
Monetary policy going forward 
In the wake of the shock of the global financial crisis, the Bank of Canada was aggressive. 
We  engaged  in  a  series  of  innovative,  coordinated  actions  with  G-10  central  banks;  we 
slashed interest rates to their lowest possible levels; and we then provided unprecedented 
transparency on their likely future path through our conditional commitment. 
All of these actions were necessary for the Bank to fulfill its mandate to achieve its inflation 
target of 2 per cent CPI inflation. 
A more subtle approach is now warranted. The Bank must balance the competing influences 
on  Canadian  activity  and  inflation  of  momentum  in  domestic  demand  and  the  increasingly 
uneven global recovery. 
In recent months, as the need for emergency settings of monetary policy was passing, the 
Bank gradually reduced the degree of monetary stimulus. In April, we ended our conditional 
commitment, which in itself represented a tightening of monetary conditions.7 At the start of 
this month, the Bank raised its target overnight rate to 50 basis points and re-established the 
normal functioning of the overnight market. 
These decisions leave considerable monetary stimulus still in place, consistent with the large 
degree  of  excess  supply  in  Canada,  the  strength  of  Canadian  spending,  and  the  uneven 
global recovery. 
Given  the  ongoing  uncertainty  surrounding  the  outlook,  any  further  reduction  of  monetary 
stimulus would have to be weighed carefully against domestic and global developments. 
In  light  of  the  scale  and  volatility  of  these  conflicting  forces,  it  should  be  evident  that  no 
particular path for monetary policy is preordained. 
Conclusion 
In conclusion, now is not the time to rest on our laurels. Public and private boldness, both at 
home and abroad, will be required to secure the recovery. This means G-20 action to reform 
the global financial system and to secure a sustainable recovery. This means investments by 
our  businesses  to  improve  productivity  and  to  gain  new  markets.  This  means  Canadians 
should fully engage the new multi-polar global economy. 
                                                 
6   R. B. Zoellick, President The World Bank Group, “The End of the Third World? Modernizing Multilateralism for 
a  Multipolar  World,”  Speech  delivered  to  the  Woodrow  Wilson  Center  for  International  Scholars,  April  14, 
2010, available at: <http://web.worldbank.org >. 
7   See Bank of  Canada, “Framework for Conducting Monetary Policy  at Low Interest Rates,” Monetary Policy 
Report, April 2009, available at: <http://www.bankofcanada.ca/en/mpr/pdf/2009/mpr230409.pdf>. 
6 
 BIS Review 83/2010
These  are  all  big  decisions.  How  quickly  and  how  effectively  they  are  taken  will  influence 
activity and inflation in Canada and, therefore, the stance of monetary policy. The Bank will 
need to be agile. 
The Bank will maintain its unwavering commitment to price stability. The single, most direct 
contribution  that  monetary  policy  can  make  to  sound  economic  performance  is  to  provide 
Canadians with confidence that their money will retain its purchasing power. Price stability 
lowers uncertainty, minimizes the costs of inflation, reduces the cost of capital, and creates 
an environment in which households and firms can invest and plan for the future. 
BIS Review 83/2010 
 7
Appendix 
  BIS Review 83/2010
 8 
 