Erkki Liikanen: Some observations on today’s international financial 
situation on the occasion of the 150th anniversary of the Bank of Russia 
Remarks  by  Mr  Erkki  Liikanen,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Finland,  on  the  occasion  of  the 
150th anniversary of the Bank of Russia, Moscow, 18 June 2010. 
 It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  bring  the  greetings  of  the  Bank  of  Finland  to  the 
150th anniversary  of  the  Bank  of  Russia.  Our  central  banks  are  actually  kind  of  relatives. 
Emperor  Alexander  II  founded  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Russian  Empire  exactly  150  years 
ago. 
The Bank of Finland, for its part, was established by his uncle, Alexander I, in 1811. So it is 
clear that we have many common roots. I will return to these common roots in a moment, but 
let me first make some observations on today’s international financial situation.  
 No country has escaped the effects of the current economic crisis. In many ways this was to 
be  expected:  The  past  decade  witnessed  unprecedented  rise  in  the  volumes  of  both 
international trade and financial flows. Not even during the first golden age of globalization, in 
the last decades of the 19th century and the first decade of the 20th, were so many countries 
trading  so  much  with  each  other.  During  the  present,  second  era  of  globalization,  many 
countries  previously  largely  outside  the  international  division  of  labour,  have  been  able  to 
enjoy the benefits of international trade and specialization.  
The other side of the largely beneficial coin of globalization and interdependence is of course 
the  higher  vulnerability  to  other  countries’  economic  misfortunes.  If  a  negative  shock 
decreases  demand  in  any  large  economy,  the  negative  effects  ripple  through  the  world 
economy. In the current crisis, the sudden and very large disruption in the functioning of the 
global  banking  system  made  the  problems  even  worse.  After  the  collapse  of  Lehman 
Brothers in September 2008, one third of the volume of the world trade disappeared almost 
overnight.  The  increased  integration  of  the  world’s  financial  systems  allowed  the  negative 
liquidity shock to spread extremely fast. Very few countries were immune.  
While the global scope of the recent crisis is unique, in many ways this crisis has been very 
similar to the ones before it. It was preceded by an economic boom, accompanied by higher 
indebtedness,  which  increased  vulnerabilities.  Asset  prices  rose,  including  housing  prices. 
When  negative  shocks  occurred,  expectations  were  revised  downwards,  and  this  caused 
asset prices to drop. Banks’ loan losses increased, and economic recession made the banks’ 
situation even more difficult. Loan losses reduced bank capital, which led to banking crises in 
many countries. Problems in the banking sector led to further problems in the real sector of 
the  economy.  Crises  in  the  financial  and  real  sectors  have  had  adverse  effects  on  public 
finances, as tax revenues have plummeted and public expenditures have risen. This means 
that in many cases financial and economic crises have been followed by crises of the public 
finances, as we are now seeing in Europe.  
The nature of the crisis has reminded us of a basic fact, perhaps overlooked in the previous 
years.  Liquidity  is  extremely  important.  This  means  that  the  tasks  of  the  central  banks  as 
liquidity  creators  and  providers  have  come  into  focus.  This  has  happened  everywhere, 
Russia  included.  For  its  part,  the  Bank  of  Russia  acted  quickly  to  ensure  the  liquidity  of 
Russian banking sector, as did other central banks in their own economies. In fact, we have 
been reminded of some very old lessons in economic policy-making. Already in 1873 Walter 
Bagehot told us that central banks should lend freely to illiquid but solvent banks if they have 
adequate collateral to offer.  
BIS Review 87/2010 
 1
What  are  then  the  broader  lessons  for  policy-makers?  How  should  economic  policy  be 
designed  in  the  new  era  of  globalization?  It  is  clear  that  even  if  countries  have  become 
dependent  on  each  other,  economic  policies  still  matter.  Moreover,  national  economic 
policies have international dimensions and international repercussions.  
During  the  current,  very  difficult  crisis,  central  banks  have  been  able  to  ensure  the 
functioning  of  the  banking  systems.  For  sure,  there  have  been  problems  in  many  private 
financial  institutions,  and  some  of  them  have  failed,  but  functioning  of  the  whole  financial 
systems has been preserved. Actually, successful liquidity policies have only been possible 
through broad international cooperation. If there is anything positive about this crisis, it is the 
proven capacity of central banks to act in cooperation with each other.  
Fiscal policies have been loosened significantly, globally, and this has supported the level of 
overall demand although the private sector has turned to consolidating its balance sheets. 
The countries which entered the crisis with sound public finances have been in much better 
position. I am glad to note that during the upswing years, Russia was able to save for the 
rainy day through its Stabilization Fund and by paying off its debts. This has made reacting to 
the crisis much easier. Also in Finland, the pre-crisis years witnessed large public surpluses, 
which allowed the fiscal policy to be loosened when the crisis hit. However, in the coming 
years there is even greater need for responsible fiscal policies. And the benefits from fiscal 
responsibility are not limited to each country separately, but they are shared globally.  
In designing future economic policies, we need to remember at least three things. First, we 
need mechanisms to prevent over-borrowing, both in the private and public sector. Second, 
risks  need  to  be  priced  correctly.  Too  low  risk  premia  will  lead  to  over-borrowing.  Last, 
resolving  modern  financial  and  economic  crises  demands  international  and  regional 
cooperation.  Achieving  all  this  will  require  new  approaches  and  new  attitudes  both  in  the 
public  and  private  sector,  and  this  will  –  of  course  –  be  hard.  However,  failure  to  achieve 
these goals would increase the risks of more crises in the future, and this is unacceptable.  
 We  are  celebrating  now  the  anniversary  of  one  of  the  world’s  great  central  banks,  a  bank 
with long traditions and a turbulent past. I think that this jubilee is especially significant for us 
Finns. This is so because the Russian and Finnish monetary systems share a lot of common 
history,  in  particular  from  the  19th  century,  when  the  Grand  Duchy  of  Finland  was 
established as a part of the Russian Empire.  
1860, the birth-year of the Central Bank of Russia, was an important turning point also in the 
monetary  history  of  Finland.  In  March  23,  1860  (old  style),  Emperor  Alexander  II  issued  a 
decree which gave Finland a monetary unit of its own, the Finnish markka. Before that, the 
Bank of Finland had issued banknotes denominated in rubles and kopecks. In June, at about 
the  same  time  when  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Russian  Empire  was  established,  the  first 
markka banknotes were circulated.  
Both the Bank of Russia and the national monetary system of Finland were born as a result 
of  a  crisis  which  hit  the  rouble  in  the  latter  half  of  the  1850’s.  In  1860,  the  Imperial 
Government of Finland sought ways to stabilize the currency with the aim of linking it with 
silver,  even  ahead  of  Russia,  if  necessary.  This  was  the  background  to  the  creation  of  a 
national monetary unit for Finland. At the same time, the Russian government carried out a 
more comprehensive institutional reform by founding a new central bank to replace the old 
state  banks.  This  was  also  made  as  a  step  towards  a  stable  and  market-based  financial 
system. 
Circumstances  are  completely  different  now,  of  course,  but  one  thing  remains  at  least: 
financial and monetary stability are still the main objectives of today’s central bank policies, 
just as they were during the reforms of the 1860’s. We face challenges and even setbacks 
from  time  to  time,  but  must  still  fulfil  our  responsibility  in  crisis  management  and  work 
towards an even stronger and more resilient financial system in the future. This is not only a 
2 
 BIS Review 87/2010
national  task,  it  is  a  global  effort  where  good  cooperation  is  a  necessary  condition  for 
success. As circumstances change, the necessary tools may also change, but the ultimate 
goal remains the same. 
I  congratulate  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Russian  Federation  on  its  anniversary  and  wish  all 
success  in  its  important  tasks,  in  the  service  of  this  country,  and  as  a  partner  in  the 
international central banking community. 
BIS Review 87/2010 
 3
