Mary C Nkosi: Mzuzu branch project site handover and pre-contract 
meeting 
Speech  by  Mrs  Mary  C  Nkosi,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Malawi,  at  the 
Mzuzu branch project site handover and pre-contract meeting, Mzuzu, 2 August 2010. 
  The  Team  Leader  of  the  Consortium  (represented  by  Mr.  Davie  Chidyaonga)  and 
other members of the Consortium 
Director of Administration, and members from RBM 
The Project Coordinator, Mr Morrison Sulumba 
The Management of SR Nicholas Limited led by Mr G Bizzarro 
All present 
 
 
 
 
I am greatly honoured to be here this morning to deliver the expectations of the Governor, 
myself and the entire Bank. My presence here is proof of the importance the Bank places on 
this project which goes beyond the building. The Bank’s presence in Mzuzu will complement 
development in the City of Mzuzu and the Northern Region as a whole. 
Let me start by first of all congratulating the Contractor, SR Nicholas Limited, for successfully 
going  through  the  evaluation  process  and  being  awarded  this  prestigious  contract.  The 
competition was tough and therefore this is no mean achievement. 
At this juncture, let me place on record my gratitude the Chairperson and the entire Internal 
Procurement Committee of the Bank for a job well done during the tendering process. We 
know that the award criteria for this contract went beyond the usual price consideration. It 
mainly  considered  the  capacity  to  deliver  a  quality  product  within  the  specified  period  of 
24 months.  Therefore,  issues  of  experience  in  projects  of  a  similar  nature  and  magnitude, 
current commitments and track record of good performance played a bigger role. 
It is with this in mind that I want to appeal to the successful contractor, SR Nicholas Limited, 
and all other sub contractors involved in the construction of Phase II that the Bank expects 
nothing less than a quality building that will be an icon and a centre of public attraction in the 
City of Mzuzu and will stand the test of time. In this regard, you will be expected to adhere 
fully  to  all  building  standards  and  specifications.  This  entails  applying  world  class  working 
methods and use of certified materials throughout the project life. 
To  the  Team  Leader  and  indeed  the  NDDC  Consortium,  I  would  like  to  say  the  journey 
continues. You did a good job in Phase I. However, the small problems that surfaced here 
and there should be considered lessons for Phase II. The Consortium is expected to provide 
optimum supervision throughout the project life and ensure that all individual consultants in 
the team are performing as expected. The Bank will be conducting performance appraisals 
every six months to monitor performance and will not hesitate to server ties with a consultant 
who is not performing. 
I would also like to appeal to the Consortium and the Main Contractor to jointly identify all 
inherent risks that exist as we start Phase II and put in place effective control measures to 
avoid derailing the project completion date. The risks that are beyond your control should be 
escalated to the Bank for attention. 
Issues of cost control on a project of this magnitude cannot be over emphasized. Therefore, 
all parties involved in this project will be expected to play their rightful roles in cost control. In 
this  regard,  the  Bank  will  only  honour  genuine  claims  from  both  the  contractor  and  the 
consultants. We trust that the bank will not need to call for joint measurements of works done 
BIS Review 105/2010 
 1
on  site  before  effecting  payments.  On  its  part,  the  bank  will  look  to  you,  Leader  of 
Consortium for stringent surveillance of cost control at all levels. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, let me assure all stakeholders of the Bank’s full commitment on this 
project. Adequate, resources have been set aside to ensure timely payments of all claims by 
the  contractors  and  fees  for  consultants.  This  is  a  prerequisite  for  timely  completion.  The 
Bank  is  ready  to  assist  contractors  make  advance  purchase  of  materials  as  long  as  all 
required  procedures  are  followed  and  that  the  arrangement  has  the  blessing  of  the 
Consortium. 
The  road  has  been  long  for  us  to  arrive  at  this  stage.  The  design  process  for  the  Mzuzu 
Branch started as far back as 2006. On 16th December 2007, Phase 1 contract commenced 
with  a  42  week  contract  period.  A  lot  happened  and  Phase  1  contract  period  reached 
65 weeks. The building was handed over on 30th April 2009, paving way for Phase II. 
It was intended that by August 2009, the contract for Phase II would have been awarded and 
that the contractor would be on site. We are now almost 12 months behind schedule. Within 
these  12  months,  many  people  took  it  that  the  project  had  been  shelved,  halted,  or  even 
abandoned completely. It was very difficult for the Bank to convince the public that the Mzuzu 
Branch Project was alive even without the physical presence of the contractor. 
Now that today the contract for Phase II has been awarded to SR Nicholas Limited, the wish 
of the Bank and the public is that the project should be completed within the contract period 
of 24 months. We need to restore the confidence our superiors and the public at large seem 
to be questioning. To the Consortium, you have been on the Project from 2006. I have every 
reason to believe that all details, drawings, and necessary information for the contractor to 
start construction are available. 
To the management of SR Nicholas Limited, this is another challenge and our expectations 
are that 24 months from the contract commencement we shall all be here, receiving a quality 
product. 
I have also been informed that the electrical subcontract has not been concluded yet. I would 
like  to  assure  you  that  by  the  time  the  main  contractor  goes  on  site;  the  electrical  sub-
contractor will have been procured. We are working round the clock to conclude the matter. 
The  construction  period  of  24  months  is  ambitious  but  achievable  as  has  been  seen 
elsewhere. The Bank wishes to call upon each of you to join hands as partners in completing 
the  project  on  time.  We  therefore  request  you,  as  usual,  to  come  up  with  a  buildable 
programme that will include all operations to ensure a successful conclusion and delivery of 
the Mzuzu Branch offices. 
On  behalf  of  the  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Malawi,  I  welcome  you  all  to  this  pre-
contract  meeting  and  look  forward  to  an  exciting  journey  ahead  of  us  culminating  in  the 
successful completion of the project. With these few remarks I declare the site handed over 
to the Contractor; SR Nicholas. 
I thank you for your attention and may God bless us all. 
2 
 BIS Review 105/2010
