Jean-Claude Trichet: Commentary on “Fifty years of monetary policy – 
what have we learned?” by Adam Cagliarini, Christopher Kent and Glenn 
Stevens 
Commentary by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, on “Fifty 
years of monetary policy: what have we learned?”, by Adam Cagliarini, Christopher Kent and 
Glenn Stevens, at the Symposium for the 50th anniversary of the Reserve Bank of Australia, 
Sydney, 9 February 2010. 
 It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  be  here  in  Sydney  today  to  celebrate  the  50th  anniversary  of  the 
Reserve Bank of Australia. My pleasure is all the greater to have this opportunity to discuss – 
on the basis of an excellent paper by Governor Stevens and his colleagues – the lessons to 
draw from central bank experience over the past half century.  
Given the many common challenges that we have faced in the central banking community 
over  this  period,  it  is  perhaps  unsurprising  that  I  find  myself  in  large  agreement  with  the 
paper’s main arguments.  
Looking back over recent decades, I would highlight many of the same lessons for monetary 
policy  making  that  Governor  Stevens  identifies:  recognition  of  the  fundamentally  monetary 
origins of inflation; appreciation of the importance of expectations in the inflation process; the 
consequent  centrality  of  central  bank  credibility;  and  the  resulting  significance  of  the 
institutional  arrangements  surrounding  monetary  policy  making,  especially  central  bank 
independence. Such considerations were central to the design of the European Central Bank 
and to its monetary policy strategy, which guides our monetary policy decisions today. 
Looking forward, I would also identify many of the same challenges for monetary policy in the 
coming  years.  Against  a  background  of  recent  financial  crisis,  the  role  of  central  banks  in 
containing  financial  imbalances  and  asset  price  misalignments  clearly  warrants  further 
attention. And I agree that the future interaction between monetary and fiscal policies is likely 
to be complex in many parts of the world, given the considerable increase in public deficits 
and debt levels.  
Notwithstanding this high level of agreement, in the interests of promoting discussion I will 
focus the remainder of my remarks on bringing a “European perspective” to the debate. In 
the monetary policy making community, we should always strive to learn from each other – a 
process which naturally implies a focus on differences in approach across central banks. Yet 
we should be careful not to over-emphasise these differences, which are often only subtle or 
rhetorical  in  nature.  Surely  the  main  feature  of  the  past  half  century  of  monetary  policy 
making – and perhaps especially of the most recent decades – is a convergence of central 
bank practice around three elements: a focus on price stability as the objective of monetary 
policy; a public quantification of that objective, supported by greater transparency of decision 
making; and greater central bank independence.  
And,  notwithstanding  the  substantial  challenges  we  currently  face,  convergence  around 
these  three  elements  has  produced  impressive  results.  After  the  poor  experience  of  the 
1970s,  inflation  was  reduced  and  a  prolonged  period  of  price  stability  established  (see 
Figure 1). In the countries which would be part of the euro area as of January 1999, average 
inflation  stood  at  over  8  percent  in  the  1970s  and  6  percent  in  the  ‘80s,  but  has  fallen  to 
2 percent  since  the  introduction  of  the  single  currency.  Price  stability  has  established  an 
important condition for greater economic prosperity. 
BIS Review 14/2010 
 1
Rule-based approach vs. constrained discretion 
The increased credibility of central banks has been central to achieving this success. Since 
price setters are forward-looking, the evolution of price developments depends crucially on 
their  expectations  of  future  inflation.  Anchoring  private  inflation  expectations  at  levels 
consistent with price stability is therefore of the essence. This requires central banks to be 
credible. They must conduct monetary policy within a framework that convinces price setters 
that they will act in the future as necessary to maintain price stability.  
In principle, central banks could offer an exhaustive list of how they would respond to any 
future eventuality. But in practice, it is impossible to foresee all future contingencies. I agree, 
in that regard, with John Taylor,1 according to whom recent experience in the money markets 
has demonstrated that it is possible to observe “black swans” – even in places other than 
Australia!  
Central  banks  therefore  need  to  adopt  a  framework  which  attempts  to  strike  a  balance 
between: on the one hand, application of a specific rule fostering predictability; and, on the 
other,  a  completely  discretionary  approach  offering  flexibility  in  the  face  of  unforeseen 
circumstances.  
The inflation targeting strategy adopted in Australia is one attempt in this direction. Governor 
Stevens  describes  this  as  a  framework  of  “constrained  discretion”.  The  ECB’s  monetary 
policy strategy is another. We have often described our approach as being “rule-based, but 
not rule-bound”.  
Is  there  a  fundamental  difference  between  “rule-based”  behaviour  and  “constrained 
discretion”? I do not think so. Rather the differences of language reflect different historical 
experience and cultural norms. In Europe – which has historically experienced high levels of 
inflation,  and  even  hyperinflation  –  throughout  the  past  fifty  years  there  has  been  a 
preference for rules to constrain policy makers, so as to avoid previous mistakes. Australia’s 
experience,  which  is  in  line  with  the  experience  of  English-speaking  countries,  has  been 
different. 
Medium-term orientation and monetary analysis 
Whether  characterised  as  “constrained  discretion”  or  “rule-based,  but  not  rule  bound”, 
modern monetary policy frameworks accord central banks a certain “degree of freedom” in 
their decision making. To what ends should this freedom be put?  
To  be  clear,  it  is  crucial  that  price  stability  is  maintained  over  the  medium  term.  But  it  is 
neither  feasible  nor  desirable  for  inflation  to  be  targeted  on  a  short  term  basis.  Within  the 
academic 
targeting” 
framework.2  This  framework  explicitly  foresees  the  use  of  monetary  policy  to  smooth 
developments  in  economic  activity  over  the  business  cycle,  while  anchoring  longer-term 
inflation expectations at levels consistent with price stability.  
From the outset, such considerations were also recognised in the ECB’s strategy. We have 
always acknowledged the need to avoid excess volatility in output and nominal interest rates, 
which would have resulted from excessive “fine tuning”.3 Our approach is characterised by a 
medium-term orientation, which recognises that – given lags in monetary policy transmission 
and  the  inevitable  short-term  shocks  to  price  developments  –  we  should  not  attempt  to 
in  the  so-called  “flexible 
is  recognised 
literature, 
inflation 
this 
                                                 
1  J.  Taylor  and  J.C.  Williams  (2009),  “A  black  swan  in  the  money  market,” American  Economic  Journal: 
Macroeconomics 1(1), pp. 58-83. 
2  L.E.O. Svennson (1998), “Inflation targeting in an open economy: Strict or flexible inflation targeting?”, Victoria 
Economic Commentaries 15(1). 
3  ECB (1999), “The stability-oriented monetary policy strategy of the Eurosystem”, Monthly Bulletin (January). 
BIS Review 14/2010 
 2
“micro-manage”  price  developments.  Rather  we  evaluate  risks  to  price  stability  at  the 
medium-to-longer term horizon. 
The literature has focused on the use of monetary policy to smooth output in the relatively 
shorter run. But the flexibility accorded by a “rules-based, but not rule-bound” approach can 
be oriented in other directions. For example, it can be used to contain financial imbalances, 
by  applying  the  same  approach  as  we  adopt  when  facing  other  sources  of  inflationary 
pressure. If the slow accumulation of financial imbalances poses a threat to macroeconomic 
and  price  stability  over  the  longer  term,  then  we  can  respond  to  it  in  a  commensurate 
manner, even if this response implies tolerating some inflation volatility in the shorter run.  
At  the  ECB,  we  emphasise  one  tool  which  we  believe  helps  us  maintain  a  medium  term 
orientation: the monetary analysis.  
This  is  perhaps  the  most  clearly  recognisable  distinguishing  feature  of  the  European 
approach.  European  central  banks  have  always  given  prominence  to  assessing  monetary 
dynamics and asset prices when preparing monetary policy decisions. At the ECB, we have 
always  foreseen  that  the  close  monitoring  of  monetary  and  credit  developments  would 
provide important elements of a framework for addressing asset price misalignments.4  
One particular focus of our monetary analysis is the low-frequency trend in money and credit 
developments, which is associated with the emergence of imbalances. This focus allows us 
both to assess risks to price stability in the medium to long term and, simultaneously, to lean 
against excessive money, credit and asset price growth in our interest rate decisions. Such 
considerations  influenced  our  interest  rate  decisions  in  2004  and  2005.  These  decisions 
were  criticised  at  the time  by  a  number  of  observers,  including  governments  and  the  IMF. 
With  the  benefit  of  hindsight,  they  appear  particularly  well-judged.  Certainly,  this  approach 
has helped to create greater symmetry in our response to asset price developments, and it 
was at the time an important ingredient in the decision.5 
Global developments matter 
The  importance  of  monitoring  money  and  credit  developments  is  beginning  to  be  more 
recognised by academics, as well as in the policy debate. For example, leading academics 
have  argued  in  favour  of  defining  and  monitoring  new  monetary  indicators  to  detect  the 
build-up of leverage within the financial sector.6  
Of course, recognising the importance of monetary analysis does not necessarily simplify the 
task  of  interpreting  monetary  and  financial  developments.  Experience  has  shown  that 
ongoing  financial  innovation  makes  the  interpretation  of  the  monetary  data  particularly 
challenging.  Therefore,  we  are  continuously  seeking 
to  sharpen  and  deepen  our 
understanding of monetary and financial developments.  
One result derived from this ECB research relates to the identification of the global nature of 
asset  price  boom  –  bust  cycles  and  associated  financial  crises.  This  suggests  that  there 
should  be  global  concern  over  the  monetary  and  credit  developments  that  underpin  these 
episodes. Not surprisingly, recent ECB research suggests that global variables – rather than 
only national or regional indicators – can enhance our ability to identify a build-up of financial 
                                                 
4  EMI  (1997),  “The  single  monetary  policy  in  Stage  Three:  Elements  of  the  monetary  policy  strategy  of  the 
ESCB.”  O.  Issing  (2002),  “Why  stable  prices  and  stable  markets  are  important  and  how  they  fit  together”, 
Monetary Stability Foundation, Frankfurt am Main. 
5  See in particular J.C. Trichet (2009), “Credible alertness revisited”, intervention at the symposium “Financial 
stability and macroeconomic policy”, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 2009. 
6  T. Adrian and H.S. Shin (2008). “Financial intermediaries, financial stability, and monetary policy,” presented 
at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Jackson Hole Symposium. 
BIS Review 14/2010 
 3
imbalances.7 I take this opportunity to raise awareness in the central banking community of 
the importance of monetary analysis and its implications, both for economies individually and 
globally. 
Concluding remarks 
We  are  emerging  from  the  uncharted  waters  navigated  over  the  past  few  years.  But  as 
central bankers we are always faced with new episodes of turbulence in the economic and 
financial environment. While we grapple with how to deal with ever new challenges, we must 
not  forget  the  fundamental  tenets  that  we  have  learned  over  the  past  decades.  Keeping 
inflation  expectations  anchored  remains  of  paramount  importance,  under  exceptional 
circumstances even more than in normal times. Our framework has been successful in this 
regard thus far (see Figure 2). 
The  RBA  has  operated  through  fifty  turbulent  years  of  monetary  policy  making.  As  recent 
experience has shown, there will be a need for innovation by central banks to meet novel 
challenges.  But  the  lessons  of  the  past  fifty  years  –  and,  in  particular,  our  success  in 
anchoring inflation expectations – should remain uppermost in our minds. 
Figure 1: Inflation developments in industrial economies  
percent per annum, averages of quarterly data 
Note:  “Other  industrial  countries”  denotes  the  (equally  weighted)  average  of  CPI  inflation  rates  in  Australia, 
Canada, the United Kingdom and the United States. 
Source: OECD and Euro Area Wide Model database. 
                                                  
7  See  L.  Alessi  and  C.  Detken  (2009).  “Real  time  early  warning  indicators  for  costly  asset  price  boom/bust 
cycles: A role for global liquidity,” ECB working paper no. 1039. 
BIS Review 14/2010 
 4
Figure 2: Measures of longer-term inflation expectations in the euro area 
percent per annum, 5-day averages of daily data 
Note:  Data  in  percent;  BEIR  denotes  the  Break-Even  Inflation  Rate;  SPF  denotes  the  ECB Survey  of 
Professional Forecasters. 
Source: Consensus Economics, Reuters, ECB Calculations. 
BIS Review 14/2010 
  5
