Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: Elements for intervention on accounting 
issues 
Speaking  notes  by  Ms  Gertrude  Tumpel-Gugerell,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
European Central Bank, at the colloquium “La juste valeur dans tous ses Etats”, organised 
by  the  Académie  des  Sciences  et  Techniques  Comptables  et  Financières,  Paris,  27  April 
2010. 
 Which are the issues related to the fair value for companies?  
Fair value is an appropriate measurement for certain financial instruments, notably those that 
are held for trading (i.e. business model is to generate profits by buying/selling in the short 
term)  and  for  which  reliable  market  prices  are  readily  available,  as  well  as  for  derivatives. 
Indeed,  given  that  many  derivative  contracts  have  a  zero  cost  at  inception,  fair  value 
accounting is crucial as it recognises the potential leveraged exposure on the balance sheet. 
Fair value accounting mainly raises two issues: first, when to apply fair value measurement 
(conceptual considerations) and second, how to apply fair value measurement (operational 
challenges).  
First,  in  our  view  fair  value  accounting  does  not  provide  decision-useful  information  to 
investors  if  the  intention  of  an  entity  is  to  hold  the  assets  until  maturity  or  to  settle  the 
liabilities at their nominal amount at maturity. In these cases, recognising interim fair value 
changes  simply  heightens  the  volatility  of  the  financial  accounts,  without  providing  actual 
“information content”. This is typically the case for the loan book of commercial banks.  
Moreover, the ECB does not agree that an entity is required to record a gain when the fair 
value of its own debt falls due to a decrease in its creditworthiness. The rationale being that 
the entity could buy back the debt and realise the profit. However, in reality and especially in 
times of distress, an entity does not have readily available the extra cash to buy back their 
debt.  The  recognition  of  such  misleading  gains  was  particularly  prevalent  in  the  case  of 
Lehman  that  used  it  to  net  against  the  mounting  losses,  which  simply  blurred  the  entity’s 
actual performance. As referred to in the recent book “Too big to fail” by Andrew Sorkin: “It 
means that the day before you go bankrupt is the most profitable day in the history of your 
company,  because  you’ll  say  all  the  debt  was  worthless.  You  get  to  call  it  revenue.  And 
literally  (…)  pay  bonuses  off  this.”  I  think  we  can  all  agree  that  there  is  something 
fundamentally wrong with this argument. 
Second,  with  regard  to  its  application,  fair  value  accounting  poses  certain  operational 
challenges, namely when markets become illiquid and reliable market prices are no longer 
available. What is the use of marking-to-market when there is no market? The relevance and 
reliability  of  fair  values  based  on  market  prices  require  a  functioning  market  where  prices 
adequately reflect the underlying fundamentals of the financial instrument. When the market 
is  significantly  disrupted,  the  use  of  market  values  may  be  utterly  meaningless.  In  these 
cases, appropriate valuation techniques coupled with adequate guidance on the application 
of these techniques are needed in order to arrive at a reasonable estimate of the price at 
which  an  orderly  transaction  would  currently  take  place  between  market  participants.  An 
entity should have in place adequate models that have been tested for accuracy in case the 
market  is  severely  disrupted.  Moreover,  in  rare  circumstances,  if  the  market  dynamics  are 
such that an institution may be forced to change its respective business model (i.e. shifting 
from a “day trading” to a “buy and hold” business model), then it should be able to reclassify 
financial  instruments  at  amortised  cost.  These  are  important  lessons  to  be  learnt  from  the 
financial crisis.  
BIS Review 58/2010 
 1
Hence the ECB is of the opinion that fair value measurement should only be required if it is 
consistent  with  the  institution’s  business  model  and  the  characteristics  of  the  particular 
underlying asset or liability.  
Which would be the worst drawbacks, if any, deriving from applying fair value in the 
light of the events happened in the last two years? Which are the positive aspects?  
In my view, the financial crisis has clearly highlighted the heightened pro-cyclicality stemming 
from  two  mutually  reinforcing  channels  in  the  accounting  framework:  fair  value  accounting 
and the current loan loss provisioning practices (impairment methodologies). 
Fair value accounting – while certainly not being the “root cause” – served as an amplifier of 
stress in the financial system. Fair value measurement – by its nature – tends to introduce 
pro-cyclicality into the accounting framework. It requires the immediate reflection of market-
related  information  in  the  financial  accounts  (thus  providing  a  “snapshot”  of  the  reporting 
entity’s economic condition). In doing so, all fluctuations in fair value (even if only temporary) 
are to be reflected, thereby increasing accounting volatility.  
Downward swings in fair valuations of assets cause entities to sell these assets; these “fire 
sales” may themselves add to further downward pressure on respective market prices. As a 
result,  further  adjustments  to  the  fair  values  of  these  assets  become  necessary,  thereby 
perpetuating  the  “downward  dynamics”.1  These  dynamics  may  in  the  end  have  adverse 
implications for the “real economy”, e.g. banks may further curb their lending to the economy.  
In  this  context,  the  potential  impact  of  fair  value  accounting  on  behaviour,  asset  price 
dynamics and subsequently on financial stability should not be underestimated.  
Pre-crisis  provisioning  practices  delayed  the  recognition  of  credit  losses  inherent  in  loans. 
Accounting rules require a specific trigger event, such as a default in payment to take place 
before allowing an entity to create provisions for credit losses. As a result, major write-offs 
usually  accumulate  during  severe  downturns  when  the  inherent  credit  losses  actually 
materialise, adding further stress to the financial system.  
Hence,  a  more  forward-looking  provisioning  methodology  should  be  developed.  This  has 
also  been  a  recommendation  of  the  G20  Leaders.  In  this  context,  the  ECB  welcomes  the 
recent  IASB  proposal  for  an  expected  cash  flow  approach.  Despite  some  operational 
challenges  that  need  to  be  resolved  before  its  final  adoption,  this  approach  allows  for  a 
timelier 
to  mitigating 
pro-cyclicality.  In  this  context,  it  should  be  noted  that  the  Basel  Committee  has  recently 
developed an approach which aims at reducing the complexity of the IASB’s approach. The 
ECB urges the IASB to work together with the Basel Committee with a view to developing a 
workable solution to a more forward-looking provisioning approach. 
This  is  also  a  good  example  of  where  the  objectives  of  high  quality  accounting  and 
safeguarding financial stability complement each other.  
On that note, let me finally underline that the ECB acknowledges the work of the IASB and 
welcomes  the  progress  that  has  been  achieved  in  the  accounting  framework.  We  look 
forward  to  continuing  the  intense  dialogue  with  the  IASB  on  the  remaining  phases  of  the 
financial instruments’ project, as well as other accounting areas that may be of importance 
from a regulatory perspective.  
recognition  of  expected  credit 
thereby  contributing 
losses, 
                                                 
1  
It should be mentioned that the same dynamics may apply in a boom, albeit in the opposite direction, resulting 
in increasingly “optimistic valuations” and thereby fuelling additional lending. 
2 
 BIS Review 58/2010
As regards the convergence between the American implementation and the IFRS 
rules, which is your general view? More precisely, on which technical/conceptual 
points Europe will not give up?  
One of the key lessons to be learnt from this crisis is the need for international accounting 
convergence.  Towards  this  aim,  G20  Leaders  have  urged  accounting  standard  setters  to 
develop a single set of high-quality accounting standards.  
A global set of accounting standards is desirable from the perspective of both investors and 
regulators  since  it  improves  the  comparability  and  transparency  on  a  global  basis.  This 
contributes towards sounder investment decisions and thus to a more efficient allocation of 
resources  as  well  as  overall  functioning  of  capital  markets.  Moreover,  the  financial  crisis 
clearly revealed the shortcomings of different accounting rules on both sides of the Atlantic, 
as  differences  in  rules  contributed  towards  a  lower  degree  of  confidence  in  financial 
reporting.  
For  all  these  reasons,  the  ECB  welcomes  the  ongoing  efforts  of  the  accounting  standard 
setters to achieve fully compatible, high-quality accounting standards in a direct response to 
the G20 request. However, we are concerned to hear that the FASB and the IASB are still far 
from  reaching  a  consensus  on  key  accounting  concepts,  such  as  the  classification  and 
measurement  of  financial  instruments.  The  IASB  has  confirmed  a  “mixed  measurement 
model” that measures financial instruments both at amortised cost and fair value. In contrast, 
the US standard setter, the FASB, is determined to move towards a “full fair value model”, 
claiming that only fair value provides decision-useful information to investors. 
I have already mentioned in my intervention how the financial crisis has blatantly revealed 
the  flaws  with  this  measurement  and  how  in  certain  circumstances,  namely  when  markets 
are dislocated, applying full fair value accounting to the financial statements of the banking 
sector raises financial stability concerns and does not provide decision-useful information to 
investors.  
Just to re-emphasise, the ECB strongly opposes a full fair value approach. In this context, 
convergence should not come at the expense of high-quality accounting standards.  
Finally, with regard to recent assertions made by the IASB and FASB that convergence is on 
track, I would like to highlight that we are not so optimistic. In this regard, putting in place a 
reconciliation  mechanism  that  simply  discloses  figures  at  amortised  cost  and  fair  value  for 
each item on the balance sheet would certainly not achieve the aim of convergence.  
As regards governance, which improvements do you envisage in relation to the 
elaboration of accounting rules? 
First,  I  would  like  to  stress  that  the  ECB  fully  supports  the  concept  of  “independent 
accounting  standard  setting”.  In  their  April  2009  DECLARATION  ON  STRENGTHENING 
THE  FINANCIAL  SYSTEM,  when  identifying  the  main  areas  of  concern  in  the  accounting 
area, the Leaders of the G20 never challenged this concept.  
Second,  the  ECB  very  much  welcomes  the  recent  efforts  of  the  IASB  with  a  view  to 
enhancing  their  public  accountability.  We  appreciate  the  open  dialogue  between  the  IASB 
and various stakeholders, including prudential supervisors, on various accounting issues.  
Having  said  that,  the  ECB  would  still  like  to  see  accounting  standard  setters  take  better 
account of financial stability implications when revising existing or creating new accounting 
standards, as for instance indicated by the IASB on the occasion of setting up the “enhanced 
technical  dialogue”  with  prudential  supervisors  in  2009.  One  concrete  and  important  area 
where the IASB can prove that it takes duly into account financial stability implications would 
be the on-going discussions on introducing more forward-looking provisioning.  
BIS Review 58/2010 
 3
In this sense, the ECB looks forward to continuing the close dialogue with the IASB on the 
accounting projects that lie ahead.  
More generally, please indicate two essential measures for financial regulation in the 
current debate.  
The  ECB  firmly  believes  that  momentum  should  be  maintained  with  regard  to  the  global 
regulatory reform agenda. We need to ensure we put in place a regulatory framework that 
will enhance the resilience and stability of the global financial system. Under the aegis of the 
G20,  the  international  community  has  agreed  on  a  comprehensive  set  of  measures  that 
reflect  a  substantive  revamp  of  the  regulatory  framework.  Going  forward,  I  would  mention 
three key priority areas. 
First, the global community should commit to implementing the so-called Basel III proposals 
on capital and liquidity issued in December of last year. The ECB supports these proposals 
which  are  designed  to  put  banks  in  the  position  to  better  withstand  the  effects  of  future 
crises. At the same time, it is crucial to carefully assess the macro-economic impact of the 
measures.  In  this  context,  the  outcome  of  the  quantitative  impact  assessment  that  is 
currently  being  conducted  needs  to  be  awaited  before  taking  any  final  decisions. 
Inappropriate calibration of the measures may impact on the provision of credit to the real 
economy.  This  is  particularly  relevant  for  the  EU  financial  system  which  is  more  bank-
dependent and where the substitutability between market finance and bank finance is more 
limited when compared to, for example, the US. The main challenge consists in ensuring a 
more resilient and stable financial system that neither compromises economic recovery nor 
unduly impinges on financial innovation.  
Second,  we  need  to  ensure  that  we  effectively  capture  all  systemically  important  financial 
institutions, products, markets and infrastructures within the scope of regulation. One of the 
lessons from the crisis was the need to make the shadow banking sector more transparent. 
This becomes more urgent as we tighten the regulatory net for the banking sector. Otherwise 
we may simply shift risks to unregulated or more loosely regulated entities.  
In this respect let me mention the OTC derivative markets. These markets should be subject 
to  greater  transparency  by  promoting  the  reporting  of  non-centralised  trades  to  trade 
repositories.  Additionally,  we  should  promote  the  clearing  of  eligible  OTC  derivatives 
transactions  through  central  counterparties,  which  should  be  themselves  subject  to  high 
prudential and operational standards. 
Finally,  we  need  to  effectively  address  the  risks  posed  by  systemically  important  financial 
institutions.  In  particular,  we  need  to  define  a  regulatory  framework  addressing  the  risks 
posed by large and complex financial institutions, and to discuss possible measures aimed to 
ensure a smooth winding-up of ailing systemically important financial institutions. It is crucial 
that  a  consistent  framework  is  agreed  at  international  level  to  avoid  conflicting  national 
regimes  applied  to  multinational  institutions  and  regulatory  arbitrage.  In  this  context,  I 
strongly support the current work being carried out by the Financial Stability Board and the 
Basel Committee.  
4 
 BIS Review 58/2010
