Ardian Fullani: Development of the interbank market in Albania and the 
Bank of Albania 
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  the  Forum  “Interbank 
Market Development and Improvement of Operational Policy at the Bank of Albania”, Tirana, 
21 June 2010. 
 Dear bank managers, 
Dear colleagues, 
We are gathered here today to discuss an essential issue concerning the performance of our 
financial market and the Albanian economy on the whole: interbank market development and 
strengthening. 
I do believe that the role and importance of the interbank market is clear to all attendees. It 
represents the first link of liquidity trading in economy and the most transparent price setting 
mechanism.  
By  providing  the  appropriate  instruments  and  partners  for  liquidity  trading,  the  interbank 
market  allows  the  refinancing  of  short  and  medium-term  positions  and  facilitates  the 
mitigation of your business’ liquidity risk.  
The  banking  system  and  the  interbank  market  represent  the  exclusive  setting  monetary 
policy operates in. A developed, active and efficient interbank market enhances the efficiency 
of central bank’s monetary policy, transmitting its impulses into the economy best. Thus, the 
development of the interbank market smoothes the progress of financial intermediation and 
boosts lending to economy, hence improving the country’s economic and social welfare. 
The deepening and broadening of the financial market is one of the key structural reforms in 
economy. It should be ceaseless and it requires the commitment of domestic and external 
factors. It naturally adapts to the different economic development stages the country and the 
state  go  through.  I  do  believe  there  cannot  be  a  developed  and  well-integrated  economy 
without open, integrated, efficient, transparent and well-regulated markets.  
Therefore,  it  comes  out  clearly  that  the  development  of  the  interbank  market  is  in  all 
stakeholders’ interests: the banking system itself, the Bank of Albania and the economy on 
the whole.  
Being fully aware of this, the Bank of Albania has built a clear strategy in terms of: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
Deepening and broadening the money market in Albania further; 
Creating relevant market instruments;  
Establishing  a  close  and  rational  cooperation  with  the  banking  system  and  the 
financial market in general; 
Ensuring  a  clear  and  constant  communication  with  the  market  operators  and  the 
public at large; 
Providing modern technological solution. 
5. 
As  a  result  of  these  initiatives,  our  monetary  policy  is  now  entirely  based  on  indirect 
instruments of monetary management, which operate in line with the open market logic. Our 
operational framework allows the banking system to manage the liquidity effectively, being a 
counterparty of the last resort to meet the system’s aggregate needs for liquidity or invest it.  
Via the required reserve, the Bank of Albania has provided you with enough room to cover 
your unexpected liquidity needs, at a remuneration rate close to the market interest rates that 
4. 
BIS Review 97/2010 
 1
avoid  the  distortions  the  required  reserve  may  yield  to  your  banking  business.  Our 
regulations, which restrain the banking business operational, liquidity or market risks, are in 
full compliance with the international standards, providing at the same time enough room for 
the development of the interbank market. We have also taken major steps in terms of the 
institutional  development  of  this  market,  through  the  establishment  and  maintenance  of 
TRIBOR  and  TRIBID  reference  rates,  through  constant  communication  with  the  dealers’ 
association and promotion of new interbank market instruments.  
I would like to inform you today of the last Bank of Albania’s step in this regard, and also ask 
for your greater attention in terms of taking prompt actions that will boost the activity and role 
of the interbank market.  
in 
in 
interventions 
fundamental  changes 
the  money  market  quantitatively.  The 
Change of the Bank of Albania’s operational target framework  
The Bank of Albania is in the final phase of reviewing its operational targets. The latter will 
soon  change  their  form,  shifting  from  the  quantitative  targeting  of  the  Bank  of  Albania’s 
balance sheet to the targeting of interbank market interest rates. 
The operational targets of monetary policy play a key role in the formulation and conduct of 
monetary  policy.  In  a  theoretical  background,  these  targets  serve  as  a  link  between  the 
monetary  authority’s  interventions  in  the  interbank  market  and  the  intermediate  target  of 
monetary  policy.  Thus,  the  operational  targets  serve  as  the  starting  point  of  the  monetary 
policy transmission mechanism. In practice, these targets serve to steer and discipline the 
monetary  authority’s 
rapid 
transformation  of  economic  structure  and  the  development  of  interbank  markets  and 
economic  agents  were  coupled  with 
the  monetary  policy 
transmission mechanism. The latter has now become more complex, involving more players 
whose  sophistication  is  ever-increasing,  and  incorporating  more  instruments  and  financial 
contracts  that  are  timely  structured  and  indexed  to  different  indicators.  The  Albanian 
economy is now economically and financially integrated into the global economy, having the 
characteristics of a market economy but at the same time featuring the typical challenges of 
economic management that such an economy entails. 
These changes have called for the constant monitoring by the monetary authority in order to 
make the necessary changes in the monetary policy regime and the operational aspects of 
its implementation.  
Against this background, the Bank of Albania has been committed to a process of constant 
evaluation of the interbank market performance and at the same time fine-tune its monetary 
policy regime.  
The Monetary Policy Document for the 2009–2011 Period was a major step in this regard. In 
this  Document,  the  role  of  monetary  aggregates  as  indicators  of  inflationary  pressures  in 
economy  and  as  intermediate  targets  of  monetary  policy  was  complemented  with  a  wide 
range of information provided by the real sector of the economy, which is systemized and 
finalized  in  the  inflation  forecast  performance.  This  change  was  entirely  based  on  the 
Albanian experience.  
The development of money markets and progress in financial innovation, the rapid growth of 
lending  and  dollarization  of  the  economy,  and  the  increasing  role  of  real  estate  in  the 
investment opportunities caused the functioning of the Albanian economy to become even 
more complex. They were supplemented with unstable velocity of money circulation hence 
toning down the short and medium-term link between monetary aggregates and inflation.  
This change materializes the modernization of monetary policy decision-making based on a 
more  complete 
the  market  operators’ 
expectations.  
that  aims  at  managing 
information  analysis 
2 
 BIS Review 97/2010
One of the directions the Bank of Albania’s work has been focusing on during the past year, 
as we have transparently stated in our Monetary Policy Document, was the assessment of 
the  suitability  of  operational  targets  and  the  adoption  of  more  advanced  forms.  The 
quantitative targeting of the Bank of Albania’s balance sheet, in the form of a ceiling on the 
net domestic assets and a floor on the net international reserves, has for quite a long time 
acted as a guide to our interventions in the interbank market.  
In spite of that, the abovementioned developments suggest that there is plenty of room for 
improvement  in  this  philosophy  and  practice.  Targeting  the  interbank  market  interest  rates 
seems  a  practical  option  that  finds  ample  theoretical  support  and  whose  application  has 
proved successful in a number of advanced economies.  
Broadly speaking, this operational philosophy is guided by the need to steer the short-term 
interest  rates  in  the  interbank  market  close  to  the  key  interest  rate  set  by  the  monetary 
authority.  As  such,  it  serves  better  to  keeping  the  short-term  horizon  of  the  interest  rates’ 
curve under check, making the conduct of monetary policy more transparent and providing 
clearer signals for the economic activity. Steering our operations to the stability of interbank 
market  interest  rates  will  serve  to  a  more  relaxed  functioning  of  the  interbank  market  and 
lowering of risk premiums. In addition, this operational target is well-framed in our medium-
term  steering  and  commitment  to  adopting  the  inflation  targeting  regime,  making  up  an 
important link of its successful adoption.  
Concluding my theoretical discussion of this change, I would like to underline that our long-
term commitment to keeping our foreign reserve at optimal levels to cope with the shocks 
Albania may be faced with remains an unquestionable objective of our monetary policy. 
In an institutional aspect, I would like to note that such a move does not only attest to the 
level of maturity of our interbank market. It also crowns our constant efforts in achieving its 
utmost efficient management.  
In  this  context,  the  Bank  of  Albania  has  made  utmost  efforts  to  develop  liquidity  forecast 
models, to dampen the impact of fiscal flows into the money markets and to develop optimal 
procedures and modalities of interbank market  interventions. I do strongly believe that our 
efforts will persist in the future as well, enabling a smooth shift of the operational target and 
optimal functioning of their new form.  
Interbank market development  
Dear colleagues, 
Bank of Albania’s role in promoting the interbank market is indisputable. However, we are 
fully  aware  that  the  development  of  this  market  mostly  reflects  the  results  of  the  banking 
system’s own development and efforts.  
Therefore, the Bank of Albania requires your utmost attention in this regard. More precisely, 
in our discussion today we would like to have your opinion on the three steps we consider 
will  boost  the  development  of  the  interbank  market.  First,  setting  the  prime  rates  in  the 
functioning  of  commercial  banks.  These  rates  can  and  should  serve  as  a  guide  to  setting 
prices on banking products, both on the assets and liabilities’ side. Second, the functioning of 
the  collateralized  market  through  repo  or  reverse  repo  contracts.  Although  in  its  classical 
concept  the  interbank  market  is  an  uncollateralized  market,  its  enhancement  with  the 
abovementioned instruments would open the way to its thorough development,  ensuring a 
more  efficient  distribution  of  liquidity  among  the  market  operators.  Third,  banks  can  and 
should be active in quoting the liquidity in the Albanian lek, keeping the same stance as in 
the foreign exchange market. The constant quotation will encourage a more active liquidity 
management and it will enable its continuous price setting.  
Dear bank managers, 
BIS Review 97/2010 
 3
The Bank of Albania considers the development of the interbank and financial market as a 
process that requires our constant commitment but which provides tangible benefits to all of 
us. I invite you now to an open and fruitful discussion to share our opinions on the right paths 
that will encourage this market further.  
4 
 BIS Review 97/2010
