Perks Ligoya: Improving access to credit in Malawi 
Speech by Dr Perks Ligoya, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Malawi, on the occasion of the 
official  launch  of  Lilongwe  branch  of  Malawi  Savings  Bank  (MSB),  Lilongwe,  27  February 
2010. 
 Our Guest of Honour, the Minister of Finance, Honorable Ken Kandodo, MP 
The Chairman of the Board of Directors of Malawi Savings Bank, Mr. Joseph Mwanamvekha 
who is also the Secretary to the Treasury 
The Chief Executive of Lilongwe City Assembly, Mr. Kelvin M’mangisa 
The Chief Executive of Lilongwe District Assembly 
Directors of Malawi Savings Bank here present 
Valued Customers of the Bank 
Management and Staff of the Bank here present 
Members of the media 
Distinguished Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
Our Guest of honour, on behalf of the Directors, Management and Staff of the Reserve Bank 
of Malawi and indeed on my own behalf, I would like to congratulate the Board, Management 
and Staff of Malawi Savings Bank Limited for their untiring efforts to influence the presence 
and outreach of the Bank. Some of us may have read in the papers last week that Malawi 
savings  Bank  moved  out  of  Post  Office  premises  to  occupy  modern  and  spacious  office 
space in Ntaja, Mangochi and Monkey Bay. Furthermore, those of us who ply the Blantyre-
Mulanje Road via Thyolo, may have seen a magnificent branch at Bvumbwe complete with 
modern  amenities  like  an  ATM.  To  put  the  icing  on  the  cake,  today  we  are  here  to  bear 
witness to the official opening of Lilongwe Branch. These are major milestones. 
The initiatives present solid evidence that the Bank is well poised to effectively perform its 
roles relating to savings mobilization and financing of investments in both the rural and urban 
sectors of our economy. 
The  business  and  economic  environment  is  looking  good  for  Malawi.  The  IMF  has  just 
approved a 3 year financial assistance program for the country. This is clear testimony that 
Malawi  is  pursuing  good  macro  economic  policies  and  fiscal  discipline  under  the  visionary 
leadership of His Excellency, Ngwazi Dr. Bingu wa Mutharika. 
Government through the Reserve Bank of Malawi is sparing no effort in creating an enabling 
environment  for  banks  to  operate  effectively  in  the  country.  As  a  result,  more  banks  have 
come on the market and are willing to serve the rural, urban and semi-urban communities 
owing to the ever improving rural infrastructure and conducive fiscal policies. The increasing 
number  of  players  in  the  banking  industry  entails  stiff  competition.  Competition  should 
normally favour customers because in the quest to win more customers, banks tend to relax 
terms  and  conditions  for  their  products  and  improve  service.  However  in  Malawi  the 
competition is yet to bear fruit by narrowing the gap between lending rates and deposit rates. 
Recent statistics indicate that over 80% of the population of Malawi remains un-banked and 
many of these people are in the rural areas. It is therefore commendable to note that MSB 
has identified itself with the rural communities for a very long time and continues to establish 
its presence in new areas. I call upon all the authorized dealer banks in Malawi to emulate 
the example set by MSB in delivering new products and services on the door steps of the 
rural people. I would also like to urge management of the Bank to leverage on this network, 
which is a competitive edge, to roll out products and services that should be convenient and 
easy to use by ordinary customers. The FINSCOPE study should render its usefulness in this 
regard. 
BIS Review 30/2010 
 1
Memories are still fresh on the economic meltdown that engulfed western economies in the 
recent past. From a regulatory point of view, the Reserve Bank of Malawi is proud to observe 
that  our  financial  sector  went  through  these  hard  times  with  a  lot  of  resilience.  This  is 
because of the stringent supervision of the banks that RBM provides. Furthermore our banks 
are  very  well  capitalized  and  managed.  The  World  Bank  and  the  IMF  still  believe  that 
Malawian banks are the most profitable in Africa. As a regulator of the financial sector, the 
Reserve Bank of Malawi will continue to strengthen its supervision function. For example, the 
supervision of the non-bank financial institutions will grow to include pensions, macro-finance 
and insurance as stand alone departments. 
We should all be very thankful to the present Government of His Excellency Ngwazi Dr Bingu 
wa Mutharika because it is now evident that security within Malawi has been enhanced. This 
is  the  major  reason  why  banks  should  be  even  more  confident  to  open  branches  in  rural 
areas. Financial inclusion is one of the current major themes of the Reserve Bank of Malawi 
hence  my  happiness  and  gratitude  to  the  Malawi  Savings  Bank  for  opening  yet  another 
branch today. 
I therefore congratulate and commend the Board and Management of Malawi Savings Bank 
on this auspicious occasion. However, let them and all staff of the bank not relax considering 
the  many  challenges  that  the  Bank  and  the  industry  at  large  face;  particularly  with  the 
growing competition. 
The  Bank  should  therefore  endeavour  to  keep  its  customers  satisfied  by  offering  superior 
products  and  delivering  excellent  service.  Today’s  customers  are  becoming  sophisticated 
and can only distinguish institutions through quality of service. I have no doubt that you will 
succeed in this endeavour. 
I  would  like  to  challenge  banks  in  Malawi  to  devise  deliberate  policies  aimed  at  improving 
access to credit by our private sector, especially Malawians, as this is the only way Malawi 
can sustain its current level of social and economic development. 
In  conclusion,  the  Central  Bank,  as  a  stakeholder  will  continue  to  complement  efforts  by 
banks to improve service delivery systems for the betterment of all stakeholders especially 
the  less  privileged  rural  masses  who  struggle  to  access  banking  facilities  as  most  banks 
concentrate in the urban areas. 
Our Guest of Honour 
Distinguished Invited Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen. 
I thank you all for your attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 30/2010
