Duvvuri Subbarao: Financial crisis – some old questions and maybe 
some new answers 
Speech  by  Mr  Duvvuri  Subbarao,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  Tenth 
C D Deshmukh  Memorial  Lecture,  Council  for  Social  Development,  Southern  Regional 
Centre, Hyderabad, 5 August 2010. 
 1. 
It  would  be  a  privilege  for  anyone  to  deliver  this  lecture  to  honour  the  memory  of 
Sir Chintaman D. Deshmukh. The privilege is particularly special for a serving Governor of 
the Reserve Bank of India. Everyday, as I go to work, I bask in the glory of serving a public 
institution that is held in such high esteem.  
2. 
I  am  deeply  conscious  that  this  high  esteem  owes  a  lot  to  the  competence  and 
professionalism  of  the  Reserve  Bank’s  staff,  its  institutional  values  and  culture,  and 
importantly, the outstanding leadership of former Governors. As the Governor of the Reserve 
Bank  in  these  exciting  times,  I  am  deeply  humbled  by  the  intellectual  reputation  of  the 
lineage of the Reserve Bank’s Governors. Sir Chintaman stands out among them not only 
because  he  was  the  first  Indian  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank,  but  because  he  laid  the 
ethical and intellectual foundations of central banking in India, and all of us, his successors 
have stood on his giant shoulders.  
3. 
A couple of months ago, I happened to visit the Reserve Bank’s Archives in Pune, 
and there I came across a letter from Prime Minister Nehru to Governor Deshmukh in 1948 
expressing  concern  over  the  country’s  deteriorating  economic  situation  and  asking  for  his 
analysis  and  guidance.  That  letter  is  a  reflection  not  only  of  the  intellectual  stature  of 
Sir Chintaman  but  also  evidence  of  his  lasting  legacy  to  the  office  of  the  Governor  of  the 
Reserve Bank that has sustained the confidence and respect of successive Prime Ministers 
for the Reserve Bank.  
4. 
We owe a deep debt of gratitude to several of our early post independence leaders 
– politicians, civil servants, public intellectuals, corporate heads and social activists – who all 
contributed  to  building  the  institutional  structure  of  independent  India.  Given  the  gigantic 
scale of our democracy, the aspirations of Pandit Nehru for the country, and the low literacy 
and  awareness  levels,  this  was  by  all  accounts  a  formidable  challenge.  Sir  Chintaman, 
whose public career spanned over three decades, was a doyen among those early leaders. 
Not  just  the  Reserve  Bank,  but  several  of  our  institutions  today  are  a  testimony  to 
Sir Chintaman’s  commitment  to  the  idea  of  India  as  a  modern  economy  and  an  inclusive 
society.  
5. 
As  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  during  1943–49,  Sir  Chintaman’s  intellectual 
values,  progressive  outlook,  meticulous  planning  and  his  ability  to  think  outside  the  box 
played a critical role in steering the economy through turbulent waters. I know from personal 
experience that the job of a Governor, more than most other positions, involves managing 
the  tension  between  doing  what  is  expedient  in  the  short-term  and  what  is  good  in  the 
medium to long run. By his actions, Sir Chintaman demonstrated that the dharma of a central 
banker is always to defend long term sustainability against short term compulsions.  
I  struggled  to  determine  how  best  to  pay  a  tribute  to  a  person  of  the  intellectual 
6. 
stature and social commitment of Sir Chintaman. As I read about him, I realized that he was 
among those who believed in building a modern India based on reevaluating conventional 
wisdom and finding fresh approaches to old problems, and new answers to old questions.  
7. 
That  has  a  resonance  with  the  situation  today  as  the  world  is  trying  to  grasp  the 
aftermath of the most devastating financial crisis of our time. The global crisis has challenged 
many of our ideas and reopened questions that we thought have been settled. In the spirit of 
BIS Review 105/2010 
 1
paying tribute to the memory of Shri Deshmukh and his remarkable intellectual traits, I want 
to raise five old questions and see how the crisis has possibly thrown up new answers. The 
five questions are:  
(i) 
the  advanced 
Have  emerging  market  economies  (EMEs)  decoupled 
economies?  
Should central banks persist with pure inflation targeting?  
Should financial stability be an explicit mandate of central banks?  
Are controls an appropriate mechanism for managing the capital account?  
Has fiscal dominance of monetary policy ended?  
from 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
Question 1: Have emerging market economies (EMEs) decoupled from the advanced 
economies?  
8. 
The  answer  before  the  crisis  was  an  increasingly  assertive  “yes”.  The  decoupling 
hypothesis held that even if advanced economies went into a downturn, EMEs would not be 
affected because of their improved policy framework, robust external reserves and resilient 
financial sectors. It is difficult to trace the precise origins of the decoupling hypothesis but it 
would be fair to surmise that it was inspired by the superior growth performance of EMEs as 
compared to advanced economies.  
9. 
Clearly, differential growth performance by itself is not conclusive confirmation of the 
decoupling hypothesis. But the decoupling hypothesis failed the first test which came during 
the recent crisis. The banking sectors of the EMEs had relatively marginal exposure to toxic 
assets  and  their  off-balance  sheet  activities  were  limited.  So,  if  decoupling  worked,  EMEs 
should  have  been  spared  the  crisis.  Yet  all  EMEs  were  affected  by  the  crisis,  although  to 
different extents, as the crisis spread through finance, confidence and trade channels.  
10. 
Notwithstanding our sound banking system and relatively robust financial markets, 
India  felt  the  tremors  of  the  tectonic  shocks  in  the  global  financial  system.  The  first  round 
effects came through the finance channel by way of sudden stop and then reversal of capital 
flows  consequent  upon  the  global  deleveraging  process.  This  jolted  our  foreign  exchange 
markets  as  well  as  our  equity  markets.  Almost  simultaneously,  our  credit  markets  came 
under  pressure  as  corporates  found  that  their  external  sources  of  funding  had  dried  up 
suddenly and turned to domestic bank and non-bank sources for funds.  
11. 
By far the most contagious route for crisis transmission was the confidence channel. 
For weeks after the Lehman collapse in mid-September 2008, everyday there was news of 
yet  another  storied  institution  crashing.  In  this  global  scenario  of  uncertainty,  the  lack  of 
confidence in advanced country markets transmitted as hiccups to our markets too. The net 
result  was  that  all  our  financial  markets  –  equity,  debt,  money,  foreign  exchange  and  the 
government  securities  markets  –  came  under  varying  degrees  of  pressure.  Finally,  the 
transmission  of  the  crisis  through  the  real  channel  was  quite  straightforward  as  the  global 
recession that followed the financial crash resulted in a sharp decline in export demand for 
our goods and services.  
12. 
I  have  sketched  the  Indian  situation  in  some  detail  but  what  we  had  experienced 
here was typical of most EMEs, save for some differences in the degree of impact. The short 
point is that the crisis resulted in a dissipation of the euphoria over decoupling.  
13. 
So, have EMEs decoupled from the advanced economies? The new answer to this 
old question is quite nuanced. It is that “strong” decoupling does not work. In a globalized 
world,  no  country  can  be  an  island  and  what  happens  around  the  world  affects  every 
economy, even as the extent of impact depends on the nature and depth of integration of the 
economy.  However,  “soft”  decoupling  works.  It  is  possible  for  economies  to  insulate 
themselves  against  an  external  crisis,  but  to  be  able  to  do  so,  they  need  to  diversify  their 
2 
 BIS Review 105/2010
to 
drivers  of  growth, 
accommodate those stabilizers, regulate their financial systems effectively, and be swift and 
nimble in economic management.  
institute  automatic  stabilizers  and  develop 
fiscal  space 
the 
Question 2: Should central banks persist with pure inflation targeting?  
14. 
The answer before the crisis was an increasingly confident “yes”.  
The years before the crisis saw a powerful intellectual consensus building around 
15. 
inflation targetting. A growing number of central banks, starting with New Zealand in the late 
1980s  and  currently  numbering  over  twenty,  embraced  the  principle  of  gearing  monetary 
policy  almost  exclusively  to  stabilizing  inflation.  Even  where  central  banks  did  not  target  a 
precise  inflation  rate,  their  policy  objectives  were  informed,  if  not  dominated,  by  price 
stability. This approach seemed successful. There was an extended period of price stability 
accompanied by stable growth and low unemployment. In the world that existed before the 
crisis, central bankers were a triumphant lot. They had discovered the holy grail.  
16. 
The  unravelling  of  the  Great  Moderation  during  the  crisis  has  diluted,  if  not 
dissolved,  the  consensus  around  the  minimalist  formula  of  inflation  targetting.  The 
mainstream view before the crisis was that price stability and financial stability reinforce each 
other.  The  crisis  has  proved  that  wrong.  We  have  seen  that  price  stability  does  not 
necessarily ensure financial stability. Indeed there is an even stronger assertion – that there 
is  a trade-off  between  price  stability  and  financial  stability, and  that  the  more  successful  a 
central bank is with price stability, the more likely it is to imperil financial stability.  
Where do we in India stand on this? The Reserve Bank is not an inflation targetter. 
17. 
However, there is an influential view that our economy will be better served if the Reserve 
Bank becomes a pure inflation targetter. The argument is that inflation hurts much more in a 
country like India with hundreds of millions of poor people and that the Reserve Bank will be 
more effective in combating inflation if it is not burdened with other objectives.  
18. 
India, and for several reasons.  
(i) 
This argument is contestable. Inflation targetting is neither desirable nor practical in 
In  an  emerging  economy  like  ours,  it  is  not practical  for  the  central  bank  to  focus 
exclusively  on  inflation  oblivious  of  the  larger  development  context.  The  Reserve 
Bank needs to balance between growth, price stability and financial stability.  
More often than not, the drivers of inflation in India emanate from the supply side. 
Food items have a weight of 46 to 70 per cent in various CPIs and are notoriously 
subject  to  supply  shocks  which  are  normally  beyond  the  pale  of  monetary  policy. 
This dilutes our potential effectiveness as inflation targetters.  
Which inflation index do we target? Our headline inflation index is the WPI and that 
does  not,  by  definition,  reflect  the  consumer  price  situation.  Getting  a  single 
representative inflation rate for a large economy with 1.2 billion people, fragmented 
markets and diverse geography is a formidable challenge.  
A  necessary  condition  for  inflation  targetting  to  work  is  effective  monetary 
transmission. Our monetary transmission mechanism is improving but is yet to reach 
robust  standards.  It  remains  impeded  because  of  administered  interest  rates,  the 
asymmetric  contractual  relationship  between  banks  and  their  depositors,  illiquid 
bond  markets  and  large  government  borrowings.  These  impediments  to  monetary 
transmission diminish our effectiveness as inflation targetters.  
Finally, large and volatile capital flows will continue to be an important feature of our 
external  sector.  Managing  these  flows  will  mean  managing  what  has  come  to  be 
called  “the  impossible  trinity”  –  balancing  between  the  objectives  of  a  fixed 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
BIS Review 105/2010 
 3
exchange  rate,  open  capital  account  and  independent  monetary  policy.  Inflation 
targetting is clearly not possible in an impossible trinity situation.  
19. 
The burden of my argument is that the Reserve Bank cannot be, and indeed should 
not be, a pure inflation targetter. Post-crisis, the dominant view around the world is shaped 
by the “new environment hypothesis” which says that flexible inflation targetting, rather than 
pure inflation targeting, is more efficient. According to this hypothesis, if inflation is way off 
target, a central bank’s first call is to bring it within acceptable range, and if inflation is within 
the range, the central bank should focus on other objectives.  
20. 
To  summarize,  the  answer  to  the  old  question,  “should  central  banks  be  pure 
inflation  targetters?”  has  shifted  from  an  increasingly  confident  “yes”  to  an  increasingly 
qualified “yes”.  
There are powerful arguments for why central banks should be in the centre of the 
Before the crisis, there was no answer to this question – not because there was an 
Question 3: Should financial stability be an explicit mandate of central banks?  
21. 
intellectual vacuum but because no one really asked the question so pointedly.  
22. 
Post-crisis, financial stability has come centre stage. One of the big lessons of this 
crisis  is  that  financial stability  can  be  jeopardized  even  in  an  environment  of  price  stability 
and macroeconomic stability. It is even possible to make a stronger argument, based on the 
experience of this crisis, that extended periods of price stability and macroeconomic stability 
may indeed blindside policy makers to financial instability brewing in the underbelly. These 
lessons from the crisis have triggered a vigorous debate on whether financial stability should 
be made an explicit mandate of central banks.  
23. 
financial stability function. Let me list a few important ones.  
(i) 
Generally, monetary policy and financial stability are mutually supportive. This inter-
dependency  between  the  two  dimensions  suggests  that  the  central  bank,  with 
inherent responsibility for monetary policy, should also be the systemic regulator in 
charge  of  financial  stability  so  that  it  can  take  a  holistic  view  of  policy  options  by 
factoring in costs and benefits in both dimensions.  
The  responsibility  of  central  banks  for  monetary  policy  is  unquestioned.  Because 
banks are the conduits through which monetary policy decisions are transmitted to 
the real economy, it is synergistic to entrust responsibility for prudential regulation of 
banks also to the central bank. And if the central bank is the prudential regulator, 
there is a strong case for it to be the systemic regulator.  
By  far  the  strongest  argument  in  favour  of  entrusting  the  financial  stability 
responsibility to the central bank is that it is unquestionably the lender of last resort 
(LOLR)  for  the  financial  system.  A  central  bank  can  discharge  its  LOLR  function 
more  efficiently  if  its  mandate  extends  beyond  merely  monitoring  financial 
institutions to taking preventive action. This becomes possible if the central bank is 
also the systemic regulator.  
24. 
Developments  around  the  world  over  the  last  few  months  reflect  two  clear 
trends. –  first,  a  decisive  shift  towards  giving  increased  responsibility  for  both  systemic 
oversight  and  prudential  regulation  to  central  banks;  and  second,  institutionalisation  of 
collegial arrangements involving the central bank, other regulators and the government, with 
the primary responsibility of identifying threats to financial stability. The councils can make 
recommendations  for  heightened  prudential  standards  in  the  interest  of  the  safety  of  the 
financial  system,  but  notably,  not  for  forbearance  or  relaxations.  The  two  seemingly 
paradoxical trends make eminent sense and supplement each other.  
(iii) 
(ii) 
4 
 BIS Review 105/2010
A brief review of the situation around the world will be instructive in this regard. In 
25. 
the US, the proposed Financial Stability Oversight Council is to be headed by the Treasury 
Secretary  and  comprises  the  heads  of  the  central  bank  and  all  the  regulatory  agencies. 
However,  the  Act  entrusts  the  Federal  Reserve  with  powers  of  supervision  over  all  bank 
holding companies as well as any non-bank financial entity that can be a threat to financial 
stability regardless of whether they are bank holding companies or not, and to oversee the 
payment,  clearing  and  settlement  system.  In  Europe,  recognizing  the  need  for  a  specific 
body  responsible  for  macroprudential  supervision  across  the  EU  financial  system,  it  is 
proposed to constitute a European Systemic Risk Council (ESRC) chaired by the President 
of the ECB with central bank governors of the 27 member states, chairpersons of the three 
European  Supervisory  authorities,  and  a  member  of  the  European  Commission.  The 
chairperson  of  the  Economic  and  Financial  Committee  (EFC)  representing  the  finance 
ministries will participate as an observer.  
In  the  UK,  there  is  a  paradigm  shift  underway  in  terms  of  the  institutional 
26. 
arrangements 
for  microprudential  as  well  as  macroprudential  regulation.  The  new 
Government has announced plans to: (i) shift the responsibility for prudential oversight from 
the Financial Services Authority (FSA) to a new Prudential Regulation Authority (PRA) under 
the  Bank  of  England;  and  (ii)  to  set  up  a  Financial  Policy  Committee  within  the  Bank  of 
England to  “monitor  macro issues that may threaten economic and financial stability”. The 
Committee  will  comprise  a  representative  of  the  Treasury,  other  regulators  and  external 
members appointed by the Treasury. The Treasury will, however, lead coordination of action 
in a crisis.  
27. 
 The above trends recognise that while all financial sector regulators and indeed the 
sovereign  have  a  role  in  maintaining  financial  stability,  from  an  effectiveness  and 
accountability perspective and for preventing as well as managing a crisis, it is imperative to 
enjoin the executive responsibility for financial stability to a single entity and that the central 
bank is best positioned to be that single entity. The participation of and indeed coordination 
by the finance ministries underlines their role in crisis management and resolution.  
28. 
Where  do  we  in  India  stand  on  this  issue  of  financial  stability?  Historically,  the 
Reserve Bank has played a central role in preserving financial stability. As central banks go, 
the Reserve Bank is a full service central bank. In addition to being the monetary authority, 
we are the regulator and supervisor of banks, non-bank finance companies and of important 
segments of the financial markets. We also regulate the payment and settlement system.  
29. 
This  unique  combination  of  responsibilities  for  macroprudential  regulation  and 
microprudential  supervision  together  with  an  implicit  mandate  for  systemic  oversight  has 
allowed  the  Reserve  Bank  to  exploit  the  synergies  across  various  dimensions.  The  micro-
level information coming from supervision of individual institutions has been a valuable input 
for  shaping 
from 
macroprudential regulation has been effective in instituting prudential safeguards at the micro 
institution level. The micro and macro level oversight has helped address systemic risk by 
providing an insight into: (i) firm level risk and the collective behaviour of financial institutions 
as  well  as  interconnectedness  in  the  financial  system  through  the  direct  links  between 
financial institutions and the indirect links created through the financial markets; and (ii) the 
close  links  of  the  financial  system  with  the  real  economy  and  the  potential  for  strong 
feedback effects.  
This  is  a  system  that  has  served  us  well.  Just  to  give  one  example,  in  the  years 
30. 
before the crisis, sensing an unusual build-up of credit in certain sectors such as commercial 
real estate, consumer credit and capital market exposure, the Reserve Bank, to use a phrase 
that is now commonplace, “leaned against the wind” and tightened the flow of credit to these 
sectors  by  raising  the  provisioning  norms  and  risk  weights.  This  is  one  of  the  important 
factors that shielded us from the worst impact of the crisis. Again, as the crisis set in, and 
reflecting the need to revive the flow of credit, these norms were reversed to normal levels. 
the  macro  perspective.  Vice  versa, 
the  broad  understanding 
BIS Review 105/2010 
 5
What we did in India is a classic case of deployment of macroprudential tools to preserve 
financial stability, action made possible by the Reserve Bank’s broad mandate and the host 
of  instruments  at  its  command.  It  is  interesting,  although  not  surprising,  therefore  that 
increasingly  the  reformed  regulatory  models  around  the  world  are  moving  towards 
resembling our model.  
31. 
After  all  this  exposition,  let  me  return  to  the  original  question:  “should  financial 
stability  be  an  explicit  mandate  of  the  central  banks?”.  Pre-crisis,  as  I  said,  there  was  no 
answer; post-crisis, the answer is mostly “yes”.  
Question 4: Are controls an appropriate mechanism for managing the capital account?  
32. 
Pre-crisis,  the  question  was  usually  posed  in  the  context  of  the  problems 
encountered by emerging market economies in managing the adverse impact of large and 
volatile capital flows. The answer, flowing from the free market paradigm, was largely “no”.  
33. 
Critics maintain that capital controls are distortionary, largely ineffective, difficult to 
implement, easy to evade and that they entail negative externalities. Furthermore, the costs 
of  imposing  capital  controls  far  exceed  the  potential  benefits  because  financial  markets 
always  outsmart  policy  makers.  On  the  other  hand,  supporters  of  capital  controls  have 
argued that controls are desirable because they preserve monetary policy autonomy, save 
sterilization costs and tilt the composition of foreign liabilities toward long-term maturities and 
ensure  macroeconomic  and  financial  stability.  Pro-controllers  also  contest  the  argument 
about the ease of evading controls; they contend that the cost-benefit calculus is not all that 
decisive  since  efforts  to  evade  controls  and  move  funds  in  and  out  of  a  country  entail 
additional costs which is precisely what controls aim to achieve.  
34. 
The  debate  on  capital  controls  resurfaced  after  the  Asian  crisis  of  the  mid-1990s 
especially as the root cause of the crisis was traced to the open capital accounts of the East 
Asian  economies.  Even  so,  the  intellectual  orthodoxy  continued  to  denounce  controls  on 
capital  flows  as  being  inefficient  and  ineffective.  The  debate  on  capital  controls  was  not 
pursued to a logical closure as the Asian economies recovered in quick order, regained their 
export competitiveness and started building up external reserves for self-insurance.  
35. 
The recent crisis has, however, been a clear turning point in the worldview on capital 
controls. Evidence coming in is that emerging economies which have been more open have 
been affected more than those which were less open demonstrating that premature opening 
hurts more than it helps. This has prompted a review of the earlier dominant view that capital 
controls are inadvisable – always and everywhere. Notably, the IMF1 put out a policy note in 
February  2010  that  reversed  its  long  held  orthodoxy.  The  note  has  referred  to  certain 
“circumstances  in  which  capital  controls  can  be  a  legitimate  component  of  the  policy 
response  to  surges  in  capital  flows”.  The  World  Bank2  has  noted  that  “capital  restrictions 
might be unavoidable as a last resort to prevent a crisis or mitigate its effects, should one 
arise”.  The  Asian  Development  Bank  Outlook  –  2010  observed  that  “carefully  designed 
capital  controls  can  help  guard  against  disruptive  short  term  capital  flows  and  prevent 
extreme volatility in exchange rates”.  
36. 
So,  what  does  all  this  rethinking  suggest?  It  suggests  that  wisdom  lies  in  festina 
lente, as the Romans used to say – make haste slowly. Open up your capital accounts but 
calibrate  the  opening  to  your  domestic  and  external  circumstances.  In  the  context  of  this 
lecture,  the  answer  to  the  question,  “are  capital  controls  an  appropriate  mechanism  for 
                                                 
1   Ostry,  Jonathan  D.  and  Others  (2010),  “Capital  Inflows:  The  Role  of  Controls”,  IMF  Staff  Position  Note, 
SPN/10/04, February 19, 2010. 
2   World Bank: Global Monitoring Report 2009: A Development Emergency. Washington DC. 
6 
 BIS Review 105/2010
managing the capital account?” has shifted from a qualified “no” pre-crisis to a qualified “yes” 
post-crisis.  
Question 5: Has fiscal dominance of monetary policy ended?  
37. 
The  answer  before  the  crisis  was  “hopefully”.  That  judgement  is  being  revisited 
amidst apprehensions that the extraordinary fiscal expansion by the advanced economies to 
combat the crisis is actually mutating into structural fiscal deficits and that monetary policy 
will have no choice but to accommodate continued elevated government borrowing into the 
medium term. Most recently, we have all seen how the European Central Bank has had to 
show  unusual  accommodation  in  resolving  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  in  some  European 
countries. Many fear that this is just the beginning of a trend whereby fiscal policies will once 
again start dictating monetary stances.  
38. 
The  history of  fiscal  dominance  of monetary  policy  is  quite  interesting.  The  eighty 
odd  years  since  the  Great  Depression  saw  a  famous  rivalry  between  monetary  and  fiscal 
policy  for  influence.  For  at  least  three  decades  after  the  Great  Depression,  Keynes’ 
intellectual heritage ruled; governments borrowed as much as they wanted and at the price 
they wanted without worrying about the implications of debt build-up, and central banks had 
willy-nilly acquiesced in this profligacy.  
39. 
This trend began to reverse as a result of very influential work during the 1960s by 
Milton  Friedman  and  others  arguing  that  inflation  is  always  and  everywhere  a  monetary 
phenomenon  and  that  output  gains  from  debt  financed  public  expenditure  will  not  only  be 
temporary,  but  also  eventually  inflationary.  Supportive  evidence  for  this  came  from  the 
repeated  episodes  of  stagflation  during  the  1970,  which  saw  a  baffling  combination  of 
unemployment  and  inflation.  The  belief  that  continued  fiscal  deficits  are  clearly  not 
sustainable gained ground during the 1980s especially as countries integrated into the global 
system,  and  fiscally  irresponsible  economies  realized  that  the  world  capital  markets 
penalized them by demanding higher premia.  
40. 
The trend since the mid-1990s has been for a growing number of countries to adopt 
fiscal rules placing limits on deficits and/or debt and also prohibiting primary financing of debt 
by the central banks. One of the broad outcomes of this effort has been that central banks 
found  themselves  relatively  free  to  conduct  independent  monetary  policy,  not  only  free  of 
fiscal  compulsions  but  also  in  a  predictable  fiscal  framework.  The  environment  of  price 
stability  coupled  with  steady  growth  that  characterized  the  Great  Moderation  came  to  be 
seen as a vindication of the merits of freeing monetary policy from fiscal dominance.  
41. 
That happy state of affairs ended in the aftermath of the crisis, and fears about fiscal 
dominance of monetary policy have resurfaced. There are widely shared concerns about the 
extraordinary fiscal expansion necessitated by the crisis, and when and how long it will take 
to reverse that. But, by far the larger concern is not about the crisis related cyclical deficits 
but  about  the  structural fiscal  deficits  looming  large  in  most  advanced  economies.  Current 
estimates  are  that  rich  countries  will  see  a  rapid  increase  in  their  social  security  payment 
obligations because of ageing populations and shrinking workforces, and that they will need 
to raise significant amount of debt year-on-year to finance these commitments. If that be the 
case,  monetary  independence  will  remain  circumscribed  by  fiscal  compulsions  into  the 
medium term.  
42. 
The sovereign debt crisis in Europe over the past few months has turned out to be 
yet another arena where the tensions between fiscal and monetary policies played out. What 
characterizes  monetary  unions  like  the  euro  system  is  that  member  countries  pursue 
independent  fiscal  policies  but  do  not  have  recourse  to  exchange  rate  or  monetary  policy 
levers  to  make  the  adjustment  needed.  This  underscores  the  importance  of  sound  and 
credible  fiscal  policies  by  member  countries  to  ensure  the  independence  and  credibility  of 
BIS Review 105/2010 
 7
their collective monetary policy. Absent that, monetary policy will become hostage to fiscal 
excesses of individual members.  
43. 
Where do we in India stand on this? It will be fair to say that we followed the global 
trends,  indeed  more  so.  During  the  1970s,  and  much  of  the  1980s,  monetary  policy  was 
almost totally hostage to fiscal policies. However, again following trends around the world, 
there  has  been  a  gradual  abatement  of  fiscal  dominance  of  monetary  policy  starting  the 
1990s.  
The easing of fiscal pressures on monetary policy has been a continuous process 
44. 
but two discrete events marked significant milestones. The first was the agreement between 
the Reserve Bank and the Government to completely phase out ad-hoc treasury bills from 
April  1997,  a  move  that  saw  the  termination  of  the  egregious  practice  of  automatic 
monetization  by  the  central  bank  of  the  government’s  fiscal  deficit.  The  second  was  the 
enactment of the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management (FRBM) Act which, among 
other  things,  prohibited  the  Reserve  Bank  from  financing  government  debt  in  the  primary 
market with effect from April 2006.  
45. 
Like in most countries, in India too, fiscal stimulus was part of the crisis response 
and monetary policy had to acquiesce in elevated government borrowing. Going forward, the 
challenge  for  the  Government  is  to  continue  the  fiscal  consolidation  that  started  with  this 
year’s budget and for the Reserve Bank to regain the space to conduct monetary policy free 
of fiscal compulsions.  
46. 
What this broad review of the global and the Indian scenarios shows is that the jury 
is still out on the issue of fiscal dominance of monetary policy. But it will be less than honest 
not  to  acknowledge  that  the  autonomy  of  monetary  policy  from  fiscal  compulsions  is  once 
again under threat, and resolving that threat requires credible efforts by both governments 
and central banks.  
47. 
dominance of monetary policy ended, is the same as the old one. “Hopefully”.  
So,  in  the  format  of  this  lecture,  the  new  answer  to  the  question,  has  fiscal 
Conclusion  
48. 
That brings me to the conclusion of old questions and new answers. As I sign off, I 
want to say that this crisis has been a reminder, if one was required, of the need to question 
conventional wisdom and approaches. Like Sir Chintaman, who presided over a time when 
the  world,  as  well  as  the  national,  political,  economic  and  financial  order  was  undergoing 
radical transformation, we too stand on the cusp of what may be a significant turning point in 
the international financial architecture. The best tribute we can pay to Sir Chintaman Deshmukh 
is to remember that we can make progress only if we are willing to accept new answers to 
old questions when circumstances change. 
8 
 BIS Review 105/2010
