Ben S Bernanke: Economic outlook 
Testimony  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  System,  before  the  Joint  Economic  Committee,  US  Congress,  Washington  DC, 
14 April 2010. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website.  
 Chair  Maloney,  Vice  Chairman  Schumer,  Ranking  Members  Brownback  and  Brady,  and 
other members of the Committee, I am pleased to be here today to discuss economic and 
financial developments. I will also make a few remarks on the fiscal situation. 
The economic outlook 
Supported  by  stimulative  monetary  and  fiscal  policies  and  the  concerted  efforts  of 
policymakers  to  stabilize  the  financial  system,  a  recovery  in  economic  activity  appears  to 
have begun in the second half of last year. An important impetus to the expansion was firms’ 
success  in  working  down  the  excess  inventories  that  had  built  up  during  the  contraction, 
which left companies more willing to expand production. Indeed, the boost from the slower 
drawdown in inventories accounted for the majority of the sharp rise in real gross domestic 
product  (GDP)  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  last  year,  during  which  real  GDP  increased  at  an 
annual  rate  of  5.6  percent.  With  inventories  now  much  better  aligned  with  final  sales, 
however, and with the support from fiscal policy set to diminish in the coming year, further 
economic expansion will depend on continued growth in private final demand. 
On balance, the incoming data suggest that growth in private final demand will be sufficient 
to  promote  a  moderate  economic  recovery  in  coming  quarters.  Consumer  spending 
continued to increase in the first two months of this year and has now risen at an annual rate 
of about 2–1/2 percent in real terms since the middle of 2009. In particular, after slowing in 
January  and  February,  sales  of  new  light  motor  vehicles  bounced  back  in  March  as 
manufacturers offered a new round of incentives. Going forward, consumer spending should 
be aided by a gradual pickup in jobs and earnings, the recovery in household wealth from 
recent lows, and some improvement in credit availability. 
In  the  business  sector,  capital  spending  on  equipment  and  software  appears  to  have 
increased  at  a  solid  pace  again  in  the  first  quarter.  U.S.  manufacturing  output,  which  is 
benefiting from stronger export demand as well as the inventory adjustment I noted earlier, 
rose at an annual rate of 8 percent during the eight months ending in February. Also, as I will 
discuss  further  in  a  moment,  financial  conditions  continue  to  strengthen,  thus  reducing  an 
important headwind for the economy. 
To be sure, significant restraints on the pace of the recovery remain, including weakness in 
both residential and nonresidential construction and the poor fiscal condition of many state 
and  local  governments.  Sales  of  new  and  existing  homes  dropped  back  in  January  and 
February,  and  the  pace  of  new  single-family  housing  starts  has  changed  little  since  the 
middle of last year. Outlays for nonresidential construction continue to contract amid rising 
vacancy  rates,  falling  property  prices,  and  difficulties  in  obtaining  financing.  Pressures  on 
state and local budgets, though tempered by ongoing federal support, have led to continuing 
declines in employment and construction spending by state and local governments. 
As you know, the labor market was particularly hard hit by the recession. Recently, we have 
seen some encouraging signs that layoffs are slowing and that employment has turned up. 
Manufacturing  employment  increased  for  a  third  month  in  March,  and  the  number  of 
temporary jobs – often a precursor of more permanent employment – has been rising since 
BIS Review 49/2010 
 1
last  October.  New  claims  for  unemployment  insurance  continue  on  a  generally  downward 
trend. However, if the pace of recovery is moderate, as I expect, a significant amount of time 
will be required to restore the 8–1/2 million jobs that were lost during the past two years. I am 
particularly concerned about the fact that, in March, 44 percent of the unemployed had been 
without a job for six months or more. Long periods without work erode individuals’ skills and 
hurt future employment prospects. Younger workers may be particularly adversely affected if 
a weak labor market prevents them from finding a first job or from gaining important work 
experience. 
On the inflation front, recent data continue to show a subdued rate of increase in consumer 
prices.  For  the  three  months  ended  in  February,  prices  for  personal  consumption 
expenditures rose at an annual rate of 1–1/4 percent despite a further steep run-up in energy 
prices; core inflation, which excludes prices of food and energy, slowed to an annual rate of 
1/2 percent. The moderation in inflation has been broadly based, affecting most categories of 
goods  and  services  with  the  principal  exception  of  some  globally  traded  commodities  and 
materials,  including  crude  oil.  Long-run  inflation  expectations  appear  stable;  for  example, 
expected 
the  Thomson 
Reuters/University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers was 2–3/4 percent in March, which is 
at the lower end of the narrow range that has prevailed for the past few years. 
to  10  years,  as  measured  by 
inflation  over 
the  next  5 
Financial market developments 
Financial markets have improved considerably since I last testified before this Committee in 
May  of  last  year.  Conditions  in  short-term  credit  markets  have  continued  to  normalize; 
spreads  in bank  funding  markets  and  the  commercial  paper  market  have  returned  to  near 
pre-crisis  levels.  In  light  of  these  improvements,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  largely  wound 
down the extraordinary liquidity programs that it created to support financial markets during 
the crisis. The only remaining program, apart from the discount window, is the Term Asset-
Backed Securities Loan Facility for loans backed by new-issue commercial mortgage-backed 
securities,  and  that  facility  is  scheduled  to  close  at  the  end  of  June.  Overall,  the  Federal 
Reserve’s  liquidity  programs  appear  to  have  made  a  significant  contribution  to  the 
stabilization of the financial system, and they did so at no cost to taxpayers and with no credit 
losses. 
The Federal Reserve also recently completed its purchases of $1.25 trillion of federal agency 
mortgage-backed securities and about $175 billion of agency debt. Purchases under these 
programs  were  phased  down  gradually,  and  to  date,  the  transition  in  markets  has  been 
relatively smooth. The Federal Reserve’s asset-purchase program appears to have improved 
market functioning and reduced interest-rate spreads not only in the mortgage market but in 
other longer-term debt markets as well. 
On  net,  the  financial  condition  of  banking  firms  has  strengthened  markedly  during  recent 
quarters.  Last  spring,  the  Federal  Reserve  and  other  banking  regulators  evaluated  the 
nation’s  largest  bank  holding  companies  under  the  Supervisory  Capital  Assessment 
Program, popularly known as the stress test, to ensure that they would have sufficient capital 
to  remain  viable  and  to  lend  to  creditworthy  borrowers  even  in  a  worse-than-expected 
economic  scenario.1  The  release  of  the  stress  test  results  significantly  increased  market 
confidence in the banking system. Greater investor confidence in turn allowed the banks to 
                                                 
1   For more on the SCAP, see Ben S. Bernanke (2009), “The Supervisory Capital Assessment Program”, speech 
delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta 2009 Financial Markets Conference, Jekyll Island, Ga., May 
11; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2009), “Federal Reserve, OCC, and FDIC release 
results of the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program”, press release, May 7; and Daniel K. Tarullo (2010), 
“Lessons from the Crisis Stress Tests”, speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Board International Research 
Forum on Monetary Policy, Washington, March 26. 
2 
 BIS Review 49/2010
raise  substantial  amounts  of  new  equity  capital  and,  in  many  cases,  to  repay  government 
capital. The Federal Reserve and other bank regulators continue to encourage the banks to 
build  up  their  capital,  ensure  that  they  have  adequate  liquidity,  improve  their  risk 
management, and restructure their employee compensation programs to better align risk and 
reward. 
Despite their stronger financial positions, banks’ lending to both households and businesses 
has continued to fall. The decline in large part reflects sluggish loan demand and the fact that 
many potential borrowers no longer qualify for credit, both results of a weak economy. The 
high rate of write-downs has also reduced the quantity of loans on banks’ books. Banks have 
also been conservative in their lending policies, imposing tough lending standards and terms; 
this  caution  reflects  bankers’  concerns  about  the  economic  outlook  and  uncertainty  about 
their own future losses and capital positions. 
The  Federal  Reserve  has  been  working  to  ensure  that  our  bank  supervision  does  not 
inadvertently impede sound lending and thus slow the recovery. Achieving the appropriate 
balance  between  necessary  prudence  and  the  need  to  continue  making  sound  loans  to 
creditworthy borrowers is in the interest of banks, borrowers, and the economy as a whole. 
Toward  this  end,  in  cooperation  with  the  other  banking  regulators,  we  have  issued  policy 
statements to bankers and examiners emphasizing the importance of lending to creditworthy 
customers, working with troubled borrowers to restructure loans, managing commercial real 
estate  exposures  appropriately,  and  taking  a  careful  but  balanced  approach  to  small 
business  lending.2  We  have  accompanied  our  guidance  with  training  programs  for  both 
Federal Reserve and state examiners, and with outreach to bankers throughout the industry. 
For example, we just completed a training initiative that reached about 1,000 examiners. We 
are also conducting a series of meetings across the country with private- and public-sector 
partners  to  gather  information  about  the  credit  needs  of  small  businesses  and  how  those 
needs can best be met. 
We have also stepped up our information gathering, so that we can better understand factors 
that may be inhibiting bank lending. These efforts include a survey by examiners of banks’ 
practices in working out loans, the results of which will serve as a baseline against which we 
will assess the effectiveness of our supervisory guidance. We are also obtaining additional 
information  on  small  business  credit  conditions.  For  example,  we  assisted  the  National 
Federation  of  Independent  Business  in  developing  a  survey  to  assess  barriers  to  credit 
access by small businesses.3 And we are using our own Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey 
on Bank Lending Practices to monitor changes in bank lending to small businesses.4  
                                                 
2   See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Office of the 
Comptroller of the Currency, and Office of Thrift Supervision (2008), “Interagency Statement on Meeting the 
Needs  of  Creditworthy  Borrowers”,  joint  press  release,  November  12;  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal 
Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, National Credit Union Administration, Office of the 
Comptroller of the Currency, Office of Thrift Supervision, and Conference of State Bank Supervisors (2010), 
“Regulators Issue Statement on Lending to Creditworthy Small Businesses”, joint press release, February 5; 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation (2009), 
“Prudent Commercial Real Estate Loan Workouts”, Supervision and Regulation Letter SR 09-7 (October 30); 
and  Office  of  the  Comptroller  of  the  Currency,  Federal  Deposit  Insurance  Corporation,  Federal  Reserve 
Board,  Federal  Financial  Institutions  Examination  Council  and  Office  of  Thrift  Supervision  (2009),  “Policy 
Statement on Prudent Commercial Real Estate Loan Workouts”, joint policy statement, October 30. 
3   See  William  J.  Dennis  (2010),  “Small  Business  Credit  in  a  Deep  Recession”,  National  Federation  of  Small 
Business Research Foundation (Washington: NFIB, February). 
4   See  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System,  “Senior  Loan  Officer  Opinion  Survey  on  Bank 
Lending Practices”. 
BIS Review 49/2010 
 3
Fiscal policy 
In  addition  to  the  near-term  challenge  of  fostering  improved  economic  performance  and 
stronger  labor  markets,  we  as  a  nation  face  the  difficult  but  essential  task  of  achieving 
longer-term sustainability of the nation’s fiscal position. The federal budget deficit is on track 
this  year  to  be  nearly  as  wide  as  the  $1.4  trillion  gap  recorded  in  fiscal  year  2009.  To  an 
important  extent,  these  extremely  large  deficits  are  the  result  of  the  effects  of  the  weak 
economy  on  revenues  and  outlays,  along  with  the  necessary  actions  that  were  taken  to 
counter  the  recession  and  restore  financial  stability.  But  an  important  part  of  the  deficit 
appears to be structural; that is, it is expected to remain even after economic and financial 
conditions have returned to normal. 
In particular, the Administration and the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) project that the 
deficit  will  recede  somewhat  over  the  next  two  years  as  the  temporary  stimulus  measures 
wind  down  and  as  economic  recovery  leads  to  higher  revenues.  Thereafter,  however,  the 
annual deficit is expected to remain high through 2020, in the neighborhood of 4 to 5 percent 
of GDP. Deficits at that level would lead the ratio of federal debt held by the public to the 
GDP,  already  expected  to  be  greater  than  70  percent  at  the  end  of  fiscal  2012,  to  rise 
considerably  further.  This  baseline  projection  assumes  that  most  discretionary  spending 
grows  more  slowly  than  nominal  GDP,  that  no  expiring  tax  cuts  are  extended,  and  that 
current provisions that provide most taxpayers relief from the alternative minimum tax are not 
further extended. Under an alternative scenario that drops those assumptions, the deficit at 
the end of 2020 would be 9 percent of GDP and the federal debt would balloon to more than 
100 percent of GDP.5  
Although sizable deficits are unavoidable in the near term, maintaining the confidence of the 
public  and  financial  markets  requires  that  policymakers  move  decisively  to  set  the  federal 
budget  on  a  trajectory  toward  sustainable  fiscal  balance.  A  credible  plan  for  fiscal 
sustainability could yield substantial near-term benefits in terms of lower long-term interest 
rates and increased consumer and business confidence. Timely attention to these issues is 
important, not only for maintaining credibility, but because budgetary changes are less likely 
to create hardship or dislocations when the individuals affected are given adequate time to 
plan and adjust. In other words, addressing the country’s fiscal problems will require difficult 
choices, but postponing them will only make them more difficult. 
Thank you. I would be pleased to take your questions. 
                                                
 
5   These  figures  have  been  calculated  by  the  Federal  Reserve  using  the  CBO’s  estimates  of  the  budgetary 
effects  of  selected  policy  alternatives  to  adjust  the  CBO’s  baseline  budget  projection  released  in  a  recent 
report  (see  Congressional  Budget  Office  (2010),  The  Budget  and  Economic  Outlook:  Fiscal  Years  2010  to 
2020  (Washington:  CBO,  January).  The  specific  alternative  policies  used  in  these  calculations  included  the 
CBO’s  estimates  of  the  effects  of  reducing  troop  levels  in  overseas  military  operations  to  60,000  by  2015, 
increasing regular discretionary appropriations at the rate of growth of nominal GDP, extending all expiring tax 
provisions, and indexing the alternative minimum tax for inflation. 
4 
 BIS Review 49/2010
