Bandid Nijathaworn: Thailand’s economic outlook – an update 
Speech  by  Mr  Bandid  Nijathaworn,  Member  of  the  Board  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the 
Australian-Thai Chamber of Commerce dinner talk, Bangkok, 14 July 2010. 
 First, let me thank the Australian-Thai Chamber of Commerce for the invitation. This year has 
been  a  particularly  challenging  year  for  Thailand,  on  account  of  both  developments  in  the 
global economy and the political situations at home. So, what I want to do today is to give 
you  an  update  on  Thailand’s  economic  outlook,  particularly  to  see  what  these  challenges 
have meant for the Thai economy, as well as for the outlook going forward.  
A keyword this year is “uncertainty”. As you well know, the market does not like uncertainty 
because it raises risk and costs. For the global economy, this year has been an exceptionally 
“complicated”  year  because  of  the  two  major  uncertainties  that  have  contributed  to  an 
unusual degree of volatility in global financial markets. 
The first is uncertainty surrounding the strength of global economic recovery which has been 
weighed  down  by  the  high  levels  of  unemployment  and  slow  bank-lending  growth  in  the 
advanced  economies,  as  well  as  prospect  for  higher  long-term  interest  rates  in  the  major 
economies linked to the financing of public sector deficits. This is the first uncertainty.  
The second uncertainty is policy. For the advanced economies, it is the uncertainty about 
the  timing  of  exit  policy,  and  whether  the  commitment  to  fiscal  consolidation  by  the  major 
economies  can  be  sustained  given  the  adverse  implications  for  growth.  For  emerging 
markets,  there  is  uncertainty  about  the  policy  approach  that  emerging  markets  will  use  to 
manage  large  capital  inflows  particularly  in  Asia.  This  involves  the  policy  choice  between 
exchange rate management, monetary policy, and the use of macro-prudential and capital 
control.  
In my view, uncertainty about policy has been of most concern for financial markets, resulting 
in increased volatility and a constant shift in investor sentiment between risk aversion and 
risk appetite. As for Thailand, in addition to the global uncertainties, we also have our own 
home-grown  uncertainty  linked  to  domestic  political  developments,  which  have  added 
another dimension of risk to economic recovery and to the prospect of Thailand’s growth in 
the longer-term. 
How has the Thai economy performed so far amidst all this risk and challenges?  
Today,  an  important  decision  was  made  by  the  Bank  of  Thailand’s  Monetary  Policy 
Committee to begin a process of policy normalization by raising the policy interest rate by 
25 basis points to 1.50 percent. The decision represents the first increase in fifteen months 
since  the  policy  rate  was  reduced  cumulatively  by  2.5  percentage  points  to  cushion  the 
economy from the global recession. But more importantly, it also marks an important turning 
point in our assessment of the economy’s growth and inflation outlook, taking into account 
the impact of the political situation. I want to share with you this assessment, which can be 
summarized in three main points.  
First, economic recovery in the first half of this year is firm, and the momentum is likely to 
continue in the second half, supported by global economic recovery, accommodative fiscal 
and monetary policies, as well as the strong momentum of recovery itself. As for the impact 
of the political turmoil, April and May data clearly suggests that the impact is limited and the 
collateral consequences will be felt largely in the tourism sector which will take a bit longer to 
recover. For the whole of this year, we are expecting growth to be higher than the range of 
4.3–5.8 percent that we had forecasted earlier in April. So, similar to other economies in the 
BIS Review 101/2010 
 1
region, Thailand should recover firmly this year, and the recovery momentum should carry 
forward into the next year.  
Second,  with  the  economy  recovering  well,  inflationary  pressure  is  set  to  increase  going 
forward, reflecting the impact of stronger domestic spending and also higher commodity and 
raw  material  prices  in  global  markets.  Also,  going  forward,  pressure  on  asset  prices  will 
become more evident on account of continued capital inflows into the region. Therefore, with 
pressure on prices edging up and the recovery momentum looking firm, the move to begin 
policy rate normalization is a logical one for maintaining economic and financial stability. So, 
the decision today is not a surprise for financial markets, rather it is a decision that is long-
overdue.  
The  third  point  is  the  risk  to  growth.  For  the  most  part,  we  still  see  developments  in  the 
global economy as a key downside risk to Thailand’s growth this year. A key risk at this time 
is the strength of global recovery in the second-half of the year, given a more limited room in 
the advanced economies for using fiscal stimulus to drive growth because of concern over 
longer-term fiscal sustainability and the risk of eroding inflation expectations. Another issue is 
the  possible  spillover  of  concerns  over  sovereign  debt  onto  the  European  banking  sector. 
Domestically,  the  drought  situation  seems  to  have  improved  substantially  after  a  bout  of 
plentiful  rainfall  country-wide.  Finally,  we  have  risks  relating  to  how  Thailand’s  political 
situation will evolve going forward. This is an issue which remains a known-unknown to most 
Thais.  
For this evening, I have been asked to dwell a bit more into the interactions between politics 
and the economy in the context of what has been happening in Thailand. Without getting too 
much off track, let me end my remark with three personal observations on this point.  
First, it is clear that politics does affect the economy and its performance. The channels of 
impact  come  largely  through:  (1)  disruption  to  normal  businesses  from  unsettling  political 
events  as  we  have  seen  in  the  last  two  years;  (2)  its  effects  on  the  country’s  image 
internationally which negatively effects our international sectors such as tourism and exports; 
and (3) its impact on investor confidence due to the perception of political instability. These 
are the short-term impacts or shocks, that once they happen, the economy will need to adjust 
to.  
My  second  observation  is  that  the  Thai  economy  so  far  has  been  resilient  in  adjusting  to 
such shocks. As I noted, the impact on the economy from the April and May political events 
seems  to  be  limited.  This  positive  quality  can  be  attributed  to  the  economy’s  strong 
fundamentals and the high sense of tolerance by the Thai public. If, however, such shocks 
are  more  frequent  or  of  a  longer  duration,  they  can  erode  the  capacity  of  the  economy  to 
adjust to future shocks.  
And the third observation is that political instability, if it persists or worsens further, will have 
adverse  implications  for  Thailand’s  long-term  economic  performance.  This  is  because 
political  instability  affects  policy  continuity  as  well  as  divert  the  attention  of  policymakers 
away from the longer-term issues. If that happens, the lack of a clear long-term policy can 
discourage  the  flows  of  future  investment,  both  domestic  and  foreign,  thereby  limiting  the 
economy’s capital formation and potential growth.  
Fortunately,  Thailand  is  not  yet  at  this  stage.  Investment  both  private  and  public,  are  still 
growing. And at the Bank of Thailand, we always approach the policy decision with a longer-
term  perspective.  Today’s  decision  to  begin  the  process  of  policy  normalization  is  a  clear 
example  of  decision  taking  with  a  view  of  preserving  longer-term  economic  and  financial 
stability. This is what we do and this is what we will continue to do.  
Let  me  stop  here.  I  hope  this  brief  remark  has  been  useful.  Again  I  want  to  thank  the 
Australian-Thai Chamber of Commerce for the invitation. Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 101/2010
