Hirohide Yamaguchi: Japan’s economy and monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Hirohide Yamaguchi, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at a Meeting with 
Business Leaders, Kagoshima, 24 February 2010. 
 Introduction 
I am honored today to have this opportunity to speak and to exchange views with business 
leaders in Kagoshima Prefecture. 
I  will  express  my  gratitude  for  your  cooperation  in  interviews  with  the  staffers  from  the 
Kagoshima  Branch  and  for  the  Bank  of  Japan’s  surveys.  Information  obtained  from  these 
interviews  and  surveys  is  invaluable  and  utilized  fully  in  assessing  economic  and  financial 
developments and conducting monetary policy. 
Kagoshima  Prefecture  and  the  Bank  have  a  deep-rooted  relationship.  The  founder  of  the 
Bank,  Mr.  Masayoshi  Matsukata,  and  the  first  governor  of  the  Bank,  Mr.  Shigetoshi 
Yoshihara, were both born in Kagoshima Prefecture. I have been looking forward to visiting 
the place which these two important figures, who were founding fathers to the Bank, hailed 
from. 
Before  exchanging  views  with  you,  I  will  talk  about  economic  conditions  and  price 
developments in Japan. 
I. 
Economic conditions in Japan 
The current state of the economy 
I will first talk about the current state of Japan’s economy. 
Japan experienced a sharp and substantial economic downturn from the autumn of 2008 to 
early  2009,  which  could  be  described  as  “falling  off  a  cliff.”  Fortunately,  however,  the 
economy stopped worsening in the spring of 2009 and has been picking up since then.  
There are three reasons behind the pick-up in Japan’s economy.  
First  is  the  fact  that  overseas  economies  have  started  to  recover.  Especially  emerging 
economies,  such  as  China,  have  been  growing  at  a  faster  pace  than  expected.  Currently, 
emerging economies are rushing to build infrastructures, such as roads and electrical power 
systems.  Moreover,  in  China  for  example,  the  penetration  rates  of  televisions  and 
automobiles are gradually increasing along with the rise in people’s income level. Emerging 
economies  are  experiencing  a  similar  phenomenon  as  what  Japan  experienced  during  its 
high-growth period, when, along with an improvement in the transportation network, the so-
called three major household items were penetrated into every family. Emerging economies 
are enjoying high growth due to the fact that, in addition to robust business fixed investment 
and private consumption, large-scale economic stimulus measures have been implemented 
to address the financial crisis since the autumn of 2008 and the effects of monetary easing 
around the world have been spreading.  
How  about  the  situations  in  the  U.S.  and  European  economies,  where  the  financial  crisis 
began?  These  advanced  economies  have  also  started  to  pick  up,  thanks  to  the 
implementation of large-scale fiscal policy measures and substantial monetary easing.  
The financial crisis had inflicted serious damage on these economies, and they have been 
suffering from various after-effects. For example, financial institutions still hold a considerable 
amount  of  impaired  assets,  and  remain  cautious  about  extending  loans.  In  terms  of 
households,  the  hearty  consumer  appetite  has  now  receded,  because  their  purchased 
BIS Review 21/2010 
 1
housing  has  declined  in  value  and  they  are  heavily  indebted  at  the  same  time.  Those 
problems have been continuing to weigh on the U.S. and European economies in achieving 
a full-fledged recovery. 
The  second  reason  behind  the  pick-up  in  Japan’s  economy  is  that  firms  have  been 
performing inventory restocking both at home and abroad. Firms have made rapid production 
and  inventory  adjustments  in  response  to  the  fall  in  demand.  Thereafter,  as  economies 
gradually  regained  stability,  prospects  for  sales  started  to  improve.  Firms  are  now  in  the 
phase to increase inventories so as to attain an appropriate inventory level. 
And the third reason is that domestic policy measures have been contributing significantly to 
the pick-up in Japan’s economy. For example, supported by measures to promote the sale of 
durable consumer goods, such as the eco-point system and tax reductions on purchases of 
environmentally  friendly  cars,  sales  of  electrical  appliances  and  automobiles  increased 
sharply. Moreover, due in part to successive implementation of economic measures, public 
works increased and contributed to the pick-up in the economy.  
With  those  three  reasons  in  the  background,  the  continued  increases  in  exports  and 
production have been the driving force for the pick-up in Japan’s economy. Hitting bottom in 
March  2009,  exports  have  been  increasing  for  nine  consecutive  months,  and  similarly, 
production has been increasing for ten consecutive months after hitting bottom in February 
2009. By industry, the performance of automobile-related and electrical machinery industries 
has  been  particularly  good.  Furthermore,  since  wide-ranging  industries  are  related  to  the 
industries of automobiles and electrical machinery, their good performance has contributed 
to the recovery in production in industries that supply materials and parts.  
While exports and production have continued to exhibit a steady increase, so far, recovery in 
domestic private demand, including business fixed investment and private consumption, has 
not gained momentum. 
Business fixed  investment  is  only  at  a  stage  where  its  decline  has  been  coming  to  a  halt. 
According to the Tankan (Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan), the Bank’s 
quarterly survey on firms, many firms, regardless of size or industry, are still responding that 
they feel that their capital stock is excessive. Moreover, a cautious investment stance can be 
derived from their capital investment plans for the current through next fiscal years.  
Household consumption is similar to business fixed investment in that it lacks momentum for 
recovery. The substantial reduction in winter bonus payments and the unemployment rate at 
an elevated level have also been accountable for this. While sales of electrical appliances 
and automobiles, which have been underpinned by policy measures, have been brisk, sales 
at department stores and supermarkets have continued to decrease. Moreover, as seen from 
the fall in sales in the food-service and travel industries, consumers have been tightening the 
purse strings. 
As explained, the current state of Japan’s economy exhibits a vivid contrast between brisk 
exports and production on one hand, and sluggish domestic private demand, on the other. 
Based on such recognition, at the Monetary Policy Meeting held last week, the Bank made 
an assessment, “Japan’s economy is picking up mainly due to various policy measures taken 
at  home  and  abroad,  although  there  is  not  yet  sufficient  momentum  to  support  a  self-
sustaining recovery in domestic private demand.” 
Outlook for the economy 
Now, what is the outlook for the economy? It depends on how the two contrasting factors 
develop.  Namely,  whether  exports  and  production  can  maintain  their  favorable  conditions, 
and  whether  momentum  will  build  up  for  a  self-sustaining  recovery  in  domestic  private 
demand. 
2 
 BIS Review 21/2010
In that regard, it is likely that the pace of increase in exports and production is bound to slow 
down.  The  momentum  for  restocking  is  bound  to  diminish  as  inventory  approaches  an 
appropriate  level.  It  will  also  become  difficult  to  expect  the  economic  stimulus  measures 
taken at home and abroad to exert the effects that they have initially had. On the other hand, 
it appears to take some more time before we can see a visible improvement in momentum 
for  self-sustaining  recovery  in  private  demand.  As  mentioned  earlier,  firms  have  been 
cautious for business fixed investment. Moreover, as anxiety over employment and income 
conditions is yet to be dispelled, it is difficult for households to loosen the purse strings. 
Taking  those  points  into  account,  the  momentum  for  the  pick  up  in  the  economy  might 
decrease, albeit temporarily. At that point, the regions that depend heavily on public works 
might strongly feel that the pace of improvement in the economy is slow.  
That  said,  the  economy  is  expected  to  regain  momentum  from  the  summer  of  this  year. 
Overseas,  emerging  economies  are  expected  to  continue  growing  at  a  high  pace.  In  the 
United  States  and  Europe,  the  growth  rate  is  likely  to  increase  as  the  after-effects  of  the 
financial crisis wear off. As a result, Japan’s exports and production are expected to maintain 
their  favorable  conditions,  and  that  benefit  will  spread  to  exporting  firms  as  well  as  their 
related  firms  in  Japan.  If  exports  and  production  increase,  firms’  sales  will  increase  and 
corporate profits will improve. Since capacity utilization will increase as the production level 
rises,  the  firms’  sense  of  excessive  capacity  will  fade  away,  albeit  moderately,  and  their 
motivation  for  business  fixed  investment  could  be  stimulated.  Furthermore,  such  favorable 
conditions in the corporate sector are likely to spread to the household sector. As corporate 
profits further improve, expansion in new employment and recovery in wages will likely take 
place. Moreover, the decline in anxiety about employment and future income will also have 
positive  effects  on  household  consumption.  As  such,  Japan’s  economy  as  a  whole  is 
expected to gradually increase its growth rate, with the improvements in the corporate sector 
originating  from  exports  spilling  over  to  the  household  sector.  The  Bank  releases  every 
quarter  its  outlook  for  economic  activity  and  prices  for  about  two  years  ahead.  The  real 
economic growth rate is projected to decline significantly in fiscal 2009 to minus 2.5 percent, 
but gradually go up to 1.3 percent in fiscal 2010 and 2.1 percent in fiscal 2011. 
Of course, the economy changes daily. If the external environment and behavioral patterns 
of firms and households change, the outlook might be revised upward or downward. Of those 
uncertainties, let me touch on two factors that I consider to be especially important.  
One is developments in overseas economies. As I have explained so far, Japan’s economic 
outlook  will  be  affected  greatly  by  overseas  economic  developments.  Of  those,  emerging 
economies  including  China  have  been  recovering  at  an  unexpectedly  high  pace.  In  that 
regard,  it  might  well  be  the  case  that  those  economies  grow  more  than  expected  again. 
However, as those emerging economies are growing at a high pace, we need to be aware of 
the risk that the economy might overheat. Since the United States and Europe still suffer the 
after-effects of the financial crisis, there is uncertainty about the outlook for their economies. 
In particular, there are varying views on how the impaired assets of financial institutions and 
excess debts of households will be cleared. In Japan, it took extremely long to resolve the 
impaired assets problem for financial institutions after the burst of the bubble. Whether such 
history will repeat warrants attention. 
The other factor is whether firms can come up with a vision for the future. In the outlook I 
have mentioned earlier, firms are expected to decide on business fixed investment and new 
employment  as  the  economy  gradually  improves.  However,  at  present,  it  is  even  more 
difficult  to  foresee  the  future,  due partly  to  the  financial  crisis.  If  a  pessimistic  view  for  the 
future spreads, firms’ spending activity will contract more than necessary. While it is a fact 
that  Japan’s  economy  faces  many  challenges,  it  is  critical  to  raise  firms’  expectations  of 
growth to meet those challenges. I will come back to that point later.  
BIS Review 21/2010 
 3
II. 
Price developments in Japan 
Current conditions and the outlook for prices 
Before moving to a longer-term issue of firms’ growth expectations, I will touch on the current 
conditions and outlook for prices in Japan. 
The  consumer  price  index  (CPI)  inflation  rate, excluding  fresh  food  and  on  a  year-on-year 
basis,  rose  to  2.4  percent  in  the  summer  of  2008,  but  the  pace  of  increase  moderated 
thereafter, and has been in the negative territory since the spring of 2009. In particular, the 
decline  accelerated  toward  the  summer  of  2009  to  mark  a  record  –2.4  percent  decline. 
Thereafter, the decline gradually moderated, and has recently been about –1 percent.  
On the back of such recent price developments, there are mainly two factors at work. One is 
the effects of developments in commodity prices, represented by crude oil prices. The other 
is the aggregate balance of domestic supply and demand. 
The first factor, the prices of commodities such as crude oil, nonferrous metals, and grains, 
surged from the beginning of 2007 to the summer of 2008, followed by a sharp decline. In 
particular, since the autumn of 2008 when the financial crisis occurred, the decline in global 
demand and the sudden contraction of financial institutions’ funds supply led to a plunge in 
commodity  prices.  That,  through  a  decline  in  the  prices  of  foods  and  petroleum  products, 
such  as  gasoline  and  kerosene,  reflecting  a  decline  in  import  prices,  exerted  downward 
pressure  on  overall  prices.  The  main  reason  why  the  rate  of  decline  in  the  overall  prices 
accelerated toward the summer of 2009 was that the plunge in commodity prices affected the 
prices with a time lag. Since then, however, commodity prices have been picking up as the 
global economy and financial markets have restored stability. Recently, prices of petroleum 
products  are  putting  somewhat  upward  pressure  on  the  overall  prices.  As  such,  the 
developments  in  commodity  prices  have  affected  Japan’s  prices  substantially  for  the  past 
one to two years. 
The balance of aggregate supply and demand in the economy, the second factor, has been 
affecting the trend of price developments. Since the autumn of 2008, the economic downturn 
induced  a  state  in  which  demand  is  well  short  of  supply.  Therefore,  not  only  the  prices  of 
petroleum products and foods but also the prices of wide-ranging products declined. Of the 
items surveyed in compiling consumer prices, 60 to 70 percent registered a decline. While 
Japan’s economy has been picking up during the past year, a significant imbalance between 
demand and supply has been continuing, reflecting the plunge in economic activity preceding 
the pick-up. Japan’s economy is expected to continue improving, but given that the pace of 
improvement is likely to remain moderate, downward pressure on prices will persist for the 
time being. The Bank’s outlook projects that the rate of change in the CPI, year on year, will 
remain  slightly  negative  until  fiscal  2011,  although  the  pace  of  decline  will  continue  to 
moderate. 
While I have mentioned two factors that affect price developments, there is another important 
factor.  That  is  people’s  view  of  future  prices,  or,  put  simply,  price  perspective.  In  the  real 
world,  many  prices  are  set  on  a  daily  basis.  Not  to  mention  the  prices  of  products  and 
services, wages, which are compensation for labor, are also a type of prices. The outlook for 
prices  will  also  have  an  effect  on  determining  those  prices.  For  example,  if  a  view  is 
entrenched that prices will decline significantly, such view will put downward pressure on the 
determination of actual prices and wages. 
While  people’s  price  perspective  is  an  important  factor,  one  cannot  directly  observe  firms’ 
and households’ views on prices. Therefore, the Bank tries to analyze and gauge such views 
by using various forms of research, including its own surveys, and financial market data. In 
light  of  such  analysis,  it  is  judged  that  firms’  and  households’  medium-  to  long-term  price 
expectations have not changed substantially. 
4 
 BIS Review 21/2010
I have so far explained the current state and outlook for prices. However, like the outlook for 
economic activity, the outlook for prices is also associated with various uncertainties. If you 
look at quite recent CPI developments, a pace that the decline in prices moderates seems to 
have  been  somewhat  slower  compared  with  the  extent  of  improvement  in  the  aggregate 
balance  between  supply  and  demand,  although  it  is  difficult  to  accurately  gauge  such 
aggregate balance. Moreover, since the constant price decline, namely deflation, has been 
persisting, whether the view on prices might shift downward warrants due attention. Inclusive 
of that point, the Bank will carefully check future price developments.  
Issues regarding deflation 
Now, I will briefly talk about the “deflation issue.” 
The  fundamental  cause  of  deflation  is  deterioration  in  the  balance  between  demand  and 
supply. Somewhat metaphorically, prices are compared to the temperature of the economy. 
If  we  follow  this  metaphor,  deflation,  that  is  a  situation  in  which  the  temperature  of  the 
economy  has  fallen,  reflects  the  fact  that  the  physical  fitness  of  Japan’s  economy  has 
declined. Attention should not only be paid to deflation as an outcome, but also to the risk 
that  deflation  may  deteriorate  economic  activity.  Recently,  it  seems  to  me  that  there  are 
increasing  examples  of  discussions  that  relate  various  economic  problems  to  deflation. 
Therefore,  it  is  all  the  more  important  to  carefully  discuss  what  adverse  affects  deflation 
might have on the economy. 
There are some problems that deflation can cause in the economy. For example, from the 
perspective of a central bank, there is a problem of the so-called “zero interest rate bound,” 
which is the problem that monetary policy actions are constrained since interest rates cannot 
be  reduced  to  below  zero.  Today,  I  will  discuss  somewhat  in  detail  the  deflation  issue 
particularly in terms of corporate management. 
Since the cause of deflation is a lack in demand, sales will inevitably fall in volume. A fall in 
the  prices  of  products,  together  with  such  a  fall  in  the  volume  of  sales,  will  substantially 
reduce firms’ sales. Of course, if firms manage to correspondingly reduce production costs 
and  fixed  costs,  profits  –  the  most  important  element  in  corporate  management  –  will  be 
secured despite a decline in sales. 
The  problem  lies  in  the  fact  that  reduction  on  various  costs  is  difficult.  Economic  history 
reveals  episodes  in  which  deflation  further  aggravated  economic  deterioration.  Such 
episodes show that, given that ex-post reduction in the nominal amount of corporate debts 
was difficult, economic activity deteriorated further through pressure on corporate profits and 
increase in the burden to repay debts. 
Another problem is that a decline in sales and corporate profits might contract firms’ future 
growth  expectations  and  firms  might  tend  to  refrain  from  challenging  new  business  fixed 
investment  or  technological  innovation.  Famous  U.K.  economist  John  Maynard  Keynes 
expressed  entrepreneurs’  challenging  spirit  as  “animal  spirit.”  In  the  economy  under 
deflation, it becomes difficult to secure such animal spirit. For example, under deflation, firms 
tend  to  focus  more  on  how  to  increase  the  price  competitiveness  of  the  existing  products 
rather  than  developing  a  new  field.  We  should  recognize  that  such  price  competitiveness 
alone will make it difficult to gain momentum for growth.  
So  far  I  have  pointed  out,  from  the  perspective  of  corporate  management,  several 
possibilities that deflation itself might induce deterioration in economic activity. To get back to 
what I was referring to the temperature of the economy, we are aware not only of a decline in 
temperature owing to bad health but also of a risk that a decline in temperature might worsen 
illness.  The  existence  of  such  risk  is  what  makes  overcoming  deflation  all  the  more 
important. 
To  overcome  deflation,  it  is  necessary  to  consistently  continue  with  therapy  for  the 
fundamental cause of a demand shortage. At the same time, to avoid creating a situation in 
BIS Review 21/2010 
 5
which the economy will be aggravated, originating from deflation, that is, deflation inducing 
deflation, it is important to act on firms so that their business sentiment will not weaken. In 
doing so, a key will be the recovery in private demand, including business fixed investment 
and household consumption. Raising firms’ growth expectations will be the basic premise for 
the recovery, as I mentioned earlier. In that regard, the challenge of overcoming deflation is 
directly linked with the challenge for Japan’s economy in a longer perspective. 
Medium- to long-term challenge confronting Japan’s economy  
III. 
Japan’s  longer-term  challenge  is  to  regain  the  confidence  of  firms  and  households  in  the 
outlook for Japan’s economy in the long term. To achieve this, we must discuss the issue of 
where to find Japan’s source of energy to achieve sustainable growth over the long term.  
It seems to me that those issues are frequently discussed by dividing demand into two large 
categories,  namely  domestic  demand  and  external  demand,  and  considering  which  of  the 
two  is  of  greater  importance.  In  doing  so,  the  phase  of  economic  expansion  from  2002  is 
often cited. Since the driving force for economic activity during this phase was the substantial 
increase  in  exports,  it  tended  to  give  the  impression  that  Japan’s  economy  was  led  by 
external demand. The major reason why this phase of economic expansion ended was the 
sharp deterioration in overseas economies triggered by the failure of Lehman Brothers in the 
autumn of 2008. From that experience, what tends to be drawn out is a lesson that economic 
growth led by domestic demand is desirable rather than vulnerable economic growth that is 
dependent  on  overseas  economies.  However,  we  should  not  neglect  the  fact  that,  even 
though  the  economic  expansion  from  2002  originated  from  exports,  there  was  active 
business  fixed  investment  aimed  at  exports.  Moreover,  through  the  effect  of  creating 
employment and wealth effects from rising stock prices, private consumption also increased. 
In  that  light,  I  believe  that  we  should  not  make  a  simple  choice  between  domestic  and 
external  demand,  but  rather  we  should  see  them  as  two  mutually  important  elements  for 
growth, including their transmission mechanisms.  
Currently, Asia is increasing its presence as the growth center of the global economy. Japan 
has  a  considerable  advantage  that  it  is  closely  located  to  the  area  with  great  growth 
momentum. To make the most of the benefits from globalization and capture demand from 
the  area  that  is  growing  strikingly  are  the  shortcut  for  Japan  in  gaining  the  energy  for 
economic  growth.  There  are  also  views  that  pay  attention  to  the  negative  connotations  of 
globalization,  such  as  severe  competition  with  overseas  products  and  shift  of  production 
bases to overseas by business counterparts. However, income gained through globalization 
has  been  invested  domestically,  and  as  a  result,  it  has  exerted  positive  effects  on  the 
domestic economy, too. I believe that it is necessary not to turn away from globalization by 
claiming its negative aspects only, and to actually take globalization positively, actively taking 
its advantages. 
The next question is how to capture the benefits from growth in overseas economies. To that 
end,  it  is  important  to  increase  exports  to  growing  markets,  such  as  those  in  Asia.  In 
emerging  economies,  huge  markets  are  being  formed.  From  now  on,  as  people’s  level  of 
income increases further, the level of products and services that people seek is also likely to 
rise. This is a great opportunity for Japan, given its strength in relatively high-end products. It 
should  be  noted  that  the  areas  in  which  growth  is  expected  are  not  limited  to  durable 
consumer goods and general machinery, which have been Japan’s major exporting items, or 
the  environment-related  areas,  where  Japan  currently  takes  the  lead  in  technology.  For 
example,  quality  agricultural  products  or  unique  local  specialties  are  the  areas  in  which 
potential demand is great. Also, while it may be difficult to conjure from the word “exports,” 
tourism,  which  invites  foreign  tourists  to  Japan,  also  means  exporting  added  value  in  the 
form of services. Considering these points, I believe that the areas that are rich in tourism 
resources have potential for high growth. 
6 
 BIS Review 21/2010
Moreover,  there  are  other  channels  for  capturing  the  benefits  from  overseas  economies. 
Especially, profits from overseas investment are increasing substantially. If firms manage to 
tailor  production  technologies,  which  have  been  fostered  in  the  severe  environment  for 
competition  in  Japan,  and  detailed  services,  such  as  logistics  and  retails  that  have 
responded to the high requirements of consumers in Japan, to the needs of overseas local 
markets, there is sufficient room for further raising their profitability.  
Of  course,  it  is  also  necessary  to  use  the  energy  for  growth,  captured  from  overseas 
economies  through  these  channels,  to  activate  the  domestic  economy.  In  years  to  come, 
amid the low birth rate and the aging population, Japan will face an unprecedented shrinkage 
of population that no other country has experienced. If we look only at this aspect, it will be a 
burden  in  activating  the  domestic  market.  At  the  same  time,  however,  there  are  business 
opportunities  brought  about  by  changes  in  the  demographics.  In  this  light,  businesses 
targeted at the elderly, not only in terms of medical care and welfare, but also development 
of products and services tailored to the needs of the elderly, have substantial potential for 
expansion and diversification. I believe that there remains sufficient room for potential growth 
in Japan. 
The question is how to convert growth potential into actual growth. This cannot be achieved 
without firms’ technological innovations in accordance with changes in the demand structure. 
At  the  same  time,  I  emphasize  the  significance  of  the  roles  of  the  finance  and  policy 
authorities in supporting firms’ efforts to this end.  
For example, to survive in growing markets, particularly those in Asia, firms around the world 
are fiercely competing against each other. In this situation, Japanese firms have the strength 
since their technological skills are high to start with and, assured by such skills, the quality of 
their  products  is  also  high.  However,  unless  such  strength  matches  the  needs  from  new 
markets,  it  will  not  be  possible  to  fully  capture  potential  demand.  Firms  need  to  make 
technological innovations in various aspects, including thorough market research and price-
setting  strategies,  in  addition  to  product  development.  I  used  the  term  “technological 
innovations” to refer to the overall corporate efforts to capture such potential demand. 
From the viewpoint of firms, the promotion of technological innovations means that there will 
be  correspondingly  additional  costs,  since  they  will  need  to  invest  in  human  and 
management resources. Looking back, since the 1990s, the growth rate of the economy and 
the inflation rate have remained low in Japan. And, while low interest rates continued for a 
prolonged  period  and  large-scale  public  investments  were  implemented  constantly,  the 
metabolism  of  the  economy  tended  to  be  low,  and  some  firms  and  parts  of  the  corporate 
sector with low productivity remained. As a result, firms’ profit expectations overall seem to 
have  declined,  preventing  their  endeavors  to  promote  drastic  technological  innovation.  I 
believe  it  will  also  be  necessary  to  reconsider  what  factors  are  needed  to  be  effective  in 
further encouraging firms’ attempts to achieve technological innovations.  
As  a  factor  that  will  support  firms’  efforts  toward  technological  innovations,  I  believe  that 
finance  plays  one  of  the  crucial  roles.  The  basic  function  of  finance  is  to  search  for 
businesses and projects with prospects, and allocate funds to them. For firms, who are the 
borrowers, the hurdle in embarking on a new business will be less difficult as they can gain 
funds from financial institutions and financial markets. At the same time, it is important for the 
financial  side  to  encourage  firms’  efforts  in  improving  profitability,  by  setting  lending 
standards that correspond to projects with low profitability. There are many small firms with 
high  technological  skills  in  Japan.  Surveys  on  firms  show  that  the  smaller  the  size  of 
business,  the  more  firms  that  answer  that  their  financial  positions  are  weak.  If  their 
technological skills are not fully used due to financial constraints, it will cause a significant 
loss for the overall economy, too. Therefore, I hope that financial institutions will make careful 
assessments  and  facilitate  the  smooth  provision  of  funds  to  businesses  and  projects  with 
prospects. 
BIS Review 21/2010 
 7
Of  course,  the  authorities  also  play  important  roles.  During  the  process  in  which  firms 
promote technological innovation, not all the cases will lead to success. Moreover, if a sector 
grows  by  introducing  new  technologies,  behind  that  might  be  a  sector  that  has  been  left 
behind  from  the  wave  of  technological  innovation.  For  the  economy  as  a  whole,  it  is 
necessary  that,  through  such  a  process,  human  resources  and  funds  are  transferred 
smoothly to more growing areas. However, it is not always true that a person who worked in 
a different area until yesterday can easily adapt to a new environment today. In that regard, I 
believe that the policy authorities should work to enhance economic metabolism through the 
smooth  transfer  of  human  and  management  resources,  and  to  prepare  a  safety  net  to 
alleviate potential friction associated with such transfers. 
The role of the Bank of Japan 
IV. 
I have explained the challenges confronting Japan’s economy. Those challenges should be 
tackled  steadily  by  private  firms  and  the  authorities  from  their  respective  standpoints.  Of 
course, the Bank should also play an important role in that context.  
For the immediate challenge of overcoming deflation, the Bank considers the following two 
approaches as important and is steadily carrying them out. 
The first is to aim at removing the fundamental cause of deflation. That means to resolve the 
disparity between supply and demand in a sustainable manner. Based on such a viewpoint, 
the Bank has been implementing drastic monetary easing.  
The target level of the policy rate, an overnight interest rate, was reduced to 0.1 percent in 
December 2008 and has remained there since then. The 0.1 percent level of effectively zero 
interest  rate  is  currently  the  lowest  policy  rate  among  central  banks  around  the  globe. 
Moreover,  in  December  2009,  the  Bank  introduced  a  new  funds-supplying  operation  to 
encourage  a  further  decline  in  longer-term  interest  rates  in  the  money  market  through 
provision of ample funds. As a result, the effectively zero interest rate is spreading to funds 
with  even  longer  maturities.  Through  implementing  those  measures,  the  Bank  aims  at 
preparing an extremely accommodative financial environment and thereby promoting firms’ 
capital investment and household consumption. 
The other approach is to prevent people’s view on prices from worsening. In that regard, the 
Bank further clarified the stance that it is important to achieve a state that the year-on-year 
rate of change in the CPI is positive. That is part of the approach to stabilizing people’s view 
on prices. 
For  Japan’s  economy  to  overcome  deflation  and  return  to  a  sustainable  growth  path  with 
price  stability,  the  Bank  will  continue  to  consistently  make  contributions.  And,  if  judged 
necessary,  due,  for  example,  to  economic  and  price  developments  as  well  as  changes  in 
financial conditions, the Bank is always prepared to implement appropriate measures at an 
appropriate timing. 
Moreover, as for the other medium- to long-term challenge of exploring a long-term vision of 
Japan’s  economy,  the  best  contribution  the  Bank  can  make  as  a  central  bank  will  be  to 
support  the  economy  in  achieving  a  sustainable  growth  with  price  stability.  The  Bank  will 
strive to achieve economic and price conditions in which there is little future uncertainty, so 
that firms can actively expand their business with confidence.  
Concluding remarks 
I have been explaining Japan’s economic conditions and the challenges confronting Japan. 
To conclude, let me talk about my impression about Kagoshima’s economy.  
Kagoshima’s industrial structure may be characterized by the fact that the weight of export-
related  firms  are  little,  compared  with  the  national  average,  while  that  of  the  agriculture, 
8 
 BIS Review 21/2010
forestry, and fisheries industry and the construction industry is considerable. For that reason, 
it might perhaps be difficult to feel the pick-up in the economy originating from exports. In 
fact, I have been informed that, through interviews by the Bank’s Kagoshima branch, many 
firms recognize the lagging improvement in the business environment, and express concern 
about the outlook for the economy.  
Nevertheless, room for potential growth in this region is by no means small. First of all, this 
region has a big advantage over other regions in Japan since it is close to the growing East 
Asian region. For example, I have heard that efforts are being made to deepen the Shibushi 
port-based  trade  relationship  with  Asian  countries.  Since  Asian  countries  are  expected  to 
continue to grow, Kagoshima has a great chance to make a leap forward through expansion 
of sales channels to these markets, and research on markets needs as well as development 
of products tailored to such needs. Kagoshima also has high potential for growth in exploring 
tourism demand from other areas in Japan as well as the Asian region since it is blessed with 
rich tourism resources such as a world heritage and many hot spring resorts. On this point, 
the start of Kyushu shinkansen line’s full service will largely help to invite tourists from both 
within Japan as well as overseas. 
Above  all,  Kagoshima’s  strength  lies  in  its  rich  specialties,  as  represented  by  livestock 
products  and  liquor.  I  have  heard  that  Kagoshima  has  been  making  a  prefecture-wide 
agricultural promotion based on the key words of “foods and agriculture,” and it is expected 
that  such  efforts  will  pay  off.  Those  specialties  will  be  traced  back  to  various  painstaking 
efforts to overcome severe agricultural conditions of volcanic ash soil. People of the region 
have  overcome  unfavorable  conditions  through  various  devices  and  have  achieved  the 
growth in Kagoshima’s economy. That overlaps what is required for Japan’s economy in the 
years  to  come.  I  hope  that  you  will  further  make  forward-looking  efforts  in  search  of  new 
opportunities. 
The Bank will also make consistent efforts so that firms can have bright visions toward the 
future. 
BIS Review 21/2010 
 9
