José Manuel González-Páramo: The regulatory and supervisory reform in 
Europe 
Speech  by  Mr  José  Manuel  González-Páramo,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
European Central Bank, at the presentation of the Report “Observatorio sobre la reforma de 
los mercados financieros 2009, realizado por la Fundación de Estudios Financieros”, Madrid, 
22 January 2010. 
 Introduction 
Ladies and Gentlemen,1 
I am very glad to participate this morning in the presentation of the latest “Observatorio” from 
the  Fundación  de  Estudios  Financieros  (FEF).2  This  year’s  report  is  dedicated  to  the  very 
important issue of the Reform of the European Financial Markets. The current financial crisis 
has  revealed  a  number  of  deficiencies  in  the  European  and  international  regulatory 
framework,  which  need  to  be  addressed  in  order  to  place  our  financial  systems  and 
economies on a more solid footing. 
As  a  result,  a  number  of  initiatives  have  been  undertaken  in  the  relevant  European  and 
international  fora.  The  number  and  breadth  of  these  initiatives  is  impressive  and  very 
promising.  The  report  from  FEF  provides  a  very  comprehensive  survey  of  all  the  current 
initiatives, identifying the various strands of work and summarising the main implications for 
the financial sector and markets. I congratulate the authors on this exhaustive report, which 
represents  a  very  useful  reference  for  whoever  is  interested  in  understanding  the  ongoing 
developments in the regulatory and supervisory field.  
Of  course,  the  reader  may  not  necessarily  agree  with  all  conclusions  of  the  report.  In 
particular, the report identifies a major risk of over-regulation and instead stresses the virtues 
from industry self-regulation. I beg to disagree. In my view, the main risk right now is not to 
do too much, but rather that we do too little.  
There is a serious risk that the gradual improvement of conditions in the financial markets 
and the banking industry may diminish the sense of urgency and necessity of implementing 
reforms identified as essential to prevent the occurrence of similar crises in the future. Albert 
Hirschman, the American economist, noted that in many of the debates that precede social 
and  political  reforms  of  historical  magnitude,  the  proposed  changes  are  typically  met  with 
three  arguments:  (1)  that  they  would  produce  perverse  effects,  (2)  that  they  would  be 
ineffectual, and (3) that they would jeopardise previous achievements.3 I am afraid that we 
are now increasingly hearing the same arguments in the context of the debate on financial 
reform.  
The crisis which began in the summer of 2007 has developed over time into one of the most 
disruptive and costly crises for our economies and societies that the world has experienced 
in  many  decades.  Therefore,  both  public  authorities  and  the  financial  market  participants 
have  a  collective  responsibility  to  do  whatever  is  needed  to  address  weaknesses  in  the 
                                                 
1  
I  am  very  grateful  to  Katri  Mikkonen  for  valuable  inputs  and  to  Fátima  Pires,  Fabio  Recine  and  Panagiotis 
Strouzas for useful comments. 
2   Fundación  de  Estudios  Financieros  (2009),  Observatorio  sobre  la  Reforma  de  los  Mercados  Financieros 
Europeos, Papeles de la Fundación N. 34. 
3   Albert O. Hirschman (1991), The Rethoric of Reaction: Perversity, Futility, Jeopardy, Cambridge MA; Harvard 
University Press. 
BIS Review 6/2010 
 1
regulatory and supervisory framework in order to provide sounder foundations to our financial 
systems.  
Let me now stress some of the areas in which substantial work has been achieved to design 
and implement reforms. 
Three key areas of reform: credit rating agencies, hedge funds and compensation 
practices 
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  substantive  progress  has  been  made  in  the  regulatory  and 
supervisory reform as a response to the financial crisis. A remarkable amount of technical 
work  has  been  undertaken  in  a  demanding  timeframe.  All  relevant  initiatives  have  been 
coordinated globally, and the European Union has been a frontrunner in a number key areas. 
Three areas in which much progress has been made are: credit rating agencies, hedge funds 
and compensation practices.  
• 
investment 
that  alternative 
As regards credit rating agencies, a new EU regulation subjecting such agencies to 
mandatory registration and oversight in order to increase transparency and reduce 
conflicts of interest in the rating process has already entered into force in December 
2009.  
As  for  hedge  funds,  the  European  Commission  has  proposed  a  Directive  on 
alternative  investment  fund  managers.  This  proposal,  which  is  currently  under 
debate,  provides 
to 
authorisation  and  harmonised  regulatory  standards,  including  minimum  capital  as 
well as disclosure requirements.  
On  compensation  practices,  the  European  Commission  was  among  the  first  to 
incorporate  in  a  Directive  proposal  the  Principles  developed  by  the  Financial 
Stability  Board  (FSB) 
for  sound  compensation  practices,  with  a  projected 
implementation  date  of  end-2010.  In  this  context,  the  EU  was  leading  the 
international agenda in developing further guidance to align compensation practices 
with long-term value creation and discourage excessive risk-taking in the short-term. 
To  recall,  the  G20  leaders  in  Pittsburgh  in  September  endorsed  the  FSB 
implementation  standards  that  aim  to  defer  bonus  payments,  disallow  guaranteed 
bonuses, and introduce a claw-back clause. 
fund  managers  be  subject 
  Recent proposals on how to strengthen the prudential framework 
In addition, agreement has been reached globally on a comprehensive set of measures to 
strengthen the prudential framework in response to the crisis. In the EU, the Commission’s 
proposal for an amendment of the Capital Requirements Directive of July 2009 includes the 
internationally agreed stricter requirements for trading book and re-securitisations.  
Moreover, the recently issued proposals of the Basel Committee aim at improving the quality, 
consistency  and  transparency  of  capital  for  credit  institutions  as  well  as  developing  a 
framework for liquidity risk. As a consequence, the quality of capital, especially the so called 
Tier-1 capital which is of utmost importance for loss-absorption on going concern and crisis 
situations, will significantly improve.  
• 
The  risk  coverage  of  capital  requirements  will  be  further  strengthened  for  the 
counterparty risk related to derivatives, repos and securities financing activities, and 
incentives  will  be  increased  to  move  OTC  derivative  exposures  to  central 
counterparties and exchanges.  
2 
 BIS Review 6/2010
   A leverage ratio will be introduced as a supplementary measure to the Basel II risk 
control framework to curb excessive balance sheet growth and to safeguard against 
model risk and measurement error.  
Capital  buffers  and  forward-looking  provisioning  will  be  introduced  to  mitigate  the 
inherent procyclical nature of financial activities.  
Finally, a global minimum liquidity risk standard for internationally active banks will 
be  put  in  place,  requiring  banks  to  hold  sufficient  high-quality  liquid  assets  to 
withstand financial stress.  
These proposed measures have the support of the Group  of Central Bank Governors and 
Heads of Supervision, who requested the Committee to deliver a fully calibrated and finalised 
package of reforms by the end of 2010. The Commission envisages the timely incorporation 
of the aforementioned upcoming regulatory changes in the EU framework.  
Recent developments in European prudential framework 
Finally, international cooperation has been strongly reinforced and supervisory colleges for 
large  complex  financial  groups  have  been  established.  At  EU  level,  the  setting  up  and 
functioning of colleges is provided for in the EU regulatory framework and is well advanced.  
Looking ahead, legislative proposals should fully reflect the ongoing work at international and 
EU level aiming at enhancing the resilience of the financial system and protect consumers 
and investors against the impact of excessive risk taking and irresponsible market practices. 
Main priorities include: (1) finalising the reform of the prudential framework; (2) addressing 
the  risks  posed  by  systemically  important  institutions;  and  (3)  setting  a  framework  for 
macro-prudential supervision. 
• 
First, the strengthened prudential framework currently being developed needs to be 
properly  and  timely  finalised.  The  agreed  measures,  when  implemented,  will 
address many of the shortcoming highlighted by the financial crisis, and will increase 
the ability of financial institutions to withstand shocks and thus the resilience of the 
financial  system.  In  this  context,  let  me  highlight  the  importance  of  a  thorough 
impact  assessment,  to  be  carried  out  in  the  course  of  this  year,  before  the  final 
calibration of the framework can be made. The exact timing of implementation has, 
equally, to be carefully considered, so that the economic and financial recovery will 
not  be  endangered.  In  this  context,  adequate  transition  and  grandfathering 
arrangements should be ensured. 
Second, legislative reform also needs to address the moral hazard stemming from 
systemically important financial institutions. In a resilient financial system it cannot 
and should not be taken for granted that authorities will always come to the rescue. 
The focus of the ongoing work by the FSB in this regard is threefold:  
1. 
It  seeks  to  ensure  that  financial  institutions,  whatever  their  size  and 
interconnectedness, should not cause undue distress to the functioning of the 
financial system and to the economy as a whole, if and when mismanagement 
drive  them  to  bankruptcy.  Possible  tools  include  introducing  capital  and 
liquidity surcharges, or constraining size or the range of activities, to reduce 
the externalities of systemically important institutions to the society.  
The  core  financial  infrastructures  and  markets  need  to  be  strengthened,  for 
example  via  the  promotion  of  central  counterparty  clearing  and  revision  of 
supervisory standards on financial market infrastructures.  
2. 
 3.  We also need to review resolution regimes and bankruptcy laws to ensure an 
orderly  winding-down  of  systemic  cross-border  financial  institutions.  In  this 
respect, the European Commission has already launched a public consultation 
BIS Review 6/2010 
 3
 on measures for a new EU framework for crisis management in the banking 
sector, in which policy options as regards early intervention, bank resolution 
and harmonised insolvency procedures are considered. In addition, it will be 
relevant  to  enhance  the  framework  for  coordination  among  the  relevant 
authorities for financial stability in case of crisis.  
to 
the 
the 
from 
financial  crisis  relates 
The  third  and  final  area  relates  to  macro-prudential  supervision.  One  of  the  key 
lessons  stemming 
importance  of 
understanding  and  assessing  the  degree  of  “interconnectedness”  between  market 
participants. In particular, the crisis demonstrated that the nature and magnitude of 
the systemic risk in the financial sector is related not only to the potential illiquidity or 
insolvency of large banks or other major regulated financial institutions, but it also 
depends  on  the  close  intertwining  between  financial  institutions,  markets  and 
infrastructures.  The  financial  stability  framework  needs  to  be  able  to  identify  and 
assess  systemic  risks  corresponding  to  the  degree  of  “interconnectedness”  I  just 
mentioned.  In  this  context,  macro-prudential  oversight  would  focus  on  factors  and 
risks  that  can  affect  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  as  a  whole  and  therefore 
would  complement  micro-prudential  supervision,  which  looks  at  the  stability  of 
individual financial institutions. 
Macroprudential supervision in the euro area: The European Systemic Risk Board 
Macroprudential oversight will be the key task of the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB), 
which is built on the proposals of the High Level Group chaired by Jacques de Larosière. The 
European  Commission’s  legislative  proposals  for  the  establishment  and  functioning  of  the 
ESRB  have  received  the  support  by  the  ECOFIN  and  the  EU  Council.  The  European 
Parliament  is  currently  considering  the  proposals  in  its  turn.  Let  me  also  mention  that  the 
ECB/Eurosystem  expressed  its  stance  in  the  opinion  adopted  on  26  October.  2009  It 
welcomed the broad agreement reached by ECOFIN on the draft legal texts regarding the 
establishment  of  the  ESRB  and  the  involvement  of  the  ECB  in  supporting  the  ESRB.  As 
stated  in  its  Opinion,  the  ECB  has  decided  that  it  stands  ready  to  provide  the  analytical, 
statistical, administrative and logistical support to the ESRB, including the Secretariat of the 
ESRB.  
What  will  be  the  activities  of  the  ESRB  and  what  is  its  value  added?  The  ESRB  will  be 
expected  to  actively  monitor  the  various  sources  of  risk  to  financial  stability  in  the  EU  – 
across  countries  and  across  financial  sectors,  and  also  taking  into  account  global 
developments. As a result of this monitoring, the ESRB can identify the risks and analyse in-
depth  how  they  could  impact  the  financial  system.  Stress-testing  and  other  methodologies 
could assist the risk prioritisation exercise.  
The  value-added  to  be  provided  by  the  ESRB  is  to  link,  in  particular,  macro-economic 
conditions, structural developments, and key vulnerabilities of financial institutions. This will 
permit to identify system-wide risks for the benefit of regulatory and supervisory policies. The 
monitoring, assessment and collection of information on sources of risk to be conducted by 
the  ESRB,  at  the  level  of  the  entire  EU,  is  of  the  essence,  given  the  advanced  financial 
integration  of  the  internal  market.  In  addition,  the  risks  for  Europe  stemming  from  global 
sources will also need to be considered, also in coordination with the IMF and the FSB.  
The financial stability monitoring in the EU as a whole will provide significant analytical and 
informational challenges. A large part of the effectiveness of the ESRB will rely on the quality 
and solidity of the analysis and information underlying its financial stability assessments. It 
will be important to set-up efficient arrangements between the ESRB and the new European 
Supervisory Authorities for the mutual cooperation and exchange of information, as foreseen 
in the Commission’s legislative proposals. This would allow avoiding multiple reporting from 
financial institutions. 
4 
 BIS Review 6/2010
In order to support the new European macro-prudential function, as decided by the Ecofin, 
the ECB will provide analytical, statistical, administrative and logistical support, also drawing 
on  the  technical  advice  of  the  27  national  central  banks  and  supervisors  of  the  Member 
States. Accordingly, we will optimise our present capabilities and infrastructure in the areas 
of  financial  stability  monitoring,  macro-economic  analysis,  and  collection  of  statistical 
information,  to  the  benefit  of  the  ESRB.  This  aims  at  reaping  the  maximum  synergies  in 
terms of expertise, resources and infrastructures with the existing central bank activities in 
the EU. To this aim, preparatory work is already under way.  
Let  me  now  conclude  by  saying  that  although  much  has  been  achieved  to  improve  the 
European  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework,  a  lot  still  remains  to  be  done.  This  is  no 
time  for  complacency.  We  still  need  to  make  further  progress  to  create  a  supervisory  and 
regulatory  framework,  both  micro  and  macroprudential,  in  which  a  strong  and  competitive 
financial  system  can  enjoy  sustainable  growth.  Europe  should  play  a  leading  role in  these 
developments.  
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 6/2010 
 5
