Loi M Bakani: Launching of the Ekonomic Society of Papua New Guinea 
Address by Mr Loi M Bakani, Governor of the Bank of Papua New Guinea, on the occasion 
of  the  launching  of  the  Ekonomic  Society  of  Papua  New  Guinea  Inc,  Port  Moresby, 
24 June 2010. 
 Interim President Mr. James Kiele, the rest of the interim executives of the Ekonomic Society 
of  PNG,  fellow  economists,  ladies  and  gentlemen.  I  am  indeed  honoured  to  have  been 
invited to officiate at the launching of the Ekonomic Society of Papua New Guinea Inc. It is 
an occasion that you and I can feel proud that we belong to the economic profession, and 
now have a common venue to express our views and contribute meaningfully to debate and 
discussion on public policy in PNG. 
Before  the  accountants  can  account  for  how  money  is  spent,  before  the  engineers  can 
design bridges and roads and construct them, and before the lawyers can write our laws and 
regulations,  and  take  up  legal  cases,  economists  must  decide  on  the  allocation  of  scarce 
resources – the economic policies that govern and dictate: the delivery of public goods and 
services; and private investment and business decisions. One cannot help but think why is it 
then  that  in  PNG  there  has  not  been  a  professional  body  of  economists,  just  like  the 
accountants, engineers and lawyers do have their professional bodies. To have a society or 
association of economists and thus such an occasion today is therefore long over due. As 
the saying goes, it is better late than never. So it is a proud and happy moment for everyone 
who has achieved an academic qualification in economics or business studies or economics 
major in a degree and who are employed in private or public sector applying some form of 
economic  technique  or  knowledge  in  one  way  or  another,  or  who  are  still  in  the  process 
seeking employment, or who are self employed in town or in village applying what ever little 
economic and decision making skills they have. 
Why an Economics Professional Body? 
There are some obvious and not so obvious reasons and purposes to have a professional 
body for economists. I am happy to note that a lot of the reasons and purposes are provided 
for in the Society’s constitution. 
Some of these are as follows. 
(i) 
to  promote  teaching,  study  and  application  of  economics  and  to  contribute  to  the 
development  and  maintenance  of  standards  for  education  and  instruction  for 
economists in Papua New Guinea; 
There is a 
 
 
 
  (ii) 
 
Need for a good number of well trained economists, even to masters and PhD level 
Institutions offering economics courses must be of international standard 
Need for institutions offering economics courses to achieve and maintain parity with 
international standards 
Need for adequate teaching staff and quality learning facilities including specialized 
library with current titles and up-to-date issues of professional journals 
Fostering of proper application of economics as a decision-making tool in all facets 
of public policy and private investment decision making 
to encourage professional development and employment of economists; 
In public and private sectors 
BIS Review 106/2010 
 1
(iii) 
 
 (iv) 
  (v) 
 
(vi) 
 (vii) 
 (viii) 
 (ix) 
facilitate  dialogue  between  governmental  organisations,  nongovernment 
to promote professional discussion of matters concerning the national economy; 
Need for regular professional dialogues for fostering sound alternative rational policy 
outcomes 
Need  for  independent  evaluation  and  commentary  on  official  public  policies  and 
issues 
to conduct independent research and make impartial commentary on public policy 
matters without fear or favour; 
Need  to  reduce  current  dependence  on  overseas  experts  and  researchers  with 
indigenous and home grown knowledge through professional research 
Independent research and analysis can complement official policy and also provide 
alternative insights 
to  make proactive and timely contributions to research and development of public 
policy; and 
Need for regular forum or avenue for exchange of ideas 
to 
organisations, community-based organisations and the private sector; 
As  a  facilitator  and  coordinator  in  networking  partnerships  between  all  sectors  of 
society 
to  collaborate  with  other  organisations  both  in  country  and  overseas  to  further  its 
objectives; 
To ensure parity with international body of knowledge, trends and reinforcement of 
professional standards 
to  publish  journals  and  other  publications  consistent  with  the  advancement  of  the 
objectives of the Society; 
For imparting and dissemination of knowledge 
Capture research findings for promotion of proactive dialogue and for historical or 
inter-temporal comparisons 
to  organise  and  participate  in  gatherings  such  as  conferences,  forums,  meetings 
and  workshops  for  discussion  of  economics  and  other  matters  at  domestic  and 
international levels; 
For proactive exchange of ideas and findings 
For encouraging professional development 
 
 
Beside  all  these,  if  we  get  ourselves  organized  the  Society  can  get  recognized  by  the 
Government and other authorities, and can be called upon for advice and representation in 
various forums and organizations. Economists are needed in the evolving economy of ours in 
this changing and complex age of globalization. For economists have to make the important 
decisions macro and micro economic policies and other public policies, planning for delivery 
of goods and services to our people before; the lawyers to ensure the legal and governance 
issues  are  in  place  and  are  followed;  the  engineers/architects  to  design  and  oversee 
constructions of bridges, roads and buildings; and the accountants account and audit where, 
what and how the funds were spent (according to budget or if there is a case of misuse of 
funds). 
Finally,  the  Society  can  be  the  vehicle,  at  the  least,  for  us  get  to  know  each  other  in  our 
profession and exchange views and ideas, and socialize. Networking is an important element 
of every professional’s working life today. 
2 
 BIS Review 106/2010
I as the Governor of the Central Bank of PNG welcome very much the birth of this Society 
and  encourage  all  who  are  eligible  to  become  members.  I  have  asked  all  my  Economics 
graduate staff to join. The Bank supports this course as evident by it being the very first entity 
to  make  a  financial  donation  to  the  Society,  under  the  former  Governor.  This  fund  has 
enabled the Society to set itself up and eventually arrange this launching. I encourage other 
employers of economists to assist the Society in its endeavours so it can grow and meet its 
strategic  objectives,  and  for  the  enhancement  of  the  profession  in  the  country.  I  note  and 
appreciate all the efforts by the four interim executives in initiating and ensuring the birth of 
this  Society  through  the  formal  incorporation  of  the  Society  by  IPA  under  Association 
Incorporation Act on 19th December 2007 and in organizing the launching. It has taken this 
long to have the Society formally launched but the important thing is the moment has arrived 
and it is happening now. Thank you very much for that. 
I am also pleased to note that the Society will hold its first full meeting in one month time to 
elect  the  first  full  office  bearers.  I  encourage  all  you  potential  members  to  pay  up  your 
membership fees so you can be able to vote on that day and support the Society to see it 
mature through time from this birth. 
Let  us  take  pride  in  our  profession  and  in  this  moment  –  the  launching  of  the  Ekonomic 
Society  of  Papua  New  Guinea.  With  all  these  words,  I  hereby  declare  that  the  Ekonomic 
Society of Papua New Guinea is launched. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 106/2010 
 3
