Patrick Honohan: Sketching a broad economic picture including 
employment prospects 
Address  by  Mr  Patrick  Honohan,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  &  Financial  Services 
Authority of Ireland, to the Trinity Alumni Career Network, Trinity College, Dublin, 9 February 
2010. 
 What can I say to graduates seeking employment in this, the deepest of recessions in living 
memory?  There  is  much  to  talk  about.  In  these  opening  remarks  of  your  sessions,  I  will 
confine myself to sketching the broad economic picture in which your employment prospects 
will be determined. 
First let me confirm that, in my view, the overall thrust of macroeconomic policy and the pace 
and  scale  of  budgetary  adjustment  seems  about  right  to  me  as  a  basis  for  building  a 
sustained recovery. Few are now tempted here to suggest a Keynesian demand expansion 
fuelled by a larger budget deficit. Of course it would be nice to have the additional demand 
injected  into  the  economy,  but  this  cannot  come  from  the  budget  in  our  present 
circumstances. 
If we needed any reminder of how impossible such an approach would be, we need look no 
further than the recent movements in interest yields on the government debt of some other 
euro-area  countries.  Whether  we  like  it  or  not,  governments  need  to  keep  convincing  the 
markets that their budgetary and borrowing plans are viable and will be delivered. 
Interest rates on Irish government bonds, much lower than they were only a few months ago, 
have remained relatively unscathed during these past weeks of heightened tensions in the 
international  markets  for  sovereign  debt.  This  is  clearly  because  of  the  degree  to  which 
foreign  confidence  has  been  building  in  Ireland’s  ability  and  determination  to  restore  the 
public  finances  along  a  clearly  defined  strategy,  as  exemplified  by  the  relatively  tough 
measures already taken. 
Continued  adherence  to  this  disciplined  path  will  result  in  lower  borrowing  rates  for  the 
government  –  and  will  help  accelerate  the  budgetary  correction  and  reduce  the  long-term 
drag of debt servicing as we come out of the recession. The broad consensus on this need is 
one of Ireland’s great strengths in tackling the recovery. 
One of the factors keeping borrowing rates higher than they might be is the financial market’s 
concern about the future costs to the Government of recapitalising the banking system. This 
cost will become clearer over the coming weeks, as the NAMA purchases clear the way for 
capital-raising  exercises  by  the  banks.  It  will  of  course  be  a  sizable  sum,  though  some  of 
what is needed may be raised by the banks themselves through such steps as asset sales, 
new  issues  of  equity,  and  discounted  debt  buybacks.  Still,  it  is  pretty  clear  that  the 
government will be acquiring additional equity stakes. While I’m not yet in a position to put a 
number  on  it,  I  can  say  that  the  overall  net  cost  to  the  State  of  recapitalisation  will  be 
manageable. 
Indeed, the recapitalisation will ensure that the banks are clearly seen as strong, financially 
self-reliant entities able to fund themselves in the market into the future. By the same token, 
the  overhang  of  the  banking  situation  on  the  state’s  finances  will  be  removed.  These 
transactions are thus a key ingredient in moving both the banking and the budgetary situation 
forward.  As  the  market  digests  and  acknowledges  these  new  realities,  we  can  expect  a 
further tightening of borrowing spreads. 
This  may  all  seem  a  little  removed  from  your  immediate  preoccupation,  which  is  the  job 
market. But I think you will agree that an overall economic pick-up in Ireland offers the best 
BIS Review 15/2010 
 1
route  to  improved  job  prospects  here  for  yourselves,  and  that  pick-up  will  depend  on  a 
speedy resolution of the budgetary and banking problems. 
Those of you who have the ambition and capacity to start on a career of entrepreneurship 
have  an  even  more  direct  interest  in  ensuring  that  the  banks  are  functioning  providers  of 
credit. I think it’s fair to say – and what data we have seems to bear this out – that banks in 
Ireland have reacted to their own difficulties and to the downturn by greatly reducing their risk 
appetite.  Some  of  this  was  a  necessary  adjustment,  but  the  result  has  been  limited 
availability of credit for start-up firms and SMEs. Indeed, I have the impression that, during 
the  years  of  property-based  lending,  the  banks  have  lost  their  edge  in  small  business 
lending. This is something that they need to pay more attention to, not just for the sake of the 
economy, but for their own business performance in the years ahead when property-based 
lending will be on a much more limited scale. A number of new initiatives have been floated 
in this regard. It is important that the banks get going now on improving their techniques for 
making sound small business loans. 
At  the  aggregate  level,  the  pace  of  economic  activity  and  the  trend  in  unemployment  still 
remain weak. The decline in aggregate income is bottoming out, but (in the second quarter of 
2010) at a level perhaps 16 per cent lower than at the peak. (That’s GNP: economic activity, 
measured by GDP it is about 11 per cent down). Unemployment we think will continue to rise 
somewhat during 2010, though a reversal of net migration flows will serve to limit this.  
The current recession has resulted in a significant deterioration in the labour market position 
of the young in the worst affected countries. In Germany, the unemployment rate has hardly 
moved during the recession, whether at the aggregate level or among the under-25s. In the 
USA, which has seen its aggregate unemployment rate double from about 5 to about 10 per 
cent, youth unemployment went up only slightly faster from 12 to 19 per cent. But in Ireland 
youth unemployment has jumped from less than 10 per cent to over 31 per cent in the past 
two years – much faster than the aggregate rate which has gone from 4.7 to 13.3 per cent. 
(Spain  has  had  an  even  worse  experience).  This  has  to  be  turned  around:  and  that  will 
require determination. 
Some lessons can be learnt from past experience here. 
This is the fourth major recession I have lived through, though I was only in Primary School 
for the dip of the mid-1950s which prompted the sea-change in economic policy and gave us 
the  outward-looking  globalised  society  we  live  in  today.  Globalisation  has  allowed  us  to 
converge  in  average  living  standards  to  the  European  frontier,  but  globalisation  also  does 
seem  to  be  associated  with  heightened  volatility,  and  the  depth  of  the  current  downturn 
reflects  the  over-heated  expansion  that  preceded  it,  which  in  turn  was  fuelled  by  credit 
sucked-in to Ireland all too readily from the globalised financial system. In short, we did not 
manage our engagement with the global economy in a manner consistent with stable growth. 
But if globalised economies can fall far, their recovery can also be vigorous.  
The spectacular recovery of employment and fall in unemployment after the deep recession 
of  the  mid-1980s  has  rightly  been attributed  among  other  things  to  the  wage  restraint  that 
characterized the social partnership from 1987 on. Wage restraint is all the more important 
now, when price levels have been falling, with the result that nominal wage rates that might 
have been viable a couple of years ago, no longer make commercial sense. The problem is 
even  worse  because  of  the  unsustainable  upward  drift  in  wages  that  occurred  in  the  mid 
2000s. I am sorry to bang on about this, but Central Banks aim at overall price stability to 
help ensure that wage and price planning can be carried out in a manner that ensures stable 
growth. When, as in Ireland today, inflation undershoots the target and goes negative, it is 
incumbent  on  me  as  a  central  banker  to  alert  workers  and  unions  to  the  consequences.  I 
interpret  the  recent  reductions  in  the  net  pay  of  public  servants  not  only  as  a  significant 
contribution to correcting the budget deficit, but also as a signal of the realignment of overall 
wage rates in the economy that is needed to restore employment growth. 
2 
 BIS Review 15/2010
The employment boom of the 1980s and 1990s also owed a lot, I think, to an emergent can-
do attitude and a new willingness of the younger members of the Irish labour force (who are 
now, of course, in their 40s and 50s) to exploit an innate flexibility and turn their hand to any 
likely type or location of employment, without standing on ceremony, and without adopting an 
attitude  of  entitlement.  It  helped  too  that  already  third  level  education  had  become  so 
widespread.  For  me,  third  level  education  at  its  best  conveys  much  more  than  specific 
discipline-related  skills.  It  enables  the  consolidation  of  generalised  job-market  relevant 
capabilities and understanding. These are what, perhaps unknowingly, you have to offer to 
the  economy  today.  The  openings  may  not  be  obvious,  but  seize  them  when  they  come, 
regardless of how ephemeral they may seem likely to be, how poorly remunerated at first, or 
that they do not yet fully exploit your hard-earned degree-specific qualifications. The speed 
and  solidity  of  the  economic  recovery  will  in  fact  depend  to  a  considerable  extent  on  the 
enthusiasm and application of people like you in finding and working on the opportunities that 
do exist. 
If you do go abroad for better immediate prospects, I hope you  will not turn your back on 
Ireland. I have worked abroad for a few years at a time on more than one occasion. I found 
returning after one or two years easy; after a third year the new roots were harder to pull up. 
Some  authoritative  analysts  are  forecasting  quite  strong  growth  in  output  and  employment 
already in 2012. Should this materialise, it will be good news both for those who stay and 
those who, like so many Irish over the years, leave to explore possibilities abroad. 
Meanwhile, it is for us in the older generations to re-establish the conditions for this stable 
growth. That is a task to which, both in its monetary policy role, and in relation to financial 
regulation and supervision, the Central Bank is renewing its efforts. 
BIS Review 15/2010 
 3
