Charles Bean: Monetary policy after the fall 
Paper written by Messrs Charles Bean, Matthias Paustian, Adrian Penalver and Tim Taylor 
and presented by Mr Charles Bean, Deputy Governor of the Bank of England, at the Federal 
Reserve Bank of Kansas City Annual Conference, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, 28 August 2010. 
 The  assistance  of  Alina  Barnett,  Lavan  Mahadeva,  Clare  Macallan,  Haroon  Mumtaz  and  Ryland  Thomas  was 
invaluable. Helpful comments and suggestions from Ed Nelson and numerous Bank of England colleagues are 
also gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed do not necessarily reflect those of either the Bank of England 
or the Monetary Policy Committee. 
Introduction: the consensus before the crisis 
1. 
The Great Financial Crisis that began in August 2007 and the associated Great Contraction 
in  global  economic  activity  that  took  place  after  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers  in 
September  2008  have  presented  central  bankers  and  finance  ministers  in  the  advanced 
economies with one of the toughest challenges that they are ever likely to face. While no-one 
can  claim  to  have  done  it  perfectly,  by  dint  of  aggressive,  and  in  many  cases  innovative, 
policy  actions  they  have  collectively  succeeded  in  preventing  the  collapse  of  financial 
markets,  arresting  the  contraction  in  activity  and  putting  their  economies  on  the  path  to 
recovery. Even so, the de-leveraging process is incomplete, the recovery remains fragile and 
a considerable margin of spare capacity is yet to be worked off, while further policy action 
may  yet  be  necessary  to  keep  the  recovery  on  track.  It  may  therefore  seem  premature  to 
draw lessons from the crisis for the future conduct of monetary policy in normal times. But 
normal times will surely return in due course. And it is natural to ask whether the events of 
the past three years point to fundamental flaws in our policy frameworks. 
The crisis was perhaps all the more remarkable because it occurred after such a long period 
of  relatively  steady  growth  and  low  and  stable  inflation  –  the  Great  Moderation.  While  the 
causes of the Great Moderation are open to debate, most policy makers probably put some 
of that improved macroeconomic performance down to better policy. That was reflected in a 
consensus – at least in the Anglo-Saxon world – as to the ingredients of a successful policy 
framework  and  was  mirrored  in  an  equivalent  consensus  in  the  academic  literature  on 
monetary  policy,  synthesising  the  rigour  of  dynamic  general  equilibrium  modelling  with  the 
empirical  realism  of  sticky-price  Keynesian  thinking,  best  exemplified  in  the  magisterial 
contribution of Woodford (2003). 
This  pre-crisis  set  of  beliefs  was  reflected  in  many  of  the  contributions  to  this  annual 
conference  in  the  years  leading  up  to  the  crisis  and  so  might  aptly  be  christened  the 
“Jackson  Hole”  consensus;  the  volume  New  Challenges  for  Monetary  Policy  from  the 
conference that took place here eleven years ago represents as good a reflection as any of 
that  paradigm.  Broadly  speaking,  this  Jackson  Hole  consensus  consisted  of  the  following 
ingredients: 
1. 
Automatic  stabilisers  aside,  fiscal  policy  was  unsuitable  as  an  instrument  of 
macroeconomic demand management. That was justified theoretically by appeal to 
the  comparative  advantage  of  monetary  over  fiscal  policy  in  controlling  nominal 
demand or to Ricardian Equivalence or to the argument that fiscal expansions were 
harder to reverse than initiate. 
Monetary  policy  was  therefore  assigned  the  primary  role  in  short-term  aggregate 
demand management, with policy conducted through the manipulation of a suitable 
short-run interest rate. 
2. 
BIS Review 111/2010 
 1
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
to  an 
increased 
led  naturally 
The  monetary  transmission  mechanism  operated  mainly  through  longer-term 
interest  rates,  asset  prices  and  expectations  of  future  inflation.  Expectations  of 
future  policy  rates  were  central  and  credibility  was  key.  These  channels  might  be 
augmented  by  a  weak  credit  channel  but  the  banking  sector  generally  was 
conspicuous  by  its  absence,  particularly  in  the  New  Keynesian  synthesis  models, 
which  also  dominated  thinking  within  central  banks.  The  importance  accorded  to 
expectations 
focus  on  communication  and 
transparency. 
The conduct of monetary policy was best delegated to an independent central bank, 
free of short-term political considerations. That was buttressed by academic thinking 
which  drew  attention  to  the  potential  time  inconsistency  of  optimal  policy  when 
expectations  of  future  policy  mattered  and  which  suggested  that  monetary  policy 
was best delegated to conservative central bankers with long horizons. 
Intermediate monetary targets were not useful, because of their unstable link with 
the ultimate objectives of policy (though that did not preclude them being helpful at 
times  as  indicators  of  future  demand  and  inflation).  For  jurisdictions  with  floating 
exchange  rates,  monetary  policy  should  instead  be  focussed  on  the  only  thing  it 
could reliably determine in the long run, namely the price level. In many countries, 
this  was  codified  into  an  explicit  numerical  inflation  target;  in  others,  the  objective 
was  left  somewhat  fuzzier.  Focusing  policy  on  the  ultimate  objective  of  price 
stability, rather than some intermediate variable, offered a policy framework that was 
both clearer to the public and potentially more durable. But the short-run stickiness 
of wages and prices, coupled with the desirability of avoiding excessive fluctuations 
in activity, meant that some “constrained discretion” in the pursuit of price stability 
was appropriate; this flexibility was usually incorporated explicitly into central bank 
mandates in one way or another. 
Asset  markets  were  thought  to  be  efficient  at  distributing  and  pricing  risk  and 
financial innovations were normally welfare enhancing. While asset prices might be 
subject  to  bouts  of  “exuberance”  on  the  part  of  investors,  there  was  little  that 
monetary policy could do about them. The best monetary policy could was to limit 
the fallout when sentiment turned. 
Systemic  financial  crises  were  seen  only  in  history  books  and  emerging  markets; 
they were unlikely to happen in advanced economies with their developed and well-
regulated  financial  markets.  Moreover,  price  stability  and  financial  stability  were 
natural bedfellows, the successful achievement of one facilitating the attainment of 
the other. 
Of course, agreement with each and every element of this consensus was not universal. The 
European Central Bank, for instance, continued to place great value on the usefulness of a 
monetary pillar. And, as discussed below, there were some who believed that central banks 
should also use their constrained discretion to lean against incipient asset-price bubbles and 
credit growth. But the set of beliefs above were, we believe, held sufficiently widely in policy-
making and academic circles to be described as a consensus. 
In the rest of this paper, we re-visit some aspects of this consensus in the light of the crisis. It 
is not possible to cover all the elements of the consensus, though we shall offer some more 
wide-ranging observations at the end. In particular, we focus on: whether the experience with 
unorthodox  policies  during  the  crisis  has  changed  our  view  of  the  appropriate  policy 
instruments in normal times; whether the target rate of inflation should be increased or a shift 
to  price-level  targeting  is  warranted;  and  what  the  experience  of  the  crisis  has  taught  us 
about how monetary policy should respond to credit/asset-price booms.1 As a precursor to 
                                                 
1   Some of these themes already figured in the contributions to the conference held here eleven years ago. 
2 
 BIS Review 111/2010
that discussion, however, we ask whether monetary policy decisions contributed materially to 
the crisis. 
lower 
longer-term 
interest  rates 
Monetary policy and the crisis 
2. 
It  is  worth  stressing  at  the  outset  that  a  multitude  of  factors,  both  microeconomic  and 
macroeconomic,  played  into  the  crisis.  A  non-exhaustive  list  of  microeconomic  factors 
includes: the incentive to shift loans off banks’ balance sheets to avoid capital requirements; 
the  reduced  incentive  for  care  in  the  origination  of  loans,  when  those  loans  are  then 
securitised; the distorted incentives facing ratings agencies; pay packages encouraging the 
pursuit of short-term returns and the adoption of trading positions with the characteristic of a 
deeply out-of-the-money option; and the moral hazard arising from financial institutions that 
are too big or too systemically important to fail, together with inadequate supervision of the 
same. On top of that, the crisis exposed previously unappreciated informational deficiencies 
created by the underlying complexity of some asset-backed securities and the high degree of 
interconnectedness  of  financial  institutions.  Potential  macroeconomic  factors  include  the 
international payments imbalances, and the side effects of the Great Moderation, as well as 
monetary  policy.  In  our  view,  it  would  be  a  mistake  to  assign  a  key  role  to  any  of  these 
factors in isolation. On their own, none can surely explain the worst financial crisis in eighty 
years.  But  together  they  constituted  a  potent  cocktail.  Monetary  policy  makers  would 
therefore be remiss if they did not re-examine their own decisions in the lead-up to the crisis 
and strive to learn the lessons for the future conduct of policy. 
In the normal course of events, looser monetary policy boosts asset prices, as lower policy 
rates  are  usually  associated  with  somewhat 
too. 
Expansionary policy can also be expected to boost activity and profits, which also tends to 
raise asset prices. But the case for monetary policy having a role in the run-up to the crisis 
comes less from these conventional monetary transmission channels and more from the idea 
that  loose  monetary  policy  particularly  encouraged  a  shift  into  riskier  asset  classes,  which 
then got out of hand – the so-called “risk-taking channel” of monetary policy (Borio and Zhu, 
2008). 
There  are  broadly  three  ways  in  which  looser  monetary  policy  encourages  increased  risk-
taking. First, and most conventionally, a lower yield on safe assets encourages substitution 
into  higher-yielding  risky  assets,  in  the  process  driving  up  their  prices.  Second,  some 
investors  such  as  pension  funds  need  to  match  the  returns  on  their  investments  to  their 
commitments. A reduction in the return on safe assets then encourages them to switch into 
high-yielding  but  riskier  assets  in  an  attempt  to  deliver  nominal  returns  which  match  their 
liabilities  –  a  “search  for  yield”  (Rajan,  2005).  Executive  compensation  linked  to  absolute 
returns has a similar effect. 
Finally,  a  slightly  more  complex  mechanism  is  developed  by  Adrian  and  Shin  (2009)  and 
Adrian,  Moench  and  Shin  (2010).  They  argue  that  financial  intermediaries  target  leverage 
ratios  which  are  either  constant  (commercial  banks)  or  pro-cyclical  (investment  banks). 
Consequently an increase in the value of a bank’s equity resulting from, say, a rise in the 
value of its (risky) assets will lead it to expand its debt (through deposit or wholesale funding) 
and a corresponding increase in its assets, either through extending new loans or acquiring 
additional  securities.  So  as  looser  monetary  policy  boosts  asset  prices,  it  encourages  an 
expansion  in  banks’  balance  sheets,  putting  further  upward  pressure  on  asset  prices. 
Leverage targets therefore act as an amplification mechanism. But the number of relatively 
safe borrowers/projects is limited. So the extension in the volume of loans is also likely to 
involve moving along the risk spectrum towards more risky borrowers. 
Looser monetary policy is not the only factor operating through these channels. Two other 
macroeconomic factors are potentially relevant. First, a number of authors have focussed on 
the  role  of  international  payments  flows  in  the  crisis,  with  capital  flowing  “uphill”  from 
emerging  economies,  such  as  China,  into  the  United  States  and  some  other  advanced 
BIS Review 111/2010 
 3
economies  (see,  for  instance,  Obstfeld  and  Rogoff,  2009,  and  the  references  therein). 
Bernanke (2005) attributes this to a “savings glut” in the surplus countries. Possible drivers 
include:  an  inadequate  household  safety  net  and  restricted  capital  market  access  for 
enterprises in China; the accumulation of precautionary holdings of international reserves by 
emerging economies following the Asia crisis; and rational savings of the windfall gains from 
higher  oil  prices  on  the  part  of  oil  producers.  A  perceived  comparative  advantage  of  the 
United States in creating “high quality” financial assets from real investments may also have 
played a part (Caballero, Farhi and Gourinchas, 2008). This resulted in downward pressure 
on the yields on government bonds and other safe assets, and upward pressure on asset 
prices generally. Low long-term safe interest rates would also have encouraged the shift into 
riskier assets through the risk-taking channel described above. 
Second, the lead-up to the crisis was also a long period of steady growth coupled with low 
and stable inflation (the Great Moderation).2 Households, businesses and market participants 
were  consequently  faced  with  a  complex  signal-extraction  problem:  how  much  of  this 
reduction in economic volatility was permanent? Whereas many economic signal extraction 
problems  involve  learning  about  the  first  moments  of  a  distribution,  this  involves  making 
inferences about higher moments. The longer such a period of low volatility lasts, the more 
reasonable  it  is  to  assume  that  it  is  permanent.  But  given  the  necessary  infrequency  with 
which tail events occur, there may be a natural tendency for people erroneously to conclude 
that  they  could  never  happen  simply  because  none  have  materialised  recently.  Certainly 
market  measures  of  uncertainty  are  consistent  with  this  idea,  as  measures  of  volatility 
implied  from  options  prices  (such  as  the  VIX)  suggest  that  the  perceived  risks  in  financial 
markets  had  shrunk  to  extremely  low  levels  by  2006.  This  reduction  in  the  perceived 
riskiness  of  the  environment  is  also  likely  to  encourage  financial  market  participants  to 
increase their holdings of riskier assets and to drive up their prices. 
A key piece of evidence suggesting that excessively loose monetary policy might have had a 
part to play in generating the preconditions for the crisis is provided by comparisons of policy 
rates with the policy settings generated by a benchmark Taylor rule (Taylor, 2007). Chart 1 
shows  the  difference  between  the  policy  rate  and  benchmark  estimates  of  the  appropriate 
policy  rate  derived  from  a  Taylor  rule  for  the  United  States,  the  euro  area  and  the  United 
Kingdom. Notwithstanding the usual caveats about the construction of such benchmarks, the 
very low level of the Federal Funds rate relative to the Taylor rule from 2001 to 2005 in the 
aftermath of the collapse of the dot-com bubble is striking. 
Of course, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) set its target Federal Funds rate at 
unusually low levels for a reason, namely concerns that the United States might find itself 
mired  in  deflation  of  the  sort  experienced  by  Japan  during  its  “Lost  Decade”.  Bernanke 
(2010) provides a vigorous defence of Federal Reserve policy over this period, arguing that 
evidence  from  a  comparison  of  guideline  policy  rates  from  conventional  Taylor  rules  with 
actual policy rates is unpersuasive. Central banks usually set policy not on the basis of past 
inflation  but  rather  their  expectations  of  future  inflation,  looking  through  temporary 
movements  in  inflation  that  result  from  shocks  to  commodity  prices  or  indirect  tax  rates. 
During  2002–5,  the  FOMC  judged  that  prospective  underlying  (“core”)  inflation  was 
considerably  weaker  than  realised  headline  inflation,  and  that  the  latter  would  move  down 
towards the former in the medium term once the temporary effects of one-off disturbances 
had passed through. Bernanke finds that merely substituting Greenbook inflation forecasts 
                                                 
2   Three broad drivers for the Great Moderation have been advanced: structural changes that reduced volatility, 
such as enhanced inventory management and easier access to credit; better policy making; and plain good 
luck in the form of smaller, or more benign, shocks. As yet, the academic literature has not reached a firm 
conclusion  as  to  the  relative  roles  of  these  factors,  in  part  because  of  the  difficulty  in  distinguishing  the 
influences of good luck and better policy. 
4 
 BIS Review 111/2010
for actual inflation in an otherwise standard Taylor rule eliminates much of the discrepancy 
with the target Federal Funds rate. 
That,  of  course,  still  leaves  open  the  possibility  that  the  FOMC’s  fears  that  inflation  would 
turn  out  too  low  were,  at  least  with  hindsight,  exaggerated.  Whether  or  not  policy  was 
appropriate ex ante will always be difficult to answer because we do not know what would 
have happened under a different policy path. One can, however, answer a slightly different 
and  more  straightforward  question,  namely  what  impact  the  accommodative  policy  stance 
had on asset prices and credit growth. Bernanke goes on to provide time-series and cross-
country evidence, which suggests that monetary policy played a relatively modest role in the 
boom in house prices in the United States and a number of other countries. 
Chart 1 shows that both UK and euro-area policy rates were less noticeably out of line with 
their respective Taylor benchmarks. That too is striking. Indeed, in the United Kingdom, they 
were actually above the benchmark for much of the relevant period, even though the United 
Kingdom saw one of the larger run-ups in debt and house prices during this period. And, in 
the  euro  area,  countries  such  as  Spain  experienced  substantial  house  price  booms,  while 
countries such as Germany did not. That need not imply that monetary policy was innocent in 
the run-up to the crisis, as the equilibrium real interest rate could have been higher in the 
United Kingdom than in the calibrated Taylor rule. And differences in equilibrium real interest 
rates across countries can in principle explain the heterogeneity in the euro area. But this is 
hardly compelling evidence for assigning the central role to monetary policy, suggesting that 
other factors were more important. 
To  complement  Bernanke’s  analysis,  we  provide  some  further  evidence  on  the  impact  of 
policy  on  credit  and  asset  prices,  obtained  from  estimated  vector  auto-regressions  for  the 
United  States  and  the  United  Kingdom.  The  model  includes  the  standard  macroeconomic 
variables appearing in New Keynesian descriptions of monetary policy: real GDP growth, CPI 
inflation and a short-term nominal interest rate. In addition, the model also includes a set of 
variables  relating  to  credit  and  asset  prices:  total  credit  growth;  the  spread  of  investment-
grade corporate bonds over government bonds, as a general indicator of credit spreads; and 
house price inflation. To capture the potential impact of the Great Moderation on perceptions 
of the riskiness of the environment, we also include a measure of macroeconomic volatility. 
This  is  generated  from  an  auxiliary  factor  stochastic-volatility  model,  which  estimates  the 
common time-varying volatility in a set of key macroeconomic variables (GDP, consumption, 
investment,  exports,  imports  and  inflation).  The  resulting  series  are  shown  in  Chart  2, 
together  with  estimated  one  standard  deviation  confidence  intervals,  and  have  the 
characteristics that one would expect: high in the Seventies and early Eighties, then falling 
back as the period of the Great Moderation wears on, and rising sharply with the onset of the 
financial crisis and the Great Contraction. 
We envisage a set of seven underlying fundamental shocks driving these seven variables: an 
aggregate  demand  shock;  an  aggregate  supply  shock;  a  monetary  policy  shock;  a 
macroeconomic volatility shock; a credit demand shock; a credit supply shock; and a house 
price shock. The first three of these are conventional in nature. The fourth captures changes 
in  the  riskiness  of  the  macroeconomic  environment.  The  credit  demand  and  credit  supply 
shocks are intended to capture movements in credit resulting from other factors, while the 
house price shock captures movements in house prices attributable to factors not elsewhere 
accounted for. Other factors driving both credit and house prices will include the low level of 
long-term real interest rates and associated international current account imbalances. 
The  identification  scheme  employs  a  combination  of  ordering  assumptions  and  theoretical 
sign restrictions on the impulse responses (see Uhlig, 2005). Macroeconomic volatility should 
be a slowly moving variable that is little affected by contemporaneous developments in the 
economy.  One  would  expect  that  most  of  the  variance  in  macroeconomic  volatility  –  a 
second moment – is not well explained by the other shocks; that is borne out in the results, 
especially  for  the  United  Kingdom.  Macroeconomic  volatility  is  therefore  assumed  to  be 
BIS Review 111/2010 
 5
contemporaneously  unaffected  by  any  of  the  other  shocks.  The  aggregate  demand/supply 
block  comes  next,  affecting  credit  and  housing  markets  and  monetary  policy 
contemporaneously, but not being affected by contemporaneous developments in them; an 
aggregate  demand  shock  affects  inflation  and  growth  in  the  same  direction,  while  an 
aggregate  supply  shock  drives  them  in  different  directions.  That  is  followed  by  the  credit 
market block: again, a credit demand shock drives credit growth and the bond spread in the 
same direction, while a credit supply shock drives them in different directions. Then comes 
monetary policy; policy makers are therefore assumed to be able to react to movements in 
the  real  economy  and  in  credit  markets  within  the  quarter,  which  does  not  seem 
unreasonable. House prices come last. 
For  the  United  States,  the  variables  in  the  vector  auto-regression  are:  CPI  inflation;  GDP 
growth; the effective Federal Funds rate; the difference between the Merrill Lynch corporate 
BAA and 10-year Treasury yields; the growth in total private credit market debt outstanding 
deflated  by  CPI;  the  rate  of  change  of  house  prices  (the  National  Association  of  Realtors 
existing homes price index to 1975 linked to the Federal Housing Finance Agency thereafter) 
deflated  by  CPI;  and  the  macroeconomic  volatility  index.  For  the  United  Kingdom,  the 
equivalent variables are: CPI inflation; GDP growth; Bank Rate; the difference between the 
investment-grade  corporate  bond  and  10-year  government  bond  yields;  the  growth  in  M4 
lending (excluding securitisations and loans to intermediate OFCs) deflated by CPI; the rate 
of change of house prices (the Nationwide house price index to 1983 linked to the Halifax 
measure thereafter) deflated by CPI; and the macroeconomic volatility index. The data are 
quarterly, there are two lags of each variable, and the sample runs from 1966 Q3 to 2010 
Q1.  A  good  case  can  be  made  for  employing  only  more  recent  data,  on  the  grounds  that 
monetary  policy  reaction  functions  have  evolved  during  this  time.  But  the  cost  of  that  is 
reduced precision and estimates over just the latter part of the period turn out to be rather 
less well defined. The model is estimated using Bayesian methods to facilitate imposition of 
the  sign  restrictions  and  the  construction  of  confidence  intervals  on  convolutions  of  the 
parameters. 
The impulse responses are shown as four-quarter growth rates in Charts 3a (United States) 
and 3b (United Kingdom), where the dark blue lines are the posterior median responses and 
the  blue  swathes  provide  one  standard  deviation  confidence  intervals.  For  the  most  part 
these look sensible, though, as is usually the case in such exercises, there are one or two 
responses that look a little odd. In particular, both sets of estimates exhibit the oft-observed 
“price puzzle”, whereby the immediate impact of a monetary policy tightening is to increase, 
rather  than  decrease,  the  rate  of  inflation.  A  number  of  explanations  for  this  price  puzzle 
have been advanced in the literature, including the reaction of the monetary policy maker to 
information  on  inflation  prospects  not  incorporated  in  the  model,  and  a  monetary  policy 
reaction  function  that  is  insufficiently  sensitive  to  inflation  over  part  of  the  sample  period. 
Because of the presence of the price puzzle, we do not to focus on the behaviour of inflation 
in the simulations reported below. 
Aside  from  the  initially  perverse  inflation  response,  the  impact  of  an  unexpected  monetary 
tightening is as one would expect, in both the United States and the United Kingdom: output 
growth falls, the bond spread rises, real credit growth falls and real house price inflation falls. 
The impact of an increase in macroeconomic volatility (i.e. an increase in general riskiness) 
is also worth highlighting: output growth falls, credit spreads rise, real credit growth falls, and 
real  house  price  inflation  falls.  This  is  all  as  one  would  expect  from  the  discussion  above 
regarding the risk-taking channel. In both countries, inflation also rises when macroeconomic 
volatility increases. 
Charts 4a and 4b show historical decompositions derived using the posterior means of the 
distribution  of  the  coefficient  estimates.  As  there  is  rather  a  lot  of  information  to  digest  in 
these decompositions, we show just the main variables of interest: the policy rate, and the 
four-quarter growth rates of output, real credit and real house prices. We also combine the  
6 
 BIS Review 111/2010
impact of the aggregate demand and supply shocks into a single composite factor, and do 
the same with the credit demand and credit supply shocks so as to focus more clearly on the 
impact of monetary policy and macroeconomic volatility. There are a number of points to be 
made. 
First,  monetary  policy  (the  green  bars)  during  the  2002–5  period  is  loose  relative  to  the 
estimated historical reaction function not only in the United States – as might be expected 
given the evidence from Chart 1 – but also, more surprisingly, in the United Kingdom. In the 
United States, the Federal Funds rate is, on average, 1.5 percentage points below the rate 
that  would  have  obtained  if  the  estimated  reaction  function  had  applied.  In  the  United 
Kingdom,  the  corresponding  figure  is  2.1  percentage  points.  There  is,  however,  a  simple 
explanation  for  the  apparent  looseness  relative  to  the  estimated  reaction  function  in  the 
United  Kingdom,  namely  the  change  in  the  policy  regime  associated  with  the  adoption  of 
inflation targeting and the subsequent credibility gain from giving operational responsibility for 
monetary policy to the Bank of England. This represented a sharp change in regime after a 
somewhat  chequered  history  of  inflation  control  and  probably  contributed  to  a  lower 
equilibrium real policy rate because of the associated reduction in the inflation risk premium. 
Second, those monetary policy deviations can explain only part of the excess credit growth 
and  house  price  inflation  in  the  two  countries  over  2002–5.  In  the  United  States,  the 
monetary policy shocks are associated with, on average, an extra 0.6 percentage points on 
annual  real  credit  growth  and  an  extra  1.5  percentage  points  on  annual  real  house  price 
inflation.  That  is  to  be  compared  with  average  actual  annual  real  credit  growth  over  the 
period of 5.6 per cent and average annual real house price inflation of 5.8 per cent. For the 
United Kingdom, the corresponding figures are an average 1.3 percentage points on annual 
real credit growth and 6.0 percentage points on annual real house price inflation, compared 
with average annual real actual credit growth of 8.9 per cent and average annual real house 
price inflation of 13.0 per cent. In both countries, an important driver of house price inflation 
over the period is house price shocks, though a wider range of influences appear to have 
been involved in driving the expansion in credit. The moral from these results would appear 
to be that although monetary policy may have played a role in fuelling the credit/house-price 
boom  that  preceded  the  crisis,  it  is  rather  more  Rosencrantz  than  Hamlet.  We  return  in 
Section  5  to  the  question  of  whether  these  findings  suggest  that  policy  should  be  set 
differently in future. 
The  third  point  of  note  is  the  significant  role  played  by  shocks  to  macroeconomic  volatility 
(blue bars), particularly in regard to credit growth, with noticeably more rapid expansion in 
credit 
the  period  2002–5, 
macroeconomic  volatility  accounts  for,  on  average,  an  extra  0.7  percentage  points  on  US 
annual real credit growth and 0.5 percentage points on US annual real house price growth. In 
the  United  Kingdom,  the  corresponding  effects  are  even  larger:  2.1  percentage  points  on 
annual real credit growth and 2.0 percentage points on annual real house price inflation. A 
reduction in volatility also confers a sizeable “growth dividend”, suggesting that the stability of 
the Great Moderation period boosted the sustainable rate of growth, while the current period 
of  high  volatility  has  had  the  opposite  effect;  that  is  consistent  with  the  cross-country 
evidence of Ramey and Ramey (1995), who find that higher volatility tends to be associated 
with lower growth. 
The  idea  that  periods  of  economic  stability  encourage  exuberance  in  credit  markets,  thus 
sowing  the  seeds  of  their  own  destruction,  is  a  key  part  of  Minsky’s  theory  of  recurring 
financial crises (see e.g. Minsky, 1982). The results here provide some empirical evidence 
for  such  a  dynamic  process.  Moreover,  to  the  extent  that  better  policy  accounted  for  the 
Great  Moderation,  it  provides  a  second,  indirect,  channel  whereby  policy  may  have 
contributed to creating the conditions conducive to a subsequent financial bust. But it would 
clearly be a mistake to conclude that policy should aim to induce fluctuations in the macro-
economy in order to prevent financial market participants becoming too confident about the 
outlook! The right moral is surely that policy makers need to be most vocal about the risks to 
taking  place  during 
In  particular,  over 
tranquil  periods. 
BIS Review 111/2010 
 7
the outlook when things appear to be going well, and to take appropriate restraining action if 
needed. 
The instruments of monetary policy 
3. 
Dealing  with  the  fallout  from  the  banking  crisis  has  pushed  central  banks  in  the  affected 
jurisdictions into uncharted waters. The top panel of Table 1 summarizes the wide variety of 
measures  adopted  by  some  of  the  major  central  banks,  while  Chart  5  illustrates  the 
associated expansion in the balance sheets of the Federal Reserve, the European Central 
Bank and the Bank of England. 
The most immediate response was to offer liquidity support to the banking sector, especially 
as the crisis intensified in the wake of the collapse of Lehman Brothers and the rescue of 
American  International  Group.  Measures  adopted  included  widening  access  to  Discount 
Window  Facilities,  expanding  the  range  of  eligible  collateral  and  counterparties,  extending 
loan tenors and introducing foreign currency swap lines. As the lending in these operations is 
normally over-collateralised, there is essentially negligible credit risk to the central bank. In 
addition  to  these  classical,  if  somewhat  expanded,  central  banking  support  operations,  a 
number  of  central  banks  –  most  especially  the  Federal  Reserve,  but  also  the  European 
Central  Bank  and  the  Bank  of  England  –  undertook  less  conventional  actions  aimed  at 
improving  the  operation  of  particular,  temporarily  dysfunctional,  markets.  For  instance,  the 
Federal  Reserve  and  the  Bank  of  England  both  bought  high-quality  Commercial  Paper, 
reducing the risk that a borrower could not raise new funds to repay maturing paper and thus 
also  encouraging  private  investors  to  lend.  This  exposes  the  central  bank  to  some  credit 
risk,3 but the short tenor and restriction to high-quality companies makes the risk slight. 
The  Federal  Reserve’s  Term  Asset-Backed  Securities  Loan  Facility  (TALF)  represented  a 
rather  more  radical  departure.  Under  the  TALF,  the  Federal  Reserve  made  medium-term 
loans  to  investors  against  highly-rated  securities  backed  by  consumer  and  business  debt, 
with  the  aim  of  increasing  the  availability  of  consumer  and  business  credit.  Even  though 
there  is  a  haircut  on  the  securities,  the  credit  risk  to  the  central  bank  is  potentially  higher 
under this programme; that risk was effectively underwritten through the provision of credit 
protection by the US Treasury. 
Many  of  these  extraordinary  actions  were  designed  to  be  self-liquidating  as  conditions 
normalise:  central  bank  or  government  support  becomes  more  expensive  than  market 
finance, or else is specifically time-limited. A central bank should not offer special support to 
particular  private  institutions  or  markets  indefinitely,  unless  it  is  seeking  to  offset  an 
identifiable  market  failure.  Otherwise,  it  just  ends  up  distorting  the  market  structure. 
Moreover, to the extent that there is a market failure or distortion present, in the first instance 
it is surely the job of government, rather than the central bank, to address that market failure. 
In addition, anything that involves the central bank favouring particular businesses or sectors 
of the economy or exposing the consolidated public sector balance sheet to credit risk takes 
it into territory that is inherently political and risks inviting political intervention or limitations to 
its independence. 
While  there  should  be  little  need  for  extraordinary  liquidity  and  credit  support  once  normal 
times  return,  there  are  potential  lessons  from  the  crisis  for  the  execution  of  conventional 
monetary policy. Before the crisis, and with policy rates averaging somewhere in the 4–5 per 
cent  range,  central  bankers  generally  believed  they  had  plenty  of  room  for  manoeuvre  to 
offset all but the most severe adverse demand shocks. But the sharp increases in a range of 
credit spreads from the onset of the crisis in August 2007, and especially after the collapse of 
Lehman Brothers in the Autumn of 2008, meant that policy rates had to fall sharply merely to 
                                                 
3   Though in any case, the Bank of England’s asset purchases are indemnified against loss by HM Treasury. 
8 
 BIS Review 111/2010
maintain the pre-existing levels of key borrowing rates,4 let alone lowering them in order to 
stimulate  aggregate  demand  to  counteract  the  substantial  contraction  over  2008  Q4  and 
2009 Q1. As a result, many monetary policymakers soon found themselves with policy rates 
at, or near, the zero interest rate lower bound (ZLB) and were forced to turn to other means 
to inject further monetary stimulus. 
There are two5 main options facing a central bank when it nears the ZLB, both of which seek 
to depress longer-term interest rates and raise asset prices: committing to keep future policy 
rates low; and reducing the spreads of longer-term interest rates over expected policy rates 
through asset purchases financed by money creation. 
In the canonical New Keynesian/New Classical DSGE model, being able to commit to keep 
policy rates low for a sustained period is the only way of further stimulating the economy at 
the  ZLB,  as  the  impact  of  monetary  policy  is  completely  summarised  by  the  current  and 
future  path  of  the  policy  rate.  But  keeping  interest  rates  low  in  the  future  will  boost  future 
inflation, thus raising expected inflation and boosting activity today. The problem is that the 
central  bank  lacks  the  incentive  to  stick  to  this  strategy  once  economic  conditions  have 
improved and the ZLB episode is past, i.e. the policy is time inconsistent. So the central bank 
needs to have some way of making credible a commitment to what will subsequently seem 
like  future  irresponsibility;  words  alone  will  not  suffice,  unless  reneging  on  those  words 
carries a significant reputational cost. It is important to distinguish this policy strategy from 
simply communicating that policy rates are likely to stay low because output and inflation are 
expected to stay low. That may help to align expectations with the views of the policy maker 
and  be  valuable  in  aiding  transparency,  but  does  not  represent  the  pursuit  of  a  policy 
strategy under commitment. 
As noted above, the earlier deflation scare, following the collapse of the dot-com bubble, had 
already persuaded the FOMC not only to keep the target Federal Funds rate at an especially 
low level, but also first to indicate that it would remain low for an “extended period” and then 
to indicate that the monetary stimulus would be withdrawn at only a “measured” pace. This 
has something of the character of attempting to reap the benefits of being able to commit in 
the future by sticking to past promises. 
During  the  current  ZLB  episode,  the  FOMC  has  again  explicitly  indicated  that  it  expects 
monetary  policy  to  warrant  exceptionally  low  levels  of  the  Federal  Funds  rate  “for  an 
extended period”. The Bank of Canada and the Riksbank have also made statements that 
imply  they  expect  policy  rates  to  remain  low  for  a  period,  though  given  the  nature  and 
relatively short time horizon of those statements, it is a moot point whether these are best 
thought of as exercises in commitment or exercises in transparency. 
The  second  option  at  the  ZLB  involves  the  outright  purchases  of  longer-dated  assets, 
particularly  government  bonds,  financed  by  the  issuance  of  extra  central  bank  reserves. 
Such  purchases  aim  to  raise  the  prices  of  the  purchased  assets,  together  with  those  of  a 
whole range of assets that are imperfect substitutes as the sellers subsequently re-balance 
their portfolios. This imperfect asset substitutability may be both time-varying – in particular, 
the scope for asset substitution may be rather greater in the long run than in the short run – 
and  state-contingent,  as  traders  may  be  less  able  to  arbitrage  between  assets  in  times  of 
economic  and  financial  distress.  But  as  long  as  there  is  some  period  of  imperfect  asset 
                                                 
4   Taylor  (2008)  advocates  the  use  of  a  “spread-adjusted”  Taylor  Rule  to  set  the  policy  rate  in  such 
circumstances.  Cúrdia  and  Woodford  (2009)  develop  a  simple  model  in  which  credit  frictions  generate  a 
spread on the interest rate between savers and borrowers. The optimal monetary response to a rise in credit 
spreads in their model strictly involves a less-than-full compensatory reduction in the policy rate, but is likely to 
be  close  to  Taylor’s  recommendation  for  reasonable  calibrations  of  the  interest-elasticities  of  saving  and 
borrowing.  
5   Buiter and Panigirtzoglou (2001) also discuss other, more exotic, approaches. 
BIS Review 111/2010 
 9
substitutability to exploit, purchases by the central bank can push up asset values, which in 
turn  boosts  aggregate  demand  and  encourages  increased  issuance  of  the  assets  whose 
prices have risen. 
This  rationale  for  asset  purchases  –  that  relative  asset  supplies  affect  asset  prices  and 
returns – dates back to Tobin (1969) and Brunner and Meltzer (1972). The mechanism is, 
however, absent from the canonical New Keynesian/New Classical macroeconomic model. 
That is because of a property akin to Ricardian equivalence: private agents internalise the 
budgetary implications of the public sector’s asset acquisitions, so that any change in the risk 
to  which  the  private  sector  is  exposed  through  its  asset  holdings  is  exactly  offset  by  a 
compensating change in the risk borne by the public sector and thus ultimately the taxpayer 
through the public sector budget constraint (Eggertsson and Woodford, 2003). While this is a 
striking result, it is relatively easy to think of reasons why it might not hold in practice: any of 
credit market imperfections, limited asset-market participation or plain myopia is potentially 
sufficient.  Indeed  in  subsequent  work  (Cúrdia  and  Woodford,  2010),  Woodford  himself 
explores some of the ways that asset purchases might have traction, while Andrés, López-
Salido and Nelson (2004) provide a particular model that embeds imperfect substitutability 
arising from limited participation within a DSGE framework. 
Both the Federal Reserve and the Bank of England have bought longer-dated government 
and  private assets,  though  with  different  emphases.6  The Federal  Reserve  has  purchased 
$1.45  trillion  (10  per  cent  of  GDP)  worth  of  Government  Sponsored  Enterprise  debt  and 
mortgage-backed  securities  guaranteed  by  them.  In  addition,  the  Federal  Reserve  has 
purchased $300 billion (2 per cent of GDP) worth of US Treasuries. The Bank of England 
has bought nearly £200 billion (14 per cent of GDP) of UK government bonds, together with 
a small quantity of corporate bonds. The Bank of Japan has also bought around ¥13 trillion 
(3 per cent of GDP) of Japanese government bonds since the crisis deepened in late 2008; 
that is to be compared with ¥20 trillion of purchases during their 2001–6 quantitative easing 
period. 
It is worth stressing that neither the Federal Reserve nor the Bank of England has assigned a 
key role to the expansion of central bank liabilities in the transmission mechanism associated 
with  these  asset  purchases.  In  current  circumstances,  it  is  plausible  to  believe  that 
commercial  banks  would  be  willing  to  hold  the  extra  claims  on  the  central  bank  as  liquid 
assets  at,  or  near,  the  existing  vector  of  interest  rates,  rather  than  lending  them  on  and 
driving down loan rates. That is reflected in the fact that the ratio of the monetary liabilities of 
the banking system (broad money) to the monetary base has fallen sharply in both countries, 
as indeed it did in Japan a decade earlier. In its communications, the Bank of England has 
stressed the monetary impact of its asset purchases, but that has been on the quantity of 
monetary deposits in the banking system, not narrow money. 
Have  these  policies  been  effective?  Or  does  Eggertsson  and  Woodford’s  neutrality  result 
apply?  Studies  of  Japan’s  earlier  experience  of  quantitative  easing  suggested  only  rather 
modest  effects.  For  instance,  Bernanke  et  al.  (2004)  found  that  although  the  falls  in 
government  bond  yields 
following  bond  purchase  announcements  were  statistically 
significant, they were typically just a few basis points in magnitude. Nevertheless, over the 
period  as  a  whole,  the  yield  curve  was  somewhat  lower  than  predicted  by  a  macro-factor 
model  of  the  term  structure,  consistent  with  some  impact  from  unconventional  monetary 
policy actions (including also the Bank of Japan’s zero interest rate policy). Oda and Ueda 
(2005) estimate bond risk premia using a structural macro-finance model and find that bond 
purchases had no significant effect in reducing those risk premia, though they do find that the 
zero  interest  rate  policy  reduced  long-term  rates  by  around  20–40bp.  Finally,  Shiratsuka 
                                                 
6   The  European  Central  Bank  has  also  bought  €60  billion  (0.6%  of  GDP)  of  covered  bonds  and  the  same 
quantity  of  distressed  euro-area  sovereign  debt,  though  the  objective  of  these  interventions  has  been  to 
underpin prices and improve liquidity in the selected markets rather than alter monetary conditions. 
10 
 BIS Review 111/2010
(2009) finds that credit premia across a range of assets fell during the period of quantitative 
easing. 
From  an  empirical  perspective,  the  recent  US  and  UK  asset  purchases  offer  a  particular 
advantage – they are vastly bigger in size and took place relatively quickly.7 Hence, greater 
precision can be expected. For the United Kingdom, an early event study by Meier (2009) 
suggests that the Bank of England’s initial £125 billion of gilt purchases reduced longer-term 
gilt yields by between 40 and 100 basis points. A more recent and fuller study is provided by 
Joyce  et  al.  (2010).  They  examine  the  reaction  of  market  prices  immediately  after  each 
asset-purchase announcement and find that the total impact on gilt yields was to lower them 
by  an  average  of  about  100  basis  points.8  Moreover,  as  the  expected  path  of  Bank  Rate 
(from  overnight  indexed  swaps)  was  broadly  unaffected  by  the  announcements,  they 
conclude  that  the  primary  impact  must  be  through  a  portfolio  re-balancing  channel  rather 
than  through  any  information  that  asset-purchase  announcements  reveal  about  the  likely 
future  path  of  Bank  Rate.  Corporate  bond  yields  also  fell,  with  investment-grade  bonds 
declining 70 basis points and non-investment grade bonds declining 150 basis points, while 
the sterling exchange rate depreciated by about 4 per cent. 
For the United States, Gagnon et al. (2010) adopt a similar approach. They find that, across 
the relevant set of eight announcements, the Federal Reserve’s purchases of Treasuries and 
Agency  debt/MBS  resulted  in  total  falls  of  90  basis  points  in  the  10-year  Treasury  yield, 
160 points in the 10-year agency debt yield and 110 basis points in the agency MBS yield. 
Baa corporate bond yields also fell, by a total of 70 basis points. The size of these effects is 
broadly  comparable  to  those  found  for  the  United  Kingdom  by  Joyce  et  al.  Neely  (2010) 
provides some further evidence, this time relating to the international impact of the Federal 
Reserve’s  large  scale  asset  purchases.  He  finds  that  yields  on  Australian,  Canadian, 
German,  Japanese  and  UK  10-year  bonds  fell  by  an  average  of  45  basis  points  over  the 
same  set  of  announcements,  while  the  dollar  depreciated  by  5  per  cent.  That  points  to 
considerable international spillovers from such asset purchases. 
The  bottom  line  from  these  studies  is  the  clear  indication  that  asset  purchases  can  be  an 
effective monetary instrument. But should such unconventional policies also be part of the 
regular central bank toolkit in normal times? At first blush, there seems no reason why they 
should not. Indeed, policymakers regularly used to attempt to manipulate the yield curve in 
the Sixties and Seventies, for instance the Federal Reserve’s “Operation Twist” (though in 
that case the impact of the purchases on the money supply was sterilised). But in practice it 
probably makes sense to rely on a short interest rate as the primary instrument of monetary 
policy for three reasons. 
First, while the evidence that asset purchases do have the effect expected on asset prices is 
compelling, there is a wealth of evidence regarding the monetary transmission mechanism 
from  movements  in  short-term  policy  rates.  Central  banks,  moreover,  have  considerable 
experience  in  the  operation  of  policy  through  short  interest  rates.  Given  that  the  impact  of 
changes  in  a  short-term  policy  rate  is  both  more  certain  and  better  understood,  it  makes 
more sense to put the most weight on that instrument rather than asset purchases (Brainard, 
1967). 
Second,  and  related  to  the  above  argument  concerning  the  relative  uncertainty  of  a  short 
interest rate and asset purchases as monetary policy instruments, there are reasons to think 
                                                 
7   There is a substantial related literature attempting to uncover the effects of changes in debt maturity structure 
on relative yields. These studies have generally struggled to identify well-defined effects from variations in the 
supplies of debt of different maturities. Though the variations in asset quantities may be quite substantial, they 
usually take place slowly, necessitating controlling for a wide range of other factors affecting relative yields.  
8   By construction, an event study approach can only capture the short-run elasticity of substitution. The medium 
to longer terms effects may be somewhat less as further portfolio rebalancing takes place. 
BIS Review 111/2010 
 11
that the efficacy of the latter will be less in normal times. The theoretical case for an effect 
from  asset  purchases  rests  on  there  being  frictions  that  prevent  the  Eggertsson-Woodford 
neutrality result holding. During a financial crisis, when credit is hard to come by, arbitrageurs 
may  find  it  difficult  to  find  the  wherewithal  to  correct  any  excessive  compression  of  the 
spread  between  government  bond  yields  and  expected  policy  rates.  During  normal  times, 
such credit will be easier to come by and the activities of arbitrageurs may therefore lead to 
the attenuation of the effectiveness of asset purchases as a monetary policy tool. 
Third, while purchases of government debt may be a suitable last resort at the ZLB, regular 
purchases during normal times will be liable to give rise to the suspicion that the central bank 
is doing so at the behest of the government in order to lower the cost of budgetary finance, 
rather than for monetary policy purposes. In other words, it is intending to monetise the debt 
permanently. Aside from giving rise to doubts about the central bank’s independence, it could 
also  prompt  inflation  expectations  and  long-term  nominal  interest  rates  to  rise.  The 
communication challenge for a central bank in these circumstances would be formidable. So 
asset  purchases  aimed  at  flattening  the  yield  curve  are  probably  best  kept  in  the  locker 
marked For Emergency Use Only. 
The objectives of monetary policy: the inflation target 
4. 
Following Japan’s “lost decade”, and given impetus by the deflation scare after the bursting 
of  the  dot-com  bubble,  a  number  of  studies  appeared  evaluating  the  likelihood  of  other 
advanced  economies  reaching  the  ZLB.  Simulations  of  macroeconomic  models  where 
monetary policy follows some version of a Taylor rule suggested that an inflation target of 
2 per cent would entail relatively frequent episodes of the ZLB acting as a binding constraint 
on  monetary  policy  (Reifschneider  and  Williams  2000;  Coenen,  Orphanides  and  Wieland 
2004).  For  example,  in  simulations  with  the  Federal  Reserve  Board’s  macroeconometric 
model, Reifschneider and Williams found that the ZLB was reached about 10 per cent of the 
time. Nonetheless, these studies suggested that with an inflation target as low as 2 per cent, 
the adverse effects of the ZLB on macroeconomic volatility would be relatively modest. That 
was because the magnitude and duration of the constraint on policy actions were pretty mild. 
Only  with  inflation  targets  of  1  per  cent  or  less  did  the  ZLB  result  in  noticeably  higher 
variability of output and inflation. So an inflation target of 2 per cent or so looked to provide 
enough room for monetary policy under most circumstances. 
With  policy  rates  reaching  their  effective  ZLB  in  a  number  of  jurisdictions  and  most  of  the 
central banks concerned having resorted to unorthodox monetary policy measures in order to 
inject additional monetary stimulus into their economies, the question naturally arises as to 
whether this conclusion still stands. Or should inflation targets be raised to, say, 4 per cent 
as suggested by Blanchard, Dell’Ariccia and Mauro (2010), providing another two percentage 
points of extra room to cut policy rates before reaching the ZLB? 
Some analytical evidence in favour of a higher inflation target comes from Williams (2009). 
With  the  help  of  the  Federal  Reserve’s  macroeconomic  model,  he  asks  what  policy  the 
FOMC  (represented  as  an  appropriate  Taylor  Rule)  would  have  chosen  during  the  Great 
Contraction had it not been constrained by the ZLB and what the impact would have been on 
output and inflation; he then compares that with the outcomes when the ZLB bites. He finds 
that  although  the  ZLB  did  not  materially  aggravate  the  US  downturn  in  2008  –  essentially 
because the fall in activity after the collapse of Lehman Brothers was so sharp that, in the 
absence of perfect foresight, no monetary policy actions could have impacted fast enough – 
the ZLB does appear to have constrained the pace of recovery. In particular, if real policy 
rates could have been set around four percentage points lower, the recovery in output would 
have been significantly faster and the rise in unemployment mitigated. Abstracting from the 
scope for other policies to boost demand, Williams puts the cost to the United States of this 
constraint on policy rates at around $1.8 trillion of foregone output over 2009–2012. 
12 
 BIS Review 111/2010
Some might be tempted, therefore, to argue that a modest increase in target inflation rates 
from the current norm of around 2 per cent is called for. There are, however, potential costs 
associated  with  accepting  higher  average  inflation.  First,  while  the  costs  from  perfectly 
anticipated  inflation  might  seem  likely  to  be  modest,  the  academic  literature  suggests  that 
may not be the case. Moreover, there is a well documented empirical relationship between 
the level and the volatility of inflation, and unexpected movements in inflation are more likely 
to  generate  resource  misallocation  and  the  capricious  redistribution  of  income  and  wealth. 
There  is,  therefore,  a  risk  that  even  a  modest  increase  in  the  target  of  a  few  percentage 
points  could  lead  to  a  corresponding  increase  in  inflation  volatility  and  associated  welfare 
losses. 
Second,  unlike  in  most  macroeconomic  models,  expectations  formation  is  not  costless.  A 
bonus  from  low  and  stable  inflation  is  that  economic  agents  do  not  have  to  expend  much 
effort  in  predicting  inflation;  the  simple  heuristic  that  inflation  is  a  constant  –  or  even  that 
prices  are  stable  –  will  suffice  (Brazier  et  al.,  2008).  That  is  particularly  valuable  for 
households, who are likely to be relatively less informed. While inflation of 4 per cent may not 
sound much higher than 2 per cent, the difference is large enough that people would have 
greater need to take account of inflation explicitly in their decision making, especially if it also 
becomes more variable. 
Third,  the  case  for  creating  more  room  to  cut  policy  rates  rests  on  two  assumptions:  that 
other policies to boost aggregate demand are unavailable or inefficient; and that shocks that 
lead to the ZLB being a significant constraint are reasonably frequent. As far as the former 
goes, as already noted, there is evidence suggesting that unorthodox monetary policies have 
had some traction and usually one would also expect that there would be scope to apply a 
fiscal  stimulus  too.  But  there  is  clearly  less  room  for  manoeuvre  if  a  banking  crisis  also 
begets a fiscal crisis, as often turns out to be the case. Banking crises typically also raise 
credit spreads, which cannot be offset by a cut in the nominal policy rate by central banks 
caught  at  the  ZLB.  The  case  for  raising  the  inflation  target  to  minimise  the  risk  of  these 
situations  arising  depends  crucially  on  how  frequently  they  are  expected  to  occur  in  the 
future. To the extent that the Great Contraction represents a once-in-a-century event and the 
subsequent changes in regulation and financial market structure are effective in reducing the 
likelihood of a repeat, the case for raising the target rate of inflation will be correspondingly 
weakened. 
Finally, it seems particularly dangerous to raise inflation targets at the current juncture, as 
one should expect nominal interest rates to rise roughly in line. Even if expected long-term 
real  interest  rates  were  thus  unchanged,  the  fall  in  bond  prices  would  lower  wealth  and 
worsen  the  already-impaired  balance  sheets  of  financial  institutions.  In  summary,  raising 
inflation targets does not seem the most appropriate response to the crisis. It is surely far 
better to seek ways of reducing their frequency and impact. 
Rather than raising the target rate of inflation, an alternative and theoretically more appealing 
approach  would  be  to  target  the  price  level  rather  than  the  inflation  rate.  The  difference 
between  inflation  and  price-level  targeting  is  obviously  that,  under  the  former,  any 
undershoot or overshoot of the price level relative to the path implied by the target is ignored 
in  subsequent  periods,  whereas,  under  the  latter,  those  control  errors  have  to  be  clawed 
back,  thus  returning  the  price  level  to  its  originally  expected  path.  Consequently  the  price 
level  should  revert  to  its  trend  under  price-level  targeting,  whereas  it  will  be  difference-
stationary under inflation targeting. 
In the standard New Keynesian macroeconomic model with sticky prices and forward-looking 
agents,  the  optimal  policy  under  commitment  delivers  such  a  trend-stationary  price  level, 
even  though  welfare  only  depends  on  the  inflation  rate.  That  is  because  it  provides  the 
necessary  history-dependence  in  policy  to  ensure  that  the  policymaker  goes  through  with 
promises that are otherwise time inconsistent; see, for instance, Svensson (1999). Indeed, a 
price-level target may be an effective way of implementing the fully optimal monetary policy 
BIS Review 111/2010 
 13
under  commitment  (Vestin,  2006).  A  considerable  body  of  research  expands  on  this  idea; 
see e.g. Ambler (2009) and the references therein. 
Why  might  price-level  targeting  generate  less  variability  of  inflation  and  output  than  an 
inflation target, as it is tempting to think the opposite should be the case? Under price-level 
targeting, an adverse shock to demand, which pushes the price level below its target path, 
necessarily requires higher inflation in the future in order to return the price level to its target 
path.  Assuming  that  private  agents  understand  this,  expected  real  interest  rates  fall,  so 
boosting  demand  today.  Inflation  expectations  therefore  act  as  a  more  effective  automatic 
stabilizer than they do under inflation targeting. By the same token, an adverse supply (mark-
up)  shock,  which  raises  the  price  level  above  its  target  path  and  depresses  output  today, 
leads to lower expected future inflation. But, in the standard New Keynesian Phillips curve 
describing pricing behaviour, inflation is positively related to expected future inflation. Hence 
the  lower  expected  future  inflation  acts  to  offset  the  impact  of  the  supply  shock  by 
moderating the rise in today’s price level. 
A  corollary  of  inflation  expectations  becoming  an  automatic  stabiliser  under  price-level 
targeting is that it reduces the extent to which the nominal policy rate needs to fall to offset 
an  adverse  demand  shock.  So  a  price-level  targeting  regime  which  specifies  that  prices 
should  grow  at  x  per  cent  a  year  ought  to  lead  to  fewer  instances  in  which  the  ZLB  on 
interest rates bites than does an inflation targeting regime with a target rate of x per cent. 
This proposition is demonstrated formally by Eggertsson and Woodford (2003). 
It is, though, worth pointing out that there may be times when having a price-level target is 
likely to be unhelpful. For instance, consider the present case of the United Kingdom, where 
upward shocks to oil prices and indirect taxes and a substantial depreciation of sterling have 
led  to  inflation  running  consistently  above  the  2  per  cent  target,  but  at  a  time  when  the 
economy  has  also  been  subject  to  an  adverse  demand  shock  which  has  opened  up  a 
substantial  margin  of  spare  capacity.  Price-level  targeting  would  dictate  that  this  excess 
inflation  must  subsequently  be  unwound.  Consequently,  inflation  expectations  would  be 
lower and real interest rates higher. That in turn would exacerbate the downward pressure on 
demand, worsening the constraint of the ZLB. 
The theoretical superiority of price-level targets over inflation targets hinges on the forward-
looking nature of expectations. If expectations are not forward-looking, then their automatic 
stabilising feature is lost. And the presence of inertia in the inflation process also reduces the 
relative superiority of price-level targets. In particular, if a significant fraction of firms set their 
prices on the basis of past inflation, then it becomes optimal to permit some drift in the price-
level path in response to shocks. That is because those firms that are able to will raise their 
price in response to a shock that raises the overall price level relative to target. If the central 
bank subsequently seeks to bring the overall price level back on to the originally prescribed 
path, then the relative price of those firms will be too high. It is better instead to allow some 
base  drift  in  order  to  reduce  the  average  (squared)  distortion  in  relative  prices  across  the 
economy  as  a  whole.  That  suggests  that  some  hybrid  of  price-level  and  inflation  targeting 
may  be  a  good  idea;  targeting  average  inflation  over  a  run  of  years  is  one  way  to 
approximate such a hybrid regime (King, 1999). 
A final issue with price-level targeting lies in communications. While the public can probably 
relate  to  the  idea  of  inflation  as  the  average  rate  at  which  prices  in  the  economy  are 
changing, it less clear that they will understand what a consumer price level index means. 
Such a target for the price-level would therefore probably need to be portrayed as stabilising 
average inflation over a very long period. 
The extent to which a shift to targeting the price-level, rather than inflation, acts as a bulwark 
against the ZLB is ultimately an empirical issue. Interestingly, however, the behaviour of the 
price level in many advanced economies during the Great Moderation suggests that it might 
not  make  a  lot  of  difference  whether  or  not  countries  move  to  targeting  a  path  for  prices 
rather than inflation. As already noted, the price level under an inflation targeting regime in 
14 
 BIS Review 111/2010
which  control  errors  are  bygones  should  exhibit  a  unit  root,  whereas  under  price-level 
targeting  it  should  be  trend  stationary.  And  the  data  suggest  that  outturns  have  in  many 
cases  resembled  what  we  would  expect  to  see  under  trend,  rather  than  difference, 
stationarity.9 
This can be seen for eight jurisdictions in Charts 6a (euro area, Japan, United Kingdom and 
United States) and Chart 6b (Australia, Canada, New Zealand and Sweden – four prominent 
smaller  inflation  targeting  countries).  These  plot  the  deviation  of  the  relevant  measure  of 
consumer price inflation from a fixed trend line that grows at the target rate of inflation. For 
inflation-targeting central banks that is either given by their stated target or else the mid-point 
of their target range; the data are shown since their adoption of an inflation target. The ECB 
does  not  regard  itself  as  formally  having  an  inflation  target,  but  nevertheless  has  a  price 
stability goal of “close to, but a little below” 2 per cent; we therefore set the price-level trend 
to grow at 1.9 per cent a year. Finally neither Japan nor the United States have an explicit 
statement of their inflation objective. For Japan, we assume a target inflation rate of 0.1 per 
cent a year; that is a little higher than the within-sample trend but consistent with the idea 
that the Bank of Japan was aiming for a positive rate of inflation. For the United States, we 
assume a target inflation rate of 2.5 per cent, which is consistent with the Federal Reserve’s 
mandate  to  maintain  price  stability  and  is  close  to  the  average  inflation  rate  within  the 
sample. 
What  is  striking  about  these  series  is  that,  for  the  most  part,  they  look  more  like  trend-
stationary series than difference-stationary ones, with swings around a flattish line. The three 
exceptions are: Japan, which is not altogether surprising given that is was mired in deflation 
for much of the period; New Zealand, where inflation has systematically averaged above the 
mid-point  of  the  target  range;  and  Sweden,  where  the  opposite  is  true.  But  for  both  New 
Zealand  and  Sweden,  the  behaviour  is  still  more  characteristic  of  trend  stationarity  than 
difference stationarity. 
Table  2  reports  some  formal  (Augmented  Dickey-Fuller)  statistical  tests  of  difference 
stationarity for these eight jurisdictions over the period 1993 Q4 to 2010 Q1 (excluding the 
euro area, where the tests run from the inception of the euro). The dependent variable is the 
change in the deviation of (the logarithm of) the target measure of prices from a path along 
which the price level grows at a rate corresponding to the central bank’s inflation objective. 
The regressors include a constant, a trend,10 two lagged values of the dependant variable 
and the lagged level of the variable of interest, which should attract a zero coefficient if and 
only if the series is stationary in differences. 
In all eight jurisdictions, the coefficient on the lagged level (δ) is numerically quite large, and 
especially  so  in  the  case  of  the  euro  area.  None,  though,  are  statistically  significant  at 
conventional levels. The tests are, however, likely to be of low power on such short samples. 
In  order  to  increase  the  power  of  the  test,  the  final  row  of  the  Table  therefore  shows  the 
result when of a pooled regression, with the coefficient δ constrained to be the same across 
countries  (the  other  coefficients  are  allowed  to  differ);  the  euro  area  is  omitted  from  this 
regression in order to create a balanced panel. Unsurprisingly, the coefficient δ is close to its 
average  across  the  individual  country  regressions.  But  the  appropriately  adjusted  test 
statistic (see Levin, Lin and Chu, 2002) on δ is now highly statistically significant, strongly 
suggesting  that  collectively  the  price-level  series  are  trend-,  rather  than  difference-, 
stationary. 
There are a number of possible explanations for this apparent trend stationarity of the price 
level during the inflation-targeting period. First, it may be just an artefact of the particularly 
                                                 
9  
10   To cater for drift insofar as prices have not, on average, risen at the supposed target rate. 
I am grateful to Lars Svensson for drawing my attention to this fact. 
BIS Review 111/2010 
 15
benign  environment  obtaining  for  much  of  the  sample  period.  More  data  from  less  benign 
times may overturn this result, so it will be worth revisiting in the future. 
Second, the need for accountability and credibility may encourage a central bank to target 
average inflation over a number of years, offsetting a period of above-target inflation with a 
subsequent  period  of  below-target  inflation.  And  in  some  countries,  such  as  Australia,  the 
objective  is  explicitly  defined  as  being  “over  the  cycle”.  But,  as  already  noted,  average 
inflation targeting approaches price-level targeting as the horizon extends to infinity. 
Third, optimal policy under uncertainty may lead to some correction of price-level deviations. 
For  instance,  suppose  that  a  shock  has  caused  inflation  to  move  above  target.  As  time 
passes  and  the  central  bank  seeks  to  return  inflation  to  target,  it  is  possible  that  further 
shocks  push  inflation  away  from  the  intended  path  or  that  tighter  monetary  policy  fails  to 
return inflation to target as quickly as expected. With the usual concave objective function, 
the policymaker should prefer to err on the side of inflation undershooting its intended path, 
rather  than  risk  departing  even  further  above  target.  Consequently,  in  the  presence  of 
uncertainty, the monetary authority will seek to return inflation to target more rapidly and may 
even  aim  to  keep  inflation  below  target  for  a  period.  For  more  on  this,  see  Kamenik  et  al 
(2008). 
Whatever the explanation for the trend-stationarity of the price level, these results suggest 
that existing policy frameworks have delivered something quite close to price-level targeting 
in  practice.  That  suggests  the  welfare  gains  from  making  the  extra  step  may  be  limited, 
particularly  when  there  are  costs  to  changing  the  framework.  The  issue  is,  nevertheless, 
worthy of further investigation. 
The objectives of monetary policy: credit and asset-price boom-busts 
5. 
We  now  return  to  the  relationship  between  monetary  policy  and  credit/asset-price  boom-
busts. As discussed in Section 2, a case can be made that monetary policy played a bit part 
in  the  rapid  expansion  of  credit  in  the  run-up  to  the  crisis,  together  with  the  attendant 
compression  in  risk  premia  and  the  boom  in  asset  prices,  especially  that  of  housing.  That 
prompts the obvious question as to whether a different monetary policy setting could have 
materially reduced the likelihood or magnitude of the banking crisis. 
In  the  period  immediately  preceding  the  crisis,  there  was  a  lively  debate  amongst  central 
bankers as to the best way to respond to rapid credit growth and rising asset prices. On the 
one  hand,  economists  at  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  and  elsewhere  (e.g.  Borio 
and White, 2003; Cecchetti, Genberg and Wadhwani, 2002; White, 2006, 2009) argued that, 
despite the stability of inflation, monetary policy was nevertheless too loose. Moreover, the 
credit/asset-price  boom  was  storing  up  trouble  for  the  future.  Central  banks  should,  they 
argued, “lean against the wind” (LATW) by holding policy rates higher than suggested by, for 
instance,  a  suitable  Taylor  Rule  so  as  to  mitigate  these  risks,  even  though  the  inflation 
objective  might  not  be  immediately  threatened.  Indeed,  an  inflation-targeting  central  bank 
ought to be willing to undershoot its target in the medium term, if it could thereby sufficiently 
improve the chances of meeting its target further out through the avoidance of a disruptive 
bust  (Bean,  2003).  Essentially,  this  involves  the  policymaker  adopting  a  somewhat  longer 
perspective than is sometimes the case in inflation-targeting regimes. 
On the other hand, other policymakers – most notably at the Federal Reserve – advocated a 
policy  of  benign  neglect  during  the  boom  phase,  coupled  with  aggressive  relaxation 
(“cleaning”) should asset prices go into reverse (see e.g. Greenspan, 2002). Some analytical 
support for this approach was provided by Bernanke and Gertler (1999). The justification for 
this strategy rested on the following arguments. 
First,  the  policymaker  needs  to  judge  whether  the  credit/asset-price  boom  is  warranted  by 
fundamentals  or  whether  it  is  instead  based  on  misplaced  expectations  and  furthermore 
poses a threat to future financial and macroeconomic stability; a mechanical response that 
16 
 BIS Review 111/2010
treats  all  asset-price  movements  alike,  whatever  their  cause,  will  be  inappropriate.  That  is 
rarely  straightforward  given  that  credit/asset-price  booms  are  apt  to  occur  in  the  wake  of 
genuine improvements in fundamentals – though central bankers are, of course, called upon 
to make difficult judgments all the time, for instance over the margin of spare capacity. 
Second, once a bubble is large enough to be identified, the presence of lags in the monetary 
transmission mechanism complicate the calibration of an appropriate policy. Raising official 
interest rates could be counterproductive if the boom immediately turns to bust, so that the 
economy is subject to the twin deflationary impulses of an asset-price collapse and the effect 
of  the  policy  tightening.  Indeed,  in  the  unlikely  event  that  the  policy  maker  knows  that  an 
asset-price  collapse  is  imminent,  monetary  relaxation,  rather  than  tightening,  is  called  for. 
Gruen, Plumb and Stone (2003) show that the information needed to render a LATW policy 
effective is demanding. 
Third, a modest increase in interest rates may do little to restrain a credit/asset-price boom 
that is in full swing. But an increase large enough to materially affect the evolution of asset 
prices is likely to have a significant adverse impact on economic activity. So the policy maker 
needs to believe that the (certain) short-term costs of such a strategy are outweighed by the 
(uncertain)  longer-term  gains.  Moreover,  if  the  key  concern  is  a  build-up  of  debt,  higher 
interest rates could actually exacerbate the problem if the resulting increase in debt service 
outweighs the reduction in new borrowing. 
Whatever  the  merits  of  the  above  arguments,  the  fall-out  in  the  real  economy  from  the 
banking  crisis  seems  to  have  made  a  policy  of  benign  neglect  towards  potentially 
unsustainable  credit/asset-price  booms  untenable  and,  at  least  in  the  absence  of  other 
instruments, rather tipped the balance towards “leaning” rather than “cleaning”. But that still 
leaves open the question as to how effective a LATW interest-rate policy would have been in 
the past and could be in the future. 
In order to provide some evidence on this question, we employ the vector auto-regressions 
estimated  in  Section  2  to  assess  how  effective  a  relatively  aggressive  LATW  policy  would 
have  been  in  moderating  the  credit/asset-price  boom.  Specifically,  we  inject  a  series  of 
interest rate surprises calculated to leave policy rates roughly 200 basis points higher over 
the  pre-crisis  period  2003–2006,  implying  a  substantially  tighter  policy  than  was  actually 
followed. As most advocates of LATW seem to have in mind a relatively modest increase in 
policy rates, this seems to be at the upper bound of what might be considered appropriate.  
Conducting  the  counterfactual  policy  experiment  by  inputting  a  different  sequence  of 
monetary  policy  shocks  without  changing  the  policy  rate  reaction  function  is  potentially 
subject to the Lucas Critique, but seems reasonable as it is likely that private agents would 
have taken time to alter their beliefs about that reaction function. 
Charts  7a  and  7b  show  the  implications  of  this  policy,  for  the  United  States  and  United 
Kingdom  respectively,  together  with  one  standard  deviation  confidence  bands;11  Table  3 
presents  some  associated  statistics  for  the  median  paths.  The  Federal  Funds  rate  would 
have started rising in 2003, rather than mid-2004 and peaks at around 7.5 per cent in late 
2006. The policy is quite effective at dampening real house price inflation, though the impact 
on real credit growth is more muted. Real house prices would have peaked around 7.5 per 
cent lower. But the stock of real credit would have been just 3 per cent lower by the end of 
2006, trivial compared to the expansion in credit of almost 30 per cent. 
For  the  United  Kingdom,  Bank  Rate  would  have  been  around  7  per  cent  from  the  end  of 
2004 to mid-2007. Again this is effective in reducing real house price inflation, indeed more 
so than in the United States. Real house prices are around a fifth lower at the end of 2006. 
                                                 
11   As the simulations are conducted by inputting a sequence of shocks to the monetary policy reaction function 
rather than imposing a path for the policy rate, there is a confidence band around the policy rate as well. 
BIS Review 111/2010 
 17
The effect on real credit growth is also somewhat more powerful than in the United States, 
with the stock of real credit some 4 per cent lower by the end of 2006. But again this is trivial 
compared to the almost 50 per cent increase in the stock of credit seen over the period. 
These simulations also carry a sting in the tail, as output growth is significantly reduced. By 
2007  Q3,  just  as  the  financial  crisis  erupted,  the  cumulative  loss  of  output  in  the  United 
States  amounts  to  around  3.3  per  cent  of  real  GDP;  the  equivalent  figure  for  the  United 
Kingdom  is  3  per  cent.  These  costs  are  significant,  though  still  modest  compared  to  the 
output falls during the recession of around 8 per cent in the United States and over 10 per 
cent in the United Kingdom, relative to a continuation of pre-crisis trends. So this could be an 
insurance  premium  worth  paying  if  there  was  a  reasonable  chance  that  it  could  have 
prevented these falls. (The regression model obviously does not capture the inherently non-
linear link between the earlier credit/house-price boom and the subsequent near-collapse of 
the banking system and associated contraction in output; any gain from this more restrictive 
policy in terms of reducing the likelihood of a future bust is therefore absent – that is why the 
extent of the downturn in 2008–9 is largely unaffected.) Although the impact on house prices 
is  quantitatively  significant,  the  limited  impact  on  credit  –  arguably  the  more  important 
variable  in  determining  the  vulnerability  of  the  system  –  as  well  as  the  plethora  of  other 
factors at work in creating the crisis, makes us reluctant to conclude that it would have had a 
major impact on the probability of a crisis materialising. But ultimately this is very much in the 
eye of the beholder, as we cannot be sure what would have happened under the alternative 
policy. 
There  may  nevertheless  be  times  when  a  well-judged  monetary  policy  intervention  is 
particularly effective in curbing financial excesses. Adrian and Shin (2008) point out that even 
small  policy  rate  changes  can  have  a  large  impact  if  financial  intermediaries  are  highly 
leveraged and the changes in the policy rate affect the relevant market interest rates. And 
there may be times when a mixture of words and modest interest rate action is effective at 
cooling excessive market exuberance; both the Reserve Bank of Australia and the Riksbank 
attempted to take some of the steam out of the house price boom in this way. But, generally 
speaking, monetary policy seems too weak an instrument reliably to moderate a credit/asset-
price  boom  without  inflicting  unacceptable  collateral  damage  on  activity.  Instead,  with  an 
additional  objective  of  managing  credit  growth  and  asset  prices  in  order  to  avoid  financial 
instability, one really wants another instrument that acts more directly on the source of the 
problem. That is what “macro-prudential policy” is supposed to achieve. 
There are multiple dimensions to macro-prudential policy. On the one hand, it encompasses 
actions 
the 
interconnectedness  of 
interconnectedness  was  somewhat 
neglected  in  the  run-up  to  the  crisis,  when  it  was  assumed  that  if  banks  were  individually 
safe, then the system would be too. The presence of network externalities meant this was far 
from  being  the  case.  A  key  ingredient  here  is  increasing  not  only  the  quantity  of  capital 
available to absorb losses but also its quality, as some capital instruments have turned out to 
be ineffective loss absorbers unless the bank is liquidated. Instruments that bail in creditors 
before  that  point  is  reached,  such  as  contingent  convertible  bonds,  therefore  hold  some 
attraction. That is particularly important for institutions deemed too large or too systemically 
important to fail. In addition, structural reforms can improve the robustness of the financial 
system.  These  issues  are  currently  the  object  of  discussion  within  the  Financial  Stability 
Board and the Basel Committee and firm proposals, together with a transition timetable, are 
due  shortly.  While  this  territory  is  beyond  the  scope  of  this  paper,  it  is  worth  noting  that 
effective  measures  to  improve  the  robustness  of  the  financial  system,  by  reducing  the 
likelihood and severity of future crises, also reduce the need for monetary policy to LATW. 
On  the  other  hand,  there  is  also  a  potential  role  for  macro-prudential  policy  to  cool 
credit/asset-price  booms  that  appear  to  be  getting  out  of  hand.  Most  discussion  of  such 
instruments has so far revolved around the introduction of a pro-cyclical capital buffer. Banks 
would be required to build up extra capital/reserves during a credit/asset-price boom, which 
the  banking  system  more 
institutions.  This 
to  shocks, 
recognising 
to  make 
financial 
robust 
18 
 BIS Review 111/2010
can then be run down in the event of a bust. This should reduce the incentive for banks to 
leverage up in a boom, as well as making the financial system more robust in a bust. Other 
instruments could, however, be deployed to this end. For instance, credit/asset-price booms 
are usually characterised by an excessive shift into riskier forms of lending. In that case, an 
instrument more directly targeted at the microeconomic distortion would be to increase the 
risk-weights attached to such lending when computing banks’ required capital. And, as we 
have  seen  in  the  present  crisis,  much  of  the  action  may  take  place  outside  the  regulated 
banking system in the wider credit markets. In that case, varying margin requirements might 
be  a  more  appropriate  instrument  for  dealing  with  vulnerabilities  building  up  in  the  capital 
markets more generally. Finally, there is the option of introducing direct constraints on the 
terms  or  availability  of  credit,  for  instance  imposing  maximum  loan-to-value  ratios  in  the 
mortgage market. The best approach seems likely to involve a portfolio of instruments. And 
while experience of the use of these tools may be limited, it is not entirely a tabula rasa. In 
particular,  a  number  of  developing  and  emerging  economies  have  experience  in  applying 
some  of  these  instruments,  while  there  are  also  lessons  to  be  drawn  from  the  past 
experience of some advanced economies too. 
Our  aim  here,  though,  is  not  to  analyse  the  optimal  design  of  the  macro-prudential  policy 
toolkit,  but  rather  to  consider  how  the  deployment  of  such  instruments  might  affect  the 
conduct  of  monetary  policy.  As  yet,  there  has  been  relatively  little  analysis  of  how  the 
operation  of  macro-prudential  policy  might  interact  with  monetary  policy.  We  explore  two 
related  issues.  First,  both  monetary  policy  and  macro-prudential  policy  are  likely  to  affect 
both aggregate demand and supply on the one hand and conditions in the banking sector on 
the other. Is it possible that the two are sufficiently close in their effects that they are in effect 
perfect  substitutes?  In  that  case,  it  is  not  clear  that  having  the  additional  instrument  is  of 
much value; the two instruments need to have sufficiently differentiated effects to be useful. 
Second, to the extent that they are sufficiently independent, is there any danger of a “push-
me, pull-you” outcome if the instruments are set by different authorities? 
To  investigate  these  issues,  we  employ  a  standard,  though  stylised,  sticky-price  New 
Keynesian  macroeconomic  model,  augmented  to  incorporate  both  physical  capital  and  a 
simple banking sector. The model is a version of that of Gertler and Karadi (2009), stripped 
of features such as habit persistence that are inessential for our purposes. The key additional 
ingredients relative to the standard New Keynesian model are twofold. First, funds flowing 
from savers to borrowers must be intermediated through a banking system. Banks take in 
deposits, Dt, from households, on which they contract to pay a given nominal interest rate. 
Together with their stock of retained profits (bank capital, Bt), these funds are then lent out to 
finance  the  physical  capital  that  firms  carry  through  into  the  next  period.  The  real  (gross) 
return  on  this  lending,  Rk
t+1,  then  includes  the  marginal  product  of  that  capital  plus  any 
associated capital gains or losses as the price of physical capital evolves, net of the inflation 
rate.  Second,  banks  need  to  be  sufficiently  incentivised  to  monitor  their  borrowers,  who 
would otherwise misuse the funds; this requires that the real profits from lending exceed the 
effort of monitoring, λt per unit of loans. Formally, the incentive-compatibility constraint takes 
the form:12 
(1) 
where Rt is the real (gross) return on deposits. Consequently, there is both a spread between 
the real loan and deposit rates and an implied leverage limit on banks. Were banks to try to 
lever  up  beyond  this  point  by  taking  in  more  deposits  and  extending  more  loans,  it  would 
reduce  the  return  on  bank  capital  net  of  monitoring  effort,  leaving  them  with  insufficient 
incentive to monitor the borrowers. Equilibrium leverage is therefore a decreasing function of 
t+1 – λt) ≥ DtRt , 
(Dt + Bt)(Rk
                                                 
12   This  is  analogous  to  the  no-shirking  condition  in  some  efficiency-wage  models.  Monitoring  effort  is 
unobservable and therefore uncontractable. The resulting wedge between the deposit and lending rates also 
means that the capital stock is inefficiently low. 
BIS Review 111/2010 
 19
monitoring  costs  and  an  increasing  function  of  the  real  loan-deposit  spread,  while  total 
lending  is  just  the  product  of  equilibrium  leverage  and  the  available  bank  capital.  While 
additional loans for investment only affect production possibilities in the following period, they 
indirectly also raise current output because households supply more labour in order to avoid 
having to cut back current consumption to make room for that investment. Consequently, an 
increase in credit supply resulting from a relaxation in this incentive compatibility constraint 
provides both an indirect boost to output contemporaneously and a direct boost through a 
higher capital stock in the following period. 
There are two policy instruments. The first is monetary policy, which operates by changing 
the  deposit  rate  and  the  associated  loan-deposit  spread.  The  second  is  a  (lump-sum) 
levy/subsidy on the banking sector, which can be used to manipulate the amount of capital 
that  banks  carry  forward  into  the  next  period.  Of  course,  this  is  not  how  macro-prudential 
policy  is  expected  to  function  in  practice.  But  the  model  acts  as  a  useful  metaphor  for 
thinking  how  policies  that  alter  the  buffer  of  capital  available  to  banks  might  affect  the 
dynamics of the economy and the conduct of monetary policy. 
Both monetary and macro-prudential policies affect the incentive compatibility constraint (1) 
and are therefore essentially alternative ways of expanding the supply of credit and with it the 
volume  of  investment.  With  sticky  prices,  a  reduction  in  the  policy  rate  by  the  monetary 
authority lowers the real deposit rate, raises the loan-deposit spread, increases equilibrium 
leverage and raises the quantity of loans. And a change in available bank capital as a result 
of the macro-prudential authority’s decisions translates directly into a higher volume of loans 
at  the  existing  leverage  ratio.  But  monetary  policy  also  has  an  independent  effect  on 
aggregate  demand  by  encouraging  intertemporal  substitution  in  consumption.  This  is  not 
operative  with  macro-prudential  policy.  Consequently  the  two  instruments  are  imperfect 
substitutes in terms of their effects on the economy. We shall illustrate this by comparing the 
impact on the economy of a variety of shocks when only monetary policy is available with the 
outcomes when the macro-prudential instrument is also available. 
In  each  case,  policy  is  set  optimally.  We  assume  a  quadratic  social  loss  function,  which 
penalises the variance of inflation, output and the physical capital stock about their efficient 
frictionless  levels.  Other  than  the  appearance  of  physical  capital,  this  objective  function  is 
standard.  Edge  (2003)  shows  that  such  a  term  appears  when  capital  accumulation  is 
incorporated  into  the  sticky-price  New  Keynesian  framework  and  the  objective  function  is 
derived  from  first  principles  (along  with  a  number  of  other  terms,  which  for  simplicity  are 
omitted here), though, with all investment funded through the banking system, we interpret it 
as capturing financial stability concerns more broadly. We assume a weight of unity on the 
variance of inflation and weights of 0.01 on the variances of output gap and the capital gap; 
that  is  broadly  consistent  with  extant  calibrated  models  in  which  the  objective  function  is 
derived from first principles. Since expectations of future inflation, rates of profit, etc., matter 
in the model, it is valuable for policymakers to be able to commit to future actions so as to 
influence those expectations, just as in the canonical New Keynesian framework. In the first 
set of simulations, we assume a single policy maker who can commit (this simplifies solving 
the  model).  We  consider  two  policy  environments:  in  the  first  case,  the  policy  maker  uses 
only  monetary  policy;  in  the  second  case,  the  policy  maker  deploys  both  monetary  and 
macro-prudential instruments. 
We focus on three sorts of shock: a total factor productivity (TFP) shock; a shock to the effort 
necessary  to  monitor  borrowers,  λt;  and  a  mark-up  shock  in  the  inflation  equation.  These 
shocks  are  assumed  to  be  temporary,  though  highly  persistent.  The  TFP  and  mark-up 
shocks are familiar from standard New Keynesian models and affect households and firms in 
the usual way, though, by changing the return on capital, they also affect the equilibrium in 
the banking sector. The shock to the monitoring cost represents a simple way of altering the 
equilibrium leverage ratio and we think of it as a metaphor for changes in the willingness to 
take on risk. A fall in the cost of monitoring – an “exuberance” shock – relaxes the banks’ 
incentive  compatibility  constraint  and  is  associated  with  an  increase  in  the  equilibrium 
20 
 BIS Review 111/2010
leverage ratio, a fall in the loan-deposit spread and an increase in loans to firms; a “panic” 
shock does the opposite. 
Chart 8 shows the response of the economy to an adverse TFP shock, a financial “panic” 
shock and a mark-up shock, assuming in each case that policy responds optimally. When 
TFP falls (upper panel), it is efficient for the level of output to fall and the stock of physical 
capital to gradually fall back. But the shock also leads to a large fall in the return on capital 
and in its price. Left unaddressed, this would lead to a sharp drop in bank profits, a decline in 
bank capital and a reduction in credit supply. If the leverage ratio were constant, that would 
reduce the amount of investment, capital and output. That effect is, however, moderated by 
expectations of a future recovery in the price of capital, which raises future returns on capital, 
thus  allowing  higher  leverage,13  higher  bank  profits  and  a  degree  of  “self-healing”  in  the 
banking sector. 
When monetary policy is the sole instrument available (dashed red line), the nominal interest 
rate is cut briefly but returned to its steady-state value quickly. As described above, monetary 
policy is acting on aggregate demand and credit supply simultaneously. This supports output 
and capital but at the expense of a brief burst of inflation. The cut in the nominal interest rate 
helps boost the future loan-deposit spread but cannot prevent a fall in bank capital. Note also 
that the increase in the future loan-deposit spread pushes up the leverage ratio. 
The  response  is,  though,  quite  different  when  the  policy  maker  can  deploy  the  macro-
prudential  tool  too  (solid  blue  line).  Now,  the  policy  maker  uses  the  bank  levy/subsidy  to 
prevent  the  sharp  fall  in  bank  capital.  Monetary  policy  is  then  set  to  maintain  output  at  its 
new, lower, efficient level with prices unchanged; that requires only a minimal change to the 
policy rate. Essentially the monetary policy maker does just what he would do if there were 
no banking friction present, with the impact of that friction being offset through the macro-
prudential instrument. 
Similar results obtain in the face of a financial “panic” (middle panel), which leads to a lower 
volume of deposits and loans for a given level of bank capital. In this case, it is inefficient for 
output  or  physical  capital  to  fall,  so  policy  needs  to  counteract  the  tightening  in  credit 
conditions  in  order  to  stabilise  inflation,  output  and  capital.  The  viable  path  of  leverage  is 
lower  because  of  the  tightening  of  the  incentive  compatibility  constraint,  so  bank  capital 
needs  to  be  higher  to  sustain  investment.  If  this  has  to  be  done  through  monetary  policy 
alone, the nominal interest rate needs to be cut sharply initially in order to widen the lending 
margin and build up the necessary extra bank capital. When the macro-prudential instrument 
is also available, the necessary increase in bank capital can be achieved immediately using 
the  bank  levy/subsidy,  leaving  physical  capital,  output  and  inflation  unaffected,  again 
obviating the need for monetary policy to react. 
The  bottom  panel  of  Chart  8  shows  the  response  to  a  persistent  positive  mark-up  shock. 
Unless counteracted, the immediate impact of this shock is to push up inflation and to reduce 
output, profits and the price of capital. When monetary policy is the only available instrument, 
the presence of the banking friction leads the monetary authority to set the policy rate at a 
lower level than it would if the friction were absent, in order to boost output and moderate the 
decline in bank capital. Subsequently, the policy rate is returned to around its steady-state 
level and inflation is stabilised by the emerging output gap. The lower path for capital (and 
therefore  investment)  is  maintained  by  a  lower  level  of  bank  capital  as  the  leverage  ratio 
returns to its previous level. 
The  case  when  both  instruments  are  available  is  more  complex.  The  ability  to  use  two 
instruments  allows  the  policy  maker  to  manipulate  the  capital  to  labour  ratio  by  boosting 
credit supply (through a reduction in the bank levy) and constraining labour supply (through a 
                                                 
13   Though note that this implies a countercyclical leverage ratio, which is somewhat at odds with experience. 
BIS Review 111/2010 
 21
higher nominal interest rate). The substitution of capital for labour reduces the marginal cost 
of  output,  holding  down  inflation  for  a  given  level  of  output.  Moreover,  it  puts  capital  and 
output onto paths with much narrower gaps. But this capital-friendly policy boosts the current 
return  on,  and  price  of,  capital.  Without  an  immediate  rise  in  the  bank  levy,  future  credit 
supply would be too high. It is this which gives rise to the rather odd oscillation in the bank 
levy/subsidy. 
While  these  results  are  specific  to  the  model  and  should  not  to  be  taken  literally,  they  do 
suggest  that  policies  should  be  assigned  to  the  frictions  that  they  have  a  comparative 
advantage  in  addressing.  In  the  model,  the  limit  on  leverage  always  binds.  So  it  is 
unsurprising that when adjustments to credit supply are called for, an instrument which acts 
directly  on  that  friction  –  the  macro-prudential  instrument  –  is  more  effective  than  one 
working through several channels, namely monetary policy. So, to the extent that movements 
in bank capital and leverage are key factors driving risk taking and aggregate lending, the 
deployment  of  macro-prudential  policy  is  likely  to  be  more  effective  than  trying  to  “lean 
against the wind” using monetary policy. 
The experiments shown in Chart 8 assume a single policy maker, who is able to commit to 
future policies. In practice it is probably more plausible to assume an inability to commit, as 
well  as  the  possibility  that  decisions  on  monetary  policy  and  macro-prudential  policy  are 
made by different actors. In particular, the latter allows us to investigate the risk of a “push-
me,  pull-you”  outcome,  in  which  the  macro-prudential  authority  tightens  the  availability  of 
credit and then the monetary authority just offsets that by lowering interest rates in order to 
stimulate aggregate demand to keep inflation on track. 
We first consider the case of a single policy maker who controls both instruments, but who is 
unable to tie his hands over future policy actions (Chart 9, red dashed line). We focus on the 
case  of  a  mark-up  shock  since  this  generates  the  most  interesting  results;  for  TFP  and 
financial “panic” shocks the micro-prudential instrument alone generates good outcomes. In 
this instance, the single policy maker can achieve similar outcomes for the output and capital 
gaps to that under full commitment (black dotted line) but has to live with a somewhat higher 
level of inflation. The main difference in the policy setting occurs in the first period because 
the policy maker cannot manipulate leverage to the same degree through the future reversal 
of  the  policy  rate  and  the  bank  levy  that  occurs  under  commitment.  For  later  periods,  the 
paths of the nominal interest rate and the bank levy are close, with higher nominal interest 
rates moderated by a lower bank levy. 
Next we consider the potential co-ordination problems when the two instruments are set by 
different policy makers, where to mimic delegation each is assigned only a part of the social 
objective function. So the monetary policy maker is given an objective over just the variances 
of  inflation  and  output,  with  weights  of  unity  and  0.01,  while  the  macro-prudential  policy 
maker is given one defined over the capital gap and the output gap, also with weights of unity 
and 0.01.14 The solid blue line in Chart 9 shows the outcome of the resulting Nash game. 
Unsurprisingly, the capital gap is considerably narrower than under the single policy maker, 
because it is so prominent in the objective function of the macro-prudential policy maker. As 
a  consequence,  the  outcomes  for  inflation  and  output  are  worse.  Most  notably,  the  policy 
instruments are initially moved more sharply in opposing directions than is the case with a 
single policy maker. As he does not care about the capital gap directly, the monetary policy 
maker raises the policy rate more aggressively in order to contain inflation. And the macro-
prudential policy maker, who cares primarily about the capital gap, moves to maintain bank 
capital by cutting the bank levy more aggressively. This therefore has something of a “push-
                                                 
14   Note that if the macro-prudential policy maker only cared about the capital gap, he would ensure that it was 
zero at all times. 
22 
 BIS Review 111/2010
me, pull-you” feel to it, though in subsequent periods the policy instruments then move back 
more quickly towards their steady-state values than under a single policy maker. 
Although the simulations here do not result in an explosive contest between the  two policy 
makers,  this  issue  clearly  warrants  further  investigation.  Delegation  of  the  monetary  and 
macro-prudential instruments to different decision makers with distinct objectives is certainly 
appealing  on  the  grounds  of  clarity  and  accountability,  especially  since  the  knowledge  and 
expertise necessary to set interest rates are not necessarily the same as that required for the 
deployment  of  the  macro-prudential  toolkit.  But  if  the  instruments  are  assigned  to  different 
decision makers, the likelihood of a “pull-me, push-you” outcome in some circumstances may 
also  be  correspondingly  greater.  So  it  is  important  to  ensure  the  presence  of  suitable 
mechanisms  that  facilitate  the  necessary  co-ordination.  In  the  arrangements  recently 
proposed by the new government in the United Kingdom that is to be achieved by putting both 
the decision makers – the Monetary Policy Committee and the Financial Policy Committee – 
in the same institution and ensuring that they have a number of members in common. 
Concluding remarks 
6. 
To  conclude,  we  return  to  the  elements  of  the  pre-crisis  policy  consensus  outlined  in  the 
introduction and ask what remains or how it needs to be modified. 
1. 
The role of fiscal policy. Fiscal policy is the topic of the next session. But we should 
at  least  note  that  the  collapse  of  private  demand  after  the  demise  of  Lehman 
Brothers  prompted  not  only  the  operation  of  the  automatic  stabilisers  but  also 
additional discretionary fiscal policy measures in the most affected economies, with 
the total fiscal impulse coming in at around 4 per cent of GDP. But the effectiveness 
of  those  expansionary  fiscal  policies  in  stimulating  demand  remains  a  matter  of 
debate,  both  in  policy  making  circles  and  academia.  On  the  one  hand,  there  are 
those who believe the fiscal multipliers are negligible, either because of Ricardian 
Equivalence or because of crowding out through the impact of high public debt and 
deficits on long-term interest rates. On the other hand, there are those who reject 
these arguments and argue that the reduced effectiveness of monetary policy at the 
ZLB and during a credit crisis makes this the only effective macroeconomic policy 
weapon at the current juncture. Whatever the resolution of this debate, however, the 
traditional  arguments  against  activist  fiscal  policies  seem  likely  to  still obtain  once 
normal times return. 
The choice of monetary instrument. Given the above, monetary policy is likely once 
more to take on the primary role in short-term aggregate demand management once 
normal times return. But the apparent effectiveness of asset purchases at altering 
longer-term  yields  opens  up  the  possibility  that  they  could  become  part  of  the 
monetary toolkit in normal times. We argued in Section 3 that despite its apparent 
effectiveness, there were good reasons to return to exclusive reliance on a short-
term policy rate in normal times and after any asset purchases during the crisis have 
been appropriately unwound. 
The  monetary  transmission  mechanism.  The  crisis  has  brutally  exposed  the 
limitations  of  conventional  macroeconomic  analysis  ignoring  the  role  of  financial 
intermediaries. While the existing literature contained a strand focussing on the role 
of financial frictions – including those on the broad credit channel – they generally 
focussed  on  those  that  arose  from  the  behaviour  of  borrowers.  The  crisis  has 
illustrated  the  need  to  take  seriously  the  incentives  facing  the  intermediaries 
themselves.  Researchers  are  already  starting  to  fill  this  hole  (the  Gertler-Karadi 
model employed in Section 5 is but one example) and it is a reasonable bet that the 
literature will be in a very different place in a few years time. It may be tempting to 
think that these frictions will become less important when normal times return and 
therefore  that  the  ability  to  model  the  behaviour  of  intermediaries  will  only  be 
2. 
3. 
BIS Review 111/2010 
 23
its  own 
insufficient  on 
temporary  price-level  shocks, 
necessary during bad times. That would be, though, an error. Central bankers, as 
guardians of overall financial stability, need to understand the risks building up in the 
financial  system  better  than  we  did  during  the  run-up  to  the  present  crisis.  That 
requires greater attention to such issues during good times. 
Central bank independence. Nothing that has happened over the past decade or so 
suggests  that  the  thinking  behind  the  delegation  of  monetary  policy  to  an 
operationally independent central bank is flawed. But the application of unorthodox 
policies during the crisis has inevitably forced the central banks concerned to work 
more  closely  with  finance  ministries  and  sometimes  taken  them  into  politically 
sensitive  territory  that  they  would  rather  not  inhabit.  Normal  times  should  make  it 
possible to retreat from these unorthodox policies, but a concern to circumscribe the 
central bank’s powers may well linger. 
The pursuit of price stability. Because monetary policy failed to prevent the crisis, 
some have suggested that the emphasis on price stability has been misplaced and 
that  inflation  targeting  has  “failed”.  But  the  price-stability  oriented  policies  of  the 
Great  Moderation  proved  to  be  instrumental  in  delivering  not  just  low  and  stable 
inflation  but  also  steady  growth  for  a  sustained  period.  The  maintenance  of  price 
stability  may  be 
to  guarantee  continued  overall 
macroeconomic  stability,  but  it  surely  has  to  remain  the  central  objective  of 
monetary policy in the long run, even if other considerations may intrude in the short 
run.  Any  other  objective  risks  de-anchoring  price  expectations  and  inducing 
unnecessary  extra  volatility  into  the  economy.  Flexible  inflation  targets  (explicit  or 
implicit),  which  allow  the  monetary  authority  some  constrained  discretion  in 
accommodating 
remain  a  suitable 
organising framework for the conduct of monetary policy. We remain sceptical of the 
net benefits of moving to a higher inflation target in normal times so as to provide 
monetary policy with more room for manoeuvre. And a move to price-level targeting 
looks  likely  to  offer  only  modest  gains  –  particularly  when  there  are  also  costs  to 
changing the framework – though further analysis may shed additional light on this 
particular issue (Section 4). 
Monetary policy and credit/asset-price booms. The twin beliefs that financial markets 
are  efficient  and  that  financial  innovation  is  necessarily  welfare-enhancing  have 
been  dealt  a  serious  blow  by  the  crisis.  We  have  seen  that  financial  markets  are 
riddled with any number of incentive distortions and market failures. Alongside that, 
the crisis has also raised serious question marks about a policy of benign neglect 
towards credit/asset-price booms. In the absence of other instruments, the case for 
“leaning  against  the  wind”  by  setting  policy  rates  higher  during  the  boom  phase 
seems stronger than before. But, at least most of the time, monetary policy does not 
seem like the most appropriate instrument to call on – it is not targeted at the key 
friction  and  involves  too  much  collateral  damage  to  activity.  The  deployment  of 
macro-prudential instruments, focussed more directly on the source of the excessive 
exuberance  seems  more  appropriate.  But  we  still  have  much  to  learn  about  how 
such instruments work in practice and how they interface with monetary policy. 
The relationship between price stability and financial stability. It is now pretty clear 
that  price  stability  is  not  a  sufficient  condition  for  financial  stability.  Indeed,  the 
empirical results of Section 2 suggest that the reduction in volatility associated with 
the Great Moderation may have contributed to excessively optimistic assessments 
of risk, the compression of risk premia and the expansion in leverage. That does not 
imply  central  banks  should  retreat  from  the  pursuit  of  price  stability,  and 
macroeconomic  stability  more  generally.  But  it  does  suggest  that  policy  makers 
need both to be aware that long periods of benign conditions may foster excessive 
private-sector  risk-taking,  and  to  be  ready  to  take  the  necessary  action  when  that 
happens. 
therefore 
BIS Review 111/2010
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
24 
 Appendix: 
The model of Section 5 
The  model  is  a  slimmed  down  version  of  Gertler  and  Karadi  (2009).  The  economy  is 
populated by two types of agents: producer/consumer households and bankers. Households 
live forever and have standard intertemporal preferences over consumption (Ct) and hours 
worked (Ht). Investment (It), which is subject to adjustment costs, cannot be funded directly 
by households and instead must be financed by borrowing from a bank. Bank loans (Lt) are 
financed by the capital of bankers (Bt) and deposits (Dt) from households. Banks are owned 
and  run  by  bankers.  A  proportion  (1-γ)  of  bankers  die  at  the  end  of  each  period  and  are 
replaced by a new generation. Bankers reinvest all their earnings in the capital of the bank 
whilst they live, and leave their net wealth to households when they die. 
In log-linear form (carets denote log-deviations from steady-state), the standard block of the 
model is described by: 
1) 
 2) 
3) 
4) 
5)  
6) 
7) 
8) 
      Market-clearing  condition  for  output 
(Yt); 
Production function (Zt is TFP and Kt 
is capital); 
Labour  market  equilibrium  (Xt 
marginal costs); 
Price of physical capital (qt); 
is 
  Return on capital (rk
t); 
Law of motion for physical capital; 
Consumption  Euler  equation  (rn
deposit rate); 
New  Keynesian  Phillips  curve  (πt  is 
inflation rate). 
t  is 
 The  special  ingredient  is  a  moral  hazard  friction  in  the  banking  sector.  As  households  are 
unable to finance investment directly but most borrow the funds from a bank, the value of the 
stock of physical capital, qtKt, is equal to the level of bank loans, which, because banks are 
assumed to hold no other assets, is also equal to bank capital plus deposits 
9) 
But bankers must exert (unobservable) effort (λt) per unit of loans each period to ensure that 
borrowers invest in productive physical capital rather than unproductive status symbols with 
private benefit and no recovery value for the bank. So in order for monitoring to be incentive 
compatible, the cost of monitoring must be less than or equal to the gross return on lending, 
10) 
where Rk
t and Rt are gross returns on loans and deposits, respectively. Putting these banking 
sector  equations  together  and  recalling  that  bankers  do  not  consume  but  pass  on  their 
wealth when they die, we have two additional equilibrium conditions, a no-shirking condition 
for bankers : 
11) 
  where 
 and 
; and a law of motion for bank capital: 
BIS Review 111/2010 
 25
12) 
where τt is a bank levy/subsidy. Equation (11) shows that the leverage ratio is an increasing 
function of the spread between the return on capital but decreasing in the monitoring cost 
(λt). Equation (12) shows that bank capital accumulates according to the profits of surviving 
bankers. Changes in bank profits, in turn, reflect the average spread between the loan rate 
and  the  deposit  rate  on  changes  on  the  deposit  base,  the  average  return  on  lending  on 
changes in bank capital, positive shocks to the rate of return on current lending and negative 
shocks to the deposit rate. 
We assume that policy makers seek to minimise a loss function: 
 13)  
L
  j
 0
 j

y
 2
t

j
 y
t
 j
 y
*
t

j
2
 
k
 
l
 k
*
t

j
t
 j
 2
  The  addition  of  the  arguments  in  kt  is  designed  to  reflect  financial  stability  concerns.  We 
assume  equal  weights  of  1  on  inflation  and  0.01  on  the  output  gap  and  capital  gap.  The 
starred  variables  are  the  levels  of  output  and  lending  which  would  hold  in  a  frictionless 
economy. 
Policymakers  are  set  the  nominal  interest  rate  and  the  bank  levy/subsidy.  The  model  was 
calibrated  with  standard  parameter  values  at  a  quarterly  frequency  (see,  for  example, 
Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist, 1999). Bank leverage was set at 10 in the steady state and 
the steady-state spread between the return on capital and the deposit rate is 1 percent. 
26 
 BIS Review 111/2010
Table 1 
Central Bank Policy Actions during the Crisis 
   
k
n
a
B
  
l
a
r
t
n
e
C
n
a
e
p
o
r
u
E
 
e
v
r
e
s
e
R
 
l
a
r
e
d
e
F
S
U
  d
n
a
l
g
n
E
 
f
o
 
k
n
a
B
Enhanced liquidity provision 
Modified discount window 
Exceptional long-term ops 
Broadening collateral 
Expanding counterparties 
FX swap lines 
Policy rate guidance 
Indicative policy path 
Asset purchases/funding 
Government bonds 
Foreign currency securities 
Commercial paper 
Asset-backed securities 
Corporate bonds 
Other securities 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 X 
X 
 X 
 X 
X 
 X 
 X 
    X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
  n
a
p
a
J
 
f
o
 
k
n
a
B
 X 
X 
X 
X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
X 
 
a
d
a
n
a
C
 
f
o
 
k
n
a
B
 X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
       
a
i
l
a
r
t
s
u
A
 
f
o
 
k
n
a
B
 
e
v
r
e
s
e
R
 X 
X 
X 
X 
        
k
n
a
B
 
l
a
n
o
i
t
a
N
 
s
s
i
w
S
 X 
X 
 X 
  X 
  X 
X 
 
k
n
a
b
s
k
i
R
h
s
i
d
e
w
S
 X 
X 
X 
X 
 X 
      BIS Review 111/2010 
 27
Table 2 
Stationarity Tests on Price Level 
 Coefficienta 
ADF Statisticb 
-0.487 
-0.119 
-0.095 
-0.183 
-0.105 
-0.186 
-0.141 
-0.188 
-0.138c 
-2.46 
-1.89 
-1.02 
-2.03 
-2.22 
-2.61 
-2.55 
-2.68 
-5.98d 
 Euro area 
Japan 
United Kingdom 
United States 
Australia 
Canada 
Sweden 
New Zealand 
Pooled 
Notes:  Sample  runs  from  1993Q4  to  2010Q1,  except  for  the  euro  area,  which  runs  from 
1999Q4 to 2010Q1. 
a: The coefficient δ in the regression Δρt = α + βt + γ1Δρt-1 + γ2Δρt-2 + δρt-1 + εt, where ρt is the 
deviation of the actual price level from a price path implied by the target measure of inflation. 
b: 90% critical level = -3.14 (-3.16 for euro-area regression). 
c: The coefficient δ in a pooled regression (omitting the euro area), where δ is constrained to 
take the same value in all jurisdictions. 
d: Adjusted t-statistic, following Levin, Lin and Chu (2002). 
BIS Review 111/2010
 28 
 Table 3 
 A Leaning Against the Wind Policy 
  Policy Rate 
(% change 
from 2003Q1) 
Base 
LATW 
scenario
Real Stock of 
Credit 
(% change 
from 2003Q1)  
LATW 
Base
scenario
Real House 
Prices 
(% change 
from 2003Q1) 
LATW 
Base
scenario
Output 
(% change 
from 2003Q1) 
Base  LATW 
scenario
United States 
2004Q1 
1.0 
2005Q1 
2.5 
2006Q1 
4.5 
2007Q1 
5.3 
2008Q1 
3.2 
United Kingdom 
2004Q1 
3.9 
2005Q1 
4.8 
2006Q1 
4.5 
2007Q1 
5.3 
2008Q1 
5.3 
2.9 
4.9 
6.9 
7.0 
3.0 
5.6 
7.1 
7.1 
7.4 
6.0 
5.9 
5.3 
5.5 
4.2 
12.2 
10.5 
13.8 
10.0 
4.1 
7.6 
19.3 
16.4 
21.1 
14.0 
10.9 
28.1 
23.9 
22.2 
12.1 
12.5 
3.7 
6.3 
8.5 
9.0 
34.7 
30.1 
16.2 
5.0 
14.8 
10.8 
9.7 
9.4 
17.5 
15.3 
21.1 
19.7 
26.7 
18.3 
38.2 
34.3 
34.7 
15.1 
3.6 
5.5 
9.1 
45.3 
39.7 
43.0 
15.0 
11.6 
3.4 
4.7 
7.3 
9.0 
55.4 
47.2 
41.1 
5.8 
13.7 
10.1 
 BIS Review 111/2010 
 29
Chart 1 
Deviation of Policy Rates from Taylor Rule 
Percentage points
 Euro area
UK
US
5 
4 
3 
2 
1 
0 
-1 
-2 
-3 
-4 
-5
2000 
2001 
2002 
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009 
Source: OECD. 
 30 
 BIS Review 111/2010
Chart 2 
Macroeconomic Volatility Measures 
 United States 
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
2010
 7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
2010
 31
1966 
1970 
1974 
1978 
1982
1986
1990
1994
1998
2002 
2006 
United Kingdom 
1966 
1970 
1974 
1978 
1982
1986
1990
1994
1998
2002 
2006 
BIS Review 111/2010 
 3
2
 Chart 3a 
Impulse Responses for United States  
United 
States 
 Macro-
volatility 
Inflation 
GDP 
growth 
Change in 
bond 
spread 
Real credit 
growth 
Policy rate  House price 
inflation 
 Volatility 
shock 
Supply 
shock 
Demand 
shock 
Credit 
demand 
shock 
Credit 
supply 
shock  
Monetary 
policy 
shock 
House 
price 
shock 
 i
 I
B
S
R
e
v
e
w
1
1
1
2
0
1
0
      Chart 3b 
Impulse Responses for United Kingdom 
United 
Kingdom 
 Macro-
volatility 
Inflation 
GDP 
growth 
Change in 
bond 
spread 
Real credit 
growth 
Policy rate  House price 
inflation 
 i
 I
B
S
R
e
v
e
w
1
1
1
2
0
1
0
  Volatility 
shock 
Supply 
shock 
Demand 
shock 
Credit 
demand 
shock 
Credit 
supply 
shock  
Monetary 
policy 
shock 
House 
price 
shock 
 3
3
     15
10
5
0
‐5
‐10
‐15
Chart 4a 
Historical Decompositions: United States 
Real credit growth (ann %) 
Real house price inflation (ann %) 
1970
1974
1978
1986
1990
1982
Federal Funds rate (%) 
1998
1994
2002
15
10
5
0
‐5
‐10
‐15
2006
2010
1970
1974
1978
20
15
10
5
0
‐5
‐10
1986
1990
1982
1998
GDP growth (ann %) 
1994
2002
2006
2010
10
8
6
4
2
0
‐2
‐4
‐6
‐8
1970
1974
1978
1982
1986
1990
1994
1998
2002
2006
2010
1970
Legend:1  
1974
1978
1982
1986
1990
1994
1998
2002
2006
2010
Trend
Aggregate demand and supply shocks
Credit market shocks
Macro volatility  shock
Monetary policy shock
House price shock
 1  Aggregate  demand  and  supply  shocks”  is  the  net  impact  of  the  aggregate  demand  shock  and  the  aggregate  supply 
shock. Similarly, “Credit market shocks” is the net impact of the credit demand and credit supply shocks. 
34 
 BIS Review 111/2010
 40
30
20
10
0
‐10
‐20
‐30
Chart 4b 
Historical Decompositions: United Kingdom 
Real credit growth (ann %) 
Real house price inflation (ann %) 
25
20
15
10
5
0
‐5
‐10
‐15
‐20
‐25
‐30
1970
1974
1978
1982
1986
1990
1994
1998
2002
2006
2010
1970
1974
1978
1982
1986
1990
1994
1998
2002
2006
2010
Bank Rate (%) 
GDP growth (ann %) 
20
15
10
5
0
‐5
‐10
‐15
12
8
4
0
‐4
‐8
1970
1974
1978
1982
1986
1990
1994
1998
2002
2006
2010
1970
1974
1978
1982
1986
1990
1994
1998
2002
2006
2010
Legend:  
Trend
Aggregate demand and supply shocks
Credit market shocks
Macro volatility  shock
Monetary policy shock
House price shock
  BIS Review 111/2010 
 35
Chart 5 
Central Bank Assets (LHS) and Liabilities (RHS) 
United States 
    Euro Area 
  36 
 BIS Review 111/2010
 Chart 5 (cont.) 
Central Bank Assets (LHS) and Liabilities (RHS) 
 United Kingdom 
   BIS Review 111/2010 
 37
Deviation of Price Level from Deterministic Target Path 
Chart 6 
     BIS Review 111/2010
 38 
  15
10
5
0
-5
-10
-15
Simulation of a “Leaning Against The Wind” Policy 2003–6: US 
Chart 7a 
 Policy rate 
Real credit growth (ann %) 
10
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
2010
 2001
2004
2007
2001
2004
2007
2010
Real house price growth (ann %) 
GDP growth (ann %) 
10
5
0
-5
-10
-15
2001
2004
2007
2010
  5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
-4
-5
2001
2004
2007
2010
BIS Review 111/2010 
 39
Simulation of a “Leaning Against The Wind” Policy 2003–6: UK 
Chart 7b 
 Policy rate 
Real credit growth (ann %) 
10
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
2010
 2001
2004
2007
2001
2004
2007
Real house price growth (ann %) 
GDP growth (ann %) 
30
20
10
0
-10
-20
-30
-40
2001
2004
2007
2010
2001
2004
2007
   14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
2010
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
-8
2010
40 
 BIS Review 111/2010
Chart 8 
    BIS Review 111/2010 
 41
 Chart 9 
  42 
 BIS Review 111/2010
 Bibliography 
Adrian,  Tobias,  and  Hyun  S.  Shin  (2008).  “Financial  Intermediaries, Financial  Stability  and 
Monetary Policy”, in Maintaining Stability in a Changing Financial System, 287–334. Federal 
Reserve Bank of Kansas: Kansas City. 
Adrian, Tobias, and Hyun S. Shin (2009). “Money, Liquidity and Monetary Policy”, American 
Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 99, 600–605. 
Adrian,  Tobias,  Emanuel  Moench  and  Hyun  S.  Shin  (2010).  “Macro  Risk  Premium  and 
Intermediary  Balance  Sheet  Quantities”,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  Staff  Report 
No.428. 
Ambler, Stephen (2009). “Price-Level Targeting and Stabilization Policy: A Review”, Bank of 
Canada Review, Spring, 19–29. 
Andrés,  Javier,  J.  David  López-Salido,  and  Edward  Nelson  (2004).  “Tobin’s  Imperfect 
Substitution in Optimizing General Equilibrium”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 36(4), 
665–690. 
Bean,  Charles  R.  (2003).  “Asset  Prices,  Financial  Imbalances  and  Monetary  Policy:  Are 
Inflation Targets Enough?” in Anthony Richards and Timothy Robinson (eds.) Asset Prices 
and Monetary Policy, 48–76. Reserve Bank of Australia: Sydney. 
Bernanke,  Ben  S.  (2005).  “The  Global  Saving  Glut  and  the  US  Current  Account  Deficit”, 
Sandridge Lecture, Virginia Association of Economics, Richmond, Virginia, 10 March. 
Bernanke,  Ben  S.  (2010).  “Monetary  Policy  and  the  Housing  Bubble”,  speech  to  the 
American Economic Association, Atlanta, Georgia, 3 January. 
Bernanke, Ben S., and Mark Gertler (1999). “Monetary Policy and Asset Price Volatility”, in 
New  Challenges  for  Monetary  Policy,  77–128.  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas:  Kansas 
City. 
Bernanke, Ben S., Mark Gertler, and Simon Gilchrist (1999). “The Financial Accelerator in a 
Quantitative  Business  Cycle  Framework“,  in  John  B.  Taylor  and  Michael  Woodford  (eds.) 
Handbook of Macroeconomics, edition 1, volume 1, 1341–1393. Elsevier: Amsterdam. 
Bernanke, Ben S., Vince Reinhart and Brian Sack (2004). “Monetary Policy Alternatives at 
the Zero Bound: An Empirical Assessment”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 35(2), 
1–100. 
Blanchard,  Olivier,  Giovanni  Dell’Ariccia  and  Paolo  Mauro 
Macroeconomic Policy”, mimeo, International Monetary Fund, January. 
Borio,  Claudio,  and  William  White  (2003).  “Whither  Monetary  and  Financial  Stability?  The 
Implications of Evolving Policy Regimes”, in Monetary Policy and Uncertainty: Adapting to a 
Changing Economy, 131–212. Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City: Kansas City. 
Borio, Claudio, and Haibin Zhu (2008). “Capital regulation, Risk-Taking and Monetary Policy: 
A Missing Link in the Transmission Mechanism”, Bank for International Settlements Working 
Paper No.268. 
Brainard,  William  C.  (1967).  “Uncertainty  and  the  Effectiveness  of  Policy”,  American 
Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 57, 411–25. 
Brazier,  Alex,  Richard  Harrison,  Mervyn  A.  King,  and  A.  Yates  (2008).  “The  Danger  of 
Inflating  Expectations  of  Macroeconomic  Stability:  Heuristic  Switching  in  an  Overlapping-
Generations Monetary Model”, International Journal of Central Banking, 4(2), 219–254.  
Brunner,  Karl  and  Allan  Meltzer  (1972).  “Money,  Debt  and  Economic  Activity”,  Journal  of 
Political Economy, vol. 80, 951–977. 
“Rethinking 
(2010). 
BIS Review 111/2010 
 43
 Buiter, Willem H., and Nicolas Panigirtzoglou (2001). “Liquidity Traps: How to Avoid Them 
and  How  to  Escape  Them”,  in  Wim  F.  V.  Vanthoor  and  Joke  Mooij,  (eds.)  Reflections  on 
Economics and Econometrics: Essays in Honour of Martin Fase, 13–58. De Nederlandsche 
Bank NV: Amsterdam. 
Caballero, Ricardo J., Emmanuel Farhi and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas (2008). “An Equilibrium 
Model of Global Imbalances and Low Interest Rates”, American Economic Review, 98, 358–
393. 
Cecchetti, Stephen, Hans Genberg, and Sushil Wadhwani (2002). “Asset Prices in a Flexible 
Inflation  Targeting  Framework”, 
in  William  Hunter,  George  Kaufman  and  Michael 
Pomerleano,  eds.,  Asset  Price  Bubbles:  The  Implications  for  Monetary,  Regulatory  and 
International Policies, 427–444. MIT Press: Cambridge, MA. 
Coenen,  Günter,  Athanasios  Orphanides  and  Volker  Wieland  (2004).  “Price  Stability  and 
Monetary Policy Effectiveness when Nominal Interest Rates are Bounded at Zero”, Advances 
in Macroeconomics, 4(1). 
Cúrdia, Vasco, and Michael Woodford (2009). “Credit Spreads and Monetary Policy”, NBER 
Working Paper 15289. 
Cúrdia,  Vasco,  and  Michael  Woodford  (2010).  “The  Central  Bank  Balance  Sheet  as  an 
Instrument  of  Monetary  Policy”,  paper  prepared  for  Carnegie-Rochester  Conference  on 
Public Policy, “The Future of Central Banking,” April 16–17. 
Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Michael Woodford (2003). “The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and 
Optimal Monetary Policy”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1, 139–211. 
Edge,  Rochelle  M.  (2003).  “A  Utility-Based  Welfare  Criterion  in  a  Model  with  Endogenous 
Capital  Accumulation”,  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System,  Finance  and 
Economics Discussion Series, No.2003-66.  
Gagnon,  Joseph,  Matthew  Raskin,  Julie  Remache,  and  Brian  Sack  (2010).  “Large-scale 
Asset Purchases by the Federal Reserve: Did They Work?” Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York, Staff Report No.441. 
Gertler,  Mark,  and  Peter  Karadi  (2009).  “A  Model  of  Unconventional  Monetary  Policy”, 
mimeo, New York University.  
Greenspan, Alan (2002) “Opening Remarks” in Rethinking Stabilization Policy, 1–10. Federal 
Reserve Bank of Kansas: Kansas City. 
Gruen,  David,  Michael  Plumb  and  Andrew  Stone  (2003).  “How  Should  Monetary  Policy 
Respond to Asset-Price Bubbles?” in A. Richards and T. Robinson, eds., Asset Prices and 
Monetary Policy, 260–280. Reserve Bank of Australia: Sydney. 
Heikensten, Lars (2009). “Inflation Targeting 20 Years On”, Presentation at 6th Norges Bank 
Monetary Policy conference, Oslo, June 12. 
Joyce,  Michael,  Ana  Lasaosa,  Ibrahim  Stevens  and  Matthew  Tong  (2010).  “The  Financial 
Market Impact of Quantitative Easing,” Bank of England Working Paper No.393. 
Kamenik,  Ondra,  Heesun  Kiem,  Vladimir  Klyuev  and  Douglas  Laxton  (2008).  “Why  is 
Canada’s Price Level So Predictable?” IMF Working Paper No.08/25. 
King, Mervyn A. (1999). “Challenges for Monetary Policy”, in New Challenges for Monetary 
Policy, 11–58. Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas: Kansas City. 
Levin, Andrew, Chien-Fu Lin and Chia-Shang James Chu (2002). “Unit Root Tests in Panel 
Data: Asymptotic and Finite-Sample Properties”, Journal of Econometrics, 108, 1–24. 
Meier,  André.  (2009).  “Panacea,  Curse,  or  Non-Event?  Unconventional  Monetary  Policy  in 
the United Kingdom”, IMF Working Paper No.09/163. 
44 
 BIS Review 111/2010
 Minsky,  Hyman  (1982).  “The  Financial-Instability  Hypothesis:  Capitalist  Processes  and  the 
Behavior  of  the  Economy”  in  Charles  Kindleberger  and  Jean-Pierre  Laffargue  (eds.), 
Financial Crises. Cambridge University Press: Cambridge. 
Neely,  Christopher  J.  (2010).  “The  Large  Scale  Asset  Purchases  had  Large  International 
Effects”, Federal Reserve Bank of St.Louis Working Paper No.2010-018A. 
Obstfeld,  Maurice,  and  Kenneth  S.  Rogoff  (2009).  “Global  Imbalances  and  the  Financial 
Crisis:  Products  of  Common  Causes”,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  San  Francisco  Asia 
Economic policy Conference, 18–20 October. 
Oda, Nobuyuki, and Kazuo Ueda (2005). “The Effects of the Bank of Japan’s Zero Interest 
Rate Commitment and Quantitative Monetary Easing on the Yield Curve: A Macro-Finance 
Approach”, Bank of Japan Working Paper No.05-E-6. 
Ramey, Garey and Valerie A. Ramey (1995). “Cross-Country Evidence on the Link Between 
Volatility and Growth”, American Economic Review, 85(5), 1138–1151. 
Reifschneider, David L., and John C. Williams (2000). “Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in 
a Low Inflation Era”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 32(4), 936–966. 
Rajan, Raghuram G. (2005). “Has Financial Development Made the World Riskier?”, in The 
Greenspan  Era:  Lessons  for  the  Future,  313–370.  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City: 
Kansas City. 
Shiratsuka,  Shigenori  (2009).  “Size  and  Composition  of  the  Central  Bank  Balance  Sheet: 
Revisiting  Japan’s  Experience  of  the  Quantitative  Easing  Policy”,  Bank  of  Japan  IMES 
Discussion Paper No. 2009-E-25. 
Svensson,  Lars  E.  O.  (1999).  “Price-level  Targeting  versus  Inflation  Targeting:  A  Free 
Lunch?,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 31(3), 277–295. 
Taylor,  John  B.  (2007).  “Housing  and  Monetary  Policy”  in  Housing,  Housing  Finance  and 
Monetary Policy, 463–476. Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City: Kansas City. 
Taylor,  John  B.  (2008).  “The  Costs  and  Benefits  of  Deviating  from  the  Systematic 
Component  of  Monetary  Policy”.  Keynote  Address  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  San 
Francisco Conference on Monetary Policy and Asset Markets, February 22, 2008.  
Tobin,  James  (1969).  “A  General  Equilibrium  Approach  to  Monetary  Theory”,  Journal  of 
Money, Credit and Banking, 1, 15–29. 
Uhlig, Harald (2005). “What are the Effects of Monetary Policy on Output? Results from an 
Agnostic Identification Procedure”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 52, 381–419. 
Vestin,  David  (2006).  “Price-Level  versus 
Economics, 53(7), 1361–1376. 
White,  William  R.  (2006).  “Is  Price  Stability  Enough?”,  Bank  for  International  Settlements 
Working Paper 205. 
White, William R. (2009). “Should Monetary Policy ‘Lean or Clean’?”, Federal Reserve Bank 
of Dallas Globalisation and Monetary Policy Institute Working Paper 34. 
Williams, John C. (2009). “Heeding Daedalus: Optimal Inflation and the Zero Lower Bound”, 
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2, 1–50. 
Woodford, Michael (2003). Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy. 
Princeton University Press: Princeton, NJ. 
Inflation  Targeting”,  Journal  of  Monetary 
BIS Review 111/2010 
 45
