Mercedes Marcó del Pont: The certainties and uncertainties in the world 
economy 
Speech  by  Ms  Mercedes  Marcó  del  Pont,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Argentina,  
at  the  Money  and  Banking  Conference  2010,  Central  Bank  of  Argentina,  Buenos  Aires, 
2 September 2010. 
 This 2010 Conference is very special to all Argentineans because this year is our country’s 
Bicentennial and the 75th anniversary of the Central Bank. We are celebrating this Money 
Conference  in  the  framework  of  a  world  economy  with  abundant  uncertainties.  During  the 
early morning session, the possibility of developed countries entering a final, sustainable and 
balanced  growth  phase  was  discussed.  There  is  also  uncertainty  as  to  what  is  going  to 
happen to the weakest European economies that are implementing the fiscal consolidation 
and adjustment programs imposed on them to settle their debt issues, which most of us think 
will probably stress Europe’s current structural issues. 
There  is  also  uncertainty  in  the  international  financial  regulation  arena  and  its  new 
engineering. After the onset of the crisis when rock bottom was hit, there were some signs of 
a  possible  exit  to  the  crisis  with  the  emergence  of  positive  indicators  in  a  number  of 
developed economies; now the most critical positions concerning a substantial reform of the 
international financial architecture are starting to fade away. The idea of making changes so 
that everything at the structural level remains the same seems to be consolidating.  
There are many more uncertainties that could be discussed, but I would rather speak to you 
today about some certainties we have in developing countries, especially in Argentina. We 
have one clear certainty: for the first time in our short- and long-term history, countries in the 
region, in general, and Argentina, in particular, are going through this global crisis – one of 
most severe since the Great Depression – with very low economic and social costs, without 
having faced a cyclical and structural external sector crisis or been immersed in recession 
crises leading to job and wealth destruction. In fact, it was quite the opposite: as we faced 
this  crisis,  activity  levels  were  preserved,  macroeconomic  imbalances, avoided  and,  at  the 
same  time,  income  levels  were  intended  to  be  distributed,  both  in  Argentina  and  in  many 
countries in the region.  
This is not by chance. It is the result of our countries’ consistent economic models, which 
gave up old conventional theories that furthered our nations’ underdevelopment, and drove 
attention back to domestic market growth supported by wage corrections and redistribution 
policies, where public investment acts as a source of wealth and social inclusion, and private 
investment  was  also  encouraged.  This  is  especially  important  in  a  country  like  Argentina 
which, after ten years of convertibility, was able to restore foreign exchange and monetary 
sovereignty.  
The  certainties  developing  countries  have  –  there  are  many  colleagues  from  Mercosur 
countries with whom we frequently meet –,  enable us to realize there are many  economic 
policy areas that we have recovered. As to central banking, these areas are related to certain 
instruments that are already part of our policy menu and are here to stay.  
I will briefly refer to three of them. The first is intervention in the exchange market. With their 
specificities  and  different  monetary  regimes,  developing  countries  now  know  they  have  to 
intervene in order to curb high currency volatility; in the case of Argentina, in order to sustain 
a competitive exchange rate that underpins national production and employment. There are 
certainties  about  the  fundamental  role  of  international  reserve  accumulation  which  has 
enabled  many  of  us  to  intervene  and  thus  better  weather  the  negative  impacts  of  the 
international  crisis.  There  is  also  strong  consensus  on  the  negative  impact  of  short-term 
financial  capital  flows.  As  quoted  here  today,  in  1944,  Raúl  Prebisch  said  as  regards  hot 
BIS Review 113/2010 
 1
money,  i.e.  the  floating  funds  which  have  brought  so  many  difficulties  to  our  countries:  it 
comes  when  we  do  not  need  it  and  leaves  when  it  could  be  of  use.  This  matter  was 
discussed almost 60 years ago but today, with financial globalization, it is more current than 
ever.  We  know  that  short-term  hot  money  weakens  the  processes  of  industrialization  and 
production  profile  change  in  our  countries,  creating  consumption  and  asset  bubbles  and, 
when it leaves the country, it causes a lot of damage.  
It is very important that we defend and value these certainties because they have to be part 
of  developing  countries’  agendas  when  we  negotiate  at  the  international  level.  So  far, 
developed  countries,  which  have  other  serious  problems  and  are  focused  on  them,  are 
perhaps not worried about these heterodoxies and only allow us to refer to them temporarily. 
We should not rule out the possibility that when everything goes back to normal, when exit 
strategies are implemented, these mechanisms, already part of our public policies, may be 
dismantled. And these mechanisms give us autonomy in this globalized world.  
I  would  like  to  mention  that  there  is  increased  certainty  or  perhaps  more  discussion,  both 
locally and globally, regarding the role of central banks and their responsibility, not only in 
maintaining monetary and financial stability, but also in ensuring that stability is consistent 
with  economic  growth  and  employment.  We  still  have  to  make  a  huge  effort  and  try  to 
reconcile stability with growth, employment and equity. Much progress has been made in this 
discussion and that is what we want to foster from the Central Bank.  
It may sound anecdotal, but I consider it relevant to mention that last week we at the Central 
Bank made the decision to change our Monetary Program. When making this decision, we 
were faithful to this view of economic problems: monetary variables cannot be independent 
of  the  real  economy.  Monetary  affairs  have  to  be  consistent  with  a  vigorously  growing 
country  that  gradually  distributes  the  fruits  borne.  This  is  one  of  the  challenges:  leaving 
behind  those  watertight  compartments  where  monetary  affairs  are  detached  from  the  real 
economy.  Perhaps  conventional  thinking,  the  monetarist  system,  is  so  embedded  in 
Argentina that it makes it difficult to deal with the stability issues related to the challenges of 
a still developing country which has a long way to go as regards growth, income distribution, 
job recovery and upward wage correction. That was what we did: we adjusted the Monetary 
Program so as not to sterilize growth and for it to be consistent with these objective data of 
the  Argentine  economy.  We  aspire  to  break  those  watertight  compartments  and  put  the 
Central Bank of Argentina back at the core of macroeconomic coordination. The aim is to be 
in  line  with  what  has  been  done  by  successfully  developed  countries.  We  must  work  very 
hard  to  identify  what  these  countries  have  done  and  keep  doing  to  promote  their 
development and protect their own interests rather that what they say they have done. 
In this sense, it is by no means a small detail that this is the first time a president of Argentina 
has joined us in this Money Conference. For that reason, I would like to thank Mrs. President 
for  honoring  us  with  her  presence  today  in  a  conference  where  we  intend  to  have  a 
discussion without conceptual categorizations, with a high degree of pragmatism and, most 
importantly,  with  the  intellectual honesty  needed  to  raise these  issues.  I  am  confident  that 
throughout this Conference there will be very good ideas shedding light on the path we have 
walked in Argentina in recent years which engages us all in strengthening development and 
equity.  
Thank you very much. 
2 
 BIS Review 113/2010
