Hu Xiaolian: Successful experiences of further reforming the RMB 
exchange rate regime 
Article  by  Ms  Hu  Xiaolian,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  People’s  Bank  of  China,  Beijing, 
30 July 2010. 
 China moved into a managed floating exchange rate regime based on market demand and 
supply with reference to a basket of currencies on July 21st, 2005. Positive results produced 
thereafter showed that the reform was launched at the right time in the right direction. 
I. 
The reform of exchange rate regime has been furthered at an appropriate time 
It is at the 3rd Plenary Session of 14th CPC Central Committee that the goal of establishing a 
managed floating exchange rate regime based on market supply and demand was outlined. 
In  January  1994,  with  the  unification  of  RMB’s  official  exchange  rate  and  swap  rate,  the 
single, managed floating exchange rate based on market supply and demand was officially 
adopted.  The  RMB  exchange  rate  gradually  approached  an  adaptive  level,  which  helped 
enhance  the  competitiveness  of  export-oriented  enterprises  and  facilitated  the  shift  from 
trade deficit to surplus. 
During  the  Asian  financial  crisis  in  1997,  the  RMB  exchange  rate  was  kept  stable  around 
8.3 yuan to one dollar in order to brake competitive devaluation of Asian currencies. Though 
the impacts of Asian financial crisis subsided in 2001, the RMB was kept at a stable level 
against  the  US  dollar  as  unfavorable  factors,  such  as  deflation,  arose  domestically. 
Reflecting  on  the  crisis,  China  stepped  up  the  financial  reform  and  infrastructure  building. 
Researches and preparation on resuming exchange rate floating were also well underway. 
As  financial  institutions  had  not  completed  reform  and  were  not  yet  prepared  to  handle 
exchange rate movements or provide enterprises with relevant services, the reform of large-
sized state-owned commercial banks was conducted before exchange rate reform. 
The reform in large financial institutions, which is the basis for exchange rate regime reform, 
was completed by July 2005. The Bank of Communications, China Construction Bank and 
the Bank of China finished financial restructuring and became listed companies. The financial 
restructuring  of  Industrial  and  Commercial  Bank  of  China  was  put  on  agenda  and  the 
preparation for the reform of China  Development Bank and the Agricultural Bank of China 
was underway. In addition, China’s accession into the WTO had significantly enhanced the 
competitiveness  of  export-oriented  enterprises.  With  continued  expansion  of  trade  surplus, 
Chinese enterprises and financial institutions were better prepared for the reform of the RMB 
exchange rate regime. With these conditions in place, the reform of exchange rate regime 
was launched decisively. 
Around end July 2008, in order to address the deepening international financial crisis, China 
narrowed  the  floating  range  of  RMB  exchange  rate  and  did  not  devalue  the  currency  as 
many  other  countries  did.  This  contributed  much  to  stabilizing  external  demand,  helped 
mitigate  the  impacts  of  the  international  financial  crisis,  and  promote  Asian  and  global 
economic recovery. Global economy is now recovering and China’s economic recovery and 
upturn  is  more  entrenched.  In  this  context,  as  approved  by  the  State  Council,  the  PBC 
decided  to  further  the  reform  of  exchange  rate  regime  and  enhance  the  flexibility  of  RMB 
exchange rate on June 19, 2010. New challenges may arise as international economic and 
financial situations evolve, but the reform of RMB exchange rate regime will continue in line 
with our established policy. 
BIS Review 105/2010 
 1
The exchange rate regime is consistent with the market-based economic 
II. 
reform in China and an integral part of the restructuring package 
China has moved into a managed floating exchange rate regime based on market demand 
and supply with reference to a basket of currencies. This is a right choice based on China’s 
specific circumstances and development strategy. As an important component of the socialist 
market  system  and  in  line  with  the  scientific  approach  to  development,  the  exchange  rate 
regime is needed in the country’s endeavor to deepen reform and opening-up, and adapt to 
the new situation after China’s accession into the WTO. In line with China’s long-term and 
fundamental interests, a managed floating exchange rate regime is an inevitable choice that 
will 
facilitate  economic  restructuring  and  comprehensive,  balanced  and  sustainable 
development, help strengthen macroeconomic management and facilitate China’s economic 
development at the juncture of strategic importance.  
The  goal  of  China’s  economic  policies  is  economic  growth,  full  employment,  price  stability 
and  a  balanced  BOP  account.  A  package  of  restructuring  measures  is  needed  to  address 
structural problems of high savings rate and inadequate domestic demand. In this package, 
exchange rate policy plays a role no less important than general industrial policies as it has 
an  impact  on  domestic  and  foreign  relative  price  in  an  aggregate  sense.  A  misaligned 
domestic and foreign relative price leads to the distortion of domestic prices and undermines 
the  stable,  balanced  and  sustainable  development  of  the  economy.  A  proper  mix  of  other 
structural  policies  and  exchange  rate  policy  can  be  more  efficient  in  facilitating  a  well-
functioning pricing  mechanism.  What  has  been  achieved  showed  that,  since  the  launch  of 
the reform in 2005, the restructuring package has created a basis for exchange rate policy to 
play  a  fundamental  role  in  domestic  and  external  sector  resource  allocation,  and  the 
successful launch of the exchange rate regime has created a more facilitating environment 
for  other  reforms,  such  as  the  reform  of  resource  prices.  Moreover,  exchange  rate  policy, 
together  with  lifting  import  control,  easing  foreign  exchange  control  and  accelerating  the 
“going global” initiative, has played an important part in halting further accumulation of BOP 
imbalance. 
flexibility  of  exchange  rate  also  helps  make  macroeconomic 
management more proactive and efficient. 
Improved 
The positive results since the exchange rate regime reform in 2005 
III. 
Core  competitiveness  of  the  corporate  sector  has  been  strengthened  as  a  result  of 
heightened  efforts  to  upgrade  and  innovate  products.  This  facilitated  the  optimization  of 
export structure and the shift of trade and growth pattern. From 2006 to 2008, the structure of 
China’s exports further improved. The share of machinery, electronic products and high-tech 
products continued to rise while the export by high-pollution, high-energy consumption and 
resource-intensive  industries  had  been  restricted.  The  share  of  export  to  developing 
countries  and  emerging  markets  went  up  while  that  to  the  developed  countries  declined. 
Meanwhile,  the  process  of  “Attracting  Foreign  Investment,  Technology  and  Management 
Expertise”  and  “Going  Global”  gained  momentum,  enabling  China  to  play  a  bigger  part  in 
global industrial chain and the international market. Being more responsive to exchange rate 
movements,  large  amount  of  export-oriented  enterprises  conducted  proactive  financial 
management and raised selling prices to cover  exchange rate losses. Improved in quality, 
China’s foreign trade registered further development.  
Domestic  demand  supported  by  import  expansion  and  lower  import  cost  helped  ease 
inflationary  pressures.  From  June  2005  to  June  2008,  China’s  import  volume  totaled 
US$2.729 trillion. A total of 1.6497 trillion yuan of import cost was saved as a result of RMB 
appreciation against the dollar. Massive technology and equipment imports facilitated rapid 
improvement of China’s capacity and productivity. Moreover, yuan appreciation against the 
US  dollar  in  this  period  lowered  the  RMB-denominated  price  of  import  products  and 
cushioned  the  impacts  brought  by  the  rise  of  international  raw  material  price  on  domestic 
price level, which directly eased domestic inflationary pressures.  
2 
 BIS Review 105/2010
Resource  allocation  was  optimized,  promoting  economic  restructuring  and  more  balanced 
development.  As  a  result  of  macroeconomic  policies  including  exchange  rate  policy,  the 
industrial structure became more balanced with the service industry contributing 42.9 percent 
to  GDP  growth  in  2008,  a  growth  of  2.6  percentage  points  from  2005.  The  geographical 
distribution of industries improved as the labor-intensive industry accelerated its reallocation 
to  the  central  and  western  part  of  China,  facilitating  the  implementation  of  national 
development  strategy.  In  2008,  share  of  central  and  western  region  in  China’s  GDP  was 
37.1 percent, up 1.3 percentage points from 2005. As more resources have been channeled 
to economic sectors driven by domestic demand, domestic demand contributed 90.8 percent 
to  economic  growth  in  2008,  up  14.9  percentage  points  from  2005.  The  concentration  of 
labor force in the export sector as a result of an undervalued exchange rate has been partly 
corrected  as  more  jobs  have  been  diverted  to  the  services  industry,  which  is  largely  non-
tradable.  According  to  the  National  Bureau  of  Statistics  (NBS),  the  number  of  people 
employed  in  the  services  industry  as  a  percentage  of  total  employment  increased  by 
1.8 percentage points between 2005 and 2008. In the long run, the manufacturing industry 
will  evolve  from  a  labor-intensive  industry  to  a  capital-intensive  one,  providing  fewer  jobs. 
The services industry, in comparison, is by nature a labor-intensive industry and can create 
more jobs in a sustainable manner.  
The  reform  of  exchange  rate  regime  has  demonstrated  to  the  international  community 
China’s  commitment  to  promote  global  economic  balance,  providing  a  more  facilitating 
international environment. A floating RMB exchange rate shows that China is dedicated to 
promote  global  economic  balance  and  that  China  is  a  responsible  member  in  the 
international community. This helped ease the tension in China’s trade relations with foreign 
countries and lessen trade protectionism attempts targeting China. Between 2005 and 2008, 
trade remedy investigations against China were mostly cases limited in size and scope and 
did not harm the free and open trade environment in China. In this context, China maintained 
high growth and low inflation for a fairly long time.  
IV. 
A dynamic approach is needed to assess the impact of exchange rate reform 
on the corporate sector 
improved  division  of 
The  potential  adverse  impact  of  the  RMB  exchange  rate  reform  in  2005  was  effectively 
managed  thanks  to  the  principle  of  making  the  reform  a  self-initiated,  controllable  and 
gradual process. The corporate sector became increasingly resilient to the reform, which was 
reflected  in  improving  import  and  export  indicators  amid  a  host  of  shocks,  including  a 
stronger  RMB,  lower  export  rebate  rate  and  rising  labor  cost.  Export  was  not  substantially 
affected.  From  2006  to  2008,  the  golden  period  for  China’s  foreign  trade,  export  grew  by 
23.4 percent  annually,  and  import  by  19.7  percent.  Exchange  rate  floating  helped upgrade 
the  export  model  from  simple  processing  to  deep  and  intensive  processing,  extended  the 
production  chain,  and 
to  higher 
employment. According to the NBS, total employment increased by 16.55 million during the 
period from 2006 to 2008. 
Before the exchange rate reform was launched, there were concerns that companies could 
not  adapt  to  the  reform,  and  a  floating  exchange  rate  would  thus  lead  to  widespread 
shutdown  and  sharp  decline  in  export  and  employment.  There  were  also  people  who 
believed a 3 percent appreciation would result in mass closures and bankruptcy in textile and 
light industries. Looking back, these concerns reflected an overestimation of the side effects 
of the reform and an underestimation of companies’ resilience. They are a result of the then 
popular  static  approach  to  studying  policy  implications,  which  assumes  a  constant  cost, 
pricing  and  profitability  and  then  observes  the  direct  impact  of  exchange  rate  reform  on 
selected  economic  indicators.  In  fact,  most  Chinese  companies  have developed  the  ability 
and  mechanism  to  adjust  to  changes  in  the  market  after  nearly  three  decades  of  market-
oriented reform, which warrants the application of dynamic analysis.  
labor,  ultimately  contributing 
BIS Review 105/2010 
 3
Static approaches, including assessing exchange costs of exports and sales profits, did not 
fully capture the flexibility and adaptability of the corporate sector. In addition to expanding 
profits through technological upgrading and product innovation, exporters could transfer the 
cost  of  a  stronger  domestic  currency  by  raising  price.  Moreover,  exporters  with  import 
businesses  would  benefit  from  lower  import  costs,  and  exporters  who  also  sell  to  the 
domestic  market  could  offset  exchange  cost  by  selling  more  to  domestic  consumers.  In 
addition, companies can employ a wide range of flexible finance management means to deal 
with exchange rate movements.  
In  an  ever-changing  market  environment,  the  corporate  sector  manages  market  and  other 
risks including exchange rate risks in a dynamic manner. Operating in a market economy, an 
enterprise  has  to  face  many  changing  parameters,  including  raw  material  prices,  wage, 
export tax rebate, market demand, distribution channel, product mix and cycle, public utility 
price,  and  etc.  The  annual  movement  of  any  of  these  factors  is  often  more  than  then 
10 percent. As one of these variables, the exchange rate usually does not experience large 
swings.  In  a  market  economy,  it  is  no  longer  feasible  to  adopt  the  planned  economy 
measures to fix the external factors for enterprises. In a globalized environment, enterprises 
have  fewer  and  fewer  risk  free  long-terms  orders  and  have  to  accept  orders  with  shorter 
maturities.  Enterprises  around  the  world  are  adapting  to  the  changing  market  conditions, 
including  the  changes  in  demand,  distribution  channel  and  price  of  input  and  output, 
exchange rate, hedge price, insurance price, and etc, and are managing the risks through 
information  technology  (such  as  low  or  zero  inventory,  shorter  production  cycle  and 
outsourcing) and financial instruments.  
It is important to look at the situation in most industries and companies to assess the impact 
of exchange rate movements. While some of the industries and companies manage to grow 
through innovation, others lag behind and are eliminated. Vulnerable companies are the first 
to feel the pressure to adjust, and they should be supported by policies to improve the social 
safety net and enhance training programs to improve labor force quality and adaptability. The 
competitiveness  of  the  manufacturing  sector  as  a  whole,  rather  than  that  of  individual 
companies,  should  be  the  focus  in  measuring  the  impact  of  exchange  rate  movements. 
Similarly,  the  assessment  of  the  exchange  rate  regime  reform  should  mainly  look  at  the 
overall trade situation and the improvement of development quality. 
Information  and  voice  that  are  prone  to  systemic  deviation  need  to  be  assessed  properly. 
Exchange  rate  movements  bring  gains  and  losses  to  different  companies.  To  win  policy 
support, companies tend to highlight the losses in export, profits and employment while play 
down  merits  of  the  reform,  such  as  reduced  import  costs.  This  helps  generate  a  negative 
picture of companies’ ability to deal with exchange rate movements. Therefore, a careful and 
comprehensive analysis is needed in order to produce a subjective assessment. 
In summary, the RMB exchange rate regime reform has been advanced smoothly in a self-
initiated,  gradual  and  controllable  process  since  2005.  The  reform  plays  a  positive  role  in 
supporting the real economy, and creates favorable conditions for meeting macroeconomic 
management  objectives.  It  helps  promote  a  balanced  BOP  account,  expand  domestic 
demand and restructure the economy, and has been important in China’s efforts to address 
various domestic and global developments. 
4 
 BIS Review 105/2010
