Sada Reddy: Information exchange on microinsurance in Fiji 
Speech  by  Mr  Sada  Reddy,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji,  at  the  “Information 
Exchange on Microinsurance” in Fiji, Suva, 15 July 2010. 
 It  is  a  pleasure  for  me  to  address  the  opening  of  this  “Information  Exchange  on 
Microinsurance.”  
First, let me extend a warm welcome to you all. Tonight we have gathered leaders from 
the  private  and  public  sectors  together  in  order  to  discuss  an  important  topic  in  financial 
inclusion – microinsurance. From the CEO’s of insurance companies, to rural cooperatives of 
farmers,  everyone  here  has  a  part  to  play  in  the  development  of  this  field,  which  will  help 
create a more stable and secure Fiji.  
As  you  all  know  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji  continues  to  partner  with  key  stakeholders  of 
financial inclusion like the Pacific Financial Inclusion Programme (PFIP), to extend financial 
services  and  financial  literacy  to  rural  and  low  income  people  around  Fiji.  This  event  is 
another example of this strong partnership and represents some of the wonderful progress 
we have made together over the last year.  
The  National  Financial  Inclusion  Taskforce  turns  five  months  old  in  three  days,  and  has 
already been displaying some impressive results. Exactly one month ago, NFIT brought Vijay 
Mahajan,  Founder  of  Basix  bank  and  Chair  of  the  CGAP  Executive  Committee  to  provide 
insight on the status of financial inclusion in Fiji. Further at the end of last month the Asian 
Development  Bank  presented  a  comprehensive  report  it  completed  on  the  same  topic  to 
NFIT.  The  report  made  obvious  some  areas  in  which  we  need  to  make  reforms,  and  also 
offered some clear guidance on paths we can take moving forward.  
One issue the report exposed was that we currently have no standardized reporting format 
for  microfinance,  which  means  financial  transparency  is  very  low.  In  order  to  increase  the 
transparency  of  microfinance  institutions,  and  facilitate  better  performance  monitoring 
standards,  RBF  and  PFIP  collaborated  to  provide  financial  reporting  training  to  35  people 
here  in  Fiji  at  the  beginning  of  this  month.  This  is  an  important  step  to  building  the  local 
capacity here now, to ensure that microfinance initiatives in the future are both stable and 
sustainable. 
Further,  the  NFIT  working  group  on  financial  literacy  has  designed  a  strategy  and  is  busy 
implementing financial literacy into the national curriculum here in Fiji, so all our children will 
have the basic understanding of money management they will need to succeed. Scoping is 
also being done by PFIP to conduct a national baseline for financial literacy in Fiji, so we can 
accurately measure the impacts of our work in this field.  
While all the efforts I have mentioned above are all positive, as we all know the overarching 
goal of the National Financial Inclusion Taskforce is to:  
“To  reach  150,000  unbanked  clients  by  2014  through  a  nationally  coordinated  effort, 
supported  by  a  variety  of  financial  service  providers,  offering  a  broad  range  of  relevant, 
accessible, affordable and cost effective financial services.”  
There has been significant progress on this front as well. Shortly after the RBF’s e-money 
launch,  Vodafone  officially  launched  its  M-Paisa  product,  and  since  then,  Digicel  has  also 
made public that it will soon offer its Mobile Money product here in Fiji. The ability to provide 
financial services over these mobile networks now allows us to access rural and low income 
people  that  were  previously  too  remote,  or  too  expensive  to  reach.  M-Paisa  already  has 
thousands of customers, and is growing exponentially every day.  
BIS Review 99/2010 
 1
As this access continues to improve, we shift our focus to the types of financial products that 
can be offered on these platforms. The NFIT goal was written with forethought to promote a 
“broad  range”  of  services  as  international  experience  has  clearly  shown  that  microfinance 
products beyond savings and credit yield significant benefits to those struggling to overcome 
poverty.  
It is obvious to us all that while there are situations when most of us need credit, it is by no 
means  the  “cure-all”  financial  product  that  it  is  often  touted  as.  Some  of  these  events  are 
unpredictable, meaning that they are hard to save for, and when they occur, a loan may not 
be available or appropriate. These events, like floods, injuries at work, a death in the family, 
are the exact situations for which insurance was created. When these situations occur, low 
income  people  should  have  the  appropriate  financial  mechanisms  available  to  them  to 
reduce their risk of catastrophic income and property loss.  
Microinsurance does not currently exist in Fiji on any large scale, but its power to increase 
people’s financial security and fortify their level of social protection warrants this informational 
event  today.  As  many  of  you  know  this  product  is  now  the  fastest  growing  microfinance 
product in the world, providing benefits to millions of mothers, farmers, and small business 
owners around the world.  
Because of this phenomenon the RBF has reviewed the Insurance Act of 1998, to ensure 
that there are no restrictions hindering the introduction of this product here in Fiji. We totally 
support any initiative or pilot project in microinsurance, and hope that insurance companies 
do take the initiative to explore the potential of this market.  
I’ll now invite Mike McCaffrey, the Technical Specialist for PFIP to introduce the topic for the 
evening, Microinsurance.  
2 
 BIS Review 99/2010
