Millison K Narh: Monetary policy and outlook for economic growth 
Speech  by  Mr  Millison  K  Narh,  Second  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Ghana,  at  the 
Databank Investor Forum, Accra, 26 April 2010. 
 Introduction 
1. 
[1] 
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen, I would like to thank Databank for inviting me 
to  this  Forum  which  has  brought  together  institutional  investors  to  apprise  themselves  of 
policy initiatives and assess investment opportunities in the country. 
[2] 
I  understand  that  Databank  is  celebrating  twenty  years  of  entrepreneurship  this 
year. Let me take this opportunity to congratulate you on your significant achievements and 
contributions towards Ghana’s financial sector over the past two decades and hope that you 
will expand your activities further in the coming years. 
[3] 
My address today will focus on “Monetary Policy and Outlook for Economic Growth”. 
I will seek to address this topic by focusing on three key issues. That is, the Bank of Ghana’s 
monetary policy stance, the stabilization role of monetary policy in the Ghanaian economy 
and lastly, the outlook for economic growth in 2010 and beyond. 
2. 
The monetary policy stance of the Bank of Ghana 
[4] 
The  primary  objective  of  the  Bank  of  Ghana  is  to  maintain  price  stability.  The 
objective  of  price  stability  is  not  an  end  in  itself;  rather  it  is  in  the  interest  of  promoting 
balanced and sustainable growth in the long-term. Indeed, the clear focus on price stability 
as  stipulated  in  the  Bank  of  Ghana  Act  612  reflects  a  consensus  from  various  policy 
dialogues  that  “inflation  is  a  major  obstacle  to  the  growth  process  and  price  stability  can 
contribute  to  accelerating  growth  by  promoting  an  enabling  environment  for  efficient 
investment  and  savings  decision-making”.  Various  country  experiences,  including  Ghana, 
show  that  sustained  periods  of  strong  growth  have  always  gone  hand  in  hand  with  low 
inflation whereas low growth episodes occur under highly inflationary environments. 
[5] 
As you may be aware, the Ghanaian economy witnessed consistent growth periods 
in the recent past with real GDP growth increasing steadily from 3.7 percent to 7.3 percent 
within a spate of nine years. To a large extent this growth phase of the Ghanaian economy 
was  largely  supported  by  a  policy  environment  aimed  at  macroeconomic  stability  which 
anchored inflation expectations. This was combined with structural reforms, particularly in the 
financial sector, needed to increase financial intermediation and promote economic growth. 
[6] 
Although  growth  was  achieved,  the  reemergence  of  macro  instability  underpinned 
by  both  external  and  domestic  factors  such  as  considerable  credit  expansion  to  both 
government  and  the  private  sector  dislodged  inflationary  expectations  and  increased 
inflationary  pressures  in  the  economy.  The  combined  effect  of  expansionary  fiscal  and 
monetary  policies  resulted  in  severe  macroeconomic  imbalances  characterized  by  rising 
inflation,  exchange  rate  depreciation  and  loss  of  international  reserves.  To  bring  back 
stability in the economy, the policy framework had to refocus on restrictive monetary policy 
and fiscal prudence, leading to tight credit conditions, a general slowdown in the economy, 
and low economic growth in 2009. 
[7] 
It  is  therefore  prudent  that  in  seeking  to  promote  economic  growth,  the  Bank  of 
Ghana remains committed to its mission of price stability as well as improving the regulatory 
and supervisory frameworks to secure a strong financial sector for efficient intermediation. In 
delivering  this  mandate,  the  Bank  of  Ghana’s  operational  framework  for  monetary  policy 
involves adjusting interest rates to achieve the target inflation in the policy horizon. By this 
BIS Review 90/2010 
 1
process, the stance of monetary policy is to continuously assess risks to growth and inflation 
and properly position the key policy rate to restore balance between inflation and growth. 
[8] 
The  mandate  and  strategy  of  the  Bank  of  Ghana  is  consistent  with  theoretical 
arguments in the economic literature regarding the role of monetary policy in attaining price 
stability.  We  also  believe  that  monetary  policy  should  be  mindful  of  the  country’s  growth 
objectives. Therefore, by committing to the long-term objective of price stability, the Bank’s 
monetary policy strategy adopts a gradualist policy response approach to addressing shocks 
in  the  economy  so  as  to  minimize  the  output  loss  associated  with  pursuing  our  inflation 
objective and help anchor inflation expectations. 
The stabilizing role of monetary policy 
3. 
[9] 
It is useful for us to understand how monetary policy has over the past year and half 
contributed  to  stabilize  the  Ghanaian  economy,  and  how  it  is  currently  being  fashioned  to 
foster growth in the economy. 
[10] 
The Ghanaian economy was severely challenged in the first half of 2009 with rising 
inflation, a depreciating currency, loss of international reserves and weakening business and 
consumer confidence. The rate of inflation increased steadily and peaked at 20.7 percent in 
June, the highest on record in over four years. There were excessive upward surges in the 
exchange  rate  with  the  local  currency  depreciating  by  17.5  percent  against  the  US  dollar 
between January and June. Gross international reserve position fell to about 1.9 months of 
imports cover by June  2009. Clearly, these  signaled an economy in stress, underlying the 
urgency to implement prudent policies to restore economic stability. 
[11] 
The  immediate  policy  response  was  to  institute  a  stringent  policy  framework  of 
restrictive monetary policy complemented by prudent fiscal policies to restore stability. These 
measures  were  also  supported  by  multilateral  and  bilateral  assistance.  Monetary  policy 
tightening was deemed necessary in support of stringent fiscal policies aimed at steering the 
economy back to stability. Hence, the Bank of Ghana responded to the economic challenges 
by adjusting the policy rate upwards by 150 basis points. 
[12] 
Let me state that the macroeconomic outcome of the stringent policy framework has 
been  positive.  The  policies  have  contributed  immensely  to  the  return  of  stability  and  are 
gradually  restoring  business  and  consumer  confidence  in  the  economy.  With  tighter 
monetary  policies,  stability  in  the  local  currency  has  been  restored  and  the  disinflation 
process is ongoing. Year on year inflation has declined steadily from its peak in July 2009 to 
13.3 percent in March 2010. Similarly, the core measure of inflation (excluding energy and 
utility) is declining indicating downward inflationary pressures within the economy. 
[13] 
The  latest  assessment  of  the  economy  by  the  Bank  of  Ghana  point  to  improved 
economic fundamentals driven by diminishing inflationary pressures, exchange rate stability, 
a  gradual  pick-up  in  economic  activity  and  improvements  in  investor  and  consumer 
confidence. The external position has strengthened with significant increases in the reserve 
level,  as  well  as  improvements  in  the  trade  and  current  account  balance  in  spite  of  the 
challenges  of  the  spillover  from  the  world  economic  downturn.  Overall,  the  economy  has 
responded well to the tight policy responses. 
[14] 
These  notwithstanding, economic  activities in  2009  remained  subdued  in  line  with 
the policy tightening stance although some indicators of economic activities and confidence 
indices  show  signs  of  recovery.  Real  GDP  slowed  from  7.3  percent  in  2008,  reflecting 
expansionary policies and strong credit expansion to a provisional forecast of 4.7 percent in 
2009 as credit conditions tightened. 
[15] 
With  cognizance  to  the  successful  role  played  by  monetary  policy  in  shifting  the 
economy back to the disinflation path and price stability, the Bank of Ghana also realizes the 
need  to  complement  the  process  by  stimulating  economic  growth  in  the  medium-term. 
2 
 BIS Review 90/2010
Consequently,  the  policy  rate  has  been  cut  by  a  cumulative  350  basis  points  between 
November 2009 and March 2010. With the reduction, it is anticipated that credit conditions 
will gradually ease and credit growth will be restored to ensure a steady growth in output. 
Outlook for economic growth 
4. 
[16] 
The outlook for economic growth remains positive. Although growth was constrained 
in 2009 on the basis of tighter policies, improved economic conditions have paved the way 
for monetary policy easing to stimulate growth in 2010 and beyond. There are indications of 
a rebound in business and consumer confidence, as well as increasing investor confidence 
in  the  economy.  Hence,  as  economic  stability  gains  a  firm  hold,  the  private  sector  must 
reposition itself to drive the growth agenda. 
[17] 
As  noted  in  the  2010  budget  and  economic  policy  statement,  the  government  will 
continue with the fiscal consolidation process which started in 2009 with a view to stabilizing 
inflation  and  reducing  exchange  rate  volatilities.  External  sector  policies  will  also  focus  on 
building up reserves (which is currently at 3 months imports cover), and reducing the current 
account deficit, while pursuing strategies to increase economic growth in 2010. The budget is 
optimistic  about  growth  prospects  in  2010  with  a  revised  real  GDP  growth  of  6.5  percent 
compared to an initial program target of 5.0 percent. 
[18] 
Starting  from  2011,  Ghana  will  benefit  from  oil  production  which  is  expected  to 
attract additional investments into the country, and boost economic growth. Initial production 
is  projected  to  contribute  about  17  percent  towards  Ghana’s  GDP.  Accordingly,  real  GDP 
growth has been estimated to increase above 20 percent in 2011. 
[19] 
There is a general consensus that the contribution of monetary policy is to stabilize 
the  economy  and  create  an  enabling  environment  for  sustainable  growth  in  the  long-run. 
Looking forward therefore, the Bank of Ghana’s monetary policy stance will remain focused 
on  steering  the  economy  towards  price  stability  whilst  deepening  financial  intermediation 
processes to ensure that credit flows to the productive sectors of the economy. 
[20] 
Despite the role of monetary policy in creating an enabling environment, promoting 
long-term  growth  is  a  complex  process  and  requires  the  support  of  structural  reforms  that 
seek  to  remove  “binding  constraints”  on  the  business  environment  to  ensure  sustainable 
growth.  Clearly,  monetary  policy  is  limited  beyond  the  scope  of  resolving  structural 
bottlenecks  that  often  constrain  growth  in  the  Ghanaian  economy.  The  commitment  of  the 
Bank of Ghana to ensure macroeconomic stability and ease credit constraints must therefore 
be  supported  by  policy  reforms  to  strengthen  the  investment  climate,  increase  productivity 
and  innovation,  as  well  as  close  infrastructural  gaps  especially  in  the  energy  and  road 
sectors. 
[21] 
It is anticipated that the increased government revenues from the oil production will 
create  the  much  needed  fiscal  space  to  close  the  country’s  infrastructural  gaps  and  ease 
some  of  these  growth  constraints.  Additionally,  the  implementation  of  credible  fiscal 
consolidation  policies  underscored  by  growth-enhancing  measures  should  provide  the 
needed boost for the private sector and accelerate economic growth. 
5. 
Conclusion 
[22] 
Ghana’s economy has rebounded strongly from the instability that characterized the 
first half of 2009. Recent trends indicate that macroeconomic stability has gained ground with 
declining  inflation,  exchange  rate  stability,  growing  reserves  as  well  as  increasing  investor 
and business confidence. These conditions have paved the way for monetary policy easing 
to increase investments and spur economic growth. 
BIS Review 90/2010 
 3
Most importantly, the Central Bank remains committed to delivering a low inflation 
[23] 
environment that would support the overall broad development agenda of growth and poverty 
reduction.  Consistent  with  this,  the  monetary  policy  regime  will  sustain  price  stability  and 
economic growth. 
[24] 
I would like to conclude by stressing that monetary policy can effectively maintain 
price stability but it must be accompanied by structural reforms that will create the enabling 
environment  for  accelerated  growth  in  the  long-run.  Therefore,  notwithstanding  Bank  of 
Ghana’s  monetary  policy  stance  to  preserve  price  stability  and  create  an  enabling 
environment to foster growth, structural reforms to ease binding constraints in the economy 
must be implemented to make Ghana competitive and an important investment destination 
within the sub-region.  
4 
 BIS Review 90/2010
