Kwesi Bekoe Amissah-Arthur: Review of the cash cycle in Ghana 
Speech by Mr Kwesi Bekoe Amissah-Arthur, Governor of the Bank of Ghana, at the launch 
of the public education campaign on the GH¢2 banknote, Accra, 1 April 2010. 
 Good  morning,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen  of  the  mass  media.  I  welcome  you  to  the 
1. 
launch of the educational campaign on the GH¢2 Banknote. 
2. 
statement on the introduction in May this year of a GH¢2 banknote denomination. 
You  will  recall  that  on  February  25,  2010  the  Bank  of  Ghana  issued  a  press 
Rationale for the introduction of the GH¢2 banknote 
Following  the  July  2007  currency  re-denomination  exercise,  the  Bank  of  Ghana 
3. 
commissioned  a  review  of  the  cash  cycle  to  determine  the  effectiveness  of  the  currency 
reform and seek ways to further enhance efficiency in cash management in Ghana. 
4. 
An important observation of the “Review of the Cash Cycle in Ghana” presented in 
July  2009  was  that  the  GH¢1  banknote  had  taken  on  the  role  of  three  old  banknote 
denominations (i.e. ¢5,000, ¢10,000 and ¢20,000), consequently putting the GH¢1 banknote 
under  immense  pressure,  contributing  to  the  reduction  of  the  quality  of  the  banknote  in 
circulation. The worn out state of the GH¢1 banknote, in particular, defeats the Clean Note 
Policy  of  the  Bank,  which  seeks  to  ensure  that  only  good  quality  banknotes  remain  in 
circulation. 
5. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen  of  the  media,  since  the  re-denomination  exercise,  the 
general  public  have  demanded  an  intermediary  banknote  between  the  GH¢1  and  GH¢5 
denominations  to  reduce  the  gap  between  the  GH¢1  and  GH¢5  banknotes,  as  well  as 
improve exchangeability and facilitate transactions. 
The  GH¢2  banknote  will  therefore  expand  the  series  of  banknotes  in  circulation 
6. 
thereby providing a better choice to the public. The introduction of the new banknote would 
also  reduce  the  frequency,  and  associated  cost,  of  printing  large  volumes  of  the  GH¢1 
banknote. 
Different  portraits  allow 
Portrait uniformity on Ghana’s banknotes 
7. 
There has been some criticism of the use of a single, identical portrait (The Big Six) 
on all the five denominations introduced in the July 2007 re-denomination exercise (and the 
previous  ¢10,000  banknote  that  was  withdrawn  from  circulation  in  2007).  The  lack  of  a 
different and distinct portrait on each banknote denomination has been noted for rectification. 
8. 
the  different 
denominations. It is also an important consideration when it becomes necessary to upgrade 
and  change  the  design  and  security  features  of  banknotes.  One  of  the  key  reasons  for 
placing different portraits on different denominations is the need to frustrate counterfeiting. A 
continuing  concern  of  the  Central  Bank  is  to  guarantee  the  integrity  of  the  banknotes  and 
defend them against the escalating trends of counterfeiting. 
9. 
departed national heroes who positively impacted on the lives of Ghanaians. 
Varying  the  portraits  on  our  banknotes  will  also  permit  the  nation  to  recognize 
the  general  public 
to  easily 
identify 
BIS Review 54/2010 
 1
Selection of the portrait for the GH¢2 banknote 
10. 
It  is  for  the  above  reasons  that  the  obverse  theme,  the  portrait  of  Dr.  Kwame 
Nkrumah, was chosen for the GH¢2 banknote, to commemorate the centenary of the birth of 
this illustrious son of Africa. The reverse of the banknote depicts the old and new Parliament 
buildings, signifying Ghana’s deepening democracy. 
Ladies and Gentlemen of the media, 
11. 
The  introductory  issue  of  the  GH¢2  banknote  will  have  the  commemorative  text 
“CENTENARY OF THE BIRTH OF DR. KWAME NKRUMAH”. Future issues of the GH¢2 
banknote are not expected to have this text; making this introductory issue a collector’s item. 
12. 
The new banknote will be issued out as legal tender in May 2010, to coincide with 
the conclusion of the year-long centenary celebrations of the birth of Dr. Kwame Nkrumah. 
13. 
GH¢2 banknote duly launched. Please remember to keep the Ghana Cedi Clean! 
14. 
On this note I formally declare the educational campaign on the introduction of the 
Thank you for honouring our invitation and May God bless us all. 
2 
 BIS Review 54/2010
The New GH¢2 banknote 
Front 
Back 
BIS Review 54/2010 
   3
Poster 
         4 
 BIS Review 54/2010
