Mark Carney: The virtue of productivity in a wicked world 
Remarks by Mr Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Ottawa Economics 
Association, Ottawa, Ontario, 24 March 2010. 
 It  is  either  brave  or  foolhardy  of  the  Ottawa  Economics  Association  to  organize  another 
conference  around  Canada’s  perennial  challenges  of  demographics,  productivity,  and 
potential growth.  
The  cognoscenti  wearily  deride  these  shortcomings  even  while  they  acknowledge  their 
importance.1  After  all,  who  really  wants  to  talk  about  getting  old?  Similarly,  the  subject  of 
productivity  is  described  as  too  dull,  or  worse,  too  threatening  for  Canadians.  It  is  said  to 
imply working harder, not smarter, or to promote job losses rather than income gains. These 
debates are thus thought best confined to the policy wonks, in order that our diagnoses and 
prescriptions can occur in a parallel, forgotten universe. 
However, one wonders, who would not want to be productive in their work? Is there a child 
whom we do not want to reach his or her full potential? Could what Canadians expect of their 
economy be so very different from what they expect of themselves? 
Our  ambitions  for  the  Canadian  economy  should  be  bold.  We  are  a  country  of  immense 
strengths and, as demonstrated during the recent crisis, considerable resilience.  
Yet  Canada  does  underperform.  We  are  not  as  productive  as  we  could  be.  Our  potential 
growth is slowing. Moreover, this is occurring as the very nature of the global economy, in 
which we previously thrived, is under threat. This debate can no longer be avoided. 
What, then, must be done? 
There are two imperatives – one domestic, one international – to secure strong, sustainable, 
and  balanced  economic  growth  for  Canada.  Both  recall  Aesop’s  fable  of  the  ant  and  the 
grasshopper, the moral of which can be best summed up as “idleness brings want.” In short, 
in a wicked world, Canada needs productive virtue. 
Canada’s slowing potential  
This  conference  has  already  benefited  from  comprehensive  reviews  of  productivity  and 
potential growth, so I would like to briefly summarize the Bank’s views (which are largely in 
accord with the emerging consensus).  
We  have  a  problem:  demographic  drag  will  increase  in  coming  years.  As  the  boomer 
generation ages, labour force participation rates will decline and hours worked will fall. The 
question  is  merely  one  of  degree.  For  some  age  groups,  there  is  a  possibility  that 
participation  rates  will  be  higher  than  currently  anticipated,  particularly  since  participation 
rates of older workers have risen since 1996. Moreover, there is a role for policy to reduce 
further disincentives for participation in the labour market. Nevertheless, it will not be able to 
reverse longer-run demographic pressures. 
We  have  a  second,  much  bigger  problem:  our  abysmal  productivity  record.  Over  the  past 
decade,  it  has  averaged  a  paltry  0.7  per  cent,  about  half  the  rate  recorded  over  the  
1980–2000 period.  
                                                 
1   See,  for  example,  J. Simpson,  “Needed  urgently:  more  creativity  from  the  business  class.”  Globe  and  Mail, 
25 May 2009. 
BIS Review 36/2010 
 1
The combination of slower productivity growth and demographic shifts could well mean that 
the average rate of potential growth for the Canadian economy will be closer to 2 per cent 
going forward than the more than 3 per cent we enjoyed in the first half of the past decade 
and the latter half of the 1990s.2  
If  this  differential  were  to  persist  over  a  decade,  the  cumulative  loss  of  income  would  be 
almost $30,000 for every Canadian.3 Given Canada’s demographic trends, the principal way 
to avoid this loss is by improving our productivity. 
First imperative: improving Canada’s productivity  
There  appears  to  be  ample  opportunity  to  do  so,  since  Canada  is  not  as  productive  as  it 
could  be.  Canada’s  productivity  ranking  has  dropped  from  third  of  the  20  countries  in  the 
Organisation  for  Economic  Co-operation  and  Development  (OECD)  in  1960  to  15th  of  the 
current 30 members (see Appendix, Chart 1).4 After some promising signs in the late 1990s, 
average labour productivity growth has since slowed dramatically (Chart 2). 
In growth-accounting terms, the main culprit has been multifactor productivity growth, which 
has slumped markedly, while capital intensity failed to pick up pace.5  
I  will  sketch  out  three  types  of  explanations  based  on  the  research  done  at  the  Bank  of 
Canada and by many of you in this room.6  
First,  measurement  challenges  for  both  output  and  prices  in  the  resources  and  service 
sectors could explain some of the shortfall. 
Second,  lags  associated  with  the  economy’s  adjustment  process  could  be  obscuring 
otherwise strong performance. These include: 
 
longer-tailed  resource  investments  that  require  substantial  upfront  expenditures 
before natural resources can be turned into output, all the while drawing on more 
marginal reserves; and 
the large-scale restructuring of industries and the reallocation of capital and labour 
to new industries, which naturally dampen productivity as they take place.7  
 Third,  there  appear  to  be  deeper  structural  determinants  that  will  require  more  concerted 
efforts on the part of business and government to address:  
                                                 
2  
In April  2009, the Bank  of Canada lowered its forecast for the growth of potential output to 1.2 per cent in 
2009, 1.5 per cent in 2010, and 1.9 per cent in 2011 from 2.4 per cent in 2009 and 2.5 per cent in 2010 and 
2011, reflecting significant structural changes and subdued corporate investment. 
3   As expressed in 2009 dollars. 
4   Compendium of Productivity Indicators, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), 
2006 and 2008. 
5   Multifactor  productivity  measures  joint  influences  on  economic  growth,  such  as  technological  change, 
efficiency  improvements,  and  returns  to  scale.  Its  growth  rate  is  calculated  as  the  difference  between  the 
growth in the amount of output produced and the growth of the quantity of all inputs used, such as labour and 
machinery and equipment. 
6   For  a  recent  summary  of  Bank  of  Canada  research,  see  R. Dion,  “Interpreting  Canada’s  Productivity 
Performance in the Past Decade: Lessons from Recent Research,” Bank of Canada Review (Summer 2007): 
19–32,  available  at:  http://www.bankofcanada.ca/en/review/summer07/dion.pdf;  and  R. Dion  and  R. Fay, 
“Understanding  Productivity:  A  Review  of  Recent  Technical  Research,”  Bank  of  Canada  Occasional  Paper 
2008–3, available at: http://www.bankofcanada.ca/en/res/dp/dp(y)_2008.html. 
7   Bank of Canada research suggests that job reallocation across firms is a significant positive factor explaining 
Canadian labour productivity growth over the 1992–2006 period. D. Leung and S. Cao, “The Changing Pace 
of Labour Reallocation in Canada: Causes  and Consequences,”  Bank  of Canada  Review (Ottawa: Bank of 
Canada, Summer 2009): 31–44. Available at: http://www.bankofcanada.ca/en/review/summer09/leung.pdf. 
2 
 BIS Review 36/2010
    Canada under-invests in machinery and equipment (M&E), training, and innovation – 
in fact, all of the underlying drivers of productivity.  
Canadian workers have about half the amount of information and communications 
technology  (ICT)  of  their  American  counterparts.  ICT  capital  has  been  linked  to 
stronger multifactor productivity growth in many countries.8  
With  its  highly  educated  workforce,  flexible  labour  markets,  and  high  rates  of  firm 
entry  and  exit,  Canada  appears  to  have  all  the  ingredients  needed  to  be  an 
innovation  leader.  However,  it  is  only  16th  among  the  OECD  countries  in  the 
intensity of business research and development.9  
Our  dismal  multifactor  productivity  growth  indicates  that  Canadian  firms  do  not 
effectively use the capital that they purchase.10  
Some  possible  explanations  for  why  we  both  under-invest  and  appear  to  use  capital  so 
poorly include:  
 
the wrong skills mix: Canada has a well-educated labour force but, perhaps as the 
structure of the economy shifts, not in the areas required; 
small  firms:  Compared  with  the  United  States,  Canada  has  proportionately  more 
small firms that are significantly less productive than large firms;11 and 
in particular, inadequate competition in some sectors, especially network industries 
that  have  spillovers  throughout  the  economy,  including  telecommunications, 
electricity, and retail.12  
  Whatever  the  combination  of  reasons  behind  Canada’s  poor  productivity  record,  there  are 
several avenues available to policy-makers to encourage sustainable longer-run growth.  
It is important to acknowledge that successive governments have taken many steps in the 
right  direction.  Canadian  businesses  benefit  from  a  sound  macro-policy  environment, 
including sustainable fiscal policy and credible monetary policy, which delivers low, stable, 
and predictable inflation. Corporate tax competitiveness – particularly for new investment – 
has improved markedly over the past decade and is now among the most attractive in the 
industrialised  world.  Canada  has  also  actively  pursued  trade  openness  through  new 
agreements and unilateral tariff reductions.13 Staying the course in these regards is likely the 
single most important contribution of the public sector. 
                                                 
8   This  is  not  related  to  industrial  structure–it  is  found  in  most  industries.  See  A. Sharpe,  “What  Explains  the 
Canada-US  ICT  Investment  Gap?”  Research  Report  2005–2006,  Centre  for  the  Study  of  Living  Standards 
(CSLS), December 2005. 
9   A recent report concluded that “too many businesses in Canada are technology followers, not leaders” and 
stressed  the  need  for  “innovation-based  business  strategies.”  See  P. Nicholson,  “Innovation  and  Business 
Strategy: Why Canada Falls Short,” International Productivity Monitor, No. 18 (Spring 2009): 51–71. Available 
at: http://www.csls.ca/ipm/18/IPM-18-Nicholson.pdf. 
10   Using a growth-accounting framework, Baldwin and Gu show that multi-factor productivity (MFP) is the main 
culprit in Canada’s lagging productivity performance. They note that two sectors in particular – mining and oil 
and gas extraction and manufacturing – account for much of the slowdown in MFP growth in this decade. See 
J. Baldwin  and  W. Gu,  “Productivity  Performance  in  Canada  1961–2008:  An  Update  of  Long-term  Trends,” 
Statistics Canada, 2009. 
11   D. Leung,  C. Meh,  and  Y. Terajima,  “Productivity  in  Canada:  Does  Firm  Size  Matter?”  Bank  of  Canada 
Review, Autumn 2008. Available at: http://www.bankofcanada.ca/en/review/rev_autumn2008.html. 
12   OECD, Economic Policy Reforms: Going for Growth, 2010. 
13   See The Budget Plan, Department of Finance, Canada 2010. 
BIS Review 36/2010 
 3
These core framework policies can be supplemented by measures to foster innovation and 
commercialization, investments in strategic infrastructure, and incentives for scale. 
Finally, it is vitally important that current global financial sector reform efforts yield a stable 
and efficient financial system that channels the capital necessary for long-run growth. 
In general, while there is always more to do, governments have put in place conditions for a 
productivity  revival. Business, thus far, has disappointed. In fact, productivity growth fell in 
the  latest  recession,  the  first  time  this  has  happened  in  three  decades.  Looking  forward, 
despite  the availability  of  capital,  relatively  strong  balance sheets  and  improving  economic 
conditions,  corporate  Canada  does  not  appear  ready  to  invest.  Investment  intentions  for 
2010 remain modest and largely driven by the public sector.  
This appears unwise. 
The coming global winter? 
There  could  be  tough  times  ahead.  Canadian  grasshoppers,  perhaps  basking  in  the 
historically  easy  access  to  the  U.S.  market  and  the  relative  abundance  of  resource 
opportunities,  could  be  in  danger  of  wasting  their  days  in  the  sun  and  finding  themselves 
unprepared for the winter to come. 
Canada’s  productivity  challenge  is  made  more  pressing  by  an  international  economic 
landscape that is changing dramatically. A powerful and sustained restructuring of the global 
economy has begun. The pace and volatility of global growth are likely to be quite different 
than  during  the  so-called  “Great  Moderation”  earlier  this  decade.  The  considerable 
uncertainty  about  medium-term  global  prospects  will  require  concerted,  co-operative 
measures to moderate. 
The second imperative: the G-20 framework 
Policy-makers must work to ensure that business can operate, as much as possible, in an 
open  and  stable  global  economy.  At  a  minimum,  this  means  living  up  to  the  G-20 
commitment to resist trade and financial protectionism. More proactively, it means substantial 
reforms to build a more resilient, open, global financial system. Ultimately, as I will discuss in 
a  moment,  securing  strong,  sustainable,  and  balanced  global  growth  will  also  require 
changes in behaviour and policy adjustments on several fronts.  
While  the  recent  financial  crisis  had  many  causes,  its  intensity  and  scope  reflected 
unprecedented  disequilibria.  Large  and  unsustainable  current  account  imbalances  across 
major economic areas were integral to the buildup of vulnerabilities in many asset markets. 
In  recent  years,  the  international  monetary  system  failed  to  promote  timely  and  orderly 
economic adjustment.14  
Further  postponing  adjustment  will  only  serve  to  increase  vulnerabilities.  In  the  past,  the 
frustration  of  adjustment  by  current  account  surplus  countries  generated  deflationary 
pressures in the rest of the world. Similarly, today, the adjustment burden is being shifted to 
others.  Some  advanced  countries  –  including  Canada  –  have  recently  seen  sizable 
appreciations of their currencies. Their ability to increase domestic demand in response is 
limited. 
                                                 
14   This  failure  has  ample  precedents.  Over  the  past  century,  different  international  monetary  regimes  have 
struggled  to  adjust  to  structural  changes,  including  the  integration  of  emerging  economies  into  the  global 
economy. In all cases, systemic countries failed to adapt domestic policies in a manner consistent  with the 
monetary  system  of  the  day.  As  a  result,  adjustment  was  delayed,  vulnerabilities  grew,  and  the  reckoning, 
when it came, was disruptive for all. 
4 
 BIS Review 36/2010
The  net  result  could  be  a  suboptimal  global  recovery,  in  which  the  adjustment  burden  in 
those countries with large imbalances falls largely on domestic prices and wages, rather than 
on  nominal  exchange  rates.  History  suggests  that  this  process  either  could  take  years, 
repressing  global  output  and  welfare  in  the  interim  or  lead  to  another  crisis,  which  would 
accelerate adjustment, but at a terrible cost. 
The G-20 framework could address this issue 
The G-20 framework to promote strong, sustainable, and balanced growth in global demand, 
launched last November in St. Andrews, Scotland, is an attempt to learn these lessons from 
history.  
The  G-20  framework  stresses  the  shared  responsibility  of  countries  for  global  economic 
performance. Under the framework, members have agreed to a mutual assessment of their 
monetary,  exchange  rate,  fiscal,  and  financial  policies,  with  the  assistance  of  the 
International Monetary Fund (IMF). The implications of these policies for the level and pattern 
of global growth and the risks to financial stability will be reviewed by finance ministers and 
central  bank  governors  in  preparation  for  agreement  on  any  common  actions  by  G-20 
leaders in Canada and South Korea this year. 
To  illustrate  what  is  at  stake,  the  Bank  of  Canada  has  generated  three  scenarios  for  the 
evolution of global growth and current account positions.15  
The first is a business-as-usual scenario (Chart 3). No significant changes are made to the 
current  mix  of  policies,  which  creates  a  situation  similar  to  the  one  that  led  to  the  recent 
crisis.  In  particular,  advanced  countries  do  not  make  the  fiscal  adjustments  necessary  to 
stabilize their debt dynamics, and their household savings rates do not increase.16 As well, 
emerging Asia continues to finance the U.S. deficit through reserve accumulation, effectively 
impeding real exchange rate adjustment.  
In the short run, this combination of policies provides a fiscal boost, but it does not last. In 
response  to  the  rising  public  debt burden,  global  interest rates  begin  to  rise,  crowding  out 
private investment and ultimately lowering potential growth. This, in turn, further worsens the 
fiscal  situation.  Global  economic  growth  falls  steadily  and,  by  2013,  it  is  only  2.7  per  cent 
(compared with the 4 per cent average rate during the Great Moderation of 2002–07). More 
alarmingly,  global  imbalances  reassert  at  an  explosive  rate.  Paths  for  public  and  external 
debt are unsustainable and could lead to another crisis.  
An obvious lesson to draw from this scenario is that advanced countries need to engage in 
fiscal  consolidation  over  the  medium  term.  Indeed,  that  is  the  express  policy  of  all 
industrialised countries. But would that alone be sufficient to rebalance the global economy?  
Consider a second scenario in which there is fiscal consolidation in advanced countries such 
that debt-to-GDP stabilizes by 2015 (Chart 4).17 Other countries maintain current policies. In 
particular, there is neither a real effective exchange rate adjustment nor an increase in the 
trend of domestic demand growth in Asia’s emerging economies.  
                                                 
15   Note that these scenarios are purely illustrative and do not represent the Bank’s base-case projection. They 
were  generated  using  BoC-GEM-FIN,  the  Bank’s  global  general-equilibrium  macro  model.  See  K. Beaton, 
C. de Resende, R. Lalonde, and S. Snudden, “Prospects for Global Current Account Rebalancing,” Bank of 
Canada Discussion Paper, forthcoming in 2010. 
16   Countries  do  not  make  the  necessary  fiscal  adjustments  to  stabilize  their  debt  dynamics.  There  is  no 
stabilization  in  debt-to-GDP  ratios  by  2015.  In  the  “framework”  scenario,  debt/GDP  in  the  United  States 
stabilizes around 75 per cent of GDP. In this “do nothing” scenario, U.S. debt/GDP would reach about 95 per 
cent of GDP by 2015. 
17   At 120 per cent for the United States, 130 per cent for Euro area. 
BIS Review 36/2010 
 5
In this scenario, there is deficient demand globally. With monetary policy constrained by the 
zero lower bound, deflation emerges. As a consequence, real interest rates increase sharply, 
growth stalls, and fiscal consolidation becomes more difficult.  
It is cold comfort that global imbalances are effectively eliminated. The cost is a prolonged 
global  recession,  with  massive  foregone  output.  If  this  scenario  were  to  occur,  the  risk  of 
protectionism would undoubtedly rise, potentially exacerbating the damage. 
Finally,  consider  a  “framework  scenario,”  one  that  highlights  the  large  gains  that  the  G-20 
process could – and should – produce (Chart 5). In this case, the fiscal consolidation of the 
second scenario is complemented by policies to increase domestic demand in emerging Asia 
and a modest real effective depreciation of the U.S. dollar (across all major currencies).  
In this case, current account imbalances stabilize at low levels and, more importantly, global 
growth rises to 3.7 per cent in 2010 and 4.5 per cent in 2011. Growth is strong, sustainable, 
and balanced. 
There is no doubt we would all be much better off with the last scenario (Table 1). By 2015, 
the difference in the level of global GDP between the deflation and framework scenarios is 
about 12 per cent (Chart 6).18 For Canada, the difference would be 10 per cent of Canadian 
GDP.19  
The morality of global imbalances 
If the gains to rebalancing are so considerable, why isn’t it assured that countries will take 
the necessary steps? There are two issues: misdiagnosis and coordination. 
Regarding the former, some view global imbalances, not as a missed opportunity but, rather, 
a  modern  morality  tale.  To  them,  deficit  countries  are  the  profligate  grasshoppers  whiling 
away  their  hours  in  the  sun,  while  the  surplus  countries  are  ants  prudently  husbanding 
resources in anticipation of winter.  
The problem with this diagnosis is that it ignores the symbiotic nature of the global economy. 
Excess savings in some countries go hand-in-hand with excess dissavings in others. Taken 
to  the  extreme,  the  husbanding  of  resources  makes  the  economic  winter  more  likely.  The 
thrift  of  the  Swabian  housewife  or  the  obsessive  self-insurance  of  the  emerging  giants  is 
globally  debilitating  and  self-defeating.  Hegel’s  observation  that  all  societies  die  from  the 
morbid intensification of their own first principles comes to mind.  
The drivers of domestic demand cannot be concentrated in the same countries forever. As 
the Managing Director of the IMF has suggested, not all countries can simultaneously export 
their way to growth.20  
The framework process does not appeal to a country’s altruism. As shown in Table 1, the 
framework scenario is pareto improving – every region is better off under it.  
The second issue is coordination. To stimulate private domestic demand, surplus countries 
could enhance their social safety nets, reform financial systems to liberate trapped savings 
from small and medium-sized enterprises, and sharpen relative price signals (in part through 
greater exchange rate flexibility). While it is in their own interests to implement these policies, 
                                                 
18   Or a total of $7 trillion. 
19   According  to  the  Bank’s  rough  calculations,  the  cumulative  U.S.-dollar  purchasing-power-parity  income  per 
citizen would increase by about US$3,000 by 2015. Five years later, in 2020, it would be about US$11,700. 
20   Dominique  Strauss-Kahn,  as  cited  in  C. Giles,  “IMF  warning  over  reliance  on  exports,”  Financial  Times, 
30 January 2010. 
6 
 BIS Review 36/2010
surplus countries could be further encouraged by industrialised countries implementing the 
necessary complementary measures. 
In  particular,  industrialised  countries  must  develop  credible  medium-term  plans  for  fiscal 
consolidation  and  implement  them  once  the  recovery  is  firmly  entrenched.  Moreover,  it  is 
essential that industrialised countries, particularly those at the epicentre of the financial crisis, 
implement  a  series  of  financial  reforms  to  increase  the  resilience  of  the  global  financial 
system.  This  means  more  and  better  bank  capital,  improved  market  infrastructure  for 
derivatives and funding markets, and a series of initiatives to end “too-big-to-fail.”21  
It will not be enough to propose. Measures must also be credibly implemented. That is why 
the peer review process of the Financial Stability Board (FSB) and external reviews by the 
IMF are so important. Through these processes, financial reforms could increase actual and 
perceived  systemic  stability  and  thereby  encourage  mutually  supportive  policies  in  surplus 
countries. 
Finally, all countries will need to maintain their commitment to price stability. I will now turn to 
this issue in Canada before concluding.  
Update on the inflation outlook 
The  global  economy  has  evolved  largely  as  expected.  Strong  growth  in  many  emerging-
market  economies  has  been  accompanied  by  positive  though  uneven  growth  in  most 
advanced  countries.  Although  the  level  of  economic  activity  is  now  somewhat  higher  than 
projected, the outlook for inflation and economic growth in the global economy over the near 
term  remains  essentially  unchanged,  with  exceptional  monetary  and  fiscal  stimulus 
continuing to provide important support in many countries. 
Economic activity in Canada has surprised slightly on the upside in recent weeks relative to 
the  projection  in  our  January  Monetary  Policy  Report.  Growth  has  been  driven  mainly  by 
domestic demand, but exports have also recovered further in response to improving external 
demand. Significant policy stimulus, combined with increased confidence, improved financial 
conditions,  and  higher  terms  of  trade,  are  the  main  factors  supporting  growth  in  Canada’s 
domestic demand.  
At the same time, the persistent strength of the Canadian dollar and the low absolute level of 
U.S.  demand  in  certain  key  sectors,  such  as  autos  and  housing,  will  continue  to  act  as 
significant drags on economic activity in Canada. 
Core inflation has been slightly firmer than projected, the result of both transitory factors and 
the higher level of economic activity. The outlook for inflation should continue to reflect the 
combined influences of stronger domestic demand, slowing wage growth, and overall excess 
supply. 
At  its  2  March  2010  decision,  the  Bank  reconfirmed  that  the  target  overnight  rate  can  be 
expected to remain at its current level until the end of the second quarter of 2010 in order to 
achieve  the  inflation  target.  This  commitment  is  expressly  conditional  on  the  outlook  for 
inflation, which will be updated in the Bank’s next Monetary Policy Report, to be published on 
22 April. 
                                                 
21   For  a  more  detailed  discussion,  see  M. Carney,  “Reforming  the  Global  Financial  System.”  Speech  to  the 
Autorité des marchés financiers, Montréal, Québec, 26 October 2009. 
BIS Review 36/2010 
 7
Conclusion 
In conclusion, the twin challenges of boosting Canadian productivity and of implementing the 
G-20 framework globally are daunting. But the gains are considerable. Now is not the time to 
rest on our laurels or to take an open global economy for granted. 
The Bank is committed to tackling these important issues. We have a broad research agenda 
on productivity. We are working with our domestic and international partners to reform the 
global  financial  system.  We  are  active  participants  in  G-20  framework  discussions,  not 
merely because they offer the best outcome for the global economy but also because they 
are in Canada’s interests.  
Finally, and most fundamentally, the Bank has an unwavering commitment to price stability. 
The  single,  most  direct  contribution  that  monetary  policy  can  make  to  sound  economic 
performance  is  to  provide  Canadians  with  confidence  that  their  money  will  retain  its 
purchasing power. That means keeping inflation low, stable, and predictable. Price stability 
lowers uncertainty, minimizes the costs of inflation, reduces the cost of capital, and creates 
an environment in which households and firms can invest and plan for the future.  
 8 
 BIS Review 36/2010
  9
BIS Review 36/2010 
   10 
 BIS Review 36/2010
  11
BIS Review 36/2010 
 