DeLisle Worrell: Making the financial system more secure 
Address  by  Dr  DeLisle  Worrell,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Barbados,  at  a  joint 
luncheon meeting of the Barbados International Business Association (BIBA) and domestic 
bankers, Hastings, 2 February 2010. 
 The dramatic collapse of Lehman Brothers in September 2008 may well have completed the 
process of rethinking the management of financial systems, and of reinventing central banks. 
It  used  to  be  that  central  banks  were  mainly  concerned  with  monetary  policy,  and  only 
peripherally  with  matters  of  financial  regulation.  Indeed,  there  was  sentiment  in  favour  of 
removing responsibility for financial regulation from the ambit of central banking altogether, 
and some argued that for the monetary policy maker to be financial regulator as well, was a 
conflict of interest. That view of the world began to come unstuck in the 1990s, with the onset 
of a series of international financial crises with far reaching implications, and the mandate for 
monitoring  the  health  of  the  financial  system  was  placed  squarely  on  the  shoulders  of  the 
central bank. Financial stability is now firmly on the agenda of central banks everywhere, and 
the  bank’s  mandate  of  necessity  encompasses  all  financial  institutions  which  have  the 
potential  to  destabilise  the  system  as  a  whole,  whether  or  not  they  are  actually  under  the 
central bank’s legal purview. In this address I will explain what we mean by financial stability, 
why financial stability is important, and how we seek to attain financial stability. 
The quest for financial stability 
Interest in financial stability was rekindled by a series of financial (and exchange rate) crises 
which  began  with  the  Mexican  crisis  of  1994,  followed  by  crises  in  Russia,  Brazil,  the  Far 
East,  and  Turkey,  to  name  the  best  known  examples.  In  response,  the  scope  of  financial 
sector  oversight,  which  had  previously  focused  on  the  prudential  health  of  individual 
institutions, was broadened to encompass the financial system as a whole. The aim was to 
avert the possibility of new financial crises emerging, to develop early warnings of possible 
financial difficulties, and to minimise the cost and ramifications of such financial failures as 
did occur, so as to prevent them snowballing in ways that would lead to widespread failure. 
That aim was reflected in the intensification of research on financial risk management, the 
widespread adoption of indicators of financial soundness, the universal obsession with the 
much misunderstood stress tests, the publication of financial stability reports, the revision of 
international guidelines for financial oversight and the institution by the IMF of a programme 
for assessing and reporting on the financial systems of all its member countries on a periodic 
basis.  It  is  by  no  means  reassuring  that,  in  spite  of  this  intensive  effort  over  more  than  a 
decade,  a  crisis  of  unimagined  proportions  should  have  emerged,  affecting  the  financial 
systems of all major countries, even those which were thought to be most skillfully managed 
and regulated, according to the new methodologies and guidelines. 
One important element in the quest for financial stability was the development of tests of the 
soundness of the financial stem. Over the last decade, the financial community has adopted 
a commonly used suite of financial soundness indicators for commercial banks, with a lesser 
known set of indicators for insurance companies. The health of the financial system is judged 
by comparing each indicator against a rule-of-thumb benchmark, most of which are codified 
in  an  international  agreement.  For  example,  the  international  benchmark  for  the  capital 
adequacy  of  commercial  banks  agreed  under  the  original  accords  signed  at  the  Bank  for 
International  Settlements  in  Basel,  Switzerland,  is  that  banks  should  maintain  minimum 
capital equal to 8 percent of assets. (The assets are weighted according to the risk they are 
thought  to  carry.)  Other  indicators  include  the  ratio  of  impaired  assets  to  total  assets,  the 
ratio of liquid to total assets, the return on assets or equity, and the institution’s exposure to 
foreign exchange, interest rate or capital market variation. 
BIS Review 12/2010 
 1
The indicators help to assess the current health of the financial system, but they offer limited 
insight into possible future challenges. Early warning systems (EWSs) have been developed 
in  an  effort  to  provide  this  insight.  The  logic  of  these  systems  is  that,  by  examining  the 
behaviour  of  financial  indicators  just  before  previous  crises  and  financial  failures,  we  may 
detect a pattern which could warn of future crises. The EWSs therefore attempt to forecast 
financial system performance based on a combination of indicators, taking into account past 
experience. A complementary approach is to forecast financial performance indicators, such 
as  profitability  and  liquidity,  as  a  supplementary  outcome  from  the  forecasts  of  general 
economic performance. 
Stress tests may be the most widely recognised tool recently developed for the analysis of 
the fragility of financial systems, and they are just as widely misunderstood. What we ought 
to test for, is how far the financial institution or system is from its limit. For example, we may 
conduct a test to determine what level of loan delinquency would serve to render a financial 
institution bankrupt. Would its capital be totally eroded if 10 percent of its loan portfolio were 
to become a total loss to the bank? Or would it still be solvent if the loss were 20 percent, or 
30 percent? What the stress test cannot tell you, is what the loss is likely to be. This is the 
misapprehension  which  is  reflected  in  most  commentary  you  will  see  on  stress  tests.  The 
tests  which  the  Federal  Reserve  conducted  a  year  ago  offered  no  reassurance,  because 
even before the test results were made public, the actual extent of loss had exceeded the 
assumptions  of  the  most  severe  test.  Properly  used,  however,  stress  tests  are  helpful  in 
identifying the areas of financial activity where the institutions under scrutiny are most at risk, 
and  they  can  help  in  signalling  when  policy  intervention  may  be  needed  to  address  these 
areas of vulnerability. 
The  quest  for  financial  stability  led  to  an  intensive  world  wide  review  of  systems  for  the 
oversight of banks and other financial institutions. The previous guidelines for the supervision 
of banks, developed through collaborative efforts of banking supervisors under the auspices 
of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  (known  as  the  Basel  Accords  for  Banking 
Supervision;  the  BIS  is  headquartered  in  Basel),  were  revisited,  and  new  guidelines 
proposed,  incorporating  more  sophisticated  risk  management  techniques  and  procedures. 
The  new  guidelines  provided  explicitly  for  the  use  of  financial  market  institutions  such  as 
credit  rating  systems  to  be  used  in  assessing  risk.  After  incorporating  comments  from  a 
global  review  process, 
for  global  banking  supervision  was 
promulgated  as  a  new  accord  on  international  banking  supervision  principles,  known 
popularly as Basel II. Unfortunately, just as the movement to upgrade banking supervision to 
Basel II standards started to gather momentum, the  world financial markets collapsed into 
the  mother  of  all  recent  financial  crises.  What  will  remain  of  Basel  II  in  the  wake  of  the 
financial crisis is as yet unclear. Some commentators, including our own Avinash Persaud, 
have argued that some underlying principles of the Basel accord are fundamentally flawed, a 
view which I happen to share. The Caribbean Centre for Money and Finance, where I worked 
prior  to  taking  up  my  present  post,  will  this  year  publish  views  of  Professor  Persaud  and 
others  on  the  flaws  in  the  global  regulatory  approach  that  need  to  be  addressed,  going 
forward. 
the  revised 
framework 
The importance of financial stability 
It  has  been  widely  observed  that  financial  crises  are  almost  always  accompanied  by 
exchange  rate  crises,  resulting  in  large  devaluations  of  the  domestic  currency.  In  open 
economies  that  is  not  a  coincidence:  the  failure  of  important  financial  institutions  too  often 
leads to a loss of confidence in the domestic currency and a flight of capital, which depresses 
the value of the currency. This was the experience of Indonesia, Russia, Brazil, Mexico and 
many  others.  As  everyone  knows,  the  fixed  Barbados  dollar  peg  is  the  bedrock  of  our 
economic  stability.  Financial  stability  therefore  becomes  central  to  the  Barbados  Central 
Bank’s  concerns,  because  the  stability  of  the  financial  sector,  along  with  the  credibility  of 
2 
 BIS Review 12/2010
fiscal policy, are the things that reassure the holders of financial assets that their Barbadian 
dollar investments are perfectly safe from devaluation. 
The concern for financial stability encompasses insurance companies, credit unions, mutual 
funds and all other financial institutions, not just commercial banks. The stability of the entire 
system  is  the  business of  the  Central  Bank,  even  though  the  Central  Bank  has  regulatory 
responsibility  only  for  commercial  and  international  banks.  All  central  banks  now  have  a 
financial stability mandate, even those which, like the Bank of England, have no regulatory 
responsibility  at  all.  All  UK  financial  institutions  are  supervised  by  the  Financial  Services 
Authority  of  that  country,  but  it  is  the  Bank  of  England  that  conducts  financial  stability 
analysis and publishes the financial stability report periodically. There is no contradiction in 
this arrangement. Financial regulation has to do with the licensing and health of individual 
financial institutions, while financial stability speaks to the health of the financial system as a 
whole.  Regulators  maintain  oversight  of  prudential  indicators,  do  inspections  of  financial 
institutions, make informed judgements and issue instructions for remedial action; the central 
bank, in its financial stability role, considers economic as well as prudential indicators, takes 
account  of  economic  forecasts  at  home  and  abroad,  and  analyses  the  implications  of 
relationships  among  financial  institutions,  in  order  to  make  judgements  and  policy 
recommendations where necessary, for the financial system as a whole, or for segments of 
it. The Central Banks’ overall concern for financial stability is therefore wholly compatible with 
the existing arrangements for the regulation of non-bank financial institutions in Barbados, as 
well as with the proposed Financial Services Regulatory Commission for non-banks. 
The framework for financial stability in Barbados 
There have been two published reports on financial stability in Barbados, both prepared by 
the IMF, with input from the Central Bank of Barbados, in 2004 and 2009. They both found 
the  financial  system  to  be  sound,  and  the  risks  to  which  it  was  exposed  manageable.  In 
addition, there is an academic assessment of the Barbadian financial system published by 
myself and three colleagues at the Central Bank, which contains much of the analytical work 
on which the IMF’s judgements were based. That work continues at the Central Bank, and 
the Bank will itself begin to publish reports on financial stability from time to time, starting in 
December this year. Our financial stability assessments will take account of risks to which 
the system is exposed arising from domestic activity of financial institutions; risks that might 
arise  from  the  activities  on  the  institutions’  head  offices,  associates  and  subsidiaries;  risks 
due  to  activity  conducted  abroad  by  domestic  institutions;  and  risks  that  might  be  indirect, 
through the impact of economic shocks on the customers of financial institutions. The Central 
Bank’s  financial  stability  reports  will  be  prepared  in  close  collaboration  with  other  financial 
regulators, because the reports will need to cover risk exposures of insurance companies, 
pension fund managers, credit unions, and other financial institutions, as well as commercial 
and international banks. 
Close  collaboration  between  domestic  financial  regulators  is  already  a  fact  of  life  for  the 
Central Bank, the Supervisor of Insurance, the Registrar of Cooperatives and the Securities 
Exchange  Commission,  and  these  arrangements  will  be  reviewed  and  upgraded.  This 
cooperation was on display in the government’s response to the January 2009 CL Financial 
crisis.  As  you  are  aware,  the  Bank  and  the  Supervisor  of  Insurance  are  working  together 
towards  the  orderly  resolution  of  the  domestic  business  of  Clico  Holdings  and  its 
subsidiaries. The CL Financial crisis is an example of reputational risk exposure, which can 
be  especially  difficult  to  anticipate.  Even  though  there  was  no  material  change  in  the 
operations of Clico Holdings Barbados, the intervention of the Central Bank of Trinidad and 
Tobago  in  CL  Financial  in  Trinidad  necessitated  corresponding  action  in  Barbados. 
Reputational risk may be the principal exposure of banks in the international sector. 
Credit  unions  are  an  essential  element  in  the  competitive  structure  of  financial  services  in 
Barbados, and they therefore fall under the financial stability net. Problems in the credit union 
BIS Review 12/2010 
 3
sector would hit the small saver especially hard, and would reduce credit availability for many 
household  amenities  and  housing  improvements  which  make  a  vital  contribution  to  the 
standard  of  living  of  the  ordinary  Barbadian.  Older  Barbadians  will  know  of  the  traumatic 
effect of the failure of the “Simmonds Penny Bank” in the 1950s, an event which stymied the 
growth of indigenous financial institutions for a generation. (Popular wisdom has it that the 
Bank was solvent, but its assets were mostly invested in real estate, and there was no one to 
provide cash against the real estate assets.) 
Challenges and responses in strengthening financial stability 
The  first  challenge  the  Central  Bank  and  other  financial  regulators  face  is  to  broaden  the 
range of financial soundness indicators currently collected, and to bring them up to date and 
disseminate them in a timely fashion, as we do for other economic and financial statistics. 
We plan to make all our statistics available online in electronic format in order to increase 
their timeliness, and financial soundness indicators will be included in this initiative. 
A  second  challenge  is  to  upgrade  financial  stability  analysis  at  the  Central  Bank  and  the 
other financial regulators, and to assist financial institutions in upgrading their own prudential 
analysis  and  management  of  risk.  This  involves  research  to  make  analytical  tools  more 
robust, the development of appropriate indicators for non-banks, the refinement of analysis of 
contagion effects and indirect risks to financial stability, and training of staff. In addition, the 
Bank  and  other  local  financial  regulators  will  need  to  monitor  revisions  in  the  Basel 
framework of banking supervision, and the evolution of international guidelines for insurance 
companies, credit unions, collective security institutions and other non-banks. Through our 
participation in regional organisations of regulators, the Barbados Central Bank and the other 
domestic  financial  regulators  may  collectively  contribute  a  Caribbean  and  small  country 
perspective  to  the  discussion  and  opinions  on  the  directions  of  reform  of  guidelines  for 
financial regulation. 
A  third  major  challenge  is  to  strengthen  the  collaboration  among  domestic  financial 
supervisors, and to establish a framework among regional financial supervisors for ongoing 
surveillance of the regional financial system. In a recent paper, Julia Jhinkoo of the CCMF 
and I documented the extent of regional integration in the financial sector. As is evident from 
even  casual  observation,  the  degree  of  financial  integration  is  considerable.  Financial 
stability analysis must reflect this regionalisation of financial institutions, and going forward, 
financial  stability  monitoring  must  be  a  joint  effort  of  all  financial  regulators,  conducting 
regular scrutiny of the region as a whole, as well as the individual national components of the 
overall picture. The Caribbean Technical Assistance Centre, and the Caribbean Centre for 
Money and Finance, in collaboration with the Caribbean Group of Banking Supervisors, the 
Caribbean Association of insurance Regulators, the Credit Union league and the Caribbean 
Group  of  Securities  Commissioners,  will  hold  a  workshop  in  Trinidad  on  March  3–5,  to 
develop an action plan for setting up an appropriate framework. 
In summary 
Financial  stability  is  as  central  to  the  central  Bank’s  mandate  as  is  the  Bank’s  economic 
intelligence function, because they both are essential to the preservation of the value of the 
currency. To evaluate the threats to financial stability, the Central Bank must look not only at 
the  health  of  the  banks  which  it  regulates,  but  to  all  other  financial  institutions,  to  their 
regional partners, branches and subsidiaries, and to their head offices and activities outside 
the  region  as  well.  Surveillance  must  be  undertaken  in  collaboration  with  other  domestic 
regulators, and a framework must be set up to provide for regional financial surveillance on a 
sufficiently frequent basis. For this analysis and reporting, data collection and reporting must 
be  more  comprehensive,  analytical  tools  will  need  to  be  strengthened,  some  international 
guidance will have to be revisited, and staff of regulators and financial institutions will need to 
4 
 BIS Review 12/2010
be trained in the upgraded systems. There is much to be done, and it will be necessary to 
proceed  on  parallel  tracks,  in  practical  steps.  The  main  items  which  the  public  can  look 
forward to in 2010 are: 
• 
An action plan for regional financial surveillance, to be undertaken as a collaborative 
effort of all Caribbean regulators, coming out of the March 3–5 workshop; 
The  publication  of  financial  soundness  indicators  online  by  the  Central  Bank  of 
Barbados, starting with indicators for banks; and  
The  publication  of  the  inaugural  financial  stability  report  by  the  Central  Bank  of 
Barbados. 
  Financial  stability  is  in  all  our  interests,  the  regulators,  the  financial  institutions  and  the 
general public. By actively working together with the institutions we supervise, the financial 
regulators will be able to keep the public up to date on the health of the financial system, and 
provide the facts, figures and analysis to support their assessment of its stability. 
BIS Review 12/2010 
 5
