Emsley  D  Tromp:  International  and  local  challenges  for  financial 
institutions in the Netherlands Antilles 
Speech  by  Dr  Emsley  D  Tromp,  President  of  the  Bank  of  the  Netherlands  Antilles,  at  the 
official opening of the new headquarters of Orco Bank, Willemstad, 10 April 2010. 
 Good evening, ladies and gentlemen. 
It is a pleasure for me to join you today on the occasion of the official opening of Orco Bank’s 
new headquarters. I would like to start by congratulating the shareholders, management, and 
personnel  on  this  milestone  in  Orco’s  Bank  history.  With  the  purchase  of  this  historical 
building, you have contributed to the conservation of Curaçao’s cultural heritage. In addition, 
with  this  investment  you  have  demonstrated  your  confidence  in  the  Antillean  economy  in 
general,  and  the  Curaçao  economy  in  particular.  Given  Orco  Bank’s  performance  and  its 
prudent management, I am more than confident that in the future, your decision will prove to 
have been the right one.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  these  are  without  doubt  challenging  times  for  financial  institutions. 
Both internationally and locally, developments are taking place that affect the way financial 
institutions do business. Today, I would like to address some of these developments. I will 
first  discuss  recent  international  economic  developments  and  their  impact  on  the  financial 
sector.  Second,  I  will  deal  with  the  challenges  our  financial  institutions  are  facing  in  the 
context of the constitutional changes within the Kingdom.  
When  discussing  international  economic  developments,  we  cannot  ignore  the  international 
financial  crisis  that  resulted  in  a  worldwide  recession  last  year.  Financial  innovation  and 
closer links between financial institutions transformed a liquidity crisis in the relatively small 
U.S. subprime mortgage market into a major solvency issue in other financial markets in the 
United States and abroad. Subsequently, the financial crisis rapidly spilled over into the real 
sector.  
In  an  effort  to  prevent  a  collapse  of  the  global  financial  system,  authorities,  particularly  in 
industrial  countries,  took  unprecedented  measures  aimed  at  supporting  demand  and 
reducing  uncertainty  and  systemic  risk  in  financial  markets.  These  measures  included  the 
expansion  of  retail  deposit  insurance  schemes  and  the  provision  of  guarantees  for  bank 
liabilities  other  than  deposits.  In  addition,  banks  received  billions  in  capital  injections  and 
guarantees for  their assets  in  return  for  government  ownership stakes.  Central  banks  also 
provided generous liquidity support and cut interest rates. However, these efforts could not 
prevent a deep worldwide recession.  
As we all know, few if any economies have not been affected by the crisis. Output contracted 
in  most  of  the  advanced  economies,  including  the  United  States  and  the  Euro  area.  In 
addition, economic activities slowed in the emerging markets and developing economies. As 
a  consequence,  many  economies  experienced  a  significant  increase  in  unemployment. 
Fortunately, global economic growth has rebounded recently, and financial conditions have 
improved. However, the pace of recovery is expected to be slow as uncertainties remain in 
the financial markets, and public intervention will gradually have to be withdrawn. According 
to the International Monetary Fund’s most recent World Economic Outlook, global growth is 
forecasted to near 4 percent in 2010, following a contraction of 0.8 percent in 2009. 
Although  the  sources  of  the  crisis  were  extremely  complex  and  numerous,  a  fundamental 
cause  was  that  many  financial  firms  simply  did  not  appreciate  the  risks  they  were  taking. 
Financial regulation was not equipped to detect the risk concentration and flawed incentives 
behind the financial innovations. Regulators, in fact, were not aware of the underlying risks of 
the financial innovations and the interconnectedness between activities and institutions. As a 
BIS Review 48/2010 
 1
result,  financial  institutions  and  other  investors  took  risky  decisions  beyond  the  regulatory 
net. 
For  that  reason,  economists  and  policymakers  worldwide  generally  agree  that  the 
weaknesses  that  led  to  the  recent  financial  crisis  must  be  addressed.  Financial  regulation 
and  supervision  need  to  be  strengthened  to  prevent  a  similar  crisis  in  the  future.  This  will 
require  a  number  of  steps.  First,  regulation  should  be  broadened  and  include  all  activities 
that  pose  economy-wide  risks.  Second,  financial  regulation  will  have  to  focus  on 
strengthening  financial  institutions’  management  of  liquidity  and  risk.  Third,  conflicts  of 
interest  should  be  reduced  by  making  bonuses  more  consistent  with  long-term  success 
rather than short-term profits. And fourth, the transparency of the financial system should be 
improved. In the area of financial supervision, the focus should be to detect developments in 
the  financial  sector  that  might  lead  to  a  systemic  crisis.  Not  only  banks,  but  all  financial 
institutions should be subject to strong and comprehensive supervision on a consolidated or 
firm wide basis.  
An important lesson of the recent financial crisis is the need for international cooperation and 
policy coordination. As financial markets have become increasingly integrated and financial 
centers  interconnected,  no  country  can  escape  the  effects  of  a  financial  crisis  no  matter 
where  it  occurs.  As  a  consequence,  financial  sector  reform  cannot  stop  at  the  national 
borders.  The  recent  experience  in  dealing  with  the  crisis  has  shown  us  that  international 
policy coordination actually can be very effective.  
Ladies and gentlemen, the effects of the international financial crisis on the financial sector in 
the Netherlands Antilles were relatively contained. Of course, our financial institutions were 
affected by the global collapse of the debt and equities markets and the sharp reduction of 
interest  rates.  However,  conservative  investment  strategies  combined  with  relatively  high 
risk-aversion  limited  our  financial  institutions’  exposure  to  troubled  assets.  In  addition,  the 
financial sector supervision provided by the central bank has prevented major problems from 
the  financial  crisis.  Nevertheless,  we  should  be  aware  that  the  general  tendency  towards 
stronger  financial  supervision  and  regulation  and  increased  international  cooperation  and 
policy coordination will have implications for our financial sector supervision. The supervisory 
and regulatory standards are set by international institutions such as the BIS and the IMF. If 
we do not follow these rules, we will run the risk of being blacklisted, thereby undermining 
confidence in our financial sector and investment climate. Hence, the notion of determining 
one’s  own  supervisory  policies  is  an  illusion.  In  small  economies  like  ours  that  are  very 
vulnerable  to  shocks,  international  cooperation  and  policy  coordination  in  financial  sector 
regulation and supervision is indispensable for international recognition and to make us more 
resilient towards possible crises in the future.  
Cooperation  and  policy  coordination  in  the  areas  of  financial  sector  supervision  and 
regulation  are  also  crucial  on  the  Kingdom  level.  To  address  our  financial  sector’s 
vulnerabilities, I envision a financial supervisory structure in which every country within the 
Kingdom will have its own supervisory institution, complemented by a standard-setting body 
at the Kingdom level or Committee of Kingdom Supervisors. As I advocated recently on the 
occasion  of  the  “Kingdom seminar on Financial Sector Supervision”,  this  body  should 
consist of the presidents of the respective central banks and should be in charge of preparing 
legislation  in  line  with  international  best  practices,  the  timely  implementation  of  rules  and 
regulations,  and  monitoring  compliance.  Such  a  structure  will  guarantee  compliance  with 
international supervisory standards. In addition, this structure will create a level playing field 
with uniform rules within the Kingdom and promote credibility and transparency. The existing 
cooperative  agreements  between  the  central  banks  of  the  Netherlands,  Aruba,  and  the 
Netherlands  Antilles  can  serve  as  a  basis  for  the  development  of  a  firm  supervisory 
architecture and the achievement of sound financial institutions and financial stability in the 
new countries of the Kingdom.  
2 
 BIS Review 48/2010
to 
the  adverse 
lower  private 
Ladies and gentlemen, I would like to turn now to recent developments in our own economy. 
international  economic 
In  2009,  our  economy  also  was  affected  by 
developments.  Domestic  demand  weakened,  due 
investment  and 
consumption,  although  it  was  offset  in  part  by  increased  public  consumption  and 
investments. Inflationary pressures eased in 2009, largely because of lower energy prices. 
An  analysis  by  sector  reveals  that  the  tourism  industry  was  most  affected  by  the  global 
economic  downturn.  We  estimate  that  the  foreign  exchange  revenues  from  the  industry 
dropped by 5.5 percent in 2009. 
In most other sectors of the economy, activities weakened in 2009 compared to 2008. For 
example, in the construction sector, activities slowed down because several major tourism 
and  transportation-related  projects  reached  their  final  stages.  In  addition,  activities  in  the 
wholesale  and  retail  sector  weakened  reflecting  lower  domestic  demand,  a  decline  in  the 
number of stay-over tourists, and lower re-exports by the free-zone companies in Curaçao. 
Our economy did not contract in 2009, contrary to the experience of most countries in the 
region.  Real  economic  growth  in  the  Netherlands  Antilles,  however,  is  estimated  to  have 
decelerated from 1.8 percent in 2008 to 1.0 percent in 2009. 
The main reasons why our economy is an exception in the region is the implementation of 
the debt relief program and the Social Economic Initiative. The inflow of debt relief funds from 
the Netherlands prevented a worsening of the current account of our balance of payments in 
2009.  In  addition,  it  contributed  to  a  cash  surplus  at  the  general  government  level  and, 
hence, a decline in public sector debt. Thanks to the debt relief program, our debt-to-GDP 
ratio declined from 82 percent in 2008 to 72 percent in 2009. 
Ladies and gentlemen, the Netherlands Antilles economy is expected to grow by 1.6 percent 
in 2010 as a result of an improvement in both domestic and external demand. The growth of 
domestic demand is accounted for primarily by public sector consumption and investment. 
Expectations  are  that  wages  and  salaries  expenses  will  increase  moderately,  despite  the 
dismantling  of  the  Netherlands  Antilles,  as  no  efficiency  effects  are  expected  in  the  short 
term. As a result of the culmination of the dismantling process in 2010, consultancy fees for 
setting up the necessary institutions to support the entities in their new constitutional status 
are  projected  to  rise,  causing  spending  on  goods  and  services  to  remain  elevated. 
Meanwhile, public investment is expected to peak as most projects of the Social Economic 
Initiative  Program  will  be  implemented  in  2010.  The  current  account  of  our  balance  of 
payments is projected to worsen as imports of goods and services will offset higher exports. 
However,  the  worsening  of  the  current  account  will  be  partly  offset  by  the  net  inflows  of 
current transfers related to the implementation of the debt relief program.  
The  price  climate  is  expected  to  remain  favorable  in  2010.  Inflation  is  projected  to  rise 
modestly from 2 percent in 2009 to 2.3 percent in 2010, a result of higher commodity prices, 
reflecting the pickup of global economic activity.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  constitutional  changes  within  the  Kingdom  and  the  related 
implementation  of  the  debt  relief  program  and  Social  Economic  Initiatives  have  played  a 
crucial role in our recent economic performance and will continue to affect our performance 
in 2010. However, these developments also have implications for the financial sector.  
The debt relief program started in January 2009 for the central government and in April 2009 
for  the  island  government  after  each  entity  met  the  qualifying  requirements.  These 
requirements  included,  among  other  things,  balanced  budgets  and  the  strengthening  of 
financial management.  The Board  of Financial Supervision, or College Financieel Toezicht 
(CFT), was established to temporarily supervise the finances of the government entities. As 
you may know, the terms of the debt relief program provide that the Dutch government will 
pay  70  percent  of  interest  costs  and  100  percent  of  maturing  principal  until  approximately 
70% of the outstanding debt at the end of 2005 has been settled.  
BIS Review 48/2010 
 3
The inflow of debt relief funds from the Netherlands adds to the existing excess liquidity in 
the domestic money market. This excess liquidity was due to the uncertainties regarding the 
international  securities  markets,  which  caused  financial  institutions  and  other  investors  to 
hold  more  funds  locally.  These  developments  put  domestic  interest  rates  under  increased 
pressure, and these rates had already declined in line with international developments. As a 
consequence,  local  financial  institutions  are  obtaining  lower  interest  income,  which  forces 
them  to  reduce  deposit  rates,  tap  other  sources  of  income,  and  improve  cost  efficiency  to 
remain profitable.  
Financial  institutions  in  the  Netherlands  Antilles  have  always  considered  government 
securities  as  a  main  local  investment  instrument,  given  their  low  risk  and  attractive  return. 
This view, however, has hampered progress in the further development of our capital market. 
Because of the debt relief, the availability of government securities is diminishing rapidly. In 
addition,  new  issues  of  government  securities  will  be  limited  under  the  prevailing  budget 
rules.  Consequently,  alternative  investment  opportunities  are  needed  to  keep  our  capital 
market attractive for investors.  
One  possible  alternative  is  the  issuance  of  bonds  by  public  enterprises.  However,  these 
issues will be successful only if good corporate governance of public companies is observed. 
In this context, it is crucial that tariffs are determined based on sound business principles and 
rules  set  by  a  regulatory  board.  Strong  internal  controls,  full  disclosure,  and  independent 
boards  of  directors  and  supervisory  directors  also  are  important  preconditions  for  effective 
governance of public enterprises. Under these circumstances, investors will be confident of 
receiving  a  fair  return  on  investment.  The  Dutch  Caribbean  Stock  Exchange  is,  in  this 
context, also a welcome development as it could foster more investment alternatives in our 
capital market.  
Ladies and gentlemen, as we are reaching the final stages of the dismantling process of the 
Netherlands Antilles, we also are closing a chapter in the history of central banking in the 
Netherlands  Antilles.  In  a  few  months,  the  Netherlands  Antilles  will  cease  to  exist.  As  a 
consequence, the central bank of the Netherlands Antilles as we currently know it also will 
disappear.  The  current  system  has  served  our  nation  well  for  over  180  years.  It  essential 
therefore that the current framers of the new central bank be guided by our past experience. 
If we are to have one central bank, it ought to be reflected also in the governance structure. 
Any  attempt  to  make  the  new  central  bank  function  as  one  institution  for  two  completely 
autonomous  entities  will  be  unproductive  and  will  result  in  mutually  inconsistent  policy 
objectives. Therefore, I would like to share my views with you on the institution that should 
replace it in the new constitutional setting.  
Currently,  the  most  important  objectives  of  our  central  bank  are  to  maintain  the  external 
stability of the Netherlands Antillean guilder and to promote a sound and efficient financial 
system  in  the  Netherlands  Antilles.  These  objectives  translate  into  the  following  functions: 
(1) the  issuance  of  banknotes  and  the  circulation  of  coins;  (2)  the  supervision  of  financial 
institutions to guarantee depositors’ and other  creditors’ funds; (3) the management of the 
foreign  exchange  reserves;  (4)  the  promotion  of  a  reliable  and  efficient  payments  system; 
and (5) banker of the government. Of course, the new countries of St. Maarten and Curaçao 
also need an institution in charge of executing these functions.  
In  the  new  constitutional  arrangement,  St.  Maarten  and  Curaçao  will  establish  a monetary 
union with a common central bank and a common currency. The preservation of economies 
of scale, the continuation of the good reputation and credibility of the current central bank, 
and  a  larger  common  economic  area  are  the  main  considerations  for  having  a  common 
central bank. However, a common institution also poses great challenges for the countries 
involved.  I  think  the  high  degree  of  policy  coordination  required  to  ensure  a  balanced  and 
effective  monetary  policy  is  one  of  the  greatest  challenges  because  it  means  that  already 
some of the newly won policy autonomy has to be forfeited. Also, the introduction of uniform 
4 
 BIS Review 48/2010
legislation for monetary and financial sector supervision in both countries is a complex task 
lying ahead of us.  
Ladies and gentlemen, the process of creating a new central bank and designing effective 
governance  arrangements  for  this  new  institution  is  a  complex  one,  especially  given  the 
involvement of two new autonomous countries. In addition, the environment in which central 
banks  operate  changes  continuously,  and  the  role  and  governance  of  a  central  bank  will 
continue to evolve. Effective governance of the new central bank can be guaranteed only if 
certain preconditions are met. I would like to discuss these preconditions with you in more 
detail. 
First,  the  new  countries  will  have  to  continue  adopting  similar  legislation,  rules,  and 
regulations related to monetary and financial sector supervision. Also, reconciliation of fiscal 
policies  is  recommended,  but  for  the  time  being,  this  will  be  guaranteed  by  the  common 
budget rules monitored by the CFT.  
Second, the central bank should have a high degree of autonomy from the governments to 
guarantee  that  its  monetary  and  supervisory  policy  decisions  are  made  without  political 
interference.  Moreover,  professional  and  technical  expertise  of  monetary  and  financial 
matters  is  centralized  in  the  central  bank.  Therefore,  the  relationship  between  the 
government and the central bank, and the roles and responsibilities of both entities should be 
clearly specified in legislation. 
Third, the appointment procedures of the central bank’s board of directors should be clearly 
specified  in  the  Bank’s  statute.  Needless  to  say,  the  board  of  directors  of  a  central  bank 
should  meet  certain  requirements,  including  professional  and  personal  qualifications. 
Furthermore, the members of the board of directors should abstain from activities that would 
create  conflicts  of  interest  regarding  their  role  as  central  bankers.  When  stipulating  the 
requirements for the board of directors, we also should take into consideration the reality of 
our labor market. Hence, we should avoid limitations on, for example, age or nationality that 
could become barriers for the appointment of experienced professionals. Ultimately, what the 
central bank needs is professionally and personally qualified persons who can manage the 
institution  effectively.  Once  appointed,  the  directors  of  the  central  bank  should  direct  their 
efforts towards the realization of the institution’s objectives. Therefore, it is crucial that these 
individuals are provided with the required autonomy to execute their office effectively.  
And  finally,  an  independent  and  expert  supervisory  board  should  be  appointed.  The 
supervisory  board  plays  a  crucial  role  in  ensuring  the  effective  administration  of  the  Bank. 
Central  banks  have  supervisory  boards  to  approve  the  institution’s  operational  budget, 
review  and  approve  the  annual  accounts,  and  oversee  the  audit  process.  In  addition,  the 
supervisory  board  promotes  the  use  of  structured  planning  and  management  frameworks. 
Because the supervisory board is part of the governance structure of an independent central 
bank, it also should have a high degree of autonomy in executing its functions. Similar to the 
board of directors, the members of the supervisory board should be selected on the basis of 
their personal and professional qualifications. Their age or nationality should not play a role.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  our  financial  institutions  are  currently  facing  many  challenges. 
Developments are taking place on both the international and the local levels that will impact 
the way you operate in the near future. However, these challenges provide both the financial 
institutions  and  authorities  with  unique  opportunities  to  strengthen  our  financial  sector  and 
the functioning of our financial market, which will contribute to building strong and prosperous 
new countries.  
Once again, I would like to wish the shareholders, management, and personnel of Orco Bank 
all the best in their new office. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 48/2010 
 5
