Svein Gjedrem: Multilateral approaches to global challenges 
Speech by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at the 
Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington DC, 25 February 2010. 
 Ladies and gentlemen,  
I am honored to be a guest speaker today at the Peterson Institute. 
The international order and Norway 
The financial problems that originated in the US banking system spread quickly around the 
world. A severe international financial crisis followed, leading to a deep economic downturn 
and  dramatic  dislocations  in  global  trade.  Authorities  worldwide  have  implemented 
unprecedented policy responses. 
When the crisis unfolded, the G201 and the International Monetary Fund (IMF)2 rose to the 
task.  Nevertheless,  I  believe  that  the  role  of  non-statutory  bodies  and  the  statutory 
institutions must be reconsidered to promote the necessary multilateral approach to global 
governance. This will be the theme of my talk today.  
Norway  is  a  small,  open,  advanced  and  essentially  commodity-based  economy.  Norges 
Bank is an independent central bank with an inflation targeting framework. It also manages 
the Norwegian Pension Fund Global, the world’s second largest sovereign wealth fund. The 
country is a founding member of NATO, but not a member of the European Union. However, 
based on the European Economic Area Agreement (EEA), Norway participates in the Single 
Market  of  the  European  Union.  The  country  has  been  an  active  participant  in  multilateral 
cooperation and institutions. It is an original member of the IMF and the World Bank, and is 
represented on the Executive Boards of both institutions together with seven other countries 
in the Nordic-Baltic Constituency.  
In line with its long-held policy of supporting multilateral institutions, Norway entered into a 
bilateral loan agreement with the IMF in the first half of 2009, when the IMF urgently needed 
to  strengthen  its  lending  capacity.  Later  in  2009,  Norway  agreed  to  raise  its  commitment 
under  the  New  Arrangements  to  Borrow  (NAB)  and  expanded  its  voluntary  transactions  in 
SDRs following the large allocations. It also committed to support IMF lending facilities for 
low-income  countries.  Thus,  Norway  has  actively  backed  the  multilateral  responses  to  the 
global crisis, in large part stemming from decisions of the G20 at the London Summit in April 
2009. 
Norway has a strong external and fiscal position based on large petroleum revenues. The 
lion’s share of the revenues is invested abroad through our sovereign wealth fund. 
                                                 
1   The membership of the G20 comprises Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Canada, China, France, Germany, India, 
Indonesia, Italy, Korea, Japan, Mexico, Russia, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Turkey, the United Kingdom, the 
United States and the European Union. The G20 was formed as a new forum for cooperation and consultation 
on matters pertaining to the international financial system. It studies, reviews, and promotes discussion among 
key  industrial  and  emerging  market  countries  of  policy  issues  pertaining  to  the  promotion  of  international 
financial stability, and seeks to address issues that go beyond the responsibilities of any one organization. 
2   The International Monetary Fund (IMF) is an organisation of 186 countries, working to foster global monetary 
cooperation, secure financial stability, facilitate international trade, promote high employment and sustainable 
economic growth, and reduce poverty around the world. 
BIS Review 22/2010 
 1
The accumulation of capital in the Fund reflects the depletion of a non-renewable resource. 
The  assets  of  the  Fund  now  amount  to  some  USD  450  billion,  the  equivalent  of  115%  of 
Norway’s GDP in 2009, or around USD 100 000 per capita. 
About  40%  of  the  Fund’s  investments  are  in  fixed  income  instruments  and  60%  in  listed 
stocks. The Fund invests globally according to market value weights. It roughly holds 1% of 
all  listed  equities.  This  would  not  be  possible  without  open  and  accessible  international 
capital markets. Norway has a strong and vested interest in the well-being of global financial 
markets. Norway participated actively in the formulation of the Generally Accepted Principles 
and Practices for Sovereign Wealth Funds, the “Santiago Principles”, a process coordinated 
by the IMF. Our sovereign wealth fund respects these principles. 
Norway  has  weathered  the  crisis  better  than  most  countries.  We  believe  a  strong  fiscal 
position and well-anchored inflation expectations have contributed to our relative success. In 
addition, investment activity in the petroleum sector held up well, our exposure to the hardest 
hit sectors in the global downturn was fairly limited, and our banks are small and relatively 
solid. Norway is recovering sooner than most countries, and Norges Bank was among the 
first central banks to raise its key policy rate. It did so twice in late 2009, up to 1.75%.  
As a global investor and an open market economy, my country shares the interests of most 
market  participants,  large  and  small.  We  have  a  common  interest  in  a  market-based 
international  order,  supporting  a  level  playing  field  and  sound  economic  governance.  Like 
many other countries, we have benefitted greatly from economic and financial globalisation. 
It  has  delivered  prosperity  and  growth  without  precedent.  In  the  midst  of  the  crisis,  these 
gains must not be forgotten. 
The multilateralism of Bretton Woods 
At the end of the Second World War, 45 countries agreed to establish a new international 
financial  and  economic  order  with  the  Bretton  Woods  Institutions,  the  IMF  and  the  World 
Bank, at its center. In his inaugural speech to the Bretton Woods Conference in 1944, US 
Treasury Secretary Henry Morgenthau noted the following:  
“We know that economic conflict must develop when nations endeavor separately 
to  deal  with  economic  ills  which  are  international  in  scope.  To  deal  with  the 
problems of international exchange and of international investment is beyond the 
capacity  of  any  one  country,  or  of  any  two  or  three  countries.  These  are 
multilateral  problems,  to  be  solved  only  by  multilateral  cooperation.  They  are 
fixed and permanent problems, not merely transitional considerations of the post-
war  reconstruction.  They  are  problems  not  limited  in  importance  to  foreign 
exchange traders and bankers but are vital factors in the flow of raw  materials 
and  finished  goods,  in  the  maintenance  of  high  levels  of  production  and 
consumption, in the establishment of a satisfactory standard of living for all the 
people of all the countries on this earth.”3 
These wisely spoken words are as relevant today as in 1944. When the IMF and the World 
Bank  were  established,  it  marked  the  beginning  of  a  period  of  international  economic  and 
financial cooperation which over time embraced virtually all the countries of the world.  
The  Bretton  Woods  Institutions  have  served  their  membership  well.  When  needed,  their 
policies have adapted promptly and timely to changes in the world economy and the global 
financial  system.  The  IMF,  with  its  crucial  competence,  has  been  a  key  forum  for  policy 
collaboration. Its surveillance and lending activities are unique. I strongly believe that global 
                                                 
3   Cited inter alia in Harold James: International Monetary Cooperation since Bretton Woods, The International 
Monetary Fund, Washington D.C., 1996. 
2 
 BIS Review 22/2010
governance is best served by a statutory-based international economic order, with effective 
and legitimate multilateral institutions where all countries are represented. 
In  the  recent  decade,  the  rapid  expansion  of  many  large  emerging  economies  has  greatly 
altered  the  global  economic  landscape.  Most  dramatic  is  the  re-entry  of  China  as  a  major 
economic power. At the same time, the growing imbalances in the world economy became 
and continue to be a source of instability, in addition to spurring protectionist tendencies. It is 
perhaps  time  to  honor  some  fundamental  principles,  such  as  the  one  noted  in  an  IMF 
Pamphlet  from  1992:  “The  philosophy  of  the  Articles  of  Agreement  is  based  on  the 
superiority of free trade as the organizing principle of international economic interaction.”4  
Lessons from the crisis 
The joint, massive, and unprecedented policy responses that were put in place as the crisis 
unfolded surely deserve due credit. As Mr. Subramanian here at the Peterson Institute noted 
in the Financial Times in late December 2009:5  
“What is striking about the influence of economics is that similar policy responses 
in  the  fiscal  and  monetary  areas,  and  non-responses  in  relation  to  competitive 
devaluations  and  protectionism,  were  crafted  across  the  globe.  They  were 
evident in emerging-market economies and developing countries as much as in 
the industrial world; in red-blooded capitalist countries as well as in communist 
China and still-dirigiste India. If ever there was a Great Consensus, this was it.” 
A key lesson from the crisis is the need for multilateral cooperation and collective action. It 
relates to the framework for polices on prevention, resolution, reform and implementation. It 
also relates to the institutional set-up. The international community turns to the IMF in times 
of crisis, in part because it is an effective institution that performs the vital functions that are 
called for, but also for the very simple reason that the world has no one else to turn to. The 
IMF  has  played  a  pivotal  role  in  presenting  the  initial  lessons  from  the  crisis,  in  providing 
finance to countries with temporary balance of payments needs, and in preparing the overall 
framework for the international policy response. When the good times return, we must avoid 
memory failure and remember these facts of life.  
The financial crisis has left a legacy. Large public and private debt, high unemployment and 
wide global imbalances continue to challenge the global framework for economic policy.  
Shaping the global governance structure 
In  recent  years,  increasingly  assertive  non-statutory  bodies  have  emerged  in  the  area  of 
international  economic  and  financial  collaboration,  most  notably  the  G20.  The  global  crisis 
pushed  the  G20  into  closer  cooperation  and  at  new  levels.  As  an  effective  and  powerful 
group, the G20 featured prominently in the broad international efforts to stabilise the global 
economy  in  late  2008  and  early  2009.  Without  its  prompt  and  comprehensive  action,  the 
consequences of the crisis would have been much worse. It is in the interest of all that the 
large  and  systemically  important  countries  discuss  issues  of  common  interest.  Their 
successful collaboration benefits not only themselves, but also the rest of the world.  
Among the G20 measures of 2009 were the efforts to strengthen confidence in international 
financial institutions, the IMF in particular, to permit it to play an effective role in tackling the 
                                                 
4   The Unique Nature of the Responsibilities of the International Monetary Fund. IMF Pamphlet Series No. 46, 
1992, footnote 54. 
5   How  Economics  Managed  To  Make  Amends,  by  Arvind  Subramanian,  Peterson  Institute  for  International 
Economics. Op-ed in the Financial Times December 28, 2009. 
BIS Review 22/2010 
 3
crisis.  Indeed,  the  G20  increasingly  uses  the  IMF  as  an  instrument  of  its  policy 
implementation.  
The governance structures of the IMF have received considerable attention, as they are not 
deemed  to  adequately  reflect  recent  important  changes  in  the  global  economy.  Misgivings 
about the legitimacy of these structures have played a role in prompting the G20 member 
countries to “…designate[d] the G20 to be the premier forum for our international economic 
cooperation”  as  agreed  by  the  G20  leaders  at  their  summit  in  Pittsburgh  last  September. 
With his presence at the World Economic Forum meeting in Davos last month, the Chair of 
the G20 aimed to “drum up support for the idea of  making the summit [in Korea  later this 
year] a “premier forum” where all major discussions on worldwide economic cooperation will 
take place”.6  
Therefore, the current ambition of the G20 may not only be driven by the global crisis. It may 
also reflect the frustration of some key countries with what they see as a slow evolution of 
the  decision-making  bodies  of  the  IMF  in  response  to  changes  in  the  composition  of  the 
world economy and the rise of new economic powers.  
International policy cooperation has thus moved out of statutory bodies and into groups of a 
select  few,  bypassing  established  channels  and  fora.  Other  countries  do  not  participate, 
directly or indirectly, but are called upon to contribute to efforts that others have agreed. The 
G20 discusses and aims to agree on changes in IMF governance. The vast majority of the 
membership of the IMF has no voice or representation in these discussions, including all low-
income countries and most emerging economies.  
If  they  are  not  addressed  effectively,  the  large  and  growing  global  imbalances  that 
contributed  to  the  current  crisis  are  likely  to  widen  anew.  This  would  again  put  at  risk  the 
stability  of  the  global  economy.  Linked  to  these  prospects  are  the  continued  rigidity  of 
important  exchange  rates  and  excessive  reserve  accumulation  leading  to  the  build-up  of 
unsustainable debt. I agree with those who have said that in recent years, the international 
monetary system failed to promote timely and orderly economic adjustment.7 Global capital 
markets failed to channel surplus savings in emerging market economies into profitable long-
term  investment  in  wealthier  countries.  It  would  seem  that  we  still  risk  repeating  recent 
failures. 
Let me also mention another concern. Mercantilist attitudes may also gain ground in surplus 
countries.  Investment  behavior  in  these  countries  may  be  motivated  by  broader  strategic 
considerations,  which  may  prompt  retaliatory  measures  and  result  in  restrictions  on  cross-
border capital flows. 
Global and prompt policy action is warranted yet again. To this end, the G20 has embarked 
upon an unprecedented exercise in policy collaboration with the adoption of the Framework 
for Strong, Sustainable and Balanced Growth. IMF surveillance will acquire a new dimension 
by  assisting  G20  Finance  Ministers  and  Central  Bank  Governors  in  the  process  of  mutual 
assessment of their economic and financial policies. It is crucial that the G20 framework lives 
up  to  expectations.  The  decisions  and  policies  adopted  by  its  members  will  affect  the 
environment  for  the  formulation  of  economic  policies  in  all  countries,  large  and  small,  rich 
and  poor.  The  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  Mervyn  King,  remarked  last  month  that 
“…so  far  the  only  specific  agreement  [among  the  G20]  is  to  talk  to  each  other.  Concrete 
steps to reduce the scale of global imbalances have, to date, been notable by their absence.” 
                                                 
6   Press release (27 January 2010) on the G20 website: President Lee to Attend Davos Forum. 
7   Mark Carney: The Evolution of the International Monetary System, Remarks at the Foreign Policy Association 
in New York City, November 19, 2009. 
4 
 BIS Review 22/2010
And  I  agree  that  the  G20  has  laid  its  reputation  on  the  line.  It  will  be  damaged  if  the 
framework comes to nought.8 
And  yet,  the  G20  lacks  the  legitimacy  that  historically  has  been  associated  with  a  truly 
multilateral  framework.  Its  ambitious  economic  cooperation  should  be  anchored  in  a 
multilateral institution. The IMF is the logical choice. 
The  G20  includes  only  the  countries  that  established  it.  Membership  seems  to  have  been 
somewhat arbitrarily determined and not solely on the basis of relative size or importance in 
the global economy. The G20 formally founded the Financial Stability Board (FSB)9 and sets 
its agenda. Membership is at the discretion of the G20. The G20 agrees on the activities of 
and changes in the IMF and more or less dictates decisions to the rest of the membership. 
The  FSB  agrees  on  standards  for  financial  sector  activity,  which  the  rest  of  the  world  is 
expected  to  adopt,  without  having  been  consulted  or  given  the  opportunity  to  voice  an 
opinion in the preparatory phase. 
A strong institution like the IMF must be at the center of multilateral economic and financial 
cooperation.  Virtually  all  the  countries  of  the  world  participate  and  are  represented  in  the 
IMF. To be able to continue to play an effective role, the IMF needs to enjoy confidence and 
trust, and to be seen as having a legitimate structure of governance. Last but not least, the 
IMF needs to be financially strong, to have at its disposal financial resources commensurate 
with its tasks, including the ability to provide prompt and significant financial support when 
needed.  
The  Bretton  Woods  Institutions  are  adapting  to  new  world  economic  conditions,  including 
greater relative weight of some emerging market economies. The members of the IMF aim to 
agree on changes in the governance of the Fund by January next year as confirmed in the 
latest  IMFC10  Communiqué.  A  review  of  quotas  is  central  to  these  deliberations.  Quotas 
determine the voting weight of individual member countries in the institution. Some expect 
the  review  to  lead  to  changes  in  the  Executive  Board  of  the  IMF.  Its  current  size  ensures 
broad  and  fair  representation  of  the  member  countries  and  avoids  an  undesirable 
concentration of power.  
An important part of the governance reforms should be to enhance the role and status of the 
IMFC. The composition of the IMFC ensures fair representation of the membership through 
the constituency structure. Although without formal decision-making powers, it has political 
power  and  stature  which  it  can  bring  to  bear.  A  reinvigorated  IMFC  requires  a  firm  policy 
commitment  from  the  membership  that  strategic  discussions  for  the  institution  and  global 
economic  cooperation  take  place  in  the  IMFC.  Adequately  dedicated  and  effectively 
managed, it can provide strategic leadership and guidance to the Executive Board.  
The G20 has assumed a dominant role in matters of international economics and finance. 
Success in their ambitious tasks can only be welcomed by the rest of us. However, it is a 
weakness that the members of the G20 represent only themselves. Virtually entire groups of 
countries and regions are left out. They have no voice and no representation in the work of 
the  G20  or  in  the  institutions  which  it  chooses  to  set  up  to  further  its  agenda.  This  is  at 
variance  with  the  principles  of  multilateralism  and  international  cooperation  that  have 
prevailed since the end of the Second World War. Over time, this could easily weaken not 
                                                 
8   Mervyn King: Speech at the University of Exeter, January 19, 2010. 
9   The Financial Stability Board has been established to address vulnerabilities and to develop and implement 
strong regulatory, supervisory and other policies in the interest of financial stability. It comprises the G20, five 
other countries and international institutions and standard-setting bodies. 
10   International Monetary and Financial Committee – the policy steering committee of the International Monetary 
Fund. 
BIS Review 22/2010 
 5
only  the  G20  process, but  also the  IMF  as  it will  be  perceived  as  increasingly  guided  and 
controlled by the G20.  
I referred earlier to a recent speech by the Governor of the Bank of England and I wish to do 
so again where he states: “Looking further ahead, the legitimacy and leadership of the G20 
would be enhanced if it were seen as representing views of other countries too. That could 
be achieved if the G20 were to metamorphose into a Governing Council for the IMF, and at 
the same time acquire a procedure for voting on decisions.” Needless to say, I agree with 
him,  as  did  the  Managing  Director  of  the  IMF  in  a  recent  interview.11  In  an  article  in  the 
Financial Times late last year, Anders Åslund, a Senior Fellow at your Institute, argued in a 
refreshingly blunt manner for a change in the G20.12 
The ongoing efforts to change global governance should not be limited to the IMF alone. In 
saying this, I repeat that I fully recognise the important role played by the G20 in the time of 
crisis.  However,  while  the  G20  continues  to  exist  and  even  expands  into  policy  areas  as 
varied  as  food  security,  energy  and  climate  change,  its  legitimacy  and  democratic 
foundations must be reinforced. This can be achieved by, for example, representation and 
participation  on  a  rotating  basis.  Everyone  does  not  have  to  be  present  all  the  time.  The 
constituency  model  of  the  IMF  and  the  World  Bank  could  be  adopted,  providing  for  the 
participation  of  other  countries,  even  if  only  indirectly.  In  that  vein,  the  G20  might  be 
expanded  by,  say,  four  members  in  conjunction  with  the  adoption  of  a  structure  which 
embraces the rest of the world.  
On  the  matters  of  economics  and  finance,  I  view  the  G20  as  a  complement,  not  an 
alternative, to the IMF. An appropriate solution would be the recognition of the IMF and the 
IMFC as the statutory-based principal forum. G20 collaboration on these matters would be 
recast in the IMFC or in an enhanced version in the Council if the membership decides to 
activate the provisions on its establishment. The IMFC is an institution of the IMF and thus 
has a statutory basis. It engages the membership of the IMF directly and indirectly. It would 
lend  legitimacy  and  integrity  to  the  process  of  international  economic  and  financial 
cooperation. The Articles of Agreement of the IMF confer upon it to “oversee the international 
monetary  system  in  order  to  ensure  its  effective  operation.”13  During  the  crisis,  the  IMF 
proved its ability to respond promptly and effectively to very challenging developments.  
I therefore submit that a statutory-based and representative global order should be one of the 
main objectives of the discussions on changes in the international financial architecture.  
Conclusion 
To conclude, I have presented my view on the prevailing international economic order which 
I find deficient in important respects. The G20 played a vital role in the response to the global 
crisis  and  the  rest  of  the  world  depends  on  its  successful  cooperation.  With  the  world 
recovering  from  crisis,  the  G20  should  merge  its  activities  with  those  of  the  IMF.  That  will 
give them both wider acceptance and legitimacy.  
At  the  outset,  I  described  some  characteristics  of  Norway  and  emphasised  our  history  of 
active  support  of  multilateral  institutions  and collaboration.  Currently,  we  do  not  participate 
where  decisive  discussions  take  place  on  international  economic  and  financial  issues  and 
cooperation,  including  changes  in  the  governance  of  the  IMF.  Yet  we  are  called  upon  to 
make relatively large contributions to efforts agreed by a non-statutory body.  
                                                 
11   IMF chief warns of reliance on exports; interview with the Financial Times January 30–31, 2010, p. 5. 
12   Anders Åslund: The Group of 20 must be stopped, Financial Times November 27, 2009. 
13   Article IV, Section 3 (a) of the IMF Articles of Agreement. 
6 
 BIS Review 22/2010
I would emphasize certain key principles: 
 
First,  systemically  important  countries  need  to  collaborate  effectively  on 
consistent economic policies. Their success is vital not only for their own good, 
but also for that of others, including small open economies.  
Second, this collaboration should be anchored in a multilateral and statutory-
based  system  of  representation,  for  example  through  constituencies,  where 
smaller countries would participate, even if indirectly.  
Third,  the  constituencies  should  have  rotating  representation,  where  small 
countries, at least periodically, could participate directly.  
  Without such a global order, the interest in contributing to international efforts is certain to 
diminish. There can be no taxation without representation. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 22/2010 
 7
