Ben S Bernanke: Fostering financial literacy 
Speech by Mr Ben S Bernanke, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System,  at  the  National  Bankers  Association  Foundation  Financial  Literacy  Summit 
Reception, Washington DC, 13 April 2010. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website.  
 It is a distinct pleasure to visit with the National Bankers Association Foundation this evening. 
I  am  very  pleased  to  be  among  your  honorees.  The  foundation  does  important  work, 
including  helping  consumers  make  wise  financial  choices,  connecting  the  “unbanked”  with 
mainstream providers of financial services, and providing assistance and support to minority 
bankers and entrepreneurs.  
April is Financial Literacy Month, and so it is fitting that you are hosting this event. I note that 
you also plan to hold a Financial Literacy Summit later this year on the Howard University 
campus. The summit will bring scholars, bankers, community activists, and others together to 
brainstorm strategies for educating consumers of financial products.  
Many  American  families  are  struggling  in  the  aftermath  of  the  financial  crisis,  which 
reinforces  the  need  for  reliable  and  useful  information  to  facilitate  good  financial  choices. 
Helping people better understand how to borrow and save wisely and how to build personal 
wealth  is  one  of  the  best  things  we  can  do  to  improve  the  well-being  of  families  and 
communities. The foundation is making great contributions to this effort, for example, through 
your online library of personal finance educational materials.1 
The  Federal  Reserve  very  much  shares  your  abiding  interest  in  helping  consumers 
successfully navigate the financial marketplace. Our approach is two-pronged. First, we work 
actively to foster financial and economic education. Second, recognizing that basic financial 
knowledge is not sufficient to keep people safe from fraud and deceptive practices, we are 
committed to developing and enforcing strong rules to protect consumers.  
On  the  financial  education  front,  examples  of  the  Federal  Reserve’s  many  resources 
available to the public are  
 
an online credit card calculator that helps consumers estimate how long it will take 
to pay off a credit card bill under different payment scenarios,2 
concise brochures – in both English and Spanish – offering consumer tips on such 
topics  as  avoiding  mortgage  foreclosure  scams  and  protecting  their  checking 
accounts,3 and  
interactive websites that provide consumers with what they need to know about new 
protections for credit card accounts and overdraft protection programs that recently 
took effect.4 
                                                   
1   See NBA Foundation, Inc., “Financial Literacy”, webpage.  
2   See  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  (2009),  “Board  Announces  Availability  of  Online 
Credit Card Repayment Calculator”, press release, April 16.  
3   See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, “Consumer Information Brochures”, webpage.  
4   See  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  (2010),  “Federal  Reserve  Announces  an  Online 
Consumer Guide to Credit Cards”, press release, February 19. 
BIS Review 47/2010 
 1
As for consumer protection, the Federal Reserve continues to demonstrate its commitment in 
this area. We have recently issued rules pertaining to mortgages, credit cards, student loans, 
and overdraft protection programs, among others. I should note that in recent years we have 
used  extensive  consumer  testing,  both  to  improve  financial  disclosures  and  to  highlight 
practices that simply cannot be understood by consumers even with the best disclosures and 
thus  must  be  prohibited.  We’ve  also  stepped  up  our  consumer  protection  supervision  and 
enforcement, including at the nonbank subsidiaries of bank holding companies and foreign 
banking organizations.  
Again, let me congratulate the foundation for organizing tomorrow’s financial literacy summit 
and  for  all  the  good  work  that  it  does.  I  would  also  like  to  recognize  and  congratulate  the 
others honored this evening – John Bryant, founder of Operation Hope; the late Jack Kemp, 
who  served  as  Secretary  of  Housing  and  Urban  Development  and  as  congressman  of 
western New York; and Congresswoman Sheila Jackson Lee of Texas. It is wonderful to see 
so  many  individuals  and  organizations  working  toward  the  common  goal  of  helping 
Americans make the best choices for their financial futures.  
Thank you again. 
2 
 BIS Review 47/2010
