Spencer Dale: Inflation, inflation, inflation 
Speech  by  Mr  Spencer  Dale,  Executive  Director  and  Chief  Economist  of  the  Bank  of 
England, at Cardiff Business School, Cardiff, 22 September 2010. 
 I would like to thank Venetia Bell, Rohan Churm and Łukasz Rachel for their considerable help in preparing these 
remarks. The views expressed are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of other members of the Monetary 
Policy Committee. 
Introduction 
Thank you for the invitation to speak this evening. I studied for my undergraduate degree in 
economics  at  what  was  then  University  College  Cardiff  in  the  mid  1980s.  I  had  three 
wonderful years in Cardiff and it is a huge pleasure to come back tonight and to see so many 
familiar  faces.  Although  I  hope  some  of  those  familiar  faces  will  be  kinder  to  my  speech 
tonight than they were with my essays back then. 
The theme of my talk tonight is inflation. 
I hope that you won’t find that too disappointing. I fear that some of you were looking forward 
to a talk on more exciting topics like the financial crisis, the new responsibilities that have 
been granted to the Bank, the speculation concerning a double dip. 
But I make no apology for focussing on inflation. One of the cornerstones of our economy’s 
stable and consistent growth in the 15 years or so prior to the financial crisis was the period 
of low and stable inflation that was achieved then. And our future prosperity will depend on 
our maintaining an environment of low and stable inflation. 
One of the most worrying comments I have heard in recent months came at a lunch of senior 
businessmen I attended. One of the diners suggested that the UK was returning to its old 
ways “of depreciating the exchange rate and inflating its way out of trouble.” Soon after, a 
City circular asked “is the MPC turning a blind eye to inflation?” 
This is dangerous talk. The evils of inflation are well known. The high and volatile rates of 
inflation  of  the  1970s  and  80s  stunted  our  economic  performance.  Companies  and 
households were unable to budget and plan efficiently. Resources were misallocated. Long-
term contracts were avoided. The value of hard-earned savings was eroded. 
This dangerous talk has perhaps been partly fuelled by the behaviour of inflation in recent 
years. CPI inflation has averaged close to 3% over the past four years, significantly higher 
than the 2% target and for the most part higher than the MPC anticipated. CPI inflation has 
been above target for 41 out of the past 50 months. Lest we forget, this is a long, long way 
from the high and volatile inflation of the 1970s and 80s. Even so, it is perhaps understandable 
that  some  may  have  started  to  question  the  commitment  or  competence  of  the  Monetary 
Policy  Committee.  Has  the  MPC  gone  soft  on  inflation?  Is  this  a  conspiracy  with  the 
Government to deflate away some of its debt? 
The answer to both these questions is emphatically “No”. The MPC remains as committed as 
ever to meeting the inflation target. It is our job to achieve the target and we are accountable 
to Parliament for doing so. To borrow from a phrase of a previous Prime Minister, ask me my 
three  main  priorities  for  monetary  policy  and  I  will  tell  you:  inflation,  inflation,  inflation. 
Maintaining low and stable inflation is the best contribution that monetary policy can make to 
the long-term health and prosperity of our economy. 
But  I  recognise  that  reassuring  words  and  good  intentions  are  not  enough.  We  need  to 
understand better the factors causing inflation to be above target. And we need to learn from 
BIS Review 122/2010 
 1
the upside surprises in inflation we have experienced recently. That is the topic of tonight’s 
talk.  
I  will  argue  that  it  is  not  difficult  to  explain  the  past  strength  of  inflation.  In  fact  there  is  a 
surplus of explanations. But there are important lessons to learn from the recent behaviour of 
inflation. And I will explain to you why – despite inflation being above target and expected to 
remain so until the end of next year and monetary policy being at unprecedented loose levels – 
the MPC has not gone soft on inflation. 
What determines inflation? 
To help structure the discussion, I want to frame my comments in terms of a simple model of 
pricing behaviour, in which companies are assumed to set prices as a mark-up over marginal 
costs.  The  precise  details  of  the  model  are  not  important  for  tonight.  Many  of  the 
mechanisms and channels that I will discuss are embodied within standard pricing models.1 
More importantly, my experience of speaking to businesses since the financial crisis began 
suggests  that  this  type  of  framework  captures  the  key  factors  that  have  been  important  in 
determining their pricing decisions. In particular, this type of pricing model emphasises the 
role of four types of factors. 
First, the marginal cost of producing an additional unit of output, which is likely to depend on 
the degree of spare capacity. Spare capacity within firms – since it tends to be cheaper for a 
company to increase output if some of its employees and capital are not fully utilised. And 
spare capacity in the wider economy – as slack in the labour market will tend to limit wage 
growth and thus the cost pressures faced by companies. 
But  many  companies  face  other  cost  pressures  that  are  not  related  to  their  own  capacity 
constraints or the ease with which  they can hire staff. These “other” costs are the second 
factor.  Some  of  these  costs  relate  to  inputs  that  are  imported,  such  as  energy  and  other 
commodities,  and  so  depend  on  movements  in  world  prices  and  in  the  sterling  exchange 
rate.  Others  stem  from  domestic  factors,  including  –  importantly  in  the  current  context  – 
changes in indirect taxes.  
The third factor emphasised by this type of pricing model is the mark-up over costs included 
in the final selling price which governs the return firms make on capital. As I will discuss later, 
there is some evidence to suggest that movements in this mark-up have been different in this 
recession than in previous ones. 
The  final  set  of  factors  determining  pricing  decisions  are  expectations  of  future  costs  and 
prices. Most companies change prices infrequently and as such their pricing decisions today 
are based on expectations about how their costs and their competitors’ prices are likely to 
vary in the future. Similarly, pay awards are likely to be affected by firms’ and employees’ 
expectations of future inflation. 
I will use this broad framework to consider why inflation has been above the 2% target for 
much  of  the  past  four  years  and  why  inflation  was  higher  than  expected  for  much  of  this 
period.  
Price level shocks 
It  is  not  difficult  to  find  factors  that  have  pushed  up  inflation  over  the  past  few  years.  The 
economy has been hit by a series of large price level shocks – to oil and other commodity 
prices, to VAT and to the sterling exchange rate – which have raised companies’ costs and 
                                                 
1   The  key  intuition  of  this  model  is  based  on  work  such  as  that  by  Marshall  (1920),  Chamberlin  (1933),  
Spence (1976) and Salop (1979), among many others who contributed to this now well established literature. 
2 
 BIS Review 122/2010
put  upward  pressure  on  prices.  Together  these  factors  can  more  than  account  for  the 
strength of inflation. 
The  impact  of  the  rise  in  oil  prices  and  the  changes  to  VAT  have  been  discussed  quite 
extensively elsewhere and so I will not expand on them further this evening.2 However, it is 
perhaps  worth  spending  a  few  minutes  considering  the  effects  that  the  substantial 
depreciation of sterling has had on companies’ costs and prices. 
Sterling  has  depreciated  by  close  to  25%  since  mid-2007.  To  get  a  sense  of  the  potential 
impact this depreciation may have had on inflation, it is worth recalling that imported goods 
and services account for around a quarter of the consumer price basket. So a simple thought 
experiment in which import costs increased in line with the fall in the value of sterling and 
these increased costs were fully passed-through into retail prices would imply an increase in 
the price level of around 6 percentage points. Now there are many reasons why this simple 
thought experiment is likely to be misleading. But it does serve to emphasise the potential 
size  of  the  effect  associated  with  sterling’s  depreciation  and  how  different  judgments 
concerning its impact could have very different implications for inflation. 
It  was  difficult  to  judge in  advance  the  extent  to  which  sterling’s  depreciation  was  likely  to 
feed through into consumer prices. In part, that was because this was the first example of a 
large exchange rate depreciation since the UK had started inflation targeting. This matters 
because  the  size  and  nature  of  pass-through  is  likely  to  depend  on  the  monetary  policy 
regime.  Moreover,  pass-through  from  changes  in  the  exchange  rate  to  import  prices,  and 
then  to  consumer  prices,  has  varied  considerably  over  time.  As  my  fellow  MPC  member 
Adam  Posen  pointed  out  recently,  a  range  of  studies  suggest  that  exchange  rate  pass-
through declined during the period of Great Stability (Posen 2010). 
Even ex post, the impact of the depreciation on consumer prices is hard to assess. The peak 
impact  of  the  exchange  rate  depreciation  on  CPI  inflation was  probably  somewhere  in  the 
range  of  2  to  3  percentage  points. While  the scale  of the  total  pass-through  to  retail  price 
inflation  appears  broadly  similar  to  past  experience,  companies  seem  to  have  passed 
through increases in import cost more quickly than in the recent past.3 That quicker pass-
through is likely to help explain why inflation over the past year or so has been higher than 
the MPC had anticipated.  
What  evidence  is  this  based  on?  The  production  of  goods  (excluding  energy)  tends  to  be 
more import-intensive than that of services, so the relative trends in goods and services price 
inflation  can  help  to  assess  the  impact  of  the  depreciation  on  consumer  prices.  Between 
1997  and  2008,  annual  non-energy  industrial  goods  price  inflation  averaged  around 
6 percentage points lower than services price inflation. But that wedge closed during 2009, 
as non-energy industrial goods price inflation soared and services price inflation fell to below 
its historical average (Chart 1). Moreover, the relatively close co-movement between finished 
manufactured goods import prices and consumer goods prices (excluding energy and food) 
over the past two years is suggestive of relatively high and rapid pass-through (Chart 2). 
The  faster  adjustment  of  prices  relative  to  that  implied  by  the  evidence  from  the  Great 
Stability  may  partly  reflect  the  fact  that  much  of  that  evidence  for  the  UK  is  based  on  the 
                                                 
2   For example, see Section 4 and the box on pages 48-49 of the August 2010 Inflation Report, Fisher (2010) 
and Sentance (2009). 
3   Much  of  the  recent  analysis  of  exchange  rate  pass-through  is  based  on  evidence  taken  from  the  Great 
Stability period (see for example Campa and Goldberg (2006) and Ihrig, Marazzi and Rothenberg (2006)). The 
results from these studies pick up the average lag structure of the past, and are sensitive to the window in 
which exchange rate effects are identified. It may be that the lag structure following sterling’s depreciation was 
quicker. To the extent that businesses adjusted more quickly, pass-through in the current period might appear 
larger than suggested by the econometric techniques used in previous studies, when in fact the adjustment 
was only faster. 
BIS Review 122/2010 
 3
behaviour  of  prices  following  sterling’s  appreciation  in  1996.  It  is  quite  possible  that  those 
businesses whose margins were squeezed following the recent exchange rate depreciation 
responded more  quickly  than  they  did  to  the  increase  in  margins  associated  with  the  mid-
1990s appreciation.  
My  central  view  is  that  the  peak  impact  of  the  past  depreciation  on  inflation  has  probably 
passed  –  monthly  goods  price  inflation  has  slowed  in  recent  quarters  and  the  total 
adjustment  in  relative  prices  is  similar  to  previous  exchange  rate  changes.  But  there  is 
considerable uncertainty surrounding this judgment and it is quite possible that there may be 
further significant upward pressure on prices to come. 
The increase in prices associated with the combination of the rise in oil prices, the changes 
to VAT, and the past depreciation of sterling is more than sufficient to explain the strength of 
inflation relative to target. Moreover, the fact that some of these factors were not predictable 
in  advance  and  that  their  implications  for  inflation  –  particularly  so  in  the  case  of  the 
exchange  rate  –  appear  to  have  been  greater  than  initially  anticipated,  can  also  help  to 
account for the upside surprises in inflation. But the exact contribution from these price-level 
shocks is uncertain and it is possible that the other factors identified by the pricing framework 
also contributed to the surprising strength of inflation. 
The impact of spare capacity on costs and prices 
Consider first the impact of spare capacity on costs and prices.  
There  are  good  reasons  to  believe  that  a  substantial  margin  of  spare  capacity  opened  up 
during the recession and remains today. Output fell precipitously through the second half of 
2008 and into 2009 and, despite the recovery in recent quarters, the level of output remains 
around 10% below that implied by a continuation of its pre-recession trend. 
The precise degree of spare capacity is difficult to judge since it depends on the extent to 
which the recession damaged the supply potential of our economy.4 Some of the channels 
through which recessions in the past have impeded supply growth appear, thus far at least, 
to have been less damaging than we initially feared. Despite a larger fall in output, the fall in 
employment,  although  substantial,  has  been  less  than  in  past  recessions.  Likewise,  the 
pickup in company liquidations has been relatively muted. It is likely that the financial crisis 
and the reduced availability of credit have affected supply in other ways, such as making it 
harder  for  smaller  or  more  entrepreneurial  companies  to  raise  funds  for  investment  or 
expansion.  But  even  so,  demand  has  probably  weakened  by  substantially  more  than 
potential  supply,  implying  a  large  degree  of  slack  both  in  the  labour  market  and  within 
companies. 
Consider each in turn. 
Slack in the labour market has contributed to the muted growth in earnings seen over the 
past  18  months  or  so.  Annual  private  sector  earnings  growth  has  averaged  a  little  below 
1 1/2 % since the start of the recession, around a third of its rate in the five preceding years. 
But  the  impact  of  this  weak  pay  on  companies’  costs  has  been  offset  by  businesses 
appearing to hold onto more staff than warranted by the lower level of output. The corollary 
of  the  resilience  in  employment  has  been  a  sharp  drop  in  labour  productivity.  As  a  result, 
growth in labour costs per unit of output has remained relatively firm, although it has fallen 
back as productivity has begun to recover.  
Companies  that  have  spare  capacity  within  their  business  should  be  able  to  use  these 
underutilised resources to increase output relatively cheaply. As such, spare capacity within 
                                                 
4   See Benito et al (2010) for a discussion of the impact of the financial crisis on supply. 
4 
 BIS Review 122/2010
companies should, at the margin, push down costs and prices. But reports from our network 
of Agents suggest that some companies responded to the sharp fall in output by temporarily 
decommissioning  some  of  their  capacity  in  order  to  reduce  their  cost  base.5  Companies 
mothballed production lines; cut back on capital leases; reduced the number of shifts and so 
on.  
Although it is perhaps most natural to think of this mothballing behaviour in the context of 
manufacturing, it was also apparent within the services sector. It was relatively commonplace 
for professional services companies to encourage staff to take sabbaticals at much reduced 
pay. Aircraft were taken out of service. Shops were left empty. 
This type of adjustment has helped UK industry to withstand the effect of the recession. It 
reduces  companies’  average  costs  and  so  protects  their  profitability  during  the  period  of 
weak  demand.  A  by-product  of  this  adjustment,  however,  is  that  the  marginal  cost  of 
producing additional output is higher. Although the mothballed capacity can be reinstated, it 
is likely to be more costly to do so, especially in the short-run, than if  the resources were 
simply standing idle. Assembly lines need to be serviced before being restarted; staff need to 
be brought back from sabbaticals. As a result, the downward pressure on costs and prices 
stemming from the latent spare capacity within companies, at least in the near term, is likely 
to be less.6 
Developments in margins 
Consider next the mark-up over and above costs that companies include in their selling price.  
In the past, margins in the UK have tended to fall back during periods of weak demand and 
vice versa.7 One possible reason for this is if companies reduce their prices relative to their 
costs when demand is weak in order to gain market share which they hope to hold onto as 
demand  increases,  ie  they  hope  to  be  able  to  exploit  some  degree  of  pricing  power.  If 
successful, the lower profits in the downturn are outweighed by the gains during the upswing. 
This  pro-cyclicality  of  margins  is  another  reason  why  inflation  in  the  UK  has  tended  to 
moderate during periods of weak demand.  
But margins appear to have fallen by less during the recent recession than expected given 
the marked contraction in demand. Simple measures of margins, such as the profit share, 
have  been  relatively  resilient.  And  a  recent  survey  by  the  Bank’s  Agents  suggested  that 
margins  on  average  were  only  a  little  below  normal,  despite  the  marked  contraction  in 
demand.8 
Why so? 
In part, aggregate margins may have been boosted by the sharp rise in sterling export prices 
following  the  depreciation  of  sterling.  The  increase  in  exporters’  margins  may  well  have 
masked a decline in margins earned by domestic producers. 
                                                 
5   That is consistent with some surveys of companies’ capacity utilisation, which do not seem to have fallen by 
as much as the fall in output might suggest. 
6   An  important  issue  determining  the  evolution  of  supply  in  the  medium-term  is  how  quickly  this  mothballed 
capacity is either brought back on stream or eroded. This is likely to depend on the pace of the recovery. 
7   Strictly,  the  model  I  am  discussing  talks  about  the  mark-up  over  marginal  cost,  whereas  margins  are 
calculated  with  reference  to  average  costs.  Margins  have  the  advantage  that  they  can  be  calculated  from 
companies’ published accounts, wheras mark-ups are not directly observable. But different estimates of the 
mark-up  in  the  United  Kingdom  have  appeared  to  move  in  a  similar  direction  to  margins  across  economic 
cycles. See Haskel et al (1995) and Macallan and Parker (2008). 
8   See  the  box  on  page  5  of  the  July  2010  Agents’  summary  of  business  conditions,  available  at: 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/agentssummary/agsum10jul.pdf 
BIS Review 122/2010 
 5
But it may also reflect the nature of this recession. 
Speak to almost any businessperson and they will tell you the same story: to be successful, 
businesses need healthy cash flow. Cash is king. That has always been the case. But one 
consequence of the financial crisis – as the availability of bank financed tightened and trade 
credit  dried  up  –  is  that  the  importance  placed  on  maintaining  cash  flows  increased. 
Companies were less able to trade-off lower selling prices today for future gains in market 
share.9 
Inflation expectations 
The final factor emphasised by the pricing model is inflation expectations.  
The importance of inflation expectations is well understood. If wage and price setters expect 
the MPC to keep inflation close to target for much of the time, this will be reflected in their 
behaviour  which,  in  turn,  will  help  keep  inflation  close  to  target.  Successful  policy  and 
anchored inflation expectations are self-reinforcing. 
A significant risk associated with the recent period of above-target inflation is that it causes 
inflation  expectations  to  become  less  well  anchored.  The  dangerous  talk  may  start  to  be 
believed.  If  so,  temporary  deviations  in  inflation  would  tend  to  be  given  greater  weight  in 
wage  and  price  setting  and  so  become  more  persistent.  And  the  task  of  monetary  policy 
would become substantially harder. 
Although this remains a significant risk, my reading of the available evidence to date is that 
inflation  expectations  remain  relatively  well  anchored.  Measures  of  households’  short-term 
expectations have picked up over the past year or so, but so have the MPC’s projections for 
nearterm inflation. Indeed, the MPC’s own revisions to its central inflation projection over the 
past year have been similar to that implied by a majority of survey measures (Chart 3). And 
measures of households’ medium-term inflation expectations have remained broadly stable, 
as have expectations of professional forecasters. 
Indeed, the surprising strength in inflation during the recession may partly stem from inflation 
expectations being more firmly anchored than in the past, so helping to offset the downward 
pressure from spare capacity. This may reflect the different role played by monetary policy in 
this  recession  from  that  in  the  1980s  and  1990s.  In  those  earlier  recessions,  policy  was 
designed  to  reduce  trend  inflation.  As  such,  expectations  about  future  policy  and  the 
emerging  spare  capacity  reinforced  each  other  in  bearing  down  on  prices.  In contrast,  the 
aim  of  monetary  policy  during  this  recession  has  been  to  work  against  the  downward 
pressure  on  inflation  from  excess  capacity  in  order  to  avoid  a  prolonged  period  of  below-
target inflation. 
Where does all this leave us? 
To  my  mind,  there  is  no  great  puzzle  or  mystery  surrounding  the  period  of  above-target 
inflation seen over the past few years. Our economy has been affected by a number of large 
shocks – to energy prices, the level of VAT, and the value of sterling – which have caused 
prices to increase. Some of these shocks were not predictable in advance. And even if they 
were, trying to use monetary policy to offset short-run movements in inflation is likely to have 
amplified output volatility. 
                                                 
9   Another defining feature of this recession is that it has been very deep. If companies are already down to their 
core customer base, cutting prices may generate little additional demand. Put more formally, as output fell, the 
demand  curve  faced  by  some  companies  may  have  become  increasingly  inelastic,  thus  reducing  their 
incentive  to  cut  their  margins.  See  Bils  (1989)  and  Ravn  et  al  (2006)  for  examples  of  pricing  models  that 
incorporate such customer behaviour. 
6 
 BIS Review 122/2010
But that does not mean that we should not learn from the behaviour of inflation. My current 
assessment is that changes in the structure of the economy, the nature of the financial crisis, 
and  the  different  role  played  by  policy  all  affected  the  behaviour  of  inflation  during  the 
downturn. And it is important that we learn from those developments to help set policy in the 
future.  
Conclusion 
So what are the implications for policy? 
Surely with inflation above target and expected to remain so for some time, the natural thing 
is  to  begin  to  reduce  the  degree  of  monetary  stimulus?  Monetary  policy  is  extraordinarily 
loose and a small tightening would still leave policy hugely stimulatory. And what better way 
to counter the dangerous talk than by putting our money where our mouth is and beginning 
to withdraw the policy stimulus. 
But it is not as straightforward as that – there are significant risks to both sides of the inflation 
outlook. 
Yes: the period of above target inflation; the fact that inflation has been higher than expected; 
and that it is likely to remain above target until the end of next year all contribute to the risk 
that credibility and confidence in the MPC may start to waver. If that were to happen, and 
wage and price setters started to expect higher inflation to persist, the task facing the MPC in 
returning our economy to an environment of low and stable inflation would be substantially 
greater.  Don’t  forget  the  repeated  and  costly  failures  of  the  1970s  and  80s.  We  lose  our 
credibility at our peril – once the genie of inflation credibility escapes it is costly to put back. 
The  response  to  a  possible  loss  of  credibility  is  clear  –  monetary  policy  would  need  to 
tighten, possibly aggressively so. But I think this risk remains just that – a risk. Despite the 
dangerous talk, most measures of inflation expectations still appear broadly consistent with 
hitting the inflation target in the medium term.  
And there are significant downside risks to inflation. It is difficult to know exactly how much 
spare capacity there is in the economy and what its precise impact is on inflation. But that 
there remains some slack in the economy and this is likely to be pushing down on costs and 
prices  seems  clear.  That  impact  should  become  more  apparent  as  the  temporary  effects 
associated with the shocks to input prices and VAT wane. It is perhaps noteworthy that in the 
US  and  euro  area,  which  have  not  experienced  falls  in  their  exchange  rates  or  large 
movements in indirect taxes, core inflation has weakened substantially. The downside risks 
to the growth outlook, stemming in particular from the substantial fiscal consolidation now in 
train  and  the  continuing  constraints  on  the  supply  of  bank  lending,  add  materially  to  the 
downside risks to inflation. 
And even if the economic recovery does continue, it is possible that some of the factors that 
may have contributed to the surprising strength in inflation in the past may start to fade. As 
demand increases, companies may begin to bring mothballed capacity back on stream. And 
as firms build up their cash balances and credit becomes more available, margins may start 
to fall as companies seek to enter new markets and gain new customers. 
The risks to the inflation target are real and substantial. The job of monetary policy is to try to 
balance  these  upside  and  downside  risks  to  inflation.  In  essence  this  is  no  different  to 
normal, monetary policy is always faced with a balancing act. But what is different is that the 
current risks to inflation are unusually large. 
My central view is that these risks should gradually lessen as the temporary effects pushing 
up on inflation wane and the economic recovery continues. But it is possible that some of the 
risks will crystallise and policy will need to react. 
It  is  quite  likely  that  in  hindsight,  once  we  see  how  the  economy  evolved  and  which  risks 
materialised, that the current stance of policy will be criticised for having been too tight or too 
BIS Review 122/2010 
 7
loose. But we cannot set policy with hindsight. All we can do is set policy in such a way that 
balances  the  opposing  risks  to  inflation  and  be  ready  to  change  policy  decisively  in  either 
direction as this balance of risks alters. I do not know when policy will next change or in what 
direction. But I can assure you that when making this decision, the objectives of policy will be 
clear and unchanging: inflation, inflation, inflation. 
References 
Benito, A, Neiss, K, Price, S and Rachel, Ł (2010), “The impact of the financial crisis on 
supply”, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Vol. 50, No. 2, pages 104–114.  
Bils,  M  (1989),  “Pricing  in  a  customer  market”,  The  Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics, 
Vol. 104 (4), pages 699–718. 
Campa, J and Goldberg, L (2006), “Distribution margins, imported inputs, and the sensitivity 
of the CPI to exchange rates”, NBER Working Paper No. 12121. 
Chamberlin, E (1933), “The theory of monopolistic competition”, Cambridge, Mass. Harvard 
University Press. 
Fisher,  P  (2010),  “Why  is  CPI  inflation  so  high?”,  Remarks  based  on  a  talk  given  to 
Merseyside Young Professionals, available at: 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2010/speech438.pdf  
Haskel,  J,  Martin,  C  and  Small,  I  (1995),  “Price,  marginal  cost  and  the  business  cycle”, 
Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 57, pages 25–41.  
Ihrig,  J,  Marazzi,  M  and  Rothenberg,  A  (2006),  “Exchange  rate  pass-through  in  the 
G7 countries”,  International Finance Discussion Paper  No. 851, Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System. 
Macallan, C and Parker, M (2008), “How do mark-ups vary with demand?”, Bank of England 
Quarterly Bulletin, Volume 48, No. 2, pages 167–173. 
Marshall, A (1920), Principles of Economics, London: Macmillan. 
Posen,  A  (2010),  “The  British  recovery  in  international  comparison”,  Speech  given  to  the 
Society  of  Business  Economists  Annual  Conference  “Sustaining  the  Recovery”,  London, 
available at: http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2010/speech439.pdf  
Ravn, M, Schmitt-Grohé, S and Uribe, M (2006), “Deep habits”, The Review of Economic 
Studies, Vol. 73 (1), pages 195–218. 
Salop,  S  (1979),  “Monopolistic  competition  with  outside  goods”,  The  Bell  Journal  of 
Economics, Vol. 10 (1), pages 141–156. 
Sentance,  A  (2009),  “Monetary  policy  in  turbulent  times”,  Speech  at  the  Agricultural 
Engineers’ Association Annual Conference, Institute of Civil Engineers, London, available at: 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2009/speech385.pdf  
Spence,  M  (1976),  “Product  selection,  fixed  costs,  and  monopolistic  competition”,  The 
Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 43 (2), pages 217–235. 
8 
 BIS Review 122/2010
 9
BIS Review 122/2010 
 