Ben S Bernanke: Federal Reserve’s exit strategy 
Testimony  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  System,  before 
the  Committee  on  Financial  Services,  US  House  of 
Representatives, Washington DC, 10 February 2010. 
Statement as prepared for delivery. The hearing was postponed due to inclement weather.  
 Chairmen Frank and Watt, Ranking Members Bachus and Paul, and other members of the 
Committee and Subcommittee, I appreciate the opportunity to discuss the Federal Reserve’s 
strategy for exiting from the extraordinary lending and monetary policies that it implemented 
to combat the financial crisis and support economic activity.  
Broadly  speaking,  the  Federal  Reserve’s  response  to  the  crisis  and  the  recession  can  be 
divided  into  two  parts.  First,  our  financial  system  during  the  past  2–1/2  years  has 
experienced  periods  of  intense  panic  and  dysfunction,  during  which  private  short-term 
funding  became  difficult  or  impossible  to  obtain  for  many  borrowers.  The  pulling  back  of 
private  liquidity  at  times  threatened  the  stability  of  major  financial  institutions  and  markets 
and severely disrupted normal channels of credit. In its role as liquidity provider of last resort, 
the Federal Reserve developed a number of programs to provide well-secured, mostly short-
term credit to the financial system. These programs, which imposed no cost on the taxpayer, 
were a critical part of the government’s efforts to stabilize the financial system and restart the 
flow of credit.1 As financial conditions have improved, the Federal Reserve has substantially 
phased out these lending programs.  
Second,  after  reducing  short-term  interest  rates  nearly  to  zero,  the  Federal  Open  Market 
Committee  (FOMC)  provided  additional  monetary  policy  stimulus  through  large-scale 
purchases  of  Treasury  and  agency  securities.  These  asset  purchases,  which  had  the 
additional effect of substantially increasing the reserves that depository institutions hold with 
the Federal Reserve Banks, have helped lower interest rates and spreads in the mortgage 
market  and  other  key  credit  markets,  thereby  promoting  economic  growth.  Although  at 
present  the  U.S.  economy  continues  to  require  the  support  of  highly  accommodative 
monetary policies, at some point the Federal Reserve will need to tighten financial conditions 
by raising short-term interest rates and reducing the quantity of bank reserves outstanding. 
We  have  spent  considerable  effort  in  developing  the  tools  we  will  need  to  remove  policy 
accommodation, and we are fully confident that at the appropriate time we will be able to do 
so effectively.  
Liquidity programs 
With the onset of the crisis in the late summer and fall of 2007, the Federal Reserve aimed to 
ensure that sound financial institutions had sufficient access to short-term credit to remain 
sufficiently  liquid  and  able  to  lend  to  creditworthy  customers,  even  as  private  sources  of 
liquidity  began  to  dry  up.  To  improve  the  access  of  banks  to  backup  liquidity,  the  Federal 
Reserve reduced the spread over the target federal funds rate of the discount rate – the rate 
at  which  the  Fed  lends  to  depository  institutions  through  its  discount  window  –  from 
100 basis points to 25 basis points, and extended the maximum maturity of discount window 
loans, which had generally been limited to overnight, to 90 days.  
                                                 
1  
Indeed,  when  the  final  accounting  is  complete,  these  programs  are  likely  to  generate  significant  positive 
returns for taxpayers. Of course, stabilization of the financial system, not profit, was the principal goal of the 
programs. 
BIS Review 15/2010 
 1
Many  banks,  however,  were  evidently  concerned  that  if  they  borrowed  from  the  discount 
window,  and  that  fact  somehow  became  known  to  market  participants,  they  would  be 
perceived as weak and, consequently, might come under further pressure from creditors. To 
address this so-called stigma problem, the Federal Reserve created a new discount window 
program, the Term Auction Facility (TAF). Under the TAF, the Federal Reserve has regularly 
auctioned large blocks of credit to depository institutions. For various reasons, including the 
competitive  format  of  the  auctions,  the  TAF  has  not  suffered  the  stigma  of  conventional 
discount  window  lending  and  has  proved  effective  for  injecting  liquidity  into  the  financial 
system.2  
Liquidity  pressures  in  financial  markets  were  not  limited  to  the  United  States,  and  intense 
strains in the global dollar funding markets began to spill over to U.S. markets. In response, 
the Federal Reserve entered into temporary currency swap agreements with major foreign 
central  banks.  Under  these  agreements,  the  Federal  Reserve  provided  dollars  to  foreign 
central  banks  in  exchange  for  an  equally  valued  quantity  of  foreign  currency;  the  foreign 
central banks, in turn, lent the dollars to banks in their own jurisdictions. The swaps helped 
reduce  stresses  in  global  dollar  funding  markets,  which  in  turn  helped  to  stabilize 
U.S. markets. Importantly, the swaps were structured so that the Federal Reserve bore no 
foreign exchange risk or credit risk.3  
As  the  financial  crisis  spread,  the  continuing  pullback  of  private  funding  contributed  to  the 
illiquid and even chaotic conditions in financial markets and prompted runs on various types 
of financial institutions, including primary dealers and money market mutual funds.4 To arrest 
these  runs  and  help  stabilize  the  broader  financial  system,  the  Federal  Reserve  used  its 
emergency lending authority under Section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act – an authority 
not  used  since  the  Great  Depression  –  to  provide  short-term  backup  funding  to  certain 
nondepository institutions through a number of temporary facilities.5 For example, in March 
2008 the Federal Reserve created the Primary Dealer Credit Facility, which lent to primary 
dealers  on  an  overnight,  overcollateralized  basis.  Subsequently,  the  Federal  Reserve 
created  facilities  that  proved  effective  in  helping  to  stabilize  other  key  institutions  and 
markets, including money market mutual funds, the commercial paper market, and the asset-
backed securities market.  
As  was  intended,  use  of  many  of  the  Federal  Reserve’s  lending  facilities  has  declined 
sharply as financial conditions have improved.6 Some facilities were closed over the course 
of 2009, and most other facilities expired at the beginning of this month. As of today, the only 
facilities  still  in  operation  that  offer  credit  to  multiple  institutions,  other  than  the  regular 
discount window, are the TAF (the auction facility for depository institutions) and the Term 
Asset-Backed  Securities  Loan  Facility  (TALF),  which  has  supported  the  market  for  asset-
                                                 
2   Another possible reason that the TAF has not suffered from stigma is that auctions are not settled for several 
days, which signals to the market that auction participants do not face an immediate shortage of funds. 
In particular, foreign central banks, not the Federal Reserve, bore the credit risk associated with the foreign 
central banks’ dollar-denominated loans to financial institutions. 
3  
4   Primary dealers are broker-dealers that trade in U.S. government securities with the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York. 
5   Section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act authorizes Reserve Banks to lend to individuals, partnerships, and 
corporations in “unusual and exigent circumstances” as determined by the Board of Governors. The Federal 
Reserve invoked Section 13(3) on two occasions during the 1960s to establish lending facilities for savings 
associations; however, no credit was extended through either facility. 
In designing its facilities, the Federal Reserve in many cases incorporated features – such as pricing that was 
unattractive under  normal financial conditions –  aimed  at  encouraging borrowers to reduce their use of the 
facilities as financial conditions returned to normal. In the case of other facilities, particularly those that made 
available  fixed  amounts  of  credit  through  auctions,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  gradually  reduced  offered 
amounts. 
6  
2 
 BIS Review 15/2010
backed  securities,  such  as  those  that  are  backed  by  auto  loans,  credit  card  loans,  small 
business  loans,  and  student  loans.  These  two  facilities  will  also  be  phased  out  soon:  The 
Federal Reserve has announced that the final TAF auction will be conducted on March 8, 
and the TALF is scheduled to close on March 31 for loans backed by all types of collateral 
except  newly  issued  commercial  mortgage-backed  securities  (CMBS)  and  on  June  30  for 
loans backed by newly issued CMBS.7  
In addition, the Federal Reserve is in the process of normalizing the terms of regular discount 
window loans. We have reduced the maximum maturity of discount window loans to 28 days, 
from 90 days, and we will consider whether further reductions in the maximum loan maturity 
are  warranted.  Also,  before  long,  we  expect  to  consider  a  modest  increase  in  the  spread 
between the discount rate and the target federal funds rate. These changes, like the closure 
of a number of lending facilities earlier this month, should be viewed as further normalization 
of  the  Federal  Reserve’s  lending  facilities,  in  light  of  the  improving  conditions  in  financial 
markets;  they  are  not  expected  to  lead  to  tighter  financial  conditions  for  households  and 
businesses  and  should  not  be  interpreted  as  signaling  any  change  in  the  outlook  for 
monetary  policy,  which  remains  about  as  it  was  at  the  time  of  the January  meeting  of  the 
FOMC.  
In summary, to help stabilize financial markets and to mitigate the effects of the crisis on the 
economy, the Federal Reserve established a number of temporary lending programs. Under 
nearly  all  of  the  programs,  only  short-term  credit,  with  maturities  of  90  days  or  less,  was 
extended, and under all of the programs credit was overcollateralized or otherwise secured 
as  required  by  law.  The  Federal  Reserve  believes  that  these  programs  were  effective  in 
supporting  the  functioning  of  financial  markets  and  in  helping  to  promote  a  resumption  of 
economic growth. The Federal Reserve has borne no loss on these operations thus far and 
anticipates  no  loss  in  the  future.  The  exit  from  these  programs  is  substantially  complete: 
Total credit outstanding under all programs, including the regular discount window, has fallen 
sharply from a peak of $1–1/2 trillion around year-end 2008 to about $110 billion last week.  
Separately,  to  prevent  potentially  catastrophic  effects  on  the  U.S.  financial  system  and 
economy, and with the support of the Treasury Department, the Federal Reserve also used 
its  emergency  lending  powers  to  help  avoid  the  disorderly  failure  of  two  systemically 
important  financial  institutions,  Bear  Stearns  and  American  International  Group.  Credit 
extended under these arrangements currently totals about $116 billion, or about 5 percent of 
the  Federal  Reserve’s  balance  sheet.  The  Federal  Reserve  expects  these  exposures  to 
decline gradually over time. The Board continues to anticipate that the Federal Reserve will 
ultimately incur no loss on these loans as well. These loans were made with great reluctance 
under extreme conditions and in the absence of an appropriate alternative legal framework. 
To  preclude  any  future  need  for  the  Federal  Reserve  to  lend  in  similar  circumstances,  we 
strongly  support  the  establishment  of  a  statutory  regime  for  the  safe  resolution  of  failing, 
systemically important nonbank financial institutions.  
Monetary policy and asset purchases 
In  addition  to  supporting  the  functioning  of  financial  markets,  the  Federal  Reserve  also 
applied  an  extraordinary  degree  of  monetary  policy  stimulus  to  help  counter  the  adverse 
effects  of  the  financial  crisis  on  the  economy.  In  September  2007,  the  Federal  Reserve 
began reducing its target for the federal funds rate from an initial level of 5–1/4 percent. By 
late  2008,  this  target  reached  a  range  of  0  to  1/4  percent,  essentially  the  lowest  feasible 
level.  With  its  conventional  policy  arsenal  exhausted  and  the  economy  remaining  under 
                                                 
7   The TALF extends three- and five-year loans, which will remain outstanding after the facility closes for new 
loans. The extension of the CMBS portion of the facility reflects the Board’s assessment that conditions in that 
sector remain highly stressed, as well as the fact that CMBS securitizations are more complex and take longer 
to arrange than other types. 
BIS Review 15/2010 
 3
severe  stress,  the  Federal  Reserve  decided  to  provide  additional  stimulus  through  large-
scale purchases of federal agency debt and mortgage-backed securities (MBS) that are fully 
guaranteed  by  federal  agencies.  In  March  2009,  the  Federal  Reserve  expanded  its 
purchases  of  agency  securities  and  began  to  purchase  longer-term  Treasury  securities  as 
well. All told, the Federal Reserve purchased $300 billion of Treasury securities and currently 
anticipates concluding purchases of $1.25 trillion of agency MBS and about $175 billion of 
agency debt securities at the end of March. The Federal Reserve’s purchases have had the 
effect of leaving the banking system in a highly liquid condition, with U.S. banks now holding 
more  than  $1.1  trillion  of  reserves  with  Federal  Reserve  Banks.  A  range  of  evidence 
suggests  that  these  purchases  and  the  associated  creation  of  bank  reserves  have  helped 
improve  conditions  in  private  credit  markets  and  put  downward  pressure  on  longer-term 
private borrowing rates and spreads.  
The FOMC anticipates that economic conditions, including low rates of resource utilization, 
subdued inflation trends, and stable inflation expectations, are likely to warrant exceptionally 
low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period. In due course, however, as the 
expansion matures the Federal Reserve will need to begin to tighten monetary conditions to 
prevent  the  development  of  inflationary  pressures.  The  Federal  Reserve  has  a  number  of 
tools that will enable it to firm the stance of policy at the appropriate time.  
Most  importantly,  in  October  2008  the  Congress  gave  the  Federal  Reserve  statutory 
authority to pay interest on banks’ holdings of reserve balances. By increasing the interest 
rate on reserves, the Federal Reserve will be able to put significant upward pressure on all 
short-term interest rates, as banks will not supply short-term funds to the money markets at 
rates  significantly  below  what  they  can  earn  by  holding  reserves  at  the  Federal  Reserve 
Banks. Actual and prospective increases in short-term interest rates will be reflected in turn 
in longer-term interest rates and in financial conditions more generally.8  
The Federal Reserve has also been developing a number of additional tools it will be able to 
use  to  reduce  the  large  quantity  of  reserves  held  by  the  banking  system.  Reducing  the 
quantity  of  reserves  will  lower  the  net  supply  of  funds  to  the  money  markets,  which  will 
improve  the  Federal  Reserve’s  control  of  financial  conditions  by  leading  to  a  tighter 
relationship between the interest rate on reserves and other short-term interest rates.  
One such tool is reverse repurchase agreements (reverse repos), a method that the Federal 
Reserve has used historically as a means of absorbing reserves from the banking system. In 
a reverse repo, the Federal Reserve sells a security to a counterparty with an agreement to 
repurchase  the  security  at  some  date  in  the  future.  The  counterparty’s  payment  to  the 
Federal Reserve has the effect of draining an equal quantity of reserves from the banking 
system.  Recently,  by  developing  the  capacity  to  conduct  such  transactions  in  the  triparty 
repo market, the Federal Reserve has enhanced its ability to use reverse repos to absorb 
very large quantities of reserves. The capability to carry out these transactions with primary 
dealers, using our holdings of Treasury and agency debt securities, has already been tested 
and is currently available. To further increase its capacity to drain reserves through reverse 
repos, the Federal Reserve is also in the process of expanding the set of counterparties with 
which it can transact and developing the infrastructure necessary to use its MBS holdings as 
collateral in these transactions.  
As a second means of draining reserves, the Federal Reserve is also developing plans to 
offer to depository institutions term deposits, which are roughly analogous to certificates of 
deposit that the institutions offer to their customers. The Federal Reserve would likely auction 
large  blocks  of  such  deposits,  thus  converting  a  portion  of  depository  institutions’  reserve 
                                                 
8  
Increases  in  the  interest  rate  paid  on  reserves  are  unlikely  to  prove  a  net  subsidy  to  banks,  as  the  higher 
return  on  reserve  balances  will  be  offset  by  similar  increases  in  banks’  funding  costs.  Indeed,  on  balance, 
banks’ net interest margins will likely decline when short-term rates rise. 
4 
 BIS Review 15/2010
balances into deposits that could not be used to meet their very short-term liquidity needs 
and  could  not  be  counted  as  reserves.  A  proposal  describing  a  term  deposit  facility  was 
recently  published  in  the  Federal  Register,  and  we  are  currently  analyzing  the  public 
comments that have been received. After a revised proposal is reviewed by the Board, we 
expect to be able to conduct test transactions this spring and to have the facility available if 
necessary shortly thereafter. Reverse repos and the deposit facility would together allow the 
Federal Reserve to drain hundreds of billions of dollars of reserves from the banking system 
quite quickly, should it choose to do so.  
The Federal Reserve also has the option of redeeming or selling securities as a means of 
applying  monetary  restraint.  A  reduction  in  securities  holdings  would  have  the  effect  of 
further  reducing  the  quantity  of  reserves  in  the  banking  system  as  well  as  reducing  the 
overall size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet.  
The sequencing of steps and the combination of tools that the Federal Reserve uses as it 
exits  from  its  currently  very  accommodative  policy  stance  will  depend  on  economic  and 
financial  developments.  One  possible  sequence  would  involve  the  Federal  Reserve 
continuing to test its tools for draining reserves on a limited basis, in order to further ensure 
preparedness and to give market participants a period of time to become familiar with their 
operation. As the time for the removal of policy accommodation draws near, those operations 
could be scaled up to drain more significant volumes of reserve balances to provide tighter 
control over short-term interest rates. The actual firming of policy would then be implemented 
through  an  increase  in  the  interest  rate  paid  on  reserves.  If  economic  and  financial 
developments  were  to  require  a  more  rapid  exit  from  the  current  highly  accommodative 
policy,  however,  the  Federal  Reserve  could  increase  the  interest  rate  paid  on  reserves  at 
about the same time it commences significant draining operations.  
I currently do not anticipate that the Federal Reserve will sell any of its security holdings in 
the near term, at least until after policy tightening has gotten under way and the economy is 
clearly in a sustainable recovery. However, to help reduce the size of our balance sheet and 
the quantity of reserves, we are allowing agency debt and MBS to run off as they mature or 
are prepaid. The Federal Reserve is currently rolling over all maturing Treasury securities, 
but in the future it may choose not to do so in all cases. In the long run, the Federal Reserve 
anticipates that its balance sheet will shrink toward more historically normal levels and that 
most or all of its security holdings will be Treasury securities. Although passively redeeming 
agency  debt  and  MBS  as  they  mature  or  are  prepaid  will  move  us  in  that  direction,  the 
Federal Reserve may also choose to sell securities in the future when the economic recovery 
is  sufficiently  advanced  and  the  FOMC  has  determined  that  the  associated  financial 
tightening  is  warranted.  Any  such  sales  would  be  at  a  gradual  pace,  would  be  clearly 
communicated  to  market  participants,  and  would  entail  appropriate  consideration  of 
economic conditions.  
As a result of the very large volume of reserves in the banking system, the level of activity 
and liquidity in the federal funds market has declined considerably, raising the possibility that 
the  federal  funds  rate  could  for  a  time  become  a  less  reliable  indicator  than  usual  of 
conditions in short-term money markets. Accordingly, the Federal Reserve is considering the 
utility,  during  the  transition  to  a  more  normal  policy  configuration,  of  communicating  the 
stance  of  policy  in  terms  of  another  operating  target,  such  as  an  alternative  short-term 
interest  rate.  In  particular,  it  is  possible  that  the  Federal  Reserve  could  for  a  time  use  the 
interest rate paid on reserves, in combination with targets for reserve quantities, as a guide 
to its policy stance, while simultaneously monitoring a range of market rates. No decision has 
been  made  on  this  issue;  we  will  be  guided  in  part  by  the  evolution  of  the  federal  funds 
market as policy accommodation is withdrawn. The Federal Reserve anticipates that it will 
BIS Review 15/2010 
 5
eventually  return  to  an  operating  framework  with  much  lower  reserve  balances  than  at 
present and with the federal funds rate as the operating target for policy.9  
Conclusion 
To sum up, in response to severe threats to our economy, the Federal Reserve created a 
series  of  special  lending  facilities  to  stabilize  the  financial  system  and  encourage  the 
resumption  of  private  credit  flows.  As  market  conditions  and  the  economic  outlook  have 
improved,  many  of  these  programs  have  been  terminated  or  are  being  phased  out.  The 
Federal Reserve also promoted economic recovery through sharp reductions in its target for 
the  federal  funds  rate  and  through  purchases  of  securities.  The  economy  continues  to 
require the support of accommodative monetary policies. However, we have been working to 
ensure  that  we  have  the  tools  to  reverse,  at  the  appropriate  time,  the  currently  very  high 
degree of monetary stimulus. We have full confidence that, when the time comes, we will be 
ready to do so.  
                                                 
9   The  authority  to  pay  interest  on  reserves  is  likely  to  be  an  important  component  of  the  future  operating 
framework for monetary policy. For example, one approach is for the Federal Reserve to bracket its target for 
the federal funds rate with the discount rate above and the interest rate on excess reserves below. Under this 
so-called corridor system, the ability of banks to borrow at the discount rate would tend to limit upward spikes 
in the federal funds rate, and the ability of banks to earn interest at the excess reserves rate would tend to 
contain  downward  movements.  Other  approaches  are  also  possible.  Given  the  very  high  level  of  reserve 
balances currently in the banking system, the Federal Reserve has ample time to consider the best long-run 
framework for policy implementation. The Federal Reserve believes it is possible that, ultimately, its operating 
framework will allow the elimination of minimum reserve requirements, which impose costs and distortions on 
the banking system. 
6 
 BIS Review 15/2010
