Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Uganda’s banking sector 
Speech  by  Prof  Emmanuel-Tumusiime  Mutebile,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Uganda,  at  the 
Uganda Bankers’ Association dinner, Kampala, 27 November 2009.  
 The Guest of Honor, Hon Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development 
Distinguished Guests,  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Allow  me  to  congratulate  Uganda  Bankers  Association  (UBA)  for  organizing  this  inaugural 
annual diner. You must continue so that you allow the Chairmen and members of the board 
of directors of banks to understand some of the things we discuss every month between the 
Governor and chief executives of banks.  
I wish to take this opportunity to congratulate all the banks upon satisfactory operating results 
for the year ended 2008 and hope that the operating results for the year ended 2009 will be 
as good if not better despite the world trends.  
When  I  first  stated  that  the  world  financial  crisis  would  not  affect  Uganda’s  banking  and 
financial  sector,  I  was  called  all  sorts  of  names:  “crank”;  one  newspaper  said  I  should  go 
back to school!  
They have not apologized because now at the end of it all, the crisis hasn’t affected Ugandan 
banks. But the economic crisis may be having second round effects, but all the banks are 
strong, safe and sound.  
I  also  take  this  opportunity  to  thank  banks  for  enabling  us  maintain  a  sound  and  stable 
financial sector. Many other countries envy what you have done and let us continue working 
together  to  ensure  that  we  are  the  envy  of  those  people  who  sometimes  call  us  names 
because of other events unrelated to banking.  
The  banking  sector  has  remained  largely  profitable  and  solvent  with  average  capital 
averaging 22 percent of risk weighted assets as in the third quarter of 2009. It is testament to 
the prudent macroeconomic policies and the strengthening of banking supervision that the 
bank has put in place. 
Notwithstanding, it’s important to note the second round effects of the economic crisis due to 
external  shocks  which  has  affected  both  the  current  and  capital  accounts  and  reduced 
growth in aggregate demand must be felt. Slower growth in aggregate demand has put real 
GDP  growth  lower  with  GDP  growing  at  7 percent  in  2008/09  which  was  lower  than  9.5 
percent growth rate projected. But this growth rate is still much higher than the rates of sub 
Saharan African countries. Let us not go down and say economic situation is bad because 
it’s good and together with you we can make it even better.  
And  in  particular  I  want  to  tell  you  that  BOU  is  determined  to  ensure  that  the  current 
appreciation  of  the  exchange  rate  will  not  lead  to  an  unnecessary  reduction  in  aggregate 
domestic demand. We will take and use every measure at our disposal to ensure that this 
does not happen and that the economy remains buoyant.  
I have said before that I am not committed to a particular exchange rate of the shilling but 
because  of  the  problems  that  are  happening  now  which  lead  to  a  reduction  in  domestic 
demand, the BOU will ensure that the appreciation of the exchange rate doesn’t worsen the 
situation regarding aggregate demand.  
We are not changing the policy of not having an exchange rate level to defend. I am saying 
that we will not allow the appreciation of the exchange rate to cause other problems on our 
BIS Review 4/2010 
 1
goals. I am not changing the rule which we have followed all this while that the BOU will not 
intervene in the market except when there is volatility.  
I  herewith  therefore  announce  that,  from  tomorrow,  November  28,  2009,  in  addition  to 
volatility,  we  will,  until  further  notice,  intervene  to  stop  excessive  appreciation  of  the 
exchange rate.  
We  have  a  challenge  of  ensuring  financial  access.  We  have  a  challenge  of  ensuring  that 
agricultural  credit  is  made  available  to  a  wider  sector  of  Uganda’s  population  since  it’s 
agricultural. I must say that while Stanbic Bank has come up with additional program to the 
Finance Minister’s agricultural credit program, I still want to see other banks come up and 
offer more credit. 
I am very committed to a liberal financial system and I am not persuaded that edicts about 
interest rates work. Let’s work together and make sure that financial inclusion is expanded. 
Let  make  sure  that  any  attempts  by  some  of  the  remaining  elements  in  government  who 
want  to  control  interest  rates  are  not  given  the  chance  to  do  so.  It  will  be  disaster  if  we 
attempt to control interest rates.  
Mr. Minister, Hon. Prof Kamuntu, since you are the first person to free the shilling to float and 
to liberalize interest rates, I am glad to invite you to address this gathering.  
2 
 BIS Review 4/2010
