Bandid Nijathaworn: The future of monetary policy 
Remarks  by  Mr  Bandid  Nijathaworn,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  “South 
East  Asia  Central  Banks/Bank  for  International  Settlements  (SEACEN/BIS)  Seminar  on 
Central  Bank  Challenges  in  Emerging  Market  Economies  in  the  Post-Crisis  Era”,  Kota 
Kinabalu, Malaysia, 21 January 2010. 
 First,  let  me  thank  SEACEN  and  the  BIS  for  asking  me  to  lead  off  the  discussion  on  this 
important topic. For the SEACEN economies, I think two important questions stand out. The 
first  is  what  went  wrong  with  monetary  policy  and  what  can  we  learn  from  it?  And  the 
second is what more  can we do to improve our understanding of monetary policy so that 
long-term price stability can be assured while the risk of financial instability is avoided? 
Although the current global financial crisis has been a dramatic experience for central banks, 
it also offers an opportunity to reassess both the intellectual underpinning and the practical 
implementation of monetary policy. As we all know, monetary policy in the last fifteen years 
did  cover  almost  the  whole  of  a  global  business  cycle,  starting  from  the  period  of  the  so-
called “great moderation” when there was a perceived end to economic volatility with interest 
rates  remaining  low  for  an  extended  period,  to  the  current  global  financial  crisis  that  saw 
aggressive  use  of  monetary  policy  by  the  major  central  banks  to  combat  economic 
contractions  with  near-zero  interest  rates  and  the  use  of  unconventional  measures.  This 
reassessment,  therefore,  is  important  and  will  provide  a  useful  starting  point  for  a  better 
deliberation of monetary policy going forward. 
For this morning, I want to focus my remarks on three issues: first the lessons we can learn 
from  the  crisis;  second  how  to  move  forward  to  strengthen  monetary  policy  framework  in 
light of the crisis to ensure long-term price and financial stability; and third the relevance of 
inflation-targeting as a monetary policy framework in the post-crisis era. 
From the crisis, there are a number of important lessons that can be drawn. The first is that 
monetary policy remains the right instrument to maintain a low inflation environment which is 
crucial for sustainable growth. But the most important lesson from the crisis is that low and 
stable inflation alone is not sufficient for ensuring financial stability. This is because the risk 
to financial stability can come from many sources other than domestic inflation. In the current 
crisis,  it  was  the  housing  bubble  and  excessive  risk-taking  by  the  financial  institutions  that 
precipitated the crisis in the environment of stable prices. Therefore, to maintain economic 
and  financial  stability,  in  addition  to  price  stability,  attention  must  be  paid  to  all  the  key 
sources of risk and imbalance that can have systemic implications for the economy’s growth 
and stability. This is the first lesson. 
The second lesson is the inadequacy of the current approach in monetary policy analysis 
that focuses over-extensively on macroeconomic analysis and models. In the period leading 
up to the crisis, what was missing clearly was the recognition of the implications that a stable 
growth and inflation environment could have on developments in the financial sector in terms 
of its impact on risk perception and on the risk-taking behavior. As it turned out, the reduced 
volatility  of  growth  and  inflation  did  not  tell  a  complete  story.  In  addition,  the  intellectual 
underpinning of central bank’s approach to policy, based on efficient market hypothesis, did 
not  encourage  policy  makers  to  look  beyond  the  focus  on  inflation  risk.  As  a  result,  the 
interaction and feedback between the real economy and the financial sector were not given 
the  needed  attention  in  the  deliberation  of  monetary  policy.  A  case  in  point  is  the  typical 
absence of the financial sector, especially banks, in the macroeconomic models used in the 
analysis  of  monetary  policy.  This  absence  leaves  a  big  gap  in  our  understanding  of  the 
interactions between the financial side and the real side of the economy which, as a result, 
BIS Review 8/2010 
 1
can lead to an underestimation of risk in the good time, and an overestimation of risk in the 
bad time. 
The third lesson is that monetary policy is a powerful tool for managing growth and stability, 
but it can also be a double-edged sword. In the current crisis, monetary policy is said to have 
played a role in contributing to excessive risk-taking behavior in the period leading up to the 
crisis, but monetary policy is also powerful in handling the economic and financial downturns 
through aggressive actions on interest rate and the provision of liquidity. This shows that it is 
crucial to get the stance of monetary policy right early by formulating monetary policy in a 
forward-looking manner. This, of course, is easier said than done. 
And  the last  lesson  is communication.  One  lesson  we  learnt  clearly  from  the  crisis  is  that 
policy actions alone cannot ensure a successful outcome without the support of an effective 
communication strategy. In this crisis, the Fed has demonstrated the importance of this to the 
highest  level  through  its  ability  to  articulate  its  understanding  of  the  situations,  to 
communicate the rationale for the use of unconventional measures, its approach to making 
the  results  of  the  stress-testing  exercise  public,  as  well  as  its  ability  to  manage  market 
expectations  while  maintaining  policy  credibility.  All  these  have  been  instrumental  to  the 
success so far of the Fed’s policy response. It is, therefore, clear from the crisis that well-
executed and credible communication can help anchor market expectations. 
Let  me  now  turn  to  my  second  remark  on  strengthening  the  monetary  policy  framework.  I 
agree  much  with  what  has  been  said  about  the  need  to  improve  bank  regulation  and 
supervision going forward, especially to reduce procyclicality in the financial system. But for 
monetary  policy,  the  framework  can  also  be  strengthened  to  increase  its  effectiveness  in 
safeguarding price and financial stability. 
The first is that good macro-surveillance process is a must to help identify key risk that might 
be developing in the economy. This surveillance needs to cover both developments in the 
real economy and in the financial markets so that any potential risk to financial stability can 
be identified early. Second is the need for a disciplined decision-making process that takes 
into account information from the surveillance process in the deliberation of monetary policy. 
One  key  common  weakness  in  the  past  has  been  the  limited  use  of  information  on  the 
financial side in the formulation of monetary policy. 
Third, in order to deal effectively with both price and financial stability, the thinking now is to 
focus  monetary  policy  on  its  core  function  of  maintaining  price  stability,  while  financial 
stability objective is best served by ensuring a robust and efficient financial system through 
strong bank regulation and effective supervision.  
Nonetheless,  to  the  extent  that  developments  in  the  financial  sector  may  have  systemic 
implications,  monetary  policy  can  be  combined  with  macroprudential  measures  aimed  at 
reducing risk to financial stability at the source. An example of this is excessive credit growth 
in a certain sector that can be discouraged by tightening up the relevant lending standards. A 
number  of  SEACEN  economies  have  adopted  this  approach,  especially  for  housing  loans. 
However,  there  is  a  concern  that  this  approach  is  judgemental  and  lacks  a  coherent 
framework; i.e., how can we control both the price of credit through monetary policy and the 
quantity  of  credit  through  macroprudential  measures.  Another  unsettling  issue  is  whether 
monetary policy should lean against the wind of asset price boom and credit expansion at a 
cost  of  somewhat  weaker  growth  and  lower  inflation.  On  this,  I  think  our  default  position 
should be that we should because the cost of getting it wrong by not doing enough can be 
very costly. 
Finally,  information  on  money  and  credit  aggregates  can  be  made  more  useful  in  the 
formulation  of  monetary  policy.  Up  to  now,  a  widely  shared  so-called  “best  practice”  in 
monetary policy did not pay enough attention to monetary aggregates partly because of the 
belief  that  there  exists  no  stable  relationship  between  quantity  of  money  and  economic 
activity.  As  a  result,  prior  to  the  crisis  there  was  no  attempt  to  counteract  the  rapid  credit 
2 
 BIS Review 8/2010
growth  even  though,  in  most  if  not  all  cases,  asset  price  bubble  was  a  direct  result  of 
sustained excessive credit expansion. 
This  issue  in  my  view  is  most  relevant  for  emerging  markets  where  the  financial  sector  is 
typically bank-based, with credit being the major source of funding for businesses, and credit 
risk  being  the  most  important  risk  to  banks.  Such  factors  make  the  credit  channel  an 
important  transmission  mechanism  of  monetary  policy  in  emerging  markets.  Therefore, 
information  content  provided  in  key  banking  data  such  as  loan  demand,  rate  of  loans 
approval, lending standards adopted by banks, delinquency ratio, and NPL could be useful in 
helping to assess how risk and activities are evolving in the macroeconomy, and whether the 
information  point  to  the  need  for  monetary  policy  to  react  over  and  above  what  the  usual 
price and output data imply, either by an interest rate action or by a macroprudential action. 
My final observation is on the relevance of inflation-targeting as a monetary policy framework 
in the post-crisis era. Recently, inflation-targeting has come under a close scrutiny whether 
the  framework  is  useful  given  its  narrow  focus  on  inflation  whereas  risk  to  economic  and 
financial  stability  can  come  from  many  sources  other  than  inflation.  In  this  crisis,  the 
performance  of  the  inflation-targeting  economies  does  differ  widely,  but  the  majority  are 
those  that  have  been  more  successful  in  weathering  the  crisis.  Examples  here  include 
Australia,  New  Zealand,  Canada  and  a  large  number  of  emerging  market  economies  as 
opposed to a more difficult experience elsewhere. 
My  view  is  that  inflation-targeting  remains  useful  as  a  framework  for  monetary  policy,  and 
experience of many inflation-targeting emerging markets in this crisis demonstrates clearly 
that  price  stability  and  financial  stability  can  be  preserved  even  under  extreme  financial 
circumstances.  But  the  framework  could  be  further  strengthened  so  that  the  need  to  pay 
attention  to  financial  stability  concerns  can  be  more  formally  addressed  through  a  flexible 
inflation-targeting  regime.  Combining  macroprudential  measures  with  inflation-targeting  is 
one  area  that  flexibility  can  be  added.  The  Bank  of  Thailand  is  one  central  bank  that  has 
pursued this line of flexibility since 2004.  
Another approach is to have greater flexibility in the setting of the inflation targets, in terms of 
the choice between core and headline inflation, as well as the level of the inflation targets 
itself, so that monetary policy will have greater room to maneuver in responding to shocks. If 
done carefully, the room for flexibility can be added without undermining the credibility of the 
inflation-targeting  framework.  But  whatever  flexibility  we  add,  it  is  most  important  that  the 
long-term objective of monetary policy in sustaining a low and stable inflation environment 
and in anchoring inflation expectations over the cycle is maintained and not compromised. 
BIS Review 8/2010 
 3
