Lars E O Svensson: Why a low repo rate for an extended period? 
Speech  by  Mr  Lars  E  O  Svensson,  Deputy  Governor  of  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at 
Handelsbanken, Stockholm, 4 May 2010. 
 The opinions expressed here are my own and are not necessarily shared by other members of the Riksbank’s 
Executive Board or staff. I would like to thank Claes Berg, Per Jansson, Stefan Laséen, Christina Nyman, David 
Vestin and Staffan Viotti for discussions and comments. Björn Andersson, Joanna Gerwin, Tora Hammar, Lina 
Majtorp and Magnus Åhl have contributed to this speech.  
In  this  speech  I  would  like  to  present  my  view  of  how  monetary  policy  can  best  focus  on 
stabilising  both  inflation  and  resource  utilisation.  I  advocate  an  “extended”  repo-rate  path 
where “extended” refers to the period with a low repo rate of 0.25 per cent being extended 
until the end of the fourth quarter 2010. Here I will explain why.  
As I am sure many of you know, over the past year I have advocated a more expansionary 
monetary policy than that chosen by the majority of the members of the Executive Board. I 
entered  reservations  and  advocated  a  lower  repo  rate  and  repo-rate  path  at  all  of  the 
monetary policy meetings from and including the meeting in April 2009 to and including the 
meeting held in February 2010. Such a repo-rate leads to a better utilisation of resources and 
a better attainment of the inflation target without threatening financial stability.  
However, at the latest monetary policy meeting in April 2010 I chose not to advocate a lower 
repo-rate path but instead an “extended” repo-rate path. In this extended path, the period in 
which  the  repo-rate  is  0.25 per cent  is  extended  to  the  end  of  the  fourth  quarter  of  2010 
instead of to the end of the second quarter as the majority decided.  
I thus supported the decision to leave the repo rate unchanged at 0.25 per cent, but entered 
a reservation in favour of the extended repo-rate path. My reason for this was that such a 
repo-rate  path  has  the  same  effects  as  the  lower  repo-rate  path;  that  is  a  higher  level  of 
resource utilisation and a level of CPIF inflation closer to the target.1 
An expansionary monetary policy can thus be achieved either with a lower repo-rate path in 
which the repo rate is reduced now or with an extended repo-rate path in which the repo rate 
is maintained at a low level for a longer period of time.  Some of  my colleagues have had 
certain doubts about a repo-rate level below 0.25 per cent. As you know, I do not share these 
doubts. In this context, the extended repo-rate path has the advantage that these doubts are 
no longer relevant. It also has the advantage that it reduces the monetary policy decision to 
the question of when the repo-rate should be increased.  
Today,  I  intend  to  discuss  my  view  of  monetary  policy  and  explain  in  more  detail  why  I 
entered  a  reservation  at  the  latest  monetary  policy  meeting.  Much  of  the  reasoning  is  the 
same as when I advocated a lower repo-rate path.2 The new points that I want to make here 
today relate to the reasons why I entered a reservation in favour of the extended repo-rate 
path rather than a lower repo-rate path with a reduced repo rate. Let me begin by presenting 
my general view of monetary policy.  
                                                 
1   One may ask why the focus should be on the CPIF and not the CPI. In a situation in which significant repo-
rate  changes  have  very  large  direct  effects  on  the  CPI,  I  consider  it  to  be  more  appropriate  to  focus  on 
stabilising the CPIF around the inflation target, instead of the CPI. 
2   See also the speech “Why a lower repo rate?” that I made at Umeå University on 24 February this year for a 
detailed account of that reasoning.  
BIS Review 60/2010 
 1
Flexible inflation targeting stabilises both inflation and resource utilisation  
When discussing what repo-rate path one should choose it is natural to take the Riksbank’s 
monetary policy objectives as a starting point. The Sveriges Riksbank Act and its preparatory 
work stipulate that monetary policy focuses on stabilising inflation around the inflation target 
and resource utilisation around a normal level. This is what is referred to as flexible inflation 
targeting.  
That  the  Riksbank  should  aim  to  stabilise  inflation  follows  from  the  Act’s  price-stability 
objective, which the Riksbank has chosen to specify as an inflation target of 2 per cent. That 
the Riksbank should stabilise  resource utilisation follows from the fact that the preparatory 
work  for  the  Act  states  that  the  Riksbank  “without  prejudice  to  the  price-stability  target, 
should support the goals of general economic policy with a view to maintaining a sustainable 
level of growth and a high rate of employment”.3 
So what can the Riksbank do in order to achieve sustainable growth and high employment 
without prejudicing the price stability objective? Well, the best thing the Riksbank can do is to 
attempt  to  stabilise  resource  utilisation  around  a  normal  level.  But  why  around  a  normal 
level? Surely, a higher level of output and employment than normal would be better? Yes, 
but  it  is  beyond  the  power  of  monetary  policy  to  increase  the  average  level  of  output  and 
employment and thus increase average resource utilisation. To increase the average level of 
resource  utilisation  one  would  have  to  use  areas  of  policy  other  than  monetary  policy,  for 
example  a  structural  policy  designed  to  improve  competitiveness  and  the  workings  of  the 
labour market.  
Unfortunately  –  as  40  years  of  experience  have  shown  and  30  years  of  research  have 
explained – attempts to use monetary policy to keep resource utilisation above the normal 
level only result in average inflation being higher than the target without raising the average 
level of resource utilisation. This would entail prejudicing, or setting aside, the price-stability 
target. Without prejudicing the price-stability target, monetary policy cannot aim at a higher 
level of resource utilisation than the normal level.  
It  is  thus  a  misconception,  and  unfortunately  a  common  one,  that  the  stipulation  to  not 
prejudice  the  price-stability  target  means  that  monetary  policy  should  only  aim  to  stabilise 
inflation around the inflation target irrespective of what happens to resource utilisation, what 
is usually referred to as strict inflation targeting. The stipulation means instead that monetary 
policy should also stabilise resource utilisation, but around a normal level, not a higher level. 
As  far  as  I  can  judge  there  is  now  general  agreement  about  this  interpretation  of  the 
provisions of the Sveriges Riksbank Act and its preparatory work.  
So, at every monetary policy meeting we, that is the members of the Executive Board, have 
to  decide  what  repo-rate  path  will  best  stabilise  inflation  and  resource  utilisation.  The 
Riksbank usually expresses this by saying that monetary policy should be well balanced.  
If  there  is  a  conflict  between  stabilising  inflation  on  the  one  hand  and  stabilising  resource 
utilisation  on  the  other,  then  a  well-balanced  monetary  policy  entails  a  reasonable 
compromise between the two. Such a conflict is in fact regarded as the normal situation, but 
a  conflict  does  not  always  exist.  In  my  view,  there  is  no  such  conflict  at  present.  I  have 
therefore maintained that the lower repo-rate paths that I advocated between April 2009 and 
February 2010 would have stabilised both inflation and resource utilisation better than those 
adopted by the majority of the Executive Board.  
                                                 
3   Bill 1997/98:40. 
2 
 BIS Review 60/2010
The repo rate and the repo-rate path are means, not ends  
Are there other aspects of the repo-rate path to consider apart from the fact it should stabilise 
inflation and resource utilisation? It is important to realise that the repo rate and the repo-rate 
path  are  means  and  not  ends  in  monetary  policy.  “A  normal  repo  rate”  is  not  a  target  for 
monetary  policy.  There  is  no  support  in  the  provisions  or  the  preparatory  work  of  the 
Sveriges Riksbank Act for using a too high or a too low repo rate as a reason to stabilise 
inflation  and  resource  utilisation  less  effectively  and  in  this  sense  set  aside  the  objectives 
regarding price stability or the stability of resource utilisation. 
Consequently,  I  cannot  see  any  situation  when  monetary  policy  should  set  aside  price 
stability  and  the  stability  of  resource  utilisation  so  as  to  “normalise”  the  repo  rate  and  the 
repo-rate  path  in  order,  for  example,  to  get  away  from  a  “crisis  rate”,  or  to  attempt  to 
influence  credit  volumes  or  house  prices,  or  because  the  economy  has  bottomed  out  and 
economic activity has begun to pick up. The focus of monetary policy should always be on 
achieving  the  best  stabilisation  of  both  inflation  and  resource  utilisation.  Credit  volumes, 
house  prices  and  the  level  of  economic  activity  should  only  affect  monetary  policy  to  the 
extent that they affect the forecasts for inflation and resource utilisation. Credit volumes and 
house prices are not targets for monetary policy.  
One  can  claim,  however,  that  the  repo-rate  path  chosen  should  not  threaten  financial 
stability.  This  may  mean  that  one  avoids  repo-rate  paths  with  very  high  repo  rates  in  a 
situation in which financial stability is fragile and there is a lack of instruments to deal with 
this. It is also possible that in certain situations this can justify the avoidance of very low repo 
rates. But, as long as financial stability is not threatened I see no reason to rule out any repo-
rate path at a monetary policy decision. 
The extended repo-rate path has the same effects as the lower repo-rate path  
This leads me to the latest monetary policy decision. One of the reasons why different people 
may  prefer  different  repo-rate  paths  is  of  course  that  they  have  different  views  about 
underlying  –  of  monetary  policy  independent  –  economic  developments  in  Sweden  and 
abroad.  One  may  for  example  have  different  views  about  international  growth,  wage 
bargaining outcomes and productivity growth.  
Here I would like to make it clear that I share the view of underlying economic developments 
in Sweden and abroad presented in the latest Monetary Policy Update. I advocate a different 
repo-rate path not because my assessment of underlying economic developments is different 
but because I believe that, given these developments, a different repo-rate path will better 
stabilise inflation and resource utilisation.  
Figure 1: Three repo-rate paths  
Figure  1  shows  three  repo-rate  paths.  The  curve  marked  “Main  scenario”  is  the  repo-rate 
path  of  the  main  scenario  of  the  Monetary  Policy  Update  in  which  the  repo  rate  is  left  at 
0.25 per  cent  until  the  end  of  the  second  quarter  of  2010  and  then  increased.  The  curve 
marked “Lower” is the lower repo-rate path in which there is a reduction in April after which 
the repo rate is 0.25 percentage points below the path in the main scenario for three quarters 
and  then  gradually  returns  to  the  main  scenario’s  repo-rate  path.  The  curve  market 
“Extended low repo rate” is the extended repo-rate path in which the period with a low repo-
rate  of  0.25  per  cent  is  extended  to  the  end  of  the  fourth  quarter  2010  before  the  path 
gradually returns to the main scenario’s repo-rate path.  
 
BIS Review 60/2010 
 3
Figure 1.  
The main scenario’s repo-rate path, a lower repo-rate path and  
an “extended” repo-rate path with a low repo rate for an extended period. 
Per cent, quarterly averages 
 Source: The Riksbank 
I have previously advocated a lower repo-rate path because this provides better outcomes 
for  both  resource  utilisation  and  CPIF  inflation.  The  Monetary  Policy  Department  at  the 
Riksbank  performed  an  interesting  analysis  ahead  of  the  monetary  policy  decision.  This 
shows that the effects of the lower and the extended repo-rate paths on resource utilisation 
and inflation are very similar. Both alternatives lead to largely the same higher level of CPIF 
inflation,  the  same  higher  level  of  output  and  the  same  higher  number  of  hours  worked 
compared to the main scenario.  
So, which of the two alternatives is to be preferred? The lower repo-rate path entails a lower 
repo rate now, while the extended repo-rate path entails a forecast of an unchanged repo 
rate further ahead. The lower repo-rate path can be seen as a stronger signal. A cut now 
may be seen as more credible than a forecast of a postponed increase further ahead. From 
this point of view, the low repo-rate path may be preferable.  
As I have argued in previous minutes, and in my speech on 24 February, there is no reason 
to believe that the lower repo-rate path would have a negative impact on financial stability. 
My colleagues have, however, previously expressed doubts about a lower repo-rate path. As 
you know, I do not share these doubts. It is also the case that neither the Monetary Policy 
Department  nor  the  Financial  Stability  Department  at  the  Riksbank  have  in  their  analyses 
found any signs that a lower repo-rate path would threaten financial stability. However, in this 
context  the  extended  repo-rate  path  has  the  advantage  that  these  doubts  are  no  longer 
relevant.  This  may  therefore  make  the  extended  repo-rate  path  more  acceptable  to  my 
colleagues.  Furthermore,  there  is  a  very  convincing  argument  for  the  extended  repo-rate 
path in that it provides better outcomes for both resource utilisation and CPIF inflation, which 
can give it just as much credibility as the lower repo-rate path.  
4 
 BIS Review 60/2010
The  extended  repo-rate  path  also  has  the  advantage  that  the  monetary  policy  alternatives 
can be reduced to the question of when we should begin to increase the repo rate: in July or 
September or, as I advocate, in December. The monetary policy choice thus boils down to 
deciding which point in time for the first increase gives the best outcomes for inflation and 
resource utilisation. That is, which point in time gives a forecast for CPIF inflation that is as 
close to the target as possible and a level of resource utilisation that is as close to normal as 
possible.  Could  the  monetary  policy  decision  between  alternatives  be  any  simpler,  more 
distinct and more transparent?  
Given this background I thus decided to advocate the extend repo-rate path rather than the 
lower repo-rate path as an alternative to the path in the main scenario.  
The extended repo-rate path stabilises inflation and resource utilisation better than the 
repo-rate path of the main scenario  
In my view, various monetary policy alternatives must be discussed and assessed before any 
monetary policy decision can be clearly justified. The best way to justify why a certain repo-
rate path has been chosen is to compare the consequences of this path for inflation and the 
real economy with those of the alternatives. 
What does this mean in concrete terms? Well, it means that one must be able to show that 
the repo-rate path one prefers gives rise to the forecast for inflation and resource utilisation 
that best stabilises inflation around the target and resource utilisation around a normal level. 
It is as simple as that.  
Figure 2: Forecasts  
Figure 2 shows the forecasts for CPIF inflation (panel a), the output gap (panel b) and the 
hours-worked gap (panel c) for the main scenario and for the extended repo-rate path.  
The  curves  marked  “Expected”  show  the  forecast  under  the  following  assumptions:  The 
extended-repo-rate path is announced in April. It is perceived as credible in the sense that 
the market from and including April expects an unchanged repo-rate path until the end of the 
fourth quarter of 2010.  
The curves marked “Unexpected” show the forecast under the following assumptions: The 
extended repo-rate path is not incorporated in market expectations and the market instead 
continues to believe in the main scenario’s repo-rate path. The market is taken by surprise in 
the third and fourth quarters of 2010 when the repo rate is left unchanged.  
We can see that the effects of an expected extended repo-rate path are greater than those of 
an unexpected extended repo-rate path. It is therefore of course desirable that the extended 
repo-rate  path  is  perceived  as  credible.  As  I  mentioned  earlier,  it  is  possible  that  the 
extended repo-rate path with an unchanged repo rate further ahead would be perceived as 
less  credible  than  a  lower  repo-rate  path  with  a  reduced  repo  rate  now.  In  this  case  the 
effects are shown by the curves marked “Unexpected”. However, as the extended repo-rate 
path can be justified by the fact that it provides better outcomes for inflation and resource 
utilisation  than  the  main  scenario  it  may  perhaps  be  perceived  as  being  more  credible,  in 
which case the effects are shown by the curves marked “Expected”.4 
                                                 
4   The effects of deviations from the repo-rate path of the main scenario on inflation, output and hours worked 
are  calculated  using  the  Riksbank's  model  Ramses  with  the  methods  described  in  Laséen  and  Svensson 
(2009) for expected deviations and Leeper and Zha (2003) for unexpected deviations. They are discussed in 
more  detail  in  Svensson  (2010c).  The  lower  repo-rate  path  gives  as  an  expected  deviation  (unexpected 
deviation  in  parenthesis)  a  largest  increase  in  CPIF  inflation  of  0.42  (0.22)  percentage  points,  in  output  of 
0.33 (0.21) per cent and in hours worked of 0.35 (0.22) per cent. The extended repo-rate path gives as an 
expected deviation (unexpected in parenthesis) a largest increase in CPIF inflation of 0.48 (0.25) percentage 
BIS Review 60/2010 
 5
Forecasts for the CPIF, the output gap and the hours-worked gap in the main scenario 
and in the extended repo-rate path, for expected and unexpected deviations.  
Figure 2.  
 Source: The Riksbank  
We can also see that the extended repo-rate path provides a higher level of CPIF inflation 
closer  to  the  target  and  a  higher  level  of  resource  utilisation  closer  to  normal  for  both  the 
output gap and the hours-worked gap. This applies irrespective of the assumption of whether 
the extended repo-rate path is credible or not but to a greater degree if it is credible. 
Figure 3: Different forecasts of resource utilisation  
Resource  utilization  is  usually  measured  as  so-called  output  gaps  or  hours-worked  gaps. 
These gaps are calculated as the differences between actual and “potential” levels. These 
measures  of  resource  utilisation  are  uncertain.  However,  according  to  all  available 
measurements, there is no doubt that resource utilisation is and will remain very low during 
the forecast period. Other forecasters’ output gap forecasts are shown in Figure 3. Several of 
the forecasts from other forecasters indicate an even lower level of resource utilisation than 
the measure published by the Riksbank.  
                                                                                                                                                      
points, in output of 0.38 (0.22) per cent and in hours worked of 0.40 (0.24) per cent. The increase then abates 
over time. 
6 
 BIS Review 60/2010
Figure 3.  
Different forecasts of resource utilisation  
 Sources: The Riksbank, National Institute of Economic Research, European Commission, OECD, IMF, and the 
Ministry of Finance.  
Figure 4: Mean squared gaps  
The fact that the extended repo-rate path leads to a better stabilisation of both inflation and 
resource utilisation is confirmed by the mean squared gaps in Figure 4. The mean squared 
gap for inflation is the mean squared deviation between the inflation forecast and the inflation 
target  during  the  forecast  period.  A  lower  mean  squared  gap  for  inflation  entails  a  better 
stabilisation of inflation around the target and thus a better attainment of the inflation target.  
The  mean  squared  gap  for  output  and  for  hours  worked  is  the  mean  squared  gap  for 
resource utilisation measured in two ways, that is using the output gap and the hours-worked 
gap during the forecast period. A lower mean squared gap for output or hours worked entails 
a  better  stabilisation  of  resource  utilisation  around  a  normal  level  measured  as  the  output 
gap  or  the  hours-worked  gap.  The  closer  to  origo  the  mean  squared  gap  for  inflation  and 
resource utilisation is, the better the stabilisation of inflation and resource utilisation.  
This  case  is  special  as  there  is  no  conflict  between  stabilising  inflation  and  resource 
utilisation; the extended repo-rate path stabilises both better than the main scenario. This is 
of course already obvious in Figure 2, so the mean squared gap does not add much new 
information here.  
However, the normal situation is considered to be that there is a conflict between stabilising 
inflation and resource utilisation. In such a situation, the mean squared gap in Figure 3 would 
lie  in  a  north-west  to  south-west  direction  and  determining  monetary  policy  would  entail 
weighing up whether to stabilise one more or less than the other.  
BIS Review 60/2010 
 7
The mean squared gap for CPIF inflation and output and hours worked respectively.  
Figure 4.  
Source: The Riksbank  
 Figure 5: The decision-making situation for Norges Bank in 2005  
Figure 5 shows the policy decision facing Norges Bank in March 2005, which is an example 
of  a  case  where  there  was  a  conflict  between  stabilising  inflation  and  stabilising  resource 
utilisation.5 The problem at that time was that the inflation forecast was under the inflation 
target  of  2.5  per  cent,  so  that  the  gap  between  the  forecast  and  the  target  was  negative, 
while the forecast for the output gap was positive. In such a situation, a lower repo-rate path 
stabilises inflation around the target better but the output gap less well, and vice versa for a 
higher  repo-rate  path.  The  mean  squared  gap  then  lies  in  a  north-west  to  south-west 
direction.  This  case  is  discussed  in  more  detail  in  my  Umeå  speech  and  in  my  chapter 
“Inflation  targeting”  to  be  published  in  a  new  North-Holland  Handbook  of  Monetary 
Economics.6 
                                                 
5   Norges Bank (2005). 
6   Svensson (2010b). 
8 
 BIS Review 60/2010
Monetary policy alternatives for Norges Bank, March 2005  
Figure 5.  
 Source: Norges Bank  
Are there any arguments against an extended repo-rate path?  
In the minutes of the monetary policy meeting in April, several of my colleagues put forward 
the development of credit and house prices as reasons for not pursuing a more expansionary 
monetary policy. My view is that if this development represents a threat to financial stability 
then  the  situation  should  be  handled  using  instruments  that  impose  restrictions  regarding 
leverage,  amortisation  and  so  on.  The  repo  rate  is  a  blunt  and  inappropriate  instrument.7 
However, the analyses performed by the Riksbank and Finansinspektionen indicate that this 
development does not pose any threat to financial stability at present.8  
Credit  volumes  and  house  prices  are  not  targets  for  monetary  policy.  From  the  monetary 
policy point of view they are indicators and should only affect monetary policy to the extent 
that they affect the forecasts for inflation and resource utilisation.  
There are no signs, and as far as I know no analyses, that show credit volumes and house 
prices are now affecting the forecasts for future inflation and resource utilisation one way or 
another.  Indicators  should  only  affect  monetary  policy  if  they  contain  information  that  is 
relevant to future inflation and resource utilisation.  
Two  speeches  by  Donald  L.  Kohn  of  the  Federal  Reserve  specify  three  conditions  that 
should  be  fulfilled  before  central  banks  implement  “extraordinary  measures”  to  handle 
                                                 
7   Svensson (2010a, b). 
8   Finansinspektionen (2010). 
BIS Review 60/2010 
 9
possible  asset  price  bubbles,  such  as  the  unsustainable  development  of  housing  prices:9 
“First,  policymakers  must  be  able  to  identify  bubbles  in  a  timely  fashion  with  reasonable 
confidence.  Second,  there  must  be  a  high  probability  that  a  somewhat  tighter  monetary 
policy  will  help  to  check  at  least  some  of  the  speculative  activity.  And  third,  the  expected 
improvement  in  future  economic  performance  that  would  result  from  the  curtailment  of  the 
bubble  must  be  sufficiently  great.”  It  is  obvious  that  these  conditions  do  not  prevail  at 
present.10 
The division of the Swedish economy  
The  crisis  has  led  to  a  division  of  the  Swedish  economy  in  which  the  export  industry  is 
struggling  while  the  service  sector  is  doing  well.  It  is,  however,  beyond  the  power  of 
monetary policy to influence development in an individual sector. Monetary policy can only 
focus  on  stabilising  average  resource  utilisation  and  average  inflation.  This  division  is 
therefore  not  itself  normally  an  argument  for  either  a  more  expansionary  or  a  more 
contractionary monetary policy.  
However, in the current situation, with a very low level of resource utilisation and a very weak 
export industry, one can claim that irrespective of how sensitive to interest rates the export 
industry is it should benefit from a weak krona and suffer from a strong krona. As a more 
expansionary monetary policy would entail a weaker krona one can claim that the division is 
in  this  situation  an  argument  for  pursuing  a  more  expansionary  monetary  policy.  This 
argument is strengthened by the fact that there do not appear to be any signs of overheating 
in the service sector in the form of a shortage of labour and excessive wage increases.  
Conclusion: An extended repo rate path better stabilises inflation and resource 
utilisation  
It is possible to reduce the monetary policy decision to the following questions: When should 
we begin to increase the repo rate from its current level of 0.25 per cent – in July, September 
or December of 2010? Which of these alternatives stabilises inflation and resource utilisation 
best?  
An extended repo-rate path with a repo rate of 0.25 per cent to December 2010 stabilises 
both inflation and resource utilisation better than the repo-rate path in the main scenario. It 
poses  no  problems  to  financial  stability.  There  is  therefore  a  very  strong  argument  for  an 
extended repo-rate path. In my view there are no strong counterarguments. In fact, I cannot 
really see any valid counterarguments at all. 
References  
Bill 1997/98:40, Riksbankens ställning.  
Finansinspektionen  (2010),  “Den  svenska  bolånemarknaden  och  bankernas  kreditgivning,” 
www.fi.se.  
Kohn, Donald L. (2006), “Monetary Policy and Asset Prices”, speech held on 16 March 2006, 
www.federalreserve.gov.  
                                                 
9   Kohn (2006, 2008). 
10   Questions  regarding  the  significance  of  asset  prices  for  monetary  policy  and  of  the  monetary  policy 
conclusions to be drawn from the financial crisis are discussed further in Svensson (2010a, b). See also Kohn 
(2009). 
10 
 BIS Review 60/2010
Kohn, Donald L. (2008), “Monetary Policy and Asset Prices”, speech held on 19 November 
2008, www.federalreserve.gov.  
Kohn,  Donald  L.  (2009),  “Policy  Challenges  for  the  Federal  Reserve”,  speech  held  on 
16 November 2009, www.federalreserve.gov.  
Laséen,  Stefan  and  Lars  E.O.  Svensson  (2009),  “Anticipated  Alternative  Instrument-Rate 
Paths in Policy Simulations”, Working Paper, www.larseosvensson.net.  
Leeper,  Eric  M.  and  Tao  Zha  (2003),  “Modest  Policy  Interventions,”  Journal  of  Monetary 
Economics 50, 1673–1700.  
Norges Bank (2005), Inflation report no. 1-2005, March, www.norges-bank.no.  
Svensson,  Lars  E.O.  (2010a),  “Inflation  targeting  after  the  financial  crisis”,  speech  held  in 
Mumbai, 15 February 2010, www.riksbank.se.  
Svensson, Lars E.O. (2010b), “Inflation Targeting”, under publication in Friedman, Benjamin 
M.,  and  Michael  Woodford,  eds.,  Handbook  of  Monetary  Economics,  Volume  3a  and  3b, 
North-Holland.  
Svensson,  Lars  E.O.  (2010c),  “Why  a  lower  repo-rate  path?”,  speech  held  at  Umeå 
University, 24 February, www.riksbank.se. 
BIS Review 60/2010 
 11
