Njuguna Ndung’u: Islamic finance – the African experience 
Remarks by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the 2nd Gulf 
African Bank Annual East & Central Africa Islamic conference, Nairobi, 3–4 May 2010. 
 Suleiman Shahbal, Chairman, Gulf African Bank Ltd; 
Najmul Hassan, Chief Executive Officer, Gulf African Bank Ltd; 
Board Members; 
Distinguished Guests; 
Ladies and Gentlemen:  
I am delighted and honoured to be here this morning to preside over the opening ceremony 
of this important conference. To start with, let me extend a very warm welcome to all of you 
who  are  attending  this  2nd  Gulf  African  Bank  Annual  East  and  Central  Africa  Conference 
titled “Islamic Finance: The African Experience”. Allow me in particular to extend a special 
hand of welcome to the international participants “Karibuni Kenya”. I also wish to convey the 
apologies  of  the  Governor,  Professor  Njuguna  Ndung’u,  who  would  have  wished  to 
personally preside over this occasion but  had to attend to other engagements. I will make 
some remarks that reflect his strong views on Islamic finance and extend his best wishes for 
fruitful deliberations at the conference.  
The  conference  is  important  as  it  offer  opportunities  for  the  banking  and  financial  sector 
fraternity  to  meet  and  discuss  emerging  industry  developments,  to  learn  from  their 
accomplishments and challenges and to share views on sound practices.  
Islamic Finance is so far the fastest growing segment in the global financial industry. Despite 
the global financial crisis, Islamic finance has demonstrated strong growth with new areas of 
business such as mutual funds and Takaful industry attracting a lot of attention. We need to 
understand this business model that will support our relative comparative advantage in the 
EAC region.  
Kenya  was  the  first  country  in  the  East  and  Central  African  region  to  introduce  Islamic 
banking.  In  this  regard,  two  banks  were  licensed  in  the  last  two  years  to  exclusively  offer 
Shariah-compliant  products  with  many  other  conventional  banks  establishing  a  window 
specifically for Shariah-compliant products. With this, I am proud to inform this gathering that 
the  concept  of  shariah  complaint  banking  has  emerged  as  an  alternative  vehicle  for 
mobilisation and supply of finance. For example, the two banks have already contributed in 
development  agenda  of  the  country  by  participating  in  Shariah-compliant  (Sukuks) 
components  of  infrastructure  bonds  issued  by  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya  on  behalf  of  the 
Government  of  Kenya.  We  are  still  waiting  for  “Structured  Sukuk”  to  cover  the  bonds  and 
T-Bills market.  
However,  although  the  concept  of  Islamic  Finance  has  generated  a  lot  of  interest  and 
overwhelming support from both muslim and non-muslim population in Kenya, as a regulator, 
we have faced certain challenges which I wish to share with this gathering. Key among these 
are:  
a) 
Islamic  Banking  prohibits  interest  and  allows  profit  sharing.  However,  most  of  our 
prudential returns and disclosure report formats were tailored for institutions which 
have  the  element  of  interest  in  their  financials.  We  have  therefore  tailored  our 
returns and disclosures formats to cater for the new market niche;  
The Banking Act prohibits wholesale trading and restrict holding land and buildings 
while  Sharia  compliant  lending  has  an  element  of  trading  and  land  and  building. 
However,  this  challenge  has  been  cured  through  granting  of  exemptions  to 
b) 
BIS Review 69/2010 
 1
c) 
institutions concerned upon request. But also we are happy that this allows theses 
banks and their clients to endogenise risk;  
The  law  requires  all  banks  to  pay  interest  on  savings  accounts  as  long  as  the 
minimum  balance  is  maintained.  This  challenge  has  also  been  addressed  by 
incorporating in the Banking Act the leeway for banks to give some form of return for 
Shariah-compliant savings products.  
It  is  worth  noting  that  the  two  fully  fledged  Shariah-compliant  banks  currently  boast  of 
1570 loan accounts and 58,548 deposit accounts and control 0.8 percent of banking sector’s 
net  assets  after  being  in  operation  for  less  than  two  years.  These  developments  have 
enabled  the  formerly  unbanked  Kenyans  and  specifically  the  muslim  community  in  the 
marginal  areas  have  access  to  financial  services  adding  to  the  wealth  creation  in  the 
economy. This is a solid testimony of the vast potential of Islamic finance in Kenya, which 
should be tapped, and opportunities explored in the insurance (takaful) and capital market 
segments using sharia compliant vehicles.  
On the regional front, there is a move by the countries in the region to permit their institutions 
to  offer  Islamic  products.  Central  Bank  of  Kenya  is  therefore  sharing  its  experience  in 
Shariah-compliant  banking  with  other  Central  Banks  in  the  East  African  Community. 
Therefore,  there  is  growing  interest  in  Shariah-compliant  banking  in  our  neighbouring 
countries and Kenya has the potential to be regional Islamic finance hub. This is tandem with 
vision 2030 aspirations. Under this Vision, one of the key aspirations for the financial sector 
is positioning of Nairobi as a regional financial hub by 2030.  
With these few remarks, it is now remains for me to wish you very fruitful deliberations over 
the next two days and to declare the 2nd Gulf African Bank Annual East and Central African 
Islamic Conference officially opened.  
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 69/2010
