Patrick Honohan: International credit and financial market integration – 
after the storm? 
Opening remarks by Mr Patrick Honohan, Governor of the Central Bank & Financial Services 
Authority of Ireland, at the 8th INFINITI Conference on International Finance, Trinity College, 
Dublin, 14 June 2010. 
 It  is  a  pleasure  to  open  the  2010  INFINITI  conference,  an  acronym  I  understand  to  mean 
“international  financial  integration  studies  at  Trinity”.  Research  on  international  financial 
policy issues has never been more important in Ireland and abroad than it is now. The Great 
Financial Crisis has thrown up many key questions for research.  
Our own experience in Ireland has many international financial ramifications. For, even if I 
have  been  emphasising  recently  how  much  of  Ireland’s  banking  difficulties  were  home 
grown,  they  have  certainly  occurred  in  an  international  context.  Ireland  is  one  of  the  most 
globalised economies in the world – one indication: the ratio of exports to GDP approaching 
one (which, by the way, you will realise is not a theoretical upper bound). And its property 
price and construction bubble was financed to an important extent from abroad. Over a four 
year period 2003–2008 net indebtedness of the banks to the rest of the world jumped from 
10 per cent of GDP to over 60 per cent.  
Interestingly,  this  foreign  borrowing  was  not  only  used  to  finance  the  domestic  property 
bubble but also to finance property development abroad – mirroring a common phenomenon 
of high income countries incurring foreign debt to acquire foreign equity – in this case equity 
in the property market some of which did not perform too well.  
And there was another international development that was important in igniting the property 
boom. In line with Shiller’s theory of how bubbles get going, a myth that a new economic era 
was unfolding drove expectations. Thus there was not only an unrealistic expectation that the 
Irish economy would grow beyond the sustainable level of output – close to the production 
frontier and at full employment – which it had achieved in the Celtic Tiger period based on 
sustainable  improvements  in  competitiveness  and  efficiency.  In  addition,  the  sharp  fall  in 
nominal and real interest rates on euro entry led many investors to exaggerate the degree to 
which a higher capitalization rate would apply to long-lived assets such as property.  
What  new  areas  come  to  the  fore  now  as  topics  for  study?  I  would  like  to  emphasise  a 
number of issues which relate to the interaction of fiscal and banking policy. The direction of 
the interaction is two-way. Banks can affect the fiscal position, as in Ireland when first the 
property-related  transactions,  capital  gains  and  profits  taxes  generated  by  the  bank-led 
property  bubble  induced  the  government  to  become  reliant  on  such  transient  forms  of  tax 
revenue, creating a vulnerability in the fiscal position.  
Likewise, when it became evident that there would be banking losses, the uncertain scale of 
these losses hung over the public finances as a threat. At the Central Bank, we have dealt 
with the latter problem by applying quite severe stress tests to the banks, and requiring them 
to inject additional capital this year, with a view to ensuring that, after they have transferred 
their  big  property  loans  to  the  National  Asset  Management  Agency  (which  is  purchasing 
them at a price related to market value, and thus at a deep discount to book value), and after 
they have absorbed further losses that can be expected as a result of the recession, they will 
come through this loan-loss cycle with a comfortable buffer of core tier 1 capital – 8 per cent 
in the base case, which itself is more pessimistic than that of the banks, and 4 per cent even 
under  a  severe  stress.  When  this  recapitalisation  is  completed,  the  market  will  be  able  to 
take comfort from the removal of the large uncertainty that was hanging over both the banks 
and the government’s accounts. 
BIS Review 81/2010 
 1
Conversely,  the  fiscal  position  can  affect  the  banks,  and  we  have  seen  this  recently  in 
Europe with heightened market concerns about the fiscal situation in some countries have 
spilled  over  to  banks  and  sovereigns,  in  turn  hampering  the  transmission  of  low  monetary 
policy rates throughout the euro area. Frozen interbank markets reflected what seemed an 
overblown response to perceived fiscal risks. 
We’ve  seen  an  extensive  policy  response  to  tackle  this.  Not  only  quite  sharp  fiscal 
adjustment measures, but a huge commitment of public funds – some €750 billion, which is 
huge  in  relation,  for  example,  to  the  outstanding  stock  of  debt  in  the  countries  affected. 
There’s  also  the  ECB’s  Securities  Market  Programme,  directed  at  promptly  unblocking 
money market conditions.  
Clearly, then, this interface between fiscal and banking conditions is a fruitful area of policy 
research right now.  
Let me just mention two specific issues within this. First, the Stability and Growth Pact, which 
needs  the  addition  of  a  focus  on  sustainability  of  the  fiscal  accounts,  and  not  just  on  a 
particular deficit or debt level. Ireland was not the only country for which the downturn had a 
very  unusually  sharp  and  large  impact  on  the  deficit  reflecting  the  unsustainability  and 
transient nature of a large part of the tax system, For me there is a lesson here from banking 
regulation. Just as banks are required not only to make provision for expected loan losses in 
their accounts, but also have to hold capital reserves to meet unexpected losses, the SGP 
targets should make allowance for the risk that unexpected fall-offs in revenue may occur.  
Finally, a word on the taxation of financial intermediaries, which is back on the policy agenda. 
I see that Financial Transactions Taxes are being discussed again, though I suspect that the 
conclusion  will  be  that  they  do  little  for  improving  the  efficiency  or  safety  of  the  financial 
system  (they  would  have  done  nothing  to  discourage  derivatives  related  to  sub-prime 
lending, for example), and also would not generate as much revenue as some suppose.  
Nevertheless, it does seem possible to use some form of Pigouvian corrective taxation as a 
kind of graduated type of regulation, potentially better than outright banning of products, and 
a  useful  complement  to  the  regulation-by-ratio  that  has  become  the  norm  over  the  past 
quarter century.  
With  such  a  long  list  of  researchable  topics,  I  look  forward  to  seeing  a  large  international 
attendance again at INFINITI, and I declare the 2010 conference open. 
2 
 BIS Review 81/2010
