 Mark Carney: 7th Bundesbank Lecture 2010 – the economic 
consequences of the reforms 
Remarks  by  Mr  Mark  Carney,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  the  7th  Bundesbank 
Lecture 2010, Berlin, 14 September 2010. 
 “The power to become habituated to his surroundings is a marked characteristic 
of mankind... We assume some of the most peculiar and temporary of our late 
advantages as natural, permanent, and to be depended on, and we lay our plans 
accordingly.  On  this  sandy  and  false  foundation  we  scheme  for  social 
improvement and dress our political platforms.” 
– J. M. Keynes, The Economic Consequences of the Peace 
Introduction 
Keynes wrote prophetically of the economic consequences of the Treaty of Versailles. Could 
the  same  be  said  of  current  financial  reforms?  Are  policy-makers  taking  for  granted  the 
essential role performed by finance in a vain pursuit of its risk-proofing? Do we assume that 
our “late advantage” of an open, global capital market and trade environment is a “natural, 
permanent” feature of the economic landscape?  
Or is the other extreme possible? Are we being too timid? Consider the jaded attitudes of the 
bank  CEO  who  recounted:  “My  daughter  called  me  from  school  one  day,  and  said,  ‘Dad, 
what’s a financial crisis?’ And, without trying to be funny, I said, ‘This type of thing happens 
every five to seven years.’”1  
Should we be content with a dreary cycle of upheaval? 
Such  resignation  would  be  costly.  Even  after  heroic  efforts  to  limit  its  impact  on  the  real 
economy, the global financial crisis left a legacy of foregone output, lost jobs, and enormous 
fiscal  deficits.  As  is  typically  the  case,  much  of  the  cost  has  been  borne  by  countries, 
businesses, and individuals who did not directly contribute to the fiasco.  
If what’s past is prologue, growth will be lower and unemployment higher for years to come. 
The Bank of Canada forecasts that, as a result of the crisis, cumulative foregone economic 
output from 2009 to 2012 will be 16 per cent of GDP in Europe and 9 per cent of GDP in 
Canada  (see  Appendix,  Chart  1).  Over  the  longer  term,  we  estimate  that  these  shortfalls 
could grow to about 40 per cent and 30 per cent of respective GDP. Given the synchronous 
nature of this global crisis, there are reasons to fear such severe outcomes.  
Surely,  and  contrary  to  what  some  in  the  industry  would  have  you  believe,  there  is  some 
price  worth  paying  to  reduce  such  tail  risks  in  the  future.  This  past  weekend’s  historic 
Basel III agreement strikes exactly the right balance. 
In my remarks today, I will focus on the costs and benefits of financial sector reform. I will 
argue that the economic case is compelling and the basic stakes enormous. Financial crises 
are  normally 
increased 
protectionism. Without credible, coordinated financial reforms, we risk losing the open trading 
and financial system that has underpinned the economic miracle of recent times.  
financial  repression;  economic  downturns,  by 
followed  by 
                                                 
1   J. Dimon, Chairman and CEO, JP Morgan Chase & Company, in testimony to the U.S. Financial Crisis Inquiry 
Commission, 13 January 2010. 
BIS Review 117/2010 
 1
 The role of the financial sector 
Before  analysing  the  impact  of  the  reforms,  allow  me  to  discuss  briefly  the  role  of  the 
financial sector and how it failed during the crisis.  
By translating savings into productive investment, finance is central to economic growth. It 
has  three  core  functions.  First,  through  the  payments  system,  it  facilitates  decentralized 
exchange, which is fundamental to the functioning of a market economy.  
Second, finance transforms the maturities of assets and liabilities, taking short-term liabilities, 
such  as  deposits,  and  transforming  them  into  long-term  assets,  such  as  mortgages  or 
corporate  loans.  Households  and  businesses  can  therefore  do  the  reverse,  holding  short-
term assets and longer-term liabilities. This helps them to plan for the future and to manage 
risks  arising  from  uncertainties  over  their  cash  flows.  The  social  value  of  maturity 
transformation  is  unquestioned,  but  its  performance  creates  fundamental  risks,  which 
requires public intervention.2  
Third, the financial system intermediates credit, channelling funds from savers to investors. 
This allows savers to diversify their risk and everyone to smooth consumption over time and 
across states of the world. Young families can borrow to buy a house; students can pay for 
university. People can invest for their retirements and businesses can finance working capital 
and investment. However, if risk is persistently mispriced, these savings and investments will 
be misallocated and economic welfare reduced. 
The crisis  
Financial  services  are  supplied  by  a  combination  of  banks  and  markets.  In  recent  years, 
markets grew to the point that they became important alternatives to banks for corporate and 
household finance. More and more of the traditional functions of banks – including maturity 
transformation  and  credit  intermediation  –  were  conducted  through  a  broader  range  of 
intermediaries  and  investment  vehicles,  which  have  been  collectively  referred  to  as  the 
“shadow banking” system.3 All countries participated in these trends, to varying degrees. 
From  a  financial  system  perspective,  the  deepening  of  markets  is  generally  welcome 
because  it  makes  the  system  more  robust  and  increases  competition.  However,  while 
markets  expand  the  choices  and  lower  the  prices  available  to  financial  consumers,  they 
function differently from banks. Unlike banks, markets rely more completely on confidence for 
liquidity. To maintain that confidence, markets need clear rules and robust infrastructure.  
In  response  to  the  increased  competitive  pressure  from  markets,  banks  employed  three 
strategies:  increasing  leverage,  greater  use  of  securitization,  and  the  writing  of  deep 
out-of-the-money  options.  Though  not  recognised  at  the  time,  each  increased  risk  in  the 
system. 
By  borrowing  in  short-term  wholesale  markets  to  fund  asset  growth,  banks  became  more 
dependent on continuous access to liquidity in money and capital markets.  
By using securitization to diversify the funding sources and reduce credit risks, banks created 
new exposures. The severing of the relationship between originator and risk holder lowered 
underwriting and monitoring standards. In addition, the transfer of risk itself was frequently 
                                                 
2   To manage the fundamental risk created by maturity mismatch, banks rely on two crucial supports: deposit 
insurance  and  the  central  bank  as  a  lender  of  last  resort  to  solvent  but  illiquid  institutions.  Banks  implicitly 
accept a social contract that gives them access to liquidity support in times of stress in return for regulation of 
their behaviour at all times. 
3   Shadow  banks  included  investment  banks,  mortgage  brokers,  finance  companies,  structured  investment 
vehicles, hedge funds, and other private asset pools. 
2 
 BIS Review 117/2010
 incomplete,  with  banks  retaining  large  quantities  of  supposedly  risk-free  leveraged  super 
senior tranches of structured products.  
These exposures were compounded by the rapid expansion of banks into over-the-counter 
derivative  products.  In  essence,  banks  wrote  a  series  of  large  out-of-the-money  options  in 
markets  such  as  those  for  credit  default  swaps.4  As  credit  standards  deteriorated,  the  tail 
risks embedded in these strategies became fatter. With pricing and risk management lagging 
reality, there was a widespread misallocation of capital. 
The magnitude of these developments was remarkable. In the final years of the boom, when 
complacency  about  liquidity  reached  its  zenith,  the  scale  of  shadow  banking  activity 
exploded. The value of structured investment vehicles, for example, tripled in the three years 
to 2007. Credit default swaps grew sixfold.  
Financial  institutions,  including  many  banks,  came  to  rely  on  high  levels  of  liquidity  in 
markets.  Short-term  money  markets  were  the  predominant  source  of  financing  for  the 
one-third  increase  in  the  gross  leverage  of  U.S.  investment  banks,  U.K.  banks,  and 
European banks. The system’s exposure to market confidence was enormous. 
Through  all  of  this,  a  mirage  formed  of  relentlessly  expanding  profitability  in  the  financial 
sector.  In  the  United  States,  between  2000  and  2006,  corporate  profits  in  the  sector 
averaged over 36 per cent of total profits. It appeared briefly that finance was the ruler, rather 
than a servant of, the real economy. The large losses and costly bailouts required to repair 
balance sheets shattered this illusion.5  
The shortcomings of regulation were similarly exposed. The shadow banking system was not 
supported, regulated, or monitored in the same fashion as the conventional banking system, 
despite the fact they were of equal size on the eve of the crisis.6  
There were also major flaws in the regulation and supervision of banks themselves. Basel II 
fed  procyclicalities,  underestimated  risks,  and  permitted  excess  leverage.  Gallingly,  on  the 
day  before  each  went  under,  every  bank  that  failed  (or  was  saved  by  the  state)  reported 
capital that exceeded the Basel II standard by a wide margin. 
Most fundamentally, the global financial crisis revealed the fallacy of composition that strong 
individual financial institutions collectively ensure the safety and soundness of the system as 
a whole. Even the most vigilant, microprudential regulatory regime can be overwhelmed by 
systemic  risks.  As  a  consequence,  policy-makers  now  recognise  that  systemic  risk  is  the 
product  of  the  resiliency  of  financial  institutions,  the  robustness  of  systemically  important 
markets, and the interconnectedness between institutions and markets. 
The G-20 reform agenda 
The G-20 has initiated an extensive program of reform designed to improve the safety and 
robustness of the global financial system. The measures are mutually reinforcing, and all are 
necessary.  
                                                 
4   See  A.  Haldane,  “The  Contribution  of  the  Financial  Sector  –  Miracle  or  Mirage?”  Speech  delivered  at  the 
Future of Finance Conference, London, 14 July 2010. 
It  was  not  just  a  question  of  misleading  data  on  profitability.  The  basic  shortcoming  of  financial  growth 
accounting also plagued compensation structures. Employees were paid in cash for positive net present value 
of long-tailed risks. 
5  
6   Z. Pozsar, T. Adrian, A. Ashcraft, and H. Boesky, ”Shadow Banking”, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff 
Report No. 458, July 2010. 
BIS Review 117/2010 
 3
 Building robust markets  
The  first  strategy  is  to  build  robust  financial  markets  by  improving  infrastructure  and 
transparency. 
In  particular,  keeping  markets  continuously  open  requires  policies  and  infrastructure  that 
reinforce the private generation of liquidity in normal times and facilitate central bank support 
in  times  of  crisis.  The  cornerstone  is  clearing  and  settlement  processes  with  risk-reducing 
elements,  particularly  central  clearing  counterparties  or  “CCPs”  for  repos  and  OTC 
derivatives.  Properly  risk-proofed  CCPs  act  as  firewalls  against  the  propagation  of  default 
shocks across major market participants. Through centralised clearing, authorities can also 
require the use of through-the-cycle margins, which would reduce liquidity spirals and their 
contribution to boom-bust cycles.7  
Reducing the interconnectedness between institutions and markets  
The second G-20 imperative is to create a system that can withstand the failure of any single 
financial  institution.  From  Bear  Stearns  to  Hypo  Real  Estate  to  Lehman  Brothers,  markets 
failed that test.  
Today,  after  a  series  of  extraordinary,  but  necessary,  measures  to  keep  the  system 
functioning,  we  are  awash  in  moral  hazard.  If  left  unchecked,  this  will  distort  private 
behaviour and inflate public costs.  
As  a  consequence,  there  is  a  firm  conviction  among  policy-makers  that  losses  incurred  in 
future  crises  must  be  borne  by  the  institutions  themselves.  This  means  management, 
shareholders, and creditors, rather than taxpayers.  
Measures  to  expose  fully  firms  to  the  ultimate  sanction  of  the  market  will  also  reduce  the 
interconnectedness  between  institutions.  In  addition  to  changes  to  market  infrastructure, 
priorities include: staged-intervention regulatory regimes, “living wills” for banks, and better 
cross-border resolution regimes.  
Another  promising  avenue  is  to  embed  contingent  capital  features  into  debt  and  preferred 
shares issued by financial institutions. Contingent capital is a security that converts to capital 
when a financial institution is in serious trouble, thereby replenishing capital without the use 
of  taxpayer  funds.  Contingent  conversions  could  be  embedded  in  all  future  new  issues  of 
senior unsecured debt and subordinated securities to create a broader bail-in approach. Its 
presence would also discipline management, since common shareholders would be incented 
to  act  prudently  to  avoid  having  their  stakes  diluted  by  conversion.  Overall,  the  Bank  of 
Canada believes that contingent capital can reduce moral hazard and increase the efficiency 
of bank capital structures. We correspondingly welcome the Basel Committee’s recent public 
consultation paper on this topic.  
Improving the resiliency of financial institutions  
The  third  priority  is  to  improve  the  resiliency  of  financial  institutions  themselves.  Creating 
more resilient institutions requires more and better capital, improved balance sheet liquidity, 
and enhanced risk management.8 This past weekend’s Basel III agreement delivers on these 
objectives by: 
                                                 
7   Market resiliency can also be improved through better and more-readily available information. This reduces 
information asymmetry, facilitates the valuation process and, hence, supports market efficiency and stability. 
In this regard,  priorities  are an expansion  of the  use of trade repositories for OTC derivatives markets and 
substantial enhancements to continuous disclosure standards for securitization. 
8   The  crisis  also  underscored  the  need  to  better  capture  counterparty  exposures,  market  risk,  and  a  host  of 
contingent claims. 
4 
 BIS Review 117/2010
    Creating global standards for liquidity.  
Raising  substantially  the  quantity,  quality,  consistency,  and  transparency  of  the 
Tier 1 capital base.  
Introducing a leverage ratio as a complement to the Basel II risk-based framework. 
The leverage ratio is, in effect, a safety harness that is designed to protect against 
risks that regulators think are low but which, in fact, are not.  
Introducing a capital conservation buffer above the minimum capital requirement to 
ensure that banks and supervisors take prompt corrective action and that banks can 
absorb  losses  during  periods  of  financial  and  economic  stress.  This  conservation 
buffer  is  to  be  complemented  by  a  countercyclical  buffer,  which  would  vary  over 
time.  It  should  be  at  its  maximum  in  periods  when  credit  is  growing  rapidly  and 
system-wide  risks  are  rising.  In  times  of  stress,  the  buffer  would  be  reduced  to 
ensure that the flow of credit is not undermined by regulatory constraints.  
The goal is to make financial systems less vulnerable to booms and busts so that crises are 
less  frequent  and  less  severe.  Through  evidence-based  analysis,  policy-makers  can 
determine the package of reforms that will maximise these net economic benefits.  
It is to this issue that I will now turn. 
The benefits of reform  
The  potential  economic  benefits  of  stronger  capital  and  liquidity  standards  are  significant. 
These benefits emerge from a variety of sources:  
 
Higher capital and liquidity standards will contribute to a lower incidence of financial 
crises.  
The severity of financial crises could also be reduced.  
The economy should benefit from smoother economic cycles.  
Higher standards should help to reduce the risk that resources are misallocated.  
 
 
 
To  put  the  magnitude  of  potential  gains  into  context,  consider  more  closely  the  costs  of 
financial crises. 
In the 10 years following a financial crisis, the median output growth rate decreases by 1 per 
cent, and the unemployment rate increases by 5 percentage points.9 Experience suggests 
that  costs  build  well  into  the  future.  In  studies  released  last  month,  the  Basel  Committee 
found  that  the  median  cumulative  loss  of  past  financial  crises  was  63  per  cent  of  national 
GDP.  
Given the scale of potential losses, there are clearly large benefits to reducing the frequency 
of  crises  (Chart  2).  The  extensive  analysis  of  the  Basel  Committee  suggests  that  higher 
capital  and  liquidity  standards  would  do  just  that.  In  particular,  the  combination  of 
strengthened  liquidity  standards  and  a  2-percentage-point  increase  in  bank  capital  ratios 
would raise the annual expected level of GDP by 1.8 per cent relative to trend.  
                                                 
9   See  C.  Reinhart  and  V.  Reinhart,  “After  the  Fall”,  forthcoming  in  Macroeconomic  Policy:  Post-Crisis  and 
Risks Ahead, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Policy Symposium, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, 
26–28 August 2010. 
BIS Review 117/2010 
 5
 Because this improved performance accrues over time, it is a gift that keeps on giving. Using 
a conservative real discount rate of 5 per cent, the cumulative present value of this better 
performance is equivalent to more than 35 per cent of GDP, or €0.9 trillion for Germany.10  
Some in Canada argue that our sound financial system implies that the potential gains are 
small for our country and the G-20 reforms are, therefore, unimportant. This is misguided. In 
open  economies  such  as  ours  and  Germany’s,  reducing  the  incidence  of  foreign  crises  is 
even more important than domestic benefits. Today’s reality is one of deep interconnectedness, 
where financial problems in other regions spill rapidly into our own. In an increasingly multi-
polar  economy,  we  simply  cannot  afford  to  lurch  from  crisis  to  crisis  every  five  years.  To 
reduce this frequency, we need a strong, universally applied framework. The Basel III rules, 
combined with the FSB and IMF’s review processes, have the potential to be just that. 
Costs of reform  
Despite the clear benefits, stronger prudential standards also impose costs.  
Banks  can  follow  several  strategies  to  meet  regulatory  demands  for  higher  capital 
requirements. Most obviously, they could raise additional capital in public markets. If given 
sufficient time, they could generate capital internally through retained earnings. In addition, 
they  could  pass  on  some  of  the  costs  of  the  higher  standards  to  their  customers  through 
higher interest spreads or increased fee income. Finally, they could shed, or slow the growth, 
of assets.  
Past experience suggests that banks will use a combination of all these methods.11 However, 
to  be  conservative,  the  Basel  report  assumes  that  banks  would  recoup  the  cost  of  higher 
capital  and  liquidity  requirements  entirely  through  higher  lending  spreads.  The  long-term 
estimate of the increase in lending spreads is then used as an input to a variety of models to 
assess  the  impact  on  output.  By  combining  strengthened  liquidity  standards  with  a 
2-percentage-point increase in bank capital ratios, expected output growth, relative to trend, 
is  reduced  by  0.25  per  cent  on  average  for  the  countries  analysed  (0.30  per  cent  for 
Canada). In present-value terms, this equates to about 5 per cent of GDP.  
Together with these long-run costs, there are also costs incurred during the transition period. 
The  Basel  study  estimates  these  through  a  sophisticated  approach  using  a  wide  range  of 
models.12  The  result  for  the  group  is  a  1.1  per  cent  cumulative  reduction  in  GDP  over  a 
four-year transition period (in present value).  
A conservative estimate of the net benefits 
Netting the long-run benefits of less frequent financial crises with the long-run and transition 
costs yields average net benefits for G-20 economies of 30 per cent of GDP in present-value 
terms, or about €10 trillion (Table 1).13  
                                                 
10   The Bank of Canada estimates the equivalent figures for Canada would be 1.1 per cent and 20 per cent of 
GDP. 
11   The longer the transition period is, the more important the internal generation of earnings will be. 
12   It was necessary to make a number of assumptions in this analysis. For example, it was typically assumed 
that  monetary  policy  would  respond  to  mitigate  the  effects  of  the  more  stringent  bank  capital  and  liquidity 
requirements. It was also important to include the spillover effects that occur across borders, magnifying the 
impact on output. 
13   Assuming  a  2-percentage-point  increase  in  capital  (plus  liquidity  changes).  For  Canada,  estimates  are 
approximately 13 per cent of GDP in present-value terms, which is equal to about Can$200 billion (Tables 2 
and 3). 
6 
 BIS Review 117/2010
 This  estimate  is  conservative.  The  analysis  understates  the  benefits  of  the  new  rules  and 
errs on the side of overstating the costs. This bias is reflected in several key assumptions.  
First,  banks  are  assumed  to  fully  pass  on  the  costs  of  higher  capital  and  liquidity 
requirements to borrowers rather than reducing their current returns on shareholders’ equity 
or operating expenses, such as compensation, to adjust to the new rules.  
Consider the alternative. If banks were to reduce personnel expenses by only 10 per cent 
(equal  to  a  5  per  cent  reduction  in  operating  expenses),  they  could  lower  spreads  by  an 
amount that would completely offset the impact of a 2-percentage-point increase in capital 
requirements. 
Second, higher capital and liquidity requirements are assumed to have a permanent effect on 
lending spreads, and hence on the level of economic output. No allowance is made for the 
possibility that households and firms may find cheaper alternative sources of financing.  
Third,  the  discount  rate  used  to  calculate  net  benefits  was  more  than  twice  current  real 
interest rates and the longer-run real growth rates of the Canadian and German economies.  
Finally, the only benefit quantified is the gains to GDP resulting from a reduced probability of 
future financial crises.  
Other benefits from financial reforms are substantial  
However,  there  are  a  variety  of  other  potential  benefits  from  higher  capital  and  liquidity 
standards and the broader range of G-20 reforms. 
First,  the  variability  of  economic  cycles  should  be  reduced  by  a  host  of  macroprudential 
measures.  Analysis  by  the  Bank  of  Canada  and  the  Basel  group  suggests  a  modest 
dampening in output volatility can be achieved from the Basel III proposals, as higher capital 
and  liquidity  allow  banks  to  smooth  the  supply  of  credit  over  the  cycle.  For  instance,  a 
2-percentage-point  rise  in  capital  ratios  lowers  the  standard  deviation  of  output  by  about 
3 per cent.  
A  much  more  significant  impact  can  be  expected  from  other  macroprudential  instruments 
under consideration. These include varying loan-to-value and other credit terms in mortgage 
markets, adopting through-the-cycle margining in core funding markets, and the introduction 
of countercyclical capital buffers.  
The  Bank  of  Canada  has  modelled  the  potential  impact  of  such  a  time-varying  buffer  and 
translated  the  gains  from  reduced  volatility  into  domestic  consumption  and  GDP.  The 
preliminary findings suggest that the potential gains are in the range of 4 per cent to 6 per 
cent  of  GDP  in  present-value  terms.  In  other  words,  countercyclical  buffers  alone  could 
increase the net benefits of reforms by about 20 per cent. It is reasonable to expect similar 
results for other countries.14  
Second, there is a range of initiatives under consideration to reduce moral hazard, including 
new  frameworks  for  the  effective  resolution  of  banks,  more  intensive  supervision  of  key 
institutions,  the  introduction  of  contingent  capital,  and  the  creation  of  more  robust 
infrastructure. 
Adoption  of  these  measures  should  further  reinforce  the  ability  of  Basel  III  standards  to 
reduce the probability of crises and thereby increase net benefits. 
                                                 
14   See C. Meh and K. Moran, “The Role of Bank Capital in the Propagation of Shocks”, Journal of Economic 
Dynamics and Control 34: 555–76 (2010); I. Christensen, C. Meh, and K. Moran, “Bank Leverage Regulation 
and Macroeconomic Dynamics”, forthcoming Bank of Canada Working Paper (2010); A. Dib, “Banks, Credit 
Market Frictions, and Business Cycles”, forthcoming Bank of Canada Working Paper (2010). 
BIS Review 117/2010 
 7
 Third, the totality of the G-20 reforms has the potential to shift the balance between resiliency 
and competition. By creating a system that is robust to the failure of a single firm, reforms 
could  increase  the  competitive  intensity  in  the  financial  services  sector,  with  attendant 
benefits. 
A financial sector that is less volatile, less prone to debilitating crises, and more robust in the 
face of adverse shocks is likely to be viewed more favourably by investors and attract the 
investment  needed  to  continue  to  expand  in  a  sustainable  manner.  By  reducing  moral 
hazard, incumbents will also enjoy fewer oligopolistic privileges behind regulatory barriers to 
entry. 
Greater competition commonly leads to more innovative and diverse strategies, which would 
further  promote  resiliency  of  the  system.  Greater  competition  and  safer  banks  may  also 
contribute  to  lower  expected  return  on  equity  (ROE)  for  financial  institutions.  This,  in  turn, 
could help offset the costs and increase the net benefits discussed earlier.  
These gains from competition could be considerable. The financial services sector earns a 
50 per cent higher return on equity than the economy-wide average. If greater competition 
leads  to  a  one-percentage-point  decline  in  the  ROE  (through  a  decline  in  spreads),  the 
estimated cost from a one-percentage point increase in capital would be completely offset. 
Conclusion 
The  fundamental  objective  of  the  reforms  is  to  create  a  system  that  efficiently  supports 
economic  growth  while  providing  financial  consumers  with  choice.  The  system  must  be 
robust  to  shocks,  dampening,  rather  than  amplifying,  their  effect  on  the  real  economy.  It 
should also support sensible innovation. The system needs stable banks and robust markets, 
since both play a central role in financing, and, if properly structured, each can support the 
other. 
This means ensuring that individual financial institutions are stronger and less systemically 
important, that more options for liquidity are available in all states of the world, and that the 
new measures promote competition.  
A fully risk-proofed system is neither attainable nor desirable. The point is not to pile up so 
much capital in our institutions that they are never heard from again, either as a source of 
instability or of growth. The challenge is to get the balance between resiliency and efficiency 
right. The Basel III agreement accomplishes these objectives. Moreover, a careful analysis 
indicates that the economic case for the reforms is compelling. 
Most  fundamentally,  successful  implementation  of  the  G-20  agenda  will  increase  the 
likelihood  of  an  open,  flexible  international  financial  and  trading  system.  Modern  Germany 
has prospered in this environment and has a great stake in leading the G-20 in building a 
more secure foundation for modern prosperity.  
The Bundesbank has led the development of many of these reforms. Tremendous progress 
was made this past weekend, but there is still more to do. Germany’s continued leadership in 
the coming weeks and months will be critical, so that we can finish building a solid financial 
foundation for growth and social improvement.  We should all heed the words of President 
Weber:  "Policy-makers  now  have  to  muster  the  political  will  to  take  the  necessary  steps, 
however contested and painful they might be”.15  
Thank you. 
                                                 
15   A. A. Weber, “The G20 Agenda on Financial Regulation”, Dinner speech at the International Conference on 
Financial Market Regulation, 19 May 2010. 
8 
 BIS Review 117/2010
 Appendix 
Chart 1 
An illustration of the cumulative output loss in Canada from the financial crisis 
Chart 2 
 Expected longer-run benefits and costs of tighter capital and liquidity standards  
In per cent of GDP 
BIS Review 117/2010 
  9
 Cumulative benefits and costs for the G-20 from stronger regulatory requirements 
Present value in per cent of GDP 
Table 1 
Table 2 
Estimated long-run costs and benefits for Canada  
from stronger regulatory requirements  
Expressed as annual percentage impact on the level of GDP 
Table 3 
Present value of benefits and costs for Canada  
from stronger regulatory requirements 
   10 
 BIS Review 117/2010
