Seiji Nakamura: Japan’s monetary policy and developments in economic 
activity and prices 
Speech  by  Mr  Seiji  Nakamura,  Member  of  the  Policy  Board  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  a 
meeting with Business Leaders, Fukuoka, 4 February 2010. 
I. 
The current economic situation  
 Overseas economies  
A. 
The  world  economy  has  been  on  a  moderate  recovery  path,  supported  by  fiscal  stimulus 
measures  such  as  the  promotion  of  car  sales  and  accommodative  monetary  policies 
implemented  around  the  world.  Increased  production,  reflecting  progress  in  inventory 
adjustment  and  a  recovery  in  trade,  also  contributed  to  the  recovery.  The  International 
Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  saw  the  economic  recovery  as  sustained,  and  on  January  26,  2010 
revised  upward  its  outlook  for  world  economic  growth  in  2010  to  3.9  percent,  up 
0.8 percentage  points  from  its  forecast  released  in  October  2009.  The  high  growth  in 
emerging  economies  such  as  China  has  been  upholding  the  economic  activity  of 
industrialized countries, including Japan, through increased trade.  
Emerging  economies  have  marked  higher-than-expected  growth  as  the  balance  sheet 
problems of financial institutions and individuals were small relative to those of industrialized 
countries.  As  a  result,  the  stimulus  measures  within  these  economies  were  particularly 
effective. The strong domestic demand boosted by a virtuous cycle of production, income, 
and spending, inflow of overseas capital, and recovery in exports to industrialized countries 
also contributed to the high growth. For example, in China, the real GDP growth rate for the 
October-December quarter of 2009 increased 10.7 percent from a year earlier, and growth 
remains  particularly  strong  in  areas  such  as  personal  consumption  and  fixed  asset 
investment.  Furthermore,  exports,  which  had  been  sluggish,  saw  double-digit  month-on-
month growth in December, spurred by high-value-added products such as high-tech goods 
and  electrical  machinery,  and  turned  positive  on  a  year-on-year  basis  for  the  first  time  in 
14 months.  
In  order  to  maintain  robust  growth,  the  Chinese  government  appears  to  have  started  to 
implement preemptive measures to cool down the overheating seen in part of the real estate 
market,  as  well  as  the  surge  in  bank  lending.  Emerging  economies,  including  China,  are 
expected to maintain high growth for the time being. Given that these economies are now the 
main engines of the world economy, it is necessary to watch out for any signs of a possible 
economic bubble and monitor the sustainability of their economic growth. 
In industrialized countries, economic conditions are improving, although the pace of recovery 
has  been  moderate  as  it  has  had  to  cope  with  the  need  to  alleviate  various  structural 
imbalances, such as excessive consumption and the heavy debts accumulated ahead of the 
financial  crisis.  Such  imbalances  have  been  apparent  in  that  the  net  assets  of  U.S. 
households  had  decreased  by  almost  20  percent  from  their  peak,  while  consumer  loan 
delinquency  rates  have  been  increasing.  Also,  banks  have  been  maintaining  their  tight 
lending attitudes and the amount outstanding of lending has been decreasing.  
In  the  United  States,  real  GDP  for  the  October-December  quarter  of  2009  registered 
5.7 percent growth and the economy as a whole has been recovering, although the level of 
economic  activity  is  still  low  and  a  full-fledged  recovery  is  likely  to  require  more  time. 
Personal consumption seems to be leveling off as Christmas sales in 2009 recovered slightly 
from the previous year, when sales had fallen sharply due to the effects of the collapse of 
Lehman Brothers, the so-called Lehman shock, and new car sales on an annualized basis 
exceeded 10 million units for four consecutive months. The housing market has also been 
BIS Review 26/2010 
 1
recovering, although uncertainty remains, and commercial real estate prices continue to fall. 
The  unemployment  rate  remains  high,  at  10  percent,  without  any  prospect  of  an  early 
recovery in the job market.  
The economy in Europe has been recovering, with exports acting as the main driving force, 
although  domestic  demand  has  been  weak  as  evidenced  by  the  decline  in  retail  sales 
(excluding cars) in December from a year earlier, when sales had fallen sharply due to the 
effects of the Lehman shock. Looking ahead, however, economic activity could be hindered 
by balance sheet adjustments in the financial sectors of European nations as well as in some 
governments including that of Greece. Therefore, the pace of economic recovery in Europe 
is likely to be more moderate than that in the United States.  
The Japanese economy  
B. 
The downturn in the Japanese economy following the Lehman shock, with the accompanying 
steep decline in exports and production, was more severe than that in the United States and 
Europe. This reflected Japan’s industrial structure, which is susceptible to the effects of world 
economic deterioration. The Japanese economy had been underpinned by buoyant exports 
of transport equipment, electrical machinery, and general machinery directed mainly to the 
United  States  and  Europe,  supported  by  the  weak  yen.  Since  these  sectors  had  come  to 
account for an increasingly large share of Japan’s production, the sudden nearly 40 percent 
decline in exports forced substantial curtailment of production and inventory. The impact was 
particularly  large  in  the  automobile  sector,  which  is  linked  to  a  wide  range  of  related 
industries.  
Although  the  Japanese  economy  deteriorated  significantly,  exports  and  production  have 
started  to  pick  up  since  hitting  bottom  in  February  2009,  due  to  recovery  in  overseas 
economic  conditions,  mainly  in  emerging  economies  such  as  China,  and  progress  in 
inventory adjustments at home and abroad. However, it is important to add that December 
2009 levels of exports and production were 78 percent and 87 percent, respectively, of those 
in September 2008, just before the Lehman shock. In the area of domestic demand, private 
consumption is picking up as a whole, with increased sales of cars and household electrical 
appliances resulting from economic stimulus measures. There are some signs that housing 
investment has stopped decreasing, since the number of housing starts, a leading indicator, 
increased  for  four  consecutive  months  until  December  2009.  The  ratio  of  job  offers  to 
applicants  also  improved  for  four  consecutive  months,  but  the  unemployment  rate  has 
remained  high,  at  5.1  percent,  and  the  perception  of  an  excessive  workforce  remains 
prevalent  among  employers.  Nominal  wages  per  employee  are  declining  and  consumers’ 
spending appetite has not improved. Although the decline in business fixed investment has 
finally  started  to  come  to  a  halt,  a  number  of  firms  are  cautious  about  making  new 
investments in Japan given that the outlook for a recovery in demand is unclear and there is 
a strong sense of excessive capital stock. In sum, although economic activity is picking up, 
momentum  to  support  a  self-sustaining  recovery  is  weak  because  production  and  exports 
remain at low levels, and any improvements so far have been largely supported by various 
stimulus measures at home and abroad.  
The bank’s policy responses since autumn 2008  
II. 
I  will  now  talk  about  various  policy  measures  the  Bank  has  taken  in  response  to  the 
unprecedented turmoil in economic and financial conditions since autumn 2008. Prior to the 
failure of Lehman Brothers in 2008, many firms in Japan sought to reduce on-hand liquidity in 
order  to  increase  capital  efficiency  under  extremely  accommodative  financial  conditions. 
After  the  Lehman  shock,  however,  firms  faced  a  rapid  financial  contraction,  making  their 
procurement  of  funds  through  CP  and  corporate  bonds  extremely  difficult.  This  critical 
situation  caused  firms,  small  and  large,  to  worry  about  the  availability  of  funds,  thereby 
raising tensions in financial markets. 
2 
 BIS Review 26/2010
In response to the turmoil in economic and financial conditions, the Bank took various steps 
to  ensure  market  stability;  for  example,  lowering  the  policy  rate  in  two  stages  from 
0.5 percent to 0.1 percent in October and December 2008, and providing ample liquidity to 
the  markets,  including  unlimited  U.S.  dollar  funding.  Furthermore,  the  Bank  adopted 
exceptional measures such as outright purchases of CP and corporate bonds to support a 
recovery in market function. Also, through its special funds-supplying operations to facilitate 
corporate financing, the Bank provided an unlimited amount of funds to counterparties at a 
fixed  rate  of  0.1  percent  against  corporate  debt  submitted  as  collateral.  Through  these 
efforts,  the  Bank  helped  firms  deal  with  difficulties  in  funding  through  markets  and  also 
encouraged interest rates to decrease.  
Having achieved the intended purpose of restoring the proper functioning of these markets, 
the Bank decided to terminate outright purchases of CP and corporate bonds at the end of 
December  2009.  Meanwhile,  it  decided  to  extend  special  funds-supplying  operations  to 
facilitate corporate financing until the end of March 2010, and thereafter to continue providing 
ample liquidity through conventional policy measures. 
At the unscheduled Monetary Policy Meeting held on December 1, 2009, the Bank decided 
to introduce a new operation to provide funds amounting to approximately 10 trillion yen, with 
a term of three months at a fixed interest rate of 0.1 percent. This decision was prompted by 
the  need  to  support  economic  recovery  from  the  financial  side  against  the  background  of 
increased  risk  that  international  financial  developments  and  foreign  exchange  market 
instability  since  the  latter  half  of  November  2009,  such  as  the  occurrence  of  Dubai’s  debt 
crisis,  might  adversely  affect  economic  activity  by  impacting  business  and  household 
sentiment. 
The Bank’s basic stance on monetary policy at present is to provide support to the Japanese 
economy in order to overcome deflation and return to a sustainable growth path with price 
stability.  To  this  end,  the  Bank  aims  to  maintain  the  extremely  accommodative  financial 
environment by providing ample liquidity to meet the demand in financial markets. 
I believe it is important for the Bank to maintain this basic stance on monetary policy. At the 
same time, the Bank should not have any predetermined view regarding the future path of 
monetary policy, but should take measures that would be most appropriate on each occasion 
in response to changing economic and financial conditions. 
III. 
Domestic price developments  
Price developments  
A. 
Inflationary  concerns  heightened  around  the  world  in  July  2008,  when  crude  oil  prices  hit 
140 dollars  per  barrel  and,  in  Japan,  the  consumer  price  index  excluding  fresh  food  (core 
CPI)  rose  2.4  percent  from  the  previous  year.  However,  in  August  2009,  the  core  CPI  fell 
2.4 percent year on year, while inflationary concerns abated significantly, reflecting the drop 
in  prices  of  natural  resources  triggered  by  the  slowdown  in  the  world  economy  and  the 
outflow  of  speculative  funds  from  commodity  markets  prompted  by  the  financial  crisis.  In 
December 2009, the rate of decline in the core CPI marked a 1.3 percent fall as the effects of 
the setback in crude oil prices receded, and is expected to continue to diminish in line with a 
moderate economic recovery.  
In  the  interim  assessment  of  the  October  2009  Outlook  for  Economic  Activity  and  Prices 
released on January 26, 2010, the median forecast for the core CPI was minus 1.5 percent 
for  fiscal  2009,  minus  0.5  percent  for  fiscal  2010,  and  minus  0.2  percent  for  fiscal  2011. 
Although the CPI is forecast to remain in negative territory until the end of fiscal 2011, the 
rate of decline is expected to moderate. The government’s plan to make high school tuition 
effectively free, due to be implemented during fiscal 2010, might cause the rate of decline to 
BIS Review 26/2010 
 3
accelerate. However, it is necessary to accurately grasp the basic price trend by adjusting for 
the effect of temporary factors caused by institutional changes. 
Deflation  
B. 
The term “deflation” is mostly used to describe a continued fall in general prices, or otherwise 
to  indicate  a  drop  in  asset  prices  or  economic  stagnation.  Nowadays,  however,  the  term 
seems to be used quite carelessly in various situations. The current heated price competition 
among  Japanese  retailers  and  other  service  providers  is  considered  to  be  causing  a 
deflationary  phenomenon,  and  is  viewed  by  some  as  a  problem.  Consumers  are  growing 
wiser  and  more  price  conscious,  spending  frugally  and  purchasing  only  essential  items  in 
needed  quantities.  An  increasing  number  of  firms  have  been  adapting  to  such  changes  in 
consumer  behavior  and  taking  action  to  entice  consumers  by  providing  new  products  and 
services that meet the shift in demand, or lowering sales prices by eliminating unnecessary 
functions.  The  price  revisions  resulting  from  such  efforts  by  firms  should  be  considered 
separately from the problem of deflation.  
The  sustained  decline  in  prices  in  Japan  is  due  to  a  combination  of  factors.  For  example, 
Japanese firms have placed a higher priority on the continuity of employment and business 
than on maintaining the wage level, and also on maintaining long-term business relationships 
and gross sales volume than on profitability. These and other factors have allowed the price 
level in Japan to remain low for a longer period than in the United States and Europe. The 
ongoing  fall  in  prices  has  also  been  triggered  by  recent  market  movements,  namely,  the 
decline in oil prices in reaction to their surge to more than 140 dollars per barrel in 2008, as 
well as the sharp decline in global demand resulting from the financial crisis. Therefore, in 
view of the current economic outlook that the recovery will be sluggish, demand – which is 
well short of supply at present – is unlikely to recover quickly, and the downward pressure on 
prices will not ease in the short term.  
The Bank’s current policy measures have been helping to underpin demand, by encouraging 
money market rates to decline and by providing ample liquidity to financial institutions. Fiscal 
measures  have  also  been  taken  to  stimulate  demand  for  consumer  durables.  Further 
restructuring  efforts  in  the  private  sector  are  necessary  to  achieve  sustained  growth  in 
demand. In other words, it is vital that the Bank, the government, and the private sector each 
play their part and jointly work to boost demand. The frequently voiced opinion that, to end 
deflation, the Bank should provide massive amounts of liquidity to private financial institutions 
as  a  quick  fix  to  overcome  the  situation,  ignores  longer-term  issues  that  have  major 
implications for the future. 
Looking back at the Bank’s quantitative easing policy implemented from 2001 to 2006, the 
Bank  provided  ample  liquidity  to  financial  institutions  via  their  current  accounts held  at  the 
Bank,  but  private  banks’  lending  to  other  private  sector  entities  did  not  rise  relative  to  the 
increase in the outstanding balance of current account deposits, indicating that the policy’s 
direct impact on ending deflation was small. Recently, the Bank’s accommodative stance on 
money  market  operations  has  enhanced  the  sense  of  an  abundance  of  liquidity,  causing 
market  rates,  including  those  on  longer-term  instruments,  to  decline  further  toward 
0.1 percent,  which  is  the  rate  applied  to  the  complementary  deposit  facility.  Nevertheless, 
due to weak corporate demand for funds, the Bank’s ample supply of funds once more has 
failed  to  lead  to  an  increase  in  bank  lending,  although  financial  institutions  have  not  been 
averse to lending. In sum, the ordinary operation of the transmission mechanism of monetary 
easing has not been working.  
Based on this observation, I believe that Japan will not be able to end deflation via policy 
measures  such  as  simply  increasing  the  supply  of  liquidity.  In  addition  to  the  Bank’s 
contribution to price stability, it is essential that all economic entities work together to create 
demand  at  home  and  abroad  through  innovation  and  steady  day-to-day  efforts,  to  ensure, 
4 
 BIS Review 26/2010
and attain the prospect of, higher income over the medium- to long-term through increased 
productivity.  
C. 
Announcement of the “Understanding of Medium- to Long-Term Price 
Stability” 
After  the  Monetary  Policy  Meeting  on  December  18,  2009,  the  Bank  reiterated  its 
“Understanding  of  Medium-  to  Long-Term  Price  Stability”  in  order  to  gain  an  accurate 
understanding  of  its  thinking  on  price  stability  in  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  The 
announcement  was  made  in  an  attempt  to  clearly  show  the  Bank’s  commitment  to  fight 
deflation  by  eradicating  any  impression  that  the  public  and  market  participants  may  have 
held that the Bank was an “inflation fighter, but not a deflation fighter,” and was not making 
serious enough efforts to end deflation. In its statement, the Bank specified that the Policy 
Board does not tolerate a year-on-year rate of change in the CPI equal to or below 0 percent, 
and that the midpoints of most Policy Board members’ “understanding” are around 1 percent. 
IV. 
The outlook and risk factors for the future conduct of monetary policy  
The outlook  
A. 
The Bank discusses economic activity and prices at the Monetary Policy Meetings held each 
month. Semiannually, in April and October, it releases the Outlook for Economic Activity and 
Prices,  known  as  the  Outlook  Report,  in  which  the  Bank  makes  public  its  forecasts  for 
economic  activity  and  prices  for  the  next  two  to  three  years,  and  three  months  after  their 
release conducts interim assessments of the reports. 
In  the  latest  interim  assessment  released  after  the  Monetary  Policy  Meeting  held  on 
January 25 and 26, 2010, the median of the Policy Board members’ forecasts for year-on-
year real GDP growth was minus 2.5 percent for fiscal 2009, 1.3 percent for fiscal 2010, and 
2.1 percent for fiscal 2011, indicating that the economy was developing basically in line with 
the  Bank’s  outlook  released  in  October  2009.  The  Japanese  economy  is  likely  to  improve 
gradually, reflecting recovery in overseas economies. Although there  remains the risk of a 
temporary  leveling-off  by  around  the  middle  of fiscal  2010,  as  the  effects  of  various  policy 
measures  taken  at  home  and  abroad  wane,  the  general  upward  trend  is  unlikely  to  be 
broken,  with  the  growth  rate  rising  to  well  above  the  potential  growth  rate  in  fiscal  2011, 
underpinned  by  a  self-sustaining  recovery  in  overseas  economies,  particularly  emerging 
economies.  
The  recovery  in  overseas  economies,  however,  is  likely  to  be  moderate  because 
considerable time may be required to overcome the various distortions accumulated in the 
global economy, mainly in industrialized countries. Therefore, it will take some time for the 
Japanese economy to achieve a full-fledged recovery. 
Given  the  sluggishness  in  the  economies  of  industrialized  countries,  it  is  necessary  for 
Japanese  firms  to  reach  out  to  consumers  in  emerging  economies,  which  have  a  rapidly 
expanding middle class. Developments in the share of Japan’s exports during the 2000-2009 
period show that the U.S. share decreased by almost half, from 29.7 percent to 16.1 percent, 
while that of China trebled from 6.3 percent to 18.9 percent, making China Japan’s largest 
trading  partner  in  terms  of  both  exports  and  imports.  The  share  of  exports  to  Asian 
economies as a whole increased from 41.1 percent to 54.2 percent, while that of the United 
States  and  the  EU  member  states  combined  dropped  from  46.0  percent  to  28.6  percent, 
underlining an accelerating expansion in the share of emerging markets. Japanese firms had 
held an advantage in producing and selling high-value-added products and services, mainly 
to industrialized countries, but are not yet adept enough to satisfy the demand in emerging 
economies  centered  on  inexpensive,  low-specification  products  and  services.  Moreover, 
many  Japanese  firms  have  long  considered  emerging  economies  mainly  as  efficient 
BIS Review 26/2010 
 5
production bases for exports to European and U.S. markets; therefore, much work needs to 
be  done  to  retarget  them  as  potential  markets,  by  developing  and  producing  new  market-
oriented  products  in  a  low  price  range,  establishing  sales  networks,  and  providing  staff 
training.  Japanese  firms  are  said  to  be  slow  to  localize  business  lines  in  emerging 
economies. When I visited rapidly developing inland China last year, I saw some U.S. and 
European firms successfully advancing quickly into the cities of Chongqing and Chengdu and 
localizing their business models, whereas there were only a few Japanese firms that were 
aggressive  in  localizing  their  operations.  The  local  deputy  mayor  had  mentioned  this 
situation.  Given  the  geographical  proximity  to  emerging  economies  with  markets  of  high 
growth potential, Japanese firms, including those in nonmanufacturing sectors, have a good 
chance of expanding their shares in these growing markets.  
resulting 
Risk factors  
B. 
There  are  both  upside  and  downside  risk  factors  to  take  into  account  in  considering  the 
outlook for the Japanese economy. The former include a possible upswing in the economic 
growth  of  emerging  economies  and  commodity-exporting  countries 
from 
accommodative  financial  environments  and  economic  stimulus  measures  in  various 
countries. The latter relate to the possible consequences of balance-sheet adjustments in the 
United  States  and  European  countries,  as  well  as  Japanese  firms’  medium-  to  long-term 
expectations of future economic growth. Regarding prices, primary commodity prices could 
rise  in  reflection  of  increasing  demand  among  emerging  economies  and  commodity-
exporting  countries  enjoying  rapid  growth;  meanwhile,  a  prolonged  sluggishness  in  the 
Japanese  economy  could  add  downward  pressure  on  medium-  to  long-term  inflation 
expectations,  accelerating  the  decline  in  prices.  The  balance  of  risks  remains  somewhat 
tilted to the downside because of the extremely large negative impact of the financial crisis, 
yet not to the degree seen a year earlier. 
In order to lower break-even points or reach out to consumers in the markets of emerging 
economies,  many  corporate  managers  are  in  a  restructuring  process  of  withdrawing  from 
unprofitable  areas  of  business,  selling  loss-making  sections  or  merging  them  with  other 
companies, exploring new business areas, and reviewing supply and production as well as 
research  and  development  capabilities.  For  this  reason,  firms  might  close  down  existing 
domestic production facilities and transfer them overseas. Even if overseas economies fully 
recover,  domestic  business  fixed  investment  would  be  restrained  and  a  recovery  in  the 
employment  situation  would  be  limited.  For  example,  production  of  information  and 
communications  equipment  for  the  Japanese  market,  such  as  flat-panel  televisions  and 
cellular phones, is being transferred overseas, increasing the share of imported equipment. 
Research  and  product  development  is  also  being  transferred  and  localized  as  a  result  of 
improved  business  infrastructure.  Transfers  of  research  and  production  overseas,  to 
emerging  economies  in  particular,  are  likely  to  increase  steadily.  Whether  this  trend  will 
accelerate and lead to a hollowing-out of the Japanese manufacturing sector is a matter of 
concern.  
As  a  result  of  the  aggressive  fiscal  policies  designed  to  underpin  the  economy  after  the 
Lehman  shock,  fiscal  deficits  and  government  debt  have  increased  to  a  very  high  level  in 
many countries. Now that the panic-like phenomena in the economy and financial markets 
have  subsided,  concerns  are  growing  around  the  world  about  the  sustainability  of 
government  debt.  For  example,  in  Greece,  the  new  government  elected  in  October  2009 
made  public  that  the  fiscal  deficit  was  larger  than  previously  announced.  This  disclosure 
prompted  a  downgrade  of  the  sovereign  debt  rating  for  Greece,  leading  to  a  sharp  rise  in 
interest  rates.  In  the  euro  area,  Portugal,  Italy,  Ireland,  and  Spain  are  also  thought  to  be 
having serious fiscal-deficit problems, and interest rates are rising in these countries. There 
was evident concern in the European Central Bank’s comments in a statement issued after a 
meeting  of  the  Governing  Council  on  January  14:  “The  very  large  government  borrowing 
requirements carry the risk of triggering rapid changes in market sentiment, leading to less 
6 
 BIS Review 26/2010
favourable medium and long-term market interest rates. This, in turn, would dampen private 
investment and thereby weaken the foundations for sustained growth. Moreover, high levels 
of  public  deficit  and  debt  would  place  an  additional  burden  on  monetary  policy  and 
undermine  the  credibility  of  the  provisions  of  both  the  Treaty  on  European  Union  and  the 
Stability and Growth Pact as a key pillar of Economic and Monetary Union. The Governing 
Council  therefore  calls  upon  governments  to  decide  and  implement  in  a  timely  fashion 
ambitious fiscal exit and consolidation strategies based on realistic growth assumptions, with 
a strong focus on expenditure reforms.” The predicament in the euro area should have given 
enough  warning  to  the  United  States,  the  United  Kingdom,  and  Japan  in  consideration  of 
their own severe fiscal conditions.  
It  is  extremely  difficult  to  generate  balanced  measures  for  short-  and  longer-term  issues, 
namely, 
fiscal 
consolidation, when the level of economic activity remains low and the pace of recovery in 
private demand is sluggish. However, we must bear in mind that depending too heavily on 
temporary emergency measures could trigger larger problems in the future. Therefore, it is 
necessary  to  review  such  measures  in  a  timely  manner  and  thoroughly  discuss  fiscal 
restructuring  over  a  medium-  to  long-term  period  in  order  to  achieve  balanced  and 
sustainable growth. 
fiscal  support  and  medium- 
for  continued  short-term 
long-term 
to 
BIS Review 26/2010 
 7
