William C Dudley: The US financial system – where we have been, where 
we are and where we need to go 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, at the Reserve Bank of Australia’s 50th Anniversary Symposium, 
Sydney, 8 February 2010. 
 What went wrong to produce the worst financial crisis in the past 70 years?  
Where are we now?  
What should be our top priorities to ensure that this never happens again? 
Today, my remarks will focus on the U.S. and global financial systems:  
• 
• 
• 
As always, my views are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Open 
Market Committee or the Federal Reserve System. 
With respect to what went wrong, it is important to recognize that the financial crisis occurred 
for  a  host  of  reasons  and,  thus,  there  is  no  single  silver  bullet  to  avoid  such  crises  in  the 
future. At the heart of the crisis was a tremendous buildup in leverage, which our regulatory 
framework  failed  to  prevent.  Large  amounts  of  opaque,  illiquid,  long-term  assets  were 
financed by short-term liabilities, and much of this financing occurred in the shadow banking 
system.  When  the  housing  bubble  burst,  financial  asset  prices  fell  and  exposed  the  deep 
linkages and overall fragility of our system. Interbank funding markets seized up, the shadow 
banking  system  crumpled  and  several  major  financial  firms  –  banks  and  nonbanks  alike –
collapsed  or  approached  the  brink  of  collapse.  Extraordinary  interventions  of  governments 
and central banks around the world were necessary to prevent a complete collapse of the 
financial system and the broader economy. 
As  a  general  matter,  regulators  did  not  appreciate  beforehand  how  vulnerable  the  system 
was to shocks. In particular, there was a failure to appreciate the important interconnections 
among  the  banking  system,  capital  markets,  and  payment  and  settlement  system.  For 
example,  the  disruption  of  the  securitization  markets  caused  by  the  poor  performance  of 
highly rated debt securities led to significant problems for major financial institutions. These 
banks had to take assets back on their books, backstop lines of credit were triggered, and 
banks could no longer securitize loans, thus increasing the pressure on their balance sheets. 
This  reduced  credit  availability,  which  increased  the  downward  pressure  on  economic 
activity, which caused asset values to decline further, and in turn, increased the degree of 
stress in the financial system. 
Moreover, regulators did not adequately understand how the dynamics of the system tended 
to exacerbate shocks, rather than dampen their impact. For example, with respect to capital, 
firms under stress had incentives to continue to pay dividends to show that they were strong. 
These dividend payments actually depleted capital, making the firms weaker and vulnerable 
to credit rating downgrades. When credit ratings were indeed cut, that increased collateral 
calls, which intensified the pressure on scarce liquidity resources. 
Regulatory gaps were another important factor in causing the crisis. American International 
Group, Inc. (AIG) is a case in point. AIG Financial Products, a subsidiary of the AIG parent 
company,  provided  guarantees  against  default  on  complex  collateralized  debt  obligations, 
leveraging  the  AAA  rating  of  the  AIG  parent  company  in  the  process.  This  activity  was 
conducted  with  inadequate  regulatory  oversight,  poor  risk  management  and  insufficient 
capital. 
Finally, many of the incentives built into the system ultimately undermined its stability. The 
problems with incentives were evident in a number of areas, including faulty compensation 
BIS Review 14/2010 
 1
schemes and risk management that was too narrowly focused on one business area without 
regard  for  the  broader  entity.  These  incentives  created  important  externalities  in  which 
participants did not bear the full costs of their actions. 
Turning to where we are now, the U.S. financial system is in much better shape today than it 
was a year ago. The capital markets are generally open for business – with the important 
exception of some securitization markets – and the major securities dealers that survived the 
crisis have seen a sharp recovery in profitability. The largest U.S. bank holding companies, 
which went through the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program exercise, have more and 
better quality capital, having raised more than $100 billion of common equity over the past 
year in the capital markets and generated nearly as much common equity via preferred stock 
conversions and from gains on asset sales. 
However,  many  smaller  and  medium-sized  banks  remain  under  significant  pressure.  This 
reflects  several  factors.  First,  such  institutions  hold  assets  that  are  carried  mainly  on  the 
books on an accrual basis. Compared with mark-to-market assets, such assets adjust much 
more slowly to changes in market conditions and the economic environment. Second, many 
of these banks have a much more concentrated exposure to commercial real estate, a sector 
that remains under considerable pressure. Not only have capitalization rates risen sharply 
– meaning the investors will pay much less for a dollar of rental income than before – but the 
rental income streams on these properties also have declined as the performance of the U.S. 
economy has declined. Together, these two factors have pushed U.S. commercial real estate 
prices down by about 40 percent to 50 percent from the peak reached in 2006. Loan losses 
in  commercial  real  estate  and  consumer  and  mortgage  loans  seem  likely  to  continue  to 
pressure smaller banks for some time to come. This in turn means that credit availability to 
households and small businesses will still be curtailed. 
The  improvement  in  the  overall  health  of  the  financial  system  and  in  market  function  has 
allowed  the  Federal  Reserve  to  phase  out  many  of  the  special  liquidity  facilities  that  were 
enacted in response to the crisis. These facilities were generally successful in achieving their 
objectives  –  helping  to  restore  confidence  and  rebuild  market  liquidity  in  a  way  that 
safeguarded the taxpayers’ interests. When a full accounting of the special liquidity facilities 
is  complete,  it  seems  likely  that  the  facilities  will  have  generated  substantial  incremental 
earnings  that  the  Federal  Reserve  will  remit  to  the  Treasury.  Although  these  incremental 
earnings were not the objective of these facilities, they are a pleasant outcome relative to the 
alternative. 
As the crisis has abated, our attention has shifted to what we need to do to prevent another 
crisis  in  the  future.  We  need  to  take  the  necessary  steps  to  build  a  strong  and  resilient 
financial system. In my opinion, three broad sets of actions are needed: 
• 
Effective  macroprudential  supervision.  By  this,  I  mean  conducting  supervision  not 
just  vertically  institution  by  institution,  but  also  horizontally  across  institutions  and 
markets. We need to better understand how the system operates as a whole and 
how problems in one area can affect financial stability elsewhere. This means both 
how the overall system affects individual firms and how the activities of a single firm 
or market affects the entire financial system.  
Make  financial  institutions  and  market  infrastructures  more  robust  to  withstand 
shocks and become less prone to failure.  
Change the system so that no financial firm is “too big to fail.” 
• 
Macroprudential supervision is essential for two reasons. First, it addresses the problem of 
gaps  in  the regulatory  regime  and  the  regulatory  arbitrage  that  such  gaps  can  encourage. 
Second,  macroprudential  supervision 
is 
interconnected.  Siloed  regulatory  oversight  is  not  sufficient.  Supervisory  practices  must  be 
revamped so that supervision is also horizontal – looking broadly across banks, nonbanks, 
markets and geographies. This also means that regulatory standards need to be harmonized 
is  needed  because 
financial  system 
the 
 BIS Review 14/2010 
 2
across different regions. Without harmonization, there will inevitably be a “race to the bottom” 
and regulatory arbitrage will be encouraged, rather than inhibited. 
Many  steps  are  needed  to  make  financial  institutions  and  infrastructure  more  robust.  For 
example,  we  need  to  strengthen  bank  capital  requirements,  improve  liquidity  buffers  and 
make financial market infrastructures more resilient to shocks when individual firms get into 
trouble. 
In  terms  of  capital  requirements,  many  changes  are  needed,  including  global  capital 
standards that put more emphasis on common equity, establish an overall leverage limit and 
better  capture  all  of  the  sources  of  risk  in  the  capital  assessment  process.  Improved  risk 
capture, for example, includes the trading accounts of banks. Some institutions had clearly 
not set aside adequate levels of capital given the risks that were embedded in their trading 
positions. 
It would also be very desirable to develop a mechanism to bolster the amount of common 
equity  available  to  absorb  losses  in  adverse  economic  environments.  This  might  be  done 
most efficiently by allowing the issuance of debt instruments that would automatically convert 
to  common  equity  in  stress  environments,  under  certain  pre-specified  conditions.  Such 
“contingent  capital”  instruments  might  have  proven  very  helpful  had  they  been  in  place 
before and during this crisis. Investors would have anticipated that common equity would be 
replenished  automatically  if  a  firm  came  under  stress,  and  this  knowledge  might  have 
tempered  anxieties  about  counterparty  risk.  At  a  minimum,  contingent  capital  instruments 
might have enabled common equity buffers at the weaker firms to be replenished earlier and 
automatically, thereby reducing uncertainty and the risk of failure. 
On  the  liquidity  front,  there  are  a  host  of  initiatives  underway.  The  Basel  Committee  on 
Banking  Supervision  is  working  on  establishing  international  standards 
liquidity 
requirements. There are two parts to this. The first is a requirement for a short-term liquidity 
buffer of sufficient size so that an institution that was shut out of the market for several weeks 
would  still  have  sufficient  liquidity  to  continue  its  operations  unimpaired.  The  second  is  a 
liquidity standard that limits the degree of permissible maturity transformation – that is, the 
amount of short-term borrowing allowed to be used in the funding of long-term illiquid assets. 
Under these standards, a firm’s holdings of illiquid long-term assets would need to be funded 
mainly by equity or long-term debt. 
With respect to financial market infrastructures, the Federal Reserve is working with a broad 
range  of  private-sector  participants,  including  dealers,  clearing  banks  and  tri-party  repo 
investors  to  dramatically  reduce  the  structural  instability  of  the  tri-party  repo  system. 
Similarly,  over-the-counter  (OTC)  derivatives  clearance  activity  is  being  pushed  toward 
central  counterparties  and  exchanges.  In  addition,  the  Federal  Reserve  and  others  are 
evaluating how greater transparency with respect to OTC derivatives prices would improve 
financial  stability.  The  Committee  on  Payment  and  Settlement  Systems  and  the  Technical 
Committee of the International Organization of Securities Commissions are doing a review of 
standards for payment, clearing and settlement systems. This work will inform the efforts of 
the Financial Stability Board to strengthen such standards. 
There is also work underway on the problem of how to ensure that financial institutions have 
compensation structures that curb rather than encourage excessive risk-taking. 
Finally, it is critical that we ensure that no firm is too big to fail. This is about both fairness 
and having proper incentives in the financial system. Having some firms that are too big to 
fail  creates moral  hazard.  These  firms  are  able  to  obtain  funding  on more  attractive  terms 
because debt holders expect that the government will intervene rather than allow failure. In 
addition, too big to fail creates perverse incentives. In a too-big-to-fail regime, firms have an 
incentive to get large, not because it facilitates greater efficiency, but instead because the 
implicit government backstop enables the too-big-to-fail firm to achieve lower funding costs. 
for 
BIS Review 14/2010 
 3
To solve the too-big-to fail problem, we need to do two things. First, we need to develop a 
truly robust resolution mechanism that allows for the orderly wind-down of a failing institution 
and  that  limits  the  contagion  to  the  broader  financial  system.  This  will  require  not  only 
domestic legislation, but also intensive work internationally to address a range of legal issues 
involved in winding down a major global firm. 
Second, we need to reduce the likelihood that systemically important institutions will come 
close to failure in the first place. This can be done by mandating higher capital requirements, 
improving the risk capture of those requirements and by requiring greater liquidity buffers for 
such firms. 
Although  the  raging  crisis  appears  to  be  over,  our  work  is  not  close  to  being  complete. 
Making  sure  this  work  keeps  moving  forward  and  is  coordinated  internationally  is  hugely 
important.  Differences  in  views  across  countries  and  regions  should  not  divert  the 
international community from the more important prize – taking the actions collectively that 
will ensure a robust and resilient financial system. 
BIS Review 14/2010 
 4
