Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview in La Repubblica 
Interview  with  Mr Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  in  La 
Repubblica,  Italy,  conducted  by  Ms  Elena  Polidori  on  16 June 2010  and  published  on 
24 June 2010. 
 Mr President, you always get angry about governments’ lack of discipline in terms of 
managing  public  finances.  Now,  after  the  case  of  Greece  and  the  speculation  that 
followed, many countries – including Italy – have taken measures. Are the steps that 
have been taken correct? Are they sufficient? 
“The delicacy of the current situation requires credible measures, this is very important. It is 
necessary  in  order  to  correct  divergent  paths.  Sustainable  fiscal  policies  will  help  to 
consolidate  the  recovery.  Governments  have  solemnly  stated  that  they  are  aware  of  this 
need, and have decided to bring forward consolidation measures. But the credibility of their 
measures will be subject to constant scrutiny.” 
Are you saying that you will monitoring them? 
“That is the task of the European Commission, in liaison with the ECB. We are very attentive 
in this respect.” 
Italy has also launched a fiscal adjustment package, which is, however, half the size of 
the  packages  of  France  and  Germany.  Is  it  enough?  Or  will  a  further  package  be 
needed shortly?  
“The measures taken on 25 May go in the right direction, namely they underpin the stability 
programme  of  the  country.  We  are  reviewing  the  situation  at  this  stage  and  attach 
importance  to  the  assessment  of  the  Commission,  taking  into  account  its  Treaty 
responsibility to monitor, evaluate and make recommendations to the Council.” 
But the Commission has already given its preliminary assessment.  
“To my knowledge, the package has not yet been assessed in detail. As I said, the Italian 
measures go in the right direction, underpinning the stability programme.” 
The Italian plan is lacking measures with regard to growth and employment. Are these 
not important? Do you have any suggestions for the government? 
“We  call  upon  all  governments,  not  just  the  Italian  government,  to  show  determination  in 
making structural reforms to increase potential growth. I place great emphasis on the need to 
increase labour productivity, for in the medium and long term, growth is dependent on this 
very factor. And that is why we say that this is a crucial reform for all countries, and Italy as 
well.” 
One cut after another: many economists say that there is a clear risk of deflation. What 
are your views on this?  
“I  don’t  think  that  such  risks  could  materialise.  On  the  contrary,  inflation  expectations  are 
remarkably well anchored in line with our definition – less than 2%, close to 2% – and have 
remained  so  during  the  recent  crisis.  As  regards  the  economy,  the  idea  that  austerity 
measures could trigger stagnation is incorrect.” 
Incorrect? 
“Yes.  In  fact,  in  these  circumstances,  everything  that  helps  to  increase  the  confidence  of 
households,  firms  and  investors  in  the  sustainability  of  public  finances  is  good  for  the 
consolidation  of  growth  and  job  creation.  I  firmly  believe  that  in  the  current  circumstances 
BIS Review 88/2010 
 1
confidence-inspiring  policies  will  foster  and  not  hamper  economic  recovery,  because 
confidence is the key factor today.” 
Which countries are most at risk after Greece?  
I have no particular comments on that. All countries are on their way to put their house in 
order. 
There is talk of difficulties in Spain and among Spanish banks … 
I have just responded to the question. 
Will you say whether the euro itself is at risk? 
“The  euro  is  a  very  credible  currency.  It  has  kept  its  value  from  the  start  in  a  way  that  is 
remarkable  and  has  ensured  price  stability  for  11½  years.  Average  annual  inflation  in  the 
euro area over this period has been 1.98%, in line with our definition of price stability, and 
this  is  the  best  result  recorded  since  the  Second  World  War  in  all  of  the  euro  area 
economies.  A  currency  which  safeguards  price  stability  is  a  major  asset  in  the  eyes  of 
investors, both domestic and international.” 
Is the sovereign debt crisis worse than the sub-prime crisis?  
“I will say that the situation we are experiencing at the moment, in Europe and in the world, 
was triggered by the financial crisis, which had a very significant impact on the deterioration 
of public finances everywhere. It is a global phenomenon. I am confident that governments 
will manage to overcome these difficulties.” 
Truthfully, did you expect all of this turmoil?  
“I am convinced that we always have to be alert. Credibly alert. Without causing alarmism.” 
Do you think that there will be a federal government of Europe? 
“European integration is a historic process which can only be understood from a long-term 
perspective.  We  will  see  whether  in  the  end  the  institutional  framework  will  be  a  political 
federation or a confederation of sovereign states, or whether other imaginative options will be 
explored. In the end, it is the people of Europe who will decide. That said, when you have a 
single currency, you need a set of very strict fiscal rules.” 
There is the Stability and Growth Pact… 
“…which  for  us  should  be  the  equivalent  of  a  federal  budget  in  terms  of  ensuring  sound 
policies.  This  is  why  we  want  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  to  be  strong,  solid  and  fully 
respected.” 
Maastricht is going to be reformed and made stricter.  
“Yes. All the aspects relating to multilateral surveillance are to be strengthened, at the level 
of the 27 EU countries and of the 16 euro area countries. We consider that a “quantum leap” 
has to be made in terms of improving the surveillance of fiscal policies, of competitiveness 
and  of  structural  reforms.  We  made  our  proposals  to  the  Van  Rompuy  task  force  and  I 
explained  to  the  European  Parliament  that  we  had  to  use  absolutely  all  the  possibilities 
offered by the “secondary legislation” of the European Union to strengthen surveillance.” 
Do you just look at fiscal policy?  
“No. We also have to look very closely at the evolution of competitiveness and, in particular, 
of indicators of competitiveness such as unit labour costs and the level of national inflation by 
comparison  with  that  of  the  euro  area.  It  is  also  important  to  monitor  very  closely  the 
information on the structural reforms of every member country.” 
How  do  you  keep  at  bay  members  of  the  ECB’s  Governing  Council,  such  as  the 
German Weber, who are opposed to purchasing the bonds of weak countries?  
2 
 BIS Review 88/2010
“I have no comment on that, the decisions are taken by the Governing Council.” 
Germany has implemented a tough austerity plan, which has been subject to a great 
deal of criticism. Is it a good or a bad thing?  
“It  is  important  that  all  countries  that  have  budget  problems  demonstrate  that  they  can 
implement credible policies in the medium to long term. This will increase the confidence of 
households, investors and firms and, therefore, consolidate the recovery.” 
But is it a good thing or a bad thing? 
“Good. I am pleased that the German government is concentrating on discipline. And what I 
think about Germany also applies to the others.” 
The  IMF  is  intervening  in  the  European  crisis.  You  were  sceptical  about  this  at  the 
beginning, were you not? 
“I  thought  from  the  very  beginning  that  we  needed  the  full  involvement  of  the  European 
peers, with the Eurogroup in particular assuming all its responsibilities. It is what has been 
decided.  Provided  that  the  Commission  and  the  Eurogroup  were  fully  involved,  the 
cooperation  between  the  Commission,  the  ECB  and  the  IMF  was  desirable  and  has  been 
excellent.” 
Are concrete results to be expected from the G20 in Toronto with regard to the future 
financial  system?  Will  you  be  discussing  a  bank  tax,  banks’  capital  or  rating 
agencies? 
“These are all important elements. We had a good preparatory meeting in Korea, at the level 
of  ministers  and  governors.  I  am  confident  that  we  are  on  the  right  track,  knowing  that  a 
number of important decisions are to be taken at the G20 meeting in November this year.” 
Mr President, your mandate is coming to an end. Governor Mario Draghi is one of the 
candidates to succeed you. What kind of profile will your successor need? 
“I have a very heavy responsibility, with all my colleagues of the Executive Board and of the 
Governing Council. And my mandate expires in one year and four months. That is a long and 
demanding period of time. It is premature for me to comment on my possible successor.” 
BIS Review 88/2010 
 3
