Svein Gjedrem: Economic perspectives 
Annual address by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), 
at the meeting of the Supervisory Council of Norges Bank, Oslo, 11 February 2010. 
 This current global crisis had its origins in an abundant supply of credit, market participants 
who took steadily higher risk and a lack of oversight on the part of banks, companies and 
authorities. 
This  is  reminiscent  of  a  play  by  Bjørnstjerne  Bjørnson’s  entitled  “A  Bankrupt”.  In  a 
conversation between the main character, Tjælde, a businessman, and his daughter Valborg, 
she says that no man of honour would keep his family or his creditors in ignorance of the 
events that foreshadow a crisis. Her father rebukes her:1 
“… you don’t understand what a business-man’s hope is from one day to the other – always 
a  renewed  hope.  That  fact  does  not  make  him  a  swindler.  He  may  be  unduly  sanguine, 
perhaps – a poet, if you like, who lives in a world of dreams – or he may be a real genius, 
who sees land ahead when no one else suspects it.” 
The  conversation  is  also  reminiscent  of  current  discussions  about  accounting  principles. 
Then, as now, the mark-to-market value of assets was under debate.  
Tjælde  says:  “[…]  values  are  fluctuating  things;  and  [a  businessman]  may  always  have  in 
hand some venture which, though it cannot be specified, may alter the whole situation.” 
Valborg has little regard for ventures at creditors’ expense. She thinks accounts should be 
transparent. A businessman who owes more than he owns should be honest about it, she 
says.  
“… But what do you want [the businessman] to do?” asks Tjælde. “ To lay all his cards on the 
table, and so ruin both himself and the others? … In that case we should see a thousand 
failures every year, and fortunes lost one after the other everywhere! No, you have a level 
head, Valborg, but your ideas are narrow.” 
And this play by Bjørnson was written in 1875.  
Three imbalances in the world economy 
The financial crisis triggered the largest decline in output in advanced economies since the 
Second World War.  
The  financial  crisis  erupted  after  a  period  of  substantial  debt  accumulation  among 
households and banks, combined with a real estate boom in the US and in some European 
countries. There were numerous examples of creative accounting as practised by Bjørnson’s 
businessman, Tjælde.  
The bubble burst, but extensive government measures helped put banking systems more or 
less  back  on  their  feet.  Interest  rates  are  close  to  zero  in  advanced  economies,  and 
governments  have  increased  purchases  of  goods  and  services  and  reduced  taxes.  Many 
emerging market economies are exhibiting vigorous growth. But imbalances are building up, 
making the recovery fragile.  
                                                 
1   Bjørnstjerne Bjørnson, Three Dramas. The Editor – The Bankrupt – The King. 2009. This eBook is for the use 
of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or 
re-use  it  under  the  terms  of  the  Project  Gutenberg  License  included  with  this  eBook  or  online  at 
www.gutenberg.org. 
BIS Review 15/2010 
 1
First, after the Asian crisis and the ensuing capital flight from the region in the 1990s, a number 
of emerging market economies in Asia sought to build up larger currency reserves. Following 
the earlier pattern of Japan and South Korea, emerging market economies pursued a policy of 
export-driven growth based on a low cost level and a stable exchange rate. Combined with the 
US market’s willingness and capacity to import and consume, this led to substantial balance of 
payments  imbalances.  And  global  capital  markets  failed  to  channel  surplus  savings  in 
emerging market economies into investment in wealthier countries.  
Over  the  past  year,  falling  demand  for  goods  and  services  in  western  economies  has 
reduced  US  imports  and  Asian  exports.  However,  unless  Asian  countries  change  course, 
these imbalances may quickly reemerge as the US gradually manages to boost growth in its 
economy. 
Second, a number of countries are approaching or experiencing a sovereign financial crisis. 
In addition to the cost of rescuing banking systems, tax revenues have decreased and social 
welfare expenditure has increased. Large deficits are resulting in elevated government debt 
levels,  with  rising  interest  payments  adding  to  the  deficits.  Sovereign  creditworthiness  is 
deteriorating and higher credit risk premiums are exacerbating the situation. 
 OECD  government  debt  will  grow  for  several  years  ahead  and  may  increase  from  80  per 
cent  of  GDP  in  2008  to  almost  120  per  cent  later  this  decade.  Cuts  in  social  welfare 
expenditure and public service production and higher taxes will be necessary for many years 
ahead to bring debt down to a level that will restore governments’ fiscal space. And should 
the need arise, governments’ capacity and appetite for intervening with new measures and 
rescue operations will probably have diminished in the meantime. 
 2 
 BIS Review 15/2010
   Markets  are  now  focusing  on  the  four  euro  area  countries  Portugal,  Ireland,  Greece  and 
Spain.  Ireland  may  have  broken  the  circle  –  by  reducing  nominal  wages  and  showing  the 
ability  to  cut  government  spending  sharply.  The  other  countries  have  not  yet  managed  to 
regain the confidence of funding markets. The challenge they face is not only high deficits 
and substantial debt today, but also limited potential to grow out of their debt problems. The 
only remedy in that case is spending cuts.  
Icelandic  banks  were  particularly  vulnerable  and  their  collapse  had  a  severe  impact  on 
Iceland’s economy. The real economic environment in Iceland, with income levels now down 
to UK and Swedish levels, is conducive to growth. However, the problems left by the banks 
must be resolved before the economy can start to pick up. 
Third,  in  the  US,  the  euro  area  countries  and  the  UK,  there  is  again  almost  double-digit 
unemployment. Unemployment is likely to become entrenched – particularly in Europe where 
the labour market is less fluid and the ability to adapt weaker.  
This can be illustrated by comparing unemployment developments in the 1980s with current 
developments. Unemployment fell back fairly quickly in the US, while it remained high in the 
BIS Review 15/2010 
 3
UK and other European countries through the decade. Entire youth cohorts did not achieve 
labour force attachment. 
 Small countries such as Norway are dependent on a growing global economy with free trade 
and  free  capital  movements.  There  is  a  risk  of  a  renewed  weakening  in  financial  markets. 
Some countries may be caught in a continuous downward spiral. But so far the IMF has been 
able to provide support.  
There is also a risk that countries experiencing deficits and substantial unemployment resort 
to protectionism when their businesses are not sufficiently competitive. However, the rules of 
the World Trade Organisation, the WTO, have generally been respected so far.  
Mercantilist  attitudes  may  also  gain  ground  in  surplus  countries.  Investment  behaviour  in 
these  countries  may  be  motivated  by  broader  strategic  considerations,  which  may  prompt 
retaliatory measures and result in restrictions on cross-border capital flows. 
The Norwegian economy – two golden decades 
The downturn in Norway has proven to be mild.  
Norway has not experienced a pronounced economic downturn since the crisis around 1990, 
when  a  cost  crisis,  an  employment  crisis  with  a  sharp  increase  in  unemployment  and  a 
decline in output, a currency crisis, a fall in property prices and a banking crisis all occurred 
around the same time.  
A long upturn followed in the period from 1992 to 2008. National income rose by an annual 
5.4 per cent in this period, far higher than the rate of output growth in the mainland economy. 
Income growth has been higher than in the 1950s and 1960s. 
4 
 BIS Review 15/2010
Behind these favourable developments were the major structural reforms of the 1980s and 
1990s that resulted in higher production capacity in the Norwegian economy. The Norwegian 
business sector experienced a long period of high productivity growth. 
 Shifting forces have otherwise driven the economy – during the crisis around 1990, labour 
costs  decreased  to  a  low  level  compared  with  Norway’s  trading  partners  and  wage 
settlements  were  moderate.  In  1995,  the  cost  level  was  10–12  per  cent  below  Norway’s 
average for the oil age from 1970 to today. 
In addition, real interest rates in Norway fell markedly through the 1990s from high levels. 
This was because the fixed krone exchange rate regime maintained through the crisis period 
managed to bring down inflation and inflation expectations.  
 BIS Review 15/2010 
 5
 Moreover, growth in public spending was rapidly reduced once business sector activity had 
recovered.  
Norway experienced an economic shift in the 2000s. The cost level began to rise, although 
this  was  related  to  the  sharp  improvement  in  Norway’s  terms  of  trade  at  that  time  and  a 
gradual  pickup  in  growth  abroad.  Prices  for  Norwegian  exports  such  as  oil,  gas,  metals, 
minerals, fish and freight, rose markedly, while prices for imported goods fell. From 2003 to 
2008, terms-of-trade gains alone pushed up national income by more than 20 per cent, or a 
good 4 per cent per year. 
Institutions  and  mechanisms  had  also  been  put  in  place  to  manage  the  sharp  increase  in 
income. Norway’s sovereign wealth fund, which is now called the Government Pension Fund 
Global,  and  the  fiscal  guidelines  were  established  with  the  express  purpose  of  preventing 
fluctuations in oil prices from feeding through to the mainland economy. Improved terms of 
trade,  higher  revenues  and  increased  government  spending  contributed  to  a  shift  in  real 
resources towards sheltered sectors and to a stronger krone, but at the same time the fiscal 
rule provided a basis for growth in business sectors other than just the oil industry and the 
public  sector  through  the  decade.  Norway  had  a  plentiful  supply  of  labour  from  new  EU 
 6 
 BIS Review 15/2010
countries  and  experienced  several  years  of  high  output  growth.  At  the  same  time,  the 
inflation target for monetary policy provided a sound anchor for inflation expectations.  
In  2008  the  expansionary  period  was  drawing  to  a  close.  Costs  had  risen  sharply,  credit 
growth had been strong, the interest rate had been raised and house prices had started to 
fall.  Petroleum  revenue  spending  over  the  central  government  budget  had  increased,  but 
employment  in  traditional  industries  was  still  high.  Despite  Norway’s  high  cost  level, 
merchandise exports and supplies of goods and services to the oil industry held up due to 
high demand.  
Instead  of  a  gradual  slowdown,  economic  growth  came  to  an  abrupt  halt  in  autumn  2008 
when  the  global  financial  crisis  came  to  a  head.  Demand  for  Norway’s  export  goods  fell 
markedly.  Norwegian  banks  proved  to  be  highly  vulnerable  to  the  credit  freeze  in  global 
money markets and stopped providing new loans.2  
However, Norwegian banks were not as exposed to loan losses – at home and abroad – as 
banks  in  other  countries.  The  downturn  proved  to  be  milder  in  Norway,  but  the  banking 
industry may also have performed its craft fairly well. Government and central bank liquidity 
provision measures were effective. The liquidity crisis passed quickly and did not turn into a 
solvency crisis in Norway’s banking system.  
The rapid rebound in oil prices and a weaker krone provided a boost to the economy. The 
interest rate was lowered and public spending markedly increased. The downturn turned out 
to be milder than we had expected when the interest rate was reduced to a low level – partly 
because  oil  prices  proved  to  be  higher  than  expected  and  partly  because  the  measures 
implemented were more effective than we had dared to assume. We therefore now expect to 
be able to raise the interest rate again at a gradual pace to more normal levels. 
The  emerging  economies  were  hardest  hit  by  the  previous  global  crisis  in  the  late  1990s. 
This  time  OECD  countries  were  the  most  severely  affected.  But  Norway  seems  to  have 
largely  escaped  the  crisis.  Overall,  output  has  fallen  to  a  lesser  extent  in  Norway  than  in 
other countries and it recovered more quickly. Unemployment has remained low. One might 
almost believe that Norway was immune to crises and that the country is unique. 
But this is not the case. It is dangerous to believe that we will be able to manage every crisis 
as successfully.  
                                                  
2  
IMF Country Report No. 10/24, January 2010. Norway: Staff Report for the 2009 Article IV Consultation. 
BIS Review 15/2010 
 7
Norway is not unique.  
We cannot expect driving forces to be as beneficial in the future. Real interest rates cannot 
be expected to fall. Another sharp boost to export prices is not likely. In addition, Norway’s 
economy  is  now  vulnerable.  Norwegian  labour  has  never  been  as  costly  as  it  is  today. 
Norwegian  businesses  may  be  at  a  disadvantage  in  tenders  and  competitions  given  the 
current  high  level  of  spare  capacity  in  other  countries.  Moreover,  it  has  never  been  more 
profitable to relocate activities abroad.  
During the upturn, Norwegian firms fared well in spite of high costs thanks to efficiency gains, 
high  turnover  volumes  and  price  increases.  The  cost  of  Norwegian  labour  has  been  very 
high, but there has been full employment. Markets will be more demanding ahead. Despite 
Norway’s floating exchange rate, our cost level cannot be expected to fall to any great extent 
as economic conditions are even weaker in other European countries. 
The  industry  structure  in  Norway’s  small  economy  is  different  from  that  of  other  advanced 
economies. The emergence of new Asian market economies is beneficial for Norway owing 
to  its  sizeable  commodity  exports  and  freight  transport.  This  is  also  reflected  in  Norway’s 
equity market. 
The value of Norwegian listed companies correlates closely with the value of companies in 
emerging  market  economies.  Norway  is  vulnerable  to  a  slowdown  in  growth  in  Asia. 
Commodity prices may then fall and the terms of trade may deteriorate. Norway’s high cost 
level may at the same time make it difficult for the business sector to shift to new markets. 
High house prices and substantial household debt add to the economy’s vulnerability. The 
downturn abroad was triggered and amplified by the drop in house prices and deleveraging. 
House  price  inflation  and  household  debt  growth  have  been  sharper  in  Norway  than  in 
several of the hardest-hit economies.  
 8 
 BIS Review 15/2010
 Tighter banking regulation and a better tax system 
Credit growth tends to be self-reinforcing. During an upturn, banks’ loans losses are low and 
profits increase. Capital is in ample supply. This leads to strong growth in lending and higher 
house  and  property  prices.  Borrowers’  collateral  increases,  which  triggers  new  rounds  of 
borrowing and price rises. With a few taps on the keyboard, people can make home equity 
withdrawals that are deposited in an online bank and are used to finance new purchases and 
current  consumption.  During  a  downturn  bank  earnings  fall,  losses  rise  and  banks  tighten 
lending.  This  can  trigger  several  rounds  of  decline.  This  is  the  mechanism  whereby 
fluctuations in the economy are amplified. 
The  global  banking  crisis  shows  that  credit  cycles  and  property  market  bubbles  that  burst 
represent one of the greatest challenges to economic policy. They can build up over a long 
period. They are difficult to identify in real time and even after they burst there is doubt as to 
the causes. The fall in prices is abrupt and costly.  
It  is  particularly  important  to  develop  structures  and  mechanisms  that  better  enable  the 
economy to regulate itself.  
New equity capital and liquidity requirements for banks can promote financial stability. The 
requirements should probably be tighter in Norway than the minimum requirements that are 
likely to be agreed internationally. Norway’s economy is small, with concentrated risk for the 
banks. It is also important to cooperate with the other Nordic countries to avoid a situation 
where more lightly regulated banks aggressively market loans in Norway.  
Owing to flaws and major shortcomings, the tax treatment of capital and property in Norway 
amplifies credit cycles and house price fluctuations. 
The 1992 reform resulted in a tax system for Norway that is based on sound principles. The 
basis  for  calculating  income  tax  was  expanded,  rates  were  reduced  and  corporate  and 
personal  income  taxation  was  better  integrated.  Distortions  were  remedied,  bringing 
business  and  economic  returns  more  closely  into  line  in  the  case  of  business  investment. 
More neutral tax rules reduced the scope for companies and industries to obtain special tax 
advantages. The reform contributed to solid economic growth in the 1990s and a substantial 
increase in government tax revenues even with appreciably lower tax rates. 
BIS Review 15/2010 
 9
But the wave of reform ebbed out before the work was completed. There is now a striking 
contrast in the quality of various components of our tax system.  
There are major weaknesses in the taxation of wealth and property.  
First, income and the value of various types of capital are taxed differently. The return on and 
value of financial capital and business capital are fully taxed. Rental income is fully taxed, 
while owner-occupied dwellings are exempt from a corresponding tax. Mortgage interest is 
tax  deductible  while capital  gains  on  dwellings and  the  benefit  of  home  ownership are  not 
taxed. Housing is taxed as an asset, but not at its market value.  
The  table  shows  the  distortionary  effects  of  the  tax  system.  Housing  investment  is 
considerably more profitable than repaying debt or investing in a business. This is the case 
for those who pay wealth tax and for those who are not liable to wealth tax.  
 Second,  property  is  taxed  differently  across  municipalities.  Moreover,  the  valuation  of 
property as a basis for wealth tax has been completely arbitrary. The new property valuation 
system  is  a  small  but  is  the  right  step  towards  applying  market  valuation  as  a  basis  for 
housing taxation.  
Third,  property  is  an  effective  tax  vehicle  but  property  taxes  are  low.  Property  cannot  be 
relocated.  Nor  does  property  tax  distort  the  use  of  resources  in  the  way  that  taxation  of 
labour and entrepreneurship does.  
An  increase  in  property  tax  will  dampen  fluctuations  in  house  prices  and  credit  cycles, 
reducing  the  magnitude  of  both  gains  and  losses.  Tax  on  capital  gains  on  housing,  and 
deductibility  of  losses,  would  in  particular  make  a  considerable  contribution  to  attenuating 
price spirals in the housing market. The result would be a more stable economy.3 
Driven by the tax system, housing accounts for a large share of household wealth. On an 
uncertain  basis,  the  value  of  housing  capital  can  be  estimated  at  over  NOK  4.5  trillion,  or 
more than one and half times the size of Norway’s sovereign wealth fund.4 The high degree 
of  concentration  on  housing  investment  crowds  out  business  investment.  Higher  property 
taxes  would  increase  growth  potential  because  business  investment  would  become  more 
profitable.  
                                                 
3   See  Paul  van  den  Noord  (2005)  “Tax  incentives  and  house  price  volatility  in  the  Euro  area:  Theory  and 
evidence.” Economie international 101, pp. 29–45. 
4   The figures are based on the model documented in Staff Memo 2006/4, Norges Bank. 
10 
 BIS Review 15/2010
Property taxes account for about two per cent of GDP in OECD countries. In Norway, the 
share is slightly higher than a half per cent.5 
It  would  be  reasonable to  introduce  property  tax  rates  and  revenues  on  a  par  with  that  of 
other countries.  
 This would generate additional annual tax revenues of around NOK 35 billion.6 
                                                  
5   The  tax  on  housing  can  be  regarded  as  neutral  when  the  return  on  housing  investment  relative  to  other 
investments is the same as it would have been without tax. In that case, mortgage interest deductibility must 
be matched by taxation of ownership and use of a dwelling. With a tax rate of 28 per cent and a mortgage rate 
of 7 per cent, this requires an annual tax that at the margin comes to about 2 per cent of the value of the 
dwelling. Denmark has a property tax at about this level. 
6   A fully neutral taxation of property in relation to other capital will generate considerably higher tax revenues, 
cf. National Budget for 2010, Table 4.8, p. 124. 
BIS Review 15/2010 
 11
When  evaluating  the  tax  system,  an  increase  in  property  taxes  will  be  matched  by  a 
reduction in the tax on labour and entrepreneurship. As shown in the menu of options in the 
chart,  an  increase  in  property  taxes  will  provide  a  basis  for  reducing  the  tax  on  ordinary 
income.  The  cost  in  terms  of  reduced  government  revenues  of  lowering  the  rate  by  one 
percentage point is NOK 10 billion, while the costs of increasing the basic allowance by NOK 
1000 is NOK 0.6 billion. The tax rate for ordinary incomes can for example be reduced from 
28 to 26 per cent, combined with an increase of NOK 25 000 in the basic allowance. Another 
option would be to use the revenues to remove wealth tax and the surtax on higher incomes. 
There would still be some room left for a reduction in the tax on ordinary income.  
 Monetary policy 
It costs 34 øre to produce a 50 krone note. But we expect to exchange this piece of paper for 
larger real values, for example a litre of milk or a loaf of bread. Most of the money we spend 
is not paper money but online banking figures. We can exchange the electronic figures for 
baskets of goods from the shop. Norges Bank issues paper money, but is also behind – as 
the banks’ bank – deposits on accounts in commercial and savings banks.  
The value of money tends to be taken for granted when we pay our bills, receive wages and 
plan  trips  and  large  purchases,  draw  up  budgets  and  keep  accounts.  But  if  prices  rise, 
money loses value. If inflation varies, the purchasing power of money becomes arbitrary. 
Moreover, decisions based on an arbitrary value of money cannot be sound, which is why 
stable and low inflation is a precondition for solid growth in the economy. The profitability of 
an  investment  project  can  only  be  calculated  correctly  when  inflation  is  in  line  with 
expectations. Accounts tend to be misleading and equity prices uncertain if the purchasing 
power of money is not stable. The tax system, with its rates and thresholds in krone terms, 
impairs the distribution of resources to a greater extent when inflation is high and variable.  
The value of money and inflation have now been stable for almost 20 years. In earlier times, 
the value of money was more variable, and periods of high inflation tended to be followed by 
a fall in prices. The value of money fell sharply and permanently around the time of the two 
World Wars and earlier wars. In the 1970s and 1980s, the value of money also fell rapidly, 
but  as  a  result  of  economic  policy.  The  interest  rate  was  kept  at  a  low  level  and  public 
spending was high in an attempt to achieve very low unemployment.  
12 
 BIS Review 15/2010
 Not only in Norway, but worldwide, there was a crisis in the monetary system in the 1970s. 
After the Second World War, the US dollar was pegged to gold while other countries held a 
fixed but adjustable exchange rate against the dollar. But inflation gradually became too high 
for  the  dollar  to  maintain  its  gold  value  and  at  the  beginning  of  the  1970s  the  system 
unravelled. Inflation increased and was unstable in most western countries until well into the 
1980s.  
For a 50 krone note in the 1970s, we could buy ten litres of milk and ten loaves of bread. The 
value of money fell sharply when inflation surged and later in the 1990s – after the period of 
inflation – we had to pay five 50 krone notes for the same goods. 
The metal standard and fixed exchange rate regime were not able to safeguard the value of 
money. 
This  is  why  most  countries  have  given  the  central  bank  and  the  interest  rate  the  role  of 
securing low and stable inflation. This ensures that money – which is so cheap to produce – 
retains  its  value.  In  order  to  avoid  setting  aside  the  objective  of  price  stability,  the  central 
bank  must  be  independent  in  interest  rate  setting  as  it  may  be  tempting  to  seek  new 
objectives and tasks when inflation has been anchored for a time. It would not be the first 
time that there would be excessive optimism with regard to managing the economy. In the 
early 1970s – after 20 years of solid growth – we believed the ghost of unemployment had 
definitively been laid to rest and new objectives were drawn up.  
We cannot – as in the 1970s – allow the interest rate to remain low over a long period of time 
in an attempt to achieve permanently higher output. This would lead to wide fluctuations and 
high inflation.  
Seldom  are  the  considerations  underlying  interest  rate  setting  pulling  in  such  different 
directions as today. In many quarters, it is now argued that the interest rate should be raised 
rapidly  to  restrain  house  price  inflation.  This  is  understandable  in  the  light  of  the  severe 
effects  that  house  price  inflation  and  high  debt  have  had  on  many  countries.  In  other 
quarters,  it  is  argued  that  the  interest  rate  should  be  lowered  to  keep  down  the  krone 
exchange  rate.  This  also  seems  well  founded  in  view  of  the  substantial  challenges  facing 
Norwegian enterprises.  
However, we cannot raise the interest rate and lower it at the same time. 
The interest rate is set to secure low and stable inflation. With strong growth in spending on 
goods and services or with falling demand, the interest rate can at the same time stabilise 
developments  in  output  and  employment.  In  this  case,  there  are  no  conflicting  objectives. 
BIS Review 15/2010 
 13
When inflation expectations are firmly anchored, we can give weight to the path for output 
and employment when we set the interest rate. In the assessment of the outlook for inflation 
and output, we also look at house prices, total credit and the krone exchange rate. In this 
respect, these variables are taken into account when we set the interest rate.  
Norges Bank only has one instrument, and the interest rate alone is too crude an instrument. 
Hence,  financial  regulation,  the  tax  system  and  fiscal  policy  have  to  contribute  more  to 
promote other economic policy objectives.  
In the past year, very low key rates have been necessary to prevent inflation from falling too 
far.  Over  the  past  decade,  inflation  has  remained  at  around  2  per  cent,  or  close  to,  but 
somewhat below the target of 2.5 per cent.  
 Division of roles in economic policy 
The division of roles in economic policy will now be put to the test: 
• 
  Monetary policy steers inflation in the medium and long term and can contribute to 
smoothing fluctuations in output and employment.  
The  central  government  budget  –  growth  in  public  expenditure  –  influences  the 
krone  and  the  size  of  the  internationally  exposed  business  sector  in  the  medium 
term.  This  is  important  because  the  growth  capacity  of  the  economy  –  the 
fundament  for  learning,  innovation  and  development  –  can  be  undermined  if  the 
portion  of  the  business  sector  exposed  to  intense  international  competition  is 
reduced.  
Wage  formation  and  economic  structures  and  incentives  lay  the  basis  for  the 
effective  and  efficient  use  of  labour  and  other  real  economic  resources,  and  for 
economic growth. 
With  concurrently  lower  inflation  and  activity  prospects,  Keynesian  demand  management 
was  an  appropriate  policy  response  to  the  crisis  in  autumn  2008.  Norway  has  room  for 
manoeuvre since there is confidence in state finances and inflation expectations are firmly 
anchored. We have been able to draw lessons from both positive and negative outcomes of 
14 
 BIS Review 15/2010
such a policy in the 1970s and around 1990. There may be material here for a “handbook” of 
effective Keynesian use of instruments. 
First, when demand for goods and services and inflation prospects fall, the interest rate is 
lowered.  At  the  same  time,  the  automatic  stabilisers  in  the  budgets  will  work  when  tax 
revenues fall and benefit payments increase.  
When the fall in demand for goods and services is so steep that an interest rate close to zero 
is not sufficient, tax rates are reduced or government measures are applied. The measures 
should not influence long-term public sector priorities such as the size of the welfare state or 
the permanent tax level.  
When the economy turns, as it now has in Norway, the rule is that fiscal policy should be 
tightened fairly rapidly.  This provides room for  growth in the business sector. When public 
expenditure has been reduced, the key rate can then be increased to a normal level.  
According to the fiscal policy guidelines, petroleum revenues should be phased in gradually 
into the economy, approximately in pace with the expected real return on the Government 
Pension Fund Global, which is estimated at 4 per cent. In periods of high or rapidly rising 
unemployment,  petroleum  revenue  spending  can  be  increased,  and  inversely  fiscal 
retrenchment is needed during periods of high economic activity and resource shortages.7 
It  now  appears  that capacity  utilisation  in  the  Norwegian  economy  may  return  to  a  normal 
level in one and a half to two years – and with a somewhat lower unemployment rate than 
today. A different path can be met with an interest rate response. Our understanding of the 
fiscal rule is that the government budget for 2012 or at the latest for 2013 should be planned 
with  a  view  to  bringing down  petroleum  revenue  spending to  4  per  cent  of  the  size  of  the 
wealth fund.  
This does not seem demanding compared with the situation in the years between 1994 and 
1996.  The  tightening  at  that  time  started  directly  after  the  economy  had  turned  and  while 
unemployment was still high. Should policy now be tightened to the same extent that history 
in retrospect indicates was the case at that time, 4 per cent would be reached in the course 
of one year.  
                                                 
7   See for example the National Budget for 2010, box 3.1, p. 53. 
 BIS Review 15/2010 
 15
It must, however, be added that in real time the tightening was not planned to be that strong. 
After  the  tax  reform,  government  revenues  from  the  corporate  sector  were  higher  than 
expected.8 But even measures on a par with those planned at that time would now rapidly 
bring down petroleum revenue spending.  
The  rate  of  petroleum  revenue  spending  –  growth  in  public  expenditure  –  is  important  for 
developments in competitiveness, which is also referred to as the real krone exchange rate, 
in  the  long  term.  But,  in  the  short  term  the  krone  exchange  rate  can  vary  widely,  and  it 
depreciated  in  autumn  2008  because  capital  sought  safe  havens.  This  helped  Norwegian 
manufacturing  in  the  first  phase  of  the  downturn.  Since  then,  the  krone  has  appreciated 
considerably.  
In  2009  and  2010,  government  petroleum  revenue  spending  shows  a  substantial  increase 
and foreign investment via the wealth fund a decrease. This increases commercial demand 
for NOK, which directly contributes to an appreciation of the krone.  
More fundamentally, the krone is influenced by the difference in activity at home and abroad 
and how fast the interest rate has to be increased in Norway to keep inflation low and stable.  
The economic geography of Norway will change over the next 10–15 years. The domestic 
cost  level  and  the  real  economy  crisis  abroad  will  bring  pressure  to  bear  on  jobs  and 
businesses in manufacturing communities.  
Job losses may have the most severe effects in areas where manufacturing has the highest 
concentration. In the ten most typical manufacturing municipalities Vestre Toten in Oppland, 
Lund  in  Rogaland,  Fusa  in  Hordaland,  Årdal  in  Sogn  and  Fjordane,  Ulstein,  Hareid, 
Sykkylven,  Stordal  and  Haram  in  Møre  and  Romsdal  and  Verran  in  Nord-Trøndelag,  local 
manufacturing accounts for more than a third of total employment. Times will become more 
demanding for the clusters of oil suppliers in Sørlandet, Nord-Jæren, Haugalandet and Stord 
and for manufacturing in Kongsberg, Grenland, Helgeland, Salten and Ofoten.  
                                                 
8   The  historical  figures  are  based  on  trend  calculations.  The  figures  for  these  years  are  therefore  based  on 
economic  developments  later  in  the  1990s.  The  degree  of  tightening  may  therefore  also  appear  greater  in 
retrospect. 
 16 
 BIS Review 15/2010
Fortunately, manufacturing districts have shown the ability to adapt. Research shows that the 
degree of geographical and occupational mobility is high for the Norwegian labour force. Few 
people remain permanently outside the labour force after a period of restructuring.9 But the 
communities are small and vulnerable and may disappear if the industry structure becomes 
too narrow.  
And  as  mentioned,  the  most  important,  perhaps  the  only,  instrument  available  to  the 
authorities  in  addressing  this  challenge  is  to  restrain  petroleum  revenue  spending  in  the 
Norwegian economy.  
The management of petroleum revenues 
It took a generation from the time the first oil field was discovered in the North Sea until the 
government  began  to  set  aside  economic  rent.  The  Government  Petroleum  Fund  was 
established in 1990 and the first transfer to the wealth fund was made in 1996.  
Each year since that time, as a savings plan, the government has transferred a portion of 
current income from petroleum activities as deposits in the fund. Today, the value of the fund 
is around NOK 2.6 trillion, or slightly higher than annual GDP in Norway. There are prospects 
that new annual transfers to the fund will be made for perhaps a little longer than another 
decade. The fund will in that case continue to grow and may reach twice its current size. The 
actual building up of the fund may span a short generation. 
The  fund  will  thereafter  enter  into  a  new  phase.  With  lower  revenues  from  oil  and  gas 
activities, the fund will no longer receive capital transfers from the government. When oil and 
gas  revenues  no  longer  provide  the  government  with  economic  rent,  only  the  annual  real 
return on the fund can be used on a permanent basis.  
In the mid-1990s, oil prices were around USD 20 per barrel and income was set aside. This 
year the oil price must be over USD 50 to generate sufficient oil revenues to make transfers 
to the fund. We must be prepared for wide variations in oil prices, and the first year without 
transfers of oil revenues – but rather withdrawals – may be near.  
                                                 
9   Kjell G. Salvanes, Jarle Møen and Kristiina Huttunen (2009): “Bedriftsnedlegging, omstillingsevne og regional 
mobilitet i norsk økonomi” (Enterprise closures, adaptability and regional mobility in the Norwegian economy). 
Appendix to the Ministry of Finance’s Long-term perspectives for the Norwegian economy 2009 [Report no. 9 
(2008–2009) to the Storting]. 
 BIS Review 15/2010 
 17
The government has stated that the annual return on the fund will be close to 4 per cent over 
time. Since its establishment, the average return has been 2¾ per cent. It is only one year 
ago that we witnessed the steepest fall in global capital markets in our time. By maintaining 
the fund’s risk profile it is fairly probable that the average return will gradually approach 4 per 
cent again.  
The government can choose the composition, required rate of return and risk profile for its 
investments  without  taking  into  account  the  funding  needs  of  Norwegian  enterprises. 
Norwegian  enterprises  can  choose  their  debt  and  equity  capital  structure  independently  of 
the government’s financial investments. There is a capital market between the government 
as  investor  and  corporate  capital  needs.  The  government’s  foreign  savings  plans  do  not 
therefore  influence  Norwegian  companies’  access  to  capital  and  required  rate  of  return  on 
their investments.  
The profitability of government investments is based on a discount rate of 4 per cent. This 
secures the same required rate of return as the government expects to achieve on its wealth 
fund  investments  over  time.  One  question  that  nevertheless  arises  is  whether  there  is  a 
queue  of  sound  and  profitable  projects  that  have  to  wait  because  of  an  excessively  tight 
fiscal policy.  
It is difficult to find support for this.  
In  the  National  Transport  Plan  for  2010–2019,  which  can  perhaps  be  considered 
representative  of  government  spending,  spending  on  road  investments  is  set  at  around 
NOK 140 billion.10 The profitability of about two-thirds of the investments has been evaluated. 
The  calculations  capture  time  saved  and  reduced  costs  related  to  accidents  and  the 
environment.  Investment  costs  and  future  operating  expenses  are  deducted.  The  projects 
show a total loss of NOK 20 billion.  
There seems to be few road projects that are economically profitable. A rare example is the 
Finnfast tunnel project that connects the mainland to the beautiful island group in Ryfylke.  
The  Bjørvika  tunnel  project  is  not  profitable  according  to  these  criteria.  Since  the  existing 
traffic interchange “Bispelokket” is so efficient, drivers will not save time when they take the 
tunnel between the east and west side of Oslo in the future. 
The economic return, as calculated here, cannot be the only criterion for selecting projects. 
The  Bjørvika  tunnel  will  make  Oslo  a  better  city  in  which  to  live  and  work  for  one  million 
people  and  create  values  that  are  not  easy  to  quantify.  The  same  also  applies  to  other 
government investments that provide benefits and satisfaction beyond an easily measured 
rate of return.  
On  the  other  hand,  when  the  projects  cannot  be  expected  to  increase  the  future  revenue 
base  in  society,  it  is  important  the  investments  are  financed  within  a  long-term  and 
sustainable  framework  or  financed  by  user  fees.  Infrastructure  or  research  reports  for  that 
matter  can  provide  benefits  and  satisfaction  over  time,  but  they  are  not  liquid  and  do  not 
generate  cash  returns  that  can  be  use  for  spending.  If  the  investments  are  made  at  the 
expense  of the  savings  plan  for  the  sovereign  wealth  fund,  future  generations  will  have  to 
bear the cost.  
Conclusion 
Allow me to conclude. This is my twelfth address entitled “Economic Perspectives”. Allow me 
to conclude with a somewhat different perspective this time.  
                                                 
10   Including road toll funding, cf. National Transport Plan 2010-19, tables 5.2 and 6.6. 
18 
 BIS Review 15/2010
Claes Gill was born in Odda a hundred years ago this year. Many of you will remember Claes 
Gill  as  an  actor  when  television  was  still  in  its  infancy.  He  lived  in  New  York  during  the 
depression in the early 1930s, but was arrested as an illegal alien, brought in for questioning 
at Ellis Island, deported from the US and sent back to Norway. He wrote his two collections 
of poems at that time, which have remained his legacy and which were an early expression 
of Norwegian modernism.  
The Governor reads a poem by the Norwegian poet Claes Gill, describing the beauty of his 
home region on the west coast of Norway.  
BIS Review 15/2010 
 19
