Masaaki Shirakawa: Japan’s economy and innovation 
Speech  by  Mr  Masaaki  Shirakawa,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the  Japan  National 
Press Club, Tokyo, 31 May 2010. 
 Introduction 
It is a great honor for me to have the opportunity to speak to you today at the prestigious 
Japan National Press Club. 
The  last  time  I  spoke  here  was  in May  2008,  immediately  after  I  became  Governor  of  the 
Bank of Japan. Looking back at developments since then, it is no exaggeration to say that 
the  global  economy  has  gone  through  a  tumultuous  two  years.  The  subprime  mortgage 
problem  triggered  by  the  plunge  in  the  U.S.  housing  market  was  followed  by  the  Lehman 
shock, and, more recently, events surrounding fiscal conditions in some European countries 
such  as  Greece  have  cast  a  large  shadow  on  international  financial  markets.  Having  said 
that,  however,  it  is  also  a  fact  that,  following  a  severe  downturn,  the  global  economy 
bottomed out around spring 2009 and has since been on a recovery trend. Looking ahead, 
there remain factors that warrant attention, including the issues in Europe I just referred to; 
nevertheless, the global economy this year is expected to achieve a relatively high growth 
rate  of  about  4  percent,  mainly  due  to  the  strong  growth  in  emerging  and  commodity-
exporting economies. 
Against the backdrop of these developments in the global economy, Japan’s economy is also 
following a recovery trend. At the end of April, the Bank released its semiannual Outlook for 
Economic  Activity  and  Prices,  which  presents  the  Bank’s  assessment  of  the  prospects  for 
economic activity and prices over the next two years.1 The baseline scenario in the report 
suggests that Japan’s economic growth rate will gradually rise toward fiscal 2011 and that 
the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  consumer  price  index  (CPI),  which  is  negative  at 
present,  may  enter  positive  territory  in  fiscal  2011.  While  it  would  be  encouraging  if  these 
projections materialize, at the same time, this is unlikely to be sufficient to lift the sentiment of 
business managers and the public at large. The key issue is the growth path to which Japan 
is  expected  to  return  following  the  current  recovery  phase.  If  the  growth  path  has  shifted 
downward, then naturally sentiment will not improve much. From this perspective, the job of 
the central bank is not only to present objectively its assessment of the outlook for the next 
two years, but also to state its view on the fundamental challenges facing Japan’s economy 
and the efforts necessary to meet those challenges. To state the conclusion in advance, a 
key issue in meeting the challenges is the role of innovation in economic activity. Therefore, 
in addition to current economic and price developments, what I would like to talk about today 
are  the  fundamental  challenges  facing  Japan’s  economy  and  the  necessary  responses  by 
focusing on the role of innovation. 
Japan’s economy 
I. 
Baseline scenario for economic activity and prices 
Let me first explain developments in Japan’s economic activity and prices. 
Japan’s  economy  is  starting  to  recover  moderately,  induced  by  improvement  in  overseas 
economic  conditions.  The  main  reason  is  the  strong  growth  in  emerging  and  commodity-
exporting  economies.  These  countries  have  been  growing  faster  than  forecasted  by 
                                                 
1   See the April 2010 Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices released by the Bank of Japan on May 1, 2010. 
BIS Review 74/2010 
 1
international  and  private  organizations,  and  forecasts  continued  to  be  revised  upward. 
Against this background, Japan’s economy has also been growing faster than envisaged at 
the beginning of this year as a result of, for example, continuing high growth in exports. In 
addition,  recently,  first  signs  pointing  toward  a  self-sustaining  recovery  in  domestic  private 
demand have gradually begun to appear. That is, with exports and production continuing to 
increase,  business  fixed  investment  is  showing  signs  of  picking  up.  As  for  private 
consumption,  in  addition  to  the  pick  up  in  sales  of  electrical  appliances  and  automobiles, 
which were boosted by policy measures, the declining trend of sales at department stores 
has  been  coming  to  a  halt  since  the  turn  of  the  year.  Moreover,  the  severity  in  the 
employment  situation  has  eased  somewhat,  with  non-scheduled  hours  worked  increasing 
and the ratio of job offers to applicants on an uptrend. Nevertheless, the employment and 
income situation remains severe on the whole, which warrants continued attention. 
The baseline scenario for the outlook is that Japan’s economy is likely to follow a recovery 
trend.  The  eco-point  system  and  subsidies  for  energy-efficient  cars  are  expected  to  be 
wound  up  in  the  course  of  fiscal  2010  and  their  demand-boosting  effects  will  dissipate 
gradually. On the other hand, exports and production are likely to continue increasing on the 
back of strong growth in emerging and commodity-exporting economies, and business fixed 
investment  is  also  likely  to  pick  up.  In  addition,  as  business  activity  increases,  the 
employment  and  income  situation  is  likely  to  gradually  improve,  and  growth  in  private 
consumption and housing investment is expected to accelerate. Based on these projections, 
Japan’s economy, following a contraction of 1.9 percent in fiscal 2009, is expected to grow 
by around 2 percent in both fiscal 2010 and 2011. 
Let me now turn to price developments. On a year-on-year basis, the CPI excluding fresh 
food continues to decline, although the pace of decline has been slowing since it peaked in 
August last year at minus 2.4 percent. In April 2010, it was minus 1.0 percent excluding the 
effects  of  subsidies  for  high  school  tuition  fees.  Moreover,  recently,  the  number  of 
CPI components  for  which  prices  are  declining  has  almost  stopped  increasing,  and 
consumer  surveys  suggest  that  the  percentage  of  consumers  expecting  prices  one  year 
ahead  to  rise  has  been  steadily  increasing,  while  that  of  consumers  expecting  prices  to 
decline has been falling. Past experience tells us that, in Japan, changes in prices tend to lag 
about  one  year  behind changes  in the  aggregate  supply  and  demand  balance.  Looking  at 
recent  developments,  the  aggregate  supply  and  demand  balance  in  Japan  has  been 
improving since around the spring of 2009, and the effects of that improvement may now be 
gradually starting to spread to prices. As mentioned at the beginning, the Bank projects that 
the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI will remain negative for fiscal 2010, but will enter 
positive territory in fiscal 2011. 
Risk factors 
As  just  described,  Japan’s  economy  is  making  steady  progress  toward  returning  to  a 
sustainable  growth  path  with  price  stability,  helped  by  the  improvements  in  overseas 
economic  conditions.  The  Bank  is  fully  aware  of  both  upside  and  downside  uncertainties 
regarding the outlook for the economy. On one hand, if emerging and commodity-exporting 
economies achieve faster growth, Japan’s domestic private demand could recover at a faster 
pace  than  expected  through  spillovers  from  an  increase  in  exports.  On  the  other  hand, 
Japan’s  economy  could  decline  if  developments  in  fiscal  conditions  in  Greece  and  other 
economies  further  intensify  strains  in  international  financial  markets  or  exert  downward 
pressure on the global economy. Also, the consequences of balance-sheet adjustments in 
the  United  States  and  Europe  continue  to  demand  vigilance.  The  Bank  will  continue  to 
thoroughly examine these various risk factors without having a predetermined view. 
2 
 BIS Review 74/2010
Fundamental problems Japan’s economy faces 
II. 
So far, I have talked about the outlook for Japan’s economy in the next two years, but what is 
equally  important  as  such  short-term  outlook  is  the  medium-  to  long-term  growth  path  of 
Japan’s economy. At present, we often hear pessimistic views about the future of Japan’s 
economy  and  the  reason  for  this  mainly  seems  to  be  a  lack  of  confidence  in  Japan’s 
medium-  to  long-term  growth  potential.  In  fact,  from  a  long-term  perspective,  Japan’s 
economic  growth  rate  is  on  a  downtrend.  I  believe  that  the  greatest  challenge  Japan’s 
economy is facing now is the decline in the potential growth rate as well as the shrinking of 
the  population  and  sluggish  productivity  growth  underlying  this.  It  could  be  said  that  the 
deflation in Japan is also a manifestation of the fundamental problem facing the economy, 
namely the decline in growth expectations. Consequently, what I would now like to talk about 
next is the growth potential of Japan’s economy. 
The rise and fall in the growth rate 
Let  me  start  by  considering  Japan’s  experience  during  the  high-speed  growth  era.  The 
average rate of economic growth from 1955 through 1973 was 9.3 percent. The first reason 
why  such  high  growth  was  possible  is  buoyant  domestic  demand  in  the  form  of  business 
fixed  investment  and  private  consumption.  The  contribution  of  domestic  demand  to  the 
aforementioned  growth  rate  during  the  high-speed  growth  era  was  9.5  percentage  points, 
while  the  contribution  of  net  external  demand,  that  is,  exports  minus  imports,  was  minus 
0.3 percentage points. While the contribution of net external demand was negative, this does 
not mean that external demand, and in turn the global economy, did not contribute to Japan’s 
economic  growth.  The  reason  why  the  contribution  of  net  external  demand  made  a  small 
negative contribution was that not only exports increased but also imports, as a result of the 
growth  in  domestic  demand,  increased  considerably.  In  other  words,  it  can  be  said  that 
Japan  achieved  rapid  economic  growth  precisely  because  it  was  able  to  access  global 
markets through foreign trade and direct investment. This is the second reason why it was 
possible for Japan to enjoy high growth. 
After  the  rapid  growth  from  the  mid-1950s  to  the  beginning  of  1970s,  the  pace  of  growth 
slowed  gradually.  Nevertheless,  Japan’s  growth  rate  still  exceeded  that  of  other  advanced 
economies up until the 1980s. However, following the burst of the bubble, Japan’s economic 
growth  rate  declined  significantly  in  the  1990s  and  has  been  at  the  lower  end  among  the 
G7 countries in the 1990s and 2000s (see Appendix). 
There  are  two  major  factors  that  underlie  the  decline  in  the  growth  rate.  The  first  is  the 
decline in labor force growth due to the low birth rate and population aging. The growth rate 
of Japan’s labor force was about 1 percent in the 1980s, but fell to almost zero in the 1990s 
and has plunged to minus 0.6 percent since 2000. This is in stark contrast with developments 
in  the  United  States,  where  the  labor  force  has  consistently  grown  at  a  rate  of  more  than 
1 percent since the 1980s. 
The second major factor for the drop in the growth rate is the decline in productivity growth in 
the economy as a whole. While the growth rate of GDP per worker in Japan was 3.2 percent 
in the 1980s, the highest among the G7 countries, it declined rapidly to 0.9 percent in the 
1990s.  In  the  1990s,  the  world  experienced  a  substantial  transformation  through  the  rapid 
development of information and communication technology and the intensification of global 
competition; however, Japan during this period was busy overcoming the various “excesses” 
in production capacity, debt, etc., that had built up during the bubble period, and thus was not 
able to grapple with these new challenges head-on. To be more precise, while the declining 
trend  in  productivity  growth  seems  to  have  begun  before  the  start  of  the  bubble,  this  was 
masked by the temporary demand increase during the economic boom in the bubble period. 
At any rate, individual firms found it difficult to engage in forward-looking economic activities 
in line with the changes in the global economy, and responses to the new challenges were 
delayed. Another element is that, at the same time, adjustments of “excesses” did not always 
BIS Review 74/2010 
 3
progress  smoothly  and  that  may  have  resulted  in  preserving  inefficient  sectors  of  Japan’s 
economy.  Against  this  backdrop,  the  environment  continued  to  be  such  that  the  efforts  of 
high-productivity  firms  and  market  entry  of  promising  new  firms  were  not  sufficiently 
rewarded, leading to a decline in productivity growth in the economy as a whole. 
In  the  preceding  discussion  I  treated  labor  force  and  productivity  trends  as  independent 
factors, but they are interrelated. As the aging of the population progresses and the share of 
the population that requires support from the generations still in work increases, this could 
affect  the  work  incentives  for  the  generations  still  in  work  through  channels  such  as  an 
increase in the fiscal burden. Thus, a country’s demographic trends and the vitality or energy 
of  its  society  as  a  whole,  or  the  productivity  of  the  economy  as  a  whole,  are  intricately 
intertwined and cannot be considered separately. 
Ways to raise Japan’s growth potential 
In order to raise growth expectations for Japan in the future, it is necessary to address the 
factors  underlying  the  decline  in  the  growth  rate  that  I  just  mentioned  and  transform  the 
economy into one that people believe will achieve growth in the future. 
To address the first factor, the decline in the labor force, the very least is to make consistent 
efforts to raise the labor force participation rate of women and the elderly. To address the 
second  factor  underlying  the  decline  in  the  growth  rate,  that  is,  the  decline  in  productivity 
growth,  a  key  point  is  how  individual  firms  can  tap  new  demand.  The  term  “rise  in 
productivity” carries the connotation of producing existing products at lower costs. Of course, 
this  aspect  is  important.  However,  when  there  are  dynamic  changes  in  customer  needs, 
raising productivity also means tapping new demand and increasing sales by establishing a 
supply system that matches such new demand. Due to economic globalization, the range of 
potential customers has rapidly increased also for Japanese firms. The explosive spread of 
personal  computers  and  the  internet  has  rapidly  reduced  the  distance  between  firms  and 
customers, and, in this respect, the gap between large and small firms has shrunk. The low 
birth rate and population aging in advanced economies and major structural changes such as 
the shift to a low carbon economy bring with them new customer needs. While it is a difficult 
task  to  discover  potential  demand  that  cannot  be  easily  discerned,  transforming  such 
potential demand into actual demand and linking this with a rise in productivity is something 
that firms should perceive as a challenge and that would provide one approach to innovation, 
as I will explain later.  
Japan’s economic strengths 
Unfortunately, through what mechanisms innovation takes place nobody can say for certain. 
However, innovation is not likely to take place unless there is sufficient energy to overcome 
the kind of pessimism many currently feel in Japan with regard to the future. Of course, when 
growth is actually sluggish and the reason for this is a decline in productivity growth, such 
pessimism is not entirely unfounded. On the other hand, however, I feel that there is also a 
tendency for the strength of Japan’s economy to be underestimated and the pessimism to be 
overdone. With regard to well-founded pessimism, it is necessary to accurately recognize the 
essence of the underlying issues and squarely address them. At the same time, we cannot 
allow  ourselves  the  luxury  of  indulging  in  groundless  pessimism.  It  is  important  to  calmly 
recognize  the  relative  strengths  of  our  country  and  utilize  them  to  the  maximum  extent 
possible. 
Earlier, I identified trends in the labor force and productivity growth as factors responsible for 
the decline in Japan’s growth potential since the 1990s. These trends in themselves are a 
fact.  To  provide  some  detail,  while  the  average  rate  of  change  in  the  labor  force  declined 
over  the  past  two  decades,  productivity  growth  plunged  in  the  1990s,  but  has  recovered 
somewhat since 2000. Looking at the growth rate of GDP per worker since 2000, this was 
1.6 percent for Japan, which was again higher than for European countries and, among the 
4 
 BIS Review 74/2010
G7 countries, second only to the United States, which registered 1.8 percent. This growth in 
GDP  per  worker  is  the  first  strength  of  Japan’s  economy  that  I  would  like  to  highlight. 
Strenuous efforts to raise productivity will continue to be a driving force of Japan’s economic 
growth. 
The  second  strength  is  Japan’s  high  level  of  technology  as  a  whole.  For  example,  Japan 
ranks  second  in  the  number  of  international  patent  applications  next  to  the  United  States, 
and  the  number  has  been  steadily  increasing.  In  addition,  according  to  a  research  by  the 
Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications, Japan ranks first among advanced countries 
in  terms  of  the  number  of  researchers  per  capita.  What  is  important  for  Japan  is  how  to 
effectively use this fundamental strength and link it with tapping new demand. 
Third, Japan’s financial system is considerably more stable than those in the United States 
and Europe. The issuing environment in the CP and corporate bond markets had become 
favorable  again  by  around  autumn  last  year.  Financial  institutions’  lending  attitudes,  as 
viewed by firms, have also become favorable. Compared with the United States and Europe, 
which face the structural problem of balance-sheet adjustments and have to contend with a 
tight  lending  stance  by  financial  institutions,  it  can  be  said  that  Japan’s  economy  is  in  a 
superior position. 
And fourth, Japan has strong economic and historical ties with, and is geographically close 
to, the rest of East Asia, which currently is the most rapidly expanding region in the world. It 
is  now  widely  recognized  that  China  is  no  longer  merely  a  production  base  but  also  the 
world’s  premier  consumption  market,  demanding  versatile  goods  and  services.  China  has 
already  become  number  one  in  the  world  in  terms  of  car  sales  and  internet  users,  and 
markets  are  expected  to  further  expand  as  the  social  infrastructure,  such  as  roads  and 
telecommunication, develops. It is necessary for Japan to seize the development of Asia as a 
golden opportunity to foster innovation. 
Growth and innovation 
III. 
What is innovation? 
I  have  thus  far  talked  without  explaining  in  detail  the  term  innovation.  While  in  Japan,  the 
term innovation has often been used interchangeably with “technological revolution,” Joseph 
Schumpeter,  who  first  introduced  the  term  to  the  field  of  economics,  understood  it  in  a 
broader sense. Stressing in particular the role of innovation as a driving force of economic 
development, he distinguished five different types, namely  the introduction of a new good, 
the introduction of a new method of production, the opening of a new market, the conquest of 
a new source of supply of raw materials, and the carrying out of the new organization of any 
industry. Thus, innovation is a very broad concept that embraces various new efforts by firms 
to capture new demand and is not limited to the field of technology. 
Given  the  current  situation  in  Japan,  it  seems  necessary  to  recognize  again  the  original 
meaning  of  the  term  “innovation.”  With  regard  to  Japan’s  manufacturing  sector,  it  has 
recently been pointed out that the gap in technological prowess vis-à-vis other East Asian 
countries has been rapidly shrinking, and even in the area of process innovation, which used 
to  be  Japan’s  forte,  Japan  has  been  losing  its  edge.  Against  this  backdrop,  firms,  or 
entrepreneurs, need to take on new challenges. In fact, many Japanese firms have recently 
been pursuing strategies consisting of setting up local production bases or establishing new 
sales networks in order to capture demand for infrastructure or the consumption demand of 
the wealthy and the middle classes in emerging  economies. Moreover, firms have actively 
explored  new  alliances  or  organizational  forms  between  firms  that  are  not  constrained  by 
traditional arrangements such as business affiliations or business groupings, as illustrated, 
for  instance,  by  the  promotion  of  cross-border  supply  chain  management  to  respond 
promptly to customer demand. This applies even to nonmanufacturers and small-sized firms. 
While  business  efforts  such  as  developing  new  sales  channels,  reviewing  suppliers  and 
BIS Review 74/2010 
 5
processing methods, and reorganizing management structures are routine at firms, adding 
the  new  challenge  of  capturing  potential  demand  could  lead  to  these  routine  efforts 
developing into innovations. 
The role of financial institutions 
With regard to innovation and raising productivity, another aspect I would like to emphasize 
is  the  important  role  played  by  financial  institutions.  Schumpeter  stressed  the  role  of  “the 
banker” in providing funds to entrepreneurs and support efforts toward innovation. In Japan, 
too, it was mainly financial institutions, particularly banks, that provided long-term risk money 
to  firms  and  nurtured  many  growing  firms  for  a  long  period  after  the  war.  Recently,  there 
have  been  signs  that  financial  institutions  are  taking  a  more  strategic  approach  to  such 
business,  actively  providing  loans  or  business  support  to  firms  that  develop  proprietary 
technologies or expand abroad, or to projects in promising areas related to the environment, 
energy, medical care, and nursing care. 
Of course, for risk money to be supplied to firms, it is important that there exist a variety of 
financial markets and investors. That being said, in Japan, the role of capital markets in the 
provision  of  such  risk  money  is  relatively  small,  and  with  regard  to  fostering  venture 
businesses, the situation in Japan hardly matches that in the United States. Although various 
initiatives  in  these  areas  by  concerned  parties  are  currently  underway,  I  think  that,  for  the 
time being, financial institutions will continue to play a central role in promoting innovation in 
Japan. 
The  economy  is  made  up  of  a  variety  of  firms  and  industries  with  differing  rates  of 
productivity growth. This means that financial institutions play the extremely important role of 
gauging borrower firms’ future profitability and growth potential and of making loan decisions 
and setting loan conditions. It is therefore strongly hoped that financial institutions hone their 
ability to identify firms with growth potential and thereby contribute to the growth of Japan’s 
economy. At the same time, in order for financial institutions to make such a contribution, it is 
important that the role of financial intermediation is properly appreciated also in Japan. 
The role of policy makers 
Now let me talk about the role policy makers play in innovation. While in every respect it is 
private economic agents that are the bearers of innovation, policy makers play an important 
role in creating an environment that is conducive to innovation. 
The  first  area  in  which  policy  makers  play  an  important  role  is  the  development  of  the 
framework under which firms conduct their business. This means that regulations and taxes 
have to be reviewed constantly as the situation requires so as not to impede firms’ innovative 
efforts and to help firms earn the fruit of such efforts in the form of corporate profits. In this 
regard, we need to be aware that just as Japanese firms are exposed to global competition, 
Japan’s business framework is also subject to international competition. 
The second contribution policy can make is to enhance the flexibility of economic structures 
so that productive resources such as labor and capital can move smoothly from areas where 
there is a low need to areas where there is a high need. To this end, the most important thing 
is a policy conduct that does not impede competition. 
The third policy contribution is the provision of various safety nets. Innovative activity is not 
always  crowned  by  success  and  carries  the  risk  of  failure.  Moreover,  the  economic 
metabolism is a process that is inevitably accompanied by pain for some sectors. Therefore, 
it is essential to establish social safety nets that mitigate the pain for firms and individuals 
and allow them to tackle new business ventures with a sense of security. 
Finally,  the fourth  area in  which  policy  makers play  a  role  is  in  the  appropriate  conduct  of 
fiscal  and  monetary  policies  to  reduce  swings  in  economic  activity  and  prices.  Less 
6 
 BIS Review 74/2010
uncertainty over future economic conditions and inflation means that, to that extent, firms can 
pursue innovation without concern. 
However, while the provision of safety nets and the implementation of countercyclical policies 
are desirable and effective measures when the economy suffers a large temporary shock, if 
those  measures  go  too  far,  they  may  impede  the  economic  metabolism  and  even  reduce 
productivity. For that reason, policy makers need to strike a delicate balance in their policy 
conduct. 
On this point, there have been various discussions regarding the current events in Europe. 
Since the Lehman shock, aggressive fiscal policies implemented in many countries played a 
significant role in stemming the economic plunge. However, at the same time, fiscal policies 
are  not  a  “cornucopia”  and  eventually  nations  have  to  repay  their  public  debt  through  the 
value added generated by economic activity. Therefore, confidence in fiscal sustainability is 
critical and once it is lost, economic activity can be severely hurt through rapid changes in 
financial  markets.  Keeping  this  point  in  mind,  policy  makers  should  work  to  appropriately 
conduct policies so as to maintain sufficient market confidence. In this regard, current events 
seem to have served as a “wakeup call” to many countries. 
The Bank’s policy responses 
IV. 
Aggressive monetary easing 
Finally, let me briefly touch on policy responses by the Bank of Japan given the economic 
and price developments discussed earlier. 
Aware of the great importance of overcoming deflation and returning Japan’s economy to a 
sustainable growth path with price stability, the Bank has continued to implement a policy of 
strong monetary easing. The policy rate was lowered to 0.1 percent, that is, effectively zero. 
Moreover, to encourage a further decline in longer-term interest rates in the money market, 
the  Bank  introduced  in  December  2009  a  new  funds-supplying  operation,  through  which 
funds  with  a  maturity  of  three  months  are  provided  at  a  fixed  rate.  As  a  result  of  these 
measures, market rates and bank lending rates have been declining. The Bank will continue 
to maintain the extremely accommodative financial environment so as to help the economy 
achieve a self-sustaining recovery in domestic private demand. 
Another  important  responsibility  of  the  Bank  is  to  ensure  financial  market  stability.  As  I 
mentioned  at  the  beginning,  strains  in  short-term  U.S.  dollar  markets  heightened  from  the 
beginning  of  May  against  the  backdrop  of  fiscal  problems  in  some  European  economies. 
These developments carry the risk of reducing liquidity in or destabilizing financial markets 
around  the  world,  including  Japan.  Therefore,  the  Bank,  in  cooperation  with  other  major 
central  banks,  has  re-established  U.S.  dollar  funds-supplying  operations,  which  had  been 
highly  effective  during  the  financial  crisis  in  2008.  The  Bank  has  been  working  to  ensure 
financial  market  stability  by  responding  flexibly  in  terms  of  funds-supplying  operations 
whenever  there  were  grave  problems  in  financial  markets.  The  re-establishment  of  U.S. 
dollar funds-supplying operations is one example of the Bank’s flexible response. Not only 
the current problems in Greece, but also many other issues remain in international finance 
that  still  warrant  attention.  The  Bank,  while  cooperating  with  overseas  central  banks,  will 
continue to make every effort to ensure the stability of financial markets. 
Funds provision to help strengthening the foundations for economic growth 
As I have explained today, the most important challenge for Japan’s economy at present is to 
raise its growth potential, and to this end, promoting innovation is indispensable. Moreover, 
to do so, the role of private financial institutions is also important. Taking these points into 
account,  the  Bank,  in  addition  to  its  policy  of  monetary  easing  and  measures  to  stabilize 
financial  markets  explained  earlier,  has  announced  its  intention  to  introduce  fund-
BIS Review 74/2010 
 7
provisioning  measures  for  strengthening  the  foundations  for  economic  growth.  While  the 
specifics of these fund-provisioning measures are being examined through an exchange of 
views  with  financial  institutions,  basically,  the  Bank  is  considering  to  provide  funds  to 
financial  institutions  –  which  through  their  lending  and  investment  provide  the  financial 
resources  for  strengthening  the  foundations  for  economic  growth  –  based  on  the  actual 
amount  of  such  lending  and  investment.  To  support  financial  institutions’  efforts  in  this 
respect, the Bank is thinking about providing loans of longer-term funds at a rate equivalent 
to  the  policy  rate,  which  is  0.1  percent  at  present,  in  a  manner  that  enables  financial 
institutions to obtain loans longer than one year. 
Of course, the Bank is fully aware that raising the growth potential essentially is something 
that can only be achieved through the efforts of the private sector, and such efforts will be 
supported by the government from the institutional side. Clearly recognizing this, and taking 
into  account  the  fact  that  the  issue  facing  Japan  is  one  of  declining  growth  expectations, 
which in turn considerably contributes to the current fall in prices, the Bank concluded that it 
should use the central banking functions it is endowed with to help strengthening the growth 
foundations of Japan’s economy from the financial side. This is consistent with the mission of 
monetary  policy  in  the  Bank  of  Japan  Act,  which  stipulates  that  “currency  and  monetary 
control by the Bank of Japan shall be aimed at achieving price stability, thereby contributing 
to  the  sound  development  of  the  national  economy.”  In  this  regard,  we  at  the  Bank  are 
paying  attention  to  the  following  two  points.  First,  the  aim  of  this  measure  is  to  provide 
temporary support from the funding side for initiatives taken by financial institutions at their 
own accord and does not imply that the Bank will be involved in the allocation of funds to 
individual industries or firms. And second, the measure should not inhibit the future conduct 
of monetary policy. The measure will be conducted while maintaining the soundness of the 
Bank of Japan’s balance sheet and without constraining interest rate policy by, for example, 
setting a limit on the total loan amount. 
Concluding remarks 
Time is running out, so I will try to wrap up my speech. The following three conclusions can 
be drawn. First, at present, Japan’s economy is making steady progress toward returning to 
a sustainable growth path with price stability. However, we need to continue to be vigilant for 
both upside and downside risks such as higher growth in emerging and commodity-exporting 
countries and international financial developments. Second, the most important challenge for 
Japan’s  economy  is  the  downward  trend  in  the  potential  growth  rate,  and  we  need  to 
squarely  address  this  problem.  The  so-called  deflation  problem  is,  in  my  view,  also  a 
manifestation  of  the  fundamental  problem  Japan  is  facing,  namely,  the  decline  in  growth 
expectations. And third, in order to put the brakes on the decline in the potential growth rate 
and productivity growth, efforts at innovation are more important than ever. To this end, in 
addition to the efforts by individual firms, it is important to achieve an optimal allocation of 
resources and raise the metabolism of the economy. 
The decline in the growth rate is a phenomenon that has gradually progressed over a long 
period  of  time.  Therefore,  raising  the  potential  growth  rate  will  also  be  a  long-drawn-out 
process. If there was a magic wand that could resolve the problem immediately, somebody 
would already have used it. The economy is a complex network. For that reason, to escape 
from the current low growth equilibrium, above all what is necessary is the will to resolve the 
current  problems.  And,  based  on  that  will,  the  only  way  to  do  so  is  for  private  economic 
agents and policy makers to make the necessary efforts based on their respective roles. The 
Bank, too, will continue to consistently make contributions as a central bank while listening 
carefully to various opinions. 
8 
 BIS Review 74/2010
BIS Review 74/2010 
  9
