Njuguna Ndung’u: Financial inclusion through the agent banking model 
and credit reference bureaus 
Remarks by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the official 
opening of Fina Bank’s, Ngong Road Branch, Nairobi, 17 June 2010. 
 The Chairman and Board Members; 
Group Chief Operating Officer; 
Management and Staff; 
Distinguished Guests; 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
It gives me great pleasure to be with you today at the official opening of Fina Bank’s, Ngong 
Road  Branch.  As  the  regulator  for  the  Banking  Sector,  the  Central  Bank  is  pleased  to  be 
associated  with  the  achievements  of  the  banks  we  regulate,  particularly  where  these 
developments  lead  to  increased  access  to  banking  services  for  the  Kenyan  public. This  is 
what Fina Bank is doing this evening.  
It is evident that Fina Bank is focused on its programme of expansion and growth strategy, 
having started its operations as Finance Institution of Africa in 1986 before converting to 
the present day Fina Bank in 1996. With the opening of this branch, the bank will have a 
network of 14 branches in the country. I also note that the bank has established its presence 
regionally by opening subsidiaries in Uganda and Rwanda. This is encouraging indeed. 
Mr. Chairman, let me take this opportunity to compliment the Board, Management and Staff 
of Fina Bank for this great achievement. I note that as at April 2010, the bank commanded an 
impressive asset portfolio of Ksh.13.5 billion and customer deposits of Ksh.11.5 billion, while 
riding on a capital base of Ksh.1.3 billion. The Central Bank is particularly encouraged by the 
bank’s leading role as a lender in the Small and Medium Enterprise (SME) sector, a growth 
sector in Kenya’s economy which has been described as the “jewel” of Kenya’s economic 
growth. 
This is indeed important following from the Budget proposals that created a revolving fund for 
SME  –  It  may  well  be  the  best  policy  in  our  times  to  support  the  growth  pole  provided  by 
SMEs. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, Kenya’s growth picked up in the last quarter of 2009, extending into 
2010 and on the back of good rainfall and a resurgence of tourism, we are optimistic that this 
positive trend will continue, and therefore forecast that the economy will post a 4 to 5 percent 
growth in 2010 on average.  
Equally  the  banks  have  had  a  spectacular  performance.  For  the  period  ended  March  31, 
2010, the Kenyan Banking sector registered an increase in asset base largely supported by 
growth  in  deposits.  Assets  increased  by  20.8  percent  to  stand  at  Ksh.1.5  trillion  while 
deposits increased by 22.8 percent to Ksh.1.1 trillion. This growth is by and large attributed 
to  the  growth  of  our  economy  that  increases  opportunities  for  investment  and  demand  for 
credit. 
The  Central  Bank  is  pleased  to  note  that  the  banking  sector  has  put  up  strategies  that 
support and stimulate the economy and responded positively to the successive reduction of 
the Central Bank Rate and Cash Reserve Ratio. While it is noteworthy and encouraging for 
banks to post healthy profits, this should also go in tandem with the reduction of lending rates 
to stimulate private sector borrowing and financing of investments, working capital as well as 
reducing the risks of default. At this juncture I want to register my compliments to Fina Bank 
for having reduced its base lending rate to 14.75 percent. I am sure there is room to do more. 
The continued lowering of base lending rates by commercial banks will not only stimulate our 
BIS Review 88/2010 
 1
economy  but  also  reduce  non-performing  loans  in  the  industry.  However,  lending  rates 
reduces the risk of default.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  The  Central  Bank  will  endeavour  to  pursue  prudent  policies  that 
foster financial stability, increase financial inclusion and improve financial efficiency. Let me 
at this juncture highlight two policy issues that are at the heart of the of financial inclusion; 
 
Agent Banking Model: An amendment to the Banking Act through the Finance Act 
2009 has enabled the banking industry embrace agent banking. Agent banking will 
permit  banks  to  contract  third  parties  to  provide  certain  banking  services  on  their 
behalf without having to put up brick and mortar. This model will therefore increase 
financial inclusion to the majority of the unbanked Kenyans at an affordable cost to 
both the bank and the customer. The Central Bank is pleased by the level of interest 
and financial innovation the model has generated. 
Credit  Reference  Bureaus:  To  ensure  the  growth  of  credit  lending  at  affordable 
and  sustainable  rates,  the  Central  Bank  has  licensed  the  first  Credit  Reference 
Bureau  (CRB)  and  a  few  more  are  in  the  pipeline.  A  robust  credit  information 
apparatus will enable the banking industry share critical customer information that 
will lead to lowering the credit risk in the industry and hence the lowering of lending 
rates in the banking industry. This policy aims at building information capital that will 
allow the credit market to function properly and efficiently and change the collateral 
technology and reduce the cost of collateralization. 
 The  Central  Bank  of  Kenya  will  continue  to  pursue  policies  that  drive  financial  innovation, 
build  strong  banks  and  partnerships  in  the  banking  industry  to  ensure  a  stable  financial 
sector  in  the  country.  Strong  banks  can  weather  shocks  more  easily.  Strong  banks  will 
support economic growth. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  I  wish  to  conclude  by  congratulating  Fina  Bank  for  opening  the 
Ngong Road Branch and to assure the Board and Management of Fina Bank of the Central 
Bank’s support in your growth initiatives and progression.  
With  these  few  remarks  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  it  is  now  my  honour  and  pleasure  to 
declare Fina Bank – Ngong Road Branch – officially open.  
Thank You and God bless you all. 
2 
 BIS Review 88/2010
