 Kiyohiko G Nishimura: Macro-prudential lessons from the financial crises – 
a practitioner’s view 
Speech by Mr Kiyohiko G Nishimura, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Asian 
Development  Bank  Institute  (ADBI)  –  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia  (Bank  Negara  Malaysia/ 
BNM)  Conference  on  Macroeconomic  and  Financial  Stability  in  Asian  Emerging  Markets, 
Kuala Lumpur, 4 August 2010. 
 I  would  like  to  express  my  sincere  gratitude  to  the  hosts  for  inviting  me  to  the  ADBI– 
Bank  Negara  Malaysia  Conference,  and  especially  to  this  timely  session:  Macroeconomic 
Frameworks to Support Financial Stability. 
In this presentation, I will touch on the issues of financial stability and central bank policies, 
based on two episodes of financial crisis: one dating from 20 years ago in Japan, and the 
other from two years ago in the United States. I first present one “stylized account” from a 
macro-prudential perspective of the buildup in financial imbalances that led eventually to the 
financial crisis in the late 1980s in Japan. Then, I illustrate the startling similarities between 
the  recent  US  subprime-triggered  experience  and  that  of  Japan  in  the  1980s.  Examining 
these two crises, I will draw four implications for macro-prudential policy which are likely to 
be  universally  relevant,  particularly  in  emerging  economies.  The  message  is  simple  and 
straightforward: Beware. So-called macro-prudential measures may not always be sufficient. 
This  leads  to  the  final  topic,  the  role  of  monetary  policy  during  the  buildup  of  financial 
imbalances, a role which I would argue is, in a word, crucial. I will explain why in the course 
of this presentation.  
Financial imbalances in 1980s Japan: a stylized account  
1. 
I  first  present  one  “stylized  account”  from  a  macro-prudential  perspective  of  the  buildup  to 
financial  imbalances  in  Japan  in  the  late  1980s.1  This  account  is  intended  to  be  rather 
descriptive  and  schematic  in  the  way  that  macro-prudential  issues  are  highlighted.  It  is 
admittedly simplistic, but I believe this is a good starting point for discussion. 
Deregulation-induced “financial innovations” and financial anomalies  
A  number  of  “financial  innovations”  introduced  as  a  result  of  deregulation  appear  to  have 
played  a  role  in  the  late  1980s  bubble  in  Japan.  Under  the  designation  of  Financial 
Liberalization, deregulation sparked the arrival of new products such as CPs and large time 
deposits with unregulated rates, which nourished the atmosphere of profit-seeking through 
these “financial technology” products.2  
Financial  Liberalization  was  a  gradual  process  that  started  in  the  late  1970s  and  spanned 
twenty  years.  Around  1986,  signs  of  “financial  anomaly”  emerged,  brought  about  by  the 
innovations  associated  with  Financial  Liberalization.  The  most  notable  anomaly  was  the 
apparent  no-risk  arbitrage  opportunity  for  large  non-financial  corporations.  In  1985,  banks 
became  allowed  to  offer  large  time  deposits  with  no  regulation  on  their  rates.  Banks  then 
offered short-term large time deposits to major non-financial corporations with rates higher 
                                                 
1   This  stylized  account  is  partly  based  on  Hattori,  M.,  H.  S.  Shin  and  W.  Takahashi,  “A  Financial  System 
Perspective on Japan’s Experience in the Late 1980s”, IMES Discussion Paper 2009-E-19, Bank of Japan, 
2009. 
2   These technologies were known at the time as zai-teku in Japanese. 
BIS Review 115/2010 
 1
 than  the  corresponding-term  CP  rates.  Thus,  large  non-financial  corporations  could  profit 
from  raising  funds  by  issuing  CPs  and  depositing  them  in  these  unregulated  large  time 
deposits  (BOJ  19893).  By  a  similar  token,  3–6  month  unregulated  time  deposit  rates  were 
substantially higher than short-term prime lending rates (see Chart 1). 
Chart 1 
Time deposit rates and prime lending rates 
Note: “3–6 month time deposit rate (unregulated, new receipts)” is the average 
interest rate on newly received time deposits with unregulated interest rates of 
terms  between  3  and  6  months.  “3  month  time  deposit  rate  (regulated,  new 
receipts)”  is  the  interest  rate  set  by  the  regulation  on  newly  received  3  month 
time  deposits.  Regulations  on  time  deposit  interest  rates  were  abolished  in 
1993.  The  end-of-month  data  for  3  month  time  deposit  rate  (regulated,  new 
receipts) are available up to May, 1992. 
Source: Economic Statistics Annual, Bank of Japan. 
 These  anomalies  were  often  explained  as  banks’  investment  in  “customer  capital”  in  large 
non-financial corporations. These large non-financial corporations, who were once the good 
customers  of  the  banks,  had  gained  increasingly  good  access  to  capital  markets  through 
deregulation.  If  the  banks  could  obtain  and  keep  long-term  customer  relations  with  these 
corporations, the banks could profit from their clients’ increased financial and other activities 
through  increased  fees  and  commissions.  This  was  not  an  implausible  position,  since  the 
banks themselves were being gradually deregulated and allowed to expand their business 
into securities markets and other activities. 
Favorable capital market conditions and loosening of lending standards  
At the same time, banks’ profits surged and their capital positions strengthened, as shown in 
Chart  2.  Banks  tapped  capital  markets  to  raise  capital  easily,  and  their  leverage  ratio 
declined dramatically from around 160 in 1986 to around 60 in 1989, as shown in Chart 3. 
                                                 
3   Bank of Japan, “Shouwa 63 nendo no kinyuu oyobi keizai no doukou (the Financial Markets and Economy in 
1988),” (in Japanese), in Chosa Geppo, May, pp 1–61, 1989. 
2 
 BIS Review 115/2010
 Chart 2 
Net income/loss of Japanese banks 
Chart 3 
Leverage 
  Note:  All  domestically  licensed  banks,  excluding  member  banks  of  the  Second 
Association of Regional Banks. 
Source: Economic Statistics Annual, Bank of Japan. 
With  strong  profit  positions,  loosened  capital  constraints  through  new  equity  issues,  and 
substantial inflows of time deposits from large non-financial corporations, bank lending to real 
estate-related sectors surged, as did lending to small enterprises (see Charts 4 and 5), partly 
compensating for lackluster growth in lending to large non-financial corporations. Around this 
time,  anecdotal  evidence  also  emerged  to  suggest  that  banks  had  loosened  their  lending 
standards.  Some  banks 
loan-
examination division of their headquarters to the loan-making divisions. Hence, the ratio of 
loan  examination  officers  at  the  headquarters  declined  sharply  in  the  1980s,  as  shown  in 
Chart 6.  
loan-examination 
transferred 
function 
from 
their 
the 
BIS Review 115/2010 
 3
 Breakdown of corporate borrowers by size 
Chart 4 
  it 
is  more 
Note: All banks, excluding member banks of the Second Association of 
Regional  Banks.  Total  outstanding  loans  used  for  calculations  are 
outstanding  loans  and  discounts  to  domestic  corporate  borrowers, 
excluding overdrafts. Large enterprises are corporations with capital of 
1 billion  yen  or  more  and  more  than  300  regular  employees.  For  the 
wholesale  trade  industry,  the  criterion  for  the  number  of  regular 
employees  is  more  than  100  persons.  For  the  retail  and  service 
industries, 
than  50  persons.  Small  enterprises  are 
unincorporated  enterprises  as  well  as  corporations  with  capital  of 
100 million  yen  or  less  or  with  regular  employees  of  300  persons  or 
fewer.  For  the  wholesale  trade  industry,  the  definition  is  corporations 
capitalized at 30 million yen or less or with 100 regular employees or 
fewer.  For  the  retail  trade  and  service  industries,  it  is  corporations 
capitalized  at  10  million  yen  or  less  or  with  50  regular  employees  or 
fewer. Outstanding loans for medium-sized enterprises are calculated 
by  excluding  those  for  small  enterprises  and  large  enterprises  from 
total  outstanding  loans.  Figures  are  deflated  by  GDP  deflators.  Total 
borrowings in 1975 in real terms = 100. 
Source:  Economic  Statistics  Monthly,  Bank  of  Japan  and  National 
Accounts, Cabinet Office. 
Bank lending to real estate-related sectors 
Chart 5 
Note: All banks, excluding member banks of the Second Association of 
Regional  Banks.  Real  estate-related  sectors  include  real  estate, 
construction, and non-bank financial. Total outstanding loans used for 
calculations are outstanding loans and discounts to domestic corporate 
borrowers,  excluding  overdrafts.  Outstanding  loans  to  the  non-bank 
financial  industry  are  the  sum  of  those  to  the  other  financial  industry 
and  the  lease  industry.  Figures  are  deflated  by  GDP  deflators.  Total 
lendings in 1975 in real terms =100. 
Source:  Economic  Statistics  Monthly,  Bank  of  Japan  and  National 
Accounts, Cabinet Office. 
4 
 BIS Review 115/2010
 Chart 6 
Ratio of examining officers at the headquarters  
by bank-type and year 
Source:  Figure  1  in  Fukao,  K.,  K.  G.  Nishimura,  Q.-Y.  Sui  and  M.  Tomiyama, 
“Japanese  Banks’  monitoring  activities  and  the  performance  of  borrower  firms: 
1981–1996,” International Economics and Economic Policy, 2 (2005), 337–362. 
 Overlooked signs of excessive optimism  
Around  this  time,  there  were  signs  of  excessive  optimism  among  investors,  especially  in 
property markets. Chart 7 illustrates the price-to-rent ratio in residential property markets in 
Tokyo,4  based  on  hedonic  price  and  rent  price  indexes  of  condominiums,  and  taking  due 
account of vast differences in quality. (Rents here are market-determined new-contract rents, 
not institutionally rigid continuing-contract rents.5) This ratio surged from around 23 in 1986, 
which in retrospect looked like the long run average, to around 40 in one year, suggesting 
substantial overheating in property markets. After a short pause, the price-to-rent ratio shot 
up to a peak of around 50 in the fall of 1990 (even after the collapse of the stock markets).  
However,  it  should  be  noted  here  that  this  quality-adjusted  price-to-rent  ratio  has  only 
recently become available. In the late 1980s, only appraisal price indexes for residential and 
commercial lands were available, with a substantial lag of half a year. There were no reliable 
rent  data.  Thus,  there  were  no  contemporaneous  hard  data  showing  investors’  excessive 
optimism  in  property  markets,  though  there  were  lots  of  anecdotes  of  property  investors’ 
excessive optimism. Moreover, in retrospect, the government itself was overly optimistic: it 
anticipated a substantial scarcity of office space partly because of internationalization of the 
Japanese  financial  markets  in  its  “Metropolitan  Reconstruction  Plan”  (1985),  and  in  “The 
4th National Comprehensive Development Plan” (1987). 
                                                 
4   See Shimizu, C., T. Watanabe, and K. G. Nishimura, “House Prices in Tokyo: A Comparison of Repeat Sales 
and Hedonic Measures” mimeo, Reitaku University and Hitotsubashi University, 2010. 
5   There is sizable rigidity in continuing rents partly because of institutional factors. The CPI rent is the weighted 
average of market-determined new-contract rents and institutionally rigid continuing rents with more weight on 
the latter. See Shimizu, C., T. Watanabe, and K. G. Nishimura, “Residential Rents and Price Rigidity: Micro 
Structure and Macro Consequences”, Journal of Japanese and International Economies 24 (2010) 282–299. 
BIS Review 115/2010 
 5
 Chart 7 
Price-to-rent ratio of Tokyo residential area 
Source: Author’s calculation. 
 Central bank policy  
Facing investors’ excessive optimism and banks’ loose lending standards, the Bank of Japan 
used its then-conventional window guidance to control banks’ lending volumes. Although the 
direct  control  of  lending  through  the  practice  of  window  guidance  was  criticized  as  a 
discretionary measure contrary to market principles, window guidance at a time of seemingly 
excessive optimism could be interpreted as one form of macro-prudential measure, albeit a 
crude one, to dampen excessive optimism through the exercise of moral suasion. However, 
as financial deregulation got under way, window guidance proved to be ineffective and failed 
to curb loans outstanding in the late 1980s.  
What  was  the  monetary  policy  stance  at  that time  and  the  public’s  expectations about  the 
policy?  Around  1986,  the  market  expectation  was  that  the  easy  monetary  policy  would 
continue for a substantial period. This was partially due to the government’s commitments in 
the international policy coordination pledged during that period. There were also confounding 
issues at the time: the fallout of Black Monday (October 19, 1987), the fear of a recession 
stemming from the substantial appreciation of the yen, and the lack of significant inflationary 
signs  in  the  CPI.  In  fact,  the  policy  rate  was  cut  from  5%  in  December  1985  to  2.5%  in 
February 1987, and remained unchanged for more than two years.  
Then, as we know only too well, the stock market began to drop in January 1990, falling from 
more  than  38,000  to  around  16,000  in  two  and  a  half  years.6  The  quality-adjusted  Tokyo 
condominium  price  index  continued  to  climb  up  until  October  of  1990  to  triple  the  price  of 
1986,  and  then  declined  by  about  30%  in  three  years.7  It  continued  declining  through  the 
1990s, with the price in 2000 being approximately the same as that of 1986. 
Similarity of the recent US experience to that of Japan in the 1980s 
2. 
When  considering  this  stylized  account,  one  cannot  help  noticing  the  similarities  between 
Japan’s  experience  in  the  1980s  and  recent  events  in  the  United  States  triggered  by  the 
subprime mortgage crisis. 
                                                 
6   The Nikkei index was 38,915 on December 29, 1989 and 15,951 on June 30, 1992. 
7   These quality-adjusted house price indexes are in Shimizu, C., T. Watanabe, and K. G. Nishimura, “House 
Prices  in  Tokyo:  A  Comparison  of  Repeat  Sales  and  Hedonic  Measures”  mimeo.,  Reitaku  University  and 
Hitotsubashi University, 2010. 
6 
 BIS Review 115/2010
 First,  financial  innovations  were  at  least  partly  responsible  for  the  buildup  of  financial 
imbalances. Securitization was thought to improve risk allocation, as risk was now borne by 
those who were more able to bear it. This reduced risk premiums (equilibrium or sustainable) 
for  previously  very  risky  investments,  such  as  subprime  mortgages.  The  financial  sector 
could  earn  substantially  higher  profits  from  originating  and  distributing  these  securitized 
products. Taking advantage of this and other innovations, banks’ profits increased and their 
capital market standing became more solid.  
Second, there were signs of financial anomalies and loose lending standards. For example, 
CDO  squares  based  on  CDOs,  which  were  in  turn  based  on  subprime  mortgage  pools, 
sometimes had a thick AAA tranche. It was argued that their pricing was based on a model 
proven to track the history well, but the history was usually too short to assure the model’s 
sustained reliability. Again as we know only too well, their assumed correlations turned out to 
be wrong. In addition, there were reports of “low doc loans” and “no doc loans,” especially in 
subprime mortgages.8  
Third,  there  seemed  to  be  signs  of  excessive  optimism,  at  least  in  the  booming  states, 
though  not  as  obviously  as  in  late  1980s  Japan.  Unlike  in  late  1980s  Japan,  semi-
contemporaneous house price indexes were available in the United States, including OFHEO 
(now  FHFA)  and  Case-Shiller  indexes,  taking  account  of  vast  differences  in  quality  of 
housing  stock.  In  some  parts  of  the  United  States,  notably  Los  Angeles  and  Miami,  price 
increases  accelerated  in  the  early  2000s,  and  more  than  doubled  from  2001  to  2006. 
Unfortunately,  there  were  no  corresponding  (new-contract)  rent  data,  comparable  to  that 
shown  before  for  Japan,  with  which  to  gauge  excessive  investor  optimism  by  calculating 
price-to-rent ratios. However, since there was no report showing substantial rent increases 
relative to CPI in these areas, it might be appropriate to assume that the real price change 
coincided with the change in the price-to-rent ratio. Then, the real house-price change in ten 
large  US  cities  (whose  residents  constitute  roughly  10%  of  the  US  population)  was 
comparable to that in Tokyo (where a similar percentage of the Japanese population lives) in 
the late 1980s, as shown in Chart 8. 
Real house price developments in the United States and Japan 
Chart 8 
Source: S&P Case-Shiller Indexes, RRPI Indexes, US and Japanese CPI. 
                                                  
8   “Low doc loans” and “no doc loans” are mortgage loans that require less than full documentation of income, 
employment, and assets. 
BIS Review 115/2010 
 7
 The course of central bank policy in the United States is well known, and I will not repeat it in 
detail  here.  I  will  just  point  out  that  firstly,  whatever  macro-prudential  measures  were 
implemented  at  that  time,  were  inadequate  to  curb  excessive  optimism,  and  secondly, 
monetary  tightening  was  “measured”  and  long-term  rates  remained  relatively  low,  stirring 
debates about this “conundrum”. 
3. 
Beware of anomalies and excessive optimism: implications for macro-
prudential policy 
So what lessons should we draw from these two episodes? Each crisis seems different from 
every other, so I should avoid oversimplification. However, the following four points are likely 
to be universally relevant, and especially so from the perspective of emerging economies. 
Firstly, financial innovations often provide fertile ground for financial excesses or imbalances. 
This  may  not  be  surprising,  since  innovations  sometimes  make  old  knowledge  obsolete: 
Veterans become novices and pros become amateurs. The old prudential measures look out 
of date. We are told that “this time is different,” and that we should embrace these new ways 
of thinking. Often, these new ways of thinking disguise excessive optimism, as exemplified in 
the two episodes we have discussed. So, Beware. 
Secondly, in the process of the buildup of imbalances, there are often signs of anomalies. In 
the  past,  these  anomalies  were  often  ignored  as  being  isolated  and  having  no  macro 
significance,  or  explained  as  rational  choices,  such  as  investment  for  future  returns.  But  if 
these  anomalies  are  found  to  coexist  with  other  signs  of  excessively  optimistic  investor 
forecasts, these are likely signs of the buildup of financial imbalances. This point is especially 
relevant if the signs are found saliently in property markets, which usually move slowly. 
Thirdly, timely information about excessive investor optimism is of utmost importance in this 
regard.  Price-to-rent  ratios  in  property  markets  are  one  indicator  of  investor  sentiment. 
Whereas  information  about  price-to-earnings  ratios  is  easily  available  in  stock  markets, 
corresponding  (properly  quality-adjusted)  price-to-rent  ratios  in  property  markets  are  not 
easily available. This has, and still does pose a serious problem for macro-prudential policy, 
especially  for  emerging  economies  where  property  markets  are  becoming  increasingly 
important. 
To have timely information about proper price-to-rent ratios, or at least price indexes that are 
reliable and internationally comparable, is not only important for assessing the magnitude of 
financial imbalances that need rectifying, but also vital to communicate with the public, both 
inside and outside of the country. In this respect, it is highly recommended that price indexes 
be constructed consistent with prospective United Nations recommendations (due next year) 
on  residential  property  price  indexes,  and  that  these  indexes  be  published  regularly  in  a 
timely manner. The Japanese price-to-rent ratios presented before are calculated from large 
data sets using hedonic regression methods, and are available monthly with approximately 
two weeks’ lag.  
Fourthly,  if  investors  are  excessively  optimistic,  a  modest  increase  in  capital  requirements 
and leverage restraints may not be sufficient to curb such unwarranted optimism. The case in 
point is the increase in banks’ new stock issues in Japan in the late 1980s and the dramatic 
decline of their leverage ratio during the buildup of the financial imbalances. This point is also 
relevant  in  contemplating  maximum  loan-to-value  ratio  requirements  as  macro-prudential 
policy. When the price doubles in a few years, it is relatively easy to comply with seemingly 
stringent  maximum  loan-to-value  requirements,  since  the  property’s  assessed  value 
increases in tandem with market prices. 
To  curb  excessive  loans,  it  is  important  to  have  measures  to  restrain  leverage.  But  at  the 
same  time  we  should  better  understand  their  limitations.  They  may  be  effective  in  some 
cases, especially for rather small buildups of financial imbalances, but perhaps not in other 
cases. 
8 
 BIS Review 115/2010
 Excessive optimism and policy expectations: implications for monetary policy 
4. 
Finally, let me turn to the role of monetary policy during the buildup of financial imbalances, 
and consider the implications of the analysis so far.  
There are two strands of thought on this issue. One strand emphasizes that monetary policy 
is a blunt instrument affecting activity across a wide variety of sectors, many of which may 
not  be  experiencing  speculative  activity.  To  dampen  speculative  bubbles  may  require 
substantial changes in interest rates, which may hurt unaffected sectors. So in principle, it is 
better  to  use  macro-prudential  measures  to  counter  financial  imbalances,  rather  than 
monetary policy.9  
The  other  strand  of  thought  points  out  that  letting  financial  imbalances  balloon  and  then 
collapse  may  be  too  costly  to  bear,  depending  on  the  magnitude  of  these  imbalances. 
Moreover, although regulatory reforms and other macro-prudential measures are now under 
consideration in addressing the issue of the buildup of financial imbalances, there remains 
substantial uncertainty about their effectiveness in the real world. It is therefore not wise to 
rule out categorically the use of monetary policy to address the issue of financial imbalances. 
Monetary  policy  could  be  used  in  tandem  with  macro-prudential  measures,  if,  firstly, 
substantial imbalances are building up and, secondly, regulatory policies have proved to be 
insufficient.10  
In  retrospect,  events  in  Japan  in  the  late  1980s  seem  to  support  the  second  view.  In 
particular,  that  episode  satisfied  the  two  requirements  for  the  use  of  monetary  policy  in 
addition to macro-prudential measures to counter the buildup of financial imbalances. 
Let me summarize what the stylized account of late 1980s Japan shows from the perspective 
of  monetary  policy.  Around  1986,  investors’  expectations  of  investment  returns  were 
substantially  elevated,  especially  in  property  markets,  though  grossly  erroneously  in 
retrospect.  And  at  the  same  time,  market  expectation  was  that  monetary  easing  would 
continue and the policy rate would remain low for a substantial period. This combination of 
elevated  investment-return  expectations  and  market  expectation  of  continuously  low  policy 
rates  accelerated  property  investment,  both  residential  and  commercial,  though  especially 
the latter. 
Property  investment  is  a  long-term,  irreversible  investment.  It  is  a  lengthy  process  from 
starting to find a lot to final dedication, and once built for a particular purpose, it is difficult to 
change usage. This is especially important in Japan, where some urban redevelopment may 
take years. Thus, not only the current policy rate but also the expectations of its future course 
have  a  significant  effect  on  investment  decisions.  Consequently,  the  expectation  of 
continuing monetary  easing  significantly  encouraged  property  investments,  and  particularly 
those in commercial properties.  
Because  of  the  inherent  irreversibility,  the  excessive  optimism  inflicted  a  huge  scar  on 
Japanese commercial property markets. The quality-adjusted commercial land price index of 
Tokyo’s central business districts was 2.161 in 1999 (1975 index = 1), down from its height 
16.556  in  1990.11  It  is  mind-boggling  to  imagine  how  this  87%  decline  in  commercial  land 
prices in the heart of Tokyo, which is the center of the Japanese economy, affected business 
activity  in  general.  The  same  is  true  for  residential  property  markets,  though  to  a  lesser 
extent.  Moreover,  since  investment  in  industrial  sectors  is often  long-term  and  irreversible, 
                                                 
9   This view has been expressed notably by many Federal Reserve officials in the past. 
10   This view is articulated in White, W., “Is Price Stability Enough?” BIS Working Paper No. 205, April 2006, Bank 
for International Settlements. 
11   See  Figure  1  in  Shimizu,  C.,  and  K.  G.  Nishimura,  “Biases  in  appraisal  land  price  information:  the  case  of 
Japan”, Journal of Property Investment and Finance, 24 (2006) 150–175. 
BIS Review 115/2010 
 9
 they also suffered serious overcapacity and misallocation problems caused by the excessive 
optimism of the late 1980s and its subsequent collapse. 
In retrospect, taking account of the devastating effects of excessive optimism and also the 
ineffectiveness of macro-prudential measures (in particular, window guidance as explained 
before), few would disagree that monetary policy should have played a role in attempting to 
rein in excessive optimism, provided that this had been detected at the time.  
This episode teaches two lessons about the role of monetary policy and its relation to macro-
prudential measures in the process of the buildup of financial imbalances. 
Firstly,  when  excessive  optimism  prevails  in  the  market,  macro-prudential  measures  alone 
may  prove  to  be  insufficient,  and  we  may  need  monetary  policy  on  top  of  these  macro-
prudential  measures  to  rein  in  such  excessive  optimism.  When  investors  are  overly 
optimistic,  asset  prices  go  up  to  make  it  easy  for  banks  to  comply  with,  for  example, 
increased  capital-buffer  requirements  and  more  stringent  loan-to-value  ratio  requirements. 
Moreover,  when  financial  imbalances  are  sizable,  they  are  likely  to  broadly  affect  many 
sectors  of  the  economy,  as  exemplified  by  1980s  Japan,  and  this  may  justify  the  use  of 
monetary policy.  
Secondly,  when  excessive  optimism  prevails  and  investment-return  expectations  rise 
erroneously, the central bank should be careful to avoid nourishing expectations of prolonged 
low interest rates relative to their long-run, sustainable levels. These expectations are likely 
to  fuel  investment  activities  further,  especially  in  property  markets.  This  increases  the 
magnitude of possible future winding down.12 
In  this  respect,  there  is  an  important  informational  factor  through  which  the  central  bank’s 
action or inaction influences market expectations. When excessive optimism emerges, a lack 
of action by the central bank may convey the wrong signal to the public. The central bank is 
responsible for the price stability that ultimately ensures the stability of economic activity. If 
there  is  no  correspondent  increase  in  prospects  for  economic  growth,  a  sharp  increase  in 
investment return expectations may lead to strong pressure on prices, raising concerns over 
inflation.  If  the  central  bank  does  not  show  concern  over  inflation  when  investment  return 
expectations  are  raised,  this  may  be  interpreted  as  a  sign  that  the  central  bank  has  also 
raised its expectations for growth potential and is thus “underwriting” market expectations. 
In practice, the most difficult task in combating excessive investor optimism and the buildup 
of  financial  imbalances  is  to  detect  the  excess  as  early  as  possible  in  a  transparent  way. 
Unfortunately, at the time of writing, conventional macroeconomic models are of little help in 
detecting excesses, though progress has been made in incorporating some characteristics of 
financial imbalances and thus in explaining their propagation mechanism. Taking account of 
this  state  of  our  understanding,  it  seems  to  me  that  significant  efforts  in  the  following  two 
areas are needed from the practitioner’s viewpoint.  
Firstly, it may be desirable to develop and operationalize so-called early warning indicators, 
to detect signs of a buildup in financial imbalances and to rein them in as early as possible 
before  it  is  costly  to  do  so.  Attempts  to  develop  early  warning  indicators  are  sometimes 
criticized  as  ad  hoc  because  of  the  lack  of  microeconomic  foundations,  so  to  speak. 
However,  what  we  face  are  “tail  risk”  phenomena  or  more  precisely,  unknown  unknowns, 
where past regularities apparently no longer hold true. In this respect, though atheoretical, 
the  development  and  continuing  improvement  of  early  warning  indicators  is  valuable  in 
discerning  factors  that  might  be  important  though  somewhat  overlooked  in  conventional 
thinking. 
                                                 
12   In the semi-annual Outlook Reports of the Bank of Japan, the Policy Board examines this possibility routinely 
in the second perspective of the two-perspective examination of economic conditions. 
10 
 BIS Review 115/2010
 Secondly, it is important (though admittedly not easy) to have timely and persuasive market 
information  related  to  the  possible  buildup  of  financial  imbalances,  particularly  information 
about  investor  optimism.  As  has  been  shown  before,  the  Japanese  government  (or  more 
precisely, some of its divisions) was partly responsible for the excessive optimism of the late 
1980s. This suggests that it is not an easy task at all to convince the market (and parts of the 
government)  plagued  by  excessive  optimism.  Many  central  banks  and  international 
institutions are working to obtain first-hand broad asset market information that is as reliable 
and as timely as possible. Here market intelligence plays an important role in detecting signs 
of  anomalies  in  these  markets.  In  doing  so,  we  should  also  duly  recognize  heterogeneity 
among regions. These are challenging tasks for emerging-economy central banks, especially 
with respect to property markets, which are traditionally not the main focus of central bank 
business,  and  anomalies  originating  in  financial  innovations,  which  often  “mutate”  and 
“disguise” themselves in subtle ways. 
We  usually  regard  financial  crises  as  rare  events,  and  most  of  the  time,  our  model  of  the 
economy  evolves  around  some 
though 
stochastically stable way. In reality however, we too often find, very painfully, that these rare 
events  are  not  in  fact  rare,  and  the  economy  moves  rather  drastically  from  stability  to 
instability in a short period time. The case of Japan in the late 1980s and the recent US case 
highlight  dramatically  this  pattern  of  crisis  occurrence.  To  contemplate  best  practices  in 
macro-prudential  and  monetary  policy,  we  should  take  proper  account  of  our  intellectual 
limitations  in  modeling  the  real  economy,  and  at  the  same  time,  we  should  be  practical in 
coping with the many-faceted problems of financial crises. 
I will stop here for now. Thank you for your kind attention. 
form  of  economic  equilibrium 
linear, 
in  a 
BIS Review 115/2010 
 11
