Subir Gokarn: People, jobs and productivity – the “simple” dynamics of 
inclusive growth 
Keynote address by Dr Subir Gokarn, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
Confederation  of  Indian  Industry  (CII)  Western  Region’s  Annual  Regional  Meeting  and 
National Conference on “Achieving Double Digit Growth”, Mumbai, 26 March 2010. 
 The  inputs  of  Abhiman  Das,  Sunil  Kumar  and  Muneesh  Kapur  in  preparation  of  this  address  are  gratefully 
acknowledged. 
Introduction 
Let me begin by thanking the Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) for inviting me to speak 
at its Annual Regional Meeting and National Conference on “Achieving Double-digit Growth”. 
The theme of the conference is, unquestionably, an issue of the utmost urgency for Indian 
policymakers. Although, in my current role, I am more focused on issues of macroeconomic 
stability and short-term growth and inflation prospects, today’s theme is one on which I wrote 
and commented on frequently in my past positions and which I feel very passionate about. 
So,  I  am  pleased  that  CII  is  giving  me  this  opportunity  to  take  a  small  diversion  from  my 
current concerns and re-visit some old, but equally important, ones. 
In  what  follows,  I  propose  to  view  the  issue  of  rapid  and  sustainable  growth  from  three 
perspectives, based on a simple principle. The principle is that rapid, sustained and inclusive 
growth will take place when large numbers of people move from low-productivity jobs to high-
productivity ones. Every single historical instance of this being achieved, cutting across time 
periods,  regions,  socio-political  contexts  and  any  other  differentiator  one  might  think  of, 
validates this principle. 
As for the three perspectives, I will first briefly tread over the by now well-known ground of 
long-term demographic projections. This is necessary to highlight just how massive the scale 
of the challenge is. I will then go over some numbers on employment and productivity, with 
the purpose of demonstrating just how significant the impact of the right kind of employment 
transitions on inclusive growth can be. Finally, I will offer some suggestions on the elements 
of a strategy that will facilitate the required transitions. 
The people imperative 
Let’s look ahead over the next 20 years using the latest demographic projections made by 
the  United  Nations  (Chart  1).  Between  2010  and  2020,  India  will  add  about  120  million 
people in the working age segment, or 28 per cent of the global increase, while it will only 
add about 43 million people to the 60+ age group, or 16 per cent of the global increase. In 
sharp contrast, China will add about 19 million people in the working age segment 20–59, 
less than 5 per cent of the global increment. In the same period, it will add about 60 million 
people to the 60+ age group, about 27 per cent of the global increase. 
BIS Review 42/2010 
 1
 Between  2020  and  2030,  the  differences  between  the  two  countries  will  be  even  starker. 
India will see its working age population increase by almost 100 million people, about one-
third  the  global  increase.  Its  60+  population  will  also  increase,  but  by  a  relatively  modest 
53 million people or 16 per cent of the global increase. On the other hand, China’s population 
in  the  working  age  segment  will  actually  decline  by  a  significant  62  million  people.  Its 
population in the 60+ segment will increase by about 104 million people, or 33 per cent of the 
global increment.  
I  draw  two  implications  from  these  numbers.  First,  independently  of  what  will  happen  to 
China, the scale of the challenge for India is going to be unlike anything we’ve seen before. A 
growing backlog of young adults who can only find subsistence employment even while their 
aspirations  and  expectations  rise,  is  hardly  the  formula  for  the  kind  of  social  and  political 
stability  that  is  an  important  pre-requisite  for  rapid  and  sustained  growth.  Thus,  there  is  a 
potential vicious circle brewing here. The less effective the growth process is in creating jobs, 
both in terms of numbers and quality, the greater the political threat and, consequently, the 
less sustainable the growth process itself. 
Second, the contrast between Chinese and Indian demographic trends reflects an enormous 
opportunity  for  us  to  put  our  inclusive  growth  trajectory  on  track.  These  trends  will  drive 
Chinese  wages  steadily  up,  weakening  the  global  competitiveness  of  their  powerhouse 
manufacturing sector. Increasing levels of automation and robotization in Chinese factories is 
one  potential  solution  but,  from  our  perspective,  the  relative  abundance  of  labour  on  our 
shores,  appropriately  skilled,  trained  and  deployed,  will  provide  global  producers  with  a 
legitimate  alternative  to  locate  their  production  facilities  in.  India  may  have  become  the  IT 
and ITES hub of the world over the past two decades; it now has the opportunity to become 
the factory to the world as well.  
Jobs and productivity 
Let us now take a quick look at our record on achieving the desired jobs-productivity nexus. I 
will do this at two levels: first, at the aggregate level across the agriculture-industry-services 
spectrum; second in the context of the possibility of India becoming “factory to the world”, at 
the level of the organized manufacturing sector, which will be key to realizing that aspiration. 
2 
 BIS Review 42/2010
The story at the aggregate level is told by charts 2, 3 and 4. Chart 2 depicts a relatively slow 
transition in the labour force, using the household employment data from 55th (1999–00) and 
61st  (2004–05)  rounds  of  the  National  Sample  Survey  as  points  of  comparison.  Over  the 
five-year period, the labour force increased from 397 million to 456 million. 18 million of the 
increment  was  absorbed  by  agriculture,  13  million  by  industry  and  28  million  by  services 
(including construction). The fact that two-thirds of the incremental number of workers were 
absorbed  by  sectors  other  than  agriculture  is  a  welcome  sign  from  the  productivity 
perspective, as I will demonstrate a little later on. However, the more worrying aspect of the 
slow transition is that the share of the total workforce employed in agriculture only declined 
from 60 per cent in 1999–00 to 57 per cent five years later. The share of industry increased 
from 12 per cent to 13 per cent and the share of services went up from 28 per cent to 30 per 
cent.  
As is well known, this pattern is almost the mirror image of the distribution of GDP across the 
three  sectors.  Chart  3  displays  the  transition  in  these  shares  over  the  same  period. 
Agriculture, already the smallest sector, lost some of its share, while services gained share in 
GDP somewhat more than they gained share in the labour force. In the overall context of my 
theme, the relative stagnation in the share of industry in both GDP and the labour force is of 
particular concern. 
 BIS Review 42/2010 
 3
Let  me  now  translate  these  two  sets  of  numbers  into  broad  productivity  indices.  Chart  4 
displays  the  ratio  of  average  GDP  per  worker,  a  rough  indicator  of  labour  productivity,  in 
industry and services to that in agriculture. The ratio for industry rose marginally from 4.1 in 
1999–00 to 4.2 in 2004–05. The ratio for services rose somewhat more, from 4.8 in 1999–00 
to  5.5  in  2004–05.  However,  regardless  of  the  magnitude  of  increase  and  the  differential 
across the two sectors, the stark fact is that average labour productivity outside agriculture is 
about 5 times that in agriculture.  
 This has very significant implications for inclusive growth. Simple arithmetic says that every 
worker who moves from agriculture to other sectors will increase his/her net contribution to 
GDP by four units. Since earnings are typically correlated with individual productivity, this will 
necessarily  translate  into  higher  incomes  for  all  the  workers  who  make  the  transition.  In 
short, the larger is the number of workers who move, the larger will be the increase in GDP 
4 
 BIS Review 42/2010
 as  well  as  in  the  average  earnings  of  the  labour  force.  We  have  both  faster  and  more 
inclusive growth. 
Obviously,  this  is  an  over-simplified  model,  but  that  should  not  detract  from  its  value  and 
usefulness  in  explaining  the  economic  transformations  of  all  the  economies  that  have 
preceded us down this path. Introducing various levels of complexity will only provide more 
realistic  estimates  of  the  potential  gains  from  the  transition  of  workers;  they  will  not 
undermine the basic logic of the argument. 
Let me now spend a little time taking a more focused look at the organized manufacturing 
sector, which, as I suggested earlier, will play a critical role in the economic transformation of 
India. The productivity comparisons at the aggregate level, while serving to make the point, 
significantly  underestimate  the  true  growth  and  inclusion  potential  of  the  transition  out  of 
agriculture and into industry and services. This is because the productivity numbers reflect 
the average GDP per worker across the organized and unorganized sectors. 
For a variety of well-known reasons, productivity in the former, in both industry and services, 
is an order of magnitude higher than in the latter. One obvious manifestation of this is the 
wage differential. Based on this, as well as other differentiating characteristics between the 
two sub-sectors, it would be reasonable to argue that organized sector employment is more 
desirable than that in the unorganized sector. But, the question is: where are the jobs? 
Chart 5 tells a story of essentially exclusive growth in the organized manufacturing sector. 
The slide combines data from the Index of Industrial Production and the Annual Survey of 
Industries,  which  covers  organized  (or  “registered”)  manufacturing  establishments,  on  the 
aggregate number of factories and workers in the sector. Each variable is normalized to a 
value of 100 in 1993–94, so the time series in the slide reflect the relative changes in the 
three variables. It is strikingly clear from the pattern that, while real output from the organized 
manufacturing sector has increased substantially, by almost three times between 1993–94 
and 2007–08, the number of factories and workers employed in the sector have barely grown 
at all. In fact, employment levels actually declined towards the middle of the period, before 
recovering somewhat in the later years. It appears that the Indian organized manufacturing 
sector has managed to triple its output from the same number of establishments, the average 
size  of  which  has  presumably  increased  and,  most  significantly,  from  virtually  the  same 
number of workers.  
BIS Review 42/2010 
  5
the  series  “Value  added/worker”.  Significantly, 
This, of course, means that the average productivity of those workers who had or were able 
to  get  jobs  in  organized  manufacturing  went  up  dramatically.  Chart  6  displays  this  trend 
through 
total  earnings  per  worker 
(emoluments/worker)  behaved  more  or  less  commensurately  with  productivity.  What  is 
particularly  important  about  the  pattern  on  this  slide,  however,  is  the  differential  between 
“wages”  –  which  reflect  the  fixed  component  of  earnings  –  and  “emoluments,  which 
combines  the  fixed  and  variable  components.  The  increasing  proportion  of  the  variable 
component in total earnings per worker indicates that the sector as a whole is beginning to 
build a welcome degree of flexibility into its employment contracts. I will return to this issue in 
the concluding section. 
 Finally, the rather worrying long-term impression of exclusion becomes somewhat less so if 
we look at more recent trends in the absolute numbers of both factories and workers. From 
Chart 7, it is apparent that organized manufacturing activity has experienced a revival in the 
number of factories during the recent growth boom. Even more reassuring is the picture in 
Chart  8,  which  suggests  that  this  has  been  matched  by  a  revival  in  employment  levels. 
I believe  that  the  increasing  flexibility  in  wage  contracts  that  was  seen  in  Chart  6  has 
something to do with this revival. Wage flexibility allows both the downside and upside of the 
business  cycle  to  be  shared  between  the  employee  and  the  employer.  To  that  extent,  it 
makes hiring people more attractive, which is, after all, the ultimate goal. 
6 
 BIS Review 42/2010
   The components of a strategy 
I  have  spoken  about  a  simple  principle  and  some  simple  arithmetic.  I  will  now  turn  to  the 
more complicated part of the problem, viz., how to translate the principle and the arithmetic 
into  outcomes.  Not  that  this  is  rocket  science;  as  I  said  earlier,  every  country  that  has 
preceded us has achieved it. Here again, I risk treading over some well-known ground, but 
given  both  the  magnitude  of  the  challenge  and  the  potential  to  become  the  factory  to  the 
world, I believe that this is a set of arguments that bears repeating. 
Three elements need to come together to achieve the transition in employment that is central 
to the achievement of rapid and inclusive growth. The first is the degree of flexibility in the 
employment contract. The evidence presented in the previous section suggests that setting 
BIS Review 42/2010 
 7
up new manufacturing establishments and hiring more people was correlated with increasing 
flexibility  in  wage  contracts.  However,  I  do  not  think  that  wage  flexibility  by  itself  goes  far 
enough.  This  needs  to  be  extended  to  employment  flexibility  as  well.  The  protection  that 
individual workers receive from job security regulations, in my view, places a disproportionate 
share  of  the  downside  risk  of  a  business  cycle  on  the  employer.  In  effect,  the  employer 
becomes the sole provider of a social safety net to the employee, which significantly raises 
the  effective  wage.  It  is  no  wonder  then,  that  the  organized  manufacturing  sector  has 
experienced exclusive growth. The easing of job security regulations is, I believe, a critical 
requirement  to  both  stimulating  more  rapid  growth  in  this  sector  and  making  it  more 
employment-intensive. 
We don’t need to look outside our country to find evidence of the strong connection between 
the  flexibility  of  the  employment  contract  and  growth  in  employment.  Our  own  services 
sector, which has provided the by far the larger employment opportunity, has the full benefit 
of employment flexibility. But, let me cite two instances from other countries that provide a 
politically palatable way to deal with the transition. 
The first is from China, which, in the early 1990s, did away with job security regulations for 
new workers and new establishments. This enabled the growth of manufacturing in the areas 
outside  the  Special  Economic  Zones,  where  a  fully  flexible  labour  market  was  in  force 
anyway. Instead of people going to where the jobs were, jobs now began coming to where 
the  people  were.  The  second  is  from  France,  which,  after  some  resistance,  recently 
implemented  its  First  Jobs  Contract  law.  This  allows  employers  to  hire  first-time  workers 
below the age of 26 under different, more flexible, conditions than its existing workforce is 
employed under. This was motivated by the need to address widespread unemployment in 
this  age  segment,  which  in  turn  was  attributed  to  the  rather  rigid  labour  regulations  that 
deterred employers from hiring new workers. 
Apart from highlighting the role that flexibility in the employment contract plays in generating 
jobs, these instances also point to the importance of “grandfathering” of existing contracts in 
making regulatory reform politically acceptable. I believe that this is a lesson we must take 
seriously in forming our own strategy. 
The second is the matching of supply and demand for skills. Hundreds of millions of potential 
workers  will  add  up  to  nothing  if  they  are  not  adequately  equipped  to  deal  with  the 
technological  and  organizational  environment  in  modern  manufacturing.  Obviously,  basic 
education,  which  provides  literacy,  numeracy,  IT  skills  and,  very  importantly,  teamwork 
capabilities, will play an important role. But, more specialized operating skills are far more 
difficult for the system to provide. From what I hear, the average shop-floor has moved far 
ahead  of  the  capabilities  of  our  vocational  training  system.  I  believe  that  industry  has  a 
significant  role  to  play  in  this  transition.  The  adoption  of  Industrial  Training  Institutes  by 
industry associations is an absolutely welcome step, but considering the numbers involved, 
both the scale and the nature of the role will have to be thought through. 
The third is the provision of a safety net. While I think it is inefficient for the employer to bear 
the sole burden of providing a safety net, which is essentially what job security regulations 
do,  I  also  think  that  a  safety  net  is an  absolutely  critical  requirement  in  an  environment  of 
employment flexibility. Experience from other countries indicates that reasonable safety nets 
can  be  built  with  contributions  from  employees,  employers  and  the  government.  The 
development  of  a  credible  safety  net,  along  with  the  grandfathering  approach  referred  to 
above  will,  in  my  view,  facilitate  the  transition  towards  a  flexible  employment  regime  in 
manufacturing.  
8 
 BIS Review 42/2010
Conclusion 
We undoubtedly have a huge challenge in creating reasonable employment for hundreds of 
millions of people over the coming decades. I believe that we have a huge opportunity as 
well to become the factory to the world. Exploiting this opportunity by 
 
 
 
creating a flexible employment environment in the manufacturing sector 
creating the capacity to provide relevant basic and operational skills to people 
and,  creating  a  reliable  safety  net  with  the  participation  of  employees,  employers 
and the government 
is critical to both accelerating growth and making it more inclusive. 
Let me end by once again thanking CII for inviting to speak at this event and thank you all for 
listening to me. 
BIS Review 42/2010 
 9
