Eleni D Dendrinou-Louri: Assessing the performance and regulation of 
the Greek banking system 
Speech  by  Ms  Eleni  D  Dendrinou-Louri,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Greece,  at  the 
conference: “The future of banking in Greece: redefining the business of financial services to 
drive growth and expansion in 2009 and beyond”, Athens, 21 January 2010. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen,  
I  would  like  to  thank  “The  Banker”  and  “Financial  Times  Global  Events”  for  inviting  me  to 
participate in this conference and giving me the opportunity to address such a distinguished 
audience.  
In this intervention, I will present an overview  of the Greek banking sector and outline the 
major  challenges  and  opportunities  that  Greek  banks  face.  I  will  finish  by  providing  a 
perspective about the new regulatory framework changes proposed by the Basel Committee.  
During  the  current  decade,  the  Greek  banking  system  has  enjoyed  a  favourable 
macroeconomic  environment,  in  both  Greece  and  in  South  Eastern  Europe  (SEE).  This 
situation has contributed to healthy profitability, underpinned by rapid loan-portfolio growth, 
relatively wide net interest margins, high-yield lending to SEE borrowers and broadly resilient 
fee-income generation. These factors, in conjunction with the negligible exposure of Greek 
banks to US subprime assets and other complex structured products, considerably mitigated 
the financial fallout from the first wave of the recent global financial crisis, the worst since the 
Great Depression in the 1930s.  
However, the Greek economy and other markets where Greek banks operate, notably SEE, 
have not been spared by the second round effects of the crisis. The liquidity squeeze and the 
asset-quality deterioration tested the Greek banking system, which fared rather  well in the 
course of the previous year (9months to be exact). More precisely:  
 
Greek  banks’  capital  adequacy  remained  at  satisfactory  levels  and  was  gradually 
strengthened;  
Profitability declined but remained at overall satisfactory levels;  
Credit risk increased and so did loan loss charges, with signs of moderation in the 
3rd quarter of the year;  
Enhanced by ECB funding, the Greek Government’s liquidity support package, and 
the  increase  in  deposit  base,  the  liquidity  position  of  Greek  banks  remained 
satisfactory.  
  In more detail:  
Capital  
In  the  first  9  months  of  2009,  the  capital  adequacy  of  Greek  commercial  banks  and  their 
groups  was  substantially  enhanced.  This  development  was  attributed  mainly 
to  a 
considerable  increase in  prudential  own  funds,  while  a  marginal  rise was  recorded  in  risk-
weighted  assets.  In  addition  to  the  quantitative  increase  of  equity  capital,  its  qualitative 
enhancement  via  the  increased  share  of  Tier  1  capital  in  prudential  own  funds  played  a 
dominant role in the banking system’s overall stability. The main factors behind the increase 
in prudential own funds of banks and their groups were the: 
BIS Review 18/2010 
 1
 Issuance  of  preference  stocks  acquired  by  the  Greek  government  as  part  of  the 
liquidity enhancement plan (Law 3723/2008)  
Completion of capital increases funded by the market  
Internal financing stemming from non-distributed profits  
Appreciation in the prices of stocks held by banks. 
 
 
 
As a result, Greek banks’ capital levels are at a par with the EU average (11.7 percent), with 
a Tier 1 ratio of 10.6 percent (Q3 2009) from 7.9 percent at end 2008. The leverage ratio 
stands at 13.4 and is significantly lower than the European average.  
Profitability  
Greek banks have remained profitable. Net interest margin stood at 2.6 percent during the 
first 9 months of 2009, twice the EU average. However, profitability declined y-o-y by around 
42%. This outcome was the unavoidable result of the crisis that hit Greece with a time lag 
and  was  aggravated  by  the  structural  and  fiscal  imbalances  that  characterise  the  Greek 
economy. Impairment charges have been the key drag on profits. ROE and ROA after taxes 
(7.5 percent and 0.5 percent, respectively, during the first 9 months of 2009) also declined 
but remain above the EU average. The cost-to-income ratio, at 51.9 percent, has decreased 
thanks to cost containment and is lower than the Large and Complex Banking Groups’ euro-
area weighted average (60.7% for the first half of 2009).  
However, it is of some concern that trading income, notable for its high volatility, represented 
a considerably large chunk of profits before taxes. The increase of trading income during the 
first 9 months of 2009 compared with the same period a year earlier, was attributable mainly 
to the increase in the price of Greek government bonds and stock prices in the second and 
third quarters of 2009. These trends have currently been reversed, rendering any gains from 
trading and financial transactions during the last quarter of 2009 and the first part of 2010 
highly unlikely.  
Asset quality  
In the course of 2009, the quality of the loan portfolio declined, resulting in an increase of the 
NPL ratio (on a solo basis) to 7.2 percent in September 2009 (from 5.0 percent in December 
2008), albeit at a decelerating rate. The NPL ratio increased for all types of loans, but the 
increase  was  more  pronounced  for  consumer  loans  (September  2009:  11.7%,  December 
2008: 8.2%). The NPL ratio for mortgages reached 6.9% (from 5.3% at the end of 2008) and 
for corporate loans reached 6.4% (from 4.3% at the end of 2008).  
With  Greece  experiencing  the  first  domestic  recession  since  the  early  1990s  and  with  a 
rather subdued private sector credit expansion and a public sector trying to address chronic 
fiscal imbalances, the medium-term outlook regarding asset quality is challenging. A further 
decline in loan quality and increases in impairment charges are likely both domestically and 
abroad;  economic  conditions  in  SEE  have  improved  but  significant  challenges  still  remain, 
observed and expected increases in unemployment being a key concern. Additionally, a high 
percentage  of  loans  in  SEE  is  FX-denominated  and  unhedged  from  the  borrowers,  which 
should  further  strain  the  balance  sheets  of  households  and  corporates.  So  Greek  banks 
should be particularly vigilant and pro-active in the management of their loan portfolio and 
overall balance-sheet.  
Liquidity  
The global financial crisis and the freezing of liquidity in international markets have affected 
funding  operations,  a  situation  that,  has  in  turn  affected  the  liquidity  buffers.  As  in  other 
2 
 BIS Review 18/2010
European  economies,  given  the  difficulties  in  wholesale  financial  markets,  ECB  lending 
facilities  have  become  a  major  source  of  funding,  alongside  the  increase  of  the  banks’ 
deposit base and the Greek Government liquidity support package. All of these sources of 
funds helped the Greek banking system to increase its liquidity position during 2009. At the 
end of September 2009, the loan-to-deposit ratio stood at 113%, one of the lowest in EU, 
and  the  financing  gap  (i.e.,  the  difference  between  deposits  and  loans)  shrank.  The  total 
borrowing  of  Greek  credit  institutions  from  the  Eurosystem/Bank  of  Greece,  at  the  end  of 
November 2009 amounted to 8.5% of total assets. At the same time, the liquidity allotted to 
Greek  banks  in  the  ECB’s  open-market  operations  represented  6.3%  of  the  total  liquidity 
provided at the Eurozone level. In the December one-year Eurosystem financing operation 
this percentage dropped to 6.0% and is expected to fall again this month.  
During the course of 2009 Greek banks issued €4.3 bn of unsecured debt with a 2–3 years 
maturity in the capital markets. They also issued €1.5 bn of covered bonds. Banks’ funding 
plans for 2010 take into account that the liquidity to be provided by the ECB will eventually 
return  to  its  pre-crisis  level.  Thus,  banks  are  now  re-oriented  to  the  capital  markets.  The 
extent to which their funding plans will be realised depends on the degree of normalization of 
international financial markets. 
Exposure to SEE – challenges and opportunities  
During the last 15 years, Greek Banks expanded in SEE, while in the last few years they also 
expanded  in  Turkey,  Poland  and  Ukraine.  The  assets  of  their  braches  and  subsidiaries  in 
those  countries  represent  10  percent  of  the  total  of  the  Greek  banking  system’s  assets. 
Before the crisis, Greek banks benefited greatly from the high lending growth (especially in 
housing and consumer loans) in these countries, the strong economic performance of these 
countries, and their accessibility to money markets because of Greece’s participation in the 
Eurosystem.  
With  the  recent  crisis  and  in  response  to  deteriorating  macroeconomic  conditions,  most 
banks in the region revised their business plans and curtailed their short-term activities. In 
recent months the scale of external support to the region has become clear. In a repetition of 
the  banking  crises  of  the  ‘90s,  the  financial-rescue  packages  funded  by  the  International 
Monetary Fund, the European Union and other IFIs, were very important for the viability of 
the domestic banking systems. Greek banks have been strong supporters of the so-called 
“Vienna  Initiative”  and  have  maintained  their  overall  exposure  to  the  area  despite  falling 
demand for loans. At the current juncture, the main challenge for the banks in the region is to 
sustain  capital  adequacy  in  the  face  of  falling  loan  quality,  coupled  with  a  still  adverse 
macroeconomic  environment  eroding  banks’  profitability.  Another  major  challenge  is  to 
preserve adequate liquidity.  
The key factors that will determine the extent of the successful operation of Greek banks in 
SEE  will  be  efficient  risk-management  practices  and  internal  control  systems,  adequate 
deposit  and  liquidity  provisions  and  efficient  administration  strategy  and  operation.  At  the 
same  time,  Greek  banks,  as  already  agreed  under  the  IMF  support  schemes,  will  at  least 
maintain their current exposure levels and continue to provide financing to the real economy.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Despite the perceived easing in international money and capital market conditions, serious 
challenges persist for the banking sector and Greek banks in particular. They mostly have to 
do  with  the  domestic  macroeconomic  environment,  the  country’s  fiscal  imbalances  and 
recent downgrades of sovereign ratings and the markets’ rating of Greek state debt.  
It  is  hence  of  critical  importance  that  Greek  banks  take  great  caution  in  planning  their 
medium-term  strategy  with  respect  to  their  capital  base  and  fund  utilization.  They  need  to 
maintain considerable capital margins over and above the required minimum levels, as well 
as  ample  liquidity  buffers.  One  way  to  achieve  this  objective  is  by  promoting  internal 
BIS Review 18/2010 
 3
financing. Furthermore, in the context of the present situation, banks should give priority to 
the strengthening of their ability to absorb any unforeseen losses. The prudent management 
of their payout and remuneration strategies is, hence, strongly advised.  
Banks must also persevere in their efforts to further strengthen the risk management culture, 
methodologies,  processes  and  controls  and  improve  governance.  As  managing  risk  is  not 
always  straightforward,  qualitative  analyses  are  needed 
to  complement  quantitative 
analyses.  We  can  see  good  steps  taken  in  this  direction.  In  a  challenging  economic 
environment,  Greek  banks  need  to  find  the  appropriate  balance  between  improving  asset 
quality,  harnessing  the  cost  of  risk  and  providing  the  necessary  liquidity  to  the  economy. 
Financial institutions need to have a clear view of the risk they undertake relative to available 
capital and liquidity buffers.  
When  planning  their  future  strategy,  banks  should  also  take  into  consideration  proposed 
changes in the supervisory and regulatory framework, aiming at strengthening the resilience 
and  enhancing  the  stability  of  the  banking  system.  One  should  bear  in  mind  that  the 
cornerstone  of  sustainable  economic  growth  is  the  ability  of  banks  to  facilitate  credit 
intermediation between savers and investors and to provide the critical services consumers 
and enterprises obtain from banks to run their daily lives and business. One cannot forget 
that  some  of  the  reasons  behind  the  recent  financial  crisis  were  the  build  up  of  excessive 
leverage,  insufficient  capital  and  liquidity  buffers  and  the  pro-cyclical  amplification  of  risks. 
International regulatory bodies promptly reacted to address the identified deficiencies of the 
current framework.  
The  Basel  Committee  recently  published  proposals  on  ways  to  redesign  the  existing 
regulatory  capital  and  liquidity  framework.  The  target  date  for  the  implementation  of  these 
proposals 
“appropriate  phase-in  measures  and  grandfathering 
arrangements  for  a  sufficiently  long  period  to  ensure  a  smooth  transition  to  the  new 
standards”. Increased capital requirements for trading books and securitizations, proposed at 
the beginning of 2009, are expected to be effective as of December 2010. These “Basel III” 
draft proposals:  
1. 
is  end-2012,  with 
Re-define eligible capital. All regulatory adjustments are to be applied to the more-
strictly defined and more internationally harmonized common equity component of 
Tier  1.  Tier  2  capital  instruments  will  be  standardized,  and  Tier  3  capital  will  be 
phased-out.  Explicit  minima  for  common  equity,  Tier  1  and  Total  Capital  as 
percentages  of  Risk  Weighted  Assets  will  be  determined  after  the  comprehensive 
impact assessment, that will take place in the first half of 2010, is concluded.  
Tighten  risk  coverage  by  better  addressing  the  counterparty  credit  risk  (CCR) 
arising  primarily  from  derivatives,  repos  and  securities-financing  activities.  This 
change  is  motivated  by  the  fact  that  “two-thirds  of  the  Counterparty  Credit  Risk 
losses were due to credit valuation adjustments and only about one-third were due 
to actual defaults”.  
Limit the inherent procyclicality of the existing framework with the introduction of 
(a)  capital  buffers  beyond  the  regulatory  minimum,  which  will  be  built-up  in  good 
times  so  that  they  can  be  drawn  upon  during  stress  periods  and  (b)  “forward-
looking” provisioning based on expected losses to substitute for the current “incurred 
loss” provisioning model.  
Introduce a non-risk metric, the leverage ratio, to supplement existing Pillar 1 risk 
metrics. 
Propose a short-term Liquidity Coverage Ratio in order to ensure that financial 
institutions  have  sufficient  high  quality  liquid  resources  to  survive  an  acute  stress 
scenario  calculated  for  30  calendar  days  into  the  future  and  a  longer-term  Net-
Stable-Funding  Ratio  which  promotes  an 
institution’s  resiliency  by  creating 
incentives for more-stable funding choices.  
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
4 
 BIS Review 18/2010
Ladies and gentlemen,  
Before closing, I would like to say a few words about an important lesson of the recent crisis 
which can be summarized in the following sentence: “Regulatory reform is a necessary, but 
not a sufficient condition for a safer financial system”.  
Broadening  the  focus  from  the  supervision  of  individual  institutions  by  taking  into  account 
system-wide risks is an urgent priority. We need to understand the ways the components of 
the financial system interact; we need to realize that because of these interactions, system-
wide risk can be much larger than the sum of the risks posed by individual institutions.  
Developing a system-wide view of financial risks, of the way they are distributed within the 
financial  system  and  of  the  systemic  importance  and  contribution  to  systemic  risk  of  each 
individual  institution  are  some  of  the  key  tasks  of  the  macro-prudential  dimension  of 
regulation. This is the mandate of the Financial Stability Department of the BoG, created as a 
separate entity during the fourth quarter of 2008. At the level of the EU, this analysis of risk is 
in the hands of the newly-established European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB). The credibility 
and effectiveness of both critically depend on not only the quality of the risk assessments but 
also  on  the  timely  and  efficient  translation  of  those  assessments  into  concrete  policy 
recommendations.  
I would like to leave you with these last thoughts:  
Despite the significant progress of this past year, the reform program is far from complete. 
Sustaining  the  reform  impetus  is  crucial,  especially  now  that  the  recovery  of  the  banking 
sector from this unprecedented credit crisis, across the world and in Greece, appears under 
way.  
For the financial industry and us regulators, this situation simply means that good plans have 
to  be  carried  to  fruition,  changes  need  to  be  institutionalized,  and  adjustments  to  the 
business models need to continue and not be forgotten. Reform is a continuous process, not 
merely a reaction to a shock.  
Thank you for your attention.  
BIS Review 18/2010 
 5
