Duvvuri Subbarao: Volatility in capital flows – some perspectives 
Comments by Dr Duvvuri Subbarao, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the High-level 
Conference on “The International Monetary System”, jointly organised by the Swiss National 
Bank and the International Monetary Fund, Zurich, 11 May 2010. 
 As  the  crisis  is  ebbing,  capital  inflows  into  emerging  market  economies  (EMEs)  have 
resumed  –  a  consequence  of  a  global  system  awash  with  liquidity,  the  assurance  of  low 
interest rates ruling in advanced economies over “an extended period” and the prospects of 
robust  growth  in  EMEs.  According  to  the  IMF,  net  private  financial  flows  to  emerging  and 
developing economies increased from US$ 254 billion in 2006 to US$ 689 billion in 2007 and 
then  declined,  at  the  height  of  the  global  financial  crisis,  to  US$  179  billion  in  2008  and 
US$ 180 billion in 2009. The resumption of capital flows has triggered familiar concerns in 
EMEs  about  macroeconomic  and  financial  stability.  This  has  also  sparked  off  a  vigorous 
debate internationally on the policy approach to capital flows at the country level and at the 
international  level.  My  comments  as  chairman  of  this  session  will  cover  the  theoretical 
arguments for and against capital flows, the collective experience to date in managing capital 
flows and issues on the way forward. I will also allude to India’s approach to capital account 
management. 
Arguments for and against capital flows  
2. 
The theoretical arguments in support of capital flows are quite persuasive. Capital 
flows  aid  growth  by  providing  external  capital  to  sustain  an  excess  of  investment  over 
domestic  savings.  By  affording  the  opportunity  of  using  the  world  market,  an  open  capital 
account  permits  both  savers  and  investors  to  diversify  their  portfolios  to  maximize  returns 
and  minimize  risks.  Capital  flows  could  also  potentially  develop  nascent  financial  markets, 
promote financial discipline and reduce the borrowing costs both for the government and the 
corporates.  
3. 
On  the  flip  side,  however,  capital  flows  are  known  to  be  procyclical  and  they 
complicate  macroeconomic  management.  An  open  capital  account  interferes  with  the 
simultaneous  management  of  a  fixed/managed  exchange  rate  peg  and  an  independent 
monetary policy – a phenomenon familiarly known as the “Impossible Trinity”.  
4. 
Large and persistent capital flows can potentially jeopardize financial stability. Large 
speculative flows in “search for yield” typically go into investment in assets leading to rapid 
and destabilizing build up of asset prices. Since such speculative flows are volatile by nature, 
they  can  impair  the  orderly  functioning  of  the  financial  markets.  When  investors  exit  from 
securities markets abruptly in a herd, stock and bond prices get affected, and when investors 
take the redemption proceeds out of the country, the exchange rate gets affected. Should the 
central bank intervene to stabilize the forex market, the resultant tightened liquidity can affect 
the  money  markets.  Thus,  speculative  flows  affect  all  financial  markets  –  the  securities 
markets, the forex market, the money market and the credit market, with contagion spreading 
from one market to another rapidly. If not contained, these swift developments can threaten 
financial stability and lead to output and employment losses. 
Managing capital flows 
5. 
Surely, capital flows are important to meet the investment needs of EMEs. Problems 
arise  when  the  flows  are  largely  in  excess  of  the  economy’s  absorptive  capacity  and  also 
when they are highly speculative in nature. EMEs have responded to managing the adverse 
macro impact of volatile capital flows through a variety of policy actions. Stylistically, these 
BIS Review 66/2010 
 1
can be categorized into three options. The first option is to do nothing (exchange rate option) 
in which case the exchange rate will appreciate. The second is to allow the flows to come in 
but intervene in the forex market (reserve accumulation option). The third option is to deploy 
capital controls. Typically, EMEs have adopted a mix of all the options. Let me briefly discuss 
the implication of these options. 
The option of exchange rate adjustment 
The  most  straight  forward  option  for  the  central  bank  is  to  allow  flows  to  come  in 
6. 
without any intervention. However, when capital inflows are large, this can lead to currency 
appreciation unrelated to fundamentals and trigger a “Dutch Disease” syndrome. Experience 
has  shown  that  a  flexible  exchange  rate  system  is  prone  to  overshooting,  and  this  has 
engendered the “fear of floating” among many countries. 
The option of reserve accumulation 
The second option for a central bank, confronted with a surge of capital flows, is to 
7. 
intervene in the foreign exchange market to dampen disorderly movements of the exchange 
rate. This will result in accumulation of foreign exchange reserves and release of additional 
liquidity into the system. If left unsterilized, the additional liquidity so generated in the system 
will have potential inflationary implications. Typically central banks have sterilized the flows, 
either partly or fully, using a variety of tools including open market operations, tightening the 
access  of  banks  to  the  discount  window,  adjusting  reserve  requirements,  using  a  foreign 
exchange swap facility, easing restrictions on capital outflows and pre-payment of external 
debt. In theory, each of these tools holds out the prospect of achieving the same effect as 
open  market  operations.  However,  one  should  be  mindful  of  the  law  of  unintentional 
consequences.  Such  intervention  would  prevent  the  domestic  money  market  interest  rates 
from  falling  which  would  attract  more  inflows  and  thus  actually  accentuate  appreciation 
pressure, the problem that was sought to be contained in the first place. In the case of EMEs, 
intervention may also entail large quasi-fiscal costs if the domestic assets yield higher returns 
than the foreign exchange reserves. 
8. 
Notwithstanding the costs of accumulating and holding reserves, reserves so built 
up come handy in preserving financial stability in the face of outflows. In fact, besides being 
an intrinsic good, foreign exchange reserves confer several other important advantages such 
as automaticity, fungibility and usage in both crisis prevention and crisis resolution. Because 
of  the  potential  for  rapid  outflows  and  the  associated  liquidity  risks,  EMEs  have  tended  to 
build up reserves as a means of self-insurance. During the recent crisis, EMEs which had 
built up reserves as self-insurance found that they could weather the crisis more effectively. 
The very possession of an ample level of reserves helped to maintain market confidence as 
measured by lower spreads on credit default swaps and also blunted the penetration of the 
crisis in these economies.  
9. 
Such self insurance has, however, faced intellectual inclement. It has been criticized 
as being costly and inefficient and also as contributing to global imbalances. To wean EMEs 
away from self insurance, international financial institutions like the IMF have recently come 
up  with  revised  instruments  such  as  a  flexible  credit  line  and  high  access  precautionary 
arrangements.  There  were  also  cases  of  regional  swap  arrangements  during  the  recent 
crisis. It is not yet clear if such external safety-nets can fully substitute for national level self-
insurance in terms of speed, effectiveness and autonomy.  
The option of capital controls 
10. 
The  third  standard  option  for  EMEs  is  to  impose  controls  on  capital  flows. 
Experience in this regard has been mixed. Protagonists of controls have argued that capital 
controls  are  distortionary,  difficult  to  implement,  easy  to  evade,  and  that  they  become 
2 
 BIS Review 66/2010
ineffective fairly quickly and entail negative externalities. On the other hand, proponents of 
capital controls contend that controls are desirable because they preserve monetary policy 
autonomy, save sterilization costs, tilt the composition of foreign liabilities toward long-term 
maturities,  and  ensure  macroeconomic  and  financial  stability.  The  challenge  for  policy 
makers is to design and implement controls where the cost of compliance is lower than the 
cost of evasion. 
11. 
Capital controls were a central issue during the Asian crisis, but the orthodox view 
that  “controls  are  not  desirable”  largely  survived  the  crisis.  Capital  controls  are  now  once 
again a central issue, as the recent crisis witnessed, across emerging economies, a rough 
correlation between the extent of openness of the capital account and the extent of adverse 
impact  of  the  crisis.  Surely,  this  should  not  be  read  as  the  denouncement  of  open  capital 
account, but a powerful demonstration of the tenet that premature capital account opening 
hurts more than it helps.  
12. 
The advisability of a Tobin tax has figured prominently in the discussion on capital 
controls  in  the  post  crisis  period.  Several  countries  have  used  variants  of  Tobin  tax  to 
discourage heavy, short-term capital inflows. It has been argued that the tax helps reduce 
exchange  rate  volatility  and  consequently  curtails  the  intensity  of  “boom-bust”  cycles 
engendered by international capital flows. However, Tobin tax has been criticized on many 
counts: the tax can be evaded easily through modern financial instruments like derivatives; it 
reduces  liquidity  in  the  markets;  and  to  be  effective,  the  scope  of  the  tax  needs  to  be 
continuously  widened  which  may  lead  to  inefficiencies.  The  efficacy  of  a  Tobin  type  tax 
remains a debatable issue. 
Refreshingly, the IMF has shed its long held orthodoxy against capital controls. The 
13. 
policy note of the IMF published in February 20101 has referred to certain “circumstances in 
which  capital  controls  can  be  a  legitimate  component  of  the  policy  response  to  surges  in 
capital flows”. The IMF’s Global Financial Stability Report (April 2010) has gone further into 
this  issue  and  observes  that  capital  controls  are  reasonable  instruments  in  the  “toolkit”  of 
developing/EME  economies  facing  volatile  capital  flows.  The  World  Bank  and  the  Asian 
Development Bank too have echoed the view that capital controls may be advisable, indeed 
inevitable, in certain circumstances. 
India’s approach  
14. 
India has experienced both “floods” and “sudden stops” of capital flows. Net capital 
flows  to  India  increased  from  as  low  as  US$  7  billion  in  1990–91  to  US$  45  billion  in  
2006–07, and further to US$ 107 billion during 2007–08, the year just before the crisis. They 
dropped to as low as US$ 7 billion in 2008–09 at the height of the crisis. Capital flows are 
estimated to have recovered to around US$ 50 billion in 2009–10.  
15. 
India has followed a consistent policy on allowing capital inflows in general and on 
capital account management in particular. Our position is that capital account convertibility is 
not  a  stand  alone  objective  but  a  means  for  higher  and  stable  growth.  We  believe  our 
economy should traverse towards capital convertibility along a gradual path – the path itself 
being recalibrated on a dynamic basis in response to domestic and global developments. We 
will continue to move towards liberalizing our capital account, but we will revisit the road map 
to reflect the lessons of the crisis. As regards a Tobin type tax, we have not so far imposed 
nor  are  we  contemplating  one.  However,  it  needs  reiterating  that  no  policy  instrument  is 
clearly off the table and our choice of instruments will be determined by the context. 
                                                 
1   Ostry,  Jonathan  D.  and  Others  (2010),  “Capital  Inflows:  The  Role  of  Controls”,  IMF  Staff  Position  Note, 
SPN/10/04, February 19, 2010. 
BIS Review 66/2010 
 3
Among  the  components  of  capital  flows,  we  prefer  long  term  flows  to  short-term 
16. 
flows and non-debt flows to debt flows. The logic for that is self-evident. Our policy on equity 
flows has been quite liberal, and in sharp contrast to other EMEs which liberalized and then 
reversed the liberalization when flows became volatile, our policy has been quite stable.  
17. 
Historically,  we  have  used  policy  levers  on  the  debt  side  of  the  flows  to  manage 
volatility.  Contrary  to  popular  perception,  we  have  used  both  quantity  and  price  based 
variables  to  moderate  debt  flows.  There  is  a  ceiling  on  the  extent  of  FII  investment  in 
sovereign  and  corporate  debt  (quantity  variable)  and  there  is  also  a  withholding  tax  (price 
variable).  External  commercial  borrowings  (ECB)  by  corporates  come  in  through  both  an 
automatic  route  and  an  approval  route.  ECB  flows  under  both  the  automatic  and  approval 
routes  are  moderated  by  interest  rate  ceilings  (a  price  variable)  and  those  under  the 
automatic  route  through  an  additional  ceiling  on  total  quantity  (a  quantity  variable). 
Non-Resident Indians (NRI) deposits are monitored through an interest rate ceiling, a price 
variable. 
18. 
Our exchange rate policy is not guided by a fixed or pre-announced target or band. 
Our policy has been to intervene in the market to manage excessive volatility and disruptions 
to  the  macroeconomic  situation.  This  “volatility  centric  approach”  to  exchange  rate  also 
stems  from  the  source  of  volatility  which  is  capital  flows.  Despite  not  having  a  fully  open 
capital account, we have experienced large volatility in capital flows as the data for last four 
years suggests (See Table below). The exchange rate of the Indian rupee vis-à-vis US dollar 
appreciated  when  there  were  large  capital  inflows;  and  it  depreciated  when  the  capital 
inflows thinned out. The two way movement is a clear demarcation of our flexible exchange 
rate policy.  
Table  
Trends in India’s external sector 
 2006/07 
2007/08  2008/09 2009/10 
CAD (% of GDP) 
Net Capital flows  
(% of GDP) 
Capital flows in excess of CAD ($ 
billion) 
Rupee appreciation (+) 
depreciation (–) vis-à-vis US$ 
during the year 
1.0 
4.8 
37 
1.3 
8.7 
2.4 
2.5 
0.6 
3.8 
92 
(–)20 
14 
2.3 
9.0 
(–)21.5 
12.9 
 19. 
India’s  exchange  rate  policy  is  said  to  have  imposed  some  costs.  Last  fiscal 
(2009/10), the rupee appreciated by 13 per cent in nominal terms but by as much as 19 per 
cent in real terms because of the inflation differential between us and our trading partners. 
This  has  implications  for  our  external  competitiveness  at  a  time  when  world  trade  is 
recovering  and  concerns  about  protectionism  are  resurfacing.  Also,  if  we  have  a  flexible 
exchange rate, and if other countries which are our trading partners or competitors for the 
same export markets have a fixed exchange rate, we get disadvantaged. 
20. 
 Although India does not have a deliberate strategy of building up reserves for self 
insurance, our reserves got built up as a result of our relatively flexible exchange rate policy. 
4 
 BIS Review 66/2010
The  reserves  so  built  up  have  been  used  to  contain  volatility  in  the  event  of  capital  flow 
reversals. 
21. 
There  has  been  much  discussion  post-crisis  on  the  cost  effectiveness  of 
self-insurance.  The  main  refrain  has  been  that  accumulation  of  reserves  by  EMEs  as  a 
safety-net entails domestic costs while also leading to global imbalances. Be that as it may, 
in  evaluating  the  level  of  reserves  and  the  quantum  of  self  insurance,  it  is  important  to 
distinguish  between  countries  whose  reserves  are  a  consequence  of  current  account 
surpluses and countries with current account deficits whose reserves are a result of capital 
inflows in excess of their economy’s absorptive capacity. India falls in the latter category. Our 
reserves comprise essentially borrowed resources, and we are therefore more vulnerable to 
sudden stops and reversals as compared with countries with current account surpluses.  
Way forward 
22. 
For several decades now, EMEs have struggled with capital flows in their own ways. 
The orthodox view that capital controls are inherently inefficient and should not be resorted to 
has inhibited mainstream research on the topic. But that orthodoxy has now changed, and a 
more  flexible  and  open-minded  approach  is  gaining  ground.  For  example,  the  April  2010 
Global Financial Stability Report of the IMF says, “there are a number of different types of 
controls  that  can  be  imposed  with  varying  degrees  of  success  under  different  country 
circumstances. Overall, the message is that one size does not fit all. Since the use of capital 
controls  is  advisable  only  to  deal  with  temporary  inflows,  in  particular  those  generated  by 
external factors, they can be useful even if their effectiveness diminishes over time.” There is 
a  need  to  follow  up  this  revised  world  view  with  research.  The  IMF  and  other  multilateral 
bodies  and  research  institutions  must  embark  on  researching  the  negative  externalities 
arising from large and volatile capital flows, the ways to address the negative externalities, 
explore  when  it  is  appropriate  to  use  controls,  what  kind  of  controls  work  best  and  under 
what circumstances. 
23. 
Another  area  where  IMF  research  would  be  value  adding  will  be  in  creating  an 
informative and exhaustive database on capital flows including cross border bank exposures. 
This may include standardization of the definition of capital flows, maintaining data at higher 
frequencies  and  collecting  information  on  the  counterparties  involved  in  the  transactions. 
Such tracking would help countries determine which types of flows are potentially unstable 
and need reserve backing. The IMF should undertake an independent study on capital flows 
based  on  such  data  and  pinpoint  the  vulnerabilities,  if  any,  in  the  international  monetary 
system so as to enable countries to take preventive action against potential pressure points. 
24. 
There  has  been  some  discussion  on  the  role  of  the  IMF  in  evaluating  the  capital 
account stances of countries. It would be preferable for the IMF to play only an advisory (and 
not  jurisdictional)  role  on  capital  account  issues  as  our  collective  understanding  is  not  yet 
complete  and  differences  in  views/perceptions/experiences  need  to  be  accommodated. 
Within this advisory role, even-handed treatment, in the sense that sources of volatility and 
potential  vulnerability  are  given  as  much  emphasis  as  the  issue  of  capital  controls,  is 
important.  
Conclusion 
25. 
In its January 28, 2010 issue, The Economist said, “Capital, like water, tends to flow 
around  such  obstacles  (taxes).  Try  to  dam  its  movements  at  one  point,  and  slowly  but 
remorselessly, it will find its way around.” To learn to “dam” the flows so that the benefits of 
capital flows exceed their costs remains an intellectual and policy challenge for EMEs.  
BIS Review 66/2010 
 5
