Ewart S Williams: Anti-money laundering and combating the financing of 
terrorism 
Address by Mr Ewart S Williams, Governor of the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago, at 
the  6th  Annual  Compliance  Conference  on  Anti-Money  Laundering  and  Combating  the 
Financing of Terrorism, Port-of-Spain, 14 January 2010. 
 I  would  like  to  thank  the  Caribbean  Financial  Action  Task  Force  (CFATF),  the  Ministry  of 
National Security, the Commonwealth Secretariat and the United States Embassy of Trinidad 
and Tobago for jointly organizing this Conference and inviting me to speak. The timing could 
not  be  better  given  the  increase  attention  that  the  international  community  is  lending  to 
sanctions for non-compliance and given our aspiration to be an international financial centre. 
Money laundering is the process through which the gains derived from criminal activities are 
made to appear as if they originated from a legitimate source. The events of 9/11 highlighted 
a more threatening dimension of the problem – the use of the financial system to mobilize 
and  direct  funds  for  terrorist  activities.  In  my  remarks  when  I  talk  about  anti-money 
laundering measures, I also include steps to counter the financing of terrorism.  
Many people don’t see money laundering as the serious crime that it is. Many people seem 
not  to  recognize  that  money  laundering  helps  to  perpetuate  the  crimes  that  generated  the 
illegal money. The truth is that money laundering, if successful, makes crime pay.  
We never rank money laundering with some of the heinous crimes like kidnapping and drug 
running  for  instance,  not  recognizing  that  very  often  money  laundering  keeps  the 
kidnapper/drug runner in business.  
In addition to the social cost, money laundering poses significant legal and reputational risks. 
As  you  know,  financial  institutions  are  important  catalysts  for  economic  growth  and 
development.  Accordingly,  a  sound  and  strong  financial  system  is  vital  to  our  country’s 
growth process.  
Money laundering, however, erodes the integrity of financial institutions by involving them in 
the proceeds of illegal activity and, in a way, by making them supportive (albeit unwittingly) of 
illegal  activity.  Such  a  connection  can  destroy  the  reputation  of  an  institution  but  what’s 
worse;  the  damage  invariably  transcends  the  institution  and  spreads,  with  far-reaching 
consequences, for the country and the region.  
Globalisation,  which  has  brought  many  benefits,  has  also  increased  the  risk  of  money 
laundering by  providing  the  channel  for  funds  to  flow  freely  across  national  boundaries.  In 
addition technological advances have provided the locomotive for these funds to reach the 
most remote countries.  
Over the past two decades the advanced countries have introduced a range of mechanisms 
to  control  money  laundering.  Criminals  have  however  risen  to  the  occasion  by  changing 
money laundering methods and techniques to overcome these barriers.  
The  shift  in  “the  modus  operandi”  involves  targeting  small  countries  that  have  less  robust 
defenses.  
The  recent  financial  crisis  has  prompted  the  establishment  of  a  new  international  financial 
architecture that emphasizes close collaboration between countries, large and small. It has 
also  raised  the  focus  on  greater  transparency  of  financial  transactions,  and  on  good 
governance.  At  the  same  time,  the  international  community  has  become  less  tolerant  of 
jurisdictions that are not adhering to international standards and is now all the more ready to 
impose sanctions on countries that don’t measure up. When Switzerland is forced to give up 
or modify its long-standing reputation for bank secrecy.  
BIS Review 4/2010 
 1
For  countries  like  Trinidad  and  Tobago,  the  systemic  risk  from  money  laundering  has 
increased exponentially in the past several years.  
Firstly,  our economy  has  become more  open  as  barriers  to  trade  and  financial  flows  have 
been eliminated. In addition, we have become an important regional financial centre, and that 
necessarily brings with it the potential to attract both legal and illegal financial flows.  
Second,  while  the  potential  sources  of  money  to  be  laundered  have  expanded  greatly  in 
recent years, illegal drugs continue to be the most prolific. The fact that our region and our 
country are now recognized as important stops on a major north-south route for illegal drugs, 
further increases our vulnerability.  
Third, money launderers are tenacious in probing financial systems for gaps, and creative for 
devising new methods to overcome safeguards. While the developed countries have been 
diligent in updating their legislative and regulatory frameworks to deal with money laundering 
(particularly after 9/11), the developing countries, Trinidad and Tobago included, have been 
slow in enhancing their frameworks, in so doing, creating another source of vulnerability.  
To  our  credit,  Trinidad  and  Tobago  has  embarked  on  a  comprehensive  programme  to 
upgrade its financial infrastructure to facilitate our anti-money laundering efforts.  
A  new  Financial  Institutions  Act  was  enacted  in  December  2008.  This  allows  the  Central 
Bank  to  issue  compliance  directions  to  licensed  financial  institutions  for  non-compliance 
with AML/CFT Guidelines. Similar amendments are being proposed for the Insurance Bill.  
The Financial Institutions Act also allows for the sharing of information with other regulators 
(a  critical  requirement  in  anti-money  laundering)  and  the  Financial  Intelligence  Unit  of 
Trinidad and Tobago (the FIU).  
The Bank has expanded its regulatory purview to money remitters via an amendment to 
the  Central  Bank  Act.  In  other  countries,  money  remitters  have  been  a  major  source  of 
money laundering. An effective licensing and supervisory regime for money remitters is being 
developed and is expected to be implemented by June 2010.  
Moreover, (as indicated by the Minister of National Security), Parliament approved three key 
money-laundering legislations in October 2009. Prior to this legislation, the centre-piece of 
our  money-laundering  framework  for  financial  institutions  was  the  Bank’s  AML/CFT 
guidelines, which were based on the FATF 40 +9 recommendations, but, which did not have 
the  force  of  law  and  carried  no  sanctions.  The  Central  Bank,  however,  conducted 
assessments of compliance with these guidelines, as part of our onsite examinations among 
banks and insurance companies.  
In general, the report card coming out of these assessments have been mixed.  
Among  the  banking  system,  for  example,  the  foreign  banks  are  seen  to  have  fairly 
sophisticated AML systems since they need to meet their head-office standards. In general, 
the local banking institutions have less robust AML systems, though it is fair to say, that they 
have been working hard to strengthen these arrangements.  
Unfortunately, the insurance sector, as a whole, has not seen money laundering as a major 
challenge, largely because, some argue, they receive payment mostly by cheques, which are 
drawn  on  banks,  and  which  themselves  are  subject  to  money  laundering  procedures.  The 
fact is however, that many insurance intermediaries deal in cash (for example, in collecting 
insurance premiums) and herein lies one potential source of money laundering.  
The passage of the three key pieces of anti-money laundering legislation in October 2009 – 
the  Proceeds  of  Crime  Amendment  Act,  the  Financial  Intelligence  Unit  of  Trinidad  and 
Tobago Act and the Financial Obligations Regulations – is intended to serve as a catalyst for 
a  major  upgrade  of  the  country’s  AML  systems.  This  legislative  package  has  brought 
Trinidad  and  Tobago  more  in  line  with  FATF’s  40  +  9  recommendations  for  Anti-Money 
Laundering  and  the  Combating  of  the  Financing  of  Terrorism  (AML/CFT).  One  of  the  key 
2 
 BIS Review 4/2010
provisions of the new legislation is the establishment of the Financial Intelligence Unit. This 
Unit will be responsible for the collection of financial intelligence and information and for the 
analysis and distribution of such information to our local law enforcement agencies, financial 
institutions and businesses in Trinidad and Tobago.  
The  fourth  and  final  piece  of  the  legislative  package,  the  Anti-Terrorist  Amendment  Bill  is 
expected to be laid in Parliament this month.  
But for all the improvements in the legislation, ultimately our AML framework is only as 
good  as  the  quality  of  implementation  and  by  the  vigilance  expended  by  our  financial 
institutions.  
There are four things institutions need to focus on: 
• 
First,  know  your  customers.  Customer  identification  is  the  first  line  of  defense 
against money laundering. Financial institutions should obtain satisfactory evidence 
of  customers’  identities,  have  effective  procedures  for  verifying  the  bona  fides  of 
new  customers,  and  screen  them  against  the  various  lists  of  suspected  money 
launderers and terrorists.  
Second,  report  all  suspicious  transactions.  Once  you  have  established  a 
customer  relationship, maintain  good  records of  all  financial  transactions  and  look 
out for unusual activities. If you suspect funds are derived illegally or belong to any 
terrorist,  file  a  report  promptly  to  the  FIU.  You  do  not  have  to  conduct  an 
investigation to verify. That is the job of the FIU.  
Third,  ensure  that  staff  is  well-trained.  New  staff,  “front-line”  staff,  staff  dealing 
with  new  customers,  and  supervisors  and  managers  should  be  given  appropriate 
training and refresher training, on AML/CFT policies and procedures.  
Finally, adopt a risk-based rather than rule-based approach. Seek to approach 
AML/CFT issues from a risk perspective, rather than a purely regulatory compliance 
perspective.  Look  out  systematically  for  products,  customers  and  geographic 
locations that pose a higher risk of money laundering or terrorism financing. 
   Of course, it would be a mistake to assume that money laundering and the need for proper 
controls  are  confined  to  the  banks.  Virtually  all  financial  service  firms  can  be  used  as  a 
vehicle for money laundering; and the more control-conscious banks become, the more other 
types of institutions will be targeted by those wishing to launder money. An effective money 
laundering  regime  will  also  require  extending  AML  measures  to  designated  non-financial 
businesses and professions, including lawyers, accountants, real estate agents and others. 
Let  me  conclude  by  emphasizing  that  anti-money  laundering  is  everybody’s  business, 
requiring active collaboration and partnership among industry, the regulator and enforcement 
agencies.  Our  anti-money 
to  achieve  rigorous 
implementation  of  international  standards,  active  international  co-operation,  robust  and 
comprehensive regulation and ongoing supervision. 
Our message to those who launder money or finance terrorism must be clear, consistent and 
strong: crime does not pay.  
I wish you fruitful discussions. Thank you.  
framework  should  seek 
laundering 
BIS Review 4/2010 
 3
