Amando M Tetangco, Jr: The Philippines – creating opportunities 
through effective governance 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (the central 
bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  Philippine  Mid-Year  Economic  Briefing  2010,  Makati  City, 
Metro Manila, 18 August 2010. 
 Members of the governments’ economic team, other Cabinet members, excellencies of the 
diplomatic corps, our partners from the private sector and multilateral institutions, our friends 
from the media, colleagues from government, ladies and gentlemen, good morning.  
Thank you for joining us in this economic briefing. 
Over  the  next  few  minutes,  allow  me  to  share  with  you  the  BSP’s  legal  mandate,  the  key 
reforms we have implemented and our assessment of the macroeconomic opportunities that 
have been created in the process. I would also like to share with you our thoughts on the 
challenges that lie ahead and the BSP’s policy strategies to meet these challenges with a 
view  to  creating  more  opportunities  to  achieve  more  durable  and  inclusive  growth  for  the 
Philippine economy. 
Let me start with a review of the major reforms that the BSP has adopted in pursuit of its 
mandated responsibilities.  
First, on monetary policy – the BSP has adopted the inflation targeting framework that has 
provided us with a disciplined approach to safeguarding price stability. The forward-looking 
perspective under the framework as well as the associated transparency and accountability 
practices have helped better anchor the inflation expectations of the markets and the public. 
This,  in  turn,  has  contributed  to  improved  inflation  management  and  to  well-contained 
inflation dynamics.  
Let us look at the numbers. 
Stable  food  prices  have  helped  temper  inflation  pressures,  despite  the  occurrence  of  the 
El Niño phenomenon early this year. From January to July 2010, headline inflation fluctuated 
between  3.9  percent  and  4.4  percent,  staying  within  the  Government’s  target  range  of  
3.5–5.5 percent for 2010.  
The benign inflation environment has given the BSP the flexibility to keep policy rates steady. 
With  stable  domestic  financial  conditions,  the  BSP  also  started  a  measured  and  paced 
unwinding of its accommodative monetary policy stance in the first half of the year. 
Second, on external sector policy – the BSP adheres to a flexible exchange rate system and 
to an appropriately designed foreign exchange regulatory framework. The BSP also has in 
place  an  external  debt  management  strategy  that  helps  promote  debt  sustainability.  As  a 
result,  we  have  seen  the  emergence  of  strong  external  payments  dynamics,  providing 
comfortable buffers against external shocks. 
Reflecting these prudent external sector policies, the country’s balance of payments (BOP) 
position posted a surplus of US$3.2 billion in the first half of the year. The resilience of OF 
remittances and the sharp recovery of exports contributed largely to the country’s favorable 
external payments dynamics. 
The  country’s  external  debt  profile  continues  to  improve.  Six  years  ago,  our  external  
debt-to-GDP  ratio  was  around  70  percent.  As  of  March  2010,  this  ratio  was  down  to 
33 percent.  
BIS Review 108/2010 
 1
The long-dated maturity structure of our foreign currency debt, helps limit rollover and foreign 
exchange risks. The country’s debt service burden as percent of GDP, which had previously 
hovered around 10 percent [2001–2003], eased to 6 percent as of March 2010. 
International reserves have climbed to new highs, providing strong coverage for both imports 
and  short-term  external  debt.  At  end-July  2010,  the  GIR  stood  at  US$48.6  billion.  At  this 
level,  the  GIR  can  cover  9  months  of  imports  and  is  equivalent  to  9.3  times  the  country’s 
short-term external debt based on original maturity and 5.1 times based on residual maturity, 
thus providing a strong cushion against external shocks. 
As a result of the strong external liquidity position, the Philippine peso has remained broadly 
stable.  The  trends  in  the  real  effective  exchange  rate  (REER)  show  that  the  peso  has 
generally maintained its international competitiveness over the last ten years. With generally 
lower inflation rates, the Philippine peso has accommodated some appreciation, but without 
undermining external price competitiveness. 
Third, on financial sector policy – the BSP has  put in place critical reforms geared toward 
maintaining  a  healthy  banking  system.  The  package  of  reforms  includes  the  disposal  of 
banks’ bad assets, the promotion of good corporate governance and transparency practices, 
and the upgrading of risk management standards. As a result, we have today an efficient, 
sound, and competitive financial system. 
These  critical  reforms  have  been  successful  in  steadily  expanding  and  strengthening  the 
banking  system.  Indicators  of  the  health  of  the  banking  system  continue  to  post  favorable 
readings, with asset levels and bank earnings continuing to improve. The capital adequacy 
ratio remained high at 16 percent and non-performing loans also remained generally low at 
less than 4 percent of total loans. 
The  favorable  performance  of  the  domestic  financial  markets  reflects  the  upturn  in  the 
country’s economic prospects. Thus, despite global market volatility following sovereign debt 
concerns  in  Europe  and  uncertainties  regarding  the  depth  and  breadth  of  the  global 
economic recovery, the spillovers on our domestic financial markets have been limited. 
With  continued  improvements  in  domestic  economic  conditions  and  a  broadly  favorable 
global outlook, we foresee a firmer growth path for the Philippine economy in 2010.  
Inflation is expected to stay within the target range of 3.5 to 5.5 percent for 2010. The outlook 
for the BOP position and the GIR level continues to be favorable, with the current account 
projected to remain in surplus. 
While we expect the economy to continue to perform strongly, we remain conscious of the 
risks and challenges that lie ahead. 
First is the multispeed recovery across the globe. Growth in emerging countries is outpacing 
growth  in  advanced  economies.  Given  global  interdependencies  and  linkages,  this  could 
result in sub-par global growth over the medium term.  
Second, the potential heavy inflow of capital into the country, as risk appetites perk up, can 
lead to liquidity management problems which could pose inflationary risks.  
Third,  the  rebound  of  the  global  economy  could  create  upward  pressures  on  commodity 
prices and fan inflation. 
The BSP’s responses to these challenges are, as always, founded on its primary mandate of 
promoting monetary and financial stability.  
In particular, our focus in the area of monetary policy will be on addressing the risks to price 
stability and re-examining policy settings when warranted. 
On  the  external  front,  our  priority  is  to  promote  policies  that  will  help  shield  the  economy 
against adverse shocks. 
2 
 BIS Review 108/2010
On the financial sector, the BSP will endeavor to maintain a well-functioning banking system 
that will efficiently mobilize funds and channel them to productive uses. 
The BSP’s policy commitments, going forward, are supportive of the Government’s agenda 
of creating an enabling environment for durable, sustainable and inclusive growth and broad-
based development, including through the pursuit of far-reaching and meaningful structural 
reforms and disciplined macroeconomic policies. 
Ladies and gentlemen, the fundamental strengths of the Philippine economy, which saw us 
through a tough period, provide a huge opportunity for us to consolidate the gains we have 
achieved  thus  far  and  allow  us  to  create  an  environment  that  will  propel  the  economy 
forward. 
The  BSP,  together  with  the  other  government  agencies,  are  firmly  committed  to  continue 
pursuing  sound  macroeconomic  management  and  structural  reforms  to  address  the 
challenges ahead. 
To this end, let us be guided by our shared commitment to serve the general good and by 
our common desire to make better things happen for the Philippines.  
Thank you. 
BIS Review 108/2010 
 3
