Jean-Claude Trichet: The entry of Estonia into the euro area 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Euro 
Conference at the Bank of Estonia, Tallinn, 20 September 2010. 
 Distinguished guests,  
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  be  here  today,  in  Tallinn,  to  participate  in  the  Euro 
Conference. On 1 January 2011 the euro will become legal tender in Estonia, and Estonia 
will  become  the  17th  country  to  join  the  euro  area.  Let  me  first  congratulate  all  parties 
involved  in  this  outstanding  achievement  on  their  efforts  and  determination  to  prepare 
Estonia for the adoption of the euro. 
The  creation  of  the  single  currency  has  been  a  very  important  step  forward  in  the 
achievement of the historical endeavour of creating a single market for the Europeans, which 
was what the founding fathers had in mind more than fifty years ago. Its inception has been, 
at the same time, a powerful symbol of the will of the European countries to pursue actively 
their strategic road towards unification. We were eleven countries when we started the euro 
on  1  January  1999.  We  will  be  seventeen  on  1  January  2011.  There  is  no  better  way  to 
demonstrate  that  the  euro  area  is  not  a  “closed  shop”  but  is  open  to  those  countries  and 
economies  that  are  fully  compliant  with  the  entry  criteria  in  a  convincing  and  sustainable 
manner. 
1  January  2011  will  become  a  landmark  in  the  history  of  Estonia,  reflecting  the  long  and 
challenging process of economic and monetary integration that has enabled Estonia to join 
the euro area. After regaining independence in 1991, Estonia embarked on a rapid and far-
reaching  programme  of  social  and  economic  reform.  In  addition  to  being  a  determined 
reformer, it became a model for stable multi-party democracy. Estonia transformed itself into 
a dynamic economy, gaining recognition for its sound fiscal record, economic freedom and 
capacity to develop new technologies. 
For  several  years,  Estonia  was  also  one  the  world’s  fastest  growing  economies,  but  its 
growth  was  far  from  balanced.  Notwithstanding  some  very  difficult  years  following  its 
regaining of independence, Estonia’s real GDP grew at an average rate of 7.2% per annum 
over the period from 1995 to 2007. However, this growth rate came to a halt in 2008. Real 
output  declined  sharply  in  2008  and  2009,  and,  after  Latvia,  Estonia  became  the  second 
most  severely  affected  EU  Member  State  in  terms  of  output  decline.  The  severity  of  the 
adjustment revealed that the period of rapid output growth was, to some extent, also a period 
of imbalanced growth and economic overheating. During the years of economic expansion, 
strong domestic demand was the main driving force behind economic growth, with domestic 
demand  itself  being  fuelled  by,  among  other  things,  rapid  increases  in  real  disposable 
income,  and  overly  optimistic  expectations  about  future  income.  The  significant  financial 
inflows into Estonia fuelled credit growth and increases in asset prices, notably in housing 
markets,  with  the  resulting  imbalances  then  being  unwound  in  the  context  of  a  severe 
recession. In addition, the very rapid growth of real GDP in the Estonian economy until 2008 
resulted  in  the  accumulation  of  sizeable,  double-digit  current  and  capital  account  deficit  to 
GDP ratios. Booming domestic demand and capacity constraints supported an unsustainable 
rise in unit labour costs, with a cumulative increase of over 50% during the period from 2000 
to  2007.  The  strong  increase  in  wages  outpaced  productivity  gains  and  had  a  negative 
impact on the competitiveness of the economy.  
Today, as we look forward to the introduction of the euro in Estonia, I would like to point out 
two key aspects of the country’s experience on its road to adopting the euro. The Estonian 
experience  may  encourage  some  euro  area  countries  to  tackle  the  pressing  need  for 
BIS Review 120/2010 
 1
adjustment  that  they  currently  face  and  inspire  Estonia,  as  well  as  current  and  other 
prospective euro area countries, to contribute to a sustainable functioning of Economic and 
Monetary Union in the years ahead.  
The  first  key  aspect  refers  to  the  importance  of  maintaining  a  sound  fiscal  record.  Even 
during  exceptional  times,  Estonia  has  demonstrated  a  strong  commitment  to  maintaining 
sound  national  fiscal  policies,  which  are  a  crucial  element  of  the  policy  framework  for 
Economic  and  Monetary  Union.  There  has  been  a  clear  consensus  in  Estonia  that  fiscal 
consolidation  should  never  be  compromised.  Indeed,  despite  the  significant  degree  of 
uncertainty  about  the  recovery  of  both  external  and  domestic  demand,  the  Estonian 
authorities implemented significant fiscal consolidation measures in 2009. This was a strong 
advantage for Estonia in its efforts to join the euro area. Indeed, the country’s fiscal policy 
record since 1992 supports the view that prudence is a key element of its fiscal policy.  
The second key aspect of Estonia’s experience refers to the importance of both the effective 
prevention and, if necessary, decisive correction of economic imbalances. With the benefit of 
hindsight, it is clear that Estonia’s overall policy stance should have been tighter in order to 
contain  demand  pressures  and  the  emergence  of  significant  macroeconomic  imbalances 
during  the  time  of  very  fast  growth.  This  is  particularly  true  over  the  period  from  2005  to 
2007,  when  the  overheating  pressures  became  most  apparent.  Efforts  to  reduce  wage 
growth and contain rapid credit growth during that period also proved largely ineffective. In 
the end, the macroeconomic imbalances accumulated by the Estonian economy were quite 
significant,  and  the  magnitude  and  speed  of  the  adjustment  that  followed  were  indeed 
dramatic. 
However, the Estonian economy, and the citizens that support it, adapted rather quickly to 
the new economic environment, proving a remarkable capacity for adjustment. This speaks 
for the flexibility of Estonia’s economy and the “alertness” of its people. The new economic 
environment  required  prompt,  determined  action  and  the  adoption  of  difficult  policy 
measures.  The  implementation  of  such  measures  contributed  to  Estonia’s  prudent  fiscal 
record  and  the  rapid  unwinding  of  the  external  and  internal  imbalances  that  had  built  up 
during  the  boom  years.  Competitiveness  is  gradually  being  restored  and  the  current  and 
capital account balance has recorded a surplus since the beginning of 2009. The adjustment 
of  nominal  wages  has  been,  and  will  continue  to  be,  an  essential  element  of  the  gradual 
correction  of  competitiveness 
to  sustainable  output  growth. 
Developments in the public sector, where nominal wages declined by around 10% in 2009, 
contributed  to  the  adjustment  of  wages  in  the  economy  as  a  whole.  Sustainable  wage 
dynamics,  with  increases  in  line  with  productivity  progress,  will  continue  to  be  crucial  to 
restoring competitiveness and maintaining a low inflation environment. 
Encouragingly, Estonia’s economic recession appears to be over, but as you know, this is no 
time for complacency. With this in mind, it will be particularly important for Estonia and other 
euro area countries to support the reallocation of domestic resources to export-oriented, high 
value  added  sectors  in  order  to  ensure  a  return  to  sustainable  external  positions.  To 
encourage sustainable job creation, it is important to ensure that wages remain sufficiently 
flexible.  Finally  –  but  crucially  from  the  ECB’s  perspective  –  the  Estonian  authorities  must 
remain  alert,  and  take  forceful  action  if  necessary,  to  ensure  that  the  low  inflation 
environment that has been achieved in the recent past is sustained over the years to come.  
The experiences of Estonia and various euro area countries over the past few years highlight 
the importance of rigorous and effective surveillance inside the single currency area. In line 
with the Treaty, the ECB attaches great importance to the notion of sustainability. A country 
must only be eligible to adopt the euro when it has achieved a high degree of sustainable 
convergence  and  its  economy  is  in  a  position  to  fully  reap  the  benefits  of  joining the  euro 
area. A lack of sustainability would inevitably result in serious economic challenges for the 
newcomer  and  would  possibly  also  have  negative  consequences  for  other  euro  area 
countries, or even for the euro area as a whole. That is why a thorough and diligent approach 
losses  and 
the  return 
2 
 BIS Review 120/2010
to ensuring adherence to the convergence criteria on a sustainable basis is in the interests of 
all current and prospective euro area countries.  
In order to fully reap the benefits of the euro and to allow adjustment mechanisms to operate 
efficiently  within  the  enlarged  euro  area,  it  is  essential  that  Estonia  adopt  appropriate 
policies, thereby contributing to robust economic growth on a sustainable basis. The success 
of the euro depends on all euro area countries seriously engaging with the responsibilities 
that  go  hand  in  hand  with  the  considerable  benefits  that  euro  area  membership  offers. 
Against  this  background,  we,  at  the  ECB,  welcome  the  commitment  by  the  Estonian 
authorities to ensure, after the introduction of the euro, an economic environment conducive 
to  sustainable  output  and  employment  growth,  with  balanced  macroeconomic  conditions, 
including price stability.  
I am also confident that Estonia, as the newest member of the “euro area family”, will make 
an important contribution to a strong and effective governance framework at the EU and euro 
area  levels,  thus  helping  to  ensure  that  the  implementation  of  sound  economic  policies  is 
closely  scrutinised.  Recently,  the  ECB  has  set  out  a  number  of  proposals  for  reinforcing 
economic governance in the euro area1. These proposals, which are to be followed up by the 
Task  Force  chaired  by  President  Van  Rompuy,  identify  what  is  needed  to  strengthen 
governance and enforcement structures in the economic policy framework for the euro area. 
They require a “quantum leap” in terms of progress towards strengthening the institutional 
foundations  of  Economic  and  Monetary  Union.  It  should  contribute  to  a  deeper  economic 
union  that  is  commensurate  with  the  degree  of  economic  integration  and  interdependency 
already achieved through monetary union. 
The  introduction  of  a  new  currency  also  represents  a  logistical  challenge  which  requires 
careful preparation. Great efforts have been, and will continue to be, made to ensure that the 
people of Estonia are well-informed about the euro banknotes and coins, and in particular the 
banknotes’ security features. 
I  am  confident  that  the  very  close  cooperation  between  the  ECB  and  Eesti  Pank  that  has 
been  achieved  over  the  last  few  years  under  the  leadership  of  Governor  Lipstok,  and  the 
cooperation  that  will  continue  into  the  future,  will  make  a  significant  contribution  to  the 
smooth and successful introduction of the euro in Estonia.  
We  look  forward  to  welcoming  Estonia  into  the  euro  area!  Thank  you  very  much  for  your 
attention. 
                                                 
1  See “Reinforcing economic governance in the euro area”, available on the ECB’s website (www.ecb.europa.eu). 
BIS Review 120/2010 
 3
