Barbro Wickman-Parak: The economy and the labour market 
Speech  by  Ms  Barbro  Wickman-Parak,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at 
Skandinaviska Enskilda Banken (SEB), Stockholm, 29 April 2010.  
 Sweden’s GDP fell by almost five per cent in 2009, compared with the previous year. We 
need to go back as far as the 1940s to find an individual year with a correspondingly large 
fall in growth. The large demand shock that followed in the wake of the financial crisis had an 
unavoidable  and  drastic  impact  on  production  and  employment.  It  has  been  possible  to 
alleviate these effects, but not to prevent them, despite forceful monetary policy measures 
and expansionary fiscal policy.  
Normally,  changes  in  employment  and  unemployment  occur  two  quarters  after  changes  in 
production. This time, however, it appears as though the upturn in employment has already 
begun and unemployment has stopped rising, which is surprisingly early given the large fall 
in GDP. But unemployment is still high, and we are expecting a slow recovery in employment 
in the coming period. During the past three months unemployment has been around 9 per 
cent as a share of the labour force.  
Today I intend to talk about developments in the labour market in Sweden. I will begin by 
describing how employment usually varies over the business cycle and then discuss what is 
different this time. I shall conclude by discussing how we Executive Board members viewed 
developments in the labour market at our monetary policy meeting last week.  
The relationship between economic activity and the labour market  
Each  economic  cycle  is  unique,  which  became  particularly  clear  during  the  most  recent 
economic downturn. However, there are some patterns that often recur in economic cycles 
and forecasters have therefore often used them as a base in their forecasting work.  
For example, it is normal that changes in activity in the labour market occur with some time 
lag  compared  with  changes  in  production.  This  is  mainly  because  it  is  expensive  for 
companies to adjust production to a new demand situation and to employ and give notice to 
staff. Firms may therefore initially choose to wait and see whether the change in demand is 
temporary.  This  means  that  the  first  thing  to  happen  in  an  economic  downturn  is  that 
productivity growth falls. Firms gradually adapt to the new situation by reducing the number 
of  hours  worked  without  reducing  the  number  of  employees.  However,  if  the  downturn  is 
long-lived, the personnel force is also downsized over time. The time lag between GDP and 
the number of hours worked is usually one quarter in Sweden, while the time lag between 
GDP and employment is usually twice as long, that is, six months.  
A well-known relationship between economic activity and activity in the labour market was 
formulated  by  Arthur  Okun  in  the  early  1960s.1  This  describes  a  negative  relationship 
between GDP growth and changes in unemployment, which has become known as “Okun’s 
law”. He found, for instance, that the US economy needed to grow by at least 3 per cent to 
avoid  an  increase  in  unemployment.  Okun’s  law  can  thus  be  interpreted  as  a  short-term 
relationship  that  expresses  the  link  between  changes  in  economic  activity  and  changes  in 
activity  in  the  labour  market.  As  the  relationship  between  growth  and  employment  is 
dependent  on  factors  such  as  labour  market  policy,  productivity,  social  norms  and 
demography, the relationship varies between different countries and different periods in time.  
                                                 
1   Okun,  A.  M.  (1962),  “Potential  GNP:  its  measurement  and  significance”,  American  Statistical  Association, 
Proceedings of the Business and Economics Statistics Section, pp. 98–104. 
BIS Review 58/2010 
 1
A  recently-published  Economic  Commentary  on  the  Riksbank’s  website2
  estimates  this 
relationship  using  Swedish  data.3  The  study  shows  that  there  is  a  relatively  strong  link 
between  GDP  growth  and  unemployment,  a  link  that  has  also  varied  over  time.  The 
connection has increased over time and between 2004 and 2008 it was relatively high, which 
indicates  that  unemployment  was  more  sensitive  to  changes  in  GDP  during  this  time. 
However the relationship has weakened over the past year, when GDP fell heavily without 
unemployment rising as much as one would have expected, given the historical relationship. 
According  to  the  study,  a  GDP  growth  of  more  than  2.8  per  cent  is  now  needed  for 
unemployment to decline, which can be compared with the historical average of 2.3 per cent. 
At  present  a  higher  level  of  economic  growth  is  thus  required  to  change  the  level  of 
unemployment  compared  to  the  average  historical  relationship  since  1980.  The  time  lag 
between GDP and unemployment also appears to have increased during the 2000s. Thus, it 
now takes longer before the full impact of a change in growth has an effect on unemployment 
in Sweden.  
What is different this time?  
Part  of  the  explanation  for  unemployment  not  having  risen  as  much  as  one  might  have 
expected given the historical relationship could be that not all of the economy has suffered. 
The  main  fall  in  employment  has  been  in  the  manufacturing  industry,  while  the  services 
sector,  which  is  more  labour  intensive,  has  fared  better.  Last  year  exports  fell  by  a  good 
13 per  cent,  while  retail  sales,  for  instance,  only  slowed  down  slightly.  This  is  probably 
because the Swedish export industry was hard hit by the large fall in world trade, while the 
large economic policy stimulation helped hold up consumption.  
Industrial production fell by around 25 per cent between the peak in November 2007 and the 
trough in May 2009. However, the fall in the production of services was just over 10 per cent 
between  the  peak  in  December  2007  and  the  trough  in  June  2009.  In  recent  months 
production in both sectors has stabilised. This has also had an effect on employment, which 
fell  much  more  in  the  manufacturing  industry  than  in  the  services  sector.  The  Riksbank’s 
calculations show that employment in the manufacturing industry has been slightly stronger 
than  the  historical  pattern  implies  during  this  economic  downturn,  given  the  large  fall  in 
production, while employment in the services sector has been much stronger than one might 
have expected given historical relationships.  
As mentioned earlier, it appears as though the Okun coefficient has declined during 2009. I 
mentioned earlier that GDP fell by almost 5 per cent last year. According to the estimated 
Okun’s law, unemployment in the economy as a whole should have risen by around 3 per 
cent, but the increase was only around 2 per cent. Although cuts in staff have been made, 
companies  have  not  adjusted  their  workforce  to  the  falling  demand  to  the  same  extent  as 
they would have if the historical pattern had applied. Many companies have instead chosen 
to retain existing personnel to a much greater extent than during earlier downturns. In some 
cases,  they  have  instead  introduced  measures  such  as  freezing  wages  or  shortening  the 
working  week.  One  explanation  might  be  that  companies  expect  demand  to  be  restored 
quickly and that they want to be prepared to quickly increase their production again. Another 
explanation as to why production has fallen more than employment, which is mentioned in 
the IMF’s latest World Economic Outlook4, could be that production has fallen most in those 
sectors of the economy with the highest productivity level.  
                                                 
2   Aranki,  Friberg  and  Sjödin,  2010,  “The  relationship  between  the  business  cycle  and  the  labour  market  in 
Sweden”, www.riksbank.se. 
3   The  relationship  estimated  is:  Change  in  unemploymentt  =  a  +  b0*(GDP  growth)t  +  b1*(GDP  growth)t-1  + 
b2*(GDP growth)t-2+ q*(Change in unemployment)t-1. εt . 
IMF World Economic Outlook, April 2010. 
BIS Review 58/2010
4  
2 
 Studies  have  shown  that  unemployment  may  suffer  long-lasting  effects  from  a  deep 
recession. This is partly because a person who has been unemployed for a long time loses 
part of his or her human capital and therefore becomes less attractive in the labour market, 
and partly because some people, after job-seeking for a long time, quite simply give up and 
leave the labour force. What is usually referred to as structural or “natural” unemployment 
may  thus  increase  during  periods  of  high  and  protracted  unemployment.  Labour  market 
policy can counteract these effects to some extent, by for instance, offering further education 
and retraining to the unemployed.  
The situation today is in contrast to what we saw during the crisis in the 1990s. Then, GDP 
fell for three years and the fall in employment was greater than the fall in GDP. That crisis 
was domestically-generated and it was generally known that tough times lay ahead, as public 
finances were to be consolidated. This time, the crisis has come from outside and there has 
been scope for forceful fiscal policy and monetary policy measures.  
It is always difficult to make forecasts. Moreover, I believe it is more difficult than normal in 
the  current  situation.  A  crisis  of  the  depth  we  have  now  passed  through  leaves  behind 
feelings of uncertainty regarding the future. Previously-observed relationships have not been 
able to provide us with the same guidance as before, and moreover it is difficult to know what 
these deviations from historical patterns will lead to further ahead.  
The way this situation develops in the future will depend on many different things. If the world 
economy  returns  after  the  recovery  to  a  situation  similar  to  that  before  the  crisis,  then 
countries  which  have  conducted  a  policy  that  has  helped  companies  to  retain  their  labour 
force through the recession will be in a very good position. Companies in these countries will 
then easily be able to increase production. However, if it turns out that the world demand is 
for other goods and services than those prior to the crisis, these countries may instead find 
themselves in a situation where they need to undergo a necessary structural transformation. 
This could lead to a more protracted period of high unemployment and lower production. In 
the  future,  countries  like  China  may  account  for  an  increasingly  large  share  of  world 
consumption.  If  consumption  patterns  differ  in  different  countries,  this  could  mean  that 
different types of product will be in demand in the future. A deep recession may also affect 
the  internal  demand  picture  within  a  country  permanently,  for  instance,  by  individuals 
changing to more energy-saving and cheaper alternatives.  
Monetary policy has a limited capacity to affect the real economy  
When the Riksbank decides on the repo rate, we assume that it will take one to two years 
before the decision has its full impact. Our monetary policy is therefore based on forecasts of 
inflation and economic developments over the coming three years. However, as I have said, 
it is particularly difficult to make forecasts right now as a result of the prevailing uncertainty. 
When  we  make  our  decisions  we  take  into  account  both  the  inflation  outlook  and  the 
prospects for the real economy. Depending on what type of shock the economy is exposed 
to, we can allow it to take time for inflation to return to the target and in this way avoid overly 
large fluctuations in employment and production.  
However,  it  is  now  generally  accepted  that  monetary  policy  cannot  be  used  to  attain  a 
permanently lower level of unemployment. Many people believed this was possible a while 
ago when A. W. Phillips found a negative correlation between unemployment and inflation at 
the end of the 1950s,5 a relationship usually called the Phillips curve. This shows that higher 
                                                 
5   Phillips  actually  studied  the  relationship  between  wages  and  unemployment,  but  later  studies  indicated  a 
similar  relationship  between  inflation  and  unemployment,  Phillips,  A.  W,  (1958)  “The  relationship  between 
unemployment and the rate of change of money wages in the United Kingdom, 1861–1957”, Economica, 25, 
pp. 283–299. 
BIS Review 58/2010 
 3
employment can be achieved at the cost of higher inflation. It was thus long believed that one 
could  “buy”  lasting  lower  unemployment  by  allowing  inflation  to  rise.  However,  this 
relationship  was  empirically  proved  not  to  hold  in  the  long  run.  In  the  1970s,  for  instance, 
there  were  periods  with  both  high  unemployment  and  high  inflation,  what  is  known  as 
stagflation. Instead we now base our discussions on the assumption that there is in the long 
run  a  “natural”  unemployment  level  that  depends  on  the  functioning  of  the  labour  market. 
This  way  of  functioning  can  in  turn  improve  or  deteriorate  as  a  result  of  economic  policy 
measures  in  a  broader  sense.  The  problems  cannot  be  tackled  with  monetary  policy.  If 
monetary policy tries to push down unemployment below this “natural” level, it will only result 
in higher inflation.  
This  is  because  inflation  expectations  have  great  significance.  Although  there  is  a 
relationship in  the  short  run  between  unemployment  and  inflation,  the central  bank  cannot 
make  use  of  this  in  the  long  run,  as  companies  and  individuals  will  realise  what  policy  is 
being  conducted  and  adapt  their  behaviour  accordingly.  For  instance,  wage-earners  may 
demand  higher  wages  as  compensation  for  expected  inflation,  which  will  have  a  negative 
effect on employment, as the scope for new recruitment will decline. Monetary policy is thus 
unable  to  lastingly  affect  real  variables  such  as  long-term  lower  unemployment.  But  it  can 
have  a  stabilising  effect  in  the  short  run,  particularly  if  inflation  expectations  are  well-
anchored so that temporary changes in inflation are not perceived as permanent. If a central 
bank succeeds in attaining credibility so that inflation expectations are stable, there is some 
scope for also taking into account developments in the real economy.  
The labour market: an important variable for monetary policy  
We  thus  try  to  conduct  our  monetary  policy  so  that  the  inflation  target  is  attained  within  a 
reasonable time horizon, at the same time as we emphasize that resource utilisation should 
approach  a  “normal”  level.  However,  there  is  no  generally-accepted  measure  for  resource 
utilisation as there is for inflation. It is therefore necessary to use questionnaires or to try to 
estimate  it  using  some  statistical  method.  At  the  Riksbank  we  use,  for  instance,  “gap 
analyses”,  where  we  try  to  relate  the  current  situation  and  the  forecasts  for  different 
measures of resource utilisation to the trend for the respective variable. The gap shows how 
far the variable is from its “normal” level. For instance, we use the deviation in GDP from its 
trend to study the GDP gap. We have two ways of measuring the gap for the labour market; 
employment  measured  as  the  number  of  hours  worked  and  measured  as  the  number  of 
persons employed. Developments in the labour market thus have considerable significance 
for the analysis that precedes the monetary policy decision. However, all of the measures of 
resource utilisation we present are very uncertain, and this is why we use several different 
measures.6 
Monetary policy decisions often concern complex deliberations. But now that the economy 
has undergone a period of deep crisis and it is difficult to assess what structural changes the 
crisis may lead to, the process becomes even more complex. One illustration of this is how 
one  should  assess  future  developments  in  the  labour  market.  So  far  employment  has  not 
fallen as much as might be justified given the historical relationship between unemployment 
and  GDP,  and  the  large  fall  in  GDP.  This  has  come  as  a  surprise  to  us  and  to  other 
forecasters. But what conclusions should one draw with regard to the effects in the slightly 
longer term when the economy recovers? Employment and the number of hours worked are 
now beginning to increase. Normally, one might have expected a greater adjustment in the 
number  of  hours  worked  than  we  have  seen  in  this  economic  downturn.  The  fact  that  the 
                                                 
6   For further information on resource utilisation, see Jonsson, M., Nilsson, C. and Palmqvist, S., 2008, “Should 
monetary  policy  stabilise  resource  utilisation?”  Economic  Commentary,  www.riksbank.se  or  Öberg,  S. 
“Monetary policy and the elusive resource utilisation”, speech published on 25 May 2009, www.riksbank.se. 
4 
 BIS Review 58/2010
adjustment has not corresponded to the fall in production means that productivity has been 
very  weak.  But  as  we  observe  in  our  most  recent  Monetary  Policy  Update,  which  was 
published last week, we expect productivity to improve in the future, which also means that 
the number of hours worked and the number of employed will grow slowly. Periods of low 
productivity are normally followed by periods when productivity recovers quickly.  
The labour market and current monetary policy  
Last week the Executive Board of the Riksbank decided to hold the repo rate unchanged at 
0.25 per cent. But at the same time we made it clear that the time for a repo rate increase 
was not too far off. This could come in the summer or the early autumn. But even with the 
increases  in  the  repo  rate  included  in  our  repo  rate  path,  monetary  policy  will  be 
expansionary for a long period of time. The real repo rate is negative throughout the whole 
year, and will be below one per cent for the whole of 2011.  
The  underlying  CPIF  inflation  rate,  that  is,  the  CPI  excluding  the  effect  of  changes  in 
mortgage rates, is now relatively high at 2.5 per cent. But our assessment is that inflation will 
begin  to  fall,  partly  as  a  result  of  a  stronger  krona.  In  addition,  slowly  rising  wages  and 
increasing productivity growth will together mean that companies can produce goods at low 
cost. As economic activity strengthens the inflation rate will be pushed up and when we look 
ahead to the end of the forecast period it is close to 2 per cent. The forecast for the CPIF is 
therefore only marginally changed, compared with the assessment in the February Monetary 
Policy Report.  
Resource  utilisation  is  an  important  variable  for  monetary  policy  as  it  is,  for  instance,  an 
important indicator of future inflationary pressures. When we made our most recent decision 
on the repo rate we had received the GDP figures for the fourth quarter, which were much 
lower  than  we  and  other  analysts  had  expected.  As  I  have  already  mentioned,  this  would 
indicate lower resource utilisation. But when we take into account the stronger labour market 
development,  our  conclusion  in  our  most  recent  Monetary  Policy  Update  is  that  resource 
utilisation is slightly higher than it was in February. But it is still low and will remain so for a 
large part of the forecast period. 
When we cut the repo rate to its current extremely low level in July last year, the situation on 
the financial markets was still critical, the economic cycle was in a much gloomier phase than 
now  and  the  forecasts  were  much  more  pessimistic.  During  the  autumn  the  positive  signs 
increased  and  the  forecasts  were  gradually  revised  up  after  numerous  downward 
adjustments. The Riksbank had offered loans at fixed-interest rates with a one-year maturity 
in  July,  September  and  October.  The  purpose  of  these  loans  was  to  bring  down  general 
interest rates in a situation where the repo rate was assessed as having come down to what 
was  in  practice  its  lowest  possible  level.  The  fact  that  new  loans  were  not  offered  in 
December was a first sign that economic activity was beginning to stabilise and that this type 
of unconventional measure was no longer necessary.  
We are assuming in our most recent forecast that GDP in Sweden will increase by 2.2 per 
cent  this  year  and  by  3.7  per  cent  next  year.  These  are  upward  revisions  of  around  one 
percentage  point  and  half  a  percentage  point  respectively,  compared  with  July  last  year. 
They are not very large changes in growth, but they are changes in the right direction and a 
sign that economic activity is on firmer ground.  
The largest change in our forecasts concerns the labour market, as I mentioned earlier. In 
July we were assuming that employment would fall by just over 3 per cent a year and would 
not begin to rise until 2011. Now we have already seen an upturn in employment and we are 
instead forecasting a marginal increase in the number of persons employed. In July we were 
assuming that unemployment would peak at 11 per cent in 2011. Following the large fall in 
production this appeared to be a reasonable forecast in line with historical patterns, and it 
was  also  shared  by  most  other  analysts.  However,  developments  are  now  rather  different 
BIS Review 58/2010 
 5
and our current forecast is that the current unemployment level of 9 per cent is a peak and 
that unemployment will be 8 per cent at the end of our forecast period.  
How has the stronger labour market affected the interest rate decisions? Firstly, it should be 
said that it is not possible to point to any individual variable that will alone be a determining 
factor in an interest rate decision. Prior to each interest rate decision we weigh together all of 
the new information received since the previous decision. But employment is of course an 
important element; when, for example, we said in February that economic activity was now 
on firmer ground one of the things we were referring to was the stronger labour market. It 
was a contributing factor to the marginal adjustment in the repo rate path we made then; with 
a  first  repo  rate  increase  coming  slightly  sooner  than  implied  in  the  repo  rate  path  from 
December.  
Our most recent repo rate decision entails both the repo rate and the repo rate path being 
held unchanged. A weaker GDP outcome for the fourth quarter could on its own have been a 
negative  signal  and  made  us  more  doubtful  about  the  timing  of  the  coming  interest  rate 
increase.  But  we  also  had  surprisingly  positive  information  on  the  labour  market,  which 
provided support for the assumption that the economy is moving in the right direction.  
Our forecasts are based on employment only increasing at a slow rate in the future and on 
resource utilisation being lower than normal for the greater part of the forecast period. But 
the situation is that the crisis has hit the export industry particularly hard, while the services 
sector has escaped relatively lightly. We have a “division” in the Swedish economy, which 
complicates  the  situation  for  monetary  policy.  We  are  unable  to  distinguish  between  the 
different sectors; our interest rate changes affect all sectors in the same direction. When we 
deliberate on monetary policy in the coming period we must of course be observant of the 
driving forces behind the different sectors and how these can affect inflationary pressures in 
the economy. 
6 
 BIS Review 58/2010
