William C Dudley: The US economic outlook 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, at the Washington and Lee University H Parker Willis Lecture in 
Political Economics, Lexington, Virginia, 1 April 2010. 
 Thank you for that kind introduction and the opportunity to speak here today. The past few 
years have been an extraordinary time for policymakers. We have been very aggressive in 
providing  support  to  the  economy,  and  it  now  appears  that  a  sustainable  recovery  is 
underway.  However,  given  the  headwinds  created  by  the  collapse  of  the  U.S.  real  estate 
market and its consequent damage to the financial system and household balance sheets, it 
seems  unlikely  that  the  recovery  will  be  as  strong  as  we  would  desire.  As  a  result,  the 
substantial  amount  of  slack  in  productive  capacity  that  exists  today  will  likely  only  be 
absorbed gradually. Consequently, trend inflation, at least over the near term, should remain 
very low. This is why the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) concluded at its March 
meeting  that  “...  economic  conditions,  including  low  rates  of  resource  utilization,  subdued 
inflation trends, and stable inflation expectations, are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels 
of the federal funds rate for an extended period”. 
What I would like to do today is to explain in some detail the logic underlying this expectation 
that economic conditions will warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for an 
extended  period.  This  conclusion  stems  from  the  observation  that  the  current  economic 
environment is qualitatively different from previous post-World War II business cycles. Most 
post-war  recessions  were  preceded  by  high  rates  of  resource  utilization  and  rising  trend 
inflation. This prompted a tightening of monetary policy, which, in turn, dampened interest-
rate  sensitive  spending,  particularly  on  housing  and  consumer  durable  goods.  Then,  as 
underlying  inflation  pressures  subsided,  monetary  policy  was  eased  and  interest-rate 
sensitive spending rebounded, often quite sharply. 
The  current  business  cycle  is  different  in  one  key  respect.  It  was  preceded  by  a  global 
financial  crisis.  The  financial  crisis  was  due,  in  large  part,  to  excessive  leverage  and 
excessive investment in real estate assets. It will take time to unwind these excesses. 
Today,  I  will  offer  a  framework  for  assessing  the  forces  that  have  shaped  the  recent 
performance  of  the  U.S.  economy.  This  framework  will  provide  context  to  the  fiscal  and 
monetary policy responses to what is now being called the “Great Recession.” Then, I will 
discuss the economic outlook for the United States over the next year. Before I proceed, I 
want to emphasize that these views are my own and do not necessarily reflect the views of 
the FOMC or the Federal Reserve System. 
Building an analytical framework 
Say’s law – named after the French economist Jean-Baptiste Say – states that the aggregate 
value of incomes earned in an economy over some period of time must by definition equal 
the value of all goods and services produced over that same time period. Or, put somewhat 
differently, on an ex post (i.e., realized) basis, saving must equal investment. Investment in 
this  case  means  current  spending  on  new  physical,  human  and  intangible  capital.  This 
insight  is  the  conceptual  basis  for  national  income  accounting  and  the  gross  domestic 
product (GDP) statistics that we follow so carefully. 
Even  so,  economists  have  been  debating  the  implications  of  Say’s  Law  since  it  was  first 
expounded. Classical economists argued that this ex post balance would occur in a way that 
kept  the  economy  quite  stable  at  full  employment.  If  there  were  shocks  to  saving  or 
investment spending that pushed the economy away from full employment, prices and wages 
BIS Review 41/2010 
 1
would adjust quickly, providing the market signals needed to bring about the reallocation of 
resources required to restore full employment. 
The  global  depression  of  the  1930s  raised  serious  questions  about  this  classical  theory. 
Although saving must equal investment on an ex post basis, the two can diverge ex ante, 
potentially  sharply.  For  example,  when  ex  ante  (i.e.,  desired)  saving  exceeds  ex  ante 
(desired) investment spending, inventories rise above desired levels. If prices of the products 
in question do not fall sufficiently rapidly so that this unwanted build-up of inventories is sold 
quickly, then production and employment must fall. Perhaps most famously, Keynes, in The 
General  Theory  of  Employment,  Interest  and  Money,  argued  that  there  are  institutional 
rigidities  that  inhibit  price  and  wage  flexibility.  This  means  that  periods  in  which  ex  ante 
saving exceeds desired investment might lead to periods of persistent unemployment. 
In this respect, the financial system plays an important role. Financial intermediaries match 
borrowers and savers. If the financial system is under stress and lending standards are being 
tightened, ex ante investment is likely to decline relative to saving, all else being equal. 
The financial intermediation process and the creation of credit is the primary channel through 
which  monetary  policy  affects  the  economy.  By  influencing  the  volume  of  credit  creation, 
monetary  policy  strives  to  keep  ex  ante  saving  and  investment  –  alternatively,  aggregate 
demand and aggregate supply – in rough balance. Too rapid a pace of credit creation would 
overstimulate  investment  relative  to  saving,  potentially  increasing  the  rate  of  inflation  and 
this, in turn, could damage the economy’s long-run performance. Too slow of a pace of credit 
creation  would  likely  lead  to  an  ex  ante  shortfall  of  investment  relative  to  saving,  causing 
unemployment to increase. 
This  analytical  framework  also  applies  to  the  global  economy,  but  with  an  added  level  of 
complexity. At the global level, income equals output and saving equals investment on an ex 
post  basis.  However,  for  an  individual  country,  saving  can  exceed  investment  or, 
alternatively, production can exceed domestic demand to the extent that a country’s exports 
exceed  its  imports.  This  requires  that,  for  some  other  economy  or  group  of  economies, 
investment must exceed saving, or alternatively, domestic demand must exceed production 
and imports must exceed exports. This means that what happens abroad in terms of desired 
saving and investment also influences the performance of our domestic economy. 
This framework provides a simple way to evaluate the recent economic environment and the 
current economic outlook. When desired investment rises relative to saving on an ex ante 
basis, then an economy tends to strengthen. If the strengthening persists, inflation may rise 
to  levels  above  what  is  regarded  as  consistent  with  maximum  sustainable  growth  and  full 
employment.  This  was  the  story  for  much  of  the  2004–06  period.  The  Federal  Reserve 
responded to rising trend inflation by tightening monetary policy to keep the economy from 
overheating. 
In  contrast,  when  investment  falls  relative  to  saving  on  an  ex  ante  basis,  an  economy 
weakens and may slip into recession, as was the case between 2007 and mid-2009. During 
this period, the Federal Reserve tried to support employment by cutting its federal funds rate 
target  nearly  to  zero;  by  creating  a  number  of  special  liquidity  facilities  to  support  the 
extension  of  credit;  and  by  engaging  in  a  large  scale  asset  purchase  program,  buying 
Treasuries, agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities. 
An economic recovery requires that desired investment must rise relative to saving. This has 
happened  recently  as  fiscal  stimulus  and  an  inventory  cycle  have  led  to  a  fall  in  ex  ante 
saving relative to investment. But for the recovery to strengthen further, this process must 
continue. There has to be a further demand impulse – be it a decline in household saving 
rates, a rise in business investment relative to profits, a further expansion of fiscal stimulus or 
an improvement in the net trade balance via an increase in exports relative to imports. 
Let’s now apply this framework to evaluate what happened over the past decade and what it 
implies for the economic outlook. 
2 
 BIS Review 41/2010
The last three decades have been marked by a shortage of U.S. domestic saving relative to 
investment.  The  United  States  has  almost  continuously  run  a  current  account  deficit  since 
the  early  1980s  (Chart  1).  In  2005  and  2006  that  current  account  deficit  averaged  around 
6 percent  of  GDP.  Yet,  the  real  exchange  value  of  the  dollar  today  is  not  terribly  different 
from what it was in the early 1990s (Chart 2). A massive flow of saving into the United States 
from around the world offset forces that otherwise would have driven the exchange value of 
the dollar lower. 
In addition to its sheer size, this inflow of saving into the United States is significant in several 
respects. First, note the direction of the flow. One might expect that capital would flow from 
the  developed  world  to  the  developing  world,  but  just  the  opposite  has  been  the  case.  In 
addition, foreign savers have been willing to lend to the United States in the U.S. currency. 
This means that foreign savers are exposed to the exchange rate risk that the dollar’s value 
might change relative to their own currencies. Finally, one might expect that over time, as 
their holdings of dollar-denominated assets increased, foreign savers would demand higher 
interest rates, but, in fact, U.S. interest rates – in both nominal and real terms – have been 
generally declining over the past three decades1 (Chart 3). 
These  facts  are  at  odds  with  the  prevailing  view  that  spendthrift  U.S.  consumers  and 
governments are pulling those savings into the United States. Indeed, for some time the “twin 
deficits”  view  held  that  large  fiscal  deficits  in  the  United  States  were  causing  large  U.S. 
current account deficits. However, even when the federal government ran surpluses in the 
late  1990s,  our  current  account  deficit  continued  to  increase.  Subsequent  research  at  the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York indicates that the link between fiscal deficits and capital 
inflows is not as strong as commonly suggested.2 
Before proceeding, a few important qualifications are in order. First, despite the large flow of 
foreign  saving  into  the  United  States,  our  international  financial  position  does  not  appear 
precarious at the present time. The United States still has substantial investments in foreign 
countries, and income from U.S. investments abroad still exceeds the income generated by 
U.S. assets owned by foreigners. Part of the reason is that U.S. firms operating abroad earn 
higher rates of profit than foreign firms operating here. In addition, low interest rates minimize 
the cost to the United States of our substantial negative net debt position. 
In addition, the fact that our foreign indebtedness is for the most part denominated in our own 
currency  is  a  huge  advantage  in  the  event  the  dollar  were  to  come  under  significant 
downward  pressure.  That  is  because  a  decline  in  the  dollar  would  raise  the  value  of  the 
income  earned  on  our  foreign  direct  investment  and  foreign-currency  denominated  assets, 
relative to the income that foreigners earned on their dollar-denominated investments in the 
United States. All else being equal, this would boost our net investment income balance. 
Note that borrowing per se is not necessarily a bad thing. The key is what the borrowing is 
used for – to finance consumption or investment. And, if it is used to fund investment, it is 
also important how productive that investment turns out to be over time. 
So what did we do with this inflow of foreign saving? We invested in a substantial volume of 
physical  capital,  particularly  residential  and  nonresidential  real  estate  (Chart  4).  It  seems 
clear that one important factor behind this investment was the decline in long-term interest 
rates. For example, from 2003 through 2005 mortgage rates declined to just under 6 percent 
on average, the lowest level since the first half of the 1960s. These lower mortgage interest 
rates were capitalized into asset prices. Rising prices for residential and nonresidential real 
                                                 
1  Brender, Anton and Florence Pisani. 2007. “Global Imbalances: Is the World Economy Really at Risk?” Dexia 
SA. 
2  Bartolini,  Leonardo  and  Amartya  Lahiri.  2006.  Twin  Deficits, Twenty  Years  Later,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
New York Current Issues in Economics and Finance, 12, no. 7 (October). 
BIS Review 41/2010 
 3
estate assets induced entrepreneurs to produce more of those assets. In the housing market, 
this  increase  in  prices  was  helped  along  by  the  relaxation  of  loan  underwriting  standards, 
which made it easier to obtain a mortgage and become a homeowner. Credit growth was the 
strongest among households with relatively low credit scores (Chart 5). The homeownership 
rate rose after being relatively stagnant for two decades (Chart 6). The increased availability 
of credit to lower income borrowers and the sharp rise in housing values contributed to the 
rise of consumption as a share of GDP and the decline of the personal saving rate3 (Chart 7). 
Now, with the aid of hindsight, it is clear that we built too many houses, invested in too much 
commercial  real  estate  and  overvalued  both  significantly.  The  market  overshot  for  several 
reasons.  First,  there  was  rampant  speculative  behavior.  The  longer  these  asset  prices 
continued to rise, the stronger the belief became that they would keep rising in the future. 
Second, the rise in prices reinforced the initial relaxation of underwriting standards. During 
the period of rising prices, defaults and loan losses were very low. A homeowner who had 
difficulty  servicing  the  debt  could  typically  sell  the  home  for  a  profit  and  pay  off  the  loan. 
Third, the boom was fueled by new financial products, such as collateralized debt obligations 
that  were  backed  by  subprime  and  Alt-A  mortgages.  Investors  misunderstood  how  risky 
these products were and this resulted in lower mortgage rates for non-conforming residential 
mortgages and lower funding costs for commercial real estate borrowing. 
In the housing sector, these factors interacted to create a strong reinforcing dynamic. The 
relaxation of underwriting standards that made it easier to become a homeowner and the low 
mortgage  rates  –  supported  in  part  by  the  new  financial  products  –  made  it  easier  to 
speculate  in  real  estate.  Moreover,  as  home  prices  rose,  household  net  worth  increased, 
making households more willing to consume a greater share of their current income. 
Not surprisingly, this bout of speculative fever ended badly. Eventually, the supply of houses 
caught up with and then vastly overshot demand. Easing underwriting standards to support 
demand could only go on for so long. Prices turned down. At the national level, home prices 
peaked in late 2005 to early 2006 with commercial real estate prices peaking about one year 
later (Chart 8). From those peaks, home prices have fallen by about 30 percent on average, 
with much larger declines in some areas, while commercial real estate prices have fallen by 
about 40 percent on average. 
As price declines intensified, the number of serious mortgage delinquencies surged and, in 
fact, continue to rise (Chart 9). Research indicates that by 2007 the percentage of nonprime 
mortgages  that  went  into  default  within  their  first  year  rose  to  10  percent  compared  with 
3 percent  of  such  loans  originated  in  2003.  While  falling  home  prices  appear  to  be  the 
primary factor explaining this sharp increase in early defaults, most of the increase cannot be 
explained by traditional risk factors.4 A potential explanation is that individual home buyers 
often  falsely  indicated  on  their  mortgage  applications  that  the  property  they  were  buying 
would be their primary residence. Using an extensive set of data on loan performance that 
we have developed with Equifax, we find that multiple first mortgage lien holders – that is, 
people owning more than one home – account for about 40 percent of the dollar volume of 
seriously delinquent mortgage balances, up from about 5 percent in 2004 (Chart 10). 
                                                 
3  There  are  a  few  caveats  to  note  about  this  trend.  First,  there  are  several  categories  of  spending  by 
households that are lumped into the personal consumption expenditures category in our official GDP statistics 
that can fairly be counted as investment. These include spending on consumer durable goods, education, and, 
possibly, medical care, and their combined share of total personal consumption expenditures (PCE) rose over 
the period in which the saving rate declined. Second, other forces were at work to push down the personal 
saving rate. Prominent among these is a secular decline in the share of health care expenditures paid out-of-
pocket by consumers, lessening the motivation for precautionary savings. 
4  Haughwout,  Andrew,  Richard  Peach,  and  Joe  Tracy.  2008.  “Juvenile  Delinquent  Mortgages:  Bad  Credit  or 
Bad Economy.”, Journal of Urban Economics, 64, no. 2 (September): 246–57. 
4 
 BIS Review 41/2010
As  delinquency  and  foreclosure  rates  rose,  structured  finance  products  backed  by  riskier 
mortgage loans performed particularly poorly. The securitization market for non-conforming 
mortgages  collapsed.  Credit  availability  tightened  as  underwriting  practices  became  much 
more restrictive, even for plain vanilla mortgages. 
The cascading effect of the sharp increase in mortgage delinquencies and the resulting steep 
decline in the market value of mortgage assets was a key contributing factor to the financial 
crisis. As the financial crisis intensified and the economic outlook deteriorated, equity prices 
eventually declined by 50 percent from their late 2007 peak before bottoming out about one 
year ago. 
But while the value of real estate and equities plunged, the debt incurred to acquire those 
assets remained, leaving households very highly leveraged. According to the Flow of Funds 
Accounts, the ratio of household liabilities to net worth rose from around 20 percent to nearly 
30 percent in just three years (Chart 11). 
The  result  was  a  sharp  decline  in  desired  investment  relative  to  saving.  The  number  of 
housing starts plunged, commercial real estate investment fell and households cut back on 
their spending as their net worth plummeted. The economy slumped into what is now called 
the “Great Recession”. 
The dimensions of the downturn 
According  to  the  Business  Cycle  Dating  Committee  of  the  National  Bureau  of  Economic 
Research  (NBER),  the  U.S.  economy  has  experienced  10  recessions  since  1950.  The 
duration of those previous recessions averaged slightly less than a year during which real 
GDP fell an average of 1.75 percent and the unemployment rate increased an average of 
2.3 percentage points. 
The Great Recession was far worse. From its peak, real GDP declined 3.8 percent – more 
than  double  the  average  decline  of  prior  downturns  (Chart  12).  The  unemployment  rate 
began  to  increase  in  the  second  half  of  2007.  Over  the  next  two  years,  it  increased 
5.5 percentage  points.  The  rise  would  have  been  even  more  pronounced  except  that  the 
average  workweek  and  the  labor  force  participation  rate  declined  unusually  sharply 
(Charts 13 and 14). Overall, total hours worked in the nonfarm business sector declined a 
staggering  10.6  percent  (Chart  15).  In  addition  to  the  decline  in  demand  for  labor,  the 
manufacturing capacity utilization rate declined to 65.1 in June of 2009, the lowest level of 
the post-World War II period. 
The  result  is  that  the  “output  gap”  –  that  is,  the  difference  between  actual  output  and  the 
output achieved at the highest resource utilization rate consistent with price stability – has 
climbed sharply. This, in turn, has put downward pressure on trend inflation. For example, on 
a year-over-year basis, the core inflation rate declined to 1.5 percent in January 2010 from 
nearly 3 percent in the fall of 2006 (Chart 16). 
The road ahead 
Fortunately, the U.S. economy is very flexible and resilient. Although it does not adjust as 
fast  as  classical  economists  envisioned,  in  the  United  States  prices  and  wages  respond 
relatively quickly. Moreover, policymakers have been aggressive in supporting the economy 
by easing monetary policy and by implementing a large fiscal-stimulus program. 
As a result, although the unemployment rate remains unacceptably high, output has begun to 
expand again, and we appear to be on the verge of seeing sustained growth in employment. 
We’ll  know  more  about  this  tomorrow  when  the  March  employment  figures  are  released. 
Equity  prices  have  recovered  sharply  and  home  prices  and  commercial  real  estate  prices 
appear to be stabilizing. Household indebtedness is declining, due to a combination of debt 
BIS Review 41/2010 
 5
repayment and credit that has been written off by lenders. After falling off a cliff during the 
first  half  of  2009,  global  trade  has  rebounded.  Both  U.S.  exports  and  U.S.  manufacturing 
output have expanded rapidly over the past six months (Chart 17). 
Although these are encouraging developments, I believe that the recovery is likely to be quite 
muted compared with past recoveries. This comes back to the framework discussed earlier. 
For faster growth, we need ex ante investment to rise relative to saving and ex ante spending 
to rise relative to the current trend of income. But it is difficult to see where this impulse will 
come from in the near term. 
The  early  stages  of  past  recoveries  have  been  led  by  consumer  spending,  particularly  for 
durable goods and residential investment. For example, in the first year of recovery following 
the deep recessions of 1973–1975 and 1981–1982, real consumer spending increased an 
average  of  6.5  percent  and  residential  investment  rose  an  average  of  38  percent.  It  is 
unlikely  that  we  will  experience  this  type  of  strength  this  time.  Households  have  suffered 
unusually  large  shocks  to  both  income  and  wealth  and  many  remain  highly  leveraged 
(Chart 18). Although the household debt to net worth ratio has declined considerably from its 
peak,  it  is  still  around  26  percent,  well  above  the  already  elevated  average  of  the  past 
decade (Chart 19). Moreover, even if consumers wanted to borrow, credit availability is still 
constrained  and  underwriting  standards  remain  relatively  tight.  Real  consumer  spending 
increased at a 2.25 percent annual rate over the second half of 2009 and looks to be growing 
at about that rate in the first quarter of 2010. 
Given that the personal saving rate is still relatively low, it will be hard for consumer spending 
to grow more quickly without large increases in real labor income. But big increases in real 
labor  income  won’t  be  possible  without  a  much  stronger  recovery  in  output.  And  a  much 
stronger recovery in output is unlikely without stronger consumption. 
Residential investment did increase over the second half of 2009, boosted by relatively low 
mortgage  interest  rates,  lower  home  prices  and  the  first-time  home  buyer  tax  credit.  But 
recent data on the housing sector indicates that the recovery has stalled (Chart 20). As with 
consumption,  we  are  unlikely  to  see  the  typical  surge  of  housing  starts  and  residential 
investment  that  was  a  key  feature  of  most  past  recoveries.  There  is  already  an  unusually 
large volume of vacant homes for rent and for sale (Chart 21). More are likely to come onto 
the market in the months ahead due to the large volume of mortgage loans currently in the 
foreclosure process. 
For the government sector, large federal budget deficits are a constraint and fiscal policy is 
slowly shifting from an expansive policy back toward restraint. At the state and local level, the 
constraints are even more binding, as budgetary gaps will need to be addressed by spending 
cuts and tax increases (Chart 22). 
Exports rebounded sharply over the second half of 2009, particularly to the emerging world 
(Chart 23). However, domestic demand in Europe and Japan – important export markets for 
the United States – remains very weak. This suggests that the U.S. trade balance is likely to 
change  little  over  the  next  year  or  two,  and,  thus,  will  be  relatively  neutral  in  terms  of  its 
impact on growth. 
Only business fixed investment is in a position to be a true locomotive of growth. Profits have 
stayed  high  relative  to  investment,  and  corporate  balance  sheets  are  awash  with  cash 
(Charts 24 and 25). However, even here, the growth impulse is likely to be weak. Prospective 
startup businesses are going to find it difficult to obtain funding. And larger businesses will 
unlikely  increase  investment  spending  sharply  at  a  time  when  capacity  utilization  rates 
remain unusually depressed (Chart 26). 
Relatively  sluggish  growth  implies  that  the  output  gap  will  be  closed  very  gradually.  This 
suggests that inflation pressures will stay subdued. The excess supply of housing is putting 
downward  pressure  on  rents,  which  represent  a  large  share  of  the  consumer  price  index 
(CPI) (Chart 27). In addition, unit labor costs have declined sharply over the past year due to 
6 
 BIS Review 41/2010
the  combination  of  unusually  rapid  productivity  growth  and  slowing  labor  compensation 
growth  (Chart  28).  Fortunately,  longer  term  inflation  expectations  remain  well  anchored. 
These  expectations  have  not  declined  and  are  broadly  consistent  with  my  views  on  the 
appropriate  inflation  goal  (Chart  29).  This  is  actually  a  welcome  development  right  now 
because it will likely help to keep the trend inflation rate from falling too much. 
Lessons to be learned 
We have just lived through a period in which rapid increases in asset prices led to a serious 
misallocation of resources and a severe financial crisis. What do we need to do to minimize 
the likelihood of avoiding this type of experience in the future? 
As  I  noted  in  a  recent  speech,  we  face  three  major  challenges  that  will  determine  how 
smooth  this  economic  expansion  turns  out  to  be.5  First,  we  need  regulatory  reform  that 
makes  our  financial  system  more  stable  and  resilient.  This  requires  many  steps,  including 
systemic risk oversight and solving the so-called too-big-to-fail problem. In this respect, we 
need  to  think  hard  about  what  we  can  do  to  prevent  the  type  of  speculative  bubbles  that 
occurred  from  causing  so  much  damage  in  the  future.  In  particular,  are  there  macro 
prudential tools that the Federal Reserve and other regulators can use to limit leverage and 
speculation and thus prevent the type of asset price booms and busts that have proved so 
troublesome? 
Second, we need viable exit strategies from this recent period of monetary and fiscal policy 
stimulus. On the monetary policy side, we have been working hard to ensure that we have 
the tools in place so that we can be effective in tightening monetary policy when the time is 
right, even with an enlarged balance sheet. Third, we need a rebalancing of global economic 
growth. That means a smaller share of consumption relative to GDP in the United States and 
offsetting shifts in Asia. 
Circumstances have improved considerably from what they were a year ago. But job creation 
is still much too slow and we have much to do on the regulatory side to make our financial 
system more resilient and robust. 
Thank you very much for your kind attention. I would be happy to take a few questions. 
                                                 
5  Financial  Market  Turmoil:  The  Federal  Reserve  and  the  Challenges  Ahead,  William  C.  Dudley.  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, March 6, 2010. 
BIS Review 41/2010 
 7
Chart 1 
Chart 2 
  8 
 BIS Review 41/2010
Chart 3 
Chart 4 
BIS Review 41/2010 
   9
Chart 5 
 
Chart 6 
 10 
   BIS Review 41/2010
Chart 7 
Chart 8 
BIS Review 41/2010 
   11
Chart 9 
Chart 10 
  12 
 BIS Review 41/2010
Chart 11 
Chart 12 
BIS Review 41/2010 
   13
Chart 13 
Chart 14 
 14 
  BIS Review 41/2010
Chart 15 
Chart 16 
BIS Review 41/2010 
   15
Chart 17 
Chart 18 
 16 
  BIS Review 41/2010
Chart 19 
Chart 20 
BIS Review 41/2010 
   17
Chart 21 
Chart 22 
  18 
 BIS Review 41/2010
Chart 23 
Chart 24 
BIS Review 41/2010 
   19
Chart 25 
Chart 26 
  20 
 BIS Review 41/2010
Chart 27 
Chart 28 
BIS Review 41/2010 
   21
Chart 29 
 22 
 BIS Review 41/2010
