Hirohide Yamaguchi: Japan’s economy and monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Hirohide Yamaguchi, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting with 
business leaders, Toyama, 21 July 2010. 
 Introduction 
I am honored today to have this opportunity to speak and to exchange views with business 
leaders in Toyama Prefecture. 
I  will  express  my  gratitude  for  your  cooperation  in  interviews  with  the  staffers  from  the 
Kanazawa  branch  and  the  local  office  in  Toyama  and  for  the  Bank  of  Japan’s  surveys. 
Information  from  these  interviews  and  surveys  is  invaluable  and  utilized  fully  in  assessing 
economic and financial developments and conducting monetary policy.  
Before  exchanging  views  with  you,  I  will  talk  about  the  recent  economic  and  financial 
developments as well as the conduct of monetary policy. 
I. 
Global economic developments 
Advanced economies and the balance-sheet problem 
Before  talking  about  Japan’s  economy,  I  will  begin  with  the  developments  in  the  global 
economy. 
In the past several years, the global economy experienced a great turmoil. On the financial 
front,  starting  with  the  subprime  mortgage  problem  in  the  U.S.  housing  market,  the  global 
financial crisis broke out in the autumn of 2008, triggered by the failure of Lehman Brothers. 
Hand in hand with that, the global economy deteriorated rapidly and significantly. Since the 
spring  of  2009,  the  global  economy  has  been  emerging  from  such  plunge.  However,  the 
improvement in economic conditions in the United States and Europe has been modest, and 
international  financial  markets  have  recently  become  increasingly  volatile  triggered  by  the 
fiscal problem in Greece and some European countries. 
The financial crisis and the fiscal problem I have just mentioned might seem to be a different 
phenomenon at a glance, but, in fact, they have a common underlying factor that has shaped 
a  big  picture  of  the  global  economy  in  the  past  several  years.  That  was  the  problem  of 
“balance-sheet adjustment” associated with the burst of a credit bubble in the United States 
and  Europe.  In  those  economies,  toward  the  mid-2000s,  households  and  firms  made 
excessive borrowing on the premise that asset prices such as housing Prices would rise and, 
in  retrospect,  made  excessive  investments  and  consumption.  In  response,  financial 
institutions  lent  aggressively  and  continued  to  increase  credit.  In  such  a  process,  not  only 
mortgages  but  also  financial  activity  in  general  overheated,  including  new  types  of 
transactions such as in securitized products. Such phenomenon has spread internationally 
and capital inflows to European peripheral countries, including recently highlighted Greece, 
have  overheated.  Such  developments  were  reversed  rapidly  once  asset  prices  such  as 
housing prices started to fall. In those circumstances, households and firms had to cut back 
on  their  consumption  and  investments  to  reduce  their  borrowing  that  had  accumulated, 
namely to repair the impaired balance sheets. Moreover, financial institutions had to struggle 
with the disposal of massive impaired assets, and were thus forced to take a cautious stance 
in new lending. That was exactly a process of balance-sheet adjustment Japan suffered in 
the 1990s after the burst of the bubble economy. 
When the economy shoulders such a problem, its effects would manifest themselves in two 
ways. First is the so-called “chronic symptom” and strong downward pressure would continue 
BIS Review 100/2010 
 1
to  be  put  on  financial  markets  and  the  economy  until  there  appear  prospects  for  balance-
sheet  adjustments  to  complete.  The  other  is  a  sudden  change  in  conditions  triggered  by 
some factors. The global financial crisis following the failure of Lehman Brothers was indeed 
a  shock  that  corresponded  to  such  “acute  symptom.”  While  the  economies  in  the  United 
States and Europe have managed to recover from the “acute symptom,” thanks to various 
policy measures by the national governments and central banks around the globe, it can be 
said that the “chronic symptom” still weighs heavily on those economies. 
Here,  let  me  touch  on  the  recently  highlighted  issue  of  concern  over  fiscal  deterioration, 
which is called sovereign risk using the word sovereign that means nation. While the Greek 
problem has been taken up in this connection, fiscal deficits in Greece did not worsen all of a 
sudden. The fact was that the massive borrowing from overseas Greece made in excess of 
its capacity amid the global investment boom toward the mid-2000s has surfaced following 
the burst of the credit bubble. Although the sheer size of the Greek economy is only some 
2 percent  of  the  European  economy,  it  generated  a  connotation  in  the  market  that  there 
might  be  other  countries  that  have  also  heavily  been  relying  on  unrealistic  external 
borrowing.  As  a  result,  in  the  financial  markets,  the  creditworthiness  of  the  government 
bonds issued by those countries has declined, leading to a hike in interest rates and concern 
over adverse effects on financial institutions that held those government bonds. Meanwhile, 
the fiscal balance in the major advanced economies in the United States and Europe also 
deteriorated rapidly in the process of crisis responses, since they increased fiscal spending 
significantly  by  assuming  risks  and  debts  of  the  private  financial  institutions  that  were 
suffering from balance-sheet adjustments. Through the responses to the crisis, the problem 
of balance-sheet adjustments has partly shifted from the private sector to the public sector. 
That  also  intensified  the  market’s  concern  over  sovereign  risk.  It  can  be  seen  that  the 
sovereign  risk  problem  that  has  become  one  destabilizing  factor  in  international  financial 
markets  also  closely  relates  to  a  big  wave  of  the  burst  of  a  credit  bubble  and  ensuing 
balance-sheet adjustments. 
High growth of and challenges for emerging and commodity-exporting economies  
Another  critical  axis  in  gauging  the  picture  of  the  global  economy  is  the  developments  in 
emerging and commodity-exporting economies. Looking at the World Economic Outlook by 
the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF),  the  global  economy  is  expected  to  grow  at  a  fairly 
high rate of more than 4 percent in 2010 and 2011 after recording the first negative growth in 
the  post-war  period  in  2009.  Of  the  growth,  indeed  70  percent  is  attributable  to  emerging 
economies, which shows that those economies are the driving force for the global economy. 
Several  factors  are  at  play  behind  the  robust  growth  in  emerging  economies.  First,  those 
economies are in the process of catching up with advanced economies in living standards, 
and thus they are characterized by strong potential demand for consumer durable goods and 
infrastructure  investments.  In  addition,  unlike  the  United  States  and  Europe,  those 
economies do not have the burden of balance-sheet adjustments and thus a virtuous cycle 
between  production,  income,  and  expenditure  has  worked  effectively,  resulting  in  strong 
growth  in  domestic  demand  including  private  consumption  and  business  fixed  investment. 
Second, Asian emerging economies including China have become a global production base 
for  IT-related  goods.  Demand  for  new  IT  products  such  as  smart  phones  and  flat-screen 
televisions  has  recently  been  increasing  globally.  Asian  emerging  economies  have  been 
taking full advantage of a growth opportunity that can be called “a new IT boom.” Third, funds 
that could not find good investment opportunities in advanced economies have been flowing 
in  massively  to  emerging  economies,  which  have  been  stimulating  the  economies  through 
assets  transactions  and  investment  activity.  While  such  inflow  of  funds  from  advanced 
economies  would  be  an  appreciating  factor  for  the  foreign  exchange  rate,  many  emerging 
economies  are  adopting  fixed  foreign  exchange  rate  policies  and  are  containing  the 
appreciation  of  the  foreign  exchange  rate.  That  has  further  reinforced  accommodative 
monetary  conditions.  While  I  do  not  go  into  details  today,  there  is  an  aspect  that  the  low 
2 
 BIS Review 100/2010
interest  rate  policy  in  advanced  economies  has  had  a  greater  economic  stimulus  on 
emerging economies than on their own economies through cross-border capital flows.  
While  emerging  economies  are  growing  faster  than  expected  against  a  backdrop  of  the 
above factors, they are now facing a critical turning point. In those countries, as a result of 
continued high growth and active capital inflows, the overheating of the economy, including a 
rise in inflation and asset prices, has become pronounced. Thus, in many of those countries, 
monetary policy has been tightened mainly by raising policy rates and flexibility in the foreign 
exchange rate policy has been enhanced. It is also critical from a perspective of the global 
economy whether such policy conduct turns out to be effective and enables those economies 
to secure sustainable growth while containing the overheating. 
II. 
Developments in Japan’s economy 
their 
improvement 
in  business  conditions  of 
Economic conditions 
Based on the developments in the global economy, I will next talk about Japan’s economy. 
Like the global economy, Japan’s economy bottomed out in the spring of 2009 and has been 
picking up, and we judge now that it shows further signs of a moderate recovery. The driving 
force for the recovery is an increase in exports and production. Namely, exports have been 
increasing  on  the  back  of  especially  high  growth  in  emerging  economies  and  global 
expansion  in  demand  for  IT-related  goods,  and  production  has  been  increasing  in  a  wide 
range  of  areas  such  as  automobiles,  electrical  machinery,  and  capital  goods.  Therefore, 
profits  in  the  manufacturing  sector  have  been  improving  rapidly.  According  to  the  June 
Tankan  (Short-Term  Economic  Survey  of  Enterprises  in  Japan)  released  recently,  current 
profits at large manufacturers for fiscal 2010 are expected to increase by 44 percent from the 
previous year. Moreover, the improvement in manufacturing firms’ profits has been leading to 
the 
trading  partners,  namely,  some 
nonmanufacturing  firms  engaged  in,  for  example,  transportation  and  information  services. 
Furthermore, such improvement in business performance has gradually started to encourage 
favorably firms’ spending activity including business fixed investment. The Tankan showed 
that business fixed investment by large firms is expected to increase, year on year, for both 
manufacturers  and  non-manufacturers,  and  that  of  manufacturers  is  expected  to  increase, 
year on year, for all firms including small firms.  
Compared with such improvement in the corporate sector, as for the household sector, the 
improvement  in  the  employment  and  income  situation  has  been  lagging.  Nevertheless, 
overtime  payments  have  been  increasing,  in  tandem  with  the  increase  in  production,  and 
some  large  firms  have  started  to  increase  their  bonuses  from  this  summer.  In  those 
circumstances,  private  consumption,  especially  that  of  consumer  durable  goods,  has  been 
picking up due mainly to the effects of various policy measures such as those to support the 
purchase of eco-friendly cars and the eco-point system for electrical appliances. Therefore, 
induced by the improvement in overseas economic conditions, positive moves of increase in 
exports spreading to domestic private demand have gradually been seen.  
When  we  compare  the  recent  real  GDP  growth  rates  on  an  annualized  basis,  they  were 
4.6 percent for Japan, 5.6 percent for the United States, and 0.5 percent for the euro area in 
the  October–December  quarter  of  2009,  and  5.0  percent  for  Japan,  2.7  percent  for  the 
United  States,  and  0.8  percent  for  the  euro  area  in  the  January–March  quarter  of  2010, 
respectively. It might be surprising, but in fact the recent growth rate of Japan’s economy has 
been, on average, the highest among the advanced economies. Nevertheless, many might 
not  realize  that.  There  might  be  several  factors  in  the  background.  Although  Japan’s 
economy shows further signs of a moderate recovery, the level of economic activity has not 
sufficiently  increased.  Or,  since  the  recovery  is  export-led,  depending  on  whether  the 
benefits  would  spread  directly,  there  are  great  differences  according  to  regions  and 
industries. Perhaps the greatest factor might be that people are concerned about the fact that 
BIS Review 100/2010 
 3
they  cannot  have  future  growth  prospects  for  Japan’s  economy,  or,  in  other  words,  it  has 
become difficult to create a growth picture. While I will later talk about our views and policy 
responses on this issue, let me next explain price developments in Japan as a topic closely 
related to the issue. 
Prices 
As for prices in Japan, the year-on-year rate of decline in the consumer price index (CPI) has 
been gradually slowing, after registering the largest decline of 2.4 percent in the summer of 
2009. A special one-off factor of subsidy for high school tuition has been pulling down the 
year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  by  around  0.5  percentage  points  since  April  2010, 
and the latest figure, excluding such effects, has showed that the rate of decline slowed to 
0.7 percent. There are mainly two factors behind the slowing pace of decline in consumer 
prices,  namely  the  improvement  in  the  aggregate  supply  and  demand  balance  of  the 
domestic economy as a whole, and an uptrend in commodity prices represented by crude oil 
prices. 
The aggregate supply and demand balance of the economy as a whole has been improving 
moderately since the spring of 2009. Since the past experience tells us that, once the supply 
and demand balance starts to improve, its effects start to influence prices with a time lag of 
around  one  year,  the  effects  of  the  picking  up of  the  economy  since  last  year  have  finally 
surfaced on the price front. As for the outlook, although it is difficult to foresee developments 
in  commodity  prices,  the  aggregate  supply  and  demand  balance  is  likely  to  continue  to 
improve if the economy follows a recovery path. Therefore, the year-on-year rate of decline 
in the CPI is expected to continue to slow, and likely to enter positive territory in fiscal 2011. 
What is important here is whether Japan’s economy will return to a sustainable growth path, 
and, through such a process, the aggregate supply and demand balance that lies behind the 
price developments will improve in a sustainable manner. Put metaphorically, prices are the 
body temperature of the economy. A fundamental reason of deflation, namely, a continuous 
price decline, is a lack of basic strength, or, in other words, growth potential of the economy. 
Therefore,  to  fundamentally  overcome  deflation,  it  is  essential  to  increase  the  growth 
potential of Japan’s economy from a medium- to long-term perspective. 
Interim assessment 
Let me now touch briefly on the interim assessment of the April 2010 Outlook for Economic 
Activity  and  Prices  (the  Outlook  Report).  The  Bank  publishes  the  outlook  for  economic 
activity and prices over the next two years every quarter – April and October Outlook Report 
and  interim  assessments  in  between.  In  the  interim  assessment  released  last  week,  the 
forecast of the real growth rate for fiscal 2010 became higher than what had been projected 
in  April.  That  was  mainly  due  to  the  faster  than  expected  increase  in  exports  against  a 
backdrop  of  acceleration  of  growth  in  emerging  economies.  As  for  fiscal  2011,  the  growth 
prospects remain broadly unchanged. The median of the Policy Board members’ forecasts 
was 2.6 percent for fiscal 2010 and 1.9 percent for fiscal 2011. 
With regard to prices, the CPI (excluding fresh food) is expected to develop broadly in line 
with the projections presented in April. Specifically, the median of the Policy Board members’ 
forecasts, the year-on-year rate of change, was minus 0.4 percent for fiscal 2010 and plus 
0.1 percent for fiscal 2011. 
We need to be attentive to the fact that those forecasts are associated with both upside and 
downside  risks.  With  regard  to  economic  activity,  there  are  some  upside  risks  such  as  an 
even  faster  growth  in  emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies.  As  downside  risks, 
international financial developments warrant attention. In particular, attention should be paid 
to the effects of developments in fiscal and financial conditions in some European economies 
on international finance and the global economy. Such upside and downside risks to deviate 
from the forecasts have become somewhat large in both directions compared with the time of 
4 
 BIS Review 100/2010
April. With regard to prices, there is a possibility that inflation will rise more than expected 
due  to  a  rise  in  commodity  prices  brought  about  by  higher  growth  rates  in  emerging  and 
commodity-exporting  economies,  while  there  is  also  a  risk  that  the  rate  of  inflation  might 
decline due, for example, to a decline in medium- to long-term inflation expectations. 
III. 
Medium- to long-term challenge for Japan’s economy 
Japan’s economic growth rates in medium to long term 
Now let me turn to the issue of medium- to long-term growth of Japan’s economy.  
The annual growth rate of Japan’s economy declined significantly from around 4.5 percent, 
on average, in the 1980s to around 1.5 percent in the 1990s, and to less than 1 percent in 
the 2000s. Even considering that the adjustment process since the 1990s after the burst of 
the  bubble  has  been  grueling,  the  decline  in  the  economic  growth  rate  has  been 
conspicuous.  
Gross  domestic  product  (GDP),  which  is  the  fruit  of  a  country’s  economic  activity,  is  the 
multiplication of the number of workers and the value-added that workers per capita produce 
in one year, namely, productivity on a value-added basis. Therefore, economic growth, or the 
increase in GDP, will be determined by two elements: growth in the number of workers and 
the growth in productivity. When viewing the decline in Japan’s economic growth rate from 
such a perspective, one can see that a key challenge for Japan’s Economy is how to raise 
productivity in the future. 
Japan’s labor force, namely, the population between 15 and 64 years old, already started to 
decline from the second half of the 1990s, and the number of actual workers has started to 
decline slightly, on average, since 2000. To maintain and raise growth rate when the number 
of workers is unlikely to grow, there is no way but to raise productivity. Raising productivity 
itself  is  an  important  issue,  regardless  of  change  in  demographics,  and  it  becomes 
increasingly important in a situation when it is difficult to expect growth in the labor force. 
Specifically, the productivity growth rate measured by the aforementioned per capita value-
added  has  been  declining  from  an  annual  average  of  3.2  percent  in  the  1980s  to  about 
1 percent  since  the  1990s.  Such  a  decline  in  productivity  is  attributable  to  the  following 
factors. 
At  the  time  of  the  1990s,  the  global  economy  was  at  a  critical  juncture  of  dramatic 
development in information and communications technology and the intensification of global 
competition. However, Japan’s economy was busy with adjusting excess facilities and debts 
that had piled up during the bubble period, and thus was not able to make positive efforts in 
response to the structural changes taking place in the global economy. Therefore, it could be 
the case that Japan was not able to develop technology or tap the market to expand new 
demand, which might have resulted in lowering the productivity of the economy as a whole. 
Moreover, it could also be the case that, during that period, metabolism had not proceeded 
sufficiently in the process of reducing “excesses,” and that might have resulted in keeping 
inefficient  parts  of  the  economy.  Furthermore,  the  fact  that  the  economy  tumbled  into  a 
vicious circle – a declining trend in the growth rate lowered firms’ and households’ growth 
expectations  in  the  future,  which  in  turn  further  withered  firms’  and  households’  spending 
activity – also seems to be a reason for the decline both in the economic growth rate and 
productivity during that period. 
To raise productivity 
Then, what should be done to raise productivity in the future in a sustainable manner? What 
is  important  on  this  point  is  how  individual  firms  tap  new  demand.  A  rise  in  productivity  is 
sometimes interpreted as producing the existing products more efficiently or reducing costs. 
BIS Review 100/2010 
 5
While  a  rise  in  productivity  indeed  has  such  aspects,  it  is  not  necessarily  limited  to  those. 
Moreover, it appears difficult to raise the productivity of the economy as a whole only through 
such rationalization in the production process of the existing products or reduction of costs 
including  labor  costs.  Amid  consumer  needs  becoming  diversified  and  evolving,  it  is 
important  for  firms  to  tap  new  demand  and  prepare  a  supply  system  that  will  meet  such 
demand, thereby increasing their sales and profits. Japan’s challenge of raising productivity 
requires tapping potential demand and creating new value-added, and thus is an issue that 
relates to both the demand side and the supply side of the economy. 
Let us consider the case of cell phones as an example. On the back of an explosive spread 
of cell phones, there seems to have been potential needs of consumers to make phone calls 
any time at any place. What embodied such potential consumer needs into a product of cell 
phone was the firms’ efforts. Firms strived to develop information technology and prepare a 
supply system including building production lines of portable terminals. As a result, demand 
for  cell  phones  increased  explosively,  and  cell  phones  prevailed  rapidly  in  a  short  period. 
Consumers  have  now  obtained  the  convenience  of  making  phone  calls  any  time  at  any 
place.  Also,  profit  opportunities  for  telecommunications  firms  and  portable  terminal 
manufacturers have increased, resulting in raising productivity of the economy as a whole. 
In tapping potential demand, high technology as represented by cell phones would not be the 
only  key.  In  fact,  there  are  not  a  few  local  firms  that  have  succeeded  in  tapping  potential 
demand by utilizing unique expertise, local specialty goods, and a home-court advantage. 
While the main players that make such efforts are business managers, as a factor to support 
such efforts, financial institutions also play a critical role. By focusing on that point, the Bank 
has  started  a  new  policy  initiative.  In  closing,  let  me  move  on  to  the  Bank’s  conduct  of 
monetary policy. 
Policy actions by the Bank of Japan 
IV. 
The Bank’s monetary policy since the Lehman shock in 2008 can be summarized in three 
types. First, measures to repair financial markets in response to the financial crisis; second, 
aggressive monetary easing in response to the economic plunge; and third, a new approach 
toward strengthening the foundations for economic growth. 
Various temporary measures to repair market function 
First, measures to repair the market function. Having been affected by the global financial 
crisis  since  the  autumn  of  2008,  the  market  functioning  of  Japan’s  financial  markets  also 
declined  rapidly,  although  the  overall  market  sentiment  has  been  significantly  stable 
compared  with  that  in  the  United  States  and  Europe.  The  issuance  of  CP  and  corporate 
bonds  became  difficult  and  corporate  funding  became  tight.  To  cope  with  such  a  rapid 
decline in market functioning, the Bank promptly introduced various extraordinary measures 
such  as  outright  purchases  of  CP  and  corporate  bonds.  Subsequently,  due  partly  to  the 
coordinated  actions  of  central  banks,  the  global  financial  turmoil  stabilized  and  the 
functioning of Japan’s financial markets improved, and those measures have been phased 
out  since  the  end  of  2009.  Ensuing  financial  market  developments  illustrate  that  market 
transactions have rather become active after the completion of those measures. However, as 
I  have  mentioned  earlier,  due  mainly  to  the  fiscal  problems  in  some  European  countries, 
strains  increased  in  the  U.S.  dollar  money  market  in  May.  Therefore,  the  Bank,  in 
coordination  with  major  central  banks,  re-established  the  U.S.  dollar  funds-supplying 
operations that were once completed in February 2010. Including those fiscal and financial 
developments  in  Europe,  there  remain  the  factors  that  warrant  attention  in  international 
finance. The Bank will, in coordination with other central banks, continue to make every effort 
to ensure financial market stability. 
6 
 BIS Review 100/2010
Aggressive monetary easing 
Second, to address the critical situation following the failure of Lehman Brothers and under 
the recognition that Japan’s economy faces the critical challenge of overcoming deflation and 
returning to a sustainable growth path with price stability, the Bank has been continuing with 
aggressive monetary easing. 
Specifically,  the  target  level  for  the  overnight  call  rate,  the  policy  rate,  was  reduced  to 
0.1 percent in December 2008 and has remained unchanged since then. The effective zero 
interest  rate  of  0.1  percent  is  the  lowest  policy  rate  among  the  central  banks  around  the 
globe. Moreover, to encourage a decline in longer-term interest rates, the Bank introduced in 
December  2009  a  new  funds-supplying  operation  to  provide  3-month  funds  to  financial 
institutions  at  a  low  interest  rate  of  0.1  percent,  the  same  as  the  policy  rate.  The  amount 
provided by that measure has now reached 20 trillion yen. With a series of those measures, 
borrowing  interest  rates  for  firms  and  households  have  been  declining.  The  stimulative 
effects  from  the  low  interest  rates  would  further  increase,  due  to  the  improvement  in 
corporate profits. 
As I have mentioned earlier, Japan’s economy shows further signs of a moderate recovery. 
Based on high growth in the global economy as the IMF forecasts, the baseline scenario for 
Japan’s economy is likely to be that the recovery trend will be maintained in the future. At the 
same  time,  there  are  still  many  uncertainties  such  as  developments  in  the  U.S.  and 
European economies and volatile developments in international financial markets reflecting 
fiscal  and  financial  conditions  in  Europe.  The  Bank  will  consistently  maintain  extremely 
accommodative  financial  conditions  and  thereby  will  aim  at  contributing  to  the  recovery  of 
Japan’s economy. 
Fund-provisioning to support strengthening the foundations for economic growth  
And third, the Bank took a new approach to addressing the most important challenge Japan’s 
economy is facing, namely, to raise medium- to long-term growth potential. In this regard, the 
Bank  introduced  a  new  fund-provisioning  framework  to  support,  from  the  financial  side, 
private financial institutions’ own efforts toward strengthening the foundations for economic 
growth.  The  Bank  is  preparing  to  make  the  first  fund-provisioning  at  around  the  end  of 
August.  On  June  25,  the  Bank  selected  counterparty  financial  institutions  for  the  fund-
provisioning through public application, which were as many as 66. Not only mega-banks but 
also a wide range of financial institutions, including regional banks I and II as well as shinkin 
banks, became counterparties. I have hoped a variety of financial institutions, both in terms 
of business and in terms of region, to use the fund-provisioning framework to make positive 
efforts toward strengthening the foundations for economic growth, by utilizing their business 
and regional characteristics. Therefore, it was quite encouraging to see a number of financial 
institutions applying for the fund-provisioning framework. 
The new fund-provisioning measure supplies long-term and low interest rate funds to private 
financial  institutions  in  accordance  with  their  efforts  in  terms  of  lending  and  investment 
toward  strengthening  the  foundations  for  economic  growth.  We  expect  private  financial 
institutions  to  utilize  the  fund-provisioning  measure,  taking  it  as  an  opportunity  to  expand 
lending and investment to businesses that will contribute to raising productivity and creating 
new demand. Strengthening the foundations for economic growth is not necessarily limited to 
promoting technological revolution. The measure can also be used for loans and investment 
projects  that  would  support  positive  efforts  by  regional  small  firms  including  regional 
revitalization  business.  We  highly  expect  regional  firms,  in  cooperation  with  financial 
institutions, to launch positive efforts toward tapping demand and raising productivity. 
The  Bank’s  decision  to  implement  the  fund-provisioning  measure  was  based  on  the 
recognition  that  merely  maintaining  accommodative  financial  conditions  as  the  Bank  has 
been  pursuing  could  not  directly  address  Japan’s  medium-  to  long-term  challenge  of  the 
declining  trend  in  growth  potential.  Normal  monetary  policy  assumes  a  transmission 
BIS Review 100/2010 
 7
mechanism in which a central bank provides liquidity, thereby lowers market interest rates as 
a whole and stimulates economic activity. When productivity has been declining, it would be 
difficult  to  raise  the  growth  rate  in  a  sustainable  manner  even  if  market  interest  rates  and 
lending  rates  have  declined.  Deflation  in  Japan  is,  as  I  have  mentioned  earlier,  a 
phenomenon  that  Japan’s  problem  of  trend  decline  in  productivity  is directly  related.  If  the 
fund-provisioning measure serves as a “catalyst” for private financial institutions in pursuing 
efforts  toward  strengthening  the  foundations  for  economic  growth,  it  would  contribute  to 
raising productivity of Japan’s economy and consequently to overcoming deflation. 
While  the  fund-provisioning  measure  is  one  new  measure  to  support  strengthening  the 
foundations  for  economic  growth,  the  ways  to  support  strengthening  the  foundations  for 
economic  growth  are  not  necessarily  limited  to  the  measure  the  Bank has  introduced.  For 
example, if market participants consider schemes such as securitizing loans and investments 
that would relate to the strengthening of foundations for economic growth, the Bank is willing 
to  actively  cooperate  in  establishing  a  market  for  such  purposes.  Moreover,  if  such 
securitized products are to be nurtured, there will be room for exploring ways to accept those 
securitized products as eligible collateral for the Bank’s operations. We will continue to make 
sufficient considerations while exploring various possibilities.  
Concluding remarks 
Today  I  have  talked  about  Japan’s  economic  situation,  its  challenges,  and  the  Bank’s 
conduct of monetary policy. In closing, I will offer my impression about Toyama’s economy. 
Looking  at  the  industrial  structure  of  this  region,  against  a  backdrop  of  ample  water 
resources, diligent people, active attraction of enterprises, and improved infrastructure, this 
region  is  one  of  the  best  “manufacturing  prefectures”  on  the  Japan  Sea  where  the 
manufacturing  businesses  such  as  chemicals  like  medicine,  general  machinery,  electrical 
machinery,  and  metal  products  like  aluminium  building  materials  have  been  locally 
integrated.  In  addition,  this  region  is  famous  for  “a  business  of  Etchu  Toyama  traveling 
medicine salesperson,” which has a history dating back more than 300 years. The business 
had systems such as the fare collection system, which hands drugs first and collects money 
later for the amount of drugs actually used, and use of books, which contain various kinds of 
customer and sales information. Those systems could be said as a revolutionary business 
model  that  leads  to  credit  card  business,  customer  data  management,  and  inventory 
management at present. Such tradition of making cutting-edge approaches toward industrial 
promotion  and  economic  development  has  been  handed  down  from  generation  to 
generation. 
As for the recent economic situation of the regional economy, the branch informed me that “it 
has been steadily picking up, led by the manufacturing industry, although there is still some 
lingering severity on the employment front.” This region has growth potential including “the 
integration of manufacturers with high technology,” “comparative advantage in being located 
close  to  Japan  Sea  rim  countries  that  have  been  growing  rapidly,”  and  “rich  tourism 
resources.”  Upon  thoroughly  utilizing  the  fund-provisioning  scheme  we  newly  introduced,  I 
expect this region to fulfil its growth potential and expect you all to continue to strive for the 
development of the regional economy. 
For  firms  to  be  able  to  have  bright  prospects  for  future  growth,  the  Bank  will  consistently 
make efforts as a central bank. 
8 
 BIS Review 100/2010
