Kiyohiko G Nishimura: Japan’s economy and monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Kiyohiko G Nishimura, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at a Meeting 
with Business Leaders, Miyagi, 21 April 2010. 
 Introduction 
I am honored today to have this opportunity to speak and to exchange views with business 
leaders  in  Miyagi  Prefecture.  I  will  express  my  gratitude  for  your  cooperation  in  interviews 
with the staffers from the Sendai Branch and for the Bank of Japan’s surveys. Information 
obtained  from  those  interviews  and  surveys  is  invaluable  and  utilized  fully  in  assessing 
economic and financial developments and conducting monetary policy.  
Before exchanging views with you, I will talk about economic and financial developments in 
Japan as well as the thinking of the conduct of monetary policy. I will also briefly touch on the 
challenges Japan’s economy faces for its growth. 
I. 
Economic conditions in Japan 
Overseas economies 
With  progress  in  economic  globalization,  developments  in  Japan’s  economy  are  under 
significant influence of overseas economic developments. The plunge in Japan’s economy 
after the failure of Lehman Brothers in the autumn of 2008 was attributable to the worldwide 
economic  dive  triggered  by  the  financial  crisis,  the  epicenters  of  which  were  the  United 
States and Europe. Therefore, I will first talk about overseas economies. 
In  response  to  the  rapid  deterioration  in  international  financial  markets  and  in  the  global 
economy  following  the  failure  of  Lehman  Brothers,  the  governments  and  central  banks 
around  the  globe  took  bold  policy  measures.  Partly  due  to  the  effects  of  those  measures, 
international  financial  markets  have  regained  stability.  For  example,  in  money  markets  in 
which  financial  institutions  mutually  trade  short-term  funds,  the  transaction  volume  once 
plunged  to  the  extent  “liquidity  evaporated.”  It  is  now  in  a  state  that  money  markets  are 
awash with low cost funds, and extremely low interest rates have been continuing.  
The  real  economy  is  the  same  as  the  international  financial  markets  and  Overseas 
Economies in terms of bottoming out from the substantial deterioration which continued until 
the beginning of 2009  and has been improving since then. The global economy has been 
recovering moderately led by robust growth in emerging economies. 
There  are  several  reasons  emerging  economies  were  among  the  first  to  recover  and 
continue to grow strongly. 
First, domestic demand, including business fixed investment and private consumption, was 
potentially  strong.  In  emerging  economies,  the  purchasing  power  of  households  has  risen 
and  is  expected  to  rise  in  accordance  with  an  expansion  of  the  economy.  Therefore, 
emerging  economies,  which  attracted  attention  as  production  bases 
for  advanced 
economies, have also become increasingly attractive as products markets. To capture such 
promising  markets,  firms  in  advanced  economies  have  been  increasing  the  number  of 
production  and  sales  bases  for  local  products.  In  addition,  local  firms  have  also  been 
increasing their production by introducing technologies and sales know-how from advanced 
economies.  A  virtuous  cycle,  in  that  such  an  increase  in  business  activity  stimulates 
consumption  through  a  rise  in  the  purchasing  power  of  households,  which  in  turn  further 
increases  business  activity,  is  expected  to  continue.  Expectations  for  the  future  are  also 
pushing up demand at present. 
BIS Review 53/2010 
 1
Second,  fiscal  and  monetary  policies  carried  out  as  a  financial  crisis  response  in  various 
countries  significantly  exploited  the  potential  demand.  For  example,  in  China,  purchase 
support  measures  for  automobiles  and  television  sets  were  taken  and  a  large-scale  fiscal 
expenditure was set partly for improving infrastructure. Accommodative monetary conditions 
in advanced economies resulted in providing low cost funds to the markets, and those funds 
are flowing into emerging economies in which high growth is expected. That brought about 
an  improvement  in  funding  conditions  and  a  rise  in  stock  prices,  which  contributed  to 
increasing business activity and promoting consumption through an increase in income. 
By  contrast,  while  the  U.S.  and  European  advanced  economies  have  been  recovering, 
momentum has been lacking. In the United States, while the number of workers has started 
to increase and consumption has been holding up well, house sales and house prices have 
been  stagnant  and  the  unemployment  rate  has  been  close  to  10  percent.  In  European 
countries,  where  economic  ties  with  high  growing  East  Asian  regions  are  weak,  the 
improvement has been further lagging. Moreover, financial institutions are shouldering large 
impaired assets and taking a cautious stance in extending loans and households are taking a 
cautious  consumption  behavior  due  to  the  heavy  debt  burden.  Those  are  the  problems 
common to the United Stated and Europe. They are the “balance-sheet problem,” namely, 
the problem of how to repair the impaired asset conditions. As you remember, it dragged the 
economy for a protracted period also in Japan after the burst of the bubble. 
As  for  the  outlook,  it  is  projected  that  overseas  economies  will  continue  to  improve  while 
stability  in  international  financial  markets  will  be  maintained.  Emerging  economies  will 
continue  to  expand,  and  the  U.S.  and  European  economies  will  gradually  increase  their 
degree  of  recovery,  even  though  balance-sheet  problems  need  time  to  resolve.  However, 
such outlook is associated with various uncertainties. 
First, in international financial markets, the recovery in the depth of market transactions and 
in market liquidity has still been delayed for longer-term transactions. In addition, triggered by 
the  problems  concerning  fiscal  deficits  in  some  European  countries,  fiscal  soundness  and 
fiscal sustainability have been drawing increasing attention in various countries. 
Second, there are many uncertain factors concerning the outlook for overseas economies. If 
the  aforementioned  resolution  of  balance-sheet  problems  in  the  United  States  and  Europe 
takes  more  time  than  expected,  such  delay  will  drag  down  the  economies  accordingly.  In 
addition, there is nascent concern about overheating in emerging economies. In China, real 
estate  prices,  mainly  in  the  city  areas,  have  been  rapidly  increasing.  Such  increase  is 
recently observed in the inland areas, in addition to the costal areas. Moreover, the growth 
rate  of  wages  and  prices  has  been  gradually  increasing.  Also,  in  many  other  emerging 
economies,  concern  over  inflation  has  been  emerging.  In  those  economies,  while  policy 
interest  rates  have  been  raised  and  lending  restraint  measures  have  been  taken,  the 
authorities have been forced to perform difficult maneuvers on those policy measures. If the 
restraint measures are too strong, it would be a sudden brake on the main engine of those 
economies. On the other hand, if the restraint measures are insufficient, it will be an upside 
risk for economic activity in the short run. However, in the future, it will become necessary to 
substantially correct the excesses and that might end up in destabilizing those economies. 
Particularly,  the  outlook  for  the  Chinese  economy  warrants  attention.  Amid  the  trend  of 
establishing the global division of labor that makes the most of development in information 
and telecommunications technology, China has been growing at a pace that can be called as 
“explosive” and has become in part the world’s factory. In the process of growth, advanced 
economies had overcome constraints in terms of human resources, technology, and finance, 
and  evolved  after  passing  several  stages.  However,  by  benefiting  from  globalization  in 
technology and finance, China is achieving a development that overcomes those constraints 
at once and has several development stages co-existing simultaneously. It should be noted 
that,  if  such  growth  continues,  it  cannot  be  denied  that,  at  one  point,  a  bottleneck  might 
emerge in terms of the labor force and resources, leading to a rapid increase in inflationary 
2 
 BIS Review 53/2010
pressure, or the economy might reach the growth ceiling. In such a case, Japan’s economy 
will  be  affected  significantly.  In  other  emerging  economies,  with  varying  degrees,  rapid 
changes  might  take  place  due  to  the  effects  of  information  and  telecommunications 
technology advancement and globalization. 
We  need  to  continue  to  deliberately  examine  developments  in  overseas  economies, 
including  advanced  and  emerging  economies,  and  the  national  authorities’  conduct  of 
macroeconomic policy. 
The current state of the economy 
Based on the developments in overseas economies, I will now turn to Japan’s economy.  
Japan’s  economy  has  been  picking  up  due  mainly  to  the  improvement  in  overseas 
economies  and  the  effects  of  various  policy  measures.  Exports,  mainly  to  high  growing 
emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies,  have  been  increasing  since  the  spring  of 
2009. Correspondingly, the level of capacity utilization in domestic firms is gradually picking 
up.  Although  there  is  not  yet  sufficient  momentum  to  support  a  self-sustaining  recovery, 
consumption,  backed  mainly  by  demand  for  eco-friendly  automobiles  and  electrical 
appliances that has been underpinned by policy measures, is picking up. Moreover, it has 
become evident that the decline in business fixed investment has been leveling out. 
The economy is likely to continue picking up. On the back of favorable conditions in overseas 
economies, exports and production are likely to increase somewhat more than projected and, 
albeit with some swings, to perform firmly. Policy support will continue for the time being, as 
represented by an extension of the purchase support measures for electrical appliances that 
have been highly effective. In addition, the fact that housing starts have started to increase is 
a welcoming sign. When houses are built, there are spillover effects on electrical appliances 
and furniture. Markets have once been concerned about the so-called “double dip,” but we 
judge that the possibility of the economy experiencing another plunge has fairly receded. 
Then,  how  about  the  sustainability  of  the  recovery  going  forward?  The  point  is,  when  the 
effects  of  economic  stimulus  measures  taken  during  the  financial  crisis  dissipate,  whether 
there is sufficient momentum for a self-sustaining recovery in private demand to offset the 
waning  effects  of  stimulus  measures.  If  private  demand  has  not  recovered  sufficiently,  the 
once concerned plunge in the economy will take place at a delayed timing. However, if the 
improvements in exports and production are sustained, capacity utilization will improve and 
profits will recover through an increase in sales. Then conditions will be in place for business 
fixed  investment  to  recover,  and  the  broad-based  recovery  will  be  in  sight,  and  it  will 
gradually  extend  to  small  firms  that  compose  the  bases  of  industries  and  to  households 
through wages and dividends. If the uptrend continues, to the extent the runaway is long, the 
base for economic recovery will firm up. 
The  timing  of  the  recovery  spreading  over  to  small  firms  and  households  needs  to  be 
considered with a certain margin. Firms that shoulder exports and production are exposed to 
severe pressure of international competition. There is a possibility that, from a viewpoint of 
maintaining competitiveness, overseas investments might be considered first and returns to 
employees might be restrained. In addition, parts procurement has spread to overseas and 
thus the extent of spillover to domestic affiliated firms appears to have reduced. As a result, 
we need to recognize a possibility that the spillover effects of the recovery on small firms and 
households might be delayed. 
As for the economic outlook, there are other various uncertainties both upside and downside. 
Of  those,  uncertainty  about  developments  overseas  is  what  I  have  mentioned  earlier. 
Moreover, as uncertainty originated at home, developments in firms’ growth expectations are 
extremely important. 
Since the outbreak of a financial crisis, firms rapidly intensified their cautious stance for the 
future.  While  the  stance  gradually  improved  thereafter,  I  persistently  hear  from  firms’ 
BIS Review 53/2010 
 3
management  that  they  cannot  have  confidence  about  the  future.  If  pessimism  about  the 
future strengthens, it will result in contracting business activity. In that regard, a survey by the 
Cabinet  Office  conducted  on  large  firms  showed  that  firms’  medium-  to  long-term  growth 
expectations have been maintained. However, the dominant majority in terms of the number 
of  firms  and  the  number  of  workers  is  small  firms.  According  to  the  Tankan  (Short-Term 
Economic  Survey  of  Enterprises  in  Japan)  released  at  the  beginning  of  this  month,  what 
stands out is the fact that, while small firms’ business sentiment has improved, it has lagged 
behind,  compared  with  the  pickup  in  large  firms  and  in  the  economy  as  a  whole.  It  is 
important to promptly dispel uncertainties surrounding the economy and offer prospects for 
future growth. I will explain my views on the challenges for Japan’s economic growth later. 
Price developments in Japan 
I will now talk about price developments. 
The year-on-year rate of change in consumer prices has been declining, while the pace has 
been moderating since last August to around –1 percent recently.  
We hear from firms that it is difficult to raise sales prices as consumers are sensitive to prices 
due  to  their  tight  purse  strings,  and  as  competition  is  harsh  among  firms.  The  Tankan 
showed  that  output  prices  have  not  risen,  compared  with  the  improvement  in  business 
sentiment and the rise in input prices. 
Nevertheless, it can be said that some beams of light are starting to break through a thick 
cloud of deflation. 
First,  there  is  a  subtle  change  in  firms’  price-setting  behavior  and  consumers’  purchase 
behavior.  With  your  cooperation,  the  Bank  conducted  a  survey  on  firms’  price-setting 
behavior  at  the  beginning  of  this  year.  The  results,  which  were  published  in  our  January 
Regional  Economic  Report,  showed  that  there  were  signs  in  some  firms  to  avoid  endless 
price  competition  and  try  to  differentiate  in  aspects  other  than  prices.  The  impression 
obtained through various surveys and interviews is that there are subtle and gradual signs on 
the consumers’ front to purchase quality products by paying reasonable prices.  
Second, the effects of exports and production bottoming out in the early spring of 2009, and 
the economy as a whole picking up since then, will gradually materialize from now on. A rule 
of thumb is that there is about one year lag until changes in the economy affect the inflation 
rate. In that sense, it could be said that from the middle of 2009 to the spring of 2010 was a 
period in which the effects of the economic plunge from the autumn of 2008 to the spring of 
2009 put strong downward pressure on prices with a time lag. And the effects of the pickup in 
the economy since the spring of 2009 can be considered to spread over to prices only from 
now on. 
Third, reflecting the aforementioned changes in firms’ price-setting behavior and the lagged 
effects of the pickup in the economy, there are some changes in the trend of prices. Have 
you ever heard of expressions such as the consumer price index excluding fresh food or the 
consumer price index excluding food and energy? Those are the price indexes that, in order 
to gauge the trend changes, exclude the swings by temporary factors such as weather and 
commodity price fluctuations, and the year-on-year rate of decline in those price indexes has 
been moderating. There is also a way to automatically exclude a certain portion of items that 
register significant price fluctuations. The consumer price index compiled in that way is called 
the  “trimmed-mean”  consumer  price  index.  The  year-on-year  rate  of  decline  in  consumer 
prices in terms of trimmed mean index accelerated toward the autumn of last year, but it has 
been moderating recently for three consecutive months. 
Taking those into account, as the economy is likely to continue picking up and the aggregate 
supply  and  demand  balance  improves,  the  moderating  trend  in  the  decline  in  prices  is 
expected to continue. 
4 
 BIS Review 53/2010
Of  course,  there  are  uncertainties  about  the  outlook  for  prices.  Because  of  that,  it  is 
necessary  to  surely  confirm  the  steps  toward  overcoming  deflation.  In  the  following,  I  will 
raise two points that warrant attention in considering the outlook for prices.  
First, the risk stemming from overseas economies. There are risks both in the direction of 
deflation  and  inflation.  On  one  hand,  buoyant  business  fixed  investment  is  continuing  in 
emerging economies. If that results in excess supply worldwide, it will increase deflationary 
pressure. On the other hand, while accommodative monetary conditions are maintained in 
major economies, if a view that such conditions will become protracted more than necessary 
takes hold, there is a risk that a new type of credit “bubble” might be generated, for example, 
in  emerging  economies,  and  also  exert  unexpected  effects  on  Japan.  Moreover, 
consumption  of  resources  and  energy  in  emerging  economies  has  been  increasing 
explosively, which, depending on the situation in supplying economies, could abruptly push 
up  commodity  prices  in  the  future.  If  prices  in  emerging  economies  rise  due  partly  to  an 
increase in wages, it might spread over to the prices of Japan’s import products and others. 
In such a case, unlike energy that cannot be substituted by domestic products, it would affect 
prices in Japan through a path of gearing demand toward domestic products whose relative 
expensiveness will decline. 
Second, people’s view on prices. If people increasingly foresee that deflation will continue, it 
will put downward pressure on prices. In that regard, as long as viewed from survey data, 
people’s  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  have  been  maintained  at  about 
1 percent. However, such expectations are subjective in that it might change in the future. It 
has been said that people’s view on prices tends to be affected by past price changes. In that 
regard,  what  warrants  attention  is  that  the  waiver  of  high  school  tuition  has  been  in  effect 
since  April,  which  is  estimated  to  push  down  consumer  price  inflation  by  around 
0.5 percentage points. The effects of such one-off factors disappear in 12 months, and thus 
should be considered separately from the trend change in consumer prices. Nevertheless, 
since the effects will accelerate the pace of the price decline on surface for the time being, a 
possibility of that affecting people’s view on prices warrants vigilance.  
Domestic financial conditions 
Next, about domestic financial conditions. 
In  the  money  market,  the  effects  of  monetary  easing  by  the  Bank  have  been  gradually 
spreading and the interest rates including those of a longer term have declined to extremely 
low levels. The effects of monetary easing have spread to firms’ funding costs, including the 
borrowing rates from banks. In addition, issuing conditions for CP have become favorable, 
more  than  those  seen  prior  to  the  failure  of  Lehman  Brothers.  Issuing  conditions  for 
corporate bonds have also been favorable, with signs of improvement recently spreading to 
those for low-rated corporate bonds. 
The  Tankan  showed  that  firms’  financial  positions  have  been  improving  as  a  whole. 
However, many small firms, due partly to the lagged improvement in their businesses, still 
see their financial positions as tight. Nevertheless, the overall move toward easing has been 
continuing,  including  small  firms.  This  point  has  also  been  confirmed  by  various  surveys 
targeted at smaller firms than the Tankan. 
Against  such  a  backdrop,  it  can  be  judged  that  domestic  financial  conditions,  with  some 
lingering severity, have shown increasing signs of easing. 
Monetary policy 
II. 
Taking into account the developments in economic activity and prices, I will move on to the 
conduct of monetary policy. 
BIS Review 53/2010 
 5
The Bank wound up outright purchases of CP and corporate bonds at the end of December 
2009,  and  special  funds-supplying  operation  to  facilitate  corporate  financing  at  the  end  of 
March  2010.  The  special  funds-supplying  operation  to  facilitate  corporate  financing  is  an 
operation,  by  which  the  Bank  extends  loans  to  its  counterparts  for  an  unlimited  amount 
against  the  value  of  corporate  debt,  including  loans  on  deeds  and  corporate  bonds, 
submitted as collateral. These had been introduced temporarily as extraordinary measures 
during  the  financial  crisis.  Behind  the  introduction  of  these  measures  were  an  excessive 
sense of anxiety prevailing in part of financial markets and the considerable decline in the 
functioning of the markets, such as the plunge in transaction volume and the disappearance 
of  appropriate  pricing.  Subsequently,  as  financial  markets  restored  their  functioning,  the 
adverse effects stemming from those measures, such as the shrinkage of the market scale 
and distortion in price formation in the markets, were seen. Therefore, the Bank decided to 
wind up these temporary measures and to consistently maintain accommodative monetary 
conditions  by  taking  the  most  appropriate  funds-supplying  measures  according  to  the 
changes in the market situation. 
It is not correct to gauge the winding up of those measures as the holding back of monetary 
easing.  The  Bank  recognizes  that  Japan’s  economy  is  faced  with  a  critical  challenge  of 
overcoming deflation and returning to a sustainable growth path with price stability. To this 
end, the Bank will continue to consistently make contributions as central bank. There is no 
change in such a stance. 
Policy responses that should be taken when a great shock like a financial crisis occurs are, in 
a sense, clear. Timely, targeted, and temporary stopgap measures are required there. The 
temporary measure to cope with the rapid decline in market functioning in CP and corporate 
bond  markets  was  a  good  example.  By  contrast,  the  stagnation  of  the  economy  as 
symbolized  in  deflation  is  a  deep-rooted  problem,  and  a  response  to  it  will  be  different  in 
nature  from  that  to  a  financial  crisis.  Like  there  is  no  quick  fix  for  lifestyle  diseases,  we 
believe  it  important,  while  significant  effects  are  not  seen  immediately,  to  consistently 
maintain accommodative monetary conditions. 
The  Bank  reduced  the  policy  rate  to  virtually  zero  percent.  In  addition,  to  further  enhance 
accommodative monetary conditions, the Bank introduced a measure to encourage a decline 
in the longer-term interest rates in December 2009. It is a measure to provide three months’ 
funds against a broad range of collateral in an amount of 10 trillion yen at a fixed low rate of 
0.1  percent.  Thanks  partly  to  the  measure,  not  only  market  interest  rates  but  also  firms’ 
funding costs have declined further. 
The amount to be provided through the measure was substantially increased to 20 trillion yen 
in  March.  That  step  was  to  expand  the  measure  to  encourage  a  decline  in  longer-term 
interest  rates  while  coping  with  the  fact  that,  from  April  onward,  fund  provision  through 
special funds-supplying operations to facilitate corporate financing from the Bank will decline. 
The  Bank’s  decision  on  further  easing  at  a  time  when  the  economy  has  been  somewhat 
improving  more  than  projected  was  considered  by  some  as  an  unexpected  decision. 
However, since it continues to be the case that some time is needed for Japan’s economy to 
return to a sustainable growth path with price stability, we judged it necessary to ensure the 
improvements in economic activity and prices through an additional easing measure. 
I believe that this point will be understood easily if the following is taken into account. There 
is a risk that, when firms’ activity has contracted, the effects of low interest rates might not be 
fully exerted. As long as firms do not have willingness, low interest rates do not necessarily 
lead to an increase in investment and employment. By using an old saying, we sometimes 
say “you can lead a horse to the water, but you can’t make him drink.” Put it the other way 
round, what would happen if you bring him to the water at a time when the exhausted horse 
has somewhat regained strength? We might be able to say that the horse is more likely to 
drink water and might start to run around vividly again. In such a way, we believe that the 
6 
 BIS Review 53/2010
additional  accommodative  measure  taken  by  the  Bank  this  time  will  contribute  to  ensuring 
the improvements in economic activity and prices.  
Since  interest  rates  are  already  at  extremely  low  levels,  room  for  a  further  decline  by 
monetary easing is naturally limited. However, that does not suggest that monetary easing 
has reached its limit. Because, for firms, the level of funding rates matters in its relation to the 
rate of return. Even if a firm can raise funds at low costs, power to stimulate firm’s business 
will be limited when there are few promising investment projects. By contrast, amid continued 
low interest rates, if the economy recovers and projects with high profitability increase, the 
usability  of  funds  obtained  at  low  costs  will  considerably  improve.  It  is  expected  that  the 
economy  will  continue  picking  up  and  firms’  rate  of  return  to  further  improve.  In  those 
circumstances,  the  Bank  states  clearly  that  it  will  maintain  the  extremely  accommodative 
monetary  conditions.  This  means  that  the  effects  of  monetary  easing  will  become  further 
pronounced in the future. 
Challenges for Japan’s economic growth 
III. 
In the rest of my speech, I will touch on the challenge toward the growth of Japan’s economy. 
The challenge of how to raise the ability of Japan’s economy to create value-added. 
The  environment  has  been  changing  significantly.  Information  and  telecommunications 
technology has increasingly facilitated the adjustment of global positioning for production and 
sales bases. In addition, while the recovery in consumption in the United States and Europe 
has been sluggish, emerging economies have been increasing their presence. In Japan, the 
wave of the aging population, which is progressing at the fastest pace in the world, has been 
quietly approaching China and Asian economies. 
Japanese  firms  have  adhered  to  “high-quality  manufacturing”  and  “finely-tuned  services.” 
The  resulting  “coordination-type”  products,  which  are  exhaustively  coordinated  from  the 
stage of parts designing and firms make constant improvements in even after entering the 
stage of bulk production, have been accepted particularly by the U.S. and European markets. 
Typical are automobiles. 
At the other end of those, there are “combination-type” products. Those are the products of 
total  design,  which  separate  the  products  into  several  modules,  standardize  interface 
between  the  modules,  and  combine  or  assemble  those  to  make  final  products.  A  good 
example is a personal computer that consists of such modules as CPU, a mother board, and 
a liquid crystal display monitor. 
The recent progress in information and telecommunications technology has made it possible 
to make products that will to some extent meet consumers’ preferences by procuring high 
quality modules from the world and just assemble them. The combination-type products are 
spreading. Just for assembling, emerging economies, in which wages and land rents are low, 
have  an  advantage.  To  that  extent,  the  advantage  of  coordination-type  products,  in  which 
Japanese  firms  can  exert  their  strength,  has  declined.  Japanese  firms  still  maintain  high 
technological competitiveness in the production of core modules and processing equipment. 
However,  technology  transfer  from  Japan  to  emerging  economies  has  been  further 
progressing,  and  the  gap  between  the  two  economies  has  been  narrowing.  I  have  often 
heard that Japan should be all right since it has “manufacturing DNA” that no other country 
has.  The  reality  is  that  such  DNA  has  gradually  been  transferring  to  emerging  economies 
through  the  shift  of  Japanese  firms’  production  bases  overseas  and  associated  transfer  of 
product development sections. 
Having said that, in general terms, it may not be an appropriate policy for Japanese firms to 
convert to a combination-type structure. That is because, that case might lead to abandoning 
the strength Japanese firms have accumulated, in addition, to be forced to compete in terms 
of costs with firms in emerging economies. 
BIS Review 53/2010 
 7
What  is  necessary  now  for  Japanese  firms  is  not  to  be  complacent  about  technological 
advantages,  but  to  develop  coordination-type  products  that  respond  speedily  to  and  are 
finely-tuned to consumers’ needs, and generate a new market itself. Such high value-added 
markets  might  not  necessarily  be  large.  However,  if  firms  cover  broadly  even  such  niche 
markets, those markets as a whole will provide a significant profit opportunity for firms. 
In  that  regard,  population  aging  that  has  been  progressing  in  Japan  could  be  a  catalyst. 
Consumer needs of the elder generation are highly versatile than younger generations, to the 
extent that elderly people have wide dispersion in income and asset formation. If firms can 
make  finely-tuned  responses  to  those  needs,  it  will  lead  to  stimulating  potential  demand, 
namely, exploiting niche markets. In the near future, population aging will progress in China 
and many overseas economies. If Japanese firms can move ahead in product development 
and accumulation of business know-how in the aging population, it will lead to an increased 
chance for those firms to benefit from the first mover’s advantage overseas in the future. 
However,  challenging  various  niche  areas  ahead  of  other  firms  entails  risk.  On  this  point, 
there are critics who argue that, by referring to the fact that the establishment rate of firms in 
Japan  remains  at  about  half  that  in  United  States  and  Europe,  Japanese  DNA  is  stability-
oriented to start with and lack venture spirits. However, in the past, there were times when 
the  establishment  rate  in  Japan  was  comparable  to  that  in  countries  around  the  world. 
Stability-oriented  DNA  is  a  mere  perception.  We  expect  firms  to  aggressively  exert 
entrepreneurship. At the same time, it is also important for the public sector to prepare an 
environment in which challenges to new businesses can easily take place.  
Concluding remarks 
The economy in this region has been picking up, while there is lingering severity in private 
demand, including business fixed investment and private consumption.  
Against  such  a  backdrop,  Miyagi  Prefecture  has  set  a  goal  of  “achieving  the  wealth 
prefecture Miyagi, and striving to achieve gross production of 10 trillion yen,” and has been 
making efforts to vitalize the industries from various perspectives. I have learned that many 
companies were already attracted to the region. Moreover, Sendai City has a broad-based 
ability to pull in customers as the largest commercial city in the Tohoku region, and large-
scale facilities have recently been opened one after another.  
Of  course,  the  environment  surrounding  the  regional  economy,  including  intensified 
competition  with  overseas  and  the  decline  in  public  works,  is  by  no  means  favorable. 
However, the region is full of attractions, with one of the nation’s largest granaries, a wealth 
of fishery resources, many research institutions, and ample traditional craft industries. The 
region has high potential for growth. 
Today, I am scheduled to visit various places such as the central shopping area in front of 
Sendai Station. I believe it is a valuable opportunity to gain firsthand knowledge about the 
reality  of  the  regional  economy  that  cannot  be  gauged  through  statistics  and  the  media. 
Moreover,  as  called  as  “a  city  of  trees,”  boulevard  trees  here  are  beautiful,  and  I  can  just 
imagine that it might be dazzlingly beautiful when green shoots burst out all together through 
early  summer.  Like  those  green  shoots,  I  am  also  looking  forward  to  closely  seeing  your 
efforts toward growth. 
8 
 BIS Review 53/2010
