Ben S Bernanke: Semiannual Monetary Policy Report to the Congress  
Testimony  of  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  System,  before 
the  Committee  on  Financial  Services,  US  House  of 
Representatives, Washington DC, 24 February 2010. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website.  
 Chairman  Frank,  Ranking  Member  Bachus,  and  other  members  of  the  Committee,  I  am 
pleased  to  present  the  Federal  Reserve’s  semiannual  Monetary  Policy  Report  to  the 
Congress. I will begin today with some comments on the outlook for the economy and for 
monetary policy, then touch briefly on several other important issues.  
The economic outlook 
Although  the  recession  officially  began  more  than  two  years  ago,  U.S.  economic  activity 
contracted particularly sharply following the intensification of the global financial crisis in the 
fall of 2008. Concerted efforts by the Federal Reserve, the Treasury Department, and other 
U.S.  authorities  to  stabilize  the  financial  system,  together  with  highly  stimulative  monetary 
and  fiscal  policies,  helped  arrest  the  decline  and  are  supporting  a  nascent  economic 
recovery. Indeed, the U.S. economy expanded at about a 4 percent annual rate during the 
second half of last year. A significant portion of that growth, however, can be attributed to the 
progress firms made in working down unwanted inventories of unsold goods, which left them 
more  willing  to  increase  production.  As  the  impetus  provided  by  the  inventory  cycle  is 
temporary, and as the fiscal support for economic growth likely will diminish later this year, a 
sustained recovery will depend on continued growth in private-sector final demand for goods 
and services.  
Private  final  demand  does  seem  to  be  growing  at  a  moderate  pace,  buoyed  in  part  by  a 
general improvement in financial conditions. In particular, consumer spending has recently 
picked  up,  reflecting  gains  in  real  disposable  income  and  household  wealth  and  tentative 
signs of stabilization in the labor market. Business investment in equipment and software has 
risen  significantly.  And  international  trade  –  supported  by  a  recovery  in  the  economies  of 
many  of  our  trading  partners  –  is  rebounding  from  its  deep  contraction  of  a  year  ago. 
However, starts of single-family homes, which rose noticeably this past spring, have recently 
been  roughly  flat,  and  commercial  construction  is  declining  sharply,  reflecting  poor 
fundamentals and continued difficulty in obtaining financing.  
The job market has been hit especially hard by the recession, as employers reacted to sharp 
sales declines and concerns about credit availability by deeply cutting their workforces in late 
2008  and  in  2009.  Some  recent indicators  suggest  the  deterioration  in  the  labor  market  is 
abating:  Job  losses  have  slowed  considerably,  and  the  number  of  full-time  jobs  in 
manufacturing  rose  modestly  in  January.  Initial  claims  for  unemployment  insurance  have 
continued to trend lower, and the temporary services industry, often considered a bellwether 
for  the  employment  outlook,  has  been  expanding  steadily  since  October.  Notwithstanding 
these positive signs, the job market remains quite weak, with the unemployment rate near 
10 percent  and  job  openings  scarce.  Of  particular  concern,  because  of  its  long-term 
implications  for  workers’  skills  and  wages,  is  the  increasing  incidence  of  long-term 
unemployment; indeed, more than 40 percent of the unemployed have been out of work six 
months or more, nearly double the share of a year ago.  
Increases in energy prices resulted in a pickup in consumer price inflation in the second half 
of last year, but oil prices have flattened out over recent months, and most indicators suggest 
BIS Review 21/2010 
 1
that inflation likely will be subdued for some time. Slack in labor and product markets has 
reduced wage and price pressures in most markets, and sharp increases in productivity have 
further  reduced  producers’  unit  labor  costs.  The  cost  of  shelter,  which  receives  a  heavy 
weight  in  consumer  price  indexes,  is  rising  very  slowly,  reflecting  high  vacancy  rates.  In 
addition,  according  to  most  measures,  longer-term  inflation  expectations  have  remained 
relatively stable.  
The improvement in financial markets that began last spring continues. Conditions in short-
term funding markets have returned to near pre-crisis levels. Many (mostly larger) firms have 
been able to issue corporate bonds or new equity and do not seem to be hampered by a lack 
of  credit.  In  contrast,  bank  lending  continues  to  contract,  reflecting  both  tightened  lending 
standards and weak demand for credit amid uncertain economic prospects.  
In  conjunction  with  the  January  meeting  of  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC), 
Board  members  and  Reserve  Bank  presidents  prepared  projections  for  economic  growth, 
unemployment, and inflation for the years 2010 through 2012 and over the longer run. The 
contours of these forecasts are broadly similar to those I reported to the Congress last July. 
FOMC  participants  continue  to  anticipate  a  moderate  pace  of  economic  recovery,  with 
economic growth of roughly 3 to 3-1/2 percent in 2010 and 3-1/2 to 4-1/2 percent in 2011. 
Consistent  with  moderate  economic  growth,  participants  expect  the  unemployment  rate  to 
decline only slowly, to a range of roughly 6-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent by the end of 2012, still well 
above their estimate of the long-run sustainable rate of about 5 percent. Inflation is expected 
to remain subdued, with consumer prices rising at rates between 1 and 2 percent in 2010 
through 2012. In the longer term, inflation is expected to be between 1-3/4 and 2 percent, the 
range that most FOMC participants judge to be consistent with the Federal Reserve’s dual 
mandate of price stability and maximum employment.  
Monetary policy 
Over  the  past  year,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  employed  a  wide  array  of  tools  to  promote 
economic  recovery  and  preserve  price  stability.  The  target  for  the  federal  funds  rate  has 
been maintained at a historically low range of 0 to 1/4 percent since December 2008. The 
FOMC  continues  to  anticipate  that  economic  conditions  –  including  low  rates  of  resource 
utilization, subdued inflation trends, and stable inflation expectations – are likely to warrant 
exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period.  
To  provide  support  to  mortgage  lending  and  housing  markets  and  to  improve  overall 
conditions  in  private  credit  markets,  the  Federal  Reserve  is  in  the  process  of  purchasing 
$1.25 trillion of agency mortgage-backed securities and about $175 billion of agency debt. 
We have been gradually slowing the pace of these purchases in order to promote a smooth 
transition in markets and anticipate that these transactions will be completed by the end of 
March. The FOMC will continue to evaluate its purchases of securities in light of the evolving 
economic outlook and conditions in financial markets.  
In response to the substantial improvements in the functioning of most financial markets, the 
Federal Reserve is winding down the special liquidity facilities it created during the crisis. On 
February 1, a number of these facilities, including credit facilities for primary dealers, lending 
programs intended to help stabilize money market mutual funds and the commercial paper 
market,  and  temporary  liquidity  swap  lines  with  foreign  central  banks,  were  allowed  to 
expire.1  The  only  remaining  lending  program  for  multiple  borrowers  created  under  the 
Federal Reserve’s emergency authorities, the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility, is 
scheduled  to  close  on  March  31  for  loans  backed  by  all  types  of  collateral  except  newly 
                                                 
1   Primary dealers are broker-dealers that act as counterparties to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York in its 
conduct of open market operations. 
2 
 BIS Review 21/2010
issued commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) and on June 30 for loans backed by 
newly issued CMBS.  
In addition to closing its special facilities, the Federal Reserve is normalizing its lending to 
commercial banks through the discount window. The final auction of discount-window funds 
to depositories through the Term Auction Facility, which was created in the early stages of 
the crisis to improve the liquidity of the banking system, will occur on March 8. Last week we 
announced  that  the  maximum  term  of  discount  window  loans,  which  was  increased  to  as 
much as 90 days during the crisis, would be returned to overnight for most banks, as it was 
before the crisis erupted in August 2007. To discourage banks from relying on the discount 
window rather than private funding markets for short-term credit, last week we also increased 
the discount rate by 25 basis points, raising the spread between the discount rate and the top 
of  the  target  range  for  the  federal  funds  rate  to  50  basis  points.  These  changes,  like  the 
closure  of  most  of  the  special  lending  facilities  earlier  this  month,  are  in  response  to  the 
improved  functioning  of  financial  markets,  which  has  reduced  the  need  for  extraordinary 
assistance from the Federal Reserve. These adjustments are not expected to lead to tighter 
financial  conditions  for  households  and  businesses  and  should  not  be  interpreted  as 
signaling any change in the outlook for monetary policy, which remains about the same as it 
was at the time of the January meeting of the FOMC.  
Although the federal funds rate is likely to remain exceptionally low for an extended period, 
as the expansion matures, the Federal Reserve will at some point need to begin to tighten 
monetary  conditions  to  prevent  the  development  of  inflationary  pressures.  Notwithstanding 
the  substantial  increase  in  the  size  of  its  balance  sheet  associated  with  its  purchases  of 
Treasury and agency securities, we are confident that we have the tools we need to firm the 
stance of monetary policy at the appropriate time.2  
Most  importantly,  in  October  2008  the  Congress  gave  statutory  authority  to  the  Federal 
Reserve to pay interest on banks’ holdings of reserve balances at Federal Reserve Banks. 
By increasing the interest rate on reserves, the Federal Reserve will be able to put significant 
upward pressure on all short-term interest rates. Actual and prospective increases in short-
term  interest  rates  will  be  reflected  in  turn  in  longer-term  interest  rates  and  in  financial 
conditions more generally.  
The Federal Reserve has also been developing a number of additional tools to reduce the 
large  quantity  of  reserves  held  by  the  banking  system,  which  will  improve  the  Federal 
Reserve’s  control  of  financial  conditions  by  leading  to  a  tighter  relationship  between  the 
interest  rate  paid  on  reserves  and  other  short-term  interest  rates.  Notably,  our  operational 
capacity for conducting reverse repurchase agreements, a tool that the Federal Reserve has 
historically used to absorb reserves from the banking system, is being expanded so that such 
transactions  can  be  used  to  absorb  large  quantities  of  reserves.3  The  Federal  Reserve  is 
also  currently  refining  plans  for  a  term  deposit  facility  that  could  convert  a  portion  of 
depository  institutions’  holdings  of  reserve  balances  into  deposits  that  are  less  liquid  and 
could not be used to meet reserve requirements.4 In addition, the FOMC has the option of 
                                                 
2   For  further  details  on  these  tools  and  the  Federal  Reserve’s  exit  strategy,  see  Ben  S.  Bernanke  (2010), 
"Federal  Reserve’s  Exit  Strategy”,  statement  before  the  Committee  on  Financial  Services,  U.S.  House  of 
Representatives, February 10. 
3   The Federal Reserve has recently developed the ability to engage in reverse repurchase agreements in the 
triparty  market  for  repurchase  agreements,  with  primary  dealers  as  counterparties  and  using  Treasury  and 
agency debt securities as collateral, and it is developing the capacity to carry out these transactions with a 
wider  set  of  counterparties  (such  as  money  market  mutual  funds  and  the  mortgage-related  government-
sponsored enterprises) and using agency mortgage-backed securities as collateral. 
In  December  the  Federal  Reserve  published  a  proposal  describing  a  term  deposit  facility  in  the  Federal 
Register (see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2009), "Federal Reserve Board Proposes 
Amendments  to  Regulation  D  That  Would  Enable  the  Establishment  of  a  Term  Deposit  Facility”,  press 
release,  December  28).  We  are  now  in  the  process  of  analyzing  the  public  comments  that  have  been 
4  
BIS Review 21/2010 
 3
redeeming  or  selling  securities  as  a  means  of  reducing  outstanding  bank  reserves  and 
applying monetary restraint. Of course, the sequencing of steps and the combination of tools 
that the Federal Reserve uses as it exits from its currently very accommodative policy stance 
will depend on economic and financial developments. I provided more  discussion of these 
options and possible sequencing in a recent testimony.5  
Federal Reserve transparency 
The Federal Reserve is committed to ensuring that the Congress and the public have all the 
information  needed  to  understand  our  decisions  and  to  be  assured  of  the  integrity  of  our 
operations.  Indeed,  on  matters  related  to  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  the  Federal 
Reserve is already one of the most transparent central banks in the world, providing detailed 
records and explanations of its decisions. Over the past year, the Federal Reserve also took 
a  number  of  steps  to  enhance  the  transparency  of  its  special  credit  and  liquidity  facilities, 
including the provision of regular, extensive reports to the Congress and the public; and we 
have  worked  closely  with  the  Government  Accountability  Office  (GAO),  the  Office  of  the 
Special Inspector General for the Troubled Asset Relief Program, the Congress, and private-
sector auditors on a range of matters relating to these facilities.  
While  the  emergency  credit  and  liquidity  facilities  were  important  tools  for  implementing 
monetary policy during the crisis, we understand that the unusual nature of those facilities 
creates  a  special  obligation  to  assure  the  Congress  and  the  public  of  the  integrity  of  their 
operation. Accordingly, we would welcome a review by the GAO of the Federal Reserve’s 
management  of  all  facilities  created  under  emergency  authorities.6  In  particular,  we  would 
support legislation authorizing the GAO to audit the operational integrity, collateral policies, 
use of third-party contractors, accounting, financial reporting, and internal controls of these 
special credit and liquidity facilities. The Federal Reserve will, of course, cooperate fully and 
actively  in  all  reviews.  We  are  also  prepared  to  support  legislation  that  would  require  the 
release  of  the  identities  of  the  firms  that  participated  in  each  special  facility  after  an 
appropriate delay. It is important that the release occur after a lag that is sufficiently long that 
investors will not view an institution’s use of one of the facilities as a possible indication of 
ongoing  financial  problems,  thereby  undermining  market  confidence  in  the  institution  or 
discouraging  use  of  any  future  facility  that  might  become  necessary  to  protect  the  U.S. 
economy.  An  appropriate  delay  would  also  allow  firms  adequate  time  to  inform  investors 
through annual reports and other public documents of their use of Federal Reserve facilities.  
Looking  ahead,  we  will  continue  to  work  with  the  Congress  in  identifying  approaches  for 
enhancing  the  Federal  Reserve’s  transparency  that  are  consistent  with  our  statutory 
objectives of fostering maximum employment and price stability. In particular, it is vital that 
the conduct of monetary policy continue to be insulated from short-term political pressures so 
that  the  FOMC  can  make  policy  decisions  in  the  longer-term  economic  interests  of  the 
American  people.  Moreover,  the  confidentiality  of  discount  window  lending  to  individual 
depository  institutions  must  be  maintained  so  that  the  Federal  Reserve  continues  to  have 
effective ways to provide liquidity to depository institutions under circumstances where other 
                                                                                                                                                      
received.  A  revised  proposal  will  be  reviewed  by  the  Federal  Reserve  Board,  and  test  transactions  could 
commence during the second quarter. 
5   See Bernanke, "Federal Reserve’s Exit Strategy," in note 2. 
6   Last month the Federal Reserve said that  it  would  welcome a full review  by the GAO of all  aspects of the 
Federal  Reserve’s  involvement  in  the  extension  of  credit  to  the  American  International  Group,  Inc.  (see 
Ben S. Bernanke  (2010),  letter  to  Gene  L.  Dodaro,  January  19).  The  Federal  Reserve  would  support 
legislation authorizing a review by the GAO of the Federal Reserve’s operations of its facilities created under 
emergency authorities: the Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility, the 
Commercial  Paper  Funding  Facility,  the  Money  Market  Investor  Funding  Facility,  the  Primary  Dealer  Credit 
Facility, the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility, and the Term Securities Lending Facility. 
4 
 BIS Review 21/2010
sources of funding are not available. The Federal Reserve’s ability to inject liquidity into the 
financial  system  is  critical  for  preserving  financial  stability  and  for  supporting  depositories’ 
key role in meeting the ongoing credit needs of firms and households.  
Regulatory reform 
Strengthening our financial regulatory system is essential for the long-term economic stability 
of the nation. Among the lessons of the crisis are the crucial importance of macroprudential 
regulation  –  that  is,  regulation  and  supervision  aimed  at  addressing  risks  to  the  financial 
system as a whole – and the need for effective consolidated supervision of every financial 
institution that is so large or interconnected that its failure could threaten the functioning of 
the entire financial system.  
The  Federal  Reserve  strongly  supports  the  Congress’s  ongoing  efforts  to  achieve 
comprehensive  financial  reform.  In  the  meantime,  to  strengthen  the  Federal  Reserve’s 
oversight of banking organizations, we have been conducting an intensive self-examination 
of  our  regulatory  and  supervisory  responsibilities  and  have  been  actively  implementing 
improvements.  For  example,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  been  playing  a  key  role  in 
international  efforts  to  toughen  capital  and  liquidity  requirements  for  financial  institutions, 
particularly  systemically  critical  firms,  and  we  have  been  taking  the  lead  in  ensuring  that 
compensation  structures  at  banking  organizations  provide  appropriate  incentives  without 
encouraging excessive risk-taking.7  
The  Federal  Reserve  is  also  making  fundamental  changes  in  its  supervision  of  large, 
complex  bank  holding  companies,  both  to  improve  the  effectiveness  of  consolidated 
supervision  and  to  incorporate  a  macroprudential  perspective  that  goes  beyond  the 
traditional focus on safety and soundness of individual institutions. We are overhauling our 
supervisory framework and procedures to improve coordination within our own supervisory 
staff  and  with  other  supervisory  agencies  and  to  facilitate  more-integrated  assessments  of 
risks within each holding company and across groups of companies.  
Last  spring  the  Federal  Reserve  led  the  successful  Supervisory  Capital  Assessment 
Program, popularly known as the bank stress tests. An important lesson of that program was 
that combining on-site bank examinations with a suite of quantitative and analytical tools can 
greatly improve comparability of the results and better identify potential risks. In that spirit, 
the  Federal  Reserve  is  also  in  the  process  of  developing  an  enhanced  quantitative 
surveillance  program  for  large  bank  holding  companies.  Supervisory  information  will  be 
combined with firm-level, market-based indicators and aggregate economic data to provide a 
more complete picture of the risks facing these institutions and the broader financial system. 
Making  use  of  the  Federal  Reserve’s  unparalleled  breadth  of  expertise,  this  program  will 
apply a multidisciplinary approach that involves economists, specialists in particular financial 
markets, payments systems experts, and other professionals, as well as bank supervisors.  
The recent crisis has also underscored the extent to which direct involvement in the oversight 
of banks and bank holding companies contributes to the Federal Reserve’s effectiveness in 
carrying  out  its  responsibilities  as  a  central  bank,  including  the  making  of  monetary  policy 
and the management of the discount window. Most important, as the crisis has once again 
demonstrated,  the  Federal  Reserve’s  ability  to  identify  and  address  diverse  and  hard-to-
predict  threats  to  financial  stability  depends  critically  on  the  information,  expertise,  and 
powers that it has by virtue of being both a bank supervisor and a central bank.  
The Federal Reserve continues to demonstrate its commitment to strengthening consumer 
protections in  the  financial  services arena.  Since  the  time  of  the  previous Monetary  Policy 
                                                 
7   For  further  information,  see  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  (2009),  "Federal  Reserve 
Issues Proposed Guidance on Incentive Compensation”, press release, October 22. 
BIS Review 21/2010 
 5
Report  in  July,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  proposed  a  comprehensive  overhaul  of  the 
regulations  governing  consumer  mortgage  transactions,  and  we  are  collaborating  with  the 
Department  of  Housing  and  Urban  Development  to  assess  how  we  might  further  increase 
transparency  in  the  mortgage  process.8  We  have  issued  rules  implementing  enhanced 
consumer protections for credit card accounts and private student loans as well as new rules 
to ensure that consumers have meaningful opportunities to avoid overdraft fees.9 In addition, 
the  Federal  Reserve  has  implemented  an  expanded  consumer  compliance  supervision 
program  for  nonbank  subsidiaries  of  bank  holding  companies  and  foreign  banking 
organizations.10  
More generally, the Federal Reserve is committed to doing all that can be done to ensure 
that  our  economy  is  never  again  devastated  by  a  financial  collapse.  We  look  forward  to 
working  with  the  Congress  to  develop  effective  and  comprehensive  reform  of  the  financial 
regulatory framework.  
 
                                                
8   For  further  information,  see  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  (2009),  "Federal  Reserve 
Proposes  Significant  Changes  to  Regulation  Z  (Truth  in  Lending)  Intended  to  Improve  the  Disclosures 
Consumers  Receive  in  Connection  with  Closed-End  Mortgages  and  Home-Equity  Lines  of  Credit”,  press 
release, July 23. 
9   For  more  information,  see  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  (2009),  "Federal  Reserve 
Approves  Final  Amendments  to  Regulation  Z  That  Revise  Disclosure  Requirements  for  Private  Education 
Loans”, press release, July 30; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2009), "Federal Reserve 
Announces  Final  Rules  Prohibiting  Institutions  from  Charging  Fees  for  Overdrafts  on  ATM  and  One-Time 
Debit  Card  Transactions”,  press  release,  November  12;  and  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
System (2010), "Federal Reserve Approves Final Rules to Protect Credit Card Users from a Number of Costly 
Practices”, press release, January 12. 
10   For further information, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2009), "Federal Reserve to 
Implement Consumer Compliance Supervision Program of Nonbank Subsidiaries of Bank Holding Companies 
and Foreign Banking Organizations”, press release, September 15. 
6 
 BIS Review 21/2010
