William C Dudley: Regional economy and manufacturing update 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, at the Quarterly Regional Economic Press Briefing, New York 
City, 22 July 2010. 
 Good  morning  and  welcome  to  the  New  York  Fed’s  July  2010  Regional  Economic  Press 
Briefing. I value this opportunity to talk with the journalists covering our region – and through 
you,  to  the  people  in  our  District.  My  goal  this  morning  is  to  share  how  I  see  regional 
economic conditions, with particular focus on the manufacturing sector in the Second Federal 
Reserve District. My colleagues will follow me and provide more detail on the patterns that I’ll 
describe. As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not necessarily those of 
the Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve System.  
National economic conditions 
I. 
To  provide  some  context,  I’ll  begin  with  a  few  words  about  national  economic  conditions. 
U.S. economic activity has expanded for four consecutive quarters, but at rates that can only 
be  described  as  modest  when  compared  with  early  stages  of  past  recoveries.  The  June 
payroll numbers tell the story of this sluggish recovery in employment. The economy gained 
only 83,000 private-sector jobs, following a downwardly revised gain of only 33,000 in May. 
Growth in the third quarter may turn out to be a bit less than we saw in the first half of the 
year,  though  we  think  there  is  only  a  slight  risk  of  a  double  dip.  The  road  to  recovery  is 
turning  out  to  be  a  bit  bumpy  as  relatively  weak  consumer  spending  and  the  ongoing 
problems in financial markets are keeping growth far less robust than we would like. 
To date, the manufacturing sector has been a key source of growth during the recovery. After 
an  unusually  steep  decline  from  late  2007  to  mid-2009,  manufacturing  output  has  grown 
rapidly over the past year, although the level of manufacturing output remains well below the 
previous  peak.  A  major  force  behind  the  growth  of  manufacturing  output  has  been  an 
unusually pronounced inventory cycle. Production has expanded as firms across a variety of 
industries have been rebuilding their stocks to bring them into a better balance with sales. 
Another  driver  of  manufacturing  output  over  the  past  several  quarters  has  been  a 
pronounced  rebound  of  our  exports  of  manufactured  goods.  Economic  activity  abroad  has 
been  recovering  from  its  weak  levels  in  2009,  and  that  global  recovery  has  helped  fuel 
demand for our products, particularly capital goods. 
The  importance  of  manufacturing  in  the  recovery  makes  it  a  timely  topic  for  our  regional 
economic briefing, namely, trends in the manufacturing sector here in the Second District. 
Regional economic conditions (update since the April regional press briefing) 
II. 
Turning to our region, we can see a nascent recovery in most areas, with a holding pattern in 
other parts. This mixed pattern of growth is not surprising in the aftermath of a recession, and 
particularly a deep one with a financial crisis, as well. On the positive side, I can report that 
economic activity has picked up in many parts of the region. 
To  measure  activity  we  use  a  set  of  indexes  of  economic  activity  –  called  Coincident 
Economic Indicators – that we produce here at the New York Fed for New York State, New 
York  City  and  New  Jersey,  plus  a  similar  index  produced  in  Puerto  Rico.  These  indexes 
provide a timely, monthly gauge of economic activity. They show that in New York State and 
New  York  City,  activity  has  expanded  at  a  relatively  brisk  pace  since  the  beginning  of  the 
year. In Puerto Rico, where the recession began three years before the mainland downturn, 
BIS Review 100/2010 
 1
the  economy  also  appears  to  be  picking  up  in  recent  months.  In  contrast,  economic 
conditions  in  New  Jersey  remain  essentially  flat.  Although  activity  there  is  no  longer 
declining, New Jersey has yet to establish a sustained recovery. 
But, what about jobs – which are the key for people to truly feel the recovery in their lives? I 
am pleased to note that private-sector job growth has turned up moderately across much of 
the region in the past few months, just as it has in the nation. Growth in private-sector jobs 
signals that some firms need to hire workers to meet their production needs. This is a good 
sign  and  necessary  for  a  sustainable  recovery.  The  number  of  private-sector  jobs  has 
increased  in  and  around  New  York  City,  in  Northern  New  Jersey  and  in  some  parts  of 
upstate New York. The June job market report for New York and New Jersey showed the 
recovery is likely to be a bit bumpy. Private-sector employment fell in both in New York State 
and New York City, though despite June’s dip, employment in New York City remains above 
its  low  point  in  December  2009.  In  contrast,  New  Jersey’s  private-sector  jobs  picture 
improved  in  June,  though  a  weak  public  sector  there  continues  to  weigh  down  overall  job 
growth. 
Despite the improvements we have seen, unemployment in the region remains painfully high. 
In June, New York City’s and New Jersey’s rates were very close to the national jobless rate 
of 9.5 percent. The rate for New York State, which has been improving since the first quarter, 
is noticeably lower at 8.2 percent. Puerto Rico, which has had much higher unemployment 
than the mainland for the past several decades, had a jobless rate of 16.3 percent in June, 
with little evidence of recovery so far. 
III. 
Regional manufacturing sector 
Background 
The manufacturing sector is important to our region because it provides a substantial number 
of high-wage jobs and, in some parts of the region, is a key driver of business cycles and 
longer-term  trends.  To  understand  manufacturing  in  our  region,  it  is  important  to  note  that 
different  parts  of  the  region  specialize  in  different  products.  For  example,  New  York  City’s 
largest manufacturing industry is apparel; motor-vehicle parts is a large industry in western 
New  York,  as  are  computers  and  electronics  in  Syracuse,  Binghamton  and  the  Hudson 
Valley. The pharmaceuticals industry is dominant in Northern New Jersey and Puerto Rico. 
Over  the  past  several  decades,  manufacturing  wages  have  risen,  while  the  number  of 
workers  it  employs  has  fallen,  These  long-term  trends  stem  from  fundamental  structural 
changes in trade, technology and consumption patterns. Some manufacturing has moved to 
other  parts  of  the  United  States  or  overseas.  The  advent  of  information  technology  and 
computerization has also profoundly altered many manufacturing processes. And, the mix of 
products demanded by consumers has evolved over time. All of these factors have combined 
to reduce the number of factory jobs across the nation, with the New York/New Jersey region 
hit  particularly  hard.  What  is  less  well  known  is  that  despite  this  employment  decline, 
manufacturing  output  has  actually  continued  to  grow  moderately  in  much  of  the  New 
York/New  Jersey  region.  This  means  that  the  sector  has  experienced  substantial  gains  in 
productivity. These productivity gains – the result of innovation and adaptation – have been 
accompanied by rising average wages in manufacturing. Like the rest of the country, our job 
losses have been heavily concentrated in lower-skill positions, resulting in a leaner and more 
skilled manufacturing industry. 
The manufacturing sector and its structural job-wage dynamics are particularly important in 
upstate New York. Upstate (especially in its rural areas) manufacturing workers tend to earn 
higher wages than the average in their region, and the sector employs a larger share of the 
workforce there than it does nationally. 
2 
 BIS Review 100/2010
Outlook 
How will the current recovery in manufacturing employment play out? Nationally, the growth 
in manufacturing output over the past year has occurred in a variety of industries, including 
autos,  machinery,  and  computers  and  other  electronic  equipment.  This  growth  reflects  a 
combination  of  the  restocking  of  inventories,  domestic  demand  growth  (particularly  in 
investment goods), and higher exports. The concentration of these industries in parts of our 
region meant that those areas were poised to take advantage of this growth. The region has 
seen  some  increase  in  factory  jobs  in  recent  months,  which  undoubtedly  reflects  the 
expansion of production that has occurred nationally in these industries. 
A number of indicators suggest that the inventory cycle may be largely complete – that is, the 
recent restocking has brought inventories into a better balance with sales. If so, we will lose 
restocking  as  an  impetus  for  growth.  Despite  this,  we  expect  manufacturing  output  to 
continue  to  expand  because  of  improving  domestic  demand  and  foreign  demand  for  U.S. 
manufactured exports. Yet, if this recovery follows the typical pattern for past recoveries, the 
prospect for growth in factory jobs will likely be weaker here than the rest of the nation. 
Longer term, the sector’s prospects are likely to be governed by a continuation of the trends I 
mentioned before in international trade, technology and consumption patterns. This means 
that output and wages will likely continue to rise, both nationally and regionally. However, the 
sector is unlikely to be a major source of job growth. Beyond the national trends that work 
against  an  expansion  of  factory  jobs,  the  New  York-New  Jersey  region  faces  ongoing 
competitive  pressures  as  a  location  for  manufacturing  production.  That  competition  comes 
from  other  regions  of  the  country,  as  well  as  from  abroad.  One  key  to  meeting  these 
competitive challenges will be for the region to ensure that it develops and attracts a highly 
skilled workforce that can meet the needs of innovative and rapidly changing firms. 
The Empire State Manufacturing Survey 
IV. 
In order to monitor conditions in the region, the New York Fed conducts a monthly survey of 
manufacturing firms in New York State, our Empire State Manufacturing Survey. Let me tell 
you a little about the survey and then review recent patterns. 
The  survey  is  sent  to  a  pool  of  about  200  manufacturing  executives  in  a  wide  variety  of 
industries across the state. About 100 responses are usually received. For the survey’s main 
index  –  which  is  called  the  General  Business  Conditions  Index  –  respondents  report  the 
change  from  the  previous  month  in  of  overall  conditions  in  their  firm.  To  explain  their 
answers,  we  also  ask  them  to  assess  components  of  activity  such  as  orders,  shipments, 
inventories  and  employment.  Respondents  are  also  asked  for  their  views  on  the  likely 
direction  of  these  indicators  over  the  next  six  months.  In  addition,  each  month  we  ask 
supplementary questions on a topic of current interest. To share the information as quickly 
and broadly as possible, we post results on our public website on the 15th of each month or 
the next business day. In doing this survey, we join the four other Federal Reserve Banks 
that use a survey to monitor conditions in their manufacturing sectors. 
This  morning  I  want  to  highlight  the  results  of  our  July  survey,  which  we  released  last 
Thursday. Our main index began to signal an upturn in the manufacturing sector in New York 
State last summer and, despite a brief dip last December, has given a consistently positive 
signal for a year now. Our July survey showed that conditions continue to improve, but at a 
slower  pace  than  in  previous  months.  In  this  month’s  supplementary  questions,  we  asked 
respondents about the importance of trade with various parts of the world to manufacturing 
activity  in  New  York  State.  In  general,  respondents  indicated  that  exports  account  for  a 
growing  share  of  their  revenues.  Their  firms  are  devoting  more  resources  to  marketing 
abroad  –  particularly  in  Asia  –  and  expect  their  export  sales  to  be  higher  in  the  next 
12 months than in the past 12 months. 
BIS Review 100/2010 
 3
In sum, the region is showing signs of a moderate recovery, and the manufacturing sector is 
playing a key role in that recovery in parts of the region. 
Thank  you  for  your  kind  attention.  I  will  now  ask  Jaison  Abel  to  provide  more  details  on 
current regional economic conditions. 
4 
 BIS Review 100/2010
