Sultan Bin Nasser Al-Suwaidi: The regulatory partnerships for sustained 
growth in the MENASA Area 
Speech by H E Sultan Bin Nasser Al-Suwaidi, Governor of the Central Bank of the United 
Arab  Emirates,  at  the  MENASA  (Middle  East  North  Africa  South  Asia)  Forum,  Dubai, 
24 May 2010.  
 Good Evening, 
Excellencies 
Ladies & gentlemen 
The distinguished panel speakers 
It gives me great pleasure to be with you this evening at this important Forum. 
The subject of my speech is: “The regulatory partnerships for sustained growth in the 
Menasa area”. 
Under this subject, I will talk about four issues:  
First: Implementation of similar banking laws and regulations 
Implementation  of  similar  banking  laws,  using  similar  banking  regulations,  and  adopting 
similar processes in banking supervision in the MENASA Area countries, in my opinion, will 
go a long way in providing banking sectors with a strong basis for building on successes. It 
will  also  make  regulators  realize  the  importance  of  regional  cooperation  and  coordination, 
which hopefully will lead, at one stage in the future, to enabling cross-border branching of 
banks and other financial institutions.  
But  is  it  realistic  to  imagine  that  cross-border  branching  of  banks  and  other  financial 
institutions will be achieved soon? 
Another complication is the type of banking institutions that we have in this Area. Most banks 
are  retail  commercial  ones,  and  these  are  operating  in  the  protected  zone.  I  mean  here; 
protected through the growing need to protect interests of national banks. So, the question 
that  comes  up;  shall  the  cross-border  access  of  banks  be  done  through  a  new  type  of 
banking institutions? Which the Area is not familiar with yet.  
On implementing of similar banking laws and using similar regulations, I will start here from 
the possible regulatory response to the Global Financial Crisis. 
The  banking  regulatory  response  that  countries  in  the  Area  might  adopt  is  a  mix  between 
internationally  set  standards,  through  decisions  of  G20  countries  and  the  national 
requirements, which might cause slight ring-fencing or insulating of national financial systems 
from direct competition.  
The  Global  Financial  Crisis  might  have  already  impacted  the  international  cross-border 
banking business, which might lead to improved regional cooperation and therefore improve 
doing banking business, region wise. 
Trade related transfers outward and inward will continue to move without much hindrance. 
Foreign exchange deals will also go through, as G20 countries are eager to do more trade to 
improve their economic conditions. However, there will be some restrictions on investment 
flows  both  outward  and  inward,  because  risks  have  been  clearly  identified  in  investment 
transactions.  Outward  flows  will  be  scrutinized  by  regulators  for  type  of  investment  and 
whether direct or passive. Also complexity of investment products will draw special attention. 
As for inward investment flows, regulators will put some type of filters to prevent Hot Money, 
or huge inflows followed by quick outflow of funds.  
BIS Review 72/2010 
 1
Banking  regulations  will  probably  be  amended  in  the  coming  few  months.  I  believe,  the 
smaller economy countries will steer their banking system towards lowering the growth rate 
of  loans  and  advances  plus  investments  versus  stable  deposits.  Investment  banking 
business, on the other hand will be subjected to a great deal of more regulations than in the 
past. 
In  summary,  I  think  that  the  present  Global  Financial  Crisis  will  impact  globalization  of 
financial services, as many restrictions will be put in place in many countries including the G7 
countries, which might open a window of opportunity for countries in our region or the wider 
Area.  
Second: Cross-border investment flows  
Cross-border investment flows should be welcomed by recipient countries and encouraged 
by  source  countries,  as  many  countries  in  our  Area  need  to  set  rules  to  enable  the 
establishment of large projects for the purpose of creating jobs. That will also enhance peace 
and stability on the national level, which will certainly improve the prospects for the regions in 
this  vast  Area.  Any  help  by  the  World  Bank  in  improving  and  unifying  investment  laws  in 
addition  to  watching  their  implementation,  will  go  a  long  way  in  achieving  this  important 
regional objective.  
Sovereign  Wealth  Fund  source  countries  should  also  be  interested  in  investing  in  mega 
projects in the region for three reasons, as follows:  
1. 
The  Global  Financial  Crisis  proved 
Advanced Countries’ investment banks are not totally risk free.  
There is a need within SWF source countries to safe guard flow of food imports at 
reasonable  prices,  and  the  possibility  for  incorporating  companies  as  direct 
investment  projects  in  countries  in  the  region  is  a  realistic  possibility,  when 
investment laws are enacted and maintained at international standards.  
SWF  source  countries  should  be  interested  in  the  maintenance  of  social  order, 
peace and stability in the regions of this Area.  
Industrialized 
investments 
2. 
3. 
through 
that 
Another  reason  that  makes  me  think  that  SWFs  from  our  region  might  change  the  flow  of 
their direct investments, is that once we see the proposed Regulations re Sovereign Wealth 
Funds in the Industrialized Advanced Economies start being implemented, when economies 
in  the  West  start  doing  well,  more  questions  will  be  asked  and  more  forms  will  become 
necessary to fill and more disclosure and transparency will be demanded. This behavior will 
signal that there is no strong need for foreign capital in the West, and that the political mood 
has changed.  
Therefore,  we  might  see  gradual  tightening  of  the  scrutiny  on  capital  flows  from 
SWF countries,  at  one  stage,  especially  funds  that  are  destined  for  direct  investment  in 
certain companies. 
Faced  with  all  this  nonsense,  SWFs  will  certainly  come  to  the  conclusion  that  it  is  time  to 
change  strategy.  This  could  make  SWFs  avoid  direct  investment  in  certain  companies,  or 
even  avoid  direct  investment  in  all  companies,  and  become  more  of  passive  investment 
vehicles in the West. As, SWFs have large sums to invest, this might make them direct part 
of their investments to existing or newly created companies in the region. This situation, if it 
happens soon, will lead to creating a new regional developmental cycle.  
Third: Linking regional payment systems  
Linking regional payment systems and using local currencies for settlement of transactions 
should  be  a  long-term  objective  for  countries  in  the  MENASA  Area,  as  this  will  improve 
2 
 BIS Review 72/2010
speed, efficiency and will achieve transaction cost reduction, for the benefit of cross-border 
trade, investment flows and tourism business.  
Achieving this would be a big challenge, because the good old routes, which we all are used 
to, will have to be abandoned. Also, trust in each other’s national currency in addition to trust 
in the efficiency of national payment systems across regions is another challenge. However, 
these challenges can be overcome over a period of time, maybe depositing of the settlement 
amount with the counterpart payment system provider in the recipient country would create 
the required trust.  
To  build  trust  in  national  payment  systems,  it  will  also  be  necessary  for  the  national 
regulatory authority to take a leadership role. Payment systems on the national level should 
be unified into one system, and operate with strict rules for action against mistakes or events 
of fraud through members. 
To achieve some form of common payment system among MENASA Area Countries, it will 
be necessary to: 
1. 
Identify countries that are ready to be linked, through national payment systems that 
satisfy certain pre-set standards. 
Setting-up  of  a  steering  committee,  consisting  of  technical  staff  representing  the 
national payment systems, who would agree to work on a certain strategy aimed at 
achieving  a  common  payment  system,  that  would  use  local  currencies  for 
settlement, at a future stage. 
2. 
Forth: Investment in infrastructural projects 
Encouraging  regional  capital  flows  aimed  at  investment  in  infrastructural  projects  in  the 
MENASA Area Countries should be encouraged through capital markets. 
This could be achieved through allowing corporations that are in marine transportation, air 
transportation,  rail  road  companies,  road  authorities,  storage  facility  companies  and  
ports/air  port  authorities  to  raise  money  through  capital  markets  in  countries  of  the  Area, 
especially countries that are capital surplus ones. 
The Area can draw on the experience of the UAE in this respect, when it allowed its banking 
system to raise money for Indian companies as early as the eighties of last century. Certain 
Indian  companies  were  allowed 
to  raise  capital  against  certain  commitments  and 
undertakings. This was possible through the high requirements and standards implemented 
in both India and the UAE at that time.  
We believe Indian companies were able to benefit from such funds for a long period of time. 
Many of such companies are large conglomerates now.  
Providing  a  special  window  for  infrastructural  projects  will  benefit  the  flow  of  trade  and 
investments across regions of the Area, and will help to sustain growth of economies. 
Excellencies 
Ladies & gentlemen 
The distinguished panel speakers 
With  this  I  come  to  the  end  of  my  speech,  but  before  I  close,  I  would  like  to  thank  the 
organizers of this important forum for inviting me and for the excellent arrangements. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 72/2010 
 3
