Loi M Bakani: Papua New Guinea’s semi annual Monetary Policy 
Statement (MPS) 
Address  by  Mr  Loi  M  Bakani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Papua  New  Guinea,  to  the  Port 
Moresby Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Port Moresby, 31 March 2010.  
 Mr. David Conn, CEO of Port Moresby Chamber of Commerce and Industry, members of the 
Port Moresby Chamber of Commerce & Industry, distinguished guests ladies and gentlemen. 
I’m most grateful and honored to be invited by the Port Moresby Chamber of Commerce and 
Industry  to make  this  presentation at  today’s  breakfast,  to coincide  with  the  release  of  the 
first Monetary Policy Statement (MPS) for 2010.  
The Bank of Papua New Guinea was the first public institution that decided to subject itself to 
transparency and openness by including in the Central Banking Act 2000, the requirement to 
publish its semi annual MPS. The Act states in clause 10, and I quote: “The Governor shall 
within one month of the coming into effect of this Act, and every six months thereafter, issue 
a  policy  statement  setting  out  the  monetary  policy  of  the  Central  Bank  to  achieve  and 
maintain price stability for the following six months” end of quote.  
Monetary  Policy  is  the  central  objective  of  the  Bank  of  Papua  New  Guinea.  The  Central 
Banking  Act  2000  added  the  Regulation  of  the  Financial  System  and  the  Promotion  of  an 
Efficient  National  and  International  Payment  Systems,  as  the  second  and  third  most 
important objectives. These three main objectives and functions are fully vested and under 
the control and responsibility of the Governor. The Act continues and states, I quote: “Subject 
to the above, to promote macro-economic stability and economic growth” end of quote. This 
implies that if the objectives of monetary policy, a prudently managed stable financial system 
and  low  cost  efficient  payments  system  are  achieved,  and  subject  to  other  policies  of 
Government complementing these conditions, macroeconomic stability and sound economic 
growth can be achieved. The outcome in the last five years is a testimony to the achievement 
of these objectives.  
I want to state that, we can be very pleased with the fact that our regulatory regime proved 
itself to its full extent during the recent world wide financial meltdown. The credit goes first 
and foremost to the boards and management of the banks and financial institutions that were 
not carried away with the easy phantom profits the new instruments were presenting. I am 
sure that they will agree that the Central Bank through the financial regulation and prudential 
standards it issued and insisted on implementing has had its share in preventing the disaster.  
I move now to this morning’s breakfast presentation on the first MPS for 2010. While you can 
read  what’s  in  the  MPS  in  today’s  newspapers,  my  presentation  will  deal  with  two  main 
subjects:  
1. 
2. 
What is defined as Price Stability by the Bank of Papua New Guinea; and  
What effect might the Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) project have on the economy in 
general and on monetary developments in particular?  
The Bank of Papua New Guinea defines Price Stability as a non volatile single digit or low 
level  of  inflation  supported  by  stable  levels  of  interest  and  exchange  rates.  The  term  “non 
volatile”  is  a  very  important  part  of  the  definition.  The  objective  is,  to  create  a  conducive 
environment  for  investment  and  growth  in  economic  activity  by  the  private  sector.  For  the 
private sector to plan ahead, it must have some certainty of what will be the price of inputs 
during the period of investment and the selling price of the outputs. An entrepreneur knows 
that there is risk involved in future flows from any investment. What Central Banks are trying 
to achieve is a stable macro-economic environment that will reduce the risk of price volatility. 
BIS Review 53/2010 
 1
The risk of producing a salable product that has a market, at a competitive price rests with 
the entrepreneur.  
Based on this paradigm it is clear that we do not want a negative inflation. Expectation of 
negative inflation will reduce investment, entrepreneurs will delay activity to benefit from the 
lower future costs. Reduction in investment and activity and its multiplier effects will result in 
a decline in economic activity and negative growth. 
The  most  important  decision  the  Governor  has  to  take  is  what  level  of  inflation  will  define 
price stability. As you already understand it will depend on the level of expected economic 
activity  and  growth.  It  is  clear  that  there  is  a  trade  off  between  the  two,  i.e.  inflation  and 
economic growth.  
I want to clearly express to you my definition of price stability. At the level of average real 
economic  growth  of  5.25%  realized  in  the  four  years  2006–2009,  the  acceptable  level  of 
inflation as defined by the Central Bank and even in Government budget documents is 5.0% 
to  6.0%.  The  actual  average  inflation  outcome  for  the  same  period  was  5.265%.  This  is 
within the range that I clearly define as a period of price stability. Looking at each year you 
will see that the range of annual inflation rates varied from 2.4% in 2006 to 11.2% in 2008. 
You will all agree that once it was realized that inflation is on the rise during 2007 and 2008, 
the Bank of Papua New Guinea took steps to contain it and it declined to 5.7% in 2009.  
The next question I want to answer is what if economic growth accelerates and inflation rate 
rise to two digit levels, as was the case in China and India prior to the last Depression in 
World economic activity. Some of you might be asking was it a recession or a depression. If 
we go by the standard definition of two quarters negative growth that defines a recession, 
and any period of negative growths longer than that defines a depression, then to the best of 
my judgment the world is just coming out of a depression.  
My response is that we should accept the fact that the economic environment will be different 
and inflationary pressures will be substantial. At higher levels of economic growth, we should 
accept a higher range of inflation rates. We will have to live with a high inflation environment. 
But the policy challenge is not to allow the rate of inflation to spiral out of control and become 
entrenched in double digit figures. We should do all we can to keep it within ranges of single 
digit mark. But at an average annual economic growth rate of around 9.0% and above, the 
range of price stability has to be redefined. In a country like Papua New Guinea, in which 
domestic supplies in all areas are very scarce and those available are in very short supply; 
just  look  at  professional,  skilled  and  semi  skilled  labor,  housing,  building  materials, 
manufactured  goods,  etc…  the  high  annual  economic  growth  rates  will  exhaust  domestic 
supplies  and  exert  inflationary  pressures  to  unprecedented  levels.  In  such  a  case  the 
questions the Governor will face are:  
(1) 
Do  we  dampen  demand  by  implementing  a  very  tight  monetary  policy  of  high 
interest rates; or  
Set a higher range of inflation rates for price stability.  
(2) 
Based on the experience of other countries, in such a case, my intention is to define price 
stability at inflation rates around the 8.0% mark. But I will be quiet reluctant to have a double 
digit level of inflation, for the main reason that I want to be sure inflation is not going out of 
control. Even this higher mark is achievable only if the Government and the Central Bank will 
cooperate and coordinate all their activities, to ensure that fiscal operations are not imposing 
any further pressures on the scarce domestic resources and monetary policy management 
does not become difficult and expensive as experienced in 2008 and 2009. 
Some  examples  of  cooperation  and  coordination  relate  to  maintaining  a  balanced  budget 
inclusive of draw downs from trust accounts. Historical experience in the 1980’s and 1990’s 
and early 2000’s show that Government deficits have a very immediate impact on inflation.  
2 
 BIS Review 53/2010
Depositing all trust accounts with the Central Bank, creating the Sovereign Wealth Fund that 
should act as Stabilization and a Future Generation Fund will insulate large foreign currency 
inflows in offshore managed accounts. These should prevent those flows from impacting on 
the domestic liquidity, which have been a source for monetary inflation that the Central Bank 
had to defuse at a very high cost to the public purse by selling Central Bank Bills (CBB’s). I 
would like to commend the Government for deciding to establish a Stabilization Fund, Future 
Fund and Infrastructure Fund from the windfall revenue comprising taxes and dividends that 
will come from the LNG project. A joint working group has been set up comprising Treasury 
and BPNG staff and will submit its recommendation on an appropriate model or framework 
for these Funds to the National Executive Council (NEC) at the end of June 2010.  
During the construction phase of the LNG project, there is a need for Government to review 
all development projects and budget and implement only the most immediately needed ones, 
to ensure that no further pressures are placed on the very limited domestic resources. The 
Government has to be conscious not to crowd out the private sector, which will implement 
vey  large  infrastructure  and  development  projects  in  the  next  four  years,  during  which  the 
LNG  project  is  constructed.  In  2010,  we  have  allowed  for  broad  money  to  grow  by  21%, 
which  we  consider  sufficient  to  meet  the  borrowing  needs  of  the  private  sector  to  support 
economic  growth.  If  the  Government  will  receive  any  windfall  revenue  from  high  mineral 
taxes  and  dividends  as  a  result  of  increasing  commodity  export  prices,  it  should  allow  the 
Central Bank to insulate them by keeping the funds in offshore foreign currency accounts, 
instead of depositing them in trust accounts domestically. This would reduce the impact of 
these funds on domestic liquidity, the exchange rate and inflation.  
On  the  second  question  of  how  the  LNG  project  will  impact  on  the  Papua  New  Guinea 
economy this issue has been continuously discussed in many forums, and only one or two 
studies have been undertaken on it. I will only touch on some of the areas of the project’s 
impact, mainly those that influence the areas the Bank of Papua New Guinea is responsible 
for.  
Papua New Guinea has a history of investments in mineral and petroleum projects. I went 
back to study what can be deduced about the impact they have had on economic growth, 
inflation,  foreign  exchange  flows  and  employment.  In  the  decade  1981  to  1991  five  major 
projects were constructed, Ok Tedi, Misima, Hides Gas, Porgera and Kutubu, all at a total 
cost  of  US$  6.0  billion.  They  commenced  production  in  the  years  1984  to  1992.  The 
information about their impact was distorted by the second oil crisis in the early 80’s, and the 
Bougainville  uprising  in  1989.  In  spite  of  those  events  the  lesson  we  can  draw  is  that 
economic activity as measured by GDP increased from around 4% to 5% before reaching 
11% to 12% during the period of construction of the mining projects, and to 17% when the 
Kutubu petroleum project was constructed. 
The construction of these projects has had a very moderate impact on inflation, if at all. It 
increased  to  11.7%  in  1980  mainly  as  a  result  of  the  second  oil  crisis.  For  the  period  of 
construction of these projects, inflation rate averaged 5.5% with some outliers in 1982 and 
1983  at  6.9%  and  8.5%  and  in  early  1990’s  by  around  7.0%,  respectively.  Most  of  the 
projects  in  the  80’s  and  90’s  were  in  remote  areas  in  the  Star  Mountains,  Misima  Island, 
Southern Highlands, and Enga and these areas are not measured in the Urban Based CPI 
we are using. The lessons learnt are limited.  
The LNG project is two and a half times larger at around US$15 billion to be spent in four 
years.  But  what  is  expected  is  that  PNG  will  experience  a  period  of  heightened  economic 
activity with GDP growth increasing, combined with inflation rate moving up to a new level. 
This is expected to occur during the construction phase of the LNG project. The MPS makes 
mention of some of these impact based on a study we carried out jointly with the Monash 
University. The project is important but we have to be careful not to exaggerate its benefits. 
The GDP may increase significantly (expected to be around 50%) but what matters most are 
the  expenditures  on  domestic  factors  of  production  for  the  construction  and  set-up  phase. 
BIS Review 53/2010 
 3
Upon  the  production  phase,  the  main  means  through  which  to  spread  the  benefits  of  the 
project throughout PNG over time is the Government’s fiscal policy. The best fiscal strategy 
is to save some of the windfall revenue gain in a SWF for the future while consuming only a 
part of it. Under this strategy the effects of the Dutch Disease can be minimized. This fiscal 
strategy  will  also  make  it  easier  for  the  management  of  monetary  policy  in  addressing 
inflationary  concerns.  This  is  in  contrast  to  spending  more  than  it  receives  or  spending  all 
that it gets where the effects of the Dutch Disease will be exacerbated. Some sectors such 
as building and construction, transportation, manufacturing and services will benefit from the 
project,  especially  in  the  short  run  during  the  construction  phase.  While  others  will  not, 
particularly  the  traditional  agricultural  exports  sector  as  it  will  be  adversely  affected  by  the 
Dutch  Disease  effect  (due  to  appreciation  of  kina  exchange  rate).  Let  me  emphasize  that 
these findings are based on preliminary information and data, and they can be updated once 
all the information and the data will be provided by the project developers.  
So  the  Bank  of  Papua  New  Guinea  will  have  to  assess  the  developments  and  take  the 
necessary steps to ensure that inflation is not getting out of control.  
The system used to fund projects will assist in containing some of the inflationary pressures. 
The major developers or Engineering, Procurement and Construction (EPC) contractors use 
off-shore finance to fund the project. We expect most of these financing transactions to be 
undertaken between offshore accounts as allowed for under the 2008 Exemption Regulation, 
where they are exempted from seeking approval from BPNG for opening of foreign currency 
accounts offshore. But other sub-contractors will still be required under the Central Banking 
(Gold  &  Foreign  Exchange)  Act  to  submit  their  requirements  to  the  Bank  of  Papua  New 
Guinea to determine their eligibility under the 2008 Exemption Regulation. Some of the labor, 
materials  and  supplies  will  be  purchased  in  the  domestic  markets.  To  purchase  them  the 
developer  or  contractor  has  to  exchange  foreign  currency  for  Kina.  The  result  is  that  the 
supply of foreign exchange increases which has a revaluation effect on the exchange rate. 
As  a  result  imported  inflation  declines.  This  will  mitigate  some  of  the  unprecedented  very 
high  demand  pressures  on  domestic  resources,  and  inflation.  This  together  with  prudent 
management of the budget and trust accounts can minimize the effect of Dutch disease in 
PNG.  
The analysis leads me to the conclusion that the Bank of Papua New Guinea is going to face 
untested turbulent times. Once all the information will become available, we will design the 
policy framework for ensuring that price stability is maintained.  
The challenges faced by the Government and the Bank of Papua New Guinea are huge. I 
am  sure  that  we  can  live  up  to  them  and  secure  a  stable  macro  economic  environment 
conducive to a country wide long term economic growth.  
Thank you all for listening and have fun on a Fools Day. 
4 
 BIS Review 53/2010
