 Patrick Honohan: Examining the Irish banking system 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Patrick  Honohan,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  &  Financial 
Services Authority of Ireland, to the Joint Oireachtas Committee on Finance and the Public 
Service, Dublin, 2 March 2010. 
 As  you  know,  I  have  been  asked  by  the  Minister  for  Finance  to  prepare  one  of  the  two 
reports proposed by the Government as the first stage of an investigation into the banking 
system.  I  have  been  informed  that  the  context  for  these  reports  is  that  “the  Government 
considers  it  essential  to  thoroughly  examine  the  conduct  of  the  banking  sector  in  recent 
years in order to arrive at a fuller understanding of the root causes of the systemic failures 
that led to the need for extraordinary support from the State to the domestic banking system.” 
This seems to me to be a good basis for proceeding.  
The  two-stage  approach  to  the  investigation  speaks  of  “preliminary  reports”  which  will 
provide a basis for the Government and the Oireachtas to prepare the terms of reference for 
the  second  stage,  which  will  involve  the  establishment  of  a  Statutory  Commission  of 
Investigation.  
The  report  which  I  am  preparing  is  on  “the  respective  functions  of  the  Central  Bank  and 
Financial  Regulator”,  and  it  is  to  have  regard  in  particular  to  their  work  “in  assessing  and 
responding to risks to the stability of individual institutions as well as to the banking system 
as a whole”. The report is described as “preliminary”, and of course is being prepared against 
a  tight  deadline,  yet  I  believe  it  will  be  possible  for  me  to  establish  a  fairly  clear  and 
comprehensive  understanding  of  the  matters  in  question.  I  am  hopeful  that  satisfactory 
conclusions can be reached on many issues, leaving only a relatively limited number of open 
questions of significance requiring further investigation.  
In parallel with my report, Mr Klaus Regling and Mr Max Watson, who appeared before this 
Committee last week, are looking (among other things) at the performance of the banks and 
banking system generally. Evidently, the full picture requires that dimension also: after all, it 
is to the directors of banks that we look in the first instance for safe and sound operation of 
their firms; official prudential regulation can best be seen as a backstop designed to restrain 
the  behaviour  of  imprudence  or  recklessness.  Clearly  in  this  case  neither  the  first  line 
defence nor the backstop worked.  
The  issues  that  I  have  been  asked  to  examine  include  the  performance  of  the  respective 
functions  of  the  Central  Bank  and  the  Financial  Regulator  over  the  period  from  the 
establishment of the Financial Regulator to the end of September 2008. In addition, I have 
been  asked  to  consider  the  inclusion  of  any  matter  that  I  feel  should  be  brought  to  the 
Minister’s attention which might help or inform the preparation of the terms of reference of 
the statutory inquiry. I intend to submit my report no later than the end of May 2010.  
I have assembled a small team of experts to help me prepare this report. (If the members of 
the Committee are interested, I can furnish them with particulars of the staff helping me in 
this work). Already in train is an examination of the most relevant files, beginning with the 
documents prepared both for the Regulatory Authority and for the Board of the Central Bank, 
and drilling down from these to trace the pattern of work of the relevant units. Following this it 
is  intended  to  interview  a  number  of  officials  of  the  Regulator  and  the  Bank  who  were 
intimately involved over the period under examination. I also intend to discuss the key issues 
with members of both the Regulatory Authority and the Board of the Bank.  
I met with Mr Regling and Mr Watson last week and we agreed to cooperate as our parallel 
work proceeds. This cooperation is to ensure that there is no overlap and duplication of work 
in our respective reports. My team will be meeting Mr Regling and Mr Watson later this week.  
BIS Review 24/2010 
 1
It  might  be  considered  surprising  that  it  falls  to  me  to  enquire  into  my  own  organisation. 
Obviously any surprise will be tempered by the consideration that I am in place for less than 
six months. Still, it is not the easiest of balancing acts to ensure that I find out what needs to 
be known, without damaging the functioning of the organisation. Nevertheless I am confident 
that I can do the job effectively, and it is on that basis that I agreed to the Minister’s request.  
I have begun this task with a presumption that the situation that has emerged in our banking 
system does reflect a failure of the regulatory system. However, I would like to stress that the 
organisation which I lead, the Central Bank and Financial Services Authority of Ireland, has 
over  the  years  delivered  a  wide  range  of  key  services  to  the  Irish  economy,  including 
consumer  protection,  consumer 
information,  effective  electronic  payments  systems, 
avoidance of excessive inflation as part of its Eurosystem objectives, the supply of liquidity to 
the banking sector, and the production and issuance of bank notes and coins, to mention just 
a few, none of which is called into question by the terms of reference of this report.  
When  I  last  appeared  before  an  Oireachtas  Committee  in  December,  I  said  that  “we 
understand  some  of  what  happened,  but  some  of  it  is  still  hard  to  understand”.  We  are 
already  putting  in  place  new  procedures  and  arrangements  that  take  account  of  what  we 
have learnt to date. I hope that my report can help develop that understanding further and 
help us all emerge from our current difficulties with a degree of restored confidence.  
