Hidetoshi Kamezaki: Recent economic and financial developments in 
Japan 
Speech by Mr Hidetoshi Kamezaki, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at a 
meeting with Business Leaders, Kochi, 25 March 2010. 
 Economic developments 
Global economy 
I. 
A. 
First, let me provide an overview of economic developments worldwide until recently. 
After the global economic slowdown due to the bursting of the IT bubble and the confusion 
over the severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) in the early 2000s, the global economy 
enjoyed  a  period  of  high  growth  led  by  strong  demand  from  emerging  economies. 
Industrialized countries also maintained relatively high growth, as the prolonged period of low 
interest rates stimulated investment and consumption. However, in the United States, amid 
the  declining  risk  awareness  among  investors,  loans  to  borrowers  with  a  deficient  credit 
history  –  that  is,  subprime  mortgages  –  were  extended  based  on  the  assumption  of  ever-
growing home prices. Housing investment consequently increased, pushing up home prices 
further, which in turn encouraged homeowners both to take out loans using their houses as 
collateral,  and  to  boost  their  spending.  Behind  this  phenomenon,  European  and  U.S. 
financial institutions purchased and pooled a large number of mortgage claims, restructured 
them into securitized products – for which credit ratings appeared high as a result of financial 
engineering – and then sold those products to investors worldwide. 
However, when U.S. home prices started to fall after reaching a peak around the middle of 
2006,  the  virtuous  circle  based  on  the  assumption  of  ever-growing  home  prices  began  to 
reverse.  U.S.  households  that  borrowed  beyond  their  means  defaulted  on  their  payment 
obligations, while there was a marked increase in the losses suffered by European and U.S. 
financial  institutions  as  well  as  investors  worldwide  that  had  purchased  mortgage-related 
securitized  products,  all  as  result  of  the  decreased  creditworthiness  of  mortgage-related 
products that backed those securitized products. This brought about the turmoil in European 
and U.S. financial markets around summer 2007, and against this background, the failure of 
Lehman Brothers in September 2008 triggered the global financial crisis. It led to a vicious 
circle – that is, an adverse feedback loop between financial and economic activity – in which 
the  difficulties  and  failures  of  financial  institutions  and  the  turmoil  in  financial  markets  left 
funding  for  firms  and  households  unstable,  while  the  resultant  deterioration  in  economic 
activity  in  turn  had  a  negative  impact  on  financial  institutions  and  markets.  In  this  phase, 
global  economic  conditions, 
those  of  emerging  economies,  deteriorated 
substantially, although just before the emergence of the global financial crisis, it was widely 
acknowledged  that  there  had  been  a  decoupling  between  the  economic  slowdown  in 
industrialized countries and the strength in emerging economies. 
The subsequent aggressive monetary and fiscal policies taken around the world to support 
the  economy  helped  initiate  progress  in  the  adjustment  of  excessive  inventories,  starting 
around spring 2009. Since then, the global economy as a whole – despite some national and 
regional differences – stopped worsening and headed toward a moderate recovery. 
Looking at developments by region, the U.S. economy was recovering, albeit at a moderate 
pace, supported by the 780 billion U.S. dollar stimulus package and a rescue package for 
financial  institutions  that  faced  financial  difficulties.  However,  there  has  been  no  notable 
improvement  in  weak  areas  of  the  economy,  such  as  housing  markets,  commercial  real 
estate markets, employment, and small financial institutions’ business conditions. Therefore, 
including 
BIS Review 67/2010 
 1
there is concern that adjustments made by various economic entities to still-fragile balance 
sheets might continue to be a drag on economic growth. 
In  the  euro  area,  albeit  with  some  national  differences,  economic  activity  is  picking  up, 
supported by an increase in exports led by the global economic recovery. However, the pace 
of  recovery  in  domestic  demand  is  lagging,  mainly  due  to  weak  private  consumption 
reflecting anxiety about employment in the future. In particular, the expanding fiscal deficits in 
some  countries,  such  as  Greece,  Spain,  and  Portugal,  has  caused  concern  in  financial 
markets, thereby putting downward pressure on the economy in the euro area as a whole. 
Since all European Union member states, including these countries, are required to reduce 
fiscal expenditures as laid down in the Stability and Growth Pact, I will pay attention to future 
economic  developments  in  the  area,  including  the  effects  of  expenditure  reduction  efforts. 
The  U.K.  economic  activity  has  started  to  pick  up,  mainly  due  to  an  increase  in  exports 
boosted by the depreciation of the pound sterling. 
In  Asia,  the  Chinese  economy  has  continued  to  grow  at  a  relatively  rapid  pace,  mainly 
because of the hike in fixed asset investment due to the 4 trillion renminbi stimulus measure 
adopted  immediately  after  the  Lehman  shock.  China’s  exports  have  also  been  growing 
recently, owing to the global economic recovery. The current concern, therefore, relates to 
the overheating of the economy, and the authorities have started to implement measures to 
restrain this. The economy is unlikely to decelerate in 2010, however, partly because of the 
effects  of  the  World  Exposition  to  be  held  in  Shanghai.  Nonetheless,  if  the  measures  to 
restrain overheating are insufficient, attention should be paid to the possibility that the rise in 
real  estate  prices  might  accelerate  further,  driving  the  economy  into  a  full-scale  bubble. 
Economic  conditions  in  the  NIEs  and  the  ASEAN  countries  are  recovering  as  a  result  of 
increased  exports  and  production  –  supported  mainly  by  demand  from  China  –  which  are 
leading to improvement in private consumption and a pick-up in business fixed investment. 
The Indian economy has also continued to grow at a relatively rapid pace, with its exports 
and domestic demand being generally favorable. 
In sum, the global economy as a whole is experiencing a moderate recovery, a trend that is 
likely to continue despite there being various risks. Yet, the contrast between the situations in 
industrialized  countries  and  in  emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies  is  likely  to 
become even more striking. Specifically, in industrialized countries, the momentum of self-
sustaining  economic  recovery  is  likely  to  be  only  moderate  due  to  strong  adjustment 
pressure persisting on various economic entities’ balance sheets, while in the emerging and 
commodity-exporting economies, where there is no such pressure, strong growth has been 
achieved  partly  due  to  an  indirect  effect  of  fiscal  and  monetary  policies  taken  around  the 
world. 
Japan’s economy 
B. 
I will now turn to Japan’s economy. 
The post-bubble period of Japan’s economy is often referred to as the “lost decade” or the 
“15 lost years,” but the economy actually experienced three phases of expansion during the 
period. In particular, the expansionary phase that began in 2002 lasted more than five years, 
marking the longest period of postwar expansion, supported by the high growth in the global 
economy.  However,  in  autumn  2007,  Japan’s  economy  fell  into  a  contraction  phase, 
reflecting the downturn in the U.S. economy. Japan’s economy then deteriorated rapidly, as if 
rolling downhill, following the turmoil in the financial markets triggered by the Lehman shock 
and the subsequent steep decline in exports and production. 
Several points could be noted as reasons for the economy of Japan having deteriorated far 
more  severely  than  that  of  the  United  States  and  Europe  where  the  recent  financial  crisis 
originated.  First,  Japan’s  economy  was  hit  hard  by  the  downturn  in  the  global  economy 
because  manufacturing  industries  of  durable  goods,  such  as  general  machinery,  electrical 
machinery, and transport equipment, account for a large share of the overall economy, and 
2 
 BIS Review 67/2010
the  ratio  of  exports  in  such  industries  is  high.  Second,  these  manufacturing  industries  are 
linked  to  a  wide  range  of  domestic  industries,  and  therefore  the  fall  in  exports  broadly 
affected  domestic  industries,  including  those  that  do  not  directly  engage  in  export-related 
activities. 
Since then, as the global economy has stopped worsening and is headed toward recovery, 
Japan’s exports and production hit bottom at the beginning of 2009, since when it has been 
recovering, mainly in the area of items meeting demand from China. Japan’s economy has 
ceased to deteriorate and started to pick up, despite the increasingly severe employment and 
income  situation,  on  the  realization  of  the  positive  effects  of  the  government’s  stimulus 
measures that favor energy-efficient products, such as tax reductions applied to purchases of 
environment-friendly cars and the eco-point system for electrical appliances. However, there 
has not yet been sufficient momentum for self-sustaining recovery in domestic private final 
demand. 
In terms of economic outlook, it is expected that the effects of inventory restocking and policy 
measures, which have been driving growth, gradually will abate. Against this background and 
given the severe employment and income situation, there may be a leveling off in the area of 
private  consumption,  which  has  been  picking  up  recently.  Meanwhile,  business  fixed 
investment is likely to pick up gradually as firms can no longer postpone investment plans, 
especially in light of pressing replacement demand.  
In sum, I expect that the trend toward gradual economic recovery will continue. The situation 
warrants  careful  attention,  however,  as  many  firms  remain  cautious  about  increasing 
domestic investment and employment due to uncertainty concerning the outlook. 
Price developments in Japan 
The recent situation and the outlook 
II. 
A. 
Next,  I  will  talk  about  price  developments  against  the  background  of  the  recent  economic 
situation I have just described. International commodity prices, which have a major impact on 
Japan’s  domestic  prices,  surged  at  the  start  of  the  new  century  as  commodity  markets 
tightened  due  to  strong  demand  from  and  robust  growth  in  emerging  economies, 
compounded by an inflow of speculative funds. Commodity prices then plunged as a result of 
the rapid unwinding of speculative funds from commodity markets, prompted by the Lehman 
shock and the subsequent financial market turmoil and global economic deterioration. These 
commodity prices, however, have since resumed an upward trend in response to the recent 
moderate recovery in the global economy. 
Some items in the consumer price index (CPI) excluding fresh food (the core CPI), such as 
the prices of petroleum products and food, started to show a definite rise around the end of 
2007, reflecting the surge in international commodity prices. In the middle of 2008, the year-
on-year  rate  of  increase  in  the  core  CPI  was  around  2.5  percent,  marking  the  largest  rise 
since  the  early  1990s  if  we  exclude  the  effect  of  the  1997  consumption  tax  increase. 
Subsequently, commodity prices fell, causing the year-on-year rate of change in the core CPI 
to  a  decline.  In  summer  2009,  the  rate  of  decline  in  the  core  CPI  hit  roughly  2.5  percent, 
marking  the  sharpest  fall  ever.  The  pace  of  decline  in  the  core  CPI  has  recently  been 
moderating, underpinned by the rise in prices of petroleum products. However, in January 
the CPI excluding food and energy, or the core-core CPI, which is not usually susceptible to 
fluctuations in commodity prices, fell 1.2 percent year on year, marking the largest drop so 
far. 
Regarding the outlook, the pace of decline in the core CPI is expected to slow, as the robust 
economic  growth  in  emerging  economies  is  likely  to  keep  commodity  prices  high  and  the 
negative output gap is likely to narrow as the economy recovers. However, it is unlikely that 
an upturn in the trend of the core CPI will be achieved easily, since: the negative output gap 
has  been  narrowing  only  moderately;  there  have  been  declines  in  both  the  inflation  rate 
BIS Review 67/2010 
 3
currently perceived by households and that expected twelve months out; and the proportion 
of households expecting prices to be lower in a year’s time has increased. Such perceptions 
could affect firms’ price-setting behavior. 
The cause of deflation 
B. 
Japan’s economy is currently experiencing deflation, a sustained decline in the general price 
level. While the inflation rates in major economies have been declining since the 1990s and 
marked a further fall after the Lehman shock, it is only in Japan that inflation has marked a 
high negative rate in terms of the core-core CPI. 
Output gap 
1. 
One  cause  of  deflation  in  Japan  is  its  large  negative  output  gap.  When  demand  falls  well 
short of supply capacity for products, suppliers may opt to restrain rises in sales prices, or 
reduce prices, to attain sales volumes. If this happens across the economy, the inflation rate 
will  falter.  According  to  an  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  projection  in  the  World 
Economic  Outlook,  the  output  gap  in  Japan  has  remained  consistently  negative  since  the 
second half of the 1990s, albeit with some cyclical fluctuations, and has been larger than in 
other  major  economies.  I  believe  this  can  be  attributed  to  the  excess  supply  capacity  –  a 
legacy of the insufficient restructuring of industries, including their production facilities – that 
remained out of line with sluggish domestic demand. 
There are a number of reasons for the weakness in domestic demand, but the major one is 
the lack of forward-looking investment since the bursting of the economic bubble, as a result 
of  the  prolonged  balance-sheet  adjustments  conducted  by  various  economic  entities.  In 
particular, the delay in financial institutions’ disposal of impaired assets has weakened their 
financial intermediary functions, thereby impairing their ability to provide sufficient funds for 
new areas of growth. Although balance-sheet adjustments had been progressing significantly 
from  around  2005,  the  Lehman  shock,  which  occurred  before  such  adjustments  had  been 
completed, triggered a plunge in overseas demand and, subsequently, a rapid widening of 
the negative output gap, which in turn led to the present deflationary situation. 
Inflation expectations 
2. 
Although movements of the output gap and the inflation rate do not show a clear correlation, 
a close look at data of the past phases reveals that a widening of the negative output gap 
was  followed  by  a  decline  in  the  inflation  rate.  However,  over  the  long  term,  the  actual 
inflation rate has edged down even when the output gap has remained at the same level. It is 
assumed  that  this  is  due  to  a  decline  in  the  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations 
among various economic entities. No one would rush to buy a product when he/she expects 
its price to fall or remain almost unchanged. In such a situation, suppliers would set lower 
prices to stimulate consumers’ spending appetite. If this trend spreads across the economy, 
the actual inflation rate will decline even when the output gap is at the same level.  
The reason for the decline in medium- to long-term inflation expectations in the period from 
the  1970s  to  the  first  half  of  the  1990s  is  that  a  rise  in  the  prices  of  goods  and  services, 
together  with  inflation  expectations  for  the  general  price  level,  were  contained  by  a 
combination of factors such as stable crude oil prices, the continued appreciation of the yen 
and resultant pressure to reduce the difference between domestic and foreign prices, as well 
as deregulation and other measures to promote competition. 
Nevertheless, since the latter half of the 1990s, the correlation between the output gap and 
the actual inflation rate has been stable. At present, it seems that there is no major change in 
medium- to long-term inflation expectations. However, as I noted earlier, there has been a 
decline in the inflation rate that households anticipate twelve months out, and the proportion 
of  households  expecting  prices  to  be  lower  in  a  year’s  time  has  increased.  If  such  a  view 
leads to a decline in medium- to long-term inflation expectations, it could become difficult to 
4 
 BIS Review 67/2010
overcome deflation. Therefore, a change in inflation expectations is an important factor that 
requires careful monitoring. 
The cost of deflation 
C. 
The  main  reason  for  Japan’s  current  deflationary  situation  is  the  widening  of  the  negative 
output  gap.  Deflation  is  disadvantageous  for  suppliers  of  goods  and  services  but 
advantageous  for  consumers.  This  phenomenon  seems  like  a  zero-sum  game  on  the 
surface, so, why is deflation said to have negative effects on the economy? 
Price  fluctuations,  whether  declines  or  otherwise,  give  rise  to  extra  costs  for  society.  For 
example, sales price revisions incur costs for deliberations and negotiations prior to settling 
on  a  price,  and  then  for  changing  price  tags.  Such  extra  costs  must  be  borne  by  some 
entities within the economy. Furthermore, price revisions for a large number of products at 
varying times and differing scales could hinder the efficient allocation of economic resources, 
while uncertainty regarding price fluctuations would also add risk premiums to transactional 
costs.  In  some  cases,  it  might  become  difficult  to  conclude  long-term  contracts,  thereby 
affecting  plans  for  consumption  and  investment.  In  addition,  if  price  fluctuations  cause  a 
change in the value of financial assets and liabilities that are fixed in nominal terms, or in the 
real  value  of  transactions  and  wages,  distortions  would  arise  in  income  distribution.  Such 
distortions would give rise to a sense of unfairness among those in different functional roles, 
such as lenders and borrowers, or employers and employees. The possible loss of trust in 
social fairness and equality would affect work ethic and incentives. 
One  of  the  costs  unique  to  deflation  is  that  real  interest  rates  cannot  decline  to  the  level 
corresponding to that of economic activity, since nominal interest rates do not fall below zero. 
Furthermore, a rise in the real value of debt and the resultant increase in the burden on the 
debtor  may  eventually  lead  to  economic  deterioration.  In  such  a  case,  the  real  value  of 
creditors’ assets would increase, but, since debtors’ propensity to consume out of income is 
generally higher than creditors’, consumption in the overall economy would shrink. Therefore, 
attention should be paid to the fact that there are costs unique to deflation. 
Measures taken by the Bank 
III. 
The  Bank  is  gradually  ending  the  measures  that  have  been  implemented  to  deal  with  the 
“acute symptoms” manifested in the rapid contraction of financial market activity following the 
Lehman shock in September 2008. At the same time, the Bank is putting forward additional 
measures  to  dispel  “chronic  illness,”  namely  deflation.  Next,  I  will  elaborate  on  the  Bank’s 
monetary policy measures implemented since the Lehman shock.  
Measures to address the acute symptoms, or the rapid financial contraction 
A. 
Immediately after the failure of Lehman Brothers, financial market participants throughout the 
world  became  overly  cautious  about  their  counterparts’  creditworthiness,  and  there  were 
cases where even financially sound institutions found it difficult to acquire funds. During such 
a rapid financial contraction, which we have described as acute symptoms, a central bank is 
the  sole  provider  of  liquidity.  Thus,  from  the  day  after  the  failure  of  Lehman  Brothers,  the 
Bank  successively  injected  abundant  liquidity  into  the  money  market  by  conducting  same-
day  funds-supplying  operations.  Subsequently,  it  implemented  measures  to  provide  ample 
liquidity  to  financial  markets,  such  as  increasing  the  amount  of  outright  purchases  of 
Japanese government bonds and introducing U.S. dollar funds-supplying operations against 
pooled collateral. 
In  Japan,  it  was  the  CP  market  that  faced  a  particularly  serious  shortage  of  liquidity  as 
market  participants  withdrew  their  funds  from  the  market,  fearing  the  risk  of  corporate 
failures. Firms that could no longer acquire funds through CP issuance flocked to banks for 
BIS Review 67/2010 
 5
financing.  As  banks  tried  to  respond  to  the  increased  demand  for  loans,  they  found 
themselves unable to afford to supply sufficient funds for small firms or firms with low credit 
ratings, or for repo transactions. In this way, the liquidity shortage spread to various markets. 
To address this situation, the Bank, in addition to increasing the frequency and size of CP 
repo operations, introduced outright purchases of CP as a temporary measure. This was a 
highly  exceptional  step,  in  that  a  central  bank  took  on  the  credit  risks  of  individual  private 
firms. The underlying objective was to facilitate corporate financing and resolve the liquidity 
shortage in the CP market by helping to restore confidence in CP underwriting among market 
participants. In addition, the Bank introduced a series of temporary emergency measures to 
facilitate corporate financing, including: (1) the easing of the rating requirement for corporate 
debt  to  be  accepted  as  eligible  collateral;  (2)  the  special  funds-supplying  operation  to 
facilitate  corporate  financing  (hereafter  the  special  operation),  through  which  the  Bank 
provided  longer-term  funds  for  an  unlimited  amount  against  the  value  of  corporate  debt 
pledged as collateral at a very low fixed interest rate; and (3) outright purchases of corporate 
bonds with a short residual maturity. 
Furthermore, in order to ensure the accommodative financial environment, the Bank reduced 
the policy interest rate – that is, the uncollateralized overnight call rate – from 0.5 percent to 
0.1 percent, which is the lowest level in the world. In order to provide ample liquidity through 
maintaining  the  policy  interest  rate  at  this  low  level,  the  Bank  also  introduced  the 
complementary  deposit  facility,  whereby  interest  is  made  payable  on  excess  reserve 
balances held at the Bank by financial institutions. 
At  the  same  time,  the  Bank  introduced  temporary  measures  to  secure  the  stability  of  the 
financial system, given that the strains in global financial markets and the subsequent fall in 
stock prices and rise in credit costs have greatly affected financial institutions’ intermediary 
function  and  financial  soundness.  Such  measures  include  the  stock  purchases  held  by 
financial institutions to help them reduce the market risk associated with stock holdings and 
the provision of subordinated loans to banks to help them maintain sufficient capital bases. 
B. 
Completion of measures to address acute symptoms after markets regained 
stability 
Subsequently,  as  the  economy  stopped  worsening  and  headed  toward  recovery,  while 
financial markets regained stability, the amount of financial institutions’ bids for central bank 
funds started to fall short of the offered amount in the Bank’s outright purchases of CP and 
corporate  bonds.  In  the  CP  market  in  particular,  the  issuance  rates  on  high-rated  CP 
occasionally  fell  below  yields  on  treasury  bills,  which  in  theory  must  command  greater 
creditworthiness. Furthermore, auction rates on ordinary funds-supplying operations tended 
to decrease to such low levels that the advantages of the relatively low rates offered in the 
special  operation  were  eliminated.  As  a  result,  the  Bank  decided  to  end  some  of  the 
temporary  measures  adopted  to  deal  with  the  acute  symptoms.  For  instance,  the  Bank 
decided in October 2009 to complete outright purchases of CP and corporate bonds, as well 
as the special operation, at the end of December 2009 and March 2010, respectively. 
Measures to address chronic illness, or deflation 
C. 
The  Bank  is  firmly  committed  to  continuing  its  policy  of  maintaining  the  extremely 
accommodative financial environment, given the moderate pace of economic recovery and 
weak momentum for price increases. In fact, the policy interest rate is being maintained at a 
low  level  of  0.1  percent  and  the  complementary  deposit  facility  remains  in  operation. 
Furthermore, on December 1, 2009, in order to enhance easy monetary conditions, the Bank 
introduced a new fixed-rate funds-supplying operation against pooled collateral (hereafter the 
fixed-rate operation), whereby a large amount of funds totaling approximately 10 trillion yen 
are to be provided at an extremely low fixed interest rate. This operation has contributed to 
encouraging a decline in longer-term interest rates. On March 17, 2010, the Bank decided to 
6 
 BIS Review 67/2010
the  Bank  emphasized 
expand the measure to encourage a decline in these rates by increasing the amount of funds 
to  be  provided  through  the  fixed-rate  operation  to  approximately  20  trillion  yen,  from  the 
previous amount of approximately 10 trillion yen. 
Meanwhile, 
the 
“understanding of medium- to long-term price stability” (the level of inflation that each Policy 
Board  member  understands,  when  conducting  monetary  policy,  as  being  consistent  with 
price  stability  over  the  medium  to  long  term;  hereafter  “understanding”),  the  Bank  made  it 
clear that the Policy Board does not tolerate a year-on-year rate of change in the CPI equal 
to or below 0 percent, and that the midpoints of most Policy Board members’ “understanding” 
are around 1 percent. 
fighting  deflation.  Regarding 
its  stance  on 
Moving toward sustainable economic growth 
IV. 
As  I  have  just  explained,  the  Bank  is  making  use  of  various  policy  tools  to  maintain  the 
extremely accommodative financial environment to overcome deflation. In the money market, 
the  interest  rates  applied  for  the  Bank’s  funds-supplying  operations  have  declined  to  0.1 
percent, and there are even cases in which financial institutions’ bids fall short of the Bank’s 
offers.  Market  participants  have  become  increasingly  confident  that  they  can  acquire 
sufficient funds at a low interest rate. Various types of interest rates have declined, including 
those  for  funds  transactions  between  financial  institutions,  market  rates  on  Japanese 
government  securities,  corporate  bonds,  and  CP,  as  well  as  loans  extended  to  firms  and 
households. It is hoped that the effects of monetary easing will further spread to other types 
of interest rates, encourage vigorous activity by various economic entities, and in due course 
lead to economic growth. However, a decline in interest rates alone may not be enough to 
stimulate activity by private sector entities, namely, firms and households, and thereby raise 
the level of overall economic activity. 
So, what is necessary to encourage vigorous activity on the part of firms and households? 
My belief is that the various economic entities need to free themselves from concerns about 
the future and regain confidence in their ability to achieve sustainable economic growth. In 
the post-World War II period, Japan has achieved high economic growth supported by the 
continuous efforts of the Japanese people, who are hard-working by nature, and the belief 
that they could achieve their high aim of catching up to the economic standards of European 
countries and the United States. Yet, it seems that the Japanese people were unable to set a 
new  target  once  the  goal  of  catching  up  had  been  achieved,  and  the  ambition  to  achieve 
further  economic  growth  has  weakened.  This  may  be  a  factor  behind  the  significant 
economic slowdown since the 1990s. 
In  this  situation,  the  government’s  “New  Growth  Strategy  (Basic  Policies)”  released  in 
December 2009 is very meaningful, as it presents the objective with which the public would 
seek to achieve sustainable economic growth. The measures laid down in the new policies 
include Asia-focused strategies geared to benefit from growth in Asian markets; measures to 
boost  domestic  demand  –  an  issue  requiring  immediate  action  –  with  particular  focus  on 
sectors  related  to  environmental  protection,  energy,  and  an  aging  population  with  fewer 
children, as well as farming and other food-related sectors. This is very much in line with my 
viewpoint, as neglecting these sectors would inevitably lead to a decline in Japan’s overall 
economic  strength,  whereas  proper  attention  would  surely  lead  to  the  development  of 
promising  businesses  within  these  sectors.  However,  concrete  plans  for  the  new  policies 
have not yet been announced. I understand that such plans will be provided in the “Growth 
Strategy Implementation Plan,” which is scheduled to be released by June 2010 with more 
specific and additional measures. I look forward to the release of the effective plans, so that 
concrete measures aimed at new economic growth can be set in motion as early as possible. 
Growth strategies – however ideal they might appear – can only serve to raise suspicions 
regarding future sustainable growth, as well as add to the fears of fiscal bankruptcy and a 
large increase in taxation, if they result in a further ballooning of the fiscal deficit, because 
BIS Review 67/2010 
 7
that 
important 
the  government’s  medium-term 
Japan suffers from by far the largest government debt of any industrialized country. Thus, it 
is  very 
fiscal 
management  strategy,  also  to  be  ready  by  June  2010,  include  measures  to  establish  a 
sustainable  fiscal  structure  and  present  fiscal  restructuring  measures  to  ensure  future 
economic and fiscal soundness, thereby maintaining market confidence. 
I  am  always  aware  that  the  Bank  should  implement  policy  measures  proactively  when 
necessary,  and  its  decision  on  March  17,  2010  to  take  an  additional  measure  to  enhance 
easy monetary conditions was based on such thinking. The Bank will continue to make the 
utmost effort to encourage various economic entities to regain confidence in their ability to 
attain sustainable economic growth. 
framework  and 
fiscal 
8 
 BIS Review 67/2010
