Paul Tucker: Inflation, growth and stability – balancing the Bank of 
England’s economic priorities  
Remarks by Mr  Paul Tucker, Deputy  Governor  of the Bank of England, at The Institute of 
Economic Affairs’ 27th Annual Conference ”The State of the Economy”, London, 23 February 
2010.  
 Many thanks for input to Peter Andrews, Roger Clews, Iain de Weymarn, James Proudman, Gareth Ramsay and 
Victoria  Saporta.  For  background  work  to  Michael  Grady  and  for  secretarial  support  to  Sandra  Bannister  and 
Cheryl Feeney.  
It is an understatement that the current macroeconomic conjuncture poses major challenges 
for policy. There are also major lessons for the overall framework for preserving stability in 
our economy. I shall talk about both.  
Both the challenges and the lessons stem from the source of the crisis: a crash in the credit 
system affecting a domestic and global economy which had become severely imbalanced. 
Broadly, from the autumn of 2008 onwards, the sharp falls in economic activity were most 
pronounced  in  areas  heavily  dependent  on  credit  and  optimism  (Chart  1).  There  was  a 
vicious  spiral  down  in  world  trade,  where  supply  chains  had  become  longer,  with  more 
counterparty  risk  and  so  more  dependence  on  credit.  Likewise  in  industrial  production 
(Chart 2). Business investment collapsed (Chart 3). There was sharp destocking, helping to 
alleviate firms’ financial pressures.  
Things are better than they were. Capital markets have mostly reopened, but spreads are 
still higher than before funding markets deteriorated during 2007 and bank lending has been 
very weak. World trade and manufacturing have bounced back, although remain below pre-
crisis levels. Confidence has revived, but may not yet be resilient. The rate of job losses in 
the  USA,  the  epicentre  of  the  crisis,  has  slowed.  But  growth  in  the  euro  area,  our  largest 
trading partner, has been less encouraging recently. 
In the UK, against a backdrop of massive monetary stimulus, nominal demand grew in the 
third  quarter  of  2009  for  the  first  time  for  over  around  a  year  (Chart  4).  And  real  output 
recorded  very  slight  growth  in  the  fourth  quarter.  “Bumping  along  the  bottom”  –  but  a  lot 
better  than  might  reasonably  have  been  feared  twelve  months  ago,  when  there  was  a 
tangible risk of the economy sliding away into depression.  
The  outlook  is  better.  As  we  said  in  the  recent  Inflation  Report,  gradual  recovery  is  in 
prospect. But it is still highly uncertain. As I have said before,1 I think it will take at least until 
the middle of the year for us to have much of a sense of whether growth will be anaemic or 
robust enough to begin to absorb the slack in the economy. That view is broadly consistent 
with  the  MPC’s  latest  collective  forecasts,  published  a  fortnight  ago.  The  central  thrust  of 
those projections is for growth in economic activity to revive quite quickly but for the level of 
activity to recover slowly (Chart 5), which is what really matters for welfare. After spiking over 
the next few months, inflation is, we believe, likely to drop below our 2% target due to the 
downward pressures from a weak level of demand on wages and prices (Chart 6). But it is 
then  likely  to  climb  back  towards  the  target  as  the  economy  recovers.  Compared  with  our 
previous  collective  forecast  last  November,  there  are  differences  of  nuance  in  the  “most 
likely” and “mean” paths for growth and inflation, but frankly to my mind those nuances are 
small beer compared to the main risks. My take on those risks is that, on the downside, the 
headwinds to demand and activity could prove stronger than currently foreseen. And, on the 
                                                 
1  See  Tucker  P  M  W  (2009e),  “The  Debate  on  Financial  System  Resilience:  Macroprudential  Instruments”, 
Barclays Annual Lecture, London, 22 October, 2009. 
BIS Review 21/2010 
 1
upside, that we (and our peers) could prove too slow to withdraw monetary stimulus if animal 
spirits  revive  across  the  economy  or  further  spikes  in  inflation  outturns  raise  medium-term 
expectations. Meanwhile, the data are bound to be mixed. 
Four aspects of the conjuncture 
Against  that  background,  I  shall  briefly  review  a  handful  of  the  issues  that,  one  way  or 
another, the MPC will face over the coming months. 
A balance sheet recession? 
I have a good deal of sympathy for those who argue that the current downturn owes a lot to 
stretched balance sheets – in the private sector, public sector, and the national economy as 
a whole.  
On average over the past decade the UK ran a current account deficit of around 2% of GDP, 
increasing  in  the  years  immediately  before  the  crisis.  That  is  about  double  the  post-war 
average, but compares favourably with the United States, which had a deficit of around 5% 
of  GDP  before  the  crisis.  Sterling’s  depreciation  has  already  boosted  the  UK’s  external 
balance sheet, and net trade should benefit too over time.  
Arguably, more serious imbalances were internal. Perhaps surprisingly, they did not show up 
in unusually strong output or consumption growth, in contrast to the inflationary booms that 
preceded  earlier  busts.  In  the  five  years  leading  up  to  the  crisis,  annual  GDP  growth 
averaged  around  2½%,  similar  to  the  post-war  “trend”.  Much  the  same  was  true  for 
household  consumption  growth,  and  its  contribution  to  GDP  even  declined  slightly  during 
2005–07. But, with slower income growth, the household saving rate actually fell throughout 
this period. Household balance sheets expanded rapidly, with debt and house prices rising in 
tandem. Access to cheap and readily available finance, and a willingness to borrow, led to 
household debt rising to over 150% of annual income. That inevitably made the household 
sector more vulnerable to adverse shocks; that is what leverage does! 
But  there  were  also  important  distributional  shifts.  One  way  of  thinking  about  the  rise  in 
house prices and increase in debt is as a transfer of wealth between older (house-seller) and 
younger  (buyer)  generations.  In  balance  sheet  terms,  the  younger  buyers  were  acquiring 
housing  assets  and  debt;  and  the  older  sellers  were  swapping  free  equity  in  houses  for 
financial assets. In consequence, for a while, the ratio of aggregate household debt to assets 
remained fairly stable; and the ratio of financial and housing assets-to-income rose steadily. 
Taken as a whole, households were vulnerable to falls in asset prices.  
Households  now  face  lower  asset  prices,  somewhat  lower  house  prices,  tighter  credit 
conditions, a lower path of demand and output, rather less job security, and a much greater 
sense of uncertainty. Younger households in particular have a strong incentive to save more 
(Chart  7)  to  repair  indebted  balance  sheets,  or  to  accumulate  the  deposits  that  are  once 
again needed to buy a home (given banks’ policies on loan-to-value ratios).  
By  contrast,  taken  as  a  whole,  the  corporate  sector  has  been  running  a  cash  surplus 
throughout – in the run up to the crisis, and since. Some of that is no doubt down to firms 
having learned lessons from flirting with excessive leverage during the “telco” boom nearly a 
decade ago. But quite a lot of the cash surplus has resided in oil companies and, since the 
crisis, in financial firms, which face the task of gradually deleveraging and reliquifying. Given 
how much debt banks will need to refinance or repay to the authorities around the world over 
the next few years, the Bank is keen – as reflected in the recently published minutes of the 
Chancellor’s  Council  for  Financial  Stability  –  that  individual  banks  agree  indicative 
refinancing plans with their supervisors; and that at least aggregate national conditions be 
shared amongst international peers. That would help to avoid each bank thinking that it can 
2 
 BIS Review 21/2010
delay its effort, risking an almighty scramble in eighteen months or so when official-facilities 
will be running off.  
As  household  sector  saving  has  risen  and  as  banks  have  deleveraged,  government 
borrowing  has  increased  very  sharply  as  it  helped  to  absorb  the  macroeconomic  shock. 
Without too much exaggeration, this can be thought of as a rescheduling of private sector 
debt facilitated by the only balance sheet currently strong enough to bear it – HMG’s. But, 
like financial services, the public sector had accounted for an increasing share of measured 
output in the run up to the crisis. And since a good deal of that was debt financed, this source 
of  support  is  not  unlimited.  Indeed,  those  two  sectors  have  to  be  part  of  the  process  of 
rebalancing demand and activity in the economy over the years ahead.  
Overall, the rebuilding of balance sheets and the rebalancing of demand pose a downside 
risk to the outlook for activity.  
Effective supply, and inflationary pressures 
Repair of balance sheets will affect the path of demand. What of supply?  
There is a great deal of slack in the economy. Around three-quarters of a million jobs (net) 
have  been  lost.  And  most  surveys  have  firms  working  well  within  capacity  (Chart  8).  The 
MPC believes that that will tend to bear down on wages and consumer price inflation over 
the next few years, warranting our substantial monetary stimulus. 
But the recession will obviously impair the economy’s productive potential. Investment plans 
have been shelved and some discouraged people are likely to leave the workforce. Those 
effects are likely to accumulate over time. But there are important temporary factors too.  
Typically  when  monetary  policymakers  talk  about  the  potential  supply  of  the  economy,  we 
have  in  mind  the  slow-moving  accretion  in  productive  capacity  determined  by  growth  in 
underlying  productivity,  the  workforce  and  firms’  net  investment  in  the  capital  stock.  Right 
now, that mindset would not quite capture what is going on. There are a number of reasons 
for thinking that the “effective supply” capacity of the economy has been depleted temporarily 
due to the shock to credit supply and confidence (Chart 9). How much, and how temporary, 
are major uncertainties.  
In the months immediately after the Lehman crisis, the cutbacks in lending and in trade credit 
insurance were so severe that some firms were probably unable to maintain production at 
previous levels. Working capital is, after all, an intermediate input.2 Those constraints have 
probably reduced over the months. But, given insipid and uncertain demand, not a few firms 
seem to have temporarily suspended part of their capacity: whether by putting part of their 
workforce on short hours or closing down a production line.  
This  makes  it  likely  that  supply  conditions  are  going  to  depend  heavily  on  the  path  of 
aggregate demand. If demand recovers robustly, firms are likely to bring some capacity back 
on  line.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  demand  proves  anaemic,  then  suspended-capacity  is  more 
likely to be permanently scrapped. Under the first scenario, inflationary pressures could be 
weaker  than  would  otherwise  be  the  case  in  a  recovering  economy.  Under  the  latter 
scenario, inflationary pressures would be greater than otherwise in a stalled economy. I do 
not want to go so far as saying that the path of aggregate demand won’t affect inflation, but it 
may not be quite as potent as usual.  
Viewed more broadly, provided we do not take risks with inflation – as we must not and will 
not  –  the  robust-growth  path  would  plainly  be  preferable  as  it  would  avoid  wasteful 
impairment  of  the  economy’s  productive  potential,  and  so  of  living  standards  in  the  years 
                                                 
2  See Blinder Alan S. (1987), “Credit Rationing and Effective Supply Failures” Economic Journal, June 1987, 
97, 327–52. 
BIS Review 21/2010 
 3
ahead.  To  achieve  the  2%  inflation  target  over  the  medium  term  but  at  the  cost  of  an 
avoidable depletion of the economy’s supply capacity would not be congruent with the MPC’s 
Remit, which includes supporting growth and employment in so far as that is consistent with 
the  overriding  goal  of  price  stability.  I  was  glad  that  the  “effective  supply”  way  of  thinking 
about this was reflected in our latest Inflation Report. But I would readily concede that we 
must  not  lose  sight  of  the  potential  “speed  limit”  effects  that  featured  in  our  November 
Report. Given the need for some rebalancing in the pattern of demand and activity, and the 
likely lags in firms bringing even suspended capacity back on-line, bottlenecks are a distinct 
possibility. We will need to be especially alert to messages from the Bank’s Agents, to survey 
evidence,  and  to  data  on  productivity,  wages  and  prices  for  any  sign  of  inflationary 
pressures. 
Volatility of inflation, and inflation expectations  
The Committee’s strategy has warranted maintaining the very substantial monetary stimulus 
notwithstanding  the  marked  pick-up  in  inflation  over  recent  months.  As  the  Governor 
explained at our press conference a fortnight ago, we think that the recent rise in inflation is 
accounted for mainly by the increase in petrol prices, the restoration of VAT to 17.5%, and 
lagged effects of sterling’s substantial depreciation. But we can’t be, and aren’t, comfortable 
about  it.  Not  least  because  the  country  has  to  trust  us  that  these  will  be  temporary 
disturbances.  
In the first place, our judgments about the pass through of the exchange rate depreciation 
could prove to be wrong. Second, we are vulnerable to further upward shocks to commodity 
prices if, for example, Asian growth remains robust, although I draw a degree of comfort from 
OPEC’s excess capacity at present. Third, we cannot rule out that there has been a greater 
destruction of supply capacity than suggested by survey evidence, in which case underlying 
disinflationary pressures would be weaker than thought. And fourth, it is possible that, given 
still-tight  credit  conditions  and  an  uncertain  outlook  for  demand,  some  firms  will  take 
opportunities to raise prices in order to buttress cash flows, notwithstanding their operating 
within their potential capacity.  
As  ever,  we  must  therefore  interrogate  the  data  and  surveys,  and  we  must  be  especially 
sensitive  to  medium  term  inflation  expectations  (Chart  10).  So  far  they  have  remained 
broadly consistent with the target. Judging from options prices, financial market participants 
seem to think that there has been a rising probability that inflation will overshoot substantially 
on  the  upside.  But  there  seems  to  be  a  perception  of  a  roughly  similar  probability  of  an 
overshoot on the downside (Charts 11a and 11b). The big picture is that the risks on both 
sides are tangible. The upside risk no doubt owes something to perceptions of the scale (and 
manner) of our monetary stimulus. I must therefore underline that there is no dilution in our 
commitment  to  the  inflation  target.  This  country  suffered  too  much  from  the  inflationary 
booms and busts of the past for us to take risks on that score – in either direction.  
QE: the stimulus to nominal demand, and the financing of the banking system 
To  avoid  the  downside  risks,  we  need  to  help  to  revive  the  economy.  And  the  monetary 
stimulus is, of course, directed at a big deficiency of nominal demand in the economy. At our 
latest monthly meeting in early February, the MPC maintained Bank Rate at 0.5% and the 
stock of money injected via asset purchases at £200bn. The money market yield curve has 
edged down slightly since then.  
Over the past year my colleagues on the MPC have variously set out the key mechanisms 
through  which  Quantitative  Easing  (QE)  should  work.  I  shall  not  go  over  all  that  ground 
today, but there is unavoidable uncertainty about the speed and potency of QE’s effects. I 
am minded to think that some of the effects will come through fairly gradually. And therefore 
I would stress that the monetary stimulus from QE has not stopped. The flow effect of our 
bond  purchases  on  gilt  yields  is  not  the  beginning  and  end  of  how  QE  provides  monetary 
4 
 BIS Review 21/2010
stimulus.  Plainly  the  mechanisms  through  which  our  money  injections  affect  the  economy 
differ in some respects from the transmission of changes in Bank Rate, which in an economy 
with a lot of (net) floating-rate debt can affect household and business borrowers’ cash flows 
quickly. By imbalancing the asset portfolios of the institutional investors that sell us gilts, QE 
works in part through shifting the risk premia (broadly defined) on a wider class of financial 
assets. I would not expect that to be over and done with quickly.  
An  analogy:  it  is  sometimes  alleged  that  the  boom  leading  up  to  the  crisis  was  in  credit 
markets  but  did  not  really  affect  equity  markets.  I  do  not  agree.  Arbitrage  does  connect 
markets  –  eventually.  The  boom  in  Leveraged  Buy  Outs  was  precisely  a  mechanism  for 
using underpriced debt to buy “cheaper” equity, which would have driven down the ex post 
equity  risk  premium  had  it  taken  its  course  uninterrupted  by  the  crash.  Similarly  now,  the 
effects of imbalanced investment portfolios will, most likely, spread through different capital 
markets – and so into wealth and the availability and cost of capital – gradually.  
A second mechanism, rather less remarked – except perhaps in international central banking 
circles  –  is  how  QE  here  and  the  injection  of  money  by  other  central  banks  effectively 
contribute to the financing of the banking system. By buying assets from the non bank private 
sector,  we  increase  deposits  with  the  banks:  broad  money.  We  also  put  extra  reserves  – 
balances with the Bank – into the hands of the banks themselves. To the extent that those 
reserves holdings exceed individual banks’ demand for a liquidity buffer, they can use them 
either to expand lending or, alternatively, to repay (maturing) debt, and so help to deleverage 
their  balance  sheets.  Another  way  of  thinking  about  it  is  that,  at  an  aggregate  level,  our 
purchases reduce the scale of assets that the private sector needs to finance by borrowing 
from the banks. This is not just a UK thing.  
That  being  so,  we  should  not  be  too  surprised  that  there  has  been  a  sharp  fall  in  the 
utilisation of central banks’ liquidity facilities during 2009. The size of central bank balance 
sheets  (Chart  12)  remains  much  the  same  as  about  a  year  ago,  just  as  QE  was  getting 
underway; but the composition of our asset portfolios has changed. The bottom line is that 
we are still providing an enormous amount of liquidity to the banking system as a whole, but 
with revived wholesale money markets distributing that assistance to where it is needed. 
So  our  monetary  instruments  and  financial  stability  instruments  shade  into  one  another  – 
unsurprisingly.  And  that  means  that  when  planning  our  so-called  exit  strategies  from 
monetary easing, central bankers will need to weigh the effects on bank funding conditions, 
which in turn affect credit conditions and demand in the economy.  
Five issues for the policy framework for maintaining macro economic stability 
I want to look beyond the immediate conjuncture. I don’t plan to say anything today about 
financial  sector  reform,  but  will  concentrate  on  the  overall  framework  for  preserving 
macroeconomic stability.  
That there are lessons from the crisis is obvious.   
Don’t be seduced by the appearance of stability 
The so-called Great Stability was, with hindsight, in some respects a surface phenomenon. 
We should not lose sight of the absolutely vital achievement of establishing monetary policy 
regimes that carry credibility with households, firms and markets. But, in terms of demand 
and  output,  underneath  a  surface  of  smooth  growth  at  the  aggregate  level  lay  horribly 
imbalanced economies. And given the length of time this persisted, it may well have affected 
the pattern of investment, and so led to a distribution of the economy’s supply capacity that 
would be out of line with better balanced demand. It is hard to tell.  
I don’t much like slogans, but the “Great Threat” might have been a galvanising refrain.   
BIS Review 21/2010 
 5
The monetary transmission mechanism: we must embed the renewed interest in 
financial markets, money and credit  
As  Mark  Carney,  the  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  observed  at  Jackson  Hole  last 
summer,3  economists  developed  a  habit  of  thinking  of  the  financial  parts  of  the  monetary 
transmission  mechanism  as  more  or  less  fixed  for  practical  purposes.  But,  in  fact,  the 
evolution  of  the  financial  system  –  due  to  regulation,  innovation,  and  animal  spirits  –  can, 
subtly or not so subtly, alter the ways in which our interest rate changes flow through to the 
real  economy.  Twenty  years  ago  there  was  great  interest  in  this  kind  of  thing,  perhaps 
reaching  its  apogee  in  the  BIS’s  Cross  Report4  on  the  effects  of  interest  rate  and  foreign 
exchange derivatives on monetary policy and macroprudential policy. Over the latest period, 
we  needed  to  take  greater  account  of  the  implications  of  the  credit-market  revolution,  the 
emergence of major new financing markets, and declining credit and liquidity spreads. 
What  this  amounts  to  is  that,  in  assessing  the  outlook  for  demand  and  inflation, monetary 
policymakers need routinely to take a greater interest in financial markets and their workings, 
over and above looking at asset prices as an input to wealth and the  cost of capital. This 
means trying to make sense of risk premia and liquidity premia.5 Not easy, but it needs to be 
done.  And  it  will  be  important  soon  if  there  is  a  persistent  rise  in  the  margin  that  banks 
charge for credit over and above the risk-free rate. It might plausibly rise due to a higher cost 
of funds to banks themselves, a heightened assessment of risk of borrower default, or more 
demanding future regulatory requirements. Indeed, not a few bankers have argued in recent 
months  that  the  international  authorities  should  temper  their  regulatory  reforms  due  to  the 
prospect of higher credit costs for households and firms. But there may be offsetting factors. 
If in the steady-state equilibrium credit spreads were to be higher, then other things being 
equal there might be a lower equilibrium risk-free interest rate.6 In plain language, the Bank’s 
policy rate might on average conceivably be lower in future than during the Committee’s first 
decade. We shall have to wait and see.  
The counterpart to placing greater weight on the level of  and fluctuations in risk premia is 
being  more  attentive  to  money  and  credit  quantities.  There  is  plenty  of  such  interest  at 
present  of  course,  as  evidenced  by  the  number  of  mentions  in  the  minutes  of  the  MPC’s 
meetings. But we must ensure that interest is sustained.  
And  in  a  world  of  global  banking  and  capital  markets,  that  surely  means  looking  at  wider 
measures  alongside  our  normal  broad  money  (M4)  aggregates.  It  is  surely  not  at  all 
uncommon these days for firms around the world to hold part of their currency liquidity with 
banks overseas. 
At the Bank, we have had another go7 at creating a wider measure of UK money growth that 
takes account of international deposit-taking activity (Chart 13), and also at similar measures 
of  “world  money  growth”  (Chart  14).  In  both  cases,  the  swings  over  the  past  decade  are 
more pronounced on the wider measure, especially for the UK. I am particularly struck that 
these  aggregates  start  to  pick  up  during  late  2003,  just  about  the  time  when  the  Bank’s 
                                                 
3  Carney M (2009), “Some considerations on using monetary policy to stabilize economic activity”, remarks to a 
symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming. 
4  See Bank for International Settlements (1986), “Recent innovations in international banking”, prepared by a 
Study Group established by the Central Banks of the Group of Ten Countries, known as the “Cross Report”. 
5  King  M  A  (2006),  Speech  at  a  dinner  for  Kent  Business  Contacts  in  Conjunction  with  the  Kent  Messenger 
Group/Kent Business, Ashford, Kent, 16 January, 2006. 
6  My colleague David Miles discussed this in “The Future Financial Landscape”, a speech given at Bloomberg, 
16 December, 2009. 
7  An earlier estimate of world broad money growth can found in Tucker P M W (2007), “Macro, asset price, and 
financial system uncertainties”, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, 2007 Q1, pp. 122–130. This version takes 
into account resident foreign currency deposits and non-resident deposits with banks. 
6 
 BIS Review 21/2010
market intelligence began to report a revival in financial market “animal spirits” after the telco 
debt problems of 2002.8 Obviously these wider measures of money collapsed – and, again, 
by more than the standard M4 measure – after the Lehman crisis.  
Broader measures can tell us about domestic as well as global conditions, and this may be 
especially important for the UK. The contraction in lending to our businesses and, to a lesser 
extent,  to  our  households  owes  a  lot  to  withdrawal  by  foreign-headquartered  banks 
(Chart 15). Cross-border lending into the UK, particularly via syndicated lending, has shrunk. 
And so has lending by branches and by many (but by no means all) subsidiaries of overseas 
banks here. The same broad pattern seems to be true in other economies, but may be rather 
less  significant.  There  is  an  unusually  large  presence  of  non-UK  banks  here,  due  to  our 
hosting an international financial centre. The City is not purely an entrepot. It intermediates 
between  domestic  saving  and  investment,  as  well  as  international  flows  of  funds  and  risk. 
And the connections into our domestic economy – via credit flows, as well as taxation – gives 
us  a  vital  macroeconomic  interest  in  the  health  of  global  capital  markets  and  the 
international banking system.  
“Mopping up” and missing instruments: macroprudential policy 
I  was  always  doubtful  about  the  consensus  around  the  authorities  relying  entirely  on 
“mopping up” by slashing interest rates after bubbles burst, and frankly, with hindsight, I wish 
I had expressed my reservations more strongly.9 The mess created by this crisis – the cost 
to  businesses  and  millions  of  people  around  the  world  –  surely  puts  beyond  doubt  that  if, 
using a wider range of instruments, we could tame the credit cycle, we should. 
There  is  a  debate  about  whether,  around  the  world,  monetary  policy  inflated  the  bubble. 
Research economists will take a long time to reach anything like a consensus. But I would 
make  one  observation  today.  The  suggestion  that  I  have  heard  most  frequently  from 
thoughtful  market  participants  is  not  that  monetary  policy  was  directly  responsible  for  the 
bubble, but that it contributed to an appreciation of asset prices which then got out of hand. 
Any  easing  in  monetary  policy  inevitably  pushes  up  asset  prices  (compared  with  the 
counterfactual)  because  it  reduces  the  discount  rate  used  to  value  the  cash  flows  from 
securities  and  the  rental  income  on  property.  The  more  long-lasting  a  monetary  easing  is 
expected by the markets to be, the greater the effect on asset prices. 
In the early years of this century, those standard channels were powerfully at work around 
the  world,  led  by  dollar  markets.  And  they  combined  with  the  ex  ante  imbalance  in  global 
savings and investment, which brought down yields on risk-free bonds. Big picture, all of that 
was basically warranted by economic fundamentals. It did not itself constitute a bubble. But 
bubbles  often  get  going  because,  given  risk  illusion,  market  participants  can  extrapolate 
forward into ex ante required returns the windfall ex post gains they have enjoyed. And, once 
started, bubbles can keep going because a collective action problem – herding, to put it more 
straightforwardly  –  can  make  it  hard  for  any  individual  firm  or  fund  to  step  off  the  dance 
floor.10  
The moral of this story is that the financial authorities need to be sensitive to when a marked 
appreciation in asset prices is becoming fuelled by rapid credit growth and looks likely to get 
                                                
 
8  The Bank’s December 2003 Financial Stability Review highlighted the revival in markets and the “search for 
yield” as “spreads on high-yield and emerging market economy bonds…continued to narrow…, and estimate 
of the equity risk premium…declined. There has also been a sharp increase in inflow to hedge funds. Market 
contacts  describe some investors  willing to take more credit, interest rate or  exchange rate risk in order to 
increase returns in the short run.”, pp. 13. 
9  See Tucker P M W (2006), “Reflections on Operating Inflation Targeting”, a speech at the Graduate School of 
Business, University of Chicago, May 2006. 
10  Tucker (2009e), op. cit. 
BIS Review 21/2010 
 7
carried away beyond anything warranted by fundamentals. Regulators need to be a bit less 
disposed  to  find  fundamental  explanations  for  any  degree  of  financial  appreciation,  and  a 
little  more  alert  to  market  participants  themselves  saying,  as  many  did,  that  risk  is 
underpriced. That does not of itself mean that monetary policy should be more timid in trying 
to  repair  deficiencies  in  nominal  demand.  But  it  does  underline  the  need,  as  I  said  a  few 
years ago, to take care that the remedy for one set of imbalances does not lead to another. 
And this is especially important if, as would seem to be the case, monetary policy is capable 
of generating prolonged periods of stability at an aggregate level that lead financial market 
participants to believe mistakenly that the world is less risky than is actually the case.  
It is all very well saying that the cognitive biases of economists and the authorities should 
change  slightly,  and  that  our  mindset  should  at  times  be  a  bit  more  lateral.  But  do  we,  in 
actual  fact,  have  any  instruments  for  doing  anything  about  threats  to  stability  from  credit 
bubbles that are not associated with burgeoning nominal demand and inflationary pressures? 
That is precisely what the “macroprudential instruments” debate is about. There is increasing 
interest in these possibilities. The Bank of England’s own November Discussion Paper was 
only  one  manifestation.  Another  is  the  IMF’s  recent  review  of  the  macroeconomic  policy 
framework.11  
The  basic  question  is  whether  the  authorities  could  lean  against  credit-fuelled  booms  by 
tightening  capital  or  liquidity  requirements  for  lenders  or,  as  some  economists  have 
advocated, by raising the amount of collateral that borrowers have to put up.12 In principle, 
this could be aimed at aggregate or sectoral credit conditions, and it could have a goal of 
making our banks more resilient. It would need to be pursued by executive agencies under 
clear  mandates  from  legislators,  and  it  would  benefit  greatly  from  transparency.  A  painful 
lesson for the Bank of England is that our warnings of “underpriced risk” and system-wide 
fragilities  in  our  Financial  Stability  Reports  were  perhaps  admired  by  some  but  made  no 
difference.  And,  alongside  our  domestic  and  international  peers,  we  are  not  in  this  for 
plaudits! People – the markets, firms, households – take notice of our Inflation Report, MPC 
minutes and speeches on monetary policy not, essentially, because they might sometimes 
be  interesting  or  well  done,  but  for  the  simple  reason  that  the  MPC  is  the  body  that  sets 
sterling  interest  rates  in  the  real  world.  If  the  authorities  were  able  to  deploy  credible 
macroprudential  tools,  their  stability  warnings  would  probably  be  taken  more  seriously  in 
future, because they would be able to follow up words with actions. 
Monetary policymakers would need to be attentive to the use of such instruments, as they 
would affect credit conditions. Such instruments would also help to underpin the consensus 
that monetary policy should focus on the path of nominal demand at the aggregate level, with 
macroprudential policy seeking to address over exuberance in particular sectors or in credit 
markets generally and the resilience of the banking system. 
Slow moving threats to stability: a continuing challenge 
If the authorities could make a regime along those lines work in practice, we would reduce 
one threat to stability: out-of-control credit booms that undermine the stability of the financial 
system and so jeopardise the supply of credit that lubricates economic activity. I do think that 
we should direct some of our energies to that, alongside making the financial system more 
resilient in case, as is inevitable, “credit boom and bust” cannot be eliminated.  
But I should flag that this would not wave away all potential threats to stability. A lesson of 
this  (and  past)  crises  is  that  cumulative  imbalances  in  the  domestic  and  global  economy 
                                                 
11  Blanchard O, G Dell’Ariccia and P Mauro (2010), “Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy”, IMF Staff Position Note, 
SPN/10/03, February 12, 2010. 
12  A point made in conversation by, for example, Anil Kashyap. 
8 
 BIS Review 21/2010
eventually come home to roost. That would surely have been so on this occasion even if our 
banking systems had proved more resilient.  
A  great  challenge  for  monetary  policymakers  everywhere  is  that  external  and  internal 
imbalances typically grow slowly, and that the timing and manner of their unravelling is highly 
uncertain. In setting a course for nominal demand, we are usually trying to stabilise inflation 
in line with our target over a horizon of 2–3 years. Of course we care about longer horizons. 
As a number of us have argued over the years,13 that is nicely captured by approximating our 
objective with a so-called quadratic loss function that gives weight to deviations of inflation 
from target and deviations of the level of output from its sustainable course. In that set up, 
the policymaker cares about future volatility (or uncertainty) about the inflation rate and the 
“output gap”. Sizeable imbalances create precisely that uncertainty, threaten precisely such 
volatility. 
All very useful as an abstract framework for thinking about policy. The trouble is that there is 
not a policymaker anywhere who has much of a clue about how to operationalise it in actual 
interest rate decisions. This matters because not all imbalances are associated with credit 
booms that pose a threat to financial stability. The development of a set of macroprudential 
tools would not be sufficient to insulate our economies from imbalances. But I do believe that 
it is necessary. 
Governments as insurers against aggregate instability: the importance of government 
balance sheets 
The Bank has said before and we shall carry on saying that no set of measures introduced 
by  national  and  international  authorities  –  whether  by  way  of  regulation,  resolution,  or  the 
structure of the financial system; whether leaning against the wind; or all in combination – is 
certain to prove sufficient to guarantee macroeconomic stability in the decades ahead.  
The final protection against economic collapse comes from governments – at the expense of 
their needing to take care about creating incentives for the private sector to take large risks. 
We  have  seen  that  amply  demonstrated  in  this  crisis.  But,  if  society  wishes,  their  role  as 
catastrophe  insurer  can  go  beyond  financial  crises;  governments  can  help  smooth  the 
adjustment  of  the  economy  in  the  face  of  any  kind  of  disaster.  They  do  so  essentially  by 
accumulating debt and so spreading the burden to future years, future generations. 
The extent to which they can do so depends on the starting position of their own balance 
sheets – in other words, their levels of debt relative to their tax-generating capacity, proxied 
by GDP, before crisis hit. And that means the strength of their balance sheets when a crisis 
erupts and also prospectively looking forward, so taking account of ageing populations etc.  
We are familiar with this from that part of our history when we regularly found ourselves at 
war. Spending, and so government debt to GDP, would balloon. But it would gradually be 
brought back to low levels, so that we were equipped for the next war. A big question in the 
modern  world  is  what  level  of  government  debt/GDP  would  be  needed  by  countries  in 
economic peacetime if societies wished them to be able to offset economic disasters. 
The immediate focus is on addressing “structural” budget deficits, with a view to stabilising 
debt/GDP. But there will be longer-term choices about the level of the debt itself. Those are 
choices  for  decades  rather  than  for  a  Parliament.  And  they  are  not  choices  for  central 
bankers. But I would say this from my own vantage point. The higher the steady-state level of 
debt society chooses, the more resilient our financial system would need to be.  
                                                 
13  For example, see Bean C R (2009), “Some Lessons for Monetary Policy from the Recent Financial Turmoil”, 
remarks  at  Conference  on  Globalisation,  Inflation  and  Monetary  Policy,  Istanbul,  22  November,  2009  and 
Tucker  P  M  W  (2006),  “Reflections  on  operating  inflation  targeting”,  at  the  Graduate  School  of  Business, 
University of Chicago, 25 May, 2006, pp. 4. 
BIS Review 21/2010 
 9
Conclusion 
The title I was given for my remarks today was “Inflation, growth and stability: balancing the 
Bank of England’s economic priorities”. 
Our priority as central bankers remains the same: stability. 
Price  stability,  as  encapsulated  in  our  inflation  target,  is  a  necessary  precondition  for 
sustainable growth in output and for maintaining “full employment”. That is no less true today 
than before the current downturn.  
Indeed, it is the credibility of our commitment to price stability that has enabled the Bank to 
cut interest rates and to inject money so aggressively in order to support nominal demand in 
the  wake  of  the  credit  crisis.  If,  as  in  the  bad  old  days,  the  monetary  authority  lacked 
credibility, I believe that the stimulus would have had to be smaller and the downturn would, 
in  consequence,  have  been  greater.  That  underlines  the  risks  of  tinkering  with  central 
bankers’ inflation targets, as some commentators have seemed to suggest. 
When, unusually, we face any kind of choice in the path of demand and activity consistent 
with  maintaining  price  stability,  we  obviously  err  towards  the  stronger  path.  As  I  have 
described,  that  is  a  factor  today  when  some  businesses  have  suspended  but  not  yet 
scrapped capacity. In aggressively stimulating demand in order to absorb slack, we aim to 
keep inflation in line with the target over the medium term and also to reduce the extent to 
which the economy’s productive capacity is wasted. Due to the endogeneity of firms’ supply 
capacity,  that  is  going  to  call  for  some  difficult  judgments  in  the  quarters  ahead  about  the 
evolution of slack in the economy and about pricing pressures.  
Another  element  of  stability  –  in  the  financial  system  –  is  plainly  necessary  to  maintain 
stability in demand, output and employment. As many researchers have shown, recessions 
associated with financial crises have tended to be longer and deeper.14 That is the backdrop 
to the debate on reforming the financial system. But is also makes the case for policymakers 
developing  macroprudential  instruments  that  could  be  used  to  lean  against  future  credit 
booms and for making our financial system more resilient. If we could manage that, it might 
be  the  most  significant  extension  in  the  overall  international  macro  policy  framework  in  a 
generation. 
Price stability, financial stability and sustainable growth. They need each other.  
                                                 
14  For  example,  see  Reinhart  C  M  and  K  S  Rogoff  (2009),  “The  Aftermath  of  Financial  Crises”,  American 
Economic  Review:  Papers  and  Proceedings  2009,  99:2,  466–472  and  Hoggarth  G  and  V  Saporta  (2001) 
“Costs of banking instability: some empirical evidence”, Bank of England Financial Stability Review, Issue 10, 
June. 
10 
 BIS Review 21/2010
Charts 
Chart 1: UK GDP and sectoral output(a) 
Chart 2: World industrial production 
Contribution to annualised quarterly industrial production growth (pp)
Contribution to annualised quarterly industrial production growth (pp)
High Income Countries
High Income Countries
Developing countries excl China
Developing countries excl China
China
China
World Total
World Total
 
 
(a) Chained-volume measures.  GDP is at market prices.  
Indices of sectoral output are at basic prices. 
 
Chart 3: Business investment to GDP ratio(a) 
2007Q3
2007Q3
2007Q1
2007Q1
 
Source: World Bank 
 2008Q1
2008Q1
2008Q3
2008Q3
2009Q1
2009Q1
2009Q3
2009Q3
Chart 4: Nominal GDP 
  
(a)  Chained-volume measures.  Recessions are defined 
as two consecutive quarters of falling output (at constant 
market prices) estimated using the latest data. 
 
Chart 5: Projection of the level of GDP based 
on market interest rate expectations and 
£200bn asset purchases 
 
(a)  At current market prices. 
Chart 6: CPI inflation projection based on 
market interest rate projections and £200bn 
asset purchases 
 15
15
10
10
5
5
0
0
-5
-5
-10
-10
-15
-15
-20
-20
-25
-25
-30
-30
   BIS Review 21/2010 
 11
Chart 7: Household saving ratio(a) 
Chart 8: Survey measures of capacity utilisation 
 
(a)  Percentage of household post-tax income.  
 
Chart 9: Credit and finance as a constraint on 
output(a) 
  
Sources:  Bank of England, BCC, CBI, CBI/PwC and ONS. 
 
(a) Three measures are produced by weighting together 
surveys from the Bank’s regional Agents (manufacturing 
and services), the BCC (manufacturing and services) and 
the CBI (manufacturing, financial services, 
business/consumer services, distributive trades) using 
shares in nominal value added.  The BCC data are non 
seasonally adjusted.  
 
Chart 10: CPI and households’ inflation 
expectations for the year ahead, scaled to 
match CPI inflation(a)(b) 
Sources:  CBI and ONS. 
 
(a) This measure is produced by weighting together 
balances for the manufacturing sector and the 
consumer/business service sector using shares in nominal 
value added.  Manufacturing companies are asked:  ‘What 
factors are likely to limit output over the next three 
months?’.  Service sector companies are asked:  ‘What 
factors are likely to limit your ability to increase the level of 
business over the next twelve months?’. 
 
 
 
Sources:  Bank of England, Barclays Capital, Citigroup, GfK 
NOP, research carried out by GfK NOP on behalf of the 
European Commission, ONS and YouGov. 
 
(a)  Survey-based measures (apart from GfK NOP) have 
been scaled to have the same mean as CPI inflation over a 
comparable period.  
(b)  The questions ask about expected changes in prices 
over the next twelve months, but do not reference a specific 
price index.  All measures are based on the median 
estimated price change, except GfK NOP which captures 
the weighted net balance expecting prices to increase.    
12 
 BIS Review 21/2010
Chart 11a: Options-implied weight on falling 
consumer prices 5-7 years ahead  
Chart 11b: Options-implied weight on inflation 
rising by more than 5%, 5-7 years ahead  
per cent
US CPI <0%
UK CPI<0%*
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
EA CPI <0%
Nov
2007
Feb May Aug Nov Feb May Aug Nov Feb
2008
2009
per cent
US CPI >5%
EA CPI >5%
UK CPI>5%*
Nov
2007
Feb May Aug Nov
2008
Feb May Aug Nov Feb
2009
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
Sources: Bloomberg, RBS and Bank calculations 
Chart 12: Central banks’ balance sheets as a 
percentage of GDP(a) 
Sources: Bloomberg, RBS and Bank calculations 
Chart 13: UK M4 money growth compared to 
wider measure of money growth(a) 
Percentage changes on a year earlier
Wider measure of 
broad money (a)
M4-IOFCs
M4
25
20
15
10
5
0
-5
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009
 
Source:  Bank of England. 
(a)  Wider measure of UK broad money is M4 plus:  resident 
foreign currency deposits; cross-border sterling and foreign 
currency deposits by non-banks; and local government 
deposits. 
 
Sources:  Bank of England, Bank of Japan, Federal 
Reserve, Thomson Datastream, www.measuringworth.org 
and Bank calculations. 
 
(a) Bank of England balance sheet data:  end-February 
1914–66, end-year 1967–2008.  UK GDP:  annual data 
(nominal).  Federal Reserve balance sheet data:  end-
 
year 1914–81, end-July 1982–95, end-year 1996–2008. 
ce 
US GDP:  annual data (nominal).  Bank of Japan balan
sheet data:  end-year.  Japan GDP:  annual data 
(nominal).  Between 1914–51 National Income is used as 
a proxy for Japan’s GDP.  The National Income data point 
for 1945 is unavailable and estimated by the average of 
the 1944 and 1946 data points. 
 
BIS Review 21/2010 
 13
Chart 14: World money growth(a) 
Chart 15: Lending to UK PNFCs by domestic 
and foreign lenders(a)(b) 
Percentage changes on a year earlier
12
Broad money (a)
Wider measure of 
broad money (b)
10
8
6
4
2
0
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009
Sources:  Bank of England, Bank of Japan, Board of 
Governors of the Federal Reserve and ECB. 
 
(a)  Global broad money comprises:  UK (M4), US (M2), 
euro area (M3) and Japan (M2). 
(b)  Wider measure of global broad money also includes 
(if not already in the standard measure):  resident foreig
n 
currency deposits; cross-border local and foreign currency 
deposits by non-banks; and local government deposits. 
 
Foreign resident foreign-ow ned banks (b)
UK resident foreign-ow ned banks
UK-ow ned banks and building societies
Total
£bn
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
-10
-20
-30
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
Sources:  Bank of England and Dealogic. 
(a)  Rolling three-month flows. 
(b)  Estimated using data on syndicated lending flows. 
 14 
 BIS Review 21/2010
