Zeti Akhtar Aziz: The mandate and roles of Asian central banks 
Keynote address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 
Bank of Korea International Conference 2010 “The changing role of central banks”, Seoul, 
31  May 2010. 
 It is my great honour to be invited to speak at the “Bank of Korea International Conference 
2010”, held this year in conjunction with the 60th anniversary of the Bank of Korea. Let me 
take this opportunity to congratulate the Bank of Korea on this special occasion. The Bank of 
Korea  can  take  great  pride  in  its  achievements  during  these  six  decades.  From  its 
establishment  in  June  of  1950,  the  Bank  of  Korea  has  devoted  great  efforts  to  provide  a 
stable and conducive macroeconomic environment and to build an effective financial system 
that has facilitated the growth of the Korean economy and its long-term sustainability. 
This recent decade has been the most challenging for policymakers, in particular, for Central 
Banks. In the late 1990s, the Asian region was confronted with a severe crisis, and about a 
decade  later,  the  world  was  confronted  with  a  financial  crisis  of  unprecedented  global 
proportions. While Asia was adversely affected by these crises, there was a rapid return to 
recovery, both during the Asian financial crisis and during this recent global financial crisis. 
For  the  Bank  of  Korea,  the  courageous  policy  responses  to  some  of  the  very  tough 
challenges  presented  during  these  episodes  can  be  judged  by  the  results  that  have  been 
achieved.  There  is  now  a  cause  for  optimism  in  the  present  circumstance.  Korea  is 
recognised as one of the economies that has been the fastest to recover from the crisis. The 
exceptional work by the Bank of Korea has  been an important element in this unwavering 
resilience of the Korean economy. 
As the nature of globalisation changes and as financial innovation intensifies, the world has 
become  more  complex  and  less  predictable.  While  the  trend  for  greater  trade  orientation 
continues, changes in comparative  advantage  and  shifts in the direction of global demand 
have transformed the trade patterns in the global economy. In addition, the financialisation of 
savings  and  the  increased  diversification  of  these  funds  into  financial  markets  have 
increased  the  impact  of  these  markets  on  the  real  economy  as  the  performance  of  these 
markets  experience  booms  and  bust.  The  greater  integration  of  financial  markets  across 
borders  has  also  increased  the  potential  for  its  effects  to  be  rapidly  transmitted  from  one 
financial system to another market in another part of the world. In this new environment, the 
greater  interdependence  arising  from  the  stronger  interlinkages  between  economies  and 
financial systems have thus significantly raised the risk for contagion. 
At  the  same  time,  new  economic  growth  centres  have  emerged  that  are  shaping  the 
economic  and  financial  landscape  of  the  world  economy.  Emerging  economies  in  Latin 
America, the Middle East and Asia have become important centres in the global economy. 
These trends have resulted in an increasingly multi-polar world in which the economic power 
is  more  dispersed  in  the  global  economy.  In  Asia,  the  growing  significance  of  domestic 
demand,  the  enhanced  quality  of  the  workforce  and  the  more  developed  and  resilient 
financial  systems  have  all  contributed  to  this  strong  growth  performance.  While  the  strong 
global linkages continue to be an important element in this growth process, this decade has 
seen  the  tremendous  expansion  in  intra-regional  trade  in  Asia.  Intra-regional  trade  has 
increased  from  32%  of  total  trade  in  1995  to  now  exceed  50%.  This  trend  has  generated 
mutually reinforcing growth in the region. 
While this trend has reduced the extent to which external demand and supply shocks affect 
the Asian region, the more recent phenomenon of greater international financial integration 
has left no country insulated from the contagion of external shocks and from financial crisis 
from  other  parts  of  the  world.  In  this  new  environment  of  greater  international  financial 
BIS Review 74/2010 
 1
integration, developments in one asset class in a market in a distant country can spread to 
other asset classes, markets and to other parts of the world. Financial exposure through third 
markets  are  also  becoming  the  new  norm  as  liquidation  of  assets  frequently  occur  in  well 
functioning  and  high  performing  markets  to  meet  obligations  in  other  markets  that  have 
experienced  disruptions  or  meltdowns.  This  was  evident  in  the  post-Lehman  period  which 
saw  massive  outflows  from  the  Asian  region  following  the  deleveraging  by  the  financial 
sector in several of the advanced economies. The increased connectivity of the world means 
that  systemic  risk  events  will  become  more  widespread  and  significant  compared  to 
previously. 
These  fundamental  changes  in  the  national  and  international  financial  environment  have 
prompted the search for solutions that would reduce the prospect of such financial disasters 
from  happening  in  the  future.  This  search  has  involved  the  reassessment  of  the  role  that 
should be assigned to Central Banks. It is important to recognise however, that there is no 
unique blueprint for the design of the institutional arrangements for a Central Bank and that it 
needs to be relevant and suited to its own circumstances. Indeed, the roles of Central Banks 
have  varied  considerably  and  have  ranged  from  having  a  narrow  mandate  of  maintaining 
price  stability  to  more  broader  mandates  that  have  included  maintaining  financial  stability, 
undertaking  the  supervisory  and  regulatory  function  of  the  financial  sector,  maintaining 
orderly  financial  markets,  addressing  financial  imbalances,  leading  the  financial  resolution 
initiatives in the management of a crisis and finally, driving the development of the financial 
system.  My  remarks  today  will  focus  on  the  mandate  and  role  of  Central  Banks  from  the 
perspective of emerging economies, and more specifically, in the context of Asia.  
National roles 
This recent two decades, have witnessed radical reforms of Central Banks in several parts of 
the world, generating widespread debate on two specific trends that have emerged. The first 
relates to the shift in focus to the single mandate of price stability as being the core function 
of  Central  Banks.  This  has  been  frequently  accompanied  by  the  adoption  of  the  inflation 
targeting  framework.  The  second  relates  to  the  establishment  of  a  separate  entity  to 
undertake the supervisory function of banks, although more than half of the Central Banks 
around the world still have the responsibility of the supervisory function. In the aftermath of 
the  recent  global  financial  crisis,  the  search  for  the  appropriate  framework  for  monetary 
stability  and  for  the  optimal  institutional  structure  for  financial  sector  regulation  and 
supervision continues, perhaps now with greater earnest.  
Prior  to  the  recent  financial  crisis,  the  predominant  view  was  that  Central  Banks  should 
pursue  “one  tool  and  one  target”  policy  strategy.  Based  on  this  view,  the  best  role  for  the 
Central Bank in pursuing macroeconomic stability and prosperity was to ensure that inflation 
remains low. This recent crisis has changed this perception. Maintaining price stability and 
financial stability  is  a  means  to  an end.  The  ultimate  goal  is  surely  to achieve  sustainable 
economic growth and prosperity. Maintaining orderly financial markets has also now become 
an  important  role  for  Central  Banks  given  the  implications  it  has  on  the  functioning  and 
performance of the real economy. 
For the emerging economies in Asia, ensuring orderly financial markets has always been an 
important  role  for  the  Central  Banks  in  the  region.  Given  the  stage  of  development  of  the 
financial  markets  and  its  relative  size  in  the  international  financial  system,  disorderly 
conditions that do not self equilibrate generally threaten to undermine the performance of the 
real economy. This was evident during the Asian financial crisis in 1997 and 1998. Ten years 
hence, several financial reforms and initiatives have been implemented by the region. These 
reforms include deregulation and instilling greater market orientation, the development of the 
domestic  financial  infrastructure  and  the  supporting  legislation,  increasing  the  range  of 
instruments  at  the  disposal  of  the  Central  Bank  and  strengthening  the  surveillance 
capabilities of the Central Bank. 
2 
 BIS Review 74/2010
to 
tremendous  payoffs 
the  Asian  region.  The 
These  developments  have  yielded 
strengthened resilience that has been achieved has enabled most financial markets in Asia 
to  absorb  the  destabilising  implications  of  the  recent  global  financial  market  turmoil.  Most 
importantly, there was no disruption to our financial intermediation process. This has not only 
allowed  the  markets  to  facilitate  the  transmission  of  policy  but  it  has  also  supported  the 
recovery of private sector economic activity. 
Equally  important  has  been  the  role  of  the  Central  Bank  in  addressing  the  build  up  of 
financial imbalances which would not only have an impact on financial stability, but also on 
macroeconomic  stability.  While  interest  rates  have  been  an  important  tool  to  address  the 
build  up  of  such  financial  imbalances,  most  Central  Banks  in  Asia  have  placed  greater 
reliance on macroprudential measures. Prudential measures applied since the 1990s have 
been successful in containing the build up of such financial imbalances, thus reducing the 
risk to financial stability.  
The  world  going  forward  is  likely  to  continue  to  be  affected  by  financial  crisis.  History  has 
shown that there have been more than a hundred distinct banking crises in these two recent 
decades. The prospect of surviving such a crisis is not only about building resilience but also 
having  the  capacity  to  manage  it.  The  institutional  arrangements  for  financial  stability 
continue to be a key area of debate. The main issues have tended to centre on the role of 
the  central  bank  in  financial  stability,  and  whether  there  should  be  a  single  or  multiple 
supervisory  authorities.  Given  that  the  central  bank  is  the  lender-of-last-resort,  the  central 
bank is invariably in the frontline of the actions to restore stability. While there is no general 
agreement on the optimal structure for the supervision function, it is recognised that financial 
systems have become increasingly complex and interconnected. Whether a country adopts 
an integrated model or a model that is organized along sectoral lines, effective coordination 
is critical to effectively safeguard financial stability. 
As the entity responsible for monetary policy, the Central Bank undertakes surveillance on 
macroeconomic  conditions  and  in  undertaking  open  money  market  operations  and  the 
management of international reserves, the Central Bank has direct contact with the financial 
markets. The Central Bank is thus able to gain valuable insights that contribute towards a 
more  informed  financial  supervision,  including  in  the  design  and  implementation  of 
macroprudential policy measures. The Central Bank is also best positioned to evaluate the 
tradeoffs  should  conflicting  objectives  arise.  In  such  situations,  a  fragmented  institutional 
arrangement frequently results in delays and compromises in policy responses. In addition, 
there would also be a lack of clarity of the accountability for the decisions. 
Finally, the Central Bank also performs a critical role in crisis containment and management, 
in  particular,  to  provide  liquidity,  to  prevent  disruptions  to  the  functioning  of  the  financial 
system and to restore stability and confidence to the financial system. To avoid a piecemeal 
approach by any individual agency in the system and to ensure a comprehensive response 
to the financial crisis, the institutional arrangements for greater coordination across agencies 
is essential to allow for prompt action that may include a range of measures such as capital 
injections,  debt  guarantees  and  asset  purchases  in  the  effort  to  contain  and  manage  the 
crisis. 
Regional roles 
At  the  regional  level,  the  role  of  the  Central  Banks  in  East  Asia  has  in  this  decade, 
transitioned  to  a  new  level  of  collaboration  and  cooperation.  Following  the  Asian  financial 
crisis,  efforts  have  focused  on  five  main  areas,  namely,  to  enhance  the  effectiveness  of 
regional  economic  and  financial  surveillance,  to  improve  the  arrangements  for  regional 
crisis  management  that  is  reinforced  by  regional  support  mechanisms,  to  develop  the 
regional  financial  infrastructure  including  the  bond  market  and  the  payments  and 
settlement system, to strengthen regional financial stability, and finally, to pursue capacity 
BIS Review 74/2010 
 3
building  collaboratively,  so  as  to  enhance  the  effectiveness  of  the  Central  Banks  in  the 
region. 
The priority for Asia going forward is to accelerate regional financial integration. To ensure 
this  takes  place  in  an  environment  of  regional  stability,  strengthening  cooperation  is  also 
aimed at managing the risks and vulnerabilities of the region. In 2006, the East Asian Central 
Banks have established a monetary and financial stability committee as a forum to discuss 
the  risks  to  regional  macroeconomic  and  financial  stability.  In  addition,  the  ASEAN+3,  a 
subset  of  this  group,  has  already  taken  concrete  steps  to  multilateralise  the  Chiang  Mai 
Initiative into a more advanced and robust framework for the effective pooling and utilisation 
of liquidity support in the region. While the Asian region is highly diverse, in these key areas 
of  cooperation  and  collaboration,  the  Asian  region  has  demonstrated  its  cohesiveness  in 
coming together to deal with the challenges that the new environment presents to us. 
Conclusion 
Let  me  now  conclude.  The  world  has  changed  and  will  continue  to  change.  To  remain 
effective in the new environment and to have the capacity to respond to the new challenges, 
Central Banks also need to undertake its own transformation and modernisation. Moreover, 
in preserving the independence of the Central Bank and to be able to stand our ground in 
performing  our  responsibilities,  Central  Banks  need  to  be  standing  on  solid  ground.  This 
requires continuous capability enhancement and capacity building so as to be well positioned 
to  have  the  ability  to  rise  to  the  challenges  of  the  new  environment.  This  may  involve 
significant changes to the governance arrangements, the empowering legislation, the skills 
required, the role of communications, the human capital management and development and 
the organisational culture. Indeed, capacity building is a further robust area of collaboration in 
the Asian region.  
Going  forward,  Asia’s  participation  in  the  global  economic  and  financial  system  is  set  to 
increase exponentially. As the countries of the region connect with each other and the rest of 
the  world,  there  is  every  reason  to  hope  for  a  better  future  of  sustained  stability  and 
enhanced growth prospects for the benefit of the regional and world economy. 
4 
 BIS Review 74/2010
