William C Dudley: Remarks at the Regional Employment Press Briefing 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  2010  Regional  Employment  Press  Briefing,  New  York, 
14 April 2010. 
 Good  morning  and  welcome  to  the  New  York  Fed’s  2010  Regional  Employment  Press 
Briefing. 
The past few years have been an extraordinary time for policymakers. We have been very 
aggressive  in  providing support  to  the  economy  and  it  now  appears  that  we  are  emerging 
from a deep and protracted recession. Economic activity expanded over the second half of 
2009,  suggesting  that  a  recovery  has  begun.  While  we  continue  to  receive  encouraging 
news, growth is likely to be muted compared with the early stages of past recoveries. As a 
result, the unemployment rate is likely to decline over the near term at a very gradual pace, if 
at all. 
In the labor market, employment has begun to expand. We hope this is the beginning of a 
sustained period of job growth. Total employment shrank by roughly 8 million jobs since the 
peak of the cycle, and the current unemployment rate of 9.7 percent remains unacceptably 
high. 
At the regional level, here in the New York-New Jersey region, the labor market was not hit 
as hard as in many areas in the country, and the pace of job losses in our region has eased. 
Nevertheless, the unemployment rate in New York and New Jersey has risen to levels not 
seen in almost two decades. 
In  New  York  City,  employment  has  typically  recovered  more  than  a  year  later  than  the 
recovery of national employment and has, in the past, been led by a recovery of Wall Street 
employment.  Although  Upstate  New  York  has  seen  little  overall  job  growth  for  the  past 
several decades, job losses in this downturn were not as severe as losses for the nation, in 
part, because the upstate metro areas did not experience a boom-and-bust housing cycle. In 
addition,  Puerto  Rico,  which  is  also  part  of  our  District,  has  experienced  a  considerably 
longer and deeper downturn than the mainland or this region. 
Before I continue, it is important to explain the integral role of the Federal Reserve System in 
regional economies across the country. One of our key responsibilities here at the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York is to connect the Federal Reserve System to Main Street across 
our District. Real activity takes place on Main Street in the form of the millions of decisions 
made every day by households and businesses around the country. When we talk to them, 
we learn how firms and consumers are experiencing the economy. 
That essential insight from Main Street informs the policy decisions that we make in pursuit 
of our goals of stable prices, full employment and financial stability. Staying connected with 
Main  Street  is  also  important  because  the  effectiveness  of  our  policy  actions  is  enhanced 
when  private  actors  have  a  clear  understanding  of  what  our  actions  are  intended  to 
accomplish.  For  these  complex  policy  decisions,  the  Federal  Reserve  System  needs 
accurate and timely information on business and financial conditions, and the perspectives of 
participants in markets throughout the United States. 
Economic conditions often differ in various parts of the country, and it is important that the 
Fed takes all of this into account when it formulates policy. This input is particularly important 
for the Second District of the Federal Reserve, where we sit today, because the forces that 
drive  economic  conditions  here  often  do  not  mirror  the  forces  driving  other  regional 
economies. 
BIS Review 49/2010 
 1
In  order  to  monitor  and  understand  the  various  aspects  of  local  economic  conditions,  we 
utilize a number of different measures. Two of these measures we have developed here at 
the  New  York  Fed  –  a  survey  of  manufacturers  and  indexes  of  economic  activity.  We 
regularly  produce  the  Beige  Book  and  report  information  on  local  credit  conditions.  These 
measures supplement and extend the understanding gleaned from public data sources. We 
also  seek  input  from  regular  meetings  with  several  advisory  groups  representing  different 
facets of the District’s economy – such as our Small Business, Upstate New York and Thrift 
Institutions panels – and from interactions with key academic researchers at local universities 
and public policy organizations. 
We recognize that timely and accurate information about our region, which is highly valuable 
to us, can also help to reduce uncertainty and inform the economic and financial decisions of 
regional  residents,  businesses,  communities  and  governments.  To  that  end,  we  make  our 
various  regional  measures  and  analysis  available  to  the  public  through  our  website  and  a 
variety  of  outreach  activities.  These  activities  include  making  presentations  on  topics  of 
current concern to business and community organizations throughout the District. 
We  welcome  you  here  today  to  brief  you  on  our  views  of  the  current  state  of  activity  and 
employment  in  the  regional  economy  and  to  review  the  rich  portfolio  of  resources  that  we 
make available to help monitor economic conditions across the region. 
2 
 BIS Review 49/2010
