Jürgen Stark: Taking stock – where do we stand in the crisis? 
Speech by Mr Jürgen Stark, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at  the  BMW  (Bayerische  Motoren  Werke)  Stiftung  Herbert  Quandt,  Washington  DC, 
15 April 2010. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
 Introduction: macroeconomic developments and outlook 
In  autumn  2008,  the  world  economy  entered  the  worst  financial  crisis  and  the  deepest 
recession  since  the  Great  Depression.  Both  monetary  and  fiscal  policies  responded 
vigorously to this exceptional situation and contributed to the emergence of a recovery in the 
course of 2009. 
Hence, after falling last year, global activity is expected to grow by around 4% this year, while 
global trade is expected to grow by almost 6% (IMF January WEO update). Strong growth in 
emerging  market  economies  in  Asia  is  a  major  driving  force  behind  these  figures,  while 
growth in many advanced economies is forecast to be weak. Questions can be raised as to 
whether such an uneven pattern of the recovery will prove sustainable. 
In the euro area, recent information indicates that the recovery has continued to expand in 
the first few months of this year. Looking forward, euro area growth is expected to remain 
moderate, owing to ongoing balance sheet adjustments in the private sector, weak prospects 
for the labour market and low capacity utilisation. Available growth forecasts for 2010 put it 
at,  on  average,  around  1%.  The  crisis  is  also  expected  to  have  lasting  effects  on  our 
economy, as both the level and the growth rate of potential output are most likely reduced for 
a longer time. 
Turning  to  price  developments  in  the  euro  area,  according  to  Eurostat’s  flash  estimate, 
annual  inflation  increased  to  1.5%  in  March,  from  0.9%  in  February.  This  was higher  than 
expected. While this does not change our assessment, it is important to understand whether 
the  surge  in  inflation  in  March  is  temporary  or  more  lasting  in  nature.  This  is  difficult  to 
assess without a breakdown of developments  in the overall HICP, which will only become 
available  tomorrow  (16  April).  However,  it  seems  reasonable  to  consider  energy  and  food 
prices as the main drivers behind the higher than expected inflation outcome in March. 
Looking  ahead,  we  expect  inflation  in  the  euro  area  to  remain  moderate  over  the  policy-
relevant  horizon.  The  outcome  of  our  monetary  analysis  confirms  the  assessment  of  low 
inflationary pressures over the medium term, with money and credit growth remaining weak. 
At the same time, we need to monitor price developments in the more dynamic regions of the 
world very closely, as well as the evolution of commodity prices and their potential impact on 
global  inflation.  Notably,  a  multi-speed  recovery  of  the  world  economy,  with  some  regions 
growing  fast,  while  the  recovery  in  others  remains  rather  slow,  has  the  potential  to  exert 
upward  pressure  on  prices.  In  the  same  vein,  we  also  need  to  monitor  very  closely  the 
possible adverse impact from fiscal developments on the inflation outlook. All in all, risks to 
the inflation outlook seem to be tilted to the upside. 
This  notwithstanding,  inflation  expectations  remain  firmly  anchored  in  line  with  our  aim  of 
keeping inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. 
Let me turn to the banking sector. Adjustments are continuing in light of a re-focusing on core 
business and markets, the necessary re-organisation arising from state aid and forthcoming 
changes  to  regulatory  environment.  Although  there  have  been  improvements,  profitability 
remains subdued. Further credit-related write-downs are expected throughout this year, and 
BIS Review 51/2010 
 1
the risk of a negative feedback loop emerging between the household and corporate sectors 
and the banks persists. Banks’ may remain under pressure to continue the process of de-
leveraging,  with  possible  credit  constraints  impacting  on  economic  growth  in  the  event  of 
credit demand picking up. 
Thus, although the response of policy-makers to the crisis has certainly helped to avert an 
even more dramatic collapse in economic activity in the euro area and elsewhere, challenges 
abound.  Indeed,  most  advanced  economies  will  continue  to  face  severe  macroeconomic 
imbalances  in  the  years  to  come.  I  am  particularly  concerned  about  the  dramatic 
deterioration in public finances, which will require very ambitious fiscal consolidation efforts in 
the  years  to  come.  We  may  already  have  entered  into  the  next  phase  of  the  crisis:  a 
sovereign debt crisis following on the financial and economic crisis. 
Fiscal policy challenges  
Most  governments  in  the  advanced  countries  will  exit  from  the  recession  with  the  highest 
deficit and debt-to-GDP ratios recorded in times of peace. 
 2 
 BIS Review 51/2010
  As can bee seen in the chart, the general government deficit in the euro area is expected, 
according to the latest projections by the European Commission, to exceed 6.0% of GDP in 
2009,  2010  and  2011.  In  Japan,  the  government  deficit-to-GDP  ratio  is  foreseen  to  reach 
around  9.0%  of  GDP  in  these  years,  whereas  the  UK  and  US  government  deficits  are 
expected to be in excess of 10.0% of GDP in the period 2009–11. These high government 
deficits are reflected in mounting government debt, which will reach 88% of GDP in 2011 in 
both the euro area and the United Kingdom, 100% of GDP in the United States and 200% of 
GDP in Japan. 
These  developments  are  the  consequence  of  sizeable  fiscal  stimulus  measures  and  of 
interventions in support of financial institutions in many advanced countries, but also of the 
sharp contraction in economic activity. 
In the euro area, adverse fiscal developments are a cause of particular concern in several 
countries,  generally  those  that  did  not  exploit  more  buoyant  economic  times  to  firmly 
consolidate their  public finances.  In  the  United States,  too,  some  States  (e.g.  Arizona  and 
California) have adopted a less prudent approach to the management of their public finances 
than others. 
BIS Review 51/2010 
 3
  4 
 BIS Review 51/2010
There is no doubt that fiscal policies have been put on a path that is not sustainable. Indeed, 
as simulations for the euro area show, without a very ambitious fiscal adjustment effort, the 
debt ratio is projected to continue rising in the next decades. With an annual structural deficit 
reduction of only 0.5% of GDP, it will take the euro area 20 years or more to return to the 
pre-crisis  debt-to-GDP  level.  Substantially  stronger  consolidation  efforts  are  warranted  to 
bring the debt ratio down to a more prudent level of below 60% of GDP and to prepare for 
the rising budgetary costs of the ageing population. 
  5
BIS Review 51/2010 
 The challenges are particularly large for countries with relatively high government deficit and 
debt  levels,  as  well  as  a  rapidly  ageing  society,  and  even  more  so  for  those  that  face 
relatively high interest rates and low potential growth. 
Outside  the  euro  area,  bringing  the  public  debt  ratio  back  to  safer  regions  appears  even 
harder for the United Kingdom, the United States and Japan. Given their high budget deficits 
and the high and rising debt levels, they must undertake very strong consolidation efforts to 
manage a reversal of the rising trend in public debt ratios. 
 Growing  fiscal  imbalances,  if  not  promptly  corrected,  are  a  cause  of  concern  for  several 
reasons. Let me focus on the three most important ones. 
First, high levels of government budget deficits and debt may push up inflation expectations 
and  place  an  additional  burden  on  the  monetary  policy  of  central  banks  and  their  task  of 
maintaining price stability. 
Second, large fiscal imbalances may drive up (real) medium and longer-term interest rates, 
with adverse consequences for private investment. Given the large debt financing needs of 
many advanced countries, this constitutes a serious risk for the recovery. Moreover, rising 
interest  expenditure  on  government  debt  reduces  the  scope  for  public  spending  on  other, 
growth-enhancing items. Taken together, this would reduce long-term growth, especially in 
countries with high debt ratios. 
Third,  deteriorated  fiscal  positions  severely  limit  the  ability  of  governments  to  counter 
adverse shocks, given the reduced budgetary room for the operation of automatic stabilizers. 
In addition, large budgetary imbalances reduce the scope for fiscal stimulus measures, and 
6 
 BIS Review 51/2010
their effectiveness, as a fiscal expansion in the context of high and rising government debt 
may trigger an increase in precautionary savings and show negative fiscal multipliers. 
Against this background, it is now of the utmost importance that national fiscal policy-makers 
rapidly implement a credible and ambitious consolidation agenda. While fiscal consolidation 
may entail some costs in terms of lower economic growth in the short run, their longer-term 
benefits are largely undisputed. 
They consist, notably, of a reduction in governments’ debt financing needs, leading both to 
lower  long-term  interest  rates  (due  to  lower  demand  and  declining  risk  premia)  and  to  the 
release  of  revenues  to  finance  more  productive  expenditure  or  growth-enhancing  tax  cuts. 
More leeway is then also created for the operation of automatic fiscal stabilizers in response 
to a cyclical downturn. In sum, fiscal consolidation is essential to secure public trust in the 
long-term  sustainability  of  public  finances,  and  to  strengthen  the  foundations  for  sustained 
and durable growth. 
At the European level, fiscal consolidation should be in line with EU countries’ commitments 
under  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact,  which  provides  the  appropriate  framework  for  the 
coordination of their fiscal policies. Given past experience of a slow and hesitant correction of 
excessive  deficits,  I  see  strong  arguments  for  strengthening  the  implementation  of  the 
Stability  and  Growth  Pact  and  reinforcing  its  rules  for  fiscal  discipline.  This  could  be 
complemented with enhanced national budgetary rules and procedures that are consistent 
with the EU fiscal framework. 
Monetary policy challenges 
Let me now turn to monetary policy and focus, in particular, on the response of the ECB to 
the crisis, and its current exit strategies. 
In  response  to  the  crisis  and  the  ensuing  subdued  inflationary  pressures,  the  Governing 
Council  lowered  its  key  interest  rates  to  historically  low  levels.  In  particular,  it  reduced  its 
main refinancing rate by 325 basis points to 1%, a level not seen in recent history in any of 
the euro area countries. Overall, the Governing Council still views these low policy rates as 
appropriate. 
To foster financing conditions and facilitate the transmission of lower key ECB interest rates 
to money market and bank lending rates, the Governing Council also introduced a number of 
non-standard measures. Notably, the Eurosystem provided unlimited liquidity to banks at a 
fixed  interest  rate  and  at  maturities  of  up  to  one  year.  It  also  provided  liquidity  in  foreign 
currencies,  extended  the  list  of  eligible  collateral  and  purchased  covered  bonds  outright. 
These measures have contributed not only to lowering perceived liquidity risks on the part of 
banks, but also to a better flow of credit to households and firms than would otherwise have 
been the case. 
The ECB’s approach differs from that of some other central banks in many respects. Notably, 
our outright purchases of securities have been limited to the covered bond market, a market 
segment  that  is  very  important  in  Europe  and  a  primary  source  of  financing  for  banks. 
Moreover, we have refrained from buying government bonds. 
BIS Review 51/2010 
 7
 This  has  been  different  in  other  regions,  especially  in  the  United  States  and  the  United 
Kingdom, as you can see from this slide. Notably, in providing extra liquidity, we have relied 
primarily on repurchase agreements (red parts of bars), whereas the United States and the 
United Kingdom have focused on buying securities outright (blue parts of bars). 
From  the  very  beginning,  we  have  been  aware  of  the  fact  that  keeping  our  non-standard 
measures  in  place  for  longer  than  necessary  would  entail  the  danger  of  creating  harmful 
distortions. Therefore, we designed the measures with exit considerations in mind. In view of 
the improvements in financial market conditions seen since last spring, we have started to 
gradually phase out some of them. 
More  specifically,  we  have  stopped  providing  liquidity  in  foreign  currencies,  and  we  have 
stopped operations involving maturities longer than three months. Also, we have decided to 
return to variable rate tenders in the regular three-month operations towards the end of this 
month. 
However, the Eurosystem will continue to provide liquidity support to the euro area banking 
system at very favourable conditions in its shorter-term refinancing operations (that mature 
after one week and after approximately one month). We have decided to do this for as long 
as necessary and at least until mid-October this year. 
The speed and path of the subsequent gradual phasing-out of the non-standard measures 
will depend on economic and financial market developments. The remaining measures are 
not  many.  They  include,  inter  alia,  the  tender  procedures  to  be  applied  in  the  main 
refinancing  operations  and  the  operations  with  a  duration  of  one  maintenance  period, 
approximately one month (which could be returned to variable rate tenders). All our actions 
will remain fully in line with the objective of maintaining price stability over the medium term. 
We do not know today what normality will look like after the crisis. Likewise, we cannot be 
specific  today  about  the  design  of  the  “final”  post-crisis  operational  framework.  Before 
8 
 BIS Review 51/2010
deciding on this, we will need to consider thoroughly the lessons to be learnt from the crisis. 
However,  the  operational  framework  that  prevailed  prior  to  the  turmoil  seems  to  provide  a 
good  benchmark.  It  served  us  well  prior  to  the  crisis,  and  could  be  adapted  quickly  as 
circumstances worsened. 
Concluding remarks 
Let me conclude. 
There  is  no  doubt  that  the  crisis  will  leave  us  a  heritage  of  severe  macroeconomic 
imbalances. Dealing with them will represent one of the most daunting challenges for policy-
makers in modern history. 
Against this backdrop, let me emphasise that the Governing Council will continue to deliver 
on its mandate, which is to maintain price stability over the medium term. All our decisions 
regarding an exit from supportive measures need to be seen within this context. 
As regards fiscal policies, it is essential to prevent public finances from running out of control. 
Clearly, this will require a very ambitious fiscal consolidation effort. In particular, as regards 
the consolidation strategy, and given that the tax burden is already high in many countries, 
the fiscal adjustment will have to be primarily expenditure-based. 
Finally,  let  me  stress  that  any  call  to  reduce  the  real  value  of  public  debt  through  higher 
inflation will be firmly opposed by the ECB. A low and stable level of inflation is a prerequisite 
for confidence, stability and sustainable growth. 
Thank you. 
Background slides 
BIS Review 51/2010 
  9
 10 
 BIS Review 51/2010
