Jean-Claude Trichet: Shaping a new world – the crisis and global 
economic governance 
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, for a lecture at 
Bocconi University, Milano, 9 April 2010. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen: 
It is a real pleasure to be back at Bocconi University, after having been here two years ago.  
Going  through  my  remarks  then,  I  was  struck  at  how  much  has  changed  in  the  world 
economy in so short a period.  
My  intervention  took  place  a  few  months  before  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers,  which 
marked the peak of the global financial crisis. Back in the spring of 2008, we were keenly 
aware  of  the  risks  ahead  but  few  could  have  imagined  the  proportions  of  what  eventually 
came to happen in the autumn of the same year.  
According  to  the  calculations  made  by  two  economists,  Barry  Eichengreen  and  Kevin 
O’Rourke,  the  initial  decline  in  global  production  between  mid-2008  and  mid-2009  was 
broadly  comparable  with  that  between  mid-1929  and  mid-1930,  i.e.  during  the  Great 
Depression,  while  the  corresponding  correction  in  global  equity  prices  and  global  trade 
volumes were even larger.1 
However, the good news is that the global economy has now turned the corner, also thanks 
to  the  unprecedented  support  measures  taken  by  both  central  banks  and  governments, 
which  have  helped  restore  confidence.  Global  financial  and  economic  conditions  have 
improved  significantly  over  2009.  According  to  the  latest  projections  published  by  the 
International Monetary Fund (IMF), global output is expected to rise by about 4 percent this 
year after a contraction of about half a percent last year.  
However, the recovery remains fragile. In Europe, we expect it to be modest and we do not 
exclude a bumpy road ahead of us. Available indicators suggest that the economic recovery 
in the euro area is on track, although it is likely to remain uneven. Inflation is expected to 
remain  moderate  over  the  policy-relevant  horizon.  Activity  remains  dependent  on  past 
support  measures  to  a  significant  extent.  Central  banks  have  started  to  implement  their 
gradual  exit  from  non-standard  support  measures  and  it  is  of  paramount  importance  that 
governments implement rigorously consolidation strategies in the near future.  
Above all, we cannot afford to be again in such a dramatic situation at the global level, nor 
can we expect taxpayers to be ready to put again as much as 25 percent of GDP at risk in 
order to avert a collapse in the financial sector.  
We  have  an  absolute  obligation  to  make  the  global  financial  system  more  solid  and 
sustainable, and the international community is keenly aware of this need. 
 In my remarks today, I will focus on global governance and in particular on the lessons that 
can be drawn from the extraordinary events of the past two years. I will first elaborate on why 
we  need  a  set  of  rules,  institutions  and  international  relations  that  we  call  “global 
governance”.  Second,  I  will  analyse  how,  in  hindsight,  the  existing  global  governance  has 
                                                 
1   See B. Eichengreen and K.H. O’Rourke’s three columns on VoxEU (including the one entitled “What do the 
new data tell us?” of 8 March 2010, http://www.voxeu.org/index.php?q=node/3421). 
BIS Review 46/2010 
 1
fared during the global financial crisis. Finally, I will deal with the evolution of the system as a 
response to the crisis, and in particular I will discuss the rise of new key players in the world 
economy such as the G20 and the Financial Stability Board.  
Being in Italy, I cannot resist mentioning the teachings of Nicolò Machiavelli. He has become 
known worldwide for his pessimistic and cynical attitude towards power, but in fact one of his 
main messages was that freedom is not possible without rules, i.e. without good institutions. 
For example, in his Discorsi he admires the Roman Republic where rules and the respect for 
law allowed men to be free – in contrast with what he saw with his contemporaries, who were 
corrupt and unable to stick to rules and therefore needed a tyrant. A famous sentence of his 
is “un principe che può fare ciò ch’ei vuole è pazzo; un popolo che può fare ciò che vuole 
non è savio”.2 
Likewise, economic freedom is not possible without an adequate set of rules and this is valid 
both within countries as well as in the international realm. 
Why do we need global economic governance? 
1. 
Let  me  begin  by  explaining  what  we  mean  by  “global  economic  governance”  and  why  we 
need it. By global economic governance we mean, at least in the economic sphere, the set of 
supra-national institutions and laws as well as the international relations between countries 
that have an effect on cross-border economic and financial transactions.  
Indeed, no market, even the market in the back street, can survive without an institutional 
infrastructure, i.e. a set of rules and this is particularly true at the international level, where 
natural barriers to transactions are already formidable. I therefore agree with the late Horst 
Siebert that one of global governance’s primary aims should be that of reducing transaction 
costs,  and  that  the  process  of  doing  so  is  evolutionary  and  characterised  by  continuous 
change and learning by doing.3 One therefore needs to maintain a pragmatic approach with 
respect  to  what  arrangements  may  work  and  not  work  in  facilitating  trade  and  keeping 
transaction costs low, depending on the circumstances. 
Moreover, the more complex and durable the goods and services exchanged, the larger the 
need  for  a  sound  institutional  infrastructure.  In  this  respect,  finance  stands  out  as  a  field 
where global rules may be particular beneficial. More generally, the crisis has weakened the 
arguments  of  those  who  think  that  de-regulation  is  always  and  necessarily  conducive  to  a 
better  functioning  of  markets;  we  have  learnt  again  that  markets  cannot  function  properly 
without a proper regulatory and supervisory infrastructure. 
Of course, there are clear limits to what internationally agreed rules can and should achieve.  
First, the principle of subsidiarity remains valid, implying that no rule should be imposed at a 
global level that cannot be more or equally effectively set at the local level. Incidentally, this 
principle is enshrined in the Lisbon Treaty and is therefore part of primary EU law; the Lisbon 
Treaty,  in  particular,  has  explicitly  recognised  a  role  for  national  Parliaments  in  monitoring 
subsidiarity in the EU. This principle might also imply that the “burden of the proof” should 
rest on those who want to establish global, as opposed to local, rules and institutions.  
Second, there is a risk that common rules are not optimal and in particular they are too lax, 
since  they  have  to  be  the  “common  minimum  denominator”  across  many  different  local 
positions.4 
                                                 
2   “A prince who can do whatever he wants is mad; a people who can do whatever it wants is unwise”. 
3   Siebert (2008). 
4   See D. Rodrick’s Economic Focus in The Economist of 12 May 2009. 
2 
 BIS Review 46/2010
Third, some argue that imposing a common rule also implies limiting the range of national 
experiences  and  therefore  the  potential  for  learning  about  the  best  institutional  setting.  It 
would therefore prevent the best rules from emerging from free competition among different 
systems.  Finally,  and  perhaps  most  importantly,  it  is  not  easy  to  set  common  rules  in 
particular  in  complex  and  innovative  fields  like  finance.  In  particular,  I  agree  with  the 
assessment of the former BIS General Manager Andrew Crockett made in a recent speech, 
that “To be successful, an international financial architecture has to harness, not run counter 
to, perceived national interests”.5 
The global financial crisis has, however, weakened some of these arguments and shattered 
previously  held  convictions  that  “putting  one’s  house  in  order”  is  the  only  principle  that 
matters  to  ensure  global  welfare,  and  that  international  spillovers  need  not  be  taken  into 
account.  We  have  certainly  become  more  aware  of  the  negative  externalities  that 
globalization,  in  particular  financial  globalization,  can  create.  This  is  epitomised  in  the 
sentence  “the  crisis  is  global,  the  solutions  need  to  be  global”.  In  my  view,  international 
interdependencies are too large for purely national or regional rules to be optimal and there 
is  a  clear  need  to  strengthen  global  governance,  in  particular  in  the  financial  field.  For 
example, the crisis has exposed the risk of regulatory arbitrage, shedding a more negative 
light on the competition among different systems and rules. In addition, the view that local 
governments  are  always  driven  by  the  welfare  of  their  citizens  needs  to  be  qualified,  as 
special  interests  often  matter  a  great  deal.  Those  special  interests  are  likely  to  exert  less 
influence if the rules are agreed on at the international level.6 
How has global economic governance fared during the global financial crisis? 
2. 
Let me now turn to analyse how our global institutions have fared during the global financial 
crisis. 
Global governance in the decades before the financial crisis was characterised by a number 
of multilateral institutions and relations, in particular three key supra-national institutions, the 
IMF, the World Bank and the World Trade Organisation (WTO) were (and still are) in charge 
of  the  international  monetary  system,  long-term  development  and  trade  respectively,  while 
the G7 was the main forum for strategic impulse. To give just one example, I have a vivid 
memory that without the input of the G7 meeting in Halifax in June 1995 the “core principles” 
of the Basel Committee would not have been possible.  
Another distinctive feature of the decade before the financial crisis has been a progressive 
and  largely  beneficial  trade  liberalisation  and  integration,  driven  by  the  WTO.  Trade 
liberalisation  has  reshaped  the  world  economy,  leading  to  the  integration  of  key  emerging 
economies such as China and India in a market-based system, a trend which has benefited 
consumers the world over. At the peak of the crisis, there was a legitimate concern that such 
progresses would be stalled or reversed as countries focused on their own economic growth 
even at the expense of growth elsewhere. Protectionist and “beggar-thy-neighbour” policies 
would  have  certainly  aggravated  the  crisis,  as  they  notoriously  did  in  the  1930s,  and  yet 
somehow  it  could  have  been  expected  in  such  dire  circumstances  and  given  the  political 
difficulties associated to them. A good system is one where these self-defeating pressures 
could  be  resisted.  How  has  the  global  system  fared  in  this  regard?  I  will  look  into  five 
dimensions, namely (i) protectionism, (ii) central bank cooperation, (iii) regulatory arbitrage, 
and (iv) global imbalances.  
                                                 
5   Crockett (2009). 
6   Frieden (2009). 
BIS Review 46/2010 
 3
Protectionism 
2.1 
A systematic look at recent trends in global protectionism indicates that there has so far been 
an only moderate increase in actual protectionist measures to restrict trade through tariff and 
non-tariff barriers. According to the WTO, a significant outbreak of trade protectionism has 
been  avoided  since  the  start  of  the  crisis:  the  new  trade-restricting  or  distorting  measures 
introduced between October 2008 and October 2009 accounted together for 0.8% of world 
imports, while those adopted between September 2009 and February 2010 amounted to an 
additional 0.4% of world imports. 
Yet  more  protectionist  pressures  might  be  on  the  pipeline.  First,  evidence  from  surveys 
shows that public pressure for more economic protection not only has been mounting since 
the mid-2000s, namely well ahead of the crisis, but has intensified since its start. Second, the 
Global Trade Alert, an initiative of a network of five independent research institutes across 
the  world,  reports 
trade-damaging  state  measures  were  announced  by 
G20 members  in  the  14  months  from  November  2008  to  December  2009.  Over  the  same 
period, the G20 passed only 56 measures that benefited importers.7 
This leads me to conclude that in the trade field, while a repetition of the experience of the 
1930s is not in the cards, there is certainly no room for complacency and vigilance needs to 
remain high.8 
that  390 
Central bank cooperation  
2.2 
Another  dimension  of  international  cooperation  that  has  worked  well  during  the  financial 
crisis has been that among central banks, channelled through the various Basel and Bank for 
International  Settlements  (BIS)  committees.  This  institutionalised  cooperation  has  ensured 
an unprecedented degree of collaboration and coordination in the provision of cross border 
liquidity.9 
Information  sharing  among  central  banks  has  also  worked  very  well,  for  example  on  the 
occasion of the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) Global Economy meetings that are 
held every two months in Basel and where central bank governors from systemic economies 
have the occasion to discuss issues the global economic outlook, international monetary and 
financial issues and other issues of mutual interest. Clearly, these fora have turned out to be 
very useful in times of global financial distress and we should continue to invest on them in 
the future.  
I would also like to mention that the BIS as an institution has been “ahead of the curve” in 
terms  of  identifying  unsustainable  trends  in  the  financial  sector  and  more  generally  in  the 
global economy – such as the under-appreciation of risk and excessive credit growth – which 
eventually led to the global financial crisis. It could do so based on a high degree of analytical 
depth and information sharing at a global level that the BIS and the Basel committees have 
been able to develop over time. These analytical contributions have played a non-negligible 
contribution  to  form  the  strong  and  coordinated  policy  response  that  we  have  witnessed 
during the financial crisis.  
                                                 
7   See Baldwin (2010), in particular Chapter 5 by S. J. Evenett. 
8   Model-based simulations (Bussière et al. 2010) suggest that the impairment of the global flow of trade would 
hamper the recovery from the crisis, as well as the long-term growth potential of the global economy. At the 
same  time,  it  is  unlikely  that  protectionism  would  help  to  correct  existing  current  account  imbalances. 
Moreover,  the  countries  implementing  protectionist  measures  should  expect  a  deterioration  of  their 
international competitiveness, which would further affect the potential for longer-term real GDP growth. 
9   See CGFS (2010). 
4 
 BIS Review 46/2010
2.3 
Where the system has fared less well: regulatory arbitrage and global 
imbalances 
As much as global governance appears to have passed the severe test of the global financial 
crisis, we should not remain oblivious to the fact that there were significant shortcomings that 
may have contributed to create the conditions for the crisis to happen in the first place. I will 
mention, in particular, two dimensions: the insufficiencies in terms of financial regulation and 
international coordination, on the one hand, as well as the constellation of global imbalances, 
on the other. Let me deal with both in turn. 
The  lack  of  integration  and  coordination  in  financial  regulation  was  pervasive  before  the 
crisis,  even  though  this  was  not  properly  appreciated  at  the  time,  and  has  encouraged 
financial  institutions  to  engage  in  a  large  degree  of  regulatory  arbitrage.10  This  was  the 
unavoidable result of the fact that, while finance was becoming more and more global, with 
some  financial  institutions  having  operations  in  dozens  of  jurisdictions,  financial  regulation 
has remained largely national, with only some form of mild and non-binding coordination at 
the European and international level. Later, I will discuss how the international community is 
addressing this problem under the leadership of the Financial Stability Board. 
As regards global imbalances the insufficient orientation of macroeconomic policies towards 
the  medium-term,  stability  and  sustainability  led  to  the  build-up  of  unsustainable  external 
imbalances among key deficit and surplus economies prior to the crisis. It is a widely held 
(though  not  totally  uncontroversial11)  opinion  that  excessive  reserve  accumulation  by 
emerging  countries  may  have  made  global  imbalances  too  easy  to  finance,  compressed 
global  interest  rates  and  ultimately  result  in  too  high  risk  taking  and  leverage  in  those 
(advanced) countries that were receiving a large degree of capital inflows, ultimately creating 
the conditions for the financial crisis to unfold.12 Moreover, there was a distinct perception of 
a lack of an effective mechanism to influence macroeconomic and structural policies in key 
countries where those appeared unsustainable from the standpoint of global economic and 
financial stability. In other words, the global public good of international financial stability was 
under-supplied. This is, again, an area where reform is needed.  
The evolution of the system 
3. 
Finally, let me now turn to the question of how the financial crisis has moved the direction or 
the speed at which global governance is moving. Some of these trends are not yet fully clear, 
nor free of challenges, as we shall see. 
From the G7 to the G20 
3.1 
One  distinctive  feature  of  this  crisis  has  been  its  originating  at  the  centre  of  the  system, 
differently from past major crises in the previous three decades (such as the Asian crisis). 
Although emerging countries have also been severely affected, they  have overall been, at 
least  taken  as  a  group,  a  source  of  strength  for  the  world  economy.  It  is  therefore  not 
surprising that the crisis has led to an even better recognition of their increased economic 
importance  and  to  a  better  integration  in  global  governance.  It  is  notable  that  emerging 
markets now represent about one third of world GDP at nominal exchange rates, and close 
to  a  half  in  Purchasing  Power  Parity  (PPP).  To  be  sure,  the  acknowledgement  of  the 
                                                 
10   See, among others, V. Acharya and M. Richardson (eds) (2009): Restoring Financial Stability: How to Repair 
a Failed System, Wiley, March. 
11   See, e.g., Hume and Sentance (2009), in particular pp. 24–25. 
12   See, among others, Obstfeld and Rogoff (2009). 
BIS Review 46/2010 
 5
increased role of emerging countries is a trend which precedes the global financial crisis, but 
that has been made significantly faster, and perceived more pressing, by it.  
Global  governance  –  and  indeed  collective  decision  making  in  general  –  always  faces  a 
trade-off  between  efficiency  and  legitimacy.  With  few,  homogeneous  players  around  the 
table, decisions are taken more quickly and perhaps implemented more easily; but they may 
not  be  seen  as  legitimate  from  those  excluded  from  the  same  table.  Therefore,  devising 
institutions for collective decision making is always a delicate balancing act, even more so at 
the global level. The international community has agreed that, from now on, the G20 is the 
main forum for international economic cooperation and it includes 11 emerging economies. 
The G7 still has a meaningful role to play in particular in the area of floating currencies.  
To be sure, the G20 has already been in existence for over a decade. The main innovation is 
to make it as the key informal forum for strategic global impulse at the level of the leaders as 
well as at the level of Ministers and Governors. 
The G20 Framework 
3.2 
An  important  decision,  taken  at  the  G20  Pittsburgh  summit  in  March  2009,  has  been  the 
G20 Framework on cooperative mutual assessment of members’ policies. I consider this an 
important  step  forward  in  order  to  address  one  of  the  main  shortcomings  of  the  pre-crisis 
regime, namely the lack of a way to ensure that macroeconomic and structural policies of key 
countries take into consideration their external spillovers and in particular the risks that they 
entail  for  the  global  financial  system.  This  should  not  imply  that  the  G20  should  enter  in 
macroeconomic  decisions  on  a  short  term  basis  or  micro-manage  economic  policies,  but 
rather that a mechanism should be put in place in order to evaluate whether medium to long 
term policy objectives are mutually compatible. However, whether this or similar initiatives will 
eventually lead to more multilateralism in economic decision making is still far from obvious, 
and only time will tell.13 
Notably,  the  Framework’s  predecessor,  the  IMF’s  2007  multilateral  surveillance  initiative, 
encountered significant compliance problems, which makes the G20 ownership of the new 
Framework particularly promising and noteworthy. At the same time, we still cannot be sure 
that  the  Framework  will  be  implemented  effectively.  It  is  therefore  paramount  that  the 
international community presses ahead now and fully lives up to the commitments taken in 
the G20 context; in particular, it is important that efforts are maintained even after the most 
acute phase of the global financial crisis appears to be behind us. 
As  far  as  the  EU  and  the  euro  area  are  concerned,  it  is  important  that  the  Framework 
recognises  their  unique  institutional  features,  in  particular  as  regards  the  role  of  monetary 
policy in the euro area.  
Further strengthening of central bank cooperation 
3.3 
In the area of central bank cooperation, discrete, but decisive steps have been made since 
the onset of the crisis. A core feature of this crisis has been not only the central importance 
of  domestic  liquidity  provision  by  central  banks,  but  also  its  complementary  cross-border 
dimension, that is, the network of temporary  currency swaps or repos set up bilaterally by 
major central banks such as the ECB and the Federal Reserve, which has involved many 
other  central  banks  in  the  world.  At  the  same  time,  progress  has  been  also  made  in 
deepening central bank cooperation and extending its geographical scope.  
The main forum of global central bank cooperation is the Global Economy Meeting (GEM) 
which  takes  place  in  Basel.  Over  the  past  few  years,  this  forum  has  been  including 
                                                 
13   See, e.g., Woods (2010). 
6 
 BIS Review 46/2010
34 governors  as  permanent  members  plus  a  number  of  other  governors  attending  on  a 
revolving basis. The GEM is an important forum as it assesses global economic and financial 
conditions,  analyses  economic  and  financial  policy  issues  of  common  interest  to  central 
banks,  and  provides  guidance  for  the  central  bank  cooperative  activities  conducted  by 
various Basel-based central bank committees under the auspices of the BIS. 
It  is  remarkable  that  the  Global  Economy  Meeting  has  now  replaced  the  G10  grouping  of 
central  bank  governors  as  the  prime  forum  for  the  governance  of  cooperation  amongst 
central  banks.  We  have  now  a  fully  extensive  global  ownership  of  the  governance  of  this 
cooperation extending to systemic emerging economies. It is also remarkable that this global 
ownership even goes significantly beyond the borders of the G20 membership. 
I  have  the  privilege  to  chair  the  GEM,  and  must  say  that  I  find  the  frank  and  very  rich 
discussions we hold at its bi-monthly meetings of invaluable importance for the central bank 
community at large.  
The rise of the FSB 
3.4 
Another  crucial  innovation  of  the  past  couple  of  years  has  been  the  expansion  of  both 
membership and range of competencies of Financial Stability Board (FSB) chaired by Mario 
Draghi,  and  in  charge,  together  with  the  IMF,  of  strengthening  the  international  financial 
architecture  and  of  global  financial  stability.  The  expanded  membership  –  now  largely 
overlapping with the G20 – and the stronger mandate significantly raises the profile of the 
FSB.  The  broad  membership  of  the  FSB  –  where  both  central  banks  and  regulatory 
authorities are involved – ensures an unprecedented degree of international cooperation in 
regulatory  matters.  The  FSB  has  been  working  actively  on  drawing  the  lessons  from  the 
crisis  from  the  standpoint  of  the  global  principles  for  prudential  rules  regulations  and 
supervision  of  all  financial  activities.  In  any  case  progress  in  building  a  global  financial 
regulation architecture that is broadly agreed and at the same time effective is not easy, and 
we need a very strong consistent and determined action of all parties involved.  
Let  me  also  mention  that  the  ECB  is  actively  involved  in  the  G20  (at  the  Ministers  and 
Governors  level)  and  the  FSB,  being  a  full  member  of  both  fora,  and  participates  to  their 
sub-structures at the technical level.  
IMF reform 
3.5 
In discussing the evolution of global governance I must also touch upon the reform of the 
Bretton Woods institutions, in particular the IMF. Also in this case, this is a question that was 
already present in everybody’s mind before the crisis, but which has become more pressing 
during  and  after  it.  In  particular,  the  reform  of  the  quota  and  voice  at  the  IMF,  which  is 
ongoing, should foster its legitimacy and inclusiveness, improving overall global governance 
in line with the decision of transferring competencies and responsibilities from the G7 to the 
G20.  
An important by-product of the crisis has been the realisation that the IMF lending capacity 
should be bolstered, after years of progressive decline in the IMF lending activities. At the 
2009  G-20  London  summit,  it  was  decided  that  the  IMF  would  require  additional  financial 
resources to meet prospective needs of its member countries during the then ongoing global 
financial  crisis.  In  particular,  the  G-20  leaders pledged  to  increase  the  IMF’s  supplemental 
cash  to  $500  billion,  and  to  allocate  to  member  countries  another  $250  billion  via  Special 
Drawing Rights. In this respect, it is important that a careful assessment is made whether this 
high level of resources is justified by the actual financing needs, which means that a review 
should be conducted at some stage.  
Also, the IMF will need to re-focus its activity towards monitoring the international financial 
system  and  the  threats  to  global  financial  stability,  drawing  from  and  strengthening  its 
analytical  capabilities.  An  important  step  in  this  direction  is  the  implementation  of  the  joint 
BIS Review 46/2010 
 7
IMF-FSB  Early  Warning  exercise,  which  is  aimed  at  strengthening  the  assessment  of 
systemic,  low  probability-high  impact  risks  to  the  global  economy  and  identifying  possible 
mitigating actions. 
Summing up 
3.6 
Overall, the system is moving decisively towards an ownership of global governance that is 
really  inclusive  and  comprehends  systemic  emerging  economies  as  well  as  industrialised 
countries. This very significant transformation of global governance that we are engineering 
today can be illustrated strikingly by three examples: first, the G20 replaces the G7 as the 
prime  group  for  global  economic  and  financial  governance  at  the  level  of  Ministers  and 
Governors and at the level of Heads of State or Government. Second, the Global Economy 
Meeting of central bank governors replaces the G10 group of governors as the prime group 
for  the  governance  of  central  bank  cooperation.  And  third,  the  Financial  Stability  Board 
membership  is  extended  far  beyond  the  borders  of  the  G7.  Not  surprisingly  after  a  global 
financial crisis, the economic and financial sectors are areas where a new concept of global 
governance  has  been  decided,  and  we  can  expect  a  number  of  tests  of  this  new  bold 
concept in the years to come.  
Conclusions 
4. 
Let me conclude. 
We are living in a time that we will remember for long, a defining moment perhaps a bit like 
Bretton Woods in 1944.  
The  word  “crisis”  comes  originally  from  the  Greek  “κρίσις”,  which  means  “decision”  and 
“judgement”. The global financial crisis has shattered the world and changed our beliefs, but 
we can still harness it for the better and live in a more integrated and stable world.  
If I were to summarise the key lessons of the global financial crisis that I have been talking 
about today, I would emphasise three main points:  
Firstly, a very profound transformation of economy and finance at the global level has taken 
place over the last thirty years. The combination of a technological revolution which is still 
ongoing, particularly, but not exclusively, in the field of information technology, with the fall of 
the  Soviet  Empire  and  the  generalisation  of  market  economies  at  a  global  level,  has 
contributed  to  create  a  new  entity,  which  is  the  globally  integrated  economy  with  its 
associated global financial system.  
We have attained a level of intertwining and interdependencies at the global level which was 
previously unseen in terms of intensity of the links and also the rapidity of global transmission 
of shocks. The fact that a sole event, namely Lehman Brothers’ bankruptcy, was transmitted 
in all economies – whether industrialised or emerging – and in all sectors – whether financial 
or non-financial – in a few half days, was a “première” in the history of economy and finance.  
Secondly, the fact that the pertinent economic and financial entity is now global, calls for an 
appropriate  concept  of  global  governance.  In  this  respect,  the  crisis  has  been  revealing. 
Extremely bold changes that seemed unthinkable have been triggered by the intensification 
of the crisis in mid-September 2008. It is imperative that all institutions, governments, central 
banks  and  parties  concerned  do  what  they  can  to  make  the  new  constellation  of  global 
governance work exemplary.  
Thirdly,  the  central  issue  for  executive  branches  is  that,  even  if  the  pertinent  entity  is  the 
global  economy  and  global  finance,  major  decisions  have  to  be  taken  at  the  level  of 
individual  countries.  Only  to  speak  of  the  industrialised  world,  it  is  necessary  to  make  our 
public opinions sufficiently aware of the externalities of national decisions, and consequently 
8 
 BIS Review 46/2010
on the necessity to internalize complex concepts like global economic prosperity and global 
financial stability.  
In  our  democracies,  very  fortunately,  decisions  depend  on  the  sentiment  of  the  people.  I 
consider  that  one  of  the  most  formidable  challenges  of  today  is  to  optimize  tireless 
explanations  to  our  own  public  opinions  of  the  very  nature  of  the  new  globalised  world  in 
which we are living.  
Academia has a very important role to play in this domain.  
Thank you for your attention. 
References 
Baldwin, R. (eds.) (2010): The Great Trade Collapse: causes, consequences and prospects, 
Vox.eu publication. 
Bussière,  M.,  Perez,  E.,  Straub,  R.  and  D.  Taglioni  (2010)  “Protectionist  responses  to  the 
crisis: global trends and implications”, ECB Occasional Paper, forthcoming. 
Committee on the Global Financial System (2010): The functioning and resilience of cross 
border funding markets, March. 
Crockett,  A.  (2010):  “What  have  we  learned  in  the  past  fifty  years  about  the  international 
financial  architecture?”,  luncheon  address  at  the  50th  Anniversary  Symposium,  Reserve 
Bank of Australia. 
Frieden,  J.  A.  (2009):  “Global  governance  of  global  monetary  relations:  rationale  and 
feasibility”, Economics, Policy Paper No.  
Hume, M. and A. Sentence (2009): “The global credit boom: challenges for macroeconomics 
and policy”, Bank of England, MPC Discussion Paper No. 27. 
Rose, A. (2000): “One market, one money: estimating the effect of common currencies on 
trade”, Economic Policy, 30, pp. 7–46. 
Obstfeld, M. and K. Rogoff (2009): “Global imbalances and the financial crisis: products of 
common causes”, mimeo. 
Siebert, H. (2008): “The concept of a world economic order”, Kiel Working Paper No. 1392. 
Woods, N. (2010): “Global governance after the financial crisis: A new multilateralism or the 
last gasp of the great powers?”, Global Policy, 1, 1. 
BIS Review 46/2010 
 9
