Masaaki Shirakawa: Future of central banks and central banking 
Opening  speech  by  Mr  Masaaki  Shirakawa,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the  2010 
International Conference, hosted by the Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies, Bank 
of Japan, Tokyo, 26 May 2010. 
 Introduction 
I. 
Good morning. I am very pleased to address the Bank of Japan international conference. On 
behalf  of  my  colleagues  at  the  Bank  of  Japan,  I  welcome  all  the  participants  from  central 
banks, international organizations, and academia. 
The  global  financial  crisis  which  started  in  the  summer  of  2007  poses  a  renewed  but 
fundamental question on the role of a central bank. This year’s conference focuses on this 
timely theme of “Future of Central Banking under Globalization.” 
In exploring the future of central banks, I set my benchmark at the monetary and financial 
system and the environment surrounding central banks at the time when I started my career 
at the Bank of Japan in 1972. In those days, on the Monetary policy front, central banks did 
not  obtain  sufficient  understanding  and  support  about  their  primary  objective  of  achieving 
price  stability  from  politicians  and  the  public  at  large.  In  the  mid-1970s,  shortly  thereafter, 
double-digit  inflation  became  a  crucial  challenge  for  central  banks  in  major  countries.  And 
many  central  banks  were  yet  to  establish  their  independence.  The  foreign  exchange  rate 
system for the advanced countries was in a transition period from the adjustable peg under 
the  Bretton  Woods  system  to  the  floating  rates.  As  for  the  financial  system,  the  banks” 
activities were still highly regulated, and the memory of a financial crisis became faded just 
as a remote past event. 
The  situation  changed  significantly  after  that.1  Macroeconomic  performance  improved 
considerably.  Many  central  banks  established  their  independence,  and  succeeded  in 
improving the understanding on their role from politicians and the public. “Quiet Revolution” 
called by Alan Blinder can be understood along such a trend.2 The theory of monetary policy 
also advanced considerably.3 
Just when we feel comfortable with the positive developments, which just I mentioned, the 
situation has already been changing gradually, thereby posing a new challenge for central 
banks.  That  is,  asset-price  and  credit  bubbles  and  subsequent  economic  stagnation  and 
financial crises after the burst of bubbles. Japan faced that challenge first, and then countries 
in various parts of the world experienced similar challenges one after another. 
In  view  of  the  current  global  financial  crisis,  we  clearly  know  that  we  are  facing  the  new 
challenge. But, to what extent did central bank policymakers predict the current situation a 
couple of decades ago? Instead of venturing into a long-term future, I will rather narrow my 
focus on a near-term future. 
                                                 
1   Cagliarini,  Kent,  and  Stevens  (2010),  Caruana  (2010),  and  Crockett  (2010)  provide  excellent  reviews  on 
development in the macroeconomy, the financial system, and the international currency system, respectively. 
2   See Blinder (2004). 
3   Clarida,  Galí,  and  Gertler  (1999)  say  that  research  on  monetary  policy  reaches  a  stage  of  a  “science  of 
monetary policy” by establishing a number of useful principles for optimal monetary policy with fairly general 
applicability. 
BIS Review 72/2010 
 1
Performance of central banks 
II. 
Central  banks  in  the  world  do  not  play  the  exactly  same  roles,  reflecting  their  historical 
backgrounds.  But  to  consider  the  nature  of  modern  central  banking,  we  need  to  focus  on 
three  aspects.  First,  a  central  bank  provides  central  bank  money  with  ultimate  safety  and 
liquidity  and  operates  payment  and  settlement  systems.  Second,  a  central  bank  conducts 
monetary  policy  to  guide  the  level  of  interest  rates  for  achieving  price  stability.  Third,  a 
central bank plays a key role in maintaining financial system stability. About the third role, a 
central  bank  has  a  unique  role  as  a  lender  of  last  resort,  and,  more  or  less,  it  shares  the 
important role of financial regulation and supervision. I begin by reviewing the performance of 
central banks in the three areas.  
Central bank money and payment and settlement systems 
First,  speaking  of  central  bank  money  and  payment  and  settlement  systems,  large-value 
payments settled through central bank accounts have increased significantly, reflecting the 
growing financial market transactions. At the same time, the settlement methods have also 
changed  drastically.  In  the  early  1970s,  only  the  Fedwire,  run  by  the  US  Federal  Reserve 
System, employed the real-time gross settlement (RTGS) system, which immediately settles 
funds  transfer  instructions  between  central  bank  accounts  on  an  instruction-by-instruction 
basis. Most of the remaining systems employed the deferred net settlement (DNS) system, 
which settles funds transfer instructions between central bank accounts on a netted amount 
basis at fixed points in time. The Bank of Japan carried out most of settlements either at nine 
o’clock in the morning, one or three o’clock in the afternoon.4 However, most of the central 
banks in the world, including the Bank of Japan, have moved to RTGS systems.5 
As  for  foreign  exchange  transactions,  Continuous  Linked  Settlement  (CLS)  started  its 
operation in 2002. The system settles foreign exchange transactions in 17 currencies on a 
payment-versus-payment (PVP) basis between seven o’clock in the morning to noon, central 
European time. Those fixed hours, which were enabled by the extension of operating hours 
of central bank systems, are often called the “five-hour window” linking settlements on the 
globe. 
The  observations,  just  I  mentioned,  are  very  limited,  but  they  clearly  show  a  dramatic 
improvement  in  the  safety  and  efficiency  of  payment  and  settlement  systems.  That  was 
proven  resilient  under  the  current  financial  crisis,  as  a  result  of  steady  and  tremendous 
efforts to reduce settlement risk by all the parties concerned in the past.  
Monetary policy 
Next,  let  me  move  on  to  reviewing  the  performance  of  monetary  policy.  Although  inflation 
accelerated from the 1970s to the early 1980s, it then started declining noticeably around the 
mid-1980s. In the 1990s, inflation came down to a low and stable level where central banks 
in  major  countries  could  declare  a  victory  in  the  battle  against  inflation.  In  parallel,  public 
understanding  about  monetary  policy  was  enhanced  in  two  points:  price  stability  as  the 
primary objective, and the importance of central bank independence to that end. 
However,  bubbles  have  often  emerged  since  central  banks  just  won  the  battle  against 
inflation. As I mentioned earlier, Japan first experienced that problem in the second half of 
the  1980s.  Around  that  time,  Japan  delivered  a  remarkably  good  macroeconomic 
performance,  compared  with  other  advanced  countries.  Real  GDP  growth  reached 
5.1 percent  in  Japan,  while  the  average  of  other  G-7  countries  stayed  at  3.4  percent.  CPI 
                                                 
4   The  settlement  time  at  five  o’clock  was  introduced  in  1993  when  the  Zengin  system  moved  from  next-day 
settlement to same-day settlement. 
5   See Shirakawa (2009). 
2 
 BIS Review 72/2010
inflation  came  down  to  1.1  percent  in  Japan,  while  the  average  of  other  G-7  countries 
remained  at  3.9  percent.  Japan  received  high  marks  in  performance  criteria  for  inflation 
targeting, which would prevail later on. 
At  that  time,  there  was  debate  about  the  necessity  of  exiting  extremely  accommodative 
monetary policy in Japan. In fact, all the macroeconomic indicators except for one showed 
the  necessity  of  withdrawing  monetary  easing:  high  economic  growth,  tight  labor  market 
conditions,  rapidly  growing  bank  lending,  and  bloated  asset  prices.  The  outlier  indicator, 
however, was exactly CPI inflation. As a result, low inflation stood against the Bank of Japan, 
and  delayed  the  policy  reversal  toward  tightening.  What  happened  later  on  was  the 
expansion and burst of an asset-price and credit bubble and the subsequent financial crisis. 
Since  then,  many  countries  had  the  same  experience  that  price  stability  would  not 
automatically ensure macroeconomic stability. 
To digress a little bit, before the current crisis, a safety margin against the zero lower bound 
of  nominal  interest  rates  was  often  pointed  out  as  one  of  the  justifications  for  targeting  a 
small  but  positive  rate  of  inflation.  In  the  end,  major  countries  found  themselves  virtually 
constrained  by  the  zero  lower  bound  under  the  current  crisis.  Looking  back  at  the  serious 
economic downturn after the failure of Lehman Brothers, very few think that reducing interest 
rates by a few percentage points, enabled by having a higher target rate of inflation, would 
have materially changed a recovery path of the economy.6 That suggests how devastating 
damage financial system instability inflicts on the economy. 
We have learnt two things from our experiences in the last few decades. First, price stability 
and  financial  system  stability  are  both  prerequisites  for  macroeconomic  stability.  Second, 
price  stability  itself  is  desirable,  but  it  entails  a  complex  mechanism  for  destabilizing  the 
financial  system,  if  combined  with  over-confidence  in  economic  agents  and  unfounded 
expectations about the prolonged low interest rates.7 
Financial system 
So,  I  will  move  on  to  reviewing  the  performance  of  central  banks  in  the  third  role,  the 
achievement of financial system stability. In the early 1970s, a major financial crisis seemed 
remote to many countries, including Japan. Of course, some financial crises occurred after 
that, such as the Secondary Banking Crisis in the United Kingdom and the S&L Crisis in the 
United States, while they were far from a full-fledged crisis affecting the entire economy and 
the financial system. Such a situation, however, changed significantly in the 1990s. 
First, financial crises have occurred more frequently than before. That is apparent from the 
recent episodes: Japan’s crisis, the Nordic crisis, the East Asian crisis, the LTCM crisis, the 
Russian  crisis,  and  the  current  global  financial  crisis.  In  addition,  financial  crises  have 
increased their magnitude. 
Second, financial crises have occurred on a more global scale than before. Japan’s financial 
crisis was an isolated event for the global financial system, albeit a serious event for Japan. 
However, the subsequent crises strengthened their global nature. The crisis after the failure 
of Lehman Brothers was truly a global financial crisis. 
Third,  financial  crises  have  a  bit  different  nature,  compared  with  the  past.  Financial  crises 
always surface in the form of a liquidity shortage. Under the current crisis, the shortage of 
market liquidity, in addition to funding liquidity, did matter. In addition, such liquidity shortage 
became  extremely  acute  in  the  shadow  banking  system,  which  is  outside  the  traditional 
banking sector. 
                                                 
6   Blanchard,  Dell’Ariccia,  and  Mauro  (2010)  point  out  that  it  is  necessary  to  examine  costs  and  benefits  of 
raising an inflation target in light of the current financial crisis. 
7   See White (2006). 
BIS Review 72/2010 
 3
New and difficult challenges from success 
III. 
As  the  last  couple  of  decades  show,  central  banks  have  achieved  a  great  success  in 
stabilizing  prices  as  well  as  economic  activity.  As  a  result  of  such  success,  central  banks 
seem  to  ironically  face  new  and  difficult  challenges.8  I  will  next  explain  such  difficult 
challenges. 
Changes in the manifestation of economic imbalances 
First,  the  imbalances  in  the  economy  are  unlikely  to  appear  immediately  in  the  form  of 
imbalances in general prices. A benign macroeconomic condition tends to make economic 
agents irrationally bullish, and change their risk perception in a laxer direction. Low inflation, 
however,  tends  to  delay  the  reversal  of  easy  monetary  policy.  Under  such  a  situation, 
overconfidence, if created by some reasons, ignites an increase in asset prices, expansion of 
credit and leverage, and extension of maturity mismatches. If the imbalances in the economy 
had  appeared  in  the  form  of  a  rise  in  general  prices,  a  central  bank  would  have  relatively 
easily  been  able  to  respond  by  orthodox  monetary  tightening.  The  imbalances  in  the 
economy, however, appeared in the form of financial imbalances. Then, why have general 
prices become less responsive to the imbalances in the economy? 
One  reason,  often  pointed  out,  lies  in  the  enhanced  credibility  for  a  central  bank  in 
conducting  monetary  policy.  In  that  case,  firms  do  not  change  their  product  prices 
immediately,  when  they  perceive  general  price  fluctuations  as  just  temporary.  Another 
reason is related to the tendency toward non-price competition. Firms are concerned that a 
simple raise in the prices results in losing their customer bases in a low inflation environment, 
and  that  a  simple  reduction  in  the  prices  just  invites  subsequent  price  reductions  by 
competitors. 
Although  I  basically  agree  with  the  analyses,  just  I  mentioned,  I  conjecture  that  a  more 
fundamental reason lies in the fact that price measurement itself has become hard in recent 
years. Of course, in theory, the price index is supposed to trace quality-adjusted prices over 
time. In practice, however, value added and attendant risk are hard to be identified, as the 
economy becomes more information-driven, service-oriented, and network-intensive.9 A case 
in  point  is  financial  services  consumers  purchase  from  financial  institutions.  Financial 
services  are  about  risk  assessment.  As  our  experience  of  the  financial  crisis  shows, 
however, such risk assessment turned out to be inadequate. If an ideal quality adjustment 
method  had  been  available  to  us,  quality  adjusted  prices  of  financial  services  would  have 
increased  reflecting  their  declined  quality.  Such  a  statistical  treatment  has  hardly  been 
implemented in practice, and the situation seems to remain the same in the future. 
Policy responses after the burst of a bubble 
The second difficult challenge is that a policy response, if successful in the short term, does 
not  necessarily  imply  a  success  in  the  long  term.  Central  banks  moved  swiftly  and 
aggressively,  countering  a  serious  economic  downturn  stemming  from  the  burst  of  the 
bubble. We have to be aware that such policy responses could cause other risks, including 
the emergence of an asset-price and credit bubble. Given the increase in the frequency and 
magnitude of bubbles since the 1990s, I mentioned earlier, we need to have a longer time 
horizon to tell whether a policy response will succeed or not.  
                                                 
8   Shirakawa  (2010)  points  out  a  mechanism  of  so-called  the  “cycle  of  confidence”  behind  the  bubble  and 
financial crisis. 
9   See Varian (2001). 
4 
 BIS Review 72/2010
Central bank in democratic society 
The third difficult challenge is related to the fact that a success in policy responses poses a 
new problem as to what responsibility a central bank should bear in democratic society. 
Confronted with the financial and economic crises, central banks in major countries have all 
introduced unconventional policy measures. In that regard, the Bank of Japan was the first to 
experience  a  financial  crisis,  and,  thus,  was  the  first  to  employ  unprecedented  measures. 
Since the late 1990s, the Bank of Japan has been moving aggressively as a lender of last 
resort, including the funds provision to the securities firm. The Bank of Japan also launched 
various  unprecedented  measures,  such  as  a  stock  purchase  program  from  financial 
institutions and the outright purchase of asset backed commercial papers and asset-backed 
securities. Thus, it is my regret that innovations in the Bank of Japan’s policy responses have 
not been well recognized. In fact, under the current financial crisis, major central banks have 
also taken unprecedented policy measures, just like the Bank of Japan did.  
Unconventional policy measures taken by a central bank involve quasi-fiscal policy elements, 
such as potential taxpayers’ burden incurred by a loss from such operations, and intervention 
in resource allocation at a micro level. In the midst of a crisis, a central bank faces growing 
demand for introducing unconventional policy measures, which involve more or less quasi-
fiscal policy elements. Since a central bank generally thinks that such measures need to be 
decided and implemented by government in democratic society, a central bank falls into a 
difficult position, when decisions by government are just postponed. 
The  border  between  pure  monetary  policy  and  quasi-fiscal  policy  sometimes  becomes 
ambiguous. Looking back at the experiences of various countries since the 1990s, when their 
central bank law had clauses for making some  quasi-fiscal policy measures possible, they 
decided to carry out such measures after careful consideration. Once a crisis was overcome, 
with  the  help  of  such  unconventional  policy  measures,  central  banks  were  criticized  for 
violating the fundamental rule in democratic society. As a result, such a situation is likely to 
undermine credibility for central banks, and thus affect their policy performance. 
Tasks for central banks 
IV. 
As I discussed so far, central banks face new and difficult challenges at the moment. With 
considering  such  difficult  challenge,  I  will  point  out  some  tasks  in  addressing  such  difficult 
challenges. 
Understanding of a primary mandate for a central bank 
The  first  is  the  understanding  of  a  primary  mandate  for  a  central  bank.  Without  social 
understanding  on  that  point,  central  bank  independence  and,  eventually,  central  bank 
credibility itself are likely to be undermined. 
I  think  that  a  primary  mandate  for  a  central  bank  should  be  to  achieve  a  stable  financial 
environment,  that  is,  a  financial  environment  that  is  consistent  with,  and  contributes  to, 
sustainable economic growth. Price stability is certainly one important element in achieving a 
stable financial environment. That is, however, not the sole factor. When a central bank feels 
constrained  by  short-term  developments 
to  amplify 
macroeconomic fluctuations. 
After all, deposit money, which has a major share in broad money, is created as a product of 
maturity  mismatches and leverage  of private financial institutions. A central bank needs to 
adequately  monitor 
financial 
institutions.  Macroprudential  perspectives,  recently  reemphasized  in  light  of  the  current 
global financial crisis, should be understood as examining the interactions between the real 
and financial sides of the economy, considering the behavior of private financial institutions. 
Such an analysis is an essential task for a central bank, although it is a typical example of 
“easier said than done.” In addition, macroprudential analyses and perspectives are crucially 
including  such  behavior  of 
financial  environment, 
too  much, 
is  more 
likely 
that 
the 
BIS Review 72/2010 
 5
important  in  conducting  monetary  policy  as  well  as  designing  financial  regulations  and 
supervising financial institutions. 
Financial infrastructure 
The  second  is  the  efforts  to  improve  the  financial  infrastructure.  In  achieving  a  stable 
financial  environment,  while  monetary  policy  certainly  plays  an  important  role,  we  need  to 
avoid overstating the effectiveness of the fine-tuning policy, given our incomplete knowledge. 
As is well known, we have difficulty in measuring the output gap and inflation in an accurate 
manner. It is even more so in projecting such indicators. We also need to pay attention to the 
risk of destabilizing the economy, due to a recognition lag. 
By  contrast,  we  can  count  more  on  assured  benefits  from  enhancing  the  financial 
infrastructure, as evident from the observation that such efforts are very effective in staving 
off  the  aggravation  of  the  current  global  financial  crisis.  In  that  respect,  one  of  the  most 
important tasks is to improve cross-border funding markets.  
International monetary system 
In  discussing  the  future  of  central banking,  I cannot  conclude  my  speech  without  touching 
upon the international monetary system.10 In that regard, we sometimes hear the arguments 
for macroeconomic policy coordination to facilitate the adjustments of global imbalances. The 
current-account imbalances themselves are an adjustment mechanism for the differences in 
savings and investment patterns due to the variations in the level of economic growth and 
demographics  between  countries.  So  the  imbalances  themselves  are  not  necessarily  evil. 
What  should  be  adjusted  is  unsustainable  imbalances,  but,  as  the  current  global  financial 
crisis  shows,  those  imbalances  are  caused  primarily  by  internal  imbalances,  reflecting 
inappropriate  management  of  macroeconomic  policy  and 
financial  regulations  and 
supervisions. I well understand the necessity of reforming the international monetary system 
as a long-term task, but I should emphasize the bottom line that each country should make 
every effort to put its own house in order. 
Having  said  that,  we  need  to  recognize  new  challenges  we  are  facing  in  an  international 
context. As the role of globally operating financial institutions and investors expands, easy 
monetary  policy  in  one  country  comes  to  influence  other  countries.  We  thus  observe  a 
phenomenon that the insulating effect of the floating exchange system does not always work 
perfectly, as it is described in textbooks. One example is the growing effects of carry trade. 
Considering such changes in the transmission channel of monetary policy, I am wondering 
whether  and  to  what  extent  we  need  to  alter  our  way  of  thinking  on  monetary  policy 
management  for  the  advanced  countries  or  an  international  key  currency  country.  That 
seems to remain an open question. 
Institutional culture for a central bank 
V. 
As discussed so far, central banks are facing wide-ranging challenges. In any event, the fiat 
money  system  is  a  system  to  control  money  with  wisdom.  To  that  end,  the  institutional 
culture and human capital accumulation in such culture are crucially important for a central 
bank.11  In  closing  my  remarks  today,  let  me  touch  upon  some  aspects  of  the  institutional 
culture for a central bank I deem important. 
                                                 
10   We  see  some  renewed  interests  in  the  international  monetary  system.  See,  for  example,  Padoa-Schioppa 
(2010) for that line of arguments. 
11   Williamson  (1999)  discusses  the  governance  of  public  institutions.  Oritani  (2010)  analyzes  the  governance 
and organization of a central bank using the institutional economics. 
6 
 BIS Review 72/2010
The first aspect in the central bank culture is banking operations. A central bank is not just an 
ivory tower to discuss the macroeconomy and the financial system in an abstract manner. 
Rather,  a  central  bank  itself  is  a  bank,  which  implements  policy  actions  through  banking 
operations,  as  in  the  case  of  monetary  policy  as  well  as  a  lender  of  last  resort.  Those 
operations  require  wide-ranging  operational  knowledge,  such  as  collateral  haircut  setting, 
counterparty selection, payment and settlement of funds and securities, and debt-collection 
from failed financial institutions. 
In  addition,  such  knowledge  is  also  useful  in  assessing  the  subtle  working  of  the  financial 
system  and  its  interaction  with  the  macroeconomy.  In  introductory  textbooks,  money  is 
described as a mechanical concept just as a product of the monetary base and the money 
multiplier.  Such  a  way  of  understanding  of  money  misses  the  important  role  played  by 
money.  As  I  noted  earlier,  money  is  created  as  a  product  of  maturity  mismatches  and 
leverage in financial transactions. That implies that a central bank is unable to understand 
developments in the financial system and the macroeconomy without hands-on knowledge 
on how banks operate. The current global financial crisis clearly shows that point. 
The  second  aspect  is  to  keep  learning.  The  economy,  including  the  financial  system  and 
financial markets, is changing all the time. When we have confidence in acquiring knowledge 
on  something,  the  situation  has  already  started  changing  before  we  know  it.  One  such 
example is financial system instability after achieving price stability. 
We  are  unable  to  write  fully  state-contingent  rules  and  contracts.  Actual  markets  are 
inevitably incomplete markets in economists’ terminology. A central bank can be regarded as 
a device for dealing with such incompleteness. If that is the case, a central bank needs to 
make use of all the available knowledge in understanding the developments in the economy 
and their implications, and mapping out necessary policy actions. Thus, a central bank needs 
to put emphasis on the institutional culture of constant learning.12 
The third aspect is the integration of wide-ranging areas of knowledge. Taking an example of 
monetary  policy,  a  central  bank  generally  relies  heavily  on  the  macroeconomic  theory  in 
conducting  monetary  policy.  The  economic  theory  plays  an  important  role  in  providing  a 
framework for understanding a complex world. At the same time, we should be careful that 
sticking  to  one  specific  theory  potentially  distorts  our  views.  Historical  knowledge  is  also 
useful.  Looking  back  at  the  history  of  financial  crises,  we  are  stunned  by  the  common 
mentality  of  “this  time  is  different.”13  In  addition,  knowledge  on  banking  operations,  just  I 
mentioned, is also indispensable. A central bank needs to make constant efforts to produce 
synergy effects between monetary policy and prudential policy wings by overcoming some 
differences in the cultures of the two policy wings. 
The fourth aspect is cooperation among central banks. We expect that economic activity and 
financial market transactions will continue to grow across borders, but we do not imagine that 
sovereign nations will disappear in the foreseeable future. In that case, cooperation between 
central  banks  will  become  increasingly  important  in  achieving  financial  system  stability. 
Under the current global financial crisis, central banks have communicated with each other 
intensively  at  various  levels,  from  top  central  bankers  to  mid-class  staffers,  which  surely 
becomes considerable wealth for the future of the central bank community. 
Closing remarks 
VI. 
Central  bank  conferences  reflect  the  institutional  culture  of  central  banks,  and  this 
conference entails such aspects more clearly with its title of “future of central banking.” I am 
                                                 
12   See King (2005) for the importance of learning for central banks. 
13   See Reinhart and Rogoff (2009). 
BIS Review 72/2010 
 7
convinced  that  the  one-and-a-half-day  conference  will  give  us  profound  insights  into  the 
future of central banks and central banking. 
Thank you very much. 
References 
Blanchard,  Olivier,  Giovanni  Dell’Ariccia,  and  Paolo  Mauro,  “Rethinking  Macroeconomic 
Policy,” IMF Staff Position Note, 2010. 
Blinder, Alan S., The Quiet Revolution: Central Banking Goes Modern, Yale University Press, 
2004. 
Cagliarini,  Adam,  Christopher  Kent,  and  Glenn  Stevens,  “Fifty  Years  of  Monetary  Policy: 
What  Have  We  Learned?,”  Paper  presented  at  the  50th  Anniversary  Symposium  of  the 
Reserve Bank of Australia, February 2010. 
Caruana,  Jaime,  “Financial  Stability:  10  Questions  and  About  Seven  Answers,”  Paper 
presented at the 50th Anniversary Symposium of the Reserve Bank of Australia, February 
2010. 
Clarida,  Richard,  Jordi  Galí,  and  Mark  Gertler,  “The  Science  of  Monetary  Policy:  A  New 
Keynesian Perspective,” Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 37, pp. 1661–1707, 1999. 
Crockett, Andrew, “What Have We Learned in the Past Fifty Years About the International 
Financial  Architecture?,”  Paper  presented  at  the  50th  Anniversary  Symposium  of  the 
Reserve Bank of Australia, February 2010. 
King, Mervyn, “Monetary Policy: Practice ahead of Theory,” Speech at Mais Lecture, May 17, 
2005. 
Oritani,  Yoshiharu,  “Public  Governance  of  Central  Banks:  An  Approach  from  New 
Institutional  Economics,”  BIS  Working  Papers  No.  299,  2010.  Padoa-Schioppa,  Tommaso, 
“The Ghost of Bancor,” Speech at Louvain-la-Neuve, February 25, 2010. 
Reinhart,  Carmen  M.,  and  Kenneth  S.  Rogoff,  This  Time  is  Different:  Eight  Centuries  of 
Financial Folly, Princeton University Press, 2009. 
Shirakawa,  Masaaki,  “Toward  Development  of  Robust  Payment  and  Settlement  Systems,” 
Speech at a Symposium Commemorating the 25th Anniversary of the Center for Financial 
Industry 
at 
http://www.boj.or.jp/en/type/press/koen07/ko0911d.htm. 
——— “Revisiting the Philosophy behind Central Bank Policy,” Speech at the Economic Club of 
New York, April 22, 2010, available at http://www.boj.or.jp/en/type/press/koen07/ko1004e.htm. 
Varian,  Hal  R.,  “Markets  for  Information  Goods,”  in  Kunio  Okina  and  Tetsuya  Inoue  eds., 
Monetary  Policy  in  a  World  of  Knowledge-based  Growth,  Quality  Change  and  Uncertain 
Measurement, Palgrave, pp. 85–99, 2001. 
White,  William  R.,  “Is  Price  Stability  Enough?,”  BIS  Working  Papers  No.  205,  2006. 
Williamson,  Oliver,  “Public  and  Private  Bureaucracies:  A  Transaction  Cost  Economics 
Perspective,” Journal of Law, Economics and Organization, Vol. 15(1), pp. 306–342, 1999. 
Information 
November 
Systems, 
available 
2009, 
13, 
8 
 BIS Review 72/2010
