DeLisle Worrell: Challenges to increase IT efficiency 
Address by Dr DeLisle Worrell, Governor of the Central Bank of Barbados, to the Information 
Society of Barbados (ISB), Barbados Hilton, Bridgetown, 2 July 2010. 
 This dinner is an opportunity to revive the ISB, at a time when there are important challenges 
facing us, which can be addressed only by an organization which is structured like the ISB, 
bringing together IT professionals and users. When we started the ISB we were at the dawn 
of the era of personal computing, and today every adult and most children use sophisticated 
electronic communications devices as a matter of course. The simplest cell phone nowadays 
is capable of text messaging, and can be used for banking and financial transactions. So we 
are  now  past  the  stage  we  were  at  when  ISB  started,  when  the  main  concern  was  to 
introduce users to the potential of the latest IT products and services.  
The new challenge is to make IT work for us as a tool to increase the efficiency with which 
we work, and to increase our productivity and effectiveness. This is a major challenge, and in 
order  to  meet  it  we  must  have  effective  interaction  between  IT  professionals  who  provide 
services, and the rest of us who consume them. Going forward, I want to urge us all, through 
active participation in the society’s activities, to contribute actively and fully to this dialogue.  
I  can  best  illustrate  the  problem  by  telling  you  about  my  recent  experience  as  Executive 
Director of the CCMF. Soon after I joined the Centre we made the decision to deliver all our 
data  and  information  services  online,  and  to  publish  all  our  books  and  economics  papers 
electronically.  The  CCMF  publishes  an  academic  journal,  the  JBF3E.  As  some  of  you  will 
know,  the  publication  of  any  journal  or  magazine  is  an  onerous  process,  involving  the 
collection,  review  and  editing  of  all  the  material,  written  by  several  contributors.  A  huge 
problem in meeting publications deadlines is that you have to get all the material together, 
cleaned up and checked, before you can send the completed issue to the printers. A single 
tardy  contributor  can  wreck  your  entire  schedule,  and  prevent  you  from  bringing  the 
publication out on time. I’ve been in this business for decades, and this was the reality I’d 
always faced. It was only when we went to electronic publishing that it suddenly dawned on 
me  that  we  didn’t  have  to  wait  until  the  last  paper  was  ready  to  put  out  the  issue  of  the 
journal.  Rather,  each  paper  could  be  posted  as  soon  as  it  was  ready.  So  that  is  how  the 
JBF3E is now published. As soon as an article has been peer reviewed, revised, copy edited 
and  checked,  it  is  published  online.  The  journal  is  published  in  June  and  December.  The 
June  2010  issues  may  be  accessed  now  at  www.ccmf-uwi.org,  the  Centre’s  website.  As 
soon as the next six to eight papers are published, the December 2010 issue will be closed, 
and the next paper published after that will be designated for the June 2011 issue. In this 
way, electronic publishing frees you from the threat of being held hostage to the last laggard 
writer or editor.  
Once  we  uncovered  this  reality  we  were  able  to  extend  the  same  principle  to  other 
publications, such as a book that is currently being prepared on the financial sectors of the 
Caribbean countries. Each central bank that contributes to CCMF’s activities is contributing a 
chapter. Not all the chapters are ready, but those that are have already been posted to the 
website, and chapters are added as they are finalised. The same considerations apply even 
more importantly to data. When statistics are presented in printed form, as for example in the 
Central bank’s Annual Statistical Digest, publication has to await the data that are available 
with the longest delay. That meant that the ASD with 2008 data appeared only in 2010. The 
Central Bank intends to get around this problem by moving to electronic publishing of data, 
which allows different sectoral statistics to be published as soon as they are ready.  
Another thing we discovered at CCMF was that, even after we’d published a wealth of useful 
material  to  our  website,  people  weren’t  aware  of  it.  People  would  call  or  write  us  for 
BIS Review 95/2010 
 1
information which they could readily access on the site. A colleague of mine, a professor at 
UWI, sent a graduate student to the Centre in the hope of finding a copy of a paper he had 
presented at a conference organised by the Centre some years earlier. He was unaware that 
the paper was available electronically on the website. That made us realize that we needed a 
newsletter, to keep users and potential users up to date, and the CCMF’s monthly newsletter 
was  started.  It  features  probably  the  most  convenient  summary  of  Caribbean  regional 
business and economic news each month.  
My  point  here  is  that  we  at  CCMF  were  not  the  first  to  discover  the  fact  that  electronic 
publishing liberates publishers from being held hostage to latecomers, nor were we the first 
to confront the challenge of getting the word out about our online services. If we had been 
part  of  a  network  that  might,  at  some  point  in  its  programme  of  activities,  have  included 
experiences of publishers and editors, we might have been spared the agony of having to 
rediscover the wheel, in this case. It is this kind of networking and dialogue that I suggest the 
ISB should seek to facilitate, going forward.  
I could give many other examples of the need to share experiences to improve effectiveness 
and efficiency; many are in areas where I for one have not yet found a satisfactory solution, 
and there is at least one area where I have an amazing programme which I find absolutely 
indispensable, which no-one else seems to find useful. I’m really curious to know why. 
However, I want to end these brief remarks with a suggestion for treating with an issue that 
needs to be high on the ISB’s agenda going forward, and it has to do with the process by 
which  organizations  and  businesses  approach  the  design  of  major  new  systems.  That 
process, when it is well done, begins with a thorough discussion of the user’s needs for the 
future, so that the new systems can be designed to satisfy those needs as fully as possible. 
No matter how carefully this process is carried out, however, the resulting system never quite 
seems to be satisfactory, and sometimes the users are quite dissatisfied with the product. 
This frustrates the IT staff, who rightly point out that they have only provided the users with 
what they asked for. The users then feel stupid for not anticipating what they really needed, 
and put up with what they have, but with ill grace.  
The users should not feel stupid. The reality, which I myself have only very recently come to 
accept,  largely  but  not  wholly  as  a  result  of  my  experiences  at  CCMF,  is  that  you  cannot 
know what you really want until you have had a chance to test drive the product. I do not 
consider myself a fool for not anticipating that electronic publishing of statistics would liberate 
the publisher from the tyranny of latecomers. It is not by accident that the things we do with 
computers  resemble  the  things  we  used  to  do  before  we  had  computers.  No  matter  how 
inventive we are, our imaginations are bounded ultimately by what we know. The beauty of 
IT is that it has introduced us to a whole new world, and to take advantage of its possibilities 
we must be flexible enough to allow ourselves to go down the unexpected pathways that the 
new  technologies  reveal.  That  is  the  new  challenge  for  the  IT  professional.  You  have 
organized your work to give the user what he asked for. You need to go further, to empower 
the user to change his mind, to go off in directions he hadn’t thought of before, and to change 
the ways in which he organizes his work and his use of IT services.  
We are embarked on a voyage of discovery, in this age of IT, and we must work together, IT 
specialists and the consumers of their product, to rewrite the maps and charts that guide us, 
as we go along. We must avoid beating up on each other when we occasionally run aground 
because the charts we were working with failed to reveal dangerous shoals in our way. We 
must be able to recognize when what we had thought to be a safe harbor turns out to be an 
iron  bound coastline,  and  change course  accordingly.  By  sharing  stories  and  experiences, 
and seeking advice among ourselves and colleagues at home and abroad, the ISB members 
can make it a more productive journey for everyone. 
2 
 BIS Review 95/2010
