Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: Could monetary policy have helped prevent the 
financial crisis? 
Speech by Mr Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, at the Workshop on “Monetary policy: Recent experience and future directions”, Bank 
of Canada, Toronto, 9 April 2010. 
The original speech, which contains the graphs and various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on 
the ECB’s website.  
 I wish to thank José Luis Peydró-Alcalde and Huw Pill for their contribution to preparing the speech. I remain sole 
responsible for the opinions. 
Introduction 
There is a broad consensus that the financial crisis has been caused by several factors, such 
as: failures in financial regulation and supervision; structural changes in the financial sector, 
including  the  increased  importance  of  the  shadow  banking  system  and  securitisation;  and 
global  macro-economic  imbalances.  These  factors,  together  with  widespread  financial 
market integration, which in turn creates greater scope for contagion, have been particularly 
relevant even in countries where credit growth was relatively contained and real estate did 
not experience a boom. 
There is much less consensus on whether monetary policy could have  helped prevent the 
financial  crisis,  or,  more  provocatively,  on  whether  errant  monetary  policy  caused  the 
financial crisis. These are uncomfortable questions for central bankers – but ones we cannot 
avoid. Only by confronting such challenges honestly can we hope to understand the crisis, 
and thereby guard against its repetition. 
Some  take  the  view  that  monetary  policy  played,  at  most,  only  a  marginal  role.  In  this 
account, failures of financial regulation and supervision – rather than of monetary policy – lay 
at the heart of the crisis.1 Yet an influential body of opinion takes an opposing line, claiming 
that an overly accommodative monetary policy – at the global level, and perhaps especially 
in  the  United  States  –  was  among  the  key  causes  of  the  crisis.2  Its  advocates  argue  that 
short-term interest rates were kept “too low for too long” following the bursting of the dot-com 
bubble  at  the  turn  of  the  century,  and  led  to  the  economic  imbalances  that  ultimately 
threatened the financial and macroeconomic stability of the world economy.  
The  truth  probably  lies  somewhere  between  these  two  extremes.  No  doubt  financial 
regulation and supervision were weak. No doubt price stability is necessary but insufficient 
per se to achieve financial stability. Yet there is also no doubt that a monetary policy which 
turns  out  to  be  too  lax  to  achieve  price  stability  is  likely  to  be  responsible  for  fuelling 
excessive  credit  growth  and  thereby  creating  the  potential  for  financial  instability.  There  is 
substantial literature explaining this relationship, on which I will not elaborate further.3  
                                                 
1  See:  B.  Bernanke  (2010),  “Monetary  policy  and  the  housing  bubble”,  speech  at  the  2010  AEA  meetings 
http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/bernanke20100103a.htm. 
2  For a response to Bernanke (2010), see: J. Taylor (2010), “The Fed and the crisis: A reply to Ben Bernanke”, 
Wall Street Journal (11 January). 
3  See, inter alia: C. Borio and H. Zhu (2008), “Capital regulation, risk-taking and monetary policy: A missing link 
in the transmission mechanism?” BIS working paper no. 268; G. Jiménez, S.R.G. Ongena, J-L. Peydro and 
J. Saurina Salas (2010), “Credit supply: Identifying balance sheet channels with loan applications and granted 
loans”,  CEPR  discussion  paper  no.  7655;  Y.  Altumbas,  L.  Gambacorta  and  D.  Marques  (2010),  “Does 
monetary  policy  affect  bank  risk-taking?”  ECB  working  paper  no.  1166;  and  A.  Maddaloni  and  J-L.  Peydró 
(2009), “Bank risk-taking, securitisation, supervision and low interest rates: Evidence from lending standards”, 
ECB working paper, forthcoming. 
BIS Review 45/2010 
 1
Upside  threats  to  price  stability  were  certainly  emerging  prior  to  the  crisis,  on  the  back  of 
surging  commodity  prices  and  strong  global  growth.  Let’s  not  forget,  for  example,  that  US 
headline inflation increased from 2.3% on average in 2003 to 3.2% in 2006 and 3.8% in 2008 
(See figure 1). Core inflation increased from 1.5% in 2003 to 2.5% in 2006 and 2.3% in 2008 
(See  figure  2).  Euro  area  annual  inflation  reached  3.3%  on  average  in  2008.4  To  contain 
these upside risks to price stability, a case can be made that interest rates should have been 
higher than was the case before the crisis.  
Figure 1 
Overall inflation 
Figure 2 
Overall inflation excluding food and energy 
  Source: ECB, BLS and OECD. 
Note: Average annual inflation rates. 
                                                 
4  On the basis of the harmonised index of consumer prices (HICP). 
2 
 BIS Review 45/2010
Central to a honest self-evaluation of the role played by monetary policy is our adoption of a 
“real-time”  perspective.  The  benefits  of  hindsight  are  enormous  –  but  also  potentially 
misleading. If we had known ahead of time that Lehman Brothers would fail in September 
2008, we would no doubt have taken different policy decisions in the preceding months. But 
such considerations are not a meaningful guide to future policy. By their nature, economic 
“shocks” cannot be foreseen. 
Taking  these  aspects  into  account,  it  would  be  a  mistake  to  think  that  the  way  monetary 
policy was conducted did not play any role in the outbreak of the financial crisis. Monetary 
policy can actually be considered one of the factors that, in some countries, contributed to 
the crisis, at least to the extent that it was too accommodative to maintain price stability. The 
overly loose global monetary policy may have weakened the anchoring of price stability and 
at  the  same  time  unleashed  a  wave  of  euphoria  and  excessive  risk-taking  in  the  financial 
sector.  
It would be a waste if this financial crisis did not give us the opportunity to think deeply about 
the framework for monetary policy-making – the objective of policy; the models underpinning 
our  analysis;  and  the  indicators  on  which  we  focus  when  taking  policy  decisions.  Even  if 
excessively loose monetary policy is only partly to blame for the financial crisis, a case can 
be made that it fuelled the accumulation of financial imbalances that underlay the crisis. This 
prompts us to ask: what were the flaws in the decision-making that resulted in – according to 
some observers – policy errors? And, more importantly, how can we correct these flaws – 
and avoid any repetition – in the future? 
Since the seminal contribution of Theil,5 policy-making has been characterised as a “control 
problem”.  Such  a  characterisation  embodies  three  elements:  clearly  defining  the  policy 
objectives;  articulating  a  model  of  the  economy  by  which  policy  instrument  settings  and 
economic shocks are mapped into outcomes; and defining the information structure facing 
policy-makers. This last element determines the extent to which they can identify shocks and 
structural changes in real time.  
Using this approach as an organising framework, we can re-phrase our question: if central 
banks  made  mistakes  in  the  run-up  to  the  financial  crisis,  was  this  because  they  had  the 
wrong objectives? Or used the wrong model? Or misread the conjunctural situation? Or were 
the errors a result of the combination of these three factors? 
The objective of monetary policy 
1. 
A  large  body  of  academic  literature,  stemming  from  the  insights  of  Friedman  and  Phelps, 
provides  the  theoretical  basis  for  establishing  price  stability  as  the  objective  of  monetary 
policy.  Such  an  approach  found  overwhelming  empirical  support  in  our  experience  of  the 
Great  Inflation  during  the  1970s.  It  has  reached  its  apogee  in  the  modern  benchmark 
macroeconomic model, which articulates – on a state-of-the-art, micro-founded basis – the 
welfare costs of deviations from price stability.6 
Such  thinking  had  an  important  bearing  on  the  design  of  the  institutional  framework  for 
Monetary Union in Europe. The ECB has been assigned the primary objective of maintaining 
price stability in the euro area, establishing a clear hierarchy of goals with price stability at 
the fore. The clarity of this objective bolsters the credibility of the single monetary policy: it 
                                                 
5  See H. Theil (1964). Optimal decisions for government and industry, Amsterdam: North Holland. 
6  See: M. Goodfriend and R. King (1997), “The new neoclassical synthesis and the role of monetary policy”, 
NBER Macroeconomics Annual 12, pp. 231–296; and J.J. Rotemberg and M. Woodford (1999), “Interest rate 
rules in an estimated sticky price model”, in ed. J.B. Taylor Monetary policy rules, Chicago University Press, 
pp. 57–126. 
BIS Review 45/2010 
 3
supports the institutional independence of the ECB and helps to stabilise private longer-term 
inflation expectations at levels consistent with price stability. 
At  some  other  central  banks,  monetary  policy  has  been  given  a  dual  mandate,  with 
objectives such as economic activity, employment, financing conditions or financial stability in 
addition  to  the  goal  of  price  stability.  I  do  not  want  to  give  the  impression  that  we  are 
indifferent to such concerns at the ECB: on the contrary, I will discuss in a moment how we 
can  help  to  attain  them.  But  monetary  policy  should  not  be  over-burdened  with  additional 
objectives. It is too blunt an instrument to be effective in achieving all the goals I have just 
listed.  
For  example,  a  central  bank  with  a  dual  mandate  to  maintain  price  stability  and  support 
employment faces a particular dilemma in the context of a so-called “jobless recovery”. Its 
ability to act in a timely manner to contain emerging inflationary risks may be curtailed by its 
obligation to support employment. Moreover, since labour market developments are lagging 
indicators  of  the  cycle,  a  central  bank  assigned  an  explicit  employment  objective  may 
systematically tighten monetary policy later and more cautiously than necessary to maintain 
price stability. Such behaviour could impart an “inflation bias” to the economy. 
These factors run counter to recent proposals to assign monetary policy additional financial 
stability objectives.7 Rather, maintaining price stability over the medium term – an important 
addendum, to which I will return – is the appropriate objective of monetary policy. Given its 
neutrality  over  the  longer  run,  monetary  policy’s  ability  to  pursue  other  objectives  at  that 
horizon is heavily circumscribed. And by maintaining price stability, monetary policy creates 
an environment conducive to financial stability, economic growth and employment creation.  
If price stability is the appropriate objective of monetary policy, how should it be quantified? 
At the ECB, we have defined price stability as annual consumer price inflation of “below, but 
close to, 2%”. Whether explicit or implicit, similar targets have been established by central 
banks throughout the world. 
Recently, proposals have been made to raise inflation objectives substantially – more than 
doubling them in the euro area case.8 Frankly, these proposals are foolhardy. Any  shift in 
inflation objectives at times of economic stress invites the charge of opportunism: if you are 
willing to raise inflation objectives from 2% to 4%, then why not 6% or 10%? Such thinking 
puts at risk the hard-won credibility of the existing monetary policy frameworks. To the extent 
such  shifts  are  motivated  on  public  finance  grounds,  they  suggest  that  monetary  policy  is 
subordinate to fiscal concerns. And concerns about deflation risks should be addressed by 
refining the conduct of monetary policy, rather than redefining its objective. 
In  particular,  it  is  crucial  that  the  objective  of  price  stability  is  pursued  symmetrically.  Of 
course, asymmetries may exist in the structure of the economy. Examples include: any lower 
bound on nominal interest rates; and an aversion to falls in nominal wages. These need to be 
taken  into  account  in  policy  making.  But  this  does  not  imply  that  monetary  policy  should 
demonstrate greater aversion to deflation rather than inflation (or vice versa). An excessive 
and asymmetric fear of deflation explains in part why interest rates may have been kept “too 
low for too long” prior to the financial crisis. Pursuing price stability in a symmetric manner 
would guard against the danger of repeating this mistake.  
To sum up, I believe that the recent financial crisis has not challenged the principle according 
to which the goal of monetary policy should be price stability. In practice, this is recognised 
                                                 
7  See: e.g. S.S. Roach (2010). “The post-crisis fix: Regulatory or monetary policy remedies?” paper presented 
at the Reserve Bank of India’s First International Research Conference (February); P. De Grauwe and D. Gros 
(2009), “A new two-pillar strategy for the ECB”, CEPS policy brief no.191. 
8  See: O. Blanchard, G. Dell’Ariccia and P. Mauro (2010). “Rethinking macroeconomic policy”, IMF staff position 
note no. 10/03 http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/spn/2010/spn1003.pdf. 
4 
 BIS Review 45/2010
by most leading central banks. At the ECB, we are fortunate that the primacy of price stability 
has been made explicit.  
With  this  in  mind,  it  is  difficult  to  attribute  any  pre-crisis  “policy  error”  to  the  pursuit  of  the 
wrong monetary policy objective. Nonetheless, we are already witnessing the emergence of 
siren  calls  to  change  the  objective  –  in  particular,  for  monetary  policy  to  target  a  higher 
steady-state  inflation  rate,  difficult  to  reconcile  with  price  stability.  These  calls  must  be 
resisted.  
Emphasising  the  primacy  of  price  stability  objective  over  the  medium  term  does  not  imply 
central  bankers  should  be,  in  the  words  of  Mervyn  King,  “inflation  nutters”.9  Using  Theil’s 
framework  to  characterise  the  monetary  policy  problem  also  helps  to  clarify  its  dynamic 
nature. Recognising the long and variable lags in the transmission of monetary policy and the 
inevitability of short-term shocks to price dynamics, policy-makers need to adopt a medium-
term orientation in their decisions. Attempts to fine-tune price developments on a short-term 
basis  are  doomed  to  failure.  Such  attempts  are  likely  to  impart  an  excessive  activism  to 
policy-making,  such  that  interest  rate  decisions  add  volatility  to  the  economy  rather  than 
stabilise it. 
In adopting an appropriate medium-term orientation, monetary policy-makers are accorded 
an  extra  “degree  of  freedom”  in  setting  the  policy  stance.  There  can  be  several  paths  of 
interest rates consistent with the maintenance of price stability over the longer run. At least in 
principle,  the  choice  of  a  specific  path  can  be  used  to  support  broader  purposes,  without 
prejudicing the outlook for price stability over the medium term. This has been recognised by 
the so-called flexible inflation targeting literature.10 This framework explicitly foresees the use 
of  monetary  policy  to  smooth  developments  in  economic  activity  over  the  business  cycle, 
while anchoring longer-term inflation expectations at levels consistent with price stability.  
In  principle,  the  flexibility  accorded  to  policy-makers  by  the  medium-term  orientation  of 
monetary policy could be used in other directions, such as to contain financial imbalances or 
limit asset price volatility. The feasibility and desirability of such alternative approaches rests 
crucially on how monetary policy actions are perceived to be transmitted to the economy in 
general, and the price level in particular – in other words, on the perception of the structure of 
the economy and the monetary policy transmission mechanism.  
The monetary policy transmission mechanism 
2. 
The  desirability  of  flexible  inflation  targeting  was  established  using  the  canonical  New 
Keynesian model. In its simplest version, welfare is maximised by fully stabilising inflation at 
its  target  level,  a  policy  which  simultaneously  delivers  a  zero  output  gap.11  This  so-called 
“divine coincidence”12 implies that policy-makers who care only about stabilising inflation will 
deliver  an  efficient  path  of  economic  activity.  And,  symmetrically,  policy-makers  who  focus 
solely  on  keeping  output  at  an  (appropriately  defined)  potential  level  will  deliver  low  and 
stable inflation rates. A relatively simple Taylor-like monetary policy rule could achieve these 
desirable  outcomes.  In  this  benign  world,  traditional  monetary  policy  trade-offs  appear  to 
have disappeared! 
                                                 
9  See M.A. King (1997), “Changes in UK monetary policy: Rules and discretion in practice”. Journal of Monetary 
Economics 39, pp. 81–97. 
10  See  L.E.O.  Svennson  (1998),  “Inflation  targeting  in  an  open  economy:  Strict  or  flexible  inflation  targeting?” 
Victoria Economic Commentaries 15(1). 
11  At least when the output gap is defined in a “model-consistent” manner, i.e. as deviations of output from the 
level it would achieve in the absence of nominal rigidities. 
12  See: O. Blanchard and J. Galí (2007). “Real wage rigidities and the New Keynesian model”, Journal of Money, 
Credit and Banking 39(s1), pp. 35–65. 
BIS Review 45/2010 
 5
It is widely recognised that even modest deviations from the simplest version of the canonical 
model  introduce  caveats  to  these  very  strong  conclusions.  But  the  underlying  message  of 
these models remains: a policy aimed at stabilising inflation and the output gap at a horizon 
around  two  years  ahead  is  both  desirable  on  welfare  grounds  and  consistent  with  price 
stability over the medium term. 
Given  our  experience  over  the  past  few  years,  these  strong  conclusions  are  now  rightly 
treated  with  scepticism.  With  the  benefit  of  hindsight,  it  is  apparent  they  served  to  breed 
complacency  among  both  policy-makers  and  market  participants,  resulting  in  over-
confidence  in  the  ability  of  macro  policies  to  stabilise  the  economy.  Such  complacency 
contributed  to  both  poor  policy  choices  and  destabilising  private  sector  behaviour.  Such 
decisions may help to explain the emergence of financial crises in recent years.  
Critiques of the benchmark New Keynesian model are legion.13 I will not repeat them here. 
Suffice to note that an important weakness of these models was the absence of a financial 
sector.  As  a  consequence,  the  financial  intermediaries,  financial  frictions  and  asset  price 
bubbles  and  corrections  that  have  played  a  key  role  in  the  events  of  the  past  three  years 
were neglected. 
To  illustrate,  imagine  a  scenario  where  inflation  falls  because  of  a  positive  supply  shock, 
such  as  a  reduction  in  manufacturing  import  prices  from  Emerging  market  economies.  An 
inflation-targeting central bank would decrease its policy rates to boost inflation back towards 
its target level, simultaneously raising output closer to its new (temporarily higher) potential 
level. In this scenario, financial market participants would experience both stronger economic 
growth  and  lower  interest  rates,  all  in  an  environment  of  benign  price  developments.  The 
question arises of whether such circumstances can prompt financial market participants to 
assume a euphoric state: to take on more risk; to expand balance sheets more rapidly; to 
increase  leverage;  and  to  bid  up  asset  prices.  Such  developments  –  by  construction 
neglected in the benchmark model lacking a financial sector – may have a macroeconomic 
impact and, ultimately, undesirable consequences for both financial and price stability.  
Why should low interest rates in these circumstances induce such euphoria in the financial 
sector?  And  what  implications  can  it  have  for  credit  conditions  and  the  transmission  of 
monetary policy? 
Recent experience suggests that the monetary policy stance may affect the confidence – and 
thus the risk-taking behaviour – of financial institutions, in particular of banks.14 Since bank 
loans  are  illiquid  assets,  liquidation  is  costly.  When  liquidity  is  tight,  banks  curtail  their 
accumulation of illiquid assets, notably by constraining credit supply. However, if the central 
bank stands ready to lower interest rates when the financial system needs liquidity, financial 
institutions may be induced to accumulate illiquid and riskier assets on their balance sheets, 
given the implicit insurance provided by monetary policy.15 Low policy interest rates may also 
promote  a  “search  for  yield”,  as  investors  seek  to  maintain  their  nominal  rate  of  return  at 
historical  levels,  even  as  short  risk-free  rates  decline.  As  interest  rates  fall,  intermediaries 
take on greater risk so as to meet this demand for returns.  
                                                 
13  Prominent examples include, inter alia: P. Krugman (2009), “How did economists get it so wrong?” New York 
Times  (2  September);  and  W.H.  Buiter  (2009),  “The  unfortunate  uselessness  of  most  “state-of-the-art” 
academic monetary economics”, Financial Times (3 March). 
14  See: C.E.V. Borio and H. Zhu (2008), “Capital regulation, risk-taking and monetary policy: A missing link in the 
transmission mechanism?” BIS working paper no. 268. 
15  See:  Y.  Altumbas,  L.  Gambacorta  and  D.  Marques  (2010),  “Does  monetary  policy  affect  bank  risk-taking?” 
ECB working paper no. 1166; G. Jiménez, S.R.G. Ongena, J-L. Peydro and J. Saurina Salas (2010), “Credit 
supply: Identifying balance sheet channels with loan applications and granted loans”, CEPR discussion paper 
no.  7655;  and  A.  Maddaloni  and  J-L.  Peydró  (2009),  “Bank  risk-taking,  securitisation,  supervision  and  low 
interest rates: Evidence from lending standards”, ECB working paper, forthcoming. 
6 
 BIS Review 45/2010
level  of 
leverage.  Because 
interest  rates  also  encourage  a  higher 
Similar  institutions  will  adopt  a  similar  risk-taking  strategy.  Herding  will  emerge.  Risk 
management behaviour will become more correlated across financial intermediaries. Risk will 
rise not only at the individual bank level, but also across the system as a whole.16 
Moreover,  since  the  financial  sector  is  now  exposed  to  greater  liquidity  risk  as  a  result  of 
such behaviour, central banks are more likely to be called upon to intervene in the future. 
And the magnitude of such interventions will need to increase if they are to be effective. A 
“ratcheting-up”  of  risk  within  the  banking  sector  can  occur  over  time,  creating  increasing 
vulnerability.17 
Low 
financial 
intermediaries  –  whether  banks,  broker-dealers,  shadow  banks,  or  hedge  funds  –  finance 
themselves with short-term liabilities, central bank decisions on the level of short-term rate 
affect their marginal price of leverage. As a result, the behaviour of financial intermediaries – 
which,  by  their  nature,  have  high  levels  of  leverage  –  can  be  strongly  influenced  by  even 
small changes in short-term rates.18 Low levels of interest rates encourage higher levels of 
leverage and, as a result, an accumulation of additional risk on bank balance sheets. 
Through all these channels, a prolonged period of low short-term interest rates can support 
the accumulation of risks and financial imbalances on the balance sheets of both financial 
intermediaries and the private sector. These imbalances render the economy vulnerable to 
financial crises: if confidence evaporates, lenders call in loans, balance sheets contract and a 
painful readjustment is required, with adverse implications for financial stability and the real 
economy.  In  particular,  the  build-up  of  leverage  within  the  financial  sector  may  unwind 
abruptly, leading to a tightening of overall financing conditions.19 
Such  thinking  sheds  light  on  recent  developments  in  the  run-up  to  the  financial  crisis. 
Viewing the impact of globalisation on goods prices as the manifestation of a positive supply 
shock,  we  can  map  this  abstract  scenario  into  our  experience  of  the  past  decade.  At  the 
global level, the incorporation of emerging markets into the world economy weighed down on 
price developments (especially of manufactured goods). In response to the resulting benign 
inflation developments, the prevailing inflation targeting orthodoxy led to the adoption of an 
accommodative  monetary  policy  stance.  In  retrospect,  such  accommodation  was  probably 
inappropriate, at least to the extent that it supported the financial imbalances and asset price 
bubbles that underlay the recent financial crisis. Failure to take into account financial factors 
and channels of transmission led to a mis-calibration of the monetary policy response to the 
impact of globalisation. 
A simplistic account of the financial sector may have had other, adverse implications for the 
conduct  of  monetary  policy  in  recent  years.  Within  the  canonical  New  Keynesian  model, 
financial markets are “perfect”. On the basis of arbitrage considerations, long-term interest 
rates  and  other  yields  and  asset  returns  all  derive  from  the  expected  path  of  short-term 
interest rates determined by the central bank. 
Such a construct suggests that monetary policy-makers can steer long-term rates closely by 
simply making pre-commitments about the future path of short rates. No doubt there is an 
                                                 
16  See: E. Fahri and J. Tirole (2009), “Leverage and the central banker’s put”, American Economic Review 99(2), 
pp. 589–93. 
17  See:  D.W.  Diamond  and  R.G.  Rajan  (2009),  “Illiquidity  and  interest  rate  policy”,  NBER  working  paper 
no. 15197. 
18  See:  T.  Adrian  and  H.S.  Shin  (2009),  “Financial  intermediaries  and  monetary  economics”,  Handbook  of 
Monetary Economics, forthcoming; R.G. Rajan (2005), “Has financial development made the  world riskier?” 
Proceedings  of  the  FRB  Kansas  City  Jackson  Hole  symposium  “The  Greenspan  years:  Lessons  for  the 
future”; and F. Allen and D. Gale (2007), Understanding financial crises, Oxford University Press. 
19  See: G.B. Gorton and A. Metrick (2009), “Securitized banking and the run on repo”, Yale ICF working paper 
no. 09–14. 
BIS Review 45/2010 
 7
element of truth in this characterisation. But the conditionality of such pre-commitments on 
the  state  of  the  economy  may  prove  hard  to  communicate.  Financial  intermediaries  may 
interpret pre-announced paths as a liquidity guarantee, promoting the excessive risk-taking 
behaviour I have discussed. Such behaviour may then limit the future flexibility of monetary 
policy-makers to react promptly to changed circumstances.  
All in all, such pre-commitments are not useful and, may even be damaging. Effective central 
bank  communication  should  allow  market  participants  to  understand  the  decision-making 
framework. But a pre-commitment to a future path of short-term rates is best avoided. It limits 
the flexibility of policy-makers – operating within a transparent, rules-based framework – to 
take decisions as conditions evolve. Looking back over recent years, it seems likely that the 
adoption of such pre-commitments by some central banks led them to tighten policy too late 
and  too  slowly,  thus  helping  to  maintain  the  overly  loose  monetary  stance  that  fuelled 
financial imbalances. 
Assessing economic conditions 
3. 
Even  with  the  most  sophisticated  models  of  the  economy,  policy-makers  are  still  heavily 
reliant on an accurate assessment of the conjunctural situation. Yet the usual business cycle 
indicators  are  subject  to  a  variety  of  measurement  errors.  As  has  been  demonstrated 
extensively in the literature, the empirical proxies used to capture the output gap are subject 
to constant revision.20 Clearly, policy-makers who rely exclusively on such assessments of 
the cyclical position can be seriously misguided in their real-time conjunctural assessment. 
To  the  extent  that  these  indicators  are  central  to  the  implementation  of  flexible  inflation 
targeting, over-reliance on them may have led to an over-activist and at times inappropriate 
monetary policy stance. In particular, policy makers might also have formed an overly benign 
assessment of the situation prevailing in 2002–2004 if they relied excessively on output gap 
measures, as these measures were based on overly optimistic assumptions about potential 
growth. For instance, in early 2003 the IMF estimated the US output gap for that same year 
to be slightly above 2%. In early 2006 the estimate was revised down by 1 percentage point 
and one year later by another 1 percentage point. With the benefit of hindsight it turned out 
that in 2003 the output gap was basically nil (See figure 3).21  
Such considerations plague other composite indicators derived from the literature, such as 
the natural real interest rate.  
Understanding current inflation developments can also prove challenging. Headline inflation 
rates  may  be  volatile  in  the  short  term,  reflecting  the  impact  of  temporary  relative  price 
shocks.22  Monetary  policy-makers  need  to  look  through  such  noise.  But  conventional 
measures of so-called “core inflation” can themselves be misleading. For example, measures 
that exclude energy prices can offer a false impression of the underlying dynamics of inflation 
if energy prices are trending upwards. 
Clearly, policy-makers with a mistaken view of the conjunctural situation are liable to make 
policy  mistakes.  In  a  stylised  Taylor-rule  setting,  errors  in assessing  inflation  or  the  output 
gap will lead to flawed guidance on interest rate decisions. Such considerations may have 
led to overly accommodative monetary policy prior to the financial crisis.  
                                                 
20  See: A. Orphanides and S. van Norden (2002), “The unreliability of output gap estimates in real time”, Review 
of Economics and Statistics 84(4), pp. 569–583; and A. Orphanides and S. van Norden (2005), “The reliability 
of inflation forecasts based on output gap estimates in real time”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 37(3), 
pp. 583–601. 
21  L. Bini Smaghi (2009), “Monetary Policy and Asset Prices”, Freiburg University, 14 October 2009. 
22  Such as seasonal movements in food prices. 
8 
 BIS Review 45/2010
Spring vintages (2002–2009) of US output gap estimates by the IMF (WEO) 
Figure 3 
Source: IMF (WEO) data 
Note: Output gaps are defined as the percentage deviation of actual output from potential output. 
 To give one example, I have already discussed how the forces of globalisation at the turn of 
the  century  weighed  on  the  prices  of  manufactured  goods.  This  was  an  important  factor 
underpinning  the  benign  outlook  for  inflation.  Yet  the  rapid  growth  of  emerging  market 
economies had other implications for global price developments. Notably, commodity prices 
in  general  –  and  that  of  oil  in  particular  –  rose  rapidly  in  the  face  of  strong  demand  from 
China as well as from Brazil, Russia and India. Policy-makers who focused on measures of 
core inflation that excluded energy prices neglected the latter effect. They may have formed 
an  overly  benign  impression  of  the  consequences  of  globalisation  for  price  developments, 
and adopted an overly loose monetary policy as a result.  
Thus far, my discussion of the conjunctural assessment has focused on indicators motivated 
by the benchmark New Keynesian framework. But we need to include the financial sector. 
What  indicators  were  missed  by  central  banks  prior  to  the  crisis  due  to  the  neglect  of 
financial  factors?  What  additional  indicators  should  be  embodied  in  the  conjunctural 
assessment? 
Monetary  and  credit  aggregates  can  –  and  did  –  have  a  role  to  play.  At  least  in  part,  the 
ECB’s  oft-maligned  monetary  analysis  was  vindicated  by  the  crisis.  If  central  banks  had 
taken  the  signals  coming  from  strong  monetary  and  credit  growth  in  mid-decade  more 
seriously,  monetary  policy  decisions  might  have  been  better  calibrated  to  contain  the 
financial imbalances that ultimately led to the financial crisis.  
But  recent  events  have  also  revealed  weaknesses  in  traditional  monetary  indicators. 
Experience points to a need to deepen and broaden such analyses to take better account of 
the  fundamental  changes  observed  in  the  financial  sector  over  recent  decades.  New 
aggregates  and  indicators  need  to  be  developed.23  Work  at  the  ECB  is  proceeding  in  this 
direction. 
In  particular,  the  financial  crisis  revealed  weakness  in  central  banks’  understanding  of 
financial  fragilities  and  their  implications  for  the  real  economy  and,  ultimately,  price 
                                                 
23  See T. Adrian and H.S. Shin (2009), “Prices and quantities in the monetary policy transmission mechanism”, 
International Journal of Central Banking 5(4), pp. 131–142. 
BIS Review 45/2010 
 9
developments.  To  be  concrete:  while  demonstrating  concern  at  the  rapid  pace  of  credit 
growth, in retrospect we did not understand well enough the accumulation of leverage in the 
economy, in general – and in the financial system, in particular. And we took too benign a 
view  of  the  accelerating  securitisation  and  credit  risk  transfer  processes.  Rather  than 
distributing  risks  to  those  best  able  to  bear  them,  with  the  benefit  of  hindsight,  incentive 
problems in these processes led to a concentration of liquidity and credit risk. 
In  short,  central  banks  had  a  poor  understanding  of  the  complex  interconnections  among 
financial  intermediaries  and  with  the  real  economy,  both  domestically  and  internationally. 
Systemic  risk,  contagion  and  herding  behaviour  were  neglected.  Addressing  these 
weaknesses  in  existing  policy  frameworks  is  at  the  heart  of  the  ongoing  development  of 
so-called macro-prudential policy.  
To  sum  up,  the  main  weakness  of  monetary  policy  frameworks  prior  to  the  financial  crisis 
was their neglect of financial factors in the evolution of the economy and policy transmission. 
We need to refine our policy frameworks to take account of such channels. 
Monetary policy and macro-prudential policy 
4. 
Taking the role of the financial sector in monetary policy transmission more seriously reveals 
the  macroeconomic  consequences  of  microeconomic  behaviour:  the  impact  on  inflation, 
growth and financial stability of the behaviour of financial institutions. As a result, a revised 
framework has important implications for both the conduct of monetary policy and for policies 
aimed at maintaining financial stability.  
Viewing recent experience through this lens demonstrates that the achievement of financial 
stability  relies  on  more  than  traditional  micro-prudential  supervision  of  individual  financial 
institutions. Clearly, policy needs to take into account the impact of such externalities in order 
to  develop  a  framework  supporting  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  as  a  whole,  rather 
than the individual institutions which constitute it. 
By the same token, the preceding analysis demonstrates that taking appropriate monetary 
policy decisions relies on an understanding of the behaviour of financial intermediaries and, 
in turn, on financial structure and innovation. 
From a policy perspective, the impact of monetary policy on the behaviour of the financial 
sector suggests that short-term interest rates are a potentially powerful tool to influence the 
evolution of systemic risk, and thus to support financial stability. However, as I discussed at 
the  outset,  monetary  policy  should  not  be  overburdened  with  additional  objectives.  The 
primacy of the price stability objective must be retained.  
The well-known Tinbergen principle makes clear that a single instrument (short-term interest 
rates)  is  insufficient  to  achieve  two  goals  simultaneously.24  In  such  a  context,  additional 
policy instruments are required. This is where macro-prudential policy tools come into play. 
While  the  analytic  basis  and  calibration  of  instruments  such  as  pro-cyclical  capital 
requirements or leverage ratios require further elaboration, the hope is that such measures 
can contain the accumulation of financial imbalances and vulnerabilities without recourse to 
changes in short-term interest rates.  
Monetary  policy  and  macro-prudential  policy:  two  policy  instruments  and  two  policy 
objectives. At least in principle, the Tinbergen problem is resolved. 
But practicalities stand in the way. As I said earlier, it is immediately apparent that monetary 
policy  and  macro-prudential  policy  will  interact  in  a  variety  of  potentially  complex  ways, 
throwing  up  new  challenges  for  policy-making.  Of  course,  what  is  required  is  the  “right 
                                                 
24  See: J. Tinbergen (1952), On the theory of economic policy, Amsterdam, North-Holland. 
10 
 BIS Review 45/2010
typically 
foundered 
in  practice.  As 
combination” of prudential policies and monetary policy – a combination that simultaneously 
achieves both price stability and financial stability. How is this combination best achieved? 
We  can  draw  some  important  lessons  from  our  assessment  of  the  interaction  between 
monetary and fiscal policy in the past. Attempts to develop an optimal “macroeconomic policy 
mix”  are  superficially  attractive,  but  have 
the 
responsibilities of different policy-makers become blurred, their incentive to act appropriately 
is diluted and ultimately the overall coherence of the policy stance is lost.  
The institutional framework for monetary policy in the euro area reflects these concerns. The 
single monetary policy is independent and has been assigned an unambiguous objective of 
price  stability.  The  ECB  is  accountable  for  the  achievement  of  this  objective.  All  this  is 
understood  by  other  policy-makers.  By  acting  in  a  transparent  way  consistent  with  its 
mandate, the ECB creates an environment of price stability within which other authorities can 
take decisions under their responsibility in order  to achieve their own objectives. Clarity of 
responsibility, independence of action and accountability for decisions in an environment of 
open and frank exchange of information among policy authorities produces the best results. 
These  principles  can  be  readily  applied  to  the  relationship  between  monetary  policy  and 
macro-prudential  policies.  Of  course,  monetary  policy  decisions  can  have  implications  for 
financial  stability.  And  the  degree  of  freedom  accorded  by  the  medium-term  orientation  of 
monetary  policy  can  be  used  to  contain  excessive  risk-taking  by  banks.  In  this  sense, 
monetary  policy  can  support  financial  stability  objectives  without  prejudice  to  its  primary 
objective of price stability. 
But  this  does  not  imply  that  monetary  policy  should  be  held  jointly  accountable  for 
maintaining  financial  stability,  still  less  that  it  be  assigned  an  additional  financial  stability 
objective. Such measures would only serve to obscure the accountability of monetary policy-
makers  for  price  stability  and  dilute  the  accountability  of  those  authorities  responsible  for 
financial stability. All this leads me to re-iterate my earlier conclusion: the primary objective of 
monetary policy must remain price stability.  
By  contrast,  the  institutional  structure  for  prudential  supervision  and  regulation  at  the 
European level remains at an embryonic stage, especially on the macro-prudential side. The 
prospective creation of a European Systemic Risk Board will partly fill this lacuna.  
For  the  reasons  I  have  discussed,  financial  supervision  and  regulation  clearly  cannot  be 
conducted  without  reference  to  the  monetary  policy  stance.  But,  both  in  finalising  the 
institutional framework and in the conduct of these policies in the future, the principles I have 
articulated must be respected. We need to ensure that macro-prudential policy is formulated 
both  independently  and  transparently,  guaranteeing  a  rich  flow  of  information  among  the 
relevant authorities, including monetary policy-makers, while at the same time avoiding any 
blurring of responsibilities, objectives and accountability. 
Concluding remarks 
In  conclusion,  what  are  the  main  lessons  from  recent  experience  that  we  should  seek  to 
incorporate in any revision to the framework for monetary policy-making? 
First  and  foremost,  monetary  policy  should  have  remained  more  closely  focused  on  the 
maintenance of price stability over the medium term. This implies that this objective must be 
defined  clearly  and  pursued  symmetrically.  Monetary  policy  should  not  be  burdened  with 
additional objectives, which it is ill-equipped to pursue. 
The  institutional  independence  of  the  central  bank  is  essential  to  building  the  credibility 
required  to  pursue  price  stability  in  a  consistent  and  coherent  manner.  Dual  mandates  for 
monetary  policy  place  this  independence  at  risk.  Independence  accords  central  banks  the 
necessary flexibility to deal with a rapidly changing world without putting their credibility at 
risk. 
BIS Review 45/2010 
 11
Second,  monetary  policy  should  have  been  less  geared  to  fine-tuning  the  economy,  in 
particular to trying to reduce the output gaps which ex post turn out to be very different from 
their  real-time  measurement.  The  long  and  variable  lags  in  monetary  policy  transmission 
mean  that  a  medium-term  orientation  for  monetary  policy  must  be  maintained.  Temporary 
deviations  from  a  precise  inflation  objective  are  inevitable  –  monetary  policy-makers  must 
focus on containing persistent trends in inflation. Distinguishing between temporary and more 
persistent shocks to inflation is therefore crucial. Experience has shown that paying attention 
to specific measures of “core inflation” may mislead monetary policy. An overly mechanical 
view  of  such  indicators  can  lead  to  an  underestimation  of  the  strength  of  inflationary 
pressures at the global level. 
Third,  policy  decisions  should  have  been  based  on  better  models  of  monetary  policy 
transmission. Monetary and financial factors have been too easily dismissed, especially by 
inflation targeting regimes. Placing greater weight on monetary and credit indicators should 
allow interest rate decisions to be better calibrated to achieve the appropriate medium-term 
objectives of monetary policy. 
Can central banks learn from experience? They can if they are able to recognise what went 
wrong,  rather  than  sweeping  the  hard  questions  under  the  carpet,  and  if  they  are  able  to 
adapt their analytical and decision-making framework. Suggesting that monetary policy had 
nothing  to  do  with  the  crisis  will  not  help,  and  might  encourage  us  to  make  the  same 
mistakes in the future. The reaction to the crisis has however shown that central banks learn 
fast and can take decisive action to protect the economy. Their response is in stark contrast 
to  how  they  reacted  to  the  Great  Depression.  On  that  occasion,  monetary  policy-makers 
were largely responsible for causing the crisis, for deepening it and for preventing a quick 
recovery.  
We can be more optimistic this time around. 
12 
 BIS Review 45/2010
