Choongsoo Kim: Financial crises and policy responses – a Korean 
perspective 
Speech  by  Mr  Choongsoo  Kim,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Korea,  at  the  Bank  of  Japan’s 
annual Tripartite Governors’ Meeting, Tokyo, 3 August 2010. 
 The author wishes to express his gratitude to Dr K H Oh, Dr H J Kim, and Mr H S Shin for their assistance in 
drafting the paper. The views in the paper represent those of the author  and do not necessarily represent the 
views of the Bank of Korea.  
Introduction 
1. 
Honorable  Governor  Masaaki  Shirakawa,  Members  of  the  Policy  Board,  Ladies  and 
gentlemen,  
It is a great pleasure for me to have this opportunity to share ideas with you today on the 
topic  of  financial  crises  and  policy  responses.  The  latest  US  financial  crisis  hit  Asian 
countries hard as well, but they have shown remarkable resilience. And now Asia is regarded 
as the powerhouse for the growth of the global economy.  
However,  from  this  experience,  we  have  come  to  realize  that  the  interconnected  global 
economy is highly vulnerable to various shocks. Therefore, the governments and the central 
banks of G20 countries are now working hard on designing a new financial architecture to 
prevent further crises and to support sustainable and balanced growth.  
The  topic  of  today’s  speech  is  “Financial  Crises  and  Policy  Responses:  A  Korean 
Perspective.” In fact, I used to teach a graduate course titled “Economic Crisis Management” 
when I was a professor at a university in Korea. Since the 1997 Asian crisis, I have not been 
able  to  get the  topic  out  of  mind.  I  think  many  policymakers  in  emerging  market  countries 
have also had a similar obsession.  
The  plan  of  my  exposition  today  is  as  follows.  First,  I  will  briefly  talk  about  some  theories 
regarding  financial  crisis  and  secondly  I  will  review  the  history  of  financial  crises  with  a 
special  focus  on  the  period  since  the  1980s.  To  understand  the  situation  in  which  we  are 
placed,  it  is  helpful  to  look  back  and  draw  some  implications  from  the  past.  Lastly,  I  will 
discuss the measures under discussion in the G20 to lower the probability of future crises 
and mitigate their impact on the world economy.  
Economics of financial crisis  
2. 
Leo  Tolstoy  opened  Anna  Karenina  by  asserting,  “Happy  families  are  all  alike;  every 
unhappy  family  is  unhappy  in  its  own  way.”1  It  seems  this  phrase  also  applies  to  financial 
crises.  Each  crisis  may  have  its  own  causes  and  consequences.  Even  for  a  single  crisis, 
there  are  many  competitive  diagnoses  and  policy  prescriptions  by  researchers  and 
policymakers.  However,  it  is  also  true  that  there  are  some  common  elements  to  many 
financial  crises.  Understanding  these  common  factors  is  critical  for  preventing  a  potential 
financial crisis from materializing.  
Two key questions facing policymakers are how to reduce the risk of a financial crisis and 
how to cope with one when it does occur. Understanding the common elements of crises is 
                                                 
1   Quoted from James H. Stock and Mark W. Watson, “How Did Leading Indicator Forecasts Perform During the 
2001 Recession?” (Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly, Vol. 89/3, Summer 2003). 
BIS Review 104/2010 
 1
related to the first question and can contribute to reducing the probability of financial crises 
even though it is not possible to escape them completely. The second question is related to 
identifying  the  amplification  mechanisms  behind  a  crisis.  By  doing  this,  we  can  check  the 
spread  of  a  crisis  and  contain  the  consequences  once  it  has  been  triggered  and  a  crisis 
erupts.  
Causes of financial crises  
2.1 
There  are  several  frameworks  to  explain  the  origins  or  causes  of  financial  crises  in 
economics. Even though there may be many ways to categorize them, I would like to classify 
them into two broad categories: the “fundamentalist view” and the “human nature view.”  
The  first  view  posits  a  financial  crisis  as  a  rational  response  of  economic  agents  to 
exogenous events. Such external events include changes in fundamentals like the terms of 
trade or international financial market conditions which alter rational perceptions of agents as 
to future cash flows. Thereby, agents change their attitude toward risk, which is reflected in 
leverage  limits,  risk  pricing,  and  asset  prices.  Moreover,  according  to  this  view,  there  is  a 
fundamental intrinsic weakness within the financial system as Douglas Diamond and Philip 
Dybvig demonstrated.2 Banks provide liquidity services to the market and thus themselves 
take  on  large  liquidity  risks.  Due  to  this  inherent  weakness,  there  are  multiple  equilibria: 
everyone should stay in if everyone else does, but everyone should pullout if everyone else 
does. So, a relatively small exogenous shock can move an economy from one equilibrium to 
another one and sometimes provoke a devastating crisis.  
The  second  approach  is  based  on  the  view  that  human  nature  is  prone  to  irrationality. 
According to Hyman Minsky, the financial system itself has a tendency to generate economic 
instability  through  endogenous  waves  of  euphoria  and  anxiety.3  Myopia  and  herd-like 
behavior  rather  than  rational  long-term  calculations  are  common  and  they  lead  to 
endogenous cycles of manias and panics.  
From the point of past experiences, both frameworks seem to help explain some causes of 
financial  crises  as  these  are  not  only  driven  by  the  extent  of  fundamental  weakness  even 
though agents are rational, but also by the illusion or myopia on the part of policymakers and 
investors that “this time is different.”4 However, the two approaches still leave some gap to be 
filled with other factors like incomplete regulation leading to incentive misalignments, global 
capital flows or global imbalances, and so on.  
Amplification mechanisms  
2.2 
When  a  crisis  occurs,  the  loss  of  welfare  is  huge,  compared  with  the  size  of  the  initial 
problem. For example, according to the estimation of the IMF, the losses on U.S. subprime 
loans and securities were estimated at about $250 billion as of October 2007. However, the 
expected cumulative losses in world output associated with the crisis for the years from 2008 
to 2015 are forecast to run at $4,700 billion, about 20 times the initial subprime loss.5 Then, 
the  following  question  is  an  obvious  one:  How  could  such  a  relatively  limited  event  have 
effects of such magnitude on the national or world economy?  
                                                 
2   Diamond, Douglas W. and Philp H. Dybvig, 1983, “Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance and Liquidity,” Journal of 
Political Economy, Vol. 91, No. 3. 
3   Minsky,  Hyman  P.,  1993,  “The  Financial  Instability  Hypothesis,”  Handbook  of  Radical  Political  Economy, 
edited by Philip Arestis and Malcolm Sawyer, Edward Elgar: Aldershot. 
4   Reinhart, Carmen M. and Kenneth S. Rogoff, 2009, This Time is Different: Eight Centuries of Financial Folly, 
Princeton University Press. 
5   Blanchard,  Olivier,  2009,  “The  Crisis:  Basic  Mechanisms  and  Appropriate  Policies,”  IMF  Working  Paper, 
WP/09/80. 
2 
 BIS Review 104/2010
To explain this phenomenon, I would like to adopt the explanation put forward by Frederic 
Mishkin (1999).6 Financial markets perform the essential function of channeling funds to the 
individuals  or  firms  that  have  productive  investment  opportunities.  However,  relevant 
information  is  not  free  and  not  always  creditworthy.  The  basic  problems  in  the  financial 
system are asymmetric information: adverse selection and moral hazard. To address these 
problems,  various  measures  are  created  within  the  financial  system:  long-term  customer 
relationships, credit line arrangements, collateral posting, etc.  
However,  shocks  to  the  financial  system  make  the  adverse  selection  and  moral  hazard 
problems worse, and then credit tends to dry up, which is termed a “credit crunch.” The lack 
of  credit  leads  individuals  and  firms  to  cut  their  spending,  resulting  in  a  contraction  of 
economic activities. Four factors exacerbate asymmetric information problems, contributing 
to  financial  instability:  the  deterioration  of  financial  sector  balance  sheets,  rise  of  interest 
rates, increases in uncertainty, and the deterioration of non-financial sector balance sheets 
due to changes in asset prices.  
This  is  why  the  government  and  the  central  bank  intervene  in  financial  markets  promptly 
during a crisis. The central bank provides liquidity by acting as “the lender of last resort.” This 
helps  the  payment  system  work  smoothly,  and  prevents  the  price  of assets  from  dropping 
excessively. This, in turn, helps financial firms keep their balance sheets in better shape. The 
government  injects  public  funds  into  banks  for  recapitalization  and  helps  financial  firms 
dispose  of  their  non-performing  assets  by  establishing  special  agents  or  bad  banks. 
Sometimes,  the  government  and  the  central  bank  engage  in  financial  markets  directly  by 
taking  over  banks  or  buying  commercial  papers.  Another  important  measure  is  enhancing 
transparency  by  disclosing  key  economic,  financial  and  corporate  sector  information.  All 
these  measures  alleviate  the  asymmetric  information  problem,  helping  prevent  herd 
behavior.  
So  far,  we  talked  about  the  causes  and  amplification  mechanisms  of  crises.  Bearing  this 
theoretical understanding in mind, let us move on to the history of economic crises.  
A short history of financial crises  
3. 
Today, I would like to review four major financial crises that have taken place since 1980. 
These are the Latin American debt crisis of the 1980s, the Nordic Banking Crisis of the early 
1990s, the Asian currency crisis of the late 1990s, and the latest US financial crisis in 2007. I 
chose  them  because  they  are  most  relevant  for  understanding  the  evolution  of  the  global 
economy, although the choice may be somewhat arbitrary. I leave out the crisis which took 
place in Japan in the early 1990s and the long-term stagnation afterwards not only because I 
would not presume to venture in an area where your expertise is preeminent, but also it does 
not  have  great  relevance  to  today’s  topic.  As  we  review  each  crisis,  we  will  find  common 
characteristics as well as its own particular features.  
Latin America’s debt crisis of the 1980s  
3.1 
Let’s start by looking at the Latin American debt crisis of the 1980s. In the early 1980s, many 
Latin American countries found themselves in a situation where their foreign debt exceeded 
their earning power and they were not able to repay it.  
Even though quite a few researchers tried to explain the crisis as a result of the economic 
development  strategy  of  import  substitution  industrialization  and  heavy  reliance  on  raw 
material exports, the direct causes were the two kinds of abnormalities. On the one hand, the 
                                                 
6   Mishkin,  Frederic  S.,  1999,  “Global  Financial  Instability:  Framework,  Events,  Issues,”  Journal  of  Economic 
Perspectives, Vol. 13, No. 4. 
BIS Review 104/2010 
 3
governments and public sector typically took a large share of expenditures and investment in 
the economies, and thus the scale of the budget increased continuously. On the other hand, 
the  governments  were  unable  to  collect  the  necessary  taxes  to  pay  for  the  increased 
spending.7  
The consequence of this double problem was increased budget deficits, which in turn limited 
the capacity of the states to finance the deficit through raising debt. When the government 
could not resort to tax collection or further debt accumulation, printing money was the only 
option left, consequently resulting in hyper-inflation.  
The evolution of the international financial environment at the time also played a role in the 
process. During the 1970s, oil prices skyrocketed and oil-exporting countries invested their 
money  in  international  banks,  which  recycled  a  major  portion  of  this  as  loans  to  Latin 
American governments. However, at the end of the 1970s, the US Fed led by Paul Volcker 
raised  interest  rates  to  curb  inflation.  As  a  result,  interest  rates  in  global  financial  markets 
rose and the world economy went into a deep recession. The debt obligations that should 
have been met by the Latin American countries increased dramatically and it became much 
harder for them to pay back their debts. 
Consequently, in August 1982, Mexico declared that it would no longer be able to service its 
debt. And international commercial banks reduced new lending to Latin America significantly 
or halted it altogether. As much of the Latin American debt was short-term, a crisis followed 
when its rollover was refused. Sudden stops and massive capital outflows brought about a 
rapid depreciation of the Latin American currencies, thereby further raising the real interest 
rate. In terms of per capita real income, Latin America experienced negative growth of almost 
9 percent between 1980 and 1985.  
After the Latin American debt crisis, the so-called “Washington Consensus” emerged among 
economists and Washington, D.C.-based institutions such as the IMF and the World Bank. 
The term Washington Consensus was initially coined in 1989 by John Williamson, an economist 
of  the  Institute  for  International  Economics,  to  describe  a  set  of  specific  economic  policy 
prescriptions that he considered constitute the “standard” reform package.8  
Later,  what  was  understood  as  the  Washington  Consensus  came  to  include  more  market 
oriented  policies  such  as  capital  account  liberalization  and  was  looked  upon  as  a  kind  of 
ideology  promoting  free  market  economies.  However,  after  the  recent  series  of  global 
financial  crises,  the  Washington  Consensus  has  been  criticized  by  both  policymakers  and 
academics, and it no longer seems to have its past aura of “holy writ.” 
The Nordic banking crisis of the early 1990s9  
3.2 
A second major international financial crisis we should look at is the Nordic banking crisis. 
During  the  late  1980s  and  early  1990s,  nearly  all  major  banks  in  the  Nordic  countries  of 
Norway,  Sweden,  and  Finland  got  into  difficulties  and  made  huge  losses.  And  the 
governments of these countries had to provide public support to their banking systems.  
                                                 
7   Cavallo, Domingo F., 2004,  Lecture  Notes  for “Latin America and the  Washington Consensus” delivered  at 
Harvard University. 
8   The consensus consists of ten recommendations: fiscal discipline, a redirection of public expenditure priorities, 
tax  reform  (to  lower  marginal  rates  and  broaden  the  tax  base),  interest  rate  liberalization,  a  competitive 
exchange rate, trade liberalization, liberalization of inflows of foreign direct investment, privatization of state 
enterprises, deregulation (to abolish barriers to entry and exit), and secure property rights. (John Williamson, 
2000, “What Should the World Bank Think about the Washington Consensus?,” The World Bank Research 
Observer, Vol. 15, No. 2). 
9   Honkapohja,  Seppo,  2009,  “The  1990’s  Financial  Crises  in  Nordic  Countries,”  Bank  of  Finland  Research 
Discussion Papers, 5/2009. 
4 
 BIS Review 104/2010
The boom started with financial market deregulation, which led to an explosion of domestic 
bank  credit.  Following  financial  deregulation,  competition  between  banks  led  to  increased 
risk-taking. Another ingredient of the credit expansion was the freeing of international capital 
movements. A huge amount of capital flowed into the countries and a significant fraction of 
this was denominated in foreign currencies, but not hedged.  
On  the  other  hand,  the  rules  and  practices  in  prudential  regulation  and  bank  supervision 
were  left  unchanged  in  spite  of  the  rapid  deregulation.  Meanwhile,  social  welfare  policies 
distorted  the  market  mechanism  and  prevented  the  efficient  allocation  of  resources  by 
placing a high priority on the housing and public sectors. The tax system also contributed to 
the  credit  boom.  Full  tax  deductions  for  interest  payments  worked  as  an  incentive  to 
borrowers under a progressive tax system with high marginal rates.  
On  the  side  of  real  economy,  strong  external  demand  for  the  countries’  products  and  the 
positive terms of trade contributed to the domestic boom, rapidly pulling up real assets and 
stock prices. For example, the oil price surge in the early 1980s led to a boom in Norway, 
and the rise in the world market price of forest products contributed to the overheating of the 
Finish economy.  
However, the overall run-up of the upswing finally ended with the bursting of asset prices and 
a  huge  loss  to  the  banking  system.  The  bust  started  with  the  turnaround  of  international 
economic conditions. The oil price fall in 1986 was a major negative shock to Norway. With 
the  collapse  of  the  Soviet  Union,  Finnish  trade  with  Russia  quickly  decreased  in  1991. 
Moreover, after German reunification, interest rates rose in Europe as a result of Germany’s 
combination of an expansive fiscal policy with a tighter monetary policy.  
As  a  result,  the  three  countries  plunged  into  a  deep  recession  for  more  than  three  years. 
Finland  suffered  an  over  10  percent  cumulative  fall  in  GDP.  The  other  two  countries 
experienced a less severe loss but experienced three and four percent falls in their GDP.  
One  important  feature  to  note  about  the  Nordic  banking  crisis  is  that  while  the  crisis  was 
caused  by  excessive  liberalization  policies  without  due  adjustments  for  social  policies  and 
regulation settings, it was overcome without resorting to the financial rescue packages of the 
IMF.  
The Asian currency crisis of the late 1990s  
3.3 
Now let’s move on to the familiar Asian currency crisis of the late 1990s. East and South Asia 
had been widely acclaimed as successful models for economic development by international 
institutions  including  the  IMF  and  the  World  Bank.  Outward-oriented  growth,  high  savings 
and  investment  ratio,  low  inflation  and  strong  fiscal  positions  were  mentioned  as  the  key 
elements  in  the  successful  development  strategy.  Each  country  experienced  high  GDP 
growth  rates  of  8  to  12  percent  in  the  late  1980s  and  early  1990s.  How  then  did  these 
countries fall prey to such severe financial distress?  
The causes of the debacle are many and disputed. Huge capital inflows played a crucial role 
in the development of internal imbalances in the countries before the crisis. Capital inflows 
relative to GDP were very high in all affected countries for the pre-crisis period, ranging from 
5  percent  to  14  percent  of  GDP.  Moreover,  the  ratio  of  short-term  debt  denominated  in 
foreign currencies was quite high compared to central banks’ foreign reserves. The ratio of 
short-term debt to total foreign debt of the affected countries exceeded 50 percent.10  
As  foreign  capital  poured  into  the  Asian  countries,  lending  booms  emerged  in  all  these 
countries  before  the  crisis.  If  the  capital  inflows  and  lending  booms  had  enhanced  the 
                                                 
10   Corsetti,  Giancarlo,  Paolo  Pesenti,  and  Nouriel  Roubini,  1999,  “What  Caused  the  Asian  Currency  and 
Financial Crisis?,” Japan and the World Economy, Vol. 11, No. 3. 
BIS Review 104/2010 
 5
productivity  and  competitiveness  of  the  economies,  there  might  not  have  been  a  crisis. 
However, many of the loans were misallocated and eventually turned sour. Before the crisis, 
nonperforming loans exceeded 10 percent of total bank lending in those countries. The other 
aspect of capital inflows was the current account deficit. For example, Thailand, Indonesia, 
and Korea ran current account deficits of 8.0, 3.4, and 5.0 percent of GDP, respectively, in 
1996.  
The  crisis  started  in  Thailand  with  the  collapse  of  the  Thai  baht.  The  crisis  spread  quickly 
around  the  region.  Indonesia  and  South  Korea  were  particularly  hard  hit.  Hong  Kong, 
Malaysia, Laos and the Philippines were hurt by the slump, and the rest of the region also 
suffered from a loss of demand and confidence.  
The Asian financial crisis showed the weakness of an emerging economy against the volatile 
international  capital  markets.  Together  with  inflows  of  foreign  capital,  overconfidence  or 
excessive optimism created credit booms in the economies. Ironically, they were “victims of 
their  own  economic  success.11”  The  input-dependent  development  strategy,  which  had 
worked very well up until then, itself contributed to the crisis.  
After the crisis, Asian countries introduced various measures to tackle the weaknesses that 
had led to the crisis. First of all, they enlarged the scale of their foreign reserve accumulation 
as  the  first  line  of  defense.  They  also  shifted  to  a  free  floating  exchange  rate  system  to 
contain  the  excessive  capital  flows.  The  other  measures  included  making  financial 
surveillance and regulation efficient; improving the functioning of the market by breaking the 
links  between  businesses,  banks  and  the  government;  and  enhancing  transparency  by 
enforcing the duty of disclosure of key financial or corporate sector information.  
Controversy has raged over the IMF prescription for the affected countries. For example, the 
IMF was criticized as acting in Southeast Asia and Korea in much the same way as it had in 
the transitional economies of Eastern Europe. In short, the main criticism was that the same 
prescription was applied for different symptoms.12 Especially, in the case of Korea, interest 
rates were raised excessively in response to the foreign currency shortage, which resulted in 
a severe domestic credit crunch. However, I think that most of the measures during the crisis 
were inevitable to a certain extent and can be regarded as having erred more in their degree 
of severity rather than in their primary purpose.  
The latest US financial crisis  
3.4 
The final example of a major crisis we will review is the latest US financial crisis. Even though 
it is not yet clear whether the crisis has ended or not, it is certain that it will have a profound 
impact not only on our economies but also on our economic thought. There is even a saying 
that  we  face  not  only  an  economic  crisis  but  also  a  crisis  in  economics.13  As  you  are  of 
course all too well aware of the evolution of the US financial crisis, I will be brief on the crisis 
itself, instead focusing on the mechanism of propagation to emerging economies.  
The trigger for the crisis was the decline in housing prices in the United States. But, in the 
run-up to it, three elements had been working to bring about a major global crisis. The first 
element was credit expansion and asset price increase. During the first half of this decade, a 
benign  environment  of  low  inflation,  low  interest  rates  and  sustained  growth  led  people  to 
have  an  optimistic  attitude  with  regard  to  their  economies.  Some  people  enjoyed 
consumption  in  excess  of  their  income  level  for  too  long  a  period  of  time.  The  second 
                                                 
11   Kochhar,  Kalpana,  Prakash  Loungani,  and  Mark  R.  Stone,  1998,  “The  East  Asian  Crisis:  Macroeconomic 
Developments and Policy Lessons,” IMF Working Paper, WP/98/128. 
12   Feldstein, Martin, 1998, “Refocusing the IMF”, Foreign Affairs, Vol. 77, No. 2. 
13   Johnson,  Simon,  2009,  “The  Economic  Crisis  and  the  Crisis  in  Economics”,  A  speech  prepared  for  the 
Presidential Address to the Association for Comparative Economics, San Francisco, January 4. 
6 
 BIS Review 104/2010
ingredient  was  the  securitization  of  financial  assets  and  the  interconnectedness  between 
financial institutions both within and across countries. Basically, securitization should improve 
risk allocation and helps absorb shocks. However, in fact, it brought opacity with increasing 
complexity, and a large degree of uncertainty about the value of the securities because their 
evaluation became much more difficult. And the third ingredient was the increase in leverage. 
Financial  institutions  financed  their  portfolio  with  more  and  more  external  debt,  thus 
increasing  the  rate  of  return  on  capital.  Underestimation  of  risk,  moral  hazard  and  poor 
supervision were the factors underlying this.  
Around  the  end  of  2006,  US  housing  prices  stopped  rising  and  started  declining  rather 
steadily.  Many  marginal  mortgages,  especially  subprimes,  fell  into  default.  And  the  shock 
reverberated  through  the  securities  markets  and  financial  institutions.  As  asset  prices 
dropped  greatly,  financial  institutions  needed  to  improve  their  capital  ratio,  to  satisfy  either 
investors  or  regulatory  requirements.  To  do  this,  they  deleveraged  by  selling  part  of  their 
assets or reducing their lending.  
Through the deleveraging of financial institutions in the advanced countries, emerging market 
countries eventually started to get affected by the crisis that had originated from the former. 
Right after the financial crisis, it looked as if emerging markets might be shielded from the 
crisis.  But  things  changed  dramatically  after  Lehman’s  collapse  in  the  fall  of  2008.  In  the 
process  of  deleveraging,  banks  in  advanced  countries  started  to  drastically  reduce  their 
exposure to emerging markets, closing credit lines and repatriating funds. The situation was 
similar to the Asian crisis of the 1990s.  
Since the eruption of the latest U.S. financial crisis, much work for establishing remedial and 
preemptive measures has been going on, both in each country and internationally, ranging 
from the examination of the rules governing credit rating agencies to constraints on executive 
compensation, to new rules for evaluating assets on balance sheets, to the introduction of 
new regulatory capital ratios and so on. 
Here, I will not go into details of policy responses after the US financial crisis because these 
topics are now under discussion at the meetings of the G20, FSB, BIS, etc., and they are too 
specific to be discussed here and now. Instead, I would like to move on and touch upon the 
global  financial  safety  net,  which  is  one  of  the  most  important  agenda  items  for  the  G20 
Seoul Summit.  
Global financial safety net (GFSN)  
4. 
We learn more when something goes wrong than when everything hums along smoothly. We 
have become more knowledgeable about the global economy through a series of crises.  
As the global economy has become more integrated, crises have also evolved in their scope 
of influence and propagation mechanism. In the Latin American debt crisis and the Nordic 
banking crisis, the influence was more or less restricted within the territorial boundaries. Even 
though we name these crises by their region, contagion was not a big issue. However, since 
the Asian currency crisis, contagion has come to be understood as a key factor threatening 
the stability of the global economy.  
Principles of the GFSN  
4.1 
During the recent crisis, the affected emerging market countries responded through domestic 
policy actions by allowing exchange rates to depreciate, and by making use of accumulated 
reserves to help cushion the impact of the shock. But this was often only partially effective. In 
a number of cases, countries also needed to rely on external cooperation, including central 
bank  swap  lines,  precautionary  finance  from  the  IMF  in  the  form  of  the  newly  developed 
Flexible  Credit  Line  (FCL)  or  traditional  IMF  lending  through  a  series  of  Stand-By 
BIS Review 104/2010 
 7
Arrangements (SBAs).  These measures played a crucial role as a “fire break,” limiting the 
impact of the crisis and its further feedback.  
Based  on  these  experiences,  the  G20  has  recognized  increasing  capital  volatility  as  a 
serious future risk to the global economy. And, as a part of its efforts to pursue sustainable 
growth,  it  has  agreed  to  develop  ways  to  assist  countries  to  deal  with  such  problems. 
Notably,  the  Korean  government  has  put  forward  the  strengthening  of  the  global  financial 
safety net (GFSN) as a major item on the agenda for the G20 Seoul Summit to be held this 
November.  
From  past  experience,  we  find  the  GFSN  should  be  constructed  under  the  four  principles: 
certainty,  sufficiency,  stigma-free,  and  minimizing  moral  hazard.  These  principles  are 
important because a truly effective GFSN must work as a forward-looking crisis prevention 
mechanism  rather  than  a  crisis  resolution  mechanism.  When  countries  are  in  need,  they 
have to be assured of access to funds and the amount available has to be sufficient to cover 
problems.  And  eliminating  or  reducing  the  stigma  effect  is  also  very  important  to  enable 
countries in need to access the resource. If not, an application to the GFSN may create more 
problems than it solves, and the GFSN will become useless.  
Minimizing the moral hazard problem is also challenging, but must be dealt with in order to 
have  a  workable  GFSN.  When  I  emphasized  the  importance  of  the  GFSN  in  the  annual 
international conference of the Bank of Korea this June, some participants raised the moral 
hazard problem. I fully understand their concerns. Instead of giving up a system because of a 
moral  hazard  problem,  however,  we  should  design  the  system  to  minimize  it  efficiently.  In 
fact, we have various insurance schemes in our daily lives even though they are not immune 
to such problem. A GFSN can cope with it by extending funds only to countries with a strong 
track record and sound macroeconomic policies. In this way, it gives countries an incentive to 
keep the macroeconomy sound, bringing a virtuous cycle for the global economy.  
Current issues related to the GFSN  
4.2 
To  be  more  specific,  let  me  briefly  introduce  some  instruments  of  the  GFSN  which  are 
currently  under  discussion.  No  single  facility  can  meet  the  various  needs  of  countries 
because  each  country  confronts  a  different  situation.  A  GFSN  should  be  a  tightly-woven 
multi-layered network of facilities with their respective strengths. The GFSN could have three 
layers: bilateral, regional and global.  
An example of the bilateral layer is the swap lines between the central banks. The network of 
swap lines was highly effective during the last financial crisis. The swap between the BOJ 
and  the  BOK,  which  contributed  greatly  to  stabilizing  the  Korean  capital  market,  serves  a 
good  example  of  a  successful  bilateral  swap.  However,  the  flexible  nature  of  these  swap 
lines generates a significant degree of uncertainty for potential recipient countries because it 
is at the discretion of the issuing central banks.  
The  second  layer  is  regional  financial  safety  nets.  Regional  arrangements  in  Europe  were 
established  quite  rapidly  in  response  to  the  developments  in  Eastern  Europe  during  the 
2008–9  crisis  and  the  more  recent  euro  area  financial  distress.  In  the  Asian  region,  the 
Chiang Mai Initiative (CMI) of the ASEAN plus three countries has expanded into the Chiang 
Mai Initiative Multilateralisation (CMIM). We need to find the most effective way in which the 
IMF  and  the  regional  arrangements  can  mesh  together  through,  for  example,  coordinated 
surveillance or co-financing.  
Lastly,  various  liquidity  provision  facilities  of  the  IMF  make  up  the  global  level  layer  in  the 
GFSN.  The  Flexible  Credit  Line  (FCL)  of  the  IMF  was  a  critical  part  of  the  toolkit  in  the 
response to the latest crisis. This is a precautionary finance facility based on pre-qualification 
criteria. However, some countries feel the current FCL is not enough in view of the critical 
GFSN  principles  I  mentioned.  There  are  concerns  about  certainty,  sufficiency,  and  the 
stigma-effect.  Including  the  improvement  of  the  FCL,  a  Global  Stabilization  Mechanism 
8 
 BIS Review 104/2010
(GSM) is now under discussion. The GSM is a comprehensive liquidity-supporting framework 
which will be activated by the resolution of the Executive Board in the event of a systemic 
crisis. The GSM will allow qualified systemically important countries access to various types 
of liquidity line such as the FCL and the Short-term Liquidity Line (SSL). 
Concluding remarks  
5. 
In  Korea,  the  Asian  crisis  is  also  commonly  referred  to  as  the  IMF  crisis.  This  term  may 
indicate the fact that the IMF played a major role in resolving the crisis. But the term also 
reflects  the  bitter  emotion  felt  by  the  Korean  people.  In  a  sense,  such  emotion  has  some 
reasonable grounds in that the pain might have been much less acute if there had been an 
adequate GFSN at the time of the Asian crisis.  
The U.S. financial crisis highlighted the risk of sudden reversals of capital flows in emerging 
market  countries.  In  the  past,  these  sudden  reversals  were  typically  associated  with  the 
problems of emerging market countries such as mismanagement of macroeconomic policies 
and  a  weak  financial  regulatory  system.  This  time,  many  of  the  economies  affected  by 
contagion  had  strong  policy  frameworks  in  place.  In  this  sense,  the  crisis  hit  “innocent” 
bystanders through financial and trade channels.  
Now we are working hard to fix the system in the hope that the next crisis can be prevented 
by minimizing systemic risks. However, crises are still likely to happen in the future. It seems 
quite  natural  to  think  that,  even  if  jurisdictional  systemic  risks  are  somehow  controlled  for, 
“global”  systemic  risks  will  emerge  as  a  source  of  future  financial  crises  due  to  the  ever-
stronger trend toward the inter-connectedness of the world economy.  
It remains true that strong national economic and financial policy frameworks provide the first 
and most important line of defense for countries facing external shocks. But these are not 
enough in a globalized world. The GFSN will help cushion the impact of a crisis and limit its 
further propagation.  
And there is another issue I would like to raise. The current crisis was caused by systemic 
malfunctions  within  the  advanced  economies,  coupled  with  contagion  effects  on  the 
emerging  economies.  As  the  current  crisis  is  to  be  overcome,  we  may  well  find  that  the 
income  gaps  between  the  low  income  countries  and  the  rest  of  the  world  have  widened 
during the course of the crisis. International social instability as well as international financial 
instability will be an issue that must be dealt with soon to avoid a new type of crisis. This is 
one  of  the  compelling  reasons  that  we  are  putting  a  very  high  priority  on  “development” 
issues at the upcoming G20 meeting in Seoul.  
What then should be the role of central bankers in preventing and managing future financial 
crises? With the limited policy instruments available, central bankers should establish closer 
networking among themselves for active information sharing to cope with the ever-increasing 
cross-border transmission of domestic policy actions.  
I think there is much more that the Tripartite Governors’ meeting and our three central banks 
should be doing together in the future than they have in the past. For heightened prosperity 
and  stability,  let  us  go  forward  together  hand  in  hand.  In  this  way,  I  believe,  our  three 
countries can also contribute immensely to the global economy.  
Thank you for listening. 
BIS Review 104/2010 
 9
