Mario Draghi: 2010 World Savings Day 
Address by Mr Mario Draghi, Governor of the Bank of Italy and Chairman of the Financial 
Stability Board, at the 86th World Savings Day, Rome, 28 October 2010. 
 The international economy three years after the start of the crisis 
The recovery and international cooperation 
Economic  recovery  is  strong  in  the  emerging  countries,  weak  in  the  United  States  and 
uneven in the euro area. Economic policy responses have differed. 
Monetary policies have remained expansive everywhere, but while in the euro area there is 
now talk of tightening, in the United States a further expansion of liquidity through Federal 
Reserve purchases of treasury paper has been announced. 
In  Europe  budgetary  policies  are  now  clearly  directed  at  containing  deficits  and  reducing 
debt; this is not the case elsewhere. 
Some  countries  are  making  foreign  exchange  interventions  to  support  their  exports. 
International  payments  imbalances  are  beginning  to  widen  again;  currencies  with  market-
determined  exchange  rates  are  being  affected  by  the  policy  differences  and  the  resulting 
speculative pressures; global recovery is at risk.  
The only answer is for the main countries to coordinate their economic policies more closely. 
Some commitments were made at the last meeting of the G20: to pursue structural policies 
to support global demand; to keep current account imbalances within sustainable limits; to 
forgo  all  forms  of  protectionism;  to  move  towards  flexible  exchange  rates  more  consistent 
with the fundamentals, while working to reduce the volatility of capital flows to the emerging 
countries; and, in the advanced countries, to draw up budget consolidation programmes for 
the medium term that are credible and promote growth. These are not rhetorical conclusions, 
but follow from a hard-won recognition of the inevitability of collective action. 
Financial regulation 
Where this action is already taking the greatest steps is in the construction of a global system 
of financial regulation. The driving force is to be found within the G20; the reform of the Basel 
rules is a milestone.  
The  new  rules  introduce  a  definition  of  bank  capital  that  is  common  to  all  countries;  they 
provide for a significant increase in both the level and the quality of this aggregate; they limit 
financial  leverage,  counter  liquidity  risks,  and  mitigate  the  procyclical  trends  inherent  in 
financial intermediation.  
In comparison with the rules in force, those that have now been defined are innovative on 
several fronts and incisive. At the same time, they will be applied gradually to ensure that 
banks can continue to operate smoothly and that firms and households do not suffer from 
credit restrictions. 
To make the transition to the new rules easier for banks, the Bank of Italy will set up a help 
desk  to  explain  how  the  rules  are  to  be  interpreted  and  to  ensure  that  intermediaries 
implement management policies consistent with achievement of the new requirements. 
Basel III will make the banks stronger, but it does not address the question of the risks posed 
by Systemically Important Financial Institutions (SIFIs), whose size or presence in the most 
BIS Review 148/2010 
 1
important  financial  nerve  centres  means  they  would  be  rescued  at  any  cost  if  they  were 
about to fail. 
At the next G20 summit, the Financial Stability Board will submit a set of proposals for the 
creation of an institutional and regulatory environment within which SIFIs will be better able 
to absorb very large losses without going into a full-blown crisis and governments can allow 
them to fail when necessary. 
These  proposals,  endorsed  by  G20  Finance  Ministers  and  Central  Bank  Governors  at  the 
recent meeting in Seoul, are based on four pillars: 
i)  
Institutional arrangements should be adopted in all countries that will allow SIFIs to 
be  resolved  without  the  global  financial  system  running  severe  risks  and  without  having 
recourse to taxpayer money, as happened for the desperate rescues of the last few years. 
The national laws that hinder international cooperation today must be amended; agreements 
between home and host authorities must be drawn up, with roles and responsibilities clearly 
defined. Under Italian law the Bank of Italy already has sufficient instruments at its disposal; 
only a few adjustments will be required to transpose the international recommendations. In 
particular, the supervisory authority must be empowered to set up bridge banks to which the 
assets  and  liabilities  of  a  troubled  institution  can  be  temporarily  transferred,  to  ensure 
continuity of operations pending its disposal on the market. 
ii)  
SIFIs, especially those operating at global level, will need to have capital or other 
instruments equally capable of absorbing losses available in amounts greater than those laid 
down by the Basel III standards. Shareholders – and in some cases bondholders as well – 
must  be  asked  to  shoulder  some  of  the  losses  in  difficult  times;  among  other  things  this 
would strengthen both market discipline and investor scrutiny of management decisions. It is 
therefore  possible  to  envisage  the  introduction  of  more  severe  capital  requirements  than 
those  imposed  on  non-systemic  intermediaries,  debt  instruments  that  would  automatically 
convert to capital when banks’ ratios fall below a certain safety threshold (contingent capital), 
reductions (haircuts) for some creditors in the face value of debt during a crisis (bail-in). 
iii)  
Supervision  of  SIFIs  needs  a  broader  mandate  ensuring  greater  independence  of 
supervisors, enhanced resources and powers consonant with the degree of complexity of the 
supervised institutions. 
iv)  
The trading of the derivative products that can be standardized must take place on 
regulated markets or platforms with central counterparties, supervised by the authorities and 
having adequate capital and organizational resources. Trade reporting for all products must 
be channelled to trade  repositories that the authorities can access, including for economic 
policy purposes.  
The FSB will also submit proposals on another issue raised by the recent financial crisis: the 
role and function of credit rating agencies. The importance of external ratings for regulatory 
purposes must be gradually reduced. It is not a question of denying their general validity, but 
rather  of  addressing  the  most  obvious  drawbacks  associated  with  their  mechanical 
application, in terms of systemic procyclicality and potential destabilization of markets.  
Italian banks and the supervisory authority  
Banks’ situation and performance 
The results of the stress tests for the European banks published on 23 July 2010 confirmed 
the  high  degree  of  resilience  of  the  major  Italian  banks  to  scenarios  prefiguring  not  only 
macroeconomic decline but also a significant increase in sovereign risk. 
From the beginning of April to yesterday, CDS premiums for the three largest Italian banks 
rose by 63 basis points, reflecting the increase in those on sovereign debt. The Italian banks, 
together  with  their  Spanish  counterparts,  are  the  only  ones  in  the  euro  area  to  have 
2 
 BIS Review 148/2010
maintained  premium  levels  lower  than  those  on  sovereign  debt.  However,  the  increase 
weighs  on  the  cost  of  long-term  fund  raising,  at  a  time  when  large  volumes  of  bonds  are 
nearing maturity. 
It is important that the maturity structure of banks liabilities not be unduly tilted towards the 
short  term,  increasing  the  vulnerability  of  their  liquidity  position,  which  up  to  now  has 
remained balanced in even the most severe phases of the crisis.  
As  of  June,  the  resources  of  the  five  leading  Italian  banking  groups  best  able  to  absorb 
losses (core tier 1 capital) had reached on average 7.7 per cent of their risk-weighted assets, 
1.2 points more than in June 2009 and 2 points more than at the end of 2007. 
Compliance  with  the  new  rules  imposing  a  higher  standard  of  quality,  a  minimum 
requirement of 4.5 per cent for core tier 1 capital, and an additional buffer of 2.5 per cent will 
also make it necessary for Italian banks, above all the large ones, to strengthen their capital 
base significantly, although the time allowed to make the adjustment will mitigate the severity 
of the reform. Italian banks are not at a disadvantage internationally: the requirements have 
been  tightened  even  further  for  trading  in  securities  and  derivatives,  which  generate  less 
business in Italy. 
As  regards  lending  to  small  and  medium  enterprises,  the  preferential  treatment  already 
applying to the calculation of capital adequacy will remain in place. The capital of the smaller 
banks,  which  are  the  main  ones  serving  SMEs,  is  already  well  above  the  new  regulatory 
requirements. 
International studies indicate that the macroeconomic cost of adapting to the new rules will 
be more than offset by the benefit of a lesser likelihood of new systemic crises. 
Our fiscal treatment of write-downs and losses on loans has encouraged the setting up of 
balance-sheet provisions that do not entirely qualify as capital under the new Basel III rules. 
We  must  work  towards  finding  a  solution  to  this  problem  in  the  coming  months,  one  that 
combines  the  need  to  prevent  an  evident  competitive  disadvantage  for  our  intermediaries 
with the need to safeguard the public finances in the medium term. 
Like other banking systems founded on the traditional business of intermediation, our banks 
are also experiencing a decline in profitability. In the first half of this year the average ROE of 
the five leading Italian banks fell to 4 per cent, one percentage point lower than in the same 
period of 2009. 
Trading and investment banking contribute less to profits than in some of the other European 
groups. Profit and loss accounts, already affected by low interest rates and small volumes of 
business, now also have to cope with a significant deterioration in loan quality. 
We  will  be  careful  to  ensure  that  banks’  provisioning  policies  take  account  of  the  delicate 
nature  of  this  phase,  to  ensure  that  internal  models  for  assessing  asset  quality  pick  up 
tensions and internal stress tests are promptly updated. 
It is imperative, in order to support profitability, to take action on costs, which are higher in 
relation to income than the European average. The temptation to resort to strategies entailing 
excessive risks or to demand exorbitant commissions from clients who are less well-informed 
or in difficulty must be avoided. 
In the months to come, if the pick-up in lending we now see proves lasting, it will support 
interest  income.  Not  long  ago,  Italian  banks  demonstrated  that  they  were  able  to  boost 
revenue by increasing the range and quality of the services they offered, improving their risk-
assessment procedures and raising the level of their operating efficiency. This course must 
be resumed. Only by taking action on several fronts will it be possible to achieve levels of 
profitability that allow the system’s capitalization to be increased while ensuring the ability to 
finance the economy. 
BIS Review 148/2010 
 3
Banks’ governance and the role of the foundations 
More  than  two  years  have  passed  since  the  Bank  of  Italy,  anticipating  international 
developments,  laid  down  rules  on  banks’  governance.  Adequate  debate  and  collegiality  in 
taking  strategic  decisions,  unity  of  managerial  approach  in  running  the  business  and  an 
effective  and  aggressive  structure  of  controls  at  every  level  are  the  essential  elements  of 
sound  and  prudent  management.  I  take  this  occasion  to  underscore  some  guidelines  for 
action in this field. 
The  Bank  of  Italy  does not  interfere  improperly  with  entrepreneurial  autonomy.  It  does  not 
pretend  to  dictate  specific  internal  structures,  especially  for  the  largest  and  most  complex 
banks.  However,  it  does  consider  it  necessary,  whatever  the  structure  chosen,  that  the 
chains  of  reporting  and  command  be  established  unambiguously,  that  effective  flows  of 
information  to  and  from  the  top  be  ensured,  and  that  the  responsibilities  of  the  governing 
bodies and the individual managerial levels be set down in a transparent manner. 
One of the clearest lessons of the crisis is that the risk management function in banks must 
cover  all  strategies  and  transactions,  dialogue  authoritatively  with  the  lines  of  business  at 
every level, report directly, promptly and  thoroughly to top management and the corporate 
management bodies. 
The corporate officers of banks with control tasks, who have particularly sensitive functions, 
must  have  professional  expertise  adequate  to  the  complexity  of  assets  and  risks.  The 
obligation  to  inform  the  Bank  of  Italy  of  every  fact  that  might  affect  sound  and  prudent 
management must be complied with, on pain of sanctions. 
The delicate, specific responsibilities of directors and members of the control bodies of banks 
require  adequate  time  and  commitment.  With  this  in  mind,  it  is  advisable  to  consider  the 
possibility of rules limiting multiple office-holding. 
The  Italian  experience  of  banking  foundations  is  positive,  not  only  for  the  important 
contribution  they  make  to  socially  commendable  activities,  but  also  for  the  role  they  have 
played as stable, solid shareholders in banks; a role filled in other countries by institutional 
investors, which are rare in Italy. During the crisis, the foundations’ long-term view of banks’ 
prospects and their roots in the territory – factors driving development at local, regional and 
national level – were crucial. When other shareholders, such as investment funds, until the 
eve of the crisis so vociferous in demanding efficiency gains and changes of management, 
vanished,  often  for  good,  it  was  the  foundations  that  subscribed  for  the  repeated  capital 
increases that made it possible to weather the storm unscathed. 
Just as the future promises to be challenging for banks, it will be challenging for their largest 
shareholders as well. 
The  foundations  will  have  to  act  on  three  key  fronts:  their  own  governance,  the 
recapitalization of banks and self-discipline in their relationship with banks’ managements. 
For the action of banks’ control bodies to be adequate, it is necessary that the boards of their 
main shareholders, which help to elect them, be equally adequate.  
For the reasons described earlier, they will be asked to make a significant effort to strengthen 
banks’ capital, an effort to be faced without flinching. The foundations must continue to take 
a long view; they must understand that they cannot sacrifice the prospects of their banks and 
the economies they serve to the desire for immediate monetary returns, which, besides, are 
now harder to obtain. 
The Italian experience of public banks is vivid in our memory. Certain relationships between 
local economic groups, public banks and politics ultimately proved disastrous for the banks 
and  deleterious  for  civic  mores;  in  more  than  one  case,  local  development  was  hindered 
rather than helped. With great, conscious effort we worked our way free of this logic twenty 
years ago; other countries now look to the Italian experience. No one wants to turn back. 
4 
 BIS Review 148/2010
Growth and employment 
While the Italian banking system may have withstood the global financial crisis of 2007–08 
better  than  others,  the  recession  that  it  provoked  was  especially  severe  in  our  country, 
driving annual output in 2009 down to the level of nine years earlier. And as we have seen, 
the  difficulties  of  households  and  firms  are  now  having  repercussions  on  banks.  But  the 
recession does not appear to have halted the modernization of the productive system that we 
began to see towards the middle of the decade. 
The forecasts for GDP growth this year and next are scarcely 1 per cent. In the first half of 
this year economic activity benefited from the expansion of exports, which are now slowing. 
Economic  growth  needs  the  contribution  of  domestic  demand:  the  virtuous  circle  in  which 
advanced  models  of  consumption  and  farsighted  investment  lead  to  high  and  widely 
distributed incomes, hence further consumption and well-being. 
Consumer  spending  is  stagnating  today  because  the  real  incomes  of  households  are  not 
rising and there is widespread uncertainty about the future. The central issue is the state of 
the labour market, which needs to be analyzed considering all the available indicators and 
reliable sources of information. 
The number of people in work in Italy fell by 560,000 between the second quarter of 2008 
and  the  fourth  quarter  of  2009,  largely  among  fixed-term  and  part-time  employees  and 
persons who are formally self-employed but in almost every way have the characteristics of 
wage-earners. The first half of 2010 saw a sluggish recovery, with a gain of 40,000 jobs. 
As in other European countries, the impact of the recession was attenuated by large-scale 
resort  to  short-time  programmes.  Between  September  2008  and  August  2010  a  total  of 
1.8 million  hours  of  Wage  Supplementation  were  authorized,  equivalent  to  about  half  a 
million full-time workers each year. From the onset of the crisis, the Government extended 
eligibility for these benefits to additional workers. 
The unemployment rate has reached 8.5 per cent of the labour force, including off-the-books 
workers.  For  a  fuller  assessment  of  the  state  of  the  labour  market,  many  national  and 
international  statistical  agencies  also  use  other  measures  of  underutilization  of  labour.  In 
addition  to  the  officially  unemployed,  such  measures  also  count  workers  on  short-time 
programmes like Wage Supplementation, discouraged workers (those who want jobs and are 
available to work but have given up active search for a job because they have lost hope of 
finding one), and those who have part-time but want full-time jobs. In Italy, counting only the 
first  two  of  these  categories,  the  labour  underutilization  rate  is  above  11  per  cent  of  the 
potentially employable, about the same as in France and higher than in the United Kingdom 
and Germany. 
 Italy faced the crisis with a budget deficit still close to 3 per cent of GDP and a public debt 
that, though gradually diminishing, was still high by international standards. The response to 
the  crisis  was  prudent,  and  the  repercussions  on  the  public  finances  were  smaller  than  in 
other  countries,  thanks  in  part  to  the  absence  of  bank  bailouts.  If  fully  implemented,  the 
measures  of  the  three-year  public  finance  package  approved  in  July,  curbing  current 
expenditure and reducing tax evasion, could bring the debt ratio back onto a downward path. 
The euro-area countries have responded to the recession of recent months both individually, 
with fiscal policy measures designed to contain sovereign risk and prevent contagion, and 
collectively, with new institutions and rules. This demonstration of cooperation, solidarity and 
firm resolve has consolidated the euro. Though the process has not yet been completed, it 
has  shown  that  the  countries  with  the  weakest  public  institutions  are  not  in  a  position  to 
overcome their economic policy difficulties on their own. With European rules that are quasi-
BIS Review 148/2010 
 5
automatic, fast-acting and sensitive to market signals, they draw on the stronger countries for 
the determination they themselves lack. 
Much  has  been  done  in  controlling  deficits  on  the  front  of  the  public  finances,  but  the 
fundamental  pillar  of  financial  stability  is  economic  growth,  without  which  debts  will  not  be 
repaid.  This  is  the  front  on  which  the  Union’s  cohesion  will  be  tested:  the  ability  to  foster 
harmonious, rapid, sustained growth embracing all the member states, with common rules 
that,  like  those  governing  the  public  finances,  help  the  countries  lagging  behind  in 
undertaking the structural reforms needed if they are to return to faster growth. 
6 
 BIS Review 148/2010
