Jean-Claude Trichet: Lessons from the crisis 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
European American Press Club, Paris, 3 December 2010. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I would like to start by thanking the organisers for inviting me to share with you my thoughts 
on the economic and financial crisis. The crisis is not yet over, but we should certainly start 
drawing lessons and we should certainly start implementing them.  
Times  are  challenging,  and  Europe’s  citizens  expect  all  policy-makers  to  be  up  to  the 
responsibilities of fulfilling their respective mandates.  
As far as the European Central Bank (ECB) is concerned, I recall that we were among the 
first  central  banks  in  the  world  to  react  to  the  outbreak  of  the  financial  turmoil  back  in 
August 2007. Since then, we have continued to act with a posture that I have called “credible 
alertness”.  This  posture  includes  both  standard  monetary  policy,  which  is  implemented 
through  interest  rate  changes,  and  non-standard  policies,  which  are  implemented,  in 
essence,  through  special  liquidity  operations  and  interventions  in  some  bond  markets 
including covered bonds.  
It is my opinion that the ECB’s Governing Council has demonstrated a strong ability to keep 
the  European  monetary  vessel  on  course  through  the  waves  of  a  financial  storm  that  has 
often been defined as the most serious since the Great Depression. Throughout the global 
crisis, resolute action by policy-makers has helped to avoid a repeat of the economic policy 
disasters of the 1930s – and to foster close cooperation around the world, including among 
central banks. 
But recent developments in European sovereign debt markets remind us that the crisis is not 
yet over. They also remind us that Economic and Monetary Union rests on two pillars: an 
“Economic” pillar and a “Monetary” pillar.  
The  “Monetary”  pillar  obviously  refers  to  the  ECB,  its  mandate  and  its  independence.  The 
“Economic” pillar comprises the fiscal regime enshrined in the Stability and Growth Pact; the 
national frameworks of economic policy; and the system of mutual surveillance.  
It is very important to understand – and it has perhaps not yet been sufficiently understood – 
that the developments we are currently witnessing in Europe’s economy have to do with the 
“Economic” functions of Economic and Monetary Union. They have essentially three origins: 
unsound fiscal policies in a number of Member States; inappropriate macroeconomic policies 
in  a  number  of  Member  States;  and  overall  an  inadequate  system  of  surveillance  by  all 
Member States.  
This is the triangle that provides the perimeter of the current situation.  
The  solution  to  these  three  elements  involves  both  the  responsibility  of  national  fiscal 
authorities in ensuring sound fiscal policies in each and every member state and the ability of 
Europe’s policy-makers to design and implement a truly effective system of macroeconomic 
and fiscal surveillance.  
 Today I would like to start by discussing the two pillars of Economic and Monetary Union. 
Then I will briefly describe how the ECB has responded to the crisis. And finally, I will touch 
on the current economic situation and conclude with the key challenges that lie ahead of us 
in achieving effective economic governance in Europe. 
BIS Review 162/2010 
 1
The “monetary” pillar: price stability in the euro area  
The Treaty assigns to the ECB direct responsibility for maintaining price stability. From the 
outset  the  ECB  has  set  itself  a  very  clear  numerical  benchmark,  which  is  a  public  and 
transparent  measure.  The  ECB’s  Governing  Council  has  defined  price  stability  to  be  an 
annual rate of inflation in the euro area of below 2%, but close to 2%, over the medium term.  
We now have almost 12 years of experience with the euro – enough time to judge whether 
the ECB has been successful in delivering its mandate. Over these 12 years, the average 
annual inflation rate in the euro area has been 1.97%. We have achieved price stability in the 
euro area over what has already been quite a long horizon. It is the best result of any of the 
larger countries in the euro area for at least 50 years.  
The  conditions  for  achieving  price  stability  have  not  always  been  easy,  and  the  ECB’s 
Governing  Council  has  had  to  face  a  number  of  economic  and  political  shocks  since  we 
began, in 1999, with a new institution, a new currency and a new framework for monetary 
policy-making.  
Over the years we have had to cope with highly volatile developments in many components 
of  the  consumption  basket  –  including  oil  prices  in  the  vicinity  of  $150  per  barrel  – 
considerable variations in exchange rates, the bursting of the internet bubble and the fallout 
of the terrorist attacks on the US, to name but a few. Hence, the track record, with 12 years 
of price stability, is worthy of note.  
For France, the inflation rate has been even lower than the average in the euro area over the 
past 12 years: 1.8% per year on average from 1999 to October 2010. This is even slightly 
lower than, but very close to, the average rate of inflation in France in the 1990s prior to the 
introduction of the euro, which was 2.0%. In the 1980s, it was 7.4% and in the 1970s 8.8%. 
The credibility of the euro, as measured by its ability to preserve purchasing power, is better 
than its legacy currencies have been over the last 50 years. 
The “economic” pillar: sound and sustainable fiscal policy 
The  “Economic”  pillar  of  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  rests  on  two  ideas.  First,  fiscal 
policies must align with the requirements laid out in the Stability and Growth Pact. Second 
macroeconomic policies must be aligned with the general rules governing the participation in 
a monetary union that is based on price stability.  
I want to be candid with you today. The roots of the sovereign debt tensions we face today lie 
in  the  neglect  of  the  rules  for  fiscal  discipline  that  the  founding  fathers  of  Economic  and 
Monetary Union laid out in the Maastricht Treaty.  
We know that for several years, fiscal policies in many European countries have breached 
both the letter and the spirit of the Stability and Growth Pact. The Pact calls for budgets that 
are close to balance or in surplus over the cycle, deficits below 3% of GDP and a public debt 
level of below 60% of GDP. When a few years ago it became clear that in some countries 
fiscal policies would not be able to meet the rules of the Stability and Growth Pact, it was not 
the policies that were changed but the Pact. This was clearly a mistake. 
In  2004  and  2005,  several  governments,  including  the  government  of  the  larger  Member 
States, were actively trying to dismantle the Stability and Growth Pact. It was a very fierce 
battle at the time, and the ECB publicly voiced its grave concerns.  
The second area of policy slippage concerns macroeconomic policies. In a monetary union, 
national developments in prices and costs have to take account of the fact that the union is a 
union  of  monetary  stability.  Therefore,  national  price  and  costs  developments  significantly 
higher  than  the  union  average  entail  significant  losses  over  time  in  competitiveness. 
Competitiveness  losses  cannot  be  sustained  forever,  and  sooner  or  later  adjustments  in 
unsustainable  economic  policies  have  to  be  made.  Fiscal  and  structural  policies  need  to 
2 
 BIS Review 162/2010
keep domestic demand in line with rates of sustainable growth and price stability. Otherwise, 
booms and busts may prevail.  
Both fiscal and macroeconomic policies are monitored by the peers, supported mainly by the 
European Commission. The Eurogroup and Ecofin meetings of finance ministers are the fora 
for such peer monitoring. Of course, effective monitoring requires adherence by members to 
the  policy  framework,  it  requires  peer  pressure  and  consequences  to  deal  with  deviant 
behaviour, and it requires reliable statistics.  
Reinforcing economic governance is essential. Fiscal and macroeconomic surveillance have 
fallen short of the requirements of a monetary union. Fiscal policy conduct has quite often not 
been in line with the Pact, macroeconomic policies have been too loose, and peer pressure 
has overall been weak. These problems were visible well before the financial crisis, but the 
crisis has certainly taught us that there is no excuse for those that have not lived up fully to 
their responsibilities. 
I will come back the institutional remedies the ECB thinks are necessary to deal with these 
issues  in  a  moment.  But  first  let  me  turn  directly  to  the  crisis  and  illustrate  how  the  ECB 
operational framework helped us in tackling the challenges that the financial turmoil posed 
for monetary policy.  
The financial crisis and the policy responses 
It is fair to say that more than three years since the crisis began in the summer of 2007, there 
is a broad agreement on the role of imprudent practices in the financial sector. Over the few 
years preceding the crisis, the focus of finance moved towards the creation of financial risk, 
and away from the sound management and insurance of economic risks, typically borne by 
entrepreneurs that are willing to take risk and need financing.  
Financial  risk  is  different  from  economic  risk.  It  entails  a  deliberate  exposure  to  expected 
asset price changes. Inasmuch as it supports price discovery, financial risk-taking contributes 
to efficient allocation of resources in market economies. It can at times become toxic when it 
is based on wrong perceptions of risk.  
The  events  that  unfolded  after  15  September  2008,  when  Lehman  Brothers  filed  for 
bankruptcy,  threatened  to  create  severe  damages  for  borrowers  and  for  the  broader 
economy.  Banks  and  other  financial  intermediaries  shed  risky  and  illiquid  investments  and 
rushed  to  liquidity,  banks’  intermediation  was  reduced  and  loans  to  companies  were 
curtailed. If not tackled promptly, such developments could eventually have led to financial 
meltdown. 
As I mentioned, the ECB was among the first central banks to recognise the severity of the 
situation as early as August 2007, when the turmoil began and prompted our first reaction to 
the  lack  of  liquidity  in  the  money  market.  As  the  failure  of  Lehman  precipitated  the  acute 
phase  of  the  crisis,  the  ECB  acted  decisively  again,  taking  several  measures  to  protect 
against  a  disorderly  correction  in  credit  and  liquidity  conditions  for  the  euro  area.  Our 
approach  of  enhanced  credit  support  helped  restoring  a  more  normal  transmission  of  our 
monetary policy stance and ensuring that banks could maintain their crucial role in financing 
the  real  economy.  The  ECB  also  engaged  in  a  covered  bond  purchase  programme  worth 
€60 billion throughout the euro area. The covered bond market is important in our economy 
and it was vital to re-start and support its functioning. 
In  May  2010  increasing  market  concerns  about  the  sustainability  of  public  finances  led  to 
severe  tensions  in  certain  market  segments,  which  were  hampering  the  transmission 
mechanism of monetary policy and thereby the effective conduct of our efforts to maintain 
price stability. Once more the ECB decided on appropriate measures. 
Private  financial  intermediation  was  again  threatened.  With  the  rapid  increase  in  secured 
interbank  lending  in  the  euro  area  in  recent  years,  the  impact  on  money  markets  of 
BIS Review 162/2010 
 3
developments  in  government  bond  markets  has  grown  substantially.  Government  bonds 
have  traditionally  been  an  important  element  in  the  monetary  policy  transmission  process 
because  they  serve  as  a  benchmark  for  the  pricing  of  other  financial  contracts  and  fixed-
income securities.  
They  have  also  emerged  as  a  prime  source  of  collateral  in  interbank  lending.  As  a  result 
abrupt changes in the value or availability of these securities can imply a sharp deterioration 
in banks’ funding conditions – with adverse effects on both the supply of bank loans to the 
real economy and their prices.  
All our non-standard measures help to restore a more normal monetary policy transmission 
mechanism, which is necessary to fulfil our primary mandate of maintaining price stability in 
the medium term.  
In recent weeks, the tensions associated with the Irish fiscal problems and the reorganisation 
of its banking sector have led to renewed bouts of high volatility in financial markets. More 
than ever it is important that governments step up consolidation in way that is credible and 
lays  the  foundation  for  sustainable  long-term  growth.  There  is  a  clear  need  to  strengthen 
public confidence in the capacity of governments to return to sustainable public finances and 
thus  support  sustainable  growth  over  the  medium  term.  To  this  end,  it  is  essential  that 
countries  pursue  credible  multi-year  consolidation  plans  and  fully  implement  the  planned 
consolidation  measures.  Positive  fiscal  developments  that  may  emerge,  reflecting  factors 
such  as  a  more  favourable  than  expected  economic  environment,  should  be  exploited  to 
make faster progress with fiscal consolidation.  
Europe’s economy: the current situation and the challenges ahead 
Let me come to the third and final part of my remarks: what are the lessons we have learned 
from these events?  
First, our monetary policy strategy has proved to be effective. The quantitative definition of 
price  stability  and  the  medium-term  orientation  significantly  reduce  the  likelihood  of  either 
deflation or inflation scares. The firm anchoring of inflation expectations – throughout a time 
of  crisis  – meant  that  we  could  maintain  the  rate  on  our  refinancing  operations  at  positive 
levels without having the materialisation of a deflationary risk or of an inflationary threat.  
Europe’s  leaders  should  recognise  that  our  economic  model  is  in  need  of  a  considerable 
strengthening, especially our system of economic governance. In this respect, the Governing 
Council  of  the  ECB  considers  that  the  proposals  put  forward  by  the  Commission  and  the 
European  Council  Task  Force  do  not  yet  represent  the  quantum  leap  in  economic 
governance  that  is  needed  to  be  fully  commensurate  with  the  monetary  union  we  have 
created. 
In particular, we need to strengthen the surveillance of fiscal policies to prevent excessive 
deficits  and  unsustainable  public  debt  with  three  main  elements:  shorter  deadlines  under 
excessive  deficit  procedures;  quasi-automaticity  in  the  application  of  sanctions,  based  on 
clearly defined criteria and with less discretion over outcomes; and ambitious targets for the 
reduction of public debt towards the 60% ceiling.  
As  regards  the  surveillance  of  macroeconomic  policies  in  the  euro  area  we  need  a  new 
system  of  mutual  surveillance,  concentrating  firmly  on  countries  experiencing  sustained 
losses  of  competitiveness  and  large  current  account  deficits  as  these  countries  face  the 
greatest  sustainability  challenges.  It  should  be  determined  by  transparent  and  effective 
trigger  mechanisms  and  specify  clearly  the  sanctions  in  case  of  breach.  And  we  need 
transparency.  The  assessments  of  macroeconomic  imbalances  and  recommendations  for 
corrective  action  should  be  given  appropriate  publicity  at  all  stages  of  the  surveillance 
process.  
4 
 BIS Review 162/2010
The  effectiveness  of  these  enhancements  to  the  governance  framework  will  in  part  be 
determined by the quality and independence of the economic analysis that underpins them. 
Without  reliable  statistical  data  we  cannot  be  certain  that  the  governance  framework  will 
provide the quantum leap forward that is necessary. It is therefore extremely important that 
the Commission services charged with conducting macroeconomic and fiscal surveillance for 
the  euro  area  be  sufficiently  independent,  ideally  supported  by  a  body  of  “wise  persons” 
providing external assessments. 
To  be  sure,  the  EU  has  already  responded  to  one  particular  issue  raised  by  the  crisis, 
namely  the  need  to  co-ordinate  macro-prudential  oversight.  You  are  all  aware  that  the 
European  Council  and  the  European  Parliament  have  recently  finalised  the  decisions 
regarding the creation of the European Systemic Risk Board or ESRB, which I shall have the 
honour to chair.  
This new European body will be part of the new European System of Financial Supervision 
and its function will be to provide macro-prudential oversight of the EU financial system. It will 
bring  together  the  governors  of  the  national  central  banks,  the  new  European  Supervisory 
Agencies, the Commission and the national supervisory authorities of all 27 member states.  
The establishment of the ESRB was first recommended in February 2009 in the report of a 
high-level  group  chaired  by  Jacques  de  Larosière.  The  new  institution  is  backed  by  a 
remarkably strong consensus between the Commission, the Council and the Parliament.  
The  ECB  will  contribute  to  establishing  the  ESRB  as  a  credible  and  effective  body. 
Concretely, the ECB will host the Secretariat of the ESRB, thereby making it operational and 
providing analytical, statistical, logistical and administrative support.  
While the ESRB Secretariat will be located at the ECB, the ESRB will be a separate body, 
distinct from the ECB. The establishment of the ESRB will not affect the mandate and the 
functioning of the ECB’s statutory role in monetary policy.  
The establishment of the ESRB will be a landmark event in how Europe deals preventively 
with systemic risk. It forms part of wider developments across the globe, including in the US 
with  the  newly  created  Financial  Stability  Oversight  Council  (FSOC).  Very  much  like  the 
ESRB, this council is a collaborative body bringing together the relevant US authorities with 
the  aim  of  identifying  systemic  risk  and  responding  to  threats.  We  will  aim  for  close 
cooperation with the FSOC and other authorities for macro-prudential oversight. 
Conclusion 
Let me draw to a close. The past 12 years have been very challenging. The ECB has, I trust, 
lived up to its responsibility and delivered what had been promised to our people: a stable 
currency, as credible and as inspiring of confidence as the best of the legacy currencies. The 
euro  has  also  been  a  force  for  stability  in  what  is  now  a  more  than  three-year  period  of 
economic and financial instability. 
As  in  all  major  advanced  economies,  which,  without  exception,  have  had  to  review  their 
economic models and surveillance frameworks, changes are needed in the euro area. These 
are  not  the  kind  of  changes  that  push  us  towards  more  unilateral  action,  with  the  implicit 
dangers  of  lack  of  cooperation.  Rather  they  are  changes  towards  greater  cooperation  and 
greater cohesion through a strengthened framework of economic governance. We must keep 
our sense of direction: towards more European unity and more responsible European unity. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 162/2010 
 5
