Ewart S Williams: The importance of adequate capitalisation in the 
insurance industry 
Remarks  by  Mr  Ewart  S  Williams,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Trinidad  and  Tobago,  
at  the  signing  agreement  between  Guardian  Holdings  Limited  and  International  Finance 
Corporation, Port-of-Spain, 1 December 2010. 
 I wish to congratulate Guardian Holdings Limited on the consummation of this very significant 
relationship  with  the  IFC.  This  new  partnership  should  not  only  strengthen  GHL’s  balance 
sheet,  but  should  redound  to  the  benefit  of  the  public  by  increasing  the  availability  of 
insurance  products  to  markets  that  are  not  currently  well-served  and  in  this  list,  I  include, 
small businesses, micro-finance institutions and agribusinesses. 
Over the past several months the insurance industry has been overrun by a chorus of bad 
news  involving  institutions  in  which  the  Central  Bank  has  intervened.  Unfortunately,  even 
with  its  potential  for  contagion,  the  current  turmoil  obscures  an  insurance  industry  with 
tremendous strengths and resilience. The subsidiaries of the Guardian Holdings Group are 
an integral part of this structurally strong and resilient insurance sector. 
Since its establishment in June 1996, the Guardian Holdings Group has blossomed into an 
integrated  financial  services  entity,  covering  life,  health,  property  and  casualty  insurance, 
pensions  and  asset  management.  GHL  has  spread  its  wings  throughout  the  English  and 
Dutch  Caribbean  and  is  now  listed  on  both  the  Trinidad  and  Tobago  and  Jamaican  Stock 
Exchanges. 
Guardian  Life,  the  flagship  company  of  the  Group  is  a  major  player  in  the  life  insurance 
sector  accounting  for  38  per  cent  of  the  market’s  contract  liabilities.  Guardian  General  
has become the region’s largest indigenous property and casualty insurance company. As 
the  largest  general  insurance  company  in  Trinidad  and  Tobago,  Guardian  General  holds 
26 per cent of market share and 21 per cent of total assets of the sector. 
Among the many best-practices adopted by GHL is the annual review by A.M. Best to assess 
the financial strength of its insurance subsidiaries and to ensure that the companies are in a 
position to meet their obligations to policyholders. 
In  June  2010,  A.M.  Best  gave  a  rating  of  A–  (excellent)  for  the  financial  strength  of  both 
Guardian Life and Guardian General. According to Best, the excellent rating reflected GHL’s 
improved balance sheet, the decline in total debt and lower intangibles following the write-off 
of goodwill related to its European property and casualty operations, and its adequate level 
of risk adjusted capitalization. In the case of GGIL, the ratings were due to the support and 
commitment  of  the  parent  company  (GHL),  its  historical  profitability  and  its  adequate 
capitalization. 
You would notice the words “adequate capitalization” featuring in both cases. These words 
add even greater significance to the agreement we celebrate today. If my understanding is 
correct,  the  IFC’s  investment  of  US$75  million  involves  a  conversion  of  US$  50  million  of 
subordinated debt into equity, with the balance being an injection of new capital. As a result 
of the transaction shareholders’ equity in GHL will be increased by close to $400 million. 
The  IFC’s  decision  to  partner  with  GHL  through  equity  participation  demonstrates  its 
tremendous  confidence  in  the  local  financial  services  industry,  despite  the  challenges  the 
sector currently faces. GHL, in turn, is expected to benefit from IFC’s considerable expertise 
and its association with a strong reputable partner, which has funds available for follow-up 
investments. 
BIS Review 167/2010 
 1
From our vantage point, as regulator, this agreement sends precisely the right message to 
the insurance industry, and that is, the importance of adequate capitalisation. As you may 
(or  may  not  know),  with  our  legislation  dating  back  to  1966,  we  are  one  of  the  few 
jurisdictions  in  the  world  that  do  not  have  robust  capital  requirements  for  the  insurance 
industry.  Without  doubt,  this  deficiency  contributed  greatly  to  Clico’s  problems.  Adequate 
risk-adjusted capital would not only have provided a buffer to absorb losses but moreover, 
would  have  acted  as  a  dis-incentive  to  risk-taking  since  the  greater  the  risk,  the  greater 
would have been the need to allocate scarce resources to capital. 
I am pleased to say that the Bank is well advanced in the development of a new legislative 
framework for the Insurance industry. This new framework will include a robust risk-based 
capital regime, a standardized actuarial methodology, tighter prudential arrangements, 
enhanced  corporate  governance  and  regulatory  and  supervisory  practices,  consistent  with 
international best practices. 
Fortunately  some  insurance  companies,  including  Guardian  Life  and  Guardian  General 
should  be  able  to  adapt  easily  to  the  new  regulatory  structure  since  they  have  already 
patterned their operations in order to meet higher standards. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, the Central Bank is very pleased to demonstrate its strong support 
for GHL’s capital raising initiative. It is an added bonus that GHL’s partner in this transaction 
is a progressive reputable global development institution with deep pockets. This partnership 
should bring significant benefits to the financial services industry in Trinidad and Tobago, and 
the Caribbean. 
2 
 BIS Review 167/2010
