Stefan Ingves: Introduction on monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Stefan Ingves, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, to the Riksdag Committee 
on Finance, Stockholm, 11 November 2010. 
 It  is  always  a  pleasure  to  come  here  and  meet  the  Committee  on  Finance.  And  it  is  a 
particular pleasure to see many new faces. I had the same experience four years ago when I 
had been Governor of the Riksbank for less than a year. It is particularly inspiring to have the 
opportunity  to  discuss  monetary  policy  with  new  representatives  of  our  employer,  the 
Riksdag (Swedish parliament) – and it is, of course, as always interesting to discuss it with 
the ones I have met before.  
Just  as  I  did  four  years  ago,  I  will  begin  with  a  summary  of  the  situation.  So  where  do 
Sweden and other countries stand today, and how did we get there? I intend to give a fairly 
rough  outline  of  my  own  view  of  the  situation, without  going  into  too  many  details.  This  is 
usually  the  best  way  of  conveying  the  essential  features.  It  will  also  make  it  easier  to  put 
current monetary policy in the right perspective.  
Several explanations for the crisis  
The  past  couple  of  years  have  been  rather  dramatic,  since  the  financial  market  turmoil 
erupted into an acute global crisis in autumn 2008. It will probably take some time before we 
have  the  complete  picture  of  why  the  crisis  arose  and  how  it  could  become  so  deep.  But 
there are a number of circumstances that almost certainly contributed, although there is still 
debate on their relative significance.  
Poorly adjusted regulations and insufficient oversight  
One fact that definitely did play a role is that the regulations and supervision did not function 
satisfactorily.  One  of  the  problems  was  that  there  was  too  much  focus  on  the  situation  of 
individual agents and too little focus on the financial system as a whole – too much micro and 
too  little  macro,  if  you  like.  Moreover,  the  supervision  lacked  the  necessary  international 
oversight as it was largely conducted on a domestic basis by each individual country. There 
were  also  loopholes  in  the  regulations  that,  for  instance,  meant  that  some  institutions  and 
markets  were  not  covered  and  could  expand  without  the  authorities  having  any  real 
oversight. Things were not made easier by the fact that there was also great ingenuity in the 
financial  markets  that  resulted  in  new  financial  instruments,  where  no  one  properly 
understood  the  risks.  So  all  in  all,  one  can  say  that  the  deficiencies  in  regulation  and 
supervision meant that the brakes did not catch when events got out of control and the risks 
became too great.  
A North Atlantic property bubble…  
One of the main reasons behind the financial crisis is sometimes said to be that a property 
bubble arose in the United States, which then burst and spread extensively. This is largely 
true,  although  a  simplification.  However,  property  markets  in  many  other  countries  had 
experienced substantial price increases over a number of years, followed by a dramatic fall in 
connection  with  the  crisis.  Obvious  examples  of  this  are  the  United  Kingdom,  Ireland  and 
Spain. It is probably therefore more correct to talk about a North Atlantic property bubble.1
 
                                                 
1   The concept of “the North Atlantic real estate bubble” was introduced, as I understand it, by Paul Krugman 
and Robin Wells in “The Slump Goes On: Why?” in the New York Review of Books, September 2010. 
BIS Review 149/2010 
 1
Developments  in  the  United  States  may  have  been  the  trigger,  but  problems  had  already 
built up in many other countries, too, and not only in the property markets.  
…as a result of a long period of macroeconomic stability?  
What was the driving force behind this process? Macroeconomic factors probably played an 
important role. The global macroeconomic environment in the years prior to the crisis was 
characterised by low interest rates, low and relatively stable inflation and high and relatively 
stable growth. In brief, there was an awful lot that looked awfully good – so good that this 
period was given its own name: “The Great Moderation”. It is perhaps not so surprising that 
in  this  environment  of  low  interest  rates  and  an  apparently  new  era  of  macroeconomic 
stability households and financial institutions became over-optimistic and took on too much 
risk. Households were happy to borrow and financial institutions were happy to lend. Much of 
this credit was used to buy houses and property prices began to soar.  
…because of overly expansionary monetary policy?  
There is a debate as to the role of monetary policy in creating this situation. The debate has 
mainly  concerned  claims  that  the  US  central  bank  had  held  interest  rates  too  low  for  a 
number of years prior to the crisis. But other central banks, such as the European Central 
Bank, also held interest rates low during this period. It is not entirely clear what role monetary 
policy  played  –  and  plays  in  general  –  for  the  development  of  property  prices  and  for  risk 
propensity  among  economic  agents.  This  is  a  subject  that  will  probably  continue  to  be 
discussed.  However,  on  the  basis  of  the  information  available  at  the  time,  there  was  no 
obvious  reason  for  conducting  another  monetary  policy  than  the  one  that  was  actually 
conducted.  In  the  United  States,  for  example,  there  was  justified  concern  that  the  country 
might suffer the same deflation problems as Japan, and many other countries also perceived 
the threat of deflation as something to be taken very seriously.  
…as a result of a global savings glut?  
But  there  was  also  another  and  probably  more  important  factor  contributing  to  the  low 
interest  rates.  Since  the  end  of  the  1990s  the  emerging  economies  in  Asia,  particularly 
China, and in the Middle East had experienced large current account surpluses, particularly 
in  relation  to  the  United  States,  but  also  to  other  western  countries.  In  other  words,  the 
countries with surpluses had exported many more goods than they had imported. In return, 
they had invested the surpluses in bonds and other assets in the countries with deficits. One 
could say that this reflected an increased willingness to save in the world economy – a global 
savings glut. This surplus contributed to pushing down long-term interest rates in the world. 
At the same time, there was a lot of capital to invest in the countries with deficits. A large 
share of this found its way into the property markets, where prices soared.  
It is not unusual for such international imbalances to lead to problems sooner or later. The 
situation is reminiscent of that which arose following the oil crises in the 1970s. The large 
increases  in  oil  prices  then  meant  that  the  oil-producing  countries  were  sitting  on  huge 
amounts of dollars, the currency in which oil is normally traded. These so-called oil dollars, or 
petrodollars, were channelled through banks in the west into loans to countries in, above all, 
Latin America. However, it was gradually revealed that the loans had been granted on overly 
optimistic  grounds,  and many  countries  found  it  increasingly  difficult  to  pay  the  interest  on 
their debts. This led to the debt crisis at the beginning of the 1980s.  
We  thus  now  have  a  similar  problem  with  global  imbalances  in  the  form  of  large  current 
account surpluses in some countries and deficits in others. The difference today is that the 
surplus  this  time  has  contributed  to  excessive  borrowing  in  many  western  countries  rather 
than  to  a  debt  crisis  in  Latin  America.  But  the  theme  remains  largely  the  same:  Plenty  of 
2 
 BIS Review 149/2010
money to lend, excessive optimism among lenders and borrowers and inadequate controls 
and supervision – this is usually a sure recipe for a crisis.  
Global challenges 
So much for the causes of the financial crisis. What about its consequences? One obvious 
consequence has been that many countries have needed to use fiscal policy to support the 
bank sector and to maintain demand in the economy. As tax revenue has fallen as demand 
has weakened so much, this has led to large budget deficits and rapidly growing government 
debt. One might say that the debt problem has been transferred from the private sector to the 
public sector. So to return to my earlier discussion of the debt crisis in the early 1980s, one 
can  perhaps  say  that  the  result  of  the  international  imbalances  was  once  again  a  form  of 
public debt crisis.  
All in all, this means that the global economy is now facing at least three major challenges:  
Firstly, the regulations for the financial system need to be tightened, and supervision needs 
to be more effective. The aim is, of course, to increase stability and resilience in the financial 
system and reduce the risk of future crises.  
Secondly, as I recently noted, many countries have experienced problems with large deficits 
in their public finances. This is a problem that has now become acute, and needs to be dealt 
with. We in Sweden are all too well aware of the confidence problems that can arise from 
mismanaged  public  finances.  It  is  of  course  easier  to  make  the  necessary  consolidation  if 
private  sector  demand  is  kept  up.  One  could  say  that  many  countries  therefore  need  to 
undergo  what  could  be  described  as  an  internal  adjustment  of  demand  –  from  public  to 
private.2 
Thirdly,  an  external  adjustment  of  demand  is  also  needed.  Many  countries  in  the  western 
world,  and  not  least  the  United  States,  which  was  overly  dependent  on  high  domestic 
demand before the crisis, must rely more on exports in the future. Correspondingly, countries 
which have accumulated large current account surpluses, and in particular China, will have 
to rely more on domestic demand. Thus, what is needed is a changeover from domestic to 
foreign demand in some countries and the reverse changeover in other countries.  
Create new regulatory systems  
There is currently fairly substantial international unity on the first issue – the need for a better 
regulatory  framework  and  more  effective  supervision  of  the  financial  sector  –  even  though 
much of the details remain to be discussed. There has also been some progress in this field. 
One  example  is  what  is  known  as  the  Basel  III  regulations,  agreed  by  central  banks  and 
financial  supervisory  authorities  around  the  world  some  weeks  ago.  In  brief,  these  involve 
raising the international requirements regarding the capital and liquidity the banks must hold. 
For instance, a larger share of the capital must be real equity capital. Another example is that 
the  EU  has  established  a  special  body,  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board,  which  is  to 
identify  risks  in  the  financial  system  and  to  provide  warnings  and  recommendations  to  the 
countries and authorities concerned.  
Public finances an acute but difficult problem  
The two other challenges are rather more difficult. The problems with public finances entail a 
difficult balancing act for the countries concerned. On the one hand, it is desirable that the 
                                                 
2   This and the third challenge are taken up by, for instance, Olivier Blanchard in the foreword to the IMF’s World 
Economic Outlook, October 2010. 
BIS Review 149/2010 
 3
savings do not increase too much too soon thereby withdrawing public sector demand while 
private sector demand is still weak. This could lead to a negative spiral, with falling demand 
and production, where public finances are weakened rather than strengthened. On the other 
hand,  the  deficits  and  the  government  debt  must  not  continue  to  grow  to  the  extent  that 
doubts arise regarding the ability to repay the debt at all. Such a situation would hardly be 
preferable. A further complication is that this time there are many large countries who need 
to  save  at  the  same  time.  The  effects  on  the  global  economy  could  then  be  substantial, 
particularly if the balancing act is not successful.  
Adjusting the global imbalances is not made easier by the crisis  
The  third  challenge  –  that  some  countries  must  begin  to  rely  more  on  exports  and  others 
more on domestic demand – was debated intensively even before the crisis. After the crisis 
the problems of this global imbalance have in some way become even clearer. One means 
of maintaining demand and creating scope for consolidation of public finances is to increase 
exports. And one means by which exports can increase is if the currency weakens so that 
the country’s own goods become cheaper for other countries to buy. The problem is that all 
countries cannot by definition export their way out of the crisis at the same time. All countries 
can conduct an expansionary policy, but all countries’ currencies cannot weaken at the same 
time.  
Despite  this  insight  being  relatively  widespread,  fears  have  been  expressed  of  a  currency 
war, where countries deliberately try to weaken their own currencies. And if a currency war 
begins,  it  is  only  a  short  step  to  a  trade  war,  where  countries  begin  to  introduce  tariffs  to 
protect their own manufacturing. This was what happened during the great depression of the 
1930s, and it of course only made the problems worse. Such a development would be very 
unfortunate  and  have  a  considerable  negative  impact  on  small  economies  with  extensive 
foreign  trade,  such  as  Sweden.  At  present  there  are  major  efforts  being  made  in  various 
international forums to avoid the global economy spinning off in this direction.  
The Swedish economy has coped relatively well  
This is a general outline of the international picture. Although the world economy has begun 
to recover, there is no doubt that it is facing fairly major challenges over the coming years. 
But what is the situation here in Sweden? Well, in many ways things look rather good. The 
Swedish  economy  appears  to  have  coped  fairly  well  in  the  crisis.  Although  production  fell 
more  in  Sweden  than  in  many  other  countries,  the  recovery  has  been  much  quicker.  The 
situation now looks much more stable than in most other places.  
One important reason why we have managed so well is, I believe, that it is not so long since 
we experienced a crisis here in Sweden – both in the bank system and the economy as a 
whole. The crisis at the beginning of the 1990s was much more isolated than the recent crisis 
and can in many ways be described as “home made”. But we nevertheless managed to learn 
some important lessons from it.  
Stable frameworks provide security…  
Perhaps the most important lesson is that both monetary policy and fiscal policy need stable 
long-term  frameworks.  The  previous  crisis  therefore  led  to  a  number  of  changes  in  this 
direction, many of them through decisions made here in the Riksdag. Unlike the situation in 
the previous crisis, monetary policy is now conducted by an independent Riksbank with an 
inflation target. We also have an expenditure ceiling and a surplus target in the fiscal policy 
area, which are designed to prevent public finances being undermined or savings having to 
be made in inappropriate situations. Sweden has been one of the countries in the front line, 
both  in  reforming  the  framework  of  monetary  policy  and  that  of  fiscal  policy.  Many  other 
countries have later made changes similar to the ones we made. It is also worth noting that 
4 
 BIS Review 149/2010
the most recent crisis, and the public finance problems it has entailed, have triggered a new 
wave of interest in fiscal policy regulation.3  
The stable frameworks for monetary policy and fiscal policy have in many ways functioned as 
“shock absorbers” in this crisis. Unlike during the previous crisis, economic agents have been 
able to assume that inflation will be fairly stable and that public finances will remain under 
control. This creates a security which I believe is particularly valuable during periods like this, 
when there is considerable uncertainty in general around the world. I imagine, for instance, 
that households in countries with weak public finances are much more concerned about the 
future.  
…and make it easier to stimulate the economy  
The stable frameworks have also made it easier to stimulate the economy strongly during the 
crisis without anyone questioning the credibility of the inflation target or the sustainability of 
our  public  finances.  One  could  also  say  that  long-term  credibility  and  sustainability  are 
necessary conditions for monetary policy and fiscal policy to be able to provide short-term 
stimulation. A rather worn but appropriate expression used with regard to fiscal policy is to 
“save for a rainy day” during good times. We appear to have succeeded in doing so this time. 
So the second of the three global challenges I listed does not actually apply to Sweden.  
Better regulatory framework also important for us  
One cannot rule out the possibility that our previous crisis contributed to some extent to our 
bank system managing better this time than banks in many other countries. But the Swedish 
banks’ memories still do not appear to have been terribly long. A couple of them were carried 
away by the over-optimism in the Baltic countries, and most of them would have faced much 
larger problems if the Swedish authorities had not intervened so resolutely. On the positive 
side, they largely avoided securities containing high-risk US mortgages. New share issues 
and good earnings capacity mean that the Swedish banks now appear well-capitalised from 
an international perspective.  
The  first  challenge  –  the  design  of  a  better  regulatory  framework  and  more  effective 
supervision – is of course something to which Sweden is contributing in various ways. Our 
own financial markets and banks coped relatively well on this occasion, but it is nevertheless 
clear  that  we  are  also  hit  hard  when  there  is  international  turmoil.  Moreover,  the  financial 
sector  in  Sweden  has  some  distinguishing  characteristics  which  make  stability  and  clear 
game  rules  particularly  important.  From  an  international  perspective,  the  Swedish  banks’ 
collected balance sheet totals are large in relation to our GDP, market funding comprises a 
larger share than in most other countries, and funding from abroad is relatively extensive and 
largely short-term.  
Our own Swedish regulatory framework also needs to be renewed. For one thing, we need to 
look into the division of responsibility and the powers of authority of the different government 
agencies. For instance, the Riksbank is responsible for the stability of the financial system in 
Sweden,  but  has  no  really  effective  tools  to  carry  out  this  task.  Finansinspektionen  (the 
Swedish Financial Supervisory Authority), on the other hand, has tools that could be used to 
influence 
task  of  counteracting 
macroeconomic developments than entail risks for financial stability. Another important issue 
that needs to be addressed in a new regulatory framework is how the state should manage 
banks in distress.  
the  banks’  behaviour.  But 
it  does  not  have 
the 
                                                 
3   See,  for  instance,  Ben  S.  Bernanke,  “Fiscal  Sustainability  and  Fiscal  Rules”,  speech  given  at  the  Annual 
Meeting of the Rhode Island Public Expenditure Council, Providence, Rhode Island, 4 October 2010. 
BIS Review 149/2010 
 5
In February we presented a report to the Riksdag proposing that the regulatory framework in 
Sweden  should  be  reviewed.  We  mentioned  these  two  areas  as  examples  of  important 
objects for analysis. The Riksdag has decided that an inquiry shall be made, and hopefully 
this work will begin soon.  
Natural explanations for Sweden’s current account surplus  
With regard to the third of the challenges – the changeover from exports to domestic demand 
or vice versa – one can note that Sweden is one of the countries with large current account 
surpluses. This has in principle been the case since the previous crisis at the beginning of 
the 1990s. However, the surplus is hardly the result of a deliberate policy to build up a strong 
external position. The fact that we are saving as much as we are is partly due to our public 
finances being in good order and partly due to commercial decisions in the private sector. 
Nor  have  we  tried  to  benefit  exports  by  holding  our  currency  artificially  low.  We  conduct 
inflation  targeting,  and  the  exchange  rate  is  simply  left  to  its  own  devices.  There  are  thus 
natural  explanations  for  our  current  account  surplus  and  there  have  not  been  any  strong 
requests from abroad for us to reduce it. So really, one can say that the third challenge does 
not have any direct implications for Sweden, either.  
The forecast and the interest rate decision  
It has thus become increasingly clear that the Swedish economy is growing strongly. Many 
indicators  of  developments  in  the  real  economy  are  now  at  very  high  levels  and  GDP 
outcomes  have  been  surprisingly  strong.  How  do  we  see  developments  in  the  coming 
period? And what monetary policy is needed now?  
Recoil from the crisis  
To some extent, the rapid Swedish recovery is a recoil from the drastic fall in demand during 
the  crisis.  An  important  part  of  the  fall  in  world  trade  was  due  to  the  postponement  of 
purchases of investment goods and durable consumer goods – goods that comprise a large 
part of Swedish exports. The global economic recession therefore had a strong impact on the 
Swedish  economy,  which  is  very  dependent  on  exports.  World  trade  has  now  recovered, 
mainly through the rapid growth in emerging economies in, for instance, Asia. Growth has 
also been good in the Nordic countries. The upturn in our exports is to a great extent driven 
by  demand  for  the  goods  that  were  previously  postponed.  In  the  same  way  as  Swedish 
exports  fell  as  markets  shrank,  they  are  now  rising  as  the  markets  are  growing  again 
(Figure 1).  
Good public finances…  
But  to  a  large  part  the  good  developments  concern  what  I  just  tried  to  convey:  That  we 
actually acquitted ourselves fairly well this time. This includes the good public finances. Since 
the end of the 1990s our national debt has shown a declining trend. There has not been any 
corresponding decline in, for instance, the Eurozone and the United States (Figure 2), where 
the  national  debt  moreover  began  to  increase  substantially  during  the  financial  crisis.  In 
many areas it is thus necessary to tighten fiscal policy, but this does not apply to Sweden.  
...and a high level of household saving gives scope for growth  
But Swedish households have also acted in a way that has increased resilience during the 
economic downturn. Unlike in many other countries, savings in Sweden have shown a rising 
trend over the past decade (Figure 3).  
6 
 BIS Review 149/2010
During  the  crisis,  saving  increased  both  in  Sweden  and  in  most  other  countries.  This  is 
largely due to what is known as precautionary saving as a result of increased uncertainty. In 
many  countries  this  uncertainty  concerns  the  large  deficits  in  public  finances  and  what 
consequences these may have for household incomes in the future. As this uncertainty can 
be  expected  to  remain  over  the  coming  years,  private  consumption  will  probably  be  held 
back.  But  we  do  not  have  this  situation  in  Sweden.  Although  one  can  note  that  consumer 
confidence has strengthened in many areas in recent years, it is primarily in Sweden that it 
has reached historically high levels (Figure 4). The combination of sound public finances and 
high  household  savings  means  there  is  scope  to  reduce  saving  over  the  coming  years. 
Together  with  relatively  large  increases  in  disposable  incomes,  this  means  that  private 
consumption is likely to increase at a good pace.  
Sweden is one of few countries in the OECD area where the labour market has clearly begun 
a  recovery.  Moreover,  the  upturn  in  employment  is  on  a  broad  front.  The  manufacturing 
industry  has  once  again  begun  recruiting  and  is  expected  to  continue  to  do  so  over  the 
coming period. Employment in the services sector, which managed the crisis better, is also 
expected to continue increasing.  
Resource utilisation is rising gradually  
Swedish GDP growth is expected to amount to almost 5 per cent in 2010, before gradually 
falling back to around 2.5 per cent at the end of the forecast period. But as the fall in 2008 
and 2009 was so great, GDP will not return to its pre-crisis level until the beginning of next 
year  (Figure  5).  The  overall  assessment  of  resource  utilisation  is  that  it  is  still  lower  than 
normal, but that it will successively rise towards normal levels during the forecast period. It is 
natural  to  assume  that  the  higher  resource  utilisation  will  gradually  have  an  impact  on 
inflation.  Although  CPIF  (underlying)  inflation  will  continue  to  fall  slightly  over  the  coming 
year, partly due to a stronger krona, it will then increase, reaching 2 per cent at the end of 
2013  (Figure  6).  CPI  inflation  will  be  slightly  higher,  as  it  is  affected  more  directly  by  the 
Riksbank’s interest rate increases via households’ mortgage rates.  
The assessment we made a couple of weeks ago was that an increase in the repo rate of 
0.25 percentage points was justified. We also assumed that we will need to continue raising 
the  repo  rate  over  the  coming  years  to  stabilise  inflation  close  to  the  target  and  to  attain 
normal  resource  utilisation.  However,  we  do  not  believe  that  the  repo  rate  will  need  to  be 
raised  quite  as  quickly  as  we  had  previously  assumed.  The  slower  recovery  abroad,  with 
lower policy rates, indicates that interest rates in Sweden will not need to be so high.  
Household debts still cause concern  
One factor that I personally have taken into consideration when raising the repo rate this time 
and supporting the forecast for continued increases, is the development of household debt. If 
this does not slow down, I believe that there is a risk of financial imbalances arising, if not 
within, then beyond the forecast horizon. I believe that a gradual increase in the repo rate will 
contribute to reducing this risk. Finansinspektionen’s recently introduced loan restrictions are 
also one step in the right direction. A future challenge will be to find an appropriate balance 
between supervisory regulation and interest rate-setting.  
Of course, this overall picture may have to be revised if developments do not turn out as we 
are  expecting.  I  have  already  pointed  out  that  the  global  economy  is  facing  fairly  major 
challenges. A new economic downturn abroad  could lead to lower resource utilisation and 
inflation in Sweden, too. Monetary policy would then need to be more expansionary than in 
the forecast. But there is also a possibility that the economic upturn in Sweden turns out to 
be faster and stronger than we have assumed. In this case we might need to raise the repo 
rate slightly faster. But none of these alternatives is our main scenario at present.  
BIS Review 149/2010 
 7
In the pipeline: Assessment of monetary policy and inquiry into the housing market  
So much for the forecast and the repo rate decision. Before I finish, I would like to mention a 
couple of things that are in the pipeline. Work has now begun on the external assessment of 
the  Riksbank  during  2005–2010,  which  the  Committee  has  commissioned  Professors 
Charles Goodhart and Jean-Charles Rochet to carry out. The professors have already visited 
the Riksbank and will be visiting us again soon. We will of course provide them with every 
possible  assistance.  Unlike  the  previous  external  assessment,  which  covered  the  period 
1995–2005, this assessment covers not only monetary policy but also our work on financial 
stability.  What  is  of  particular  interest  this  time  is  that  the  professors  will  analyse  what 
lessons can be learned from the financial crisis. The assessment will be complete in autumn 
2011.  
An  inquiry  with  a  shorter  time  span  is  the  one  concerning  risks  in  the  Swedish  housing 
market,  which  was  decided  at  the  beginning  of  this  year.  In  more  concrete  terms,  this 
involves giving external experts as well as our own employees the task of analysing issues 
that  in  different  ways  illustrate  the  relationship  between  the  housing  market  and  the 
Riksbank’s objective and aims. The inquiry as a whole should be complete at the beginning 
of  next  year.  However,  as  a  part  of  this  inquiry  the  Riksbank  is  organising  a  workshop 
tomorrow  with  the  title  “Housing  markets,  monetary  policy  and  financial  stability”,  where  a 
number of invited international academics will present essays they have written on this topic. 
We  hope  that  this  inquiry  will  improve  our  knowledge  of  a  field  that  is  important  both  to 
monetary policy and the economy as a whole.  
I hope that this talk has given you, and in particular the new members of the committee, an 
insight into how I view the situation in Sweden and abroad. I shall now do my best to provide 
good answers to any questions you may have. 
 
 
 8 
  BIS Review 149/2010
    BIS Review 149/2010 
 9
  10 
   BIS Review 149/2010
 BIS Review 149/2010 
 11
