Svein Gjedrem: Perspectives on managing the Government Pension 
Fund Global 
Speech by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at the 
Norwegian Polytechnic Society, Oslo, 2 November 2010. 
 The  text  below  may  differ  from  the  actual  presentation.  This  speech  does  not  contain  assessments  of  the 
economic situation or current interest rate setting. 
A thought-provoking finding in economics is what is called “the resource curse”. In a 1995 
study  the  economists  Jeffrey  Sachs  and  Andrew  Warner1  demonstrated  that  resource-rich 
countries  generally  do  not  become  wealthier.  Natural  resource  wealth  is  not  necessarily  a 
blessing, but is more often than not a curse. They argue that spending this wealth crowds out 
industries  that  are  exposed  to  international  competition,  thereby  reducing  growth  capacity 
– the so-called Dutch disease.  
Halvor  Mehlum,  Kalle  Moene  and  Ragnar  Torvik2  find  that  the  relationship  between 
economic  development  and  natural  resources  is  more  complex;  many  countries  become 
poorer  after  discovering  abundant  natural  resources,  others  become  wealthier.  They 
conclude that the quality of the institutional framework is decisive. Vast natural wealth can 
often  induce  interest  groups  to  devote  considerable  time  and  energy  to  rent-seeking, 
weakening a country’s productivity. High quality institutions rein in this tendency. 
The  oil  fund,  now  called  the  Government  Pension  Fund  Global,  has  helped  Norway  to 
escape the resource curse. I shall first speak about how the mechanisms for the Fund were 
developed. 
I would also like to take the opportunity to express Norges Bank’s views on how the Fund’s 
strategy  can  be  further  developed.  The  Fund’s  investment  performance,  which  receives  a 
great  deal  of  attention,  is  primarily  determined  by  the  allocation  of  assets  across  different 
classes  such  as  equities  and  bonds.  Asset  allocation  is  an  important  component  of  the 
Fund’s strategy. 
Chart: Timeline for managing Norway’s petroleum wealth 
After Norway discovered oil in the North Sea in 1969, it became clear early on that this would 
be a source of substantial wealth. The revenue would transform Norwegian society3. In 1983, 
the Committee on the Future of Petroleum Activity4 – chaired by Hermod Skånland who was 
appointed central bank governor in 1985 – launched the idea of an oil fund. The proposal 
was to set up an equalisation fund. According to the Committee, government oil revenues 
would be transferred to the fund. Each year, an average of the past years’ oil revenues would 
be transferred to the central government budget and spent on a par with other revenues. 
                                                
 
1  Jeffrey  Sachs  and  Andrew  Warner  (1995):  “Natural  Resource  Abundance  and  Economic  Growth”,  NBER 
Working Paper 5398. 
2  Halvor  Mehlum,  Karl  O.  Moene  and  Ragnar  Torvik  (2006):  “Institutions  and  the  resource  curse”,  The 
Economic Journal 116, pp. 1–20. 
3  See  for  example  Report  no.  25  (1973–74)  to  the  Storting:  “Petroleumsvirksomhetens  plass  i  det  norske 
samfunn” [The role of petroleum activity in Norwegian society]. 
4  NOU  (Official  Norwegian  Report)  1983:27  “Petroleumsvirksomhetens  framtid.  Det  framtidige  omfanget  av 
petroleumsvirksomheten  på  norsk  sokkel”  [The  future  of  petroleum  activity.  The  future  scale  of  offshore 
petroleum activity in Norway]. 
BIS Review 145/2010 
 1
The Committee had limited confidence in the government’s ability to save: The Committee 
stated the following concerning a savings fund: 
“It is up to the political authorities to determine whether such a fund construction 
designed to avoid a future decline in income is realistic. The Committee chooses 
not to build on such an assumption.” 
 The notion of a sovereign oil fund matured through the 1980s. The government, under the 
premiership of Kåre Willoch, called for the establishment of such a fund in the Long-Term 
Programme presented in spring 1986, and the Act on the Government Petroleum Fund was 
passed in 1990.  
The main rules are: 
 
 
First: The totality of government petroleum revenues is transferred to the Fund. 
Second:  The  Fund  is  integrated  into  central  government  budgets  and  accounts.  The 
non-oil deficit is covered by an annual transfer from the Fund. The government cannot 
borrow to finance current expenditure as long as there is capital in the Fund. 
Third:  The  capital  in  the  Fund  can  only  be  used  for  domestic  spending  via  general 
budget transfers, and not for earmarked transfers. 
Fourth: The Fund’s capital must be invested abroad. 
 
When  the  Act  was  enforced,  the  Norwegian  economy  was  in  a  deep  downturn,  with  high 
unemployment  and  government  budget  deficits.  Projections  also  indicated  that  offshore 
production would pass the peak in the early 1990s5. Those working on the bill at the Ministry 
of Finance at that time were probably in doubt as to whether any petroleum revenues would 
ever be saved, and perhaps they also questioned the utility of such a fund. 
Initially,  the  fund  structure  was  merely  an  exercise  in  accounting.  Government  petroleum 
revenues  were  deposited  in  the  fund,  but  the  entire  amount  was  transferred  back  to  the 
central  government  budget  to  cover  some  of  the  non-oil  deficit.  However,  the  Norwegian 
economy rebounded and transfers to the Fund started in 1996. 
The  Fund  has  since  acted  as  a  buffer  between  widely  fluctuating  oil  revenues  and  public 
expenditure.  The  decision  regarding  annual  petroleum  revenue  spending  can  be  made 
independently of the size of the revenues. Thus, the fluctuations in government petroleum 
revenues do not have an automatic impact on the Norwegian economy. The Fund also has a 
stabilising  effect  on  the  krone  exchange  rate  because  capital  outflows  increase  when 
Norway’s petroleum revenues rise. 
The fiscal rule for petroleum revenue spending, which was adopted in 2001, states that the 
government may spend – as an average over the business cycle – the expected normal real 
return on the capital in the Fund over the central government budget. This return is estimated 
at 4 per cent. The rule ensures that the capital in the Fund is not drawn on unless the real 
return on the Fund is lower than 4 per cent. In this way, future generations will also benefit 
from the oil wealth. 
It  is  also  important  that  the  government’s  portfolio  of  financial  investments  is  constructed 
without  considering  the  financing  needs  of  Norwegian  enterprises.  By  the  same  token, 
Norwegian companies can choose their funding structure independently of the government’s 
financial investments. The capital market serves as intermediary between the government as 
investor  and  firms’  capital  needs,  and  this  ensures  the  separation  of  public  and  private 
choices. The Norwegian capital market is part of a Nordic market and increasingly part of a 
                                                 
5  Report No. 4 (1988–89) to the Storting: Long-Term Programme 1990–93. 
2 
 BIS Review 145/2010
larger international market. Capital markets are a very efficient tool for channelling savings 
into investment. 
Since  capital  started  flowing  into  the  Fund,  the  savings  plan  has  remained  intact.  This 
indicates  that  both  the  Fund  mechanism  and  the  fiscal  rule  are  well  anchored.  This  is  a 
prerequisite for escaping the resource curse. 
On the other hand, only once in 2007 did the government budget bill call for spending below 
4 per cent of the Fund. It later transpired that petroleum revenue spending was also lower 
than 4 per cent in 2006 and 2008. 
The Fund is in the process of becoming a major financing source for public expenditure for 
the coming decades. The Fund has reached NOK 3 trillion, or 120 per cent of GDP, of which 
NOK  600  billion  are  returns  in  foreign  currency.  The  government  can  now  spend 
NOK 120 billion annually from the Fund without reducing its real value. 
In ten years’ time the Fund is projected to be twice as high as annual GDP6. Total public 
expenditure  accounts  for  somewhat  less  than  half  of  GDP.  The  Fund  may  then  become 
about four times as large as total government expenditure. With Fund withdrawals in line with 
the fiscal rule of 4 per cent, the return will be able to finance 15–20 per cent of government 
expenditure  in  ten  years.  A  large  share  of  government  spending  will  thereby  be  financed 
without the functioning of the economy being exposed to tax disturbances. 
Chart: Time line 
Construction of the Fund 
The  first  capital  transfers  to  the  Fund  were  managed  in  the  same  way  as  Norges  Bank’s 
foreign  exchange  reserves,  which  are  invested  in  government  bonds  issued  by  our  main 
trading partners. 
The  purpose  of  the  Fund,  however,  is  entirely  different  from  that  of  foreign  exchange 
reserves and the operational management of the Fund must thus also be different. The main 
difference  is  the  investment  horizon.  The  Fund  is  meant  to  span  a  long  period,  preferably 
many decades. 
Through 1996, about NOK 40 billion was transferred to the Fund and it became clear that the 
Fund  would  be  sizeable.  It  would  be  accurate  to  say  that  there  were  divergent  viewpoints 
within Norges Bank when it was discussed whether the Bank should take on the assignment 
of managing the Fund. Three challenges were considered in particular. 
 
 
First: Norges Bank could risk impairing its reputation by accepting this assignment. 
Second: Would it be possible for a central bank to assume the role of a professional 
investment manager? 
Third: How could this activity be organised within the central bank? 
 
Norges  Bank’s  Executive  Board,  under  the  chair  of  former  central  bank  governor  Kjell 
Storvik, chose to take on this task. The Bank solved the two other challenges by delegating 
management  to  a  separate  unit  for  investment  management  –  Norges  Bank  Investment 
Management  or  NBIM.  A  key  aim  was  to  establish  NBIM  as  a  business  unit  with  clear 
financial objectives. Eventually, Chinese walls were erected between NBIM and the rest of 
the  Bank.  NBIM  does  not  participate  in  monetary  policy  deliberations  and  does  not  have 
access to the Bank’s work concerning other matters. 
                                                 
6  National Budget for 2011. 
BIS Review 145/2010 
 3
In winter 1997, Norges Bank wrote in a letter to the Ministry of Finance that the investment 
horizon implies that a substantial share of the Fund – no less than 30 per cent – should be 
invested  in  the  international  equity  market.  In  the  Revised  National  Budget  for  1997,  the 
Ministry considered this matter and set the allocation to equities at 40 per cent7. 
In the correspondence between Norges Bank and the Ministry, there is also support for the 
fiscal rule’s assumption of a real return of 4 per cent with an equity allocation of 40 per cent. 
In  1998,  the  Fund  started  investing  in  listed  equity  in  21  countries,  all  of  them  featuring  a 
fairly  well  developed  financial  market.  Other  countries  were  later  incorporated  into  the 
benchmark  portfolio.  In  2007,  small  companies  were  included  in  the  benchmark  portfolio. 
Today,  the  Fund  has  equity  holdings  in  8,000  companies  in  almost  50  different  countries. 
The bond portfolio was expanded from 10 to 18 countries in 1998. Since 2002, the Fund has 
gradually moved into the corporate bond market and mortgage-backed securities. 
Chart: Fund returns 
In 1998, analyses indicated that returns would be higher than achieved to date. It should be 
noted  that  the  Fund  is  nevertheless  considerably  larger  than  expected  10–12  years  ago. 
High oil and gas prices have resulted in substantial transfers to the Fund. Sizeable returns on 
oil in the ground have more than offset low returns on securities. 
Since  equity  investment  started  in  1998,  the  annual  average  real  return  on  the  Fund  has 
been  a  good  3  per  cent  after  expenses8.  This  figure  is  partly  a  reflection  of  the  financial 
crisis. The Fund’s short history includes a lost decade in the stock market, with two periods 
of sharp decline. 
During financial crises of the type we have recently experienced, the government as investor 
has  no  place  to  hide.  Even  though  it  is  less  visible,  the  return  on  government  real 
investments in Norway is also lower during economic downturns. 
The estimated size of Norway’s offshore oil wealth naturally varies widely with oil and gas 
prices and frequent changes in petroleum reserve estimates. The Ministry of Finance now 
assesses  the  value  of  the  government’s  share  of  the  remaining  petroleum  wealth  at 
NOK 3.6 trillion, which is about NOK 550 billion lower than the Ministry’s estimate one year 
earlier.  
Chart: Ownership interests 
In  summer  2007,  the  Ministry  of  Finance  decided  to  increase  the  allocation  to  equity  from 
40 per cent to 60 per cent and reduce the allocation to bonds correspondingly. Surging oil 
and  gas  prices,  high  oil  production  and  favourable  economic  conditions  for  the  Norwegian 
economy led to high transfers to the Fund in the course of 2007 and 2008. Equity prices fell 
sharply through 2008. 
It was against this background that the Fund purchased equities for more than NOK 1 trillion 
between  summer  2007  and  summer  2009.  With  a  fall  in  value  of  23  per  cent  or 
NOK 630 billion, it is understandable that the results in 2008 attracted considerable attention. 
The most important development for the Fund was perhaps a doubling of its global equity 
holdings. After earning high returns in the past year and a half, the Fund has also recovered 
the losses. 
Chart: Nominal interest rate level and cost of equity capital 
                                                
 
7  See “Future management of the Government Petroleum Fund”, Norges Bank’s letter to the Ministry of Finance 
of 10 April 1997 and “An analysis of the Government Petroleum Fund’s equity allocation”, Norges Bank’s letter 
to the Ministry of Finance of 15 March 2001. 
If 1997 is included, the figure is somewhat higher. The money-weighted average return is somewhat lower. 
8 
4 
 BIS Review 145/2010
As I mentioned earlier, the Fund has become larger than we expected a decade or so ago as 
high  oil  prices  have  more  than  compensated  for  fairly  low  returns  in  international  capital 
markets.  Looking  ahead,  market  prices  suggest  that  interest  rates  are  expected  to  remain 
low for many years. Real interest rates on long-term bonds have been depressed by central 
bank government bond purchases. Let us nonetheless assume an average nominal return on 
the Fund’s fixed income instruments of 3 per cent ahead. 
On  the  other  hand,  there  are  no  signs  that  return  requirements  in  equity  markets  are  low. 
Dividend  payments  are  high  in  relation  to  companies’  market  value.  Simple  valuation 
models9  indicate  that  shareholders  require  a  rate  of  return  between  8  and  10  per  cent,  a 
fairly normal level. 
This results in an overall nominal return of between 6 and 7 per cent. In addition, positive 
contributions  to  the  return  are  expected  from  non-government  bonds,  active  management 
and real estate. There is considerable uncertainty surrounding these estimates. 
Nevertheless, Norges Bank’s view is that it is still reasonable for the government to base its 
withdrawals  from  the  Fund  on  an  expected  annual  real  rate  of  return  of  4  per  cent.  The 
increase in the equity allocation from 40 per cent to 60 per cent does not provide a basis for 
higher  withdrawals  from  the  Fund,  but  reflects  prospects  for  somewhat  weaker  returns  in 
international markets today than was the case ten years ago. 
Chart: Excess return, cumulative annual since inception and quarterly 
The  long-term  return  and  the  wide  annual  variations  in  the  Fund’s  value  are  largely 
dependent on financial market developments. The most important questions therefore relate 
to the Fund’s strategy. We have nevertheless continuously sought to exploit the scope for 
profitable  active  management.  The  contribution  from  active  management  to  the  overall 
annual return was set at 0.25 percentage point by the Executive Board in 2001, which may 
appear to be neither considerable nor demanding. According to the Ministry’s calculations, 
the expected real return on the Fund rose by 0.4 percentage point when the equity allocation 
was  increased  from  40  per  cent  to  60  per  cent10.  In  this  context,  a  contribution  of 
0.25 percentage point does not seem small. 
It  is  also  fairly  demanding  to  achieve  this.  The  degree  of  efficiency  in  financial  markets  is 
generally  high.  In  a  model,  Nobel  prize  winner  William  Sharpe  divides  investors  into  two 
groups: passive and active investors. In this model, all passive investors will achieve a return 
in  line  with  the  general  market.  The  return  earned  by  active  investors  will  on  average  be 
lower than the market return because of higher management costs11. 
The idea that rational and profit-motivated participants should, on average, lose money is a 
paradox, as pointed out by Sanford Grossman and Joseph Stiglitz in 198012. For investors 
and managers to expend resources on gathering and analysing information, opportunities for 
profit in the markets must be sufficient to cover their costs. The Grossman-Stiglitz paradox 
prompted an adjustment of the efficient market hypothesis. In the modified version, financial 
                                                
 
9  See for example the Bank of England’s dividend discount model, where the risk premium is calculated as a 
residual, as used in Quarterly Bulletin Q3 2010. 
10  Report no 24 to the Storting (2006–2007): On the management of the Government Pension Fund in 2006. The 
Ministry’s estimate is based on a risk premium of 2 per cent for equities. 
11  William F. Sharpe (1991): “The arithmetic of active management”, Financial Analysts Journal, 47, pp. 7–9. 
12  Sanford  Grossman  and  Joseph  Stiglitz  (1980):  ”On  the  Impossibility  of  Informationally  Efficient  Markets”, 
American Economic Review, 70, pp. 393–408. 
BIS Review 145/2010 
 5
markets  reach  near-efficiency  most  of  the  time,  but  active  management  is  necessary  to 
eliminate mispricing and increase market efficiency13. 
When panic seized the markets in autumn 2008, prices simultaneously fell for many types of 
securities that had previously shown a low degree of correlation. It came as a surprise that 
there  was  a  strong  positive  correlation  between  for  example  Japanese  inflation-linked 
government  bonds,  bonds  issued  by  international  institutions  such  as  the  European 
Investment  Bank,  covered  bonds  issued  by  European  banks  and  US  mortgage-backed 
bonds. 
An investor such as the Fund can survive a liquidity squeeze for a period. We were prepared 
to maintain positions in fixed-income securities to maturity and the vast majority of borrowers 
appear  to  be  honouring  their  debt  obligations.  The  crisis  nevertheless  revealed  that  the 
exposure to underlying systematic risk was greater than we perhaps realised at the outset.  
In the hearing before the Storting (Norwegian parliament) in 2009, directly after the reporting 
of substantial losses in 2008, I indicated that unless the economic outlook went from bad to 
considerably  worse,  active  management  would  deliver  substantial  excess  returns  in  the 
coming  years.  Even  though  there  was  probably  an  underlying  fear  of  a  collapse  in  the 
financial system, it was fairly clear that the main factor behind the decline was limited market 
liquidity. Since the second quarter of last year, book values have increased even faster than 
we dared to hope. Returns have also been good as a result of a restructuring of the portfolio. 
The Fund continued to pursue active management through the crisis. It has proven important 
that active management could be pursued. 
Active  management  has  on  the  whole  delivered  good  results,  contributing  an  average 
0.3 percentage point to the overall annual return. All in all, active management has increased 
the value of the Fund by several tens of billions of Norwegian kroner.  
Chart: Key components of the design of the Fund’s investment strategy 
The Ministry of Finance sets out the investment strategy for the Fund, while Norges Bank as 
manager provides advice on a regular basis.  
This  past  summer,  we  proposed  several  important  changes  to  the  Fund’s  investment 
strategy14. The proposal illustrates the relationship between the various components of the 
strategy. We have also pointed to possible improvements to the investment guidelines for the 
Fund.  
The fixed income portfolio has a number of weaknesses. We have learned that we should 
not  necessarily  invest  most  in  those  companies  and  states  that  are  the  most  eager 
borrowers. Large borrowers thus have a high weight in the portfolios.  
Our assessment is that the fixed income portfolio should instead be weighted based on the 
income  that  is  to  service  the  debt.  The  GDP-weighted  alternative  is  the  most  relevant 
alternative for government debt. 
Both the equity and fixed income portfolios are constructed using regional weights. Today’s 
distribution  was  partly  determined  using  Norwegian  import  weights  from  the  mid-1990s.  It 
should  be  considered  whether  the  regional  weights  should  no  longer  be  used  so  that  the 
Fund’s holdings across all companies and recognised markets are of equal size. If regional 
weighting is discontinued, the share of the Fund’s European equity and bond holdings will be 
                                                 
13  See “Norges Banks aktive forvaltning av Statens pensjonsfond utland” [Norges bank’s active management of 
the Government Pension Fund Global], letter to the Ministry of Finance of 23 December 2010. 
14  “Utvikling av investeringsstrategien til Statens pensjonsfondutland” [Development of the investment strategy 
for the Government Pension Fund Global], Norges Bank’s letter to the Ministry of Finance of 6 July 2010. 
6 
 BIS Review 145/2010
reduced. Investments in the Americas and Asia will then increase. With such a revision, the 
stability of economic and political systems must also be assessed. 
When equity prices increase rapidly, the equity allocation will exceed the strategic weight of 
60 per cent. Rebalancing rules are then applied to bring the equity allocation back to 60 per 
cent. These rules are more important than many perhaps believe. Many investors waited for 
a long time, probably too long, to rebalance their portfolios during and after the crisis, when 
equity  allocations  fell  sharply.  It  should  also  be  considered  whether  the  rules  should  be 
designed to provide for a greater degree of automaticity, less judgement and probably also 
greater transparency. 
It is important to take into account the Fund’s particular features, that is to say a long-term, 
large investor without short-term liquidity needs, when evaluating which investment strategy 
is most appropriate. 
In the spring 2010 Report to the Storting on the Fund, the Ministry of Finance suggested that 
the level of less liquid assets should be increased: “Further development (of the strategy) will 
seek to diversify the risk further and increase the weight of investments that benefit from the 
Fund’s size, long-term perspective and ability to hold less liquid assets.” 
Today the Fund’s assets are divided into two classes: equities and bonds. Going forward, a 
division  into  three  asset  classes  may  better  enable  the  Fund  to  achieve  its  long-term 
objectives.  
The first asset class is equities. This class features the highest risk exposure and the highest 
expected return. It accounts for 60 per cent of the Fund, which reflects the risk willingness of 
the Fund’s owner. Today, the Fund can only invest in equities that are listed on a recognised 
stock  exchange.  Unlisted  shares,  so-called  private  equity,  could  be  included  in  the 
investment universe. The Fund could invest in companies with plans for an imminent listing 
on the stock exchange. Successful private equity firms can provide an excess return, but I 
doubt  that  the  Fund  will  become  a  big  investor  in  private  equity  firms  in  the  near  future. 
Selecting good companies is demanding and management fees are high. Many are highly 
leveraged and the sector’s behaviour is procyclical. 
The second class is nominal fixed income securities. Over time these securities are expected 
to  provide  a  lower  return  than  equities.  They  are  also  less  exposed  to  risk  and  are  often 
easier to sell at short notice. 
The third – and new – class is real assets excluding equities. Real assets will provide a cash 
flow that is assumed to track inflation. Such investments thus deliver a long-term and fairly 
secure return in line with the Fund’s objective. Real estate purchases, an example of assets 
in  this  class,  will  commence  in  the  near  future.  The  dividing  line  between  real  estate  and 
infrastructure is not very clear, and looking further ahead, it may be natural to invest in assets 
that can be classified as infrastructure. In addition, the Fund’s investments in inflation-linked 
bonds could be included in this class. 
The two latter classes combined will make up 40 per cent of the Fund. Many real assets are 
fairly  illiquid.  A  rapid  build-up  or  sell-down  of  positions  is  therefore  not  profitable  even  if 
prices change. Over many years ahead, the amount of nominal fixed income investments will 
exceed the amount of real assets. In the long run, it is conceivable that investments in the 
two classes may be more equally distributed. 
In the development of the investment strategy that I have presented, weight has been given 
to  exploiting  the  Fund’s  long-term  investment  horizon  and  size.  The  strategy  is  based  on 
objectives  and  expectations  regarding  the  Fund’s  overall  real  return  over  time.  Moving 
forward, Norges Bank’s operational management of the Fund should probably shift towards 
absolute return and absolute risk.  
BIS Review 145/2010 
 7
Transparency and accountability 
A clear division of responsibility between the Ministry of Finance as owner and Norges Bank 
as  manager  is  an  important  component  of  the Norwegian  model.  Moreover,  it  is  important 
that  transparency  and  accountability  are  prominent  features  of  the  model.  Management 
objectives have been clearly defined. 
Norges Bank and the Fund’s owner have always given weight to transparency with regard to 
the management of the Fund. The standard was set at an early stage when the Executive 
Board decided that an exhaustive list of the Fund’s investments should be published at the 
turn of each year and the first complete list was published in the annual report for 1998. This 
decision  has  paved  the  way  for  all  the  subsequent  discussions  about  various  individual 
investments. 
Norges  Bank  submits  extensive  reports  to  the  Ministry  and  Storting  on  the  results  and 
activities  of  the  Fund.  Our  annual  report  is  submitted  as  an  appendix  to  the  Ministry  of 
Finance’s  annual  report  to  the  Storting  on  the  management  of  the  Government  Pension 
Fund.  Norges  Bank  appears  before  the  Standing  Committee  on  Finance  and  Economic 
Affairs of the Storting at annual hearings. The Bank advises the Ministry on important issues 
related to the management of the Fund. Norges Bank’s Supervisory Council submits its own 
report  to  the  Storting  concerning  its  oversight  activities.  The  Office  of  the  Auditor  General 
carries out – as our owner has expressed it – an important function through its responsibility 
for monitoring the Ministry’s exercise of authority in relation to Norges Bank and auditing the 
item in the government accounts that refers to the Government Pension Fund Global. 
The Fund’s accounts and notes to the accounts contain a growing body of information. As 
from  the  2011  accounting  year,  Norges  Bank  will  shift  to  International  Financial  Reporting 
Standards (IFRS).  
Transparency is important for the Fund’s foreign investments. Some authorities are sceptical 
of other countries’ sovereign wealth funds. This scepticism is reflected in an annual survey 
conducted  by  Edwin  Truman,  senior  fellow  at  the  highly  renowned  Peterson  Institute  of 
International  Economics  in  Washington.  His  survey  is  by  far  the  most  thorough  and 
systematic – the most authoritative – assessment. Truman’s criteria were also included in the 
basis for the Santiago Principles which, facilitated by the IMF, were introduced in 2008 and 
implemented by a number of sovereign wealth funds. 
To quote Truman: 
“Sovereign  wealth  funds  (SWFs),  large  pools  of  government-owned  funds  that 
are invested in whole or in part outside their home country, burst upon the policy 
consciousness only three years ago. Their explosive growth up until 2007 fanned 
widespread  anxieties  about  shifts  of  global  economic  wealth  and  the  roles  of 
governments  in  managing  that  wealth.  On  the  other  hand,  SWF  investments 
helped  some  major  Western  financial  institutions  weather  the  recent  financial 
crisis.” 
Chart: Truman’s ranking 
In  Truman’s  most  recent  study  on  the  transparency  of  sovereign  wealth  funds,  the 
Government Pension Fund Global was ranked in first place. The Fund has also improved its 
score since the 2009 survey. We note with satisfaction that such a young fund has come out 
ahead of established US and European funds15. 
                                                 
15  Edwin M. Truman (2010): “Sovereign Wealth Funds: Threat or Salvation?”, Peterson Institute of International 
Economics. 
8 
 BIS Review 145/2010
As I mentioned by way of introduction, the economic literature points to two factors that can 
turn riches into rags. 
One is the risk of inducing interest groups and economic agents to engage in rent-seeking 
behaviour. It can safely be said that the framework for the Fund has fended off this risk.  
Chart: Relative wages in Norway 
The  second  is  the  risk  of  Dutch  disease.  Strictly  speaking,  the  jury  is  still  deliberating. 
Productivity  growth  and  labour  force  participation  have  been  satisfactory  over  the  past 
decade while relative labour costs and prices have reached yet higher levels. It remains to be 
seen  whether  the  real  krone  exchange  rate  will  gradually  fall  back  when  increases  in 
petroleum  revenue  spending  can  no  longer  be  sustained  and  the  relative  size  of  the  oil 
supply industry decreases. 
Thank you for your attention! 
     9
BIS Review 145/2010 
     10 
 BIS Review 145/2010
    11
BIS Review 145/2010 
     12 
 BIS Review 145/2010
    BIS Review 145/2010 
 13
    14 
 BIS Review 145/2010
