Christine M Cumming: Early intervention and resolution 
Remarks by Ms Christine M Cumming, First Vice President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York, on Early Intervention and Resolution, at the Transatlantic Corporate Governance 
Dialogue, Brussels, 25 October 2010. 
 Let  me  thank  the  organizers  for  the  opportunity  to  speak  today  about  the  supervision  and 
resolution of financial institutions in danger of failing. Let me begin by noting that the views I'll 
express  in  these  remarks  represent  my  own  views  and  not  those  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve System.  
In  any  industry,  it  is  important  that  unsuccessful  firms  fail.  Business  strategies  fall  short, 
franchises depreciate, management loses focus. Large or small, unsuccessful firms need to 
be cleared from the scene through merger, restructuring or liquidation.  
This is no less true for the financial industry than for any other. And for all firms, society has 
an  interest  in  ensuring  that  the  process  of  failure  does  not  destroy  more  value  than 
necessary.  As  an  economist,  I  see  much  innovation  in  national  insolvency  practices  over 
time as designed to reduce the cost of insolvency and increase the value preserved in the 
insolvency process.  
One  of  the  vexing  problems  during  the  recent  financial  crisis  was  concern  about  the 
adequacy of means to resolve large financial firms and uncertainty about the externalities of 
placing  a  large  financial  firm  into  insolvency.  The  Lehman  bankruptcy  no  doubt  validated 
those apprehensions for many.  
Some  of  the  issues  in  resolving  large,  internationally  active  financial  firms  have  been 
recognized for some time – the multiplicity of jurisdictions, differences in insolvency regimes 
across countries, complexities in unwinding certain books and the largely untested nature of 
national,  much  less  international,  resolution  processes  for  such  very  large  financial  firms. 
Over the last 20 years, the international legal and supervisory communities have undertaken 
several efforts to address these issues.  
In  the  wake  of  the  financial  crisis,  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  formed  a 
Cross-Border Bank Resolution Group to identify what improvements could be made to the 
international  resolution  process  and  recommend  actions  to  be  taken.  It  published  its 
recommendations in March 2010. The CBRG’s report is admirable in its clear description of 
the  problems  encountered 
its 
recommendations.  I  will  be  referring  to  them  throughout  my  remarks.  As  the  CBRG  was 
completing  its  draft  report,  the  Financial  Stability  Board  asked  a  working  group,  the  Cross 
Border Crisis Management Group, to advance the development of recovery and resolution 
plans for cross-border institutions as recommended by the CBRG.  
I’d  like  to  make  three  points  today.  The  first  is  to  highlight  the  importance  of  timely 
supervisory action in preserving the value in a financial firm. The second is to underscore the 
important innovation in supervisory practice represented by recovery planning. The third is to 
paint  a  picture,  an  admittedly  optimistic  picture,  of  the  improvements  in  the  international 
resolution  process  made  possible  by  following  the  recommendations  of  the  CBRG.  I  will 
conclude  by  returning  to  my  starting  point,  to  the  importance  and  the  scarcity  of  time  in 
dealing with a troubled financial firm.  
the  concrete  nature  of 
fall  of  2008  and 
the 
in 
The important role time plays at a failing firm 
The seeds of any financial failure are generally planted years earlier. The cycle is familiar to 
us all – in good times, most business strategies thrive. Financial institutions commence an 
BIS Review 140/2010 
 1
activity that has high initial marginal returns; over time the activity attracts more competition, 
pricing  goes  down  and  risk  appetite  goes  up.  Overexpansion  leads  to  an  inevitable 
correction,  with  the  losses  incurred  testifying  to  the  long-term  unsuccessful  nature  of  the 
strategy. 
U.S.  banking,  securities  and  finance  companies  in  the  early  1990s  experienced  the  late 
stage  of  just  such  a  cycle  in  which  commercial  real  estate  and  leveraged  buyout  lending 
overexpanded. The result was that many large financial institutions had to be merged into 
others or unwound.  
Banking supervisors responded to these problems by requiring banks with large, problematic 
exposures to implement a three-part program. First, the bank comprehensively identified its 
problem loans and assigned them to workout specialists. Second, the bank developed and 
executed  a  capital  plan  and  strengthened  its  liquidity.  Third  and  essential  to  raising  new 
capital,  the  bank  developed  a  new  business  plan  demonstrating  its  ability  to  return  to 
profitability.  
This  program  worked,  in  large  part  because  it  was  applied  timely  enough.  Stylized  facts 
about time’s role on the value of a failing firm created urgency in implementing the program. 
Those stylized facts were: 
 
The value of the firm’s assets and its business lines tends to decline with time as the 
firm’s financial weakness becomes more apparent and market pricing of its assets 
takes on a “fire sale” character;  
The  funding  capacity  of  the  firm  declines  as  its  troubles  become  more  evident, 
counterparties  cut  lines  and  limit  maturities  and  the  quality  of  counterparties 
declines; and  
The value of the firm’s franchise decays as customers migrate to other providers.  
 
This  three-part  program  of  identifying  all  problems,  replenishing  capital  and  liquidity  and 
recasting  the  business  plan  was  designed  around  loan  exposures,  but  continues  to  be 
relevant today. The challenges are to adapt such a program to the many financial institutions 
strongly oriented toward capital markets activities with the resulting volatile balance sheets 
and income streams and to apply the program timely.  
Time also plays an important role when a financial firm is subject to an insolvency process. 
Another stylized fact is that the market value of the assets and business lines often suffer a 
substantial markdown when a financial institution enters insolvency and may decay further 
thereafter.  The  Federal  Deposit  Insurance  Corporation  (FDIC),  the  resolution  authority  for 
banks  in  the  United  States,  routinely  experienced  losses  in  resolving  banks  in  the  1980s, 
when it was required to wait until the bank's book value had reached zero. That led to the 
provision in FDICIA 1991 that a bank can be declared insolvent when its tangible equity falls 
below 2 percent of assets. 
 A supervisory innovation: recovery planning 
The potential for rapid decay of asset and business line values unless assets and liabilities 
are transferred to a permanent owner quickly is a large part of what sets financial institutions 
apart  from  other  companies  entering  insolvency.  This  difference  motivates  efforts  to  avert 
insolvency through supervisory action, as I described earlier. It also motivated U.S. banking 
supervisors in the early 1990s to ask some troubled banking companies not only to apply the 
three-part program but also to develop a meaningful contingency plan for reducing risk and 
raising capital if the first round of actions did not succeed. The supervisors incorporated the 
requirement  to  develop  contingency  plans  in  its  supervisory  agreements  with  those 
institutions.  
2 
 BIS Review 140/2010
The  CBRG  has  recommended  that  all  systemically  important  financial  institutions  develop 
recovery  plans.  I  believe  the  development  of  such  plans  by  healthy  institutions  and  their 
discussion by a college of the firm’s principal regulators constitute important innovations in 
the  supervision  of  financial  institutions.  The  Cross  Border  Crisis  Management  Group  has 
provided momentum and a forum for discussion of progress and challenges as supervisors 
initiate discussion of recovery plans with firms. The discussions we have held in the United 
States  involve  the  financial  institution,  its  major  U.S.  regulators  and  the  regulators  of  the 
foreign  legal  entities  containing  its  principal  business  operations.  Those  discussions  have 
included both the development of a global liquidity contingency plan and a plan to reduce the 
risk profile of or “derisk” the financial firm by winding down or selling business operations or 
financial assets. The intention is to have recovery plans, as well as resolution plans, in place 
by the end of 2011.  
Recovery planning has several important benefits. The first is to bring about a discussion of 
the firm’s response to very severe stress scenarios. In addition, the principal supervisors of 
the firm are present together with the firm to discuss the plan as it evolves, contributing to a 
common base of understanding of the firm among the supervisors.  
The  second  benefit  is  the  identification  of  impediments  to  the  firm’s  recovery.  In  our 
discussions with U.S. institutions, four important impediments have surfaced and the same 
themes,  all  familiar  concerns  for  supervisors  and  resolution  authorities,  have  surfaced  in 
other  discussions  led  by  members  of  the  Cross  Border  Crisis  Management  Group.  The 
difference this time is that the issues are being raised by the firms themselves. 
The  first  is  the  availability  of  sufficient  financial  information  by  legal  entity.  It  begins  with 
simple housekeeping – records that accurately record the legal entities of both the firm and 
the  customer  involved  in  a  financial  transaction,  an  asset  holding  or  a  liability.  Given  the 
extensive  consolidation  of  firms  in  the  financial  industry,  the  information  systems  of  many 
firms are an accretion of systems, with issues of consistency, comprehensive aggregation of 
exposures and speed of information retrieval for analysis. For example, most firms in distress 
find it difficult to answer a crucial question: what market participants are most exposed to me 
and how will they react to my difficulties?  
A second impediment is the complexity of unwinding certain books of business, where the 
business  is  originated  in  one  location,  recorded  in  another  and  risk-managed  in  a  third. 
Derivative  transactions  are  a  prime  example.  The  level  of  complexity  related  to  how  and 
where  trades  are  marketed,  booked,  funded  and  risk-managed  leads  to  high  levels  of 
connectedness  within  the  firm,  particularly  as  institutions  book  “back-to-back”  intragroup 
trades to transfer the economics of a transaction to a central portfolio for risk management 
purposes.  
The third impediment is the use of intragroup guarantees. Institutions sometimes use parent 
guarantees to support and cover particular transactions or the entire operations of separately 
capitalized  subsidiaries  in  foreign  countries.  Guarantees  of  this  sort  allow  firms  to  operate 
subsidiaries with less capital, but can distort the pricing and economics of the subsidiary’s 
business  activities  and  make  the  subsidiary  more  valuable  to  the  current  owner  than  to  a 
potential buyer. In addition, the default of a guarantor may allow counterparties to terminate 
contracts and seize collateral even though official sector efforts are attempting to preserve 
the local operations.  
The  fourth  impediment  is  the  need  to  preserve  global  payment  operations.  The  cash 
management, cash payments, securities settlement and custodial services that some firms 
offer to wholesale and retail clients are essential to the functioning of clients, the economy 
and the financial system, but such services have high switching costs for customers. These 
services often represent core business lines with stable profitability and thus valuable assets 
for  financial  firms,  but  they  are  also  often  entwined  with  other  businesses  in  the  firm.  The 
fundamental  nature  of  these  activities  and  their  importance  to  the  financial  and  real 
BIS Review 140/2010 
 3
economies make them of special interest to the financial authorities reviewing recovery plans 
and developing resolution plans.  
The four impediments are all related to institutional complexity. A financial firm organized as 
a single legal entity would certainly face many complexities, but far fewer than organizations 
today. This clearly raises the issue of whether the extraordinary organizational complexity of 
financial firms today imposes social costs that are too burdensome, especially in resolution, 
relative to its benefits. The economists Dick Herring and Jacopo Carmassi earlier this year 
documented the reasons for the vast number of subsidiaries at large financial firms, reasons 
such as regulatory requirements, regulatory arbitrage and tax avoidance.  
If such organizational complexity imposes a high social cost by impeding recovery plans and 
resolution,  providing  incentives  to  reduce  complexity  may  be  warranted.  For  example, 
collateralization or capital requirements on intragroup exposures or parent guarantees could 
internalize  for  the  firm  some  of  those  social  costs.  Alternatively,  more  direct  supervisory 
requirements may be necessary for addressing the improvement of information systems or 
the separability and preservation of critical payment systems.  
But such measures have costs and I would argue increase the relative benefit of efforts to 
identify  the  no  doubt  very  difficult  changes  necessary  in  both  the  private  and  the  public 
sectors to reduce organizational complexity in financial firms. I note that the CBRG report not 
only has recommendations largely addressing the four impediments to recovery I described, 
but also a recommendation to simplify financial firm organizational structures. 
A final benefit of recovery planning is that it is a prod to concrete action in the near term, 
when the institution is healthy and provides a ready-made menu of options when the firm is 
distressed. Moreover, the impediments to recovery are also impediments to resolution. If the 
recovery plan does not succeed in averting failure, but the firm has acted on the plan, it will 
enter  resolution  with  better  information  systems,  a  reduced  risk  profile  and  perhaps  fewer 
intragroup exposures than it otherwise would have.  
Resolution planning  
As  I  mentioned  at  the  outset,  the  financial  crisis  validated  for  many  concerns  about  the 
adequacy  of  measures  to  resolve  large  financial  firms  without  high  costs  and  destructive 
externalities. The Lehman bankruptcy reminds us that every financial institution is resolvable, 
but at a cost. The major elements of cost are the considerable expense of insolvency, the 
substantial loss of value through any excess, “fire sale” markdown of the value of assets and 
business lines and the externalities of a large failure to other firms, their stakeholders and 
market participants in the form of knock-on and psychological effects. When the observation 
is  made  that  a  financial  institution  is  not  resolvable  or  is  too  big  to  fail,  it  represents  a 
judgment that the financial costs and externalities of failure are unacceptable.  
The desire to improve the resolution process for cross-border financial firms is widely shared, 
but  how  we  should  we  judge  progress?  The  success  of  private  and  public  sector  actions, 
such  as  those  recommended  by  the  CBRG,  to  improve  the  resolution  of  systemically 
important firms can perhaps be gauged by the extent to which resolution costs are reduced. 
We  might  further  gauge  progress  against  additional  expectations,  such  as  the  absence  of 
taxpayer support of the resolution process, the efficiency of the process (to the extent it is not 
captured in resolution costs) and the equitable and consistent treatment of stakeholders.  
To  improve  the  resolution  process,  the  CBRG’s  first  recommendation  is  that  national 
authorities have appropriate tools to deal with all types of financial institutions in difficulties so 
that an orderly resolution can be achieved. The recommendation specifically mentions power 
to  create  bridge  financial  institutions,  transfer  assets,  liabilities  and  business  operations  to 
others and to resolve claims.  
4 
 BIS Review 140/2010
The FDIC has these powers for banks and thrifts as well as a great deal of experience in 
managing bank failures and has demonstrated the utility and flexibility of its tools. A positive 
development is that many countries are considering or have adopted legislation giving the 
financial resolution authority similar powers.  
The U.S. Dodd-Frank Act passed in the summer broadens the scope of the FDIC’s resolution 
powers, although in a carefully circumscribed manner. The Dodd-Frank Act allows the FDIC 
to resolve not only a bank, but a financial holding company of a banking organization or a 
nonbank  financial  institution,  if  the  requisite  recommendations  and  conditions  are  present, 
among  them,  that  the  failure  is  a  threat  to  financial  stability.  When  the  FDIC  is  appointed 
receiver,  it  has  available  its  full  set  of  resolution  powers,  including  the  ability  to  create  a 
bridge company for a nonbank financial institution.  
The  Dodd-Frank  Act  also  strengthens  the  supervisory  regime  for  systemically  important 
financial firms. It empowers the newly formed Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) to 
designate bank and nonbank firms as systemically important. The FSOC has just published 
an  advanced  notice  of  proposed  rulemaking  soliciting  comments  on  the  criteria  for 
designating  nonbank  financial  companies  systemically  important.  Companies  that  are  so 
designated will be subject to consolidated oversight from the Federal Reserve.  
The  U.S.  supervisory  and  resolution  authorities  have  also  begun  the  process  of  resolution 
planning, as recommended by the CBRG. That discussion is intended to be on a firm-by-firm 
basis among the supervisors and resolution authorities in the principal locations of the firm's 
activities.  
The  CBRG  recommendations  provide  useful  building  blocks  toward  a  stronger  cross-
jurisdiction  national  process:  resolution  tools,  national  coordination  across  jurisdictions, 
recovery planning, setting aside of impediments to recovery and resolution and simplification 
of  organizational  complexity.  The  CBRG  also  recommends  that  national  authorities  seek 
international convergence of resolution tools and measures.  
How might we envision an effective cross-border resolution process developing from these 
building  blocks?  The  report  is  very  careful  in  talking  about  how  the  building  blocks  might 
integrate at the international level, noting the many problems and conflicts faced by national 
authorities  in  dealing  with  a  troubled  or  insolvent  organization  located  partially  outside 
national borders. So let me extrapolate from the report, expressing strictly my own views and 
sketch out how the process set in train by the CBRG recommendations might evolve.  
Let’s  focus  on  a  single  systemically  important  financial  institution.  The  healthy  dialogue 
among regulators and resolution authorities in the principal jurisdictions for a given firm and 
the firm-specific recovery and resolution plans developed could provide the basis for strong 
cooperation  when  the  institution  crosses  from  healthy  to  troubled.  On  the  basis  of  that 
cooperation, the lead supervisor, with the participation of the resolution authority in the home 
country jurisdiction, could coordinate a program of early supervisory intervention encouraging 
a private restructuring utilizing the recovery plan. At the same time, the resolution authority in 
the  home  country,  working  with  the  home  country  lead  supervisor,  could  begin  taking  the 
necessary  steps  to  prepare  for  a  possible  resolution  as  a  contingency.  If  the  supervisory 
intervention  does  not  produce  a  successful  private  restructuring  and  recovery,  the  home 
country resolution authority leads a coordinated resolution process.  
Let  me  elaborate  on  a  couple  points.  First,  I  believe  that  economists  can  be  invaluable  in 
helping  financial  supervisory  and  resolution  authorities  understand  more  fully  where 
coordinated  actions  and  cooperative  solutions  improve  outcomes  and  where  they  do  not, 
something  I  don't  believe  we  now  really  know.  The  potential  gains  from  cooperation  will 
reflect the distribution of asset and liabilities (or net worth) across legal entities, assumptions 
about the rate of decay in the values of assets and business lines pre-entry and post-entry 
into  insolvency,  the  length  of  time  spent  in  each  state  and  any  one-time  markdown  on 
entering  insolvency.  With  analysis  or  simulation,  various  decision  rules  can  be  explored 
about how a lead resolution authority could foster a cooperative, coordinated resolution using 
BIS Review 140/2010 
 5
tools  such  as  bridge  banks,  transfers  of  assets  and  liabilities,  sequencing  of  sales  or 
liquidations and other techniques. An analysis can also explore how sensitive the decision 
rules are to timing, distribution of net worth across entities and decay or markdown factors. 
In addition, one of the most important decisions for resolution authorities will be which legal 
entities within a systemically important firm to place into insolvency proceedings and which 
entities  can  and  should  be  maintained  for  sale  as  going  concerns.  In  his  September  1 
testimony  before  the  Financial  Crisis  Inquiry  Commission,  my  colleague,  Tom  Baxter, 
general counsel of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, described how Lehman’s broker-
dealer was not placed into insolvency, remained a going concern temporarily funded by the 
central bank and was sold within days after Lehman’s bankruptcy filing.  
The work needed to understand how coordinated resolution might work and when it will work 
underscores for us that an immediate jump to a fully fledged international resolution process 
is not really feasible. This is in fact why doing the hard and painstaking work of resolution 
planning is so important. Resolution planning is a smaller version of the statistical simulation 
I described, more closely tied to the specifics of the individual institution’s case, in which the 
financial  authorities  in  the  jurisdictions  where  the  firm’s  major  operations  are  located  work 
through potential scenarios. Those scenarios will reflect the current structure of the firm and 
the normal range of the distribution of assets and liabilities across legal entities. Resolution 
planning  is  likely  to  contribute  a  great  deal  of  insight  into  how  a  full-fledged  international 
process could work, insight that we do not have today.  
I have talked about early, coordinated supervisory intervention to activate a recovery plan for 
a systemically important firm and of a coordinated resolution process. Is there an opportunity 
between  those  two  stages  to  intervene  more  forcefully,  but  not  incur  the  potential  asset 
markdowns  and  administrative  costs  of  resolution?  Considerable  interest  has  been 
expressed in developing a “bail-in” mechanism to provide that intermediate step. 
Let me comment by stressing that what I am expressing is strictly my own view. And let me 
start  by  saying  that  a  bail-in  mechanism  cannot  substitute  for  the  national  resolution  tools 
and  resolution  planning  called  for  by  the  CBRG.  There  must  be  a  last  stop  where 
systemically firms can be resolved, because we will inevitably need it and we must work to 
make cross-border resolution possible at acceptable cost. 
Where can bail-in fit? I’ve described a process in which supervisors deal first with a troubled 
financial firm by encouraging its board of directors and management to activate its recovery 
plan  and  develop  a  private  restructuring.  In  my  personal  view,  the  possibility  of  a 
restructuring  prior  to  insolvency  with  potentially  more  forceful  outside  supervisory  or 
contractual intervention is interesting and deserves more study. Given the number and range 
of  stakeholders  in  a  large  financial  company,  such  a  mechanism  could  help  solve  a 
coordination problem that can be costly in terms of time and sub-optimal in terms of ensuring 
the  equitable  treatment  of  stakeholders  for  a  financial  company  on  the  threshold  of,  or  in, 
distress. 
However, bail-in is not yet a well-defined concept in the international policy discussion; I’m 
not  sure  how  my  description  of  a  mechanism  resonates  with  the  overall  discussion.  Right 
now,  the  common  theme  of  a  set  of  bail-in  concepts  is  putting  in  place  a  statutory  or 
contractual  trigger  that  would  convert  a  firm's  debt  into  equity,  thereby  immediately 
strengthening the firm's capital base. Short-term debt and liabilities would likely be excluded.  
To  move  the  bail-in  mechanism  from  concept  to  a  meaningful  proposal,  the  official 
community needs to develop one or more specific proposals that can be vetted, debated and 
improved. In that spirit, let me list some areas in which a bail-in proposal needs to be more 
specific. A proposal needs to make clear: 
 
The  nature  of  the  trigger.  Is  it  contractual  or  supervisory?  Is  it  rule-based  and  if 
supervisory, rule-based or discretionary?  
6 
 BIS Review 140/2010
    The desired capital structure before a bail-in. Consonant with the work in Basel on 
capital  and  liquidity  requirements,  how  much  bail-in  eligible  debt  should  the  firm 
have?  To  answer  that  requires  specifying  goals  for  the  capital  structure  of  the 
restructured firm. It is probably crucial that the post-bail-in capital structure provide 
enough  loss-bearing  capacity  to  make  regeneration  of  the  company's  prospects 
credible.  
Estimates of the market capacity to purchase bail-in eligible instruments relative to 
the amounts of such instruments that would be needed and the price sensitivity of 
markets to volume and financial institution credit quality.  
Funding of the restructuring firm.  
The  reactions  of  rating  agencies  and  of  customers  either  influenced  by  rating 
agency actions or subject to bylaws or guidelines.  
Legal  authority  and  enforceability  across  jurisdictions.  The  appropriate  legal 
authorization not only needs to exist in each home country jurisdiction, but we also 
need proposed legal mechanisms to ensure that: 
– 
Supervisors  in  other  countries  will  not  treat  the  triggering  of  bail-in  as  an 
insolvency event;  
Supervisors  in  other  countries  will  coordinate  with  the  home  country  in 
exercising any supervisory trigger in their jurisdiction; and  
The  company’s  debt  conversion  will  be  honored  in  all  jurisdictions  (through 
choice of law or other legal foundation).  
  I’ll conclude with the timing of the trigger. A key question is when such a mechanism has the 
greatest chance of success. In my personal view, it seems unlikely that the proverbial “one 
minute to midnight” is the right moment for action – by then most firms would face a severe 
shortage of liquidity and serious constraints in the ability to undertake new business. Timing 
that is too early brings with it a host of repercussions and risks, of course.  
If I interpret a bail-in mechanism against the three-part supervisory program for troubled firms 
that  I  described  at  the  beginning,  conversion  of  debt  to  equity  stakes  is  a  mechanism  to 
replenish capital, a critical element, but just one of the three key elements. The comparison 
suggests  that  the  conversion  of  debt  to  equity  by  itself  may  not  be  sufficient  and  a  fully 
developed proposal for a bail-in mechanism will need to include thorough identification and 
workout  of  problem  assets  and  positions,  as  well  as  a  revamped  business  plan  that 
demonstrates the ability of the financial firm to return to profitability. 
A return to the issue of time 
Let me conclude by returning to the theme of time. Long-standing supervisory practice aims 
to intercept problems before they threaten the viability of a financial institution and to promote 
action  by  the  firm’s  directors  and  management  while  the  firm  still  has  the  opportunity  to 
recover.  But  supervisors  will  not  always  execute  timely,  successfully  and  in  all  necessary 
cases and financial firms will not always be able to turn around a deteriorating situation and 
avert failure; certainly the experience of the financial crisis are sobering in that respect. That 
underscores  the  need  to  develop  with  alacrity  and  diligence  meaningful  recovery  and 
resolution planning for systemically important firms and continue to build a strong international 
resolution process.  
Recovery  planning  by  firms  helps  to  increase  the  margin  of  time  available  for  firms  by 
shortening reaction time when distress occurs and reducing the impediments to recovery and 
resolution when firms are healthy. Similarly, resolution planning gives financial authorities a 
better  starting  position  and  more  ability  to  move  swiftly  and  decisively  in  a  financial  firm 
BIS Review 140/2010 
 7
failure. Taken together, augmented resolution powers, recovery and resolution planning and 
better identification of systemic risks can move us substantially forward in dealing with failing 
systemically important institutions. 
Thank you for the opportunity to share these views with you. 
8 
 BIS Review 140/2010
