 Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview in Politis 
Interview  with  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  in  Politis, 
Cyprus, conducted by Mr Demetris Georghiades and published on 29 October 2010. 
 Politis: The framework and rules of how the EU and the euro zone work were designed at a 
time when the economies of member states were more or less on a similar level. Do we need 
to re-design them? For example you have on one hand matured economies like Germany 
and  on  the  other  hand  Romania  and  Bulgaria  that  need  to  invest  heavily  to  improve  their 
infrastructure. Is it “fair” to ask for both to obey the same fiscal deficit rules?  
Trichet:  No,  I  don’t  think  that  there  are  major  differences  between  countries  from  that 
standpoint. Sound fiscal policies are a necessary condition for sustainable medium and long 
term growth and job creation. A solid anchoring of fiscal soundness is also essential for the 
prosperity of future generations, our children and grandchildren. An excessive level of fiscal 
imbalances  puts  countries  in  a  situation  of  vulnerability,  where  they  can  be  hit  by  a  sharp 
decline of confidence among firms, households and investors.  
Politis:  Cyprus  prior  to  the  crisis  had  had  a  double  digit  current  account  deficit  (almost 
reached  18%  in  2008).  Even  during  the  recession  it  records  a  current  account  deficit  of  
7–8%. Should this be a major source of concern for Cyprus? Do you think that this might be 
one  of  the  amendments  required  to  be  made  in  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  –  the 
Maastricht Treaty, adding into the criteria one for the current account deficits? 
Trichet: The current account is an important summary indicator of economic developments 
in  a  country,  with  a  deficit  indicating  that  the  domestic  savings  are  insufficient  to  finance 
domestic  investments.  Large  and  persistent  deficits  signal  clearly  structural  underlying 
domestic imbalances. It also exposes a country to shifts in the availability and conditions of 
capital inflows and thus creates vulnerability. Therefore it is important to ensure that foreign 
capital is used to profitable investment, which will bring returns that can be used to repay the 
country’s  debt.  Current  account  deficits  can  also  signal 
international 
competitiveness  of  an  economy,  related  in  particular  to  excessive  increases  of  costs 
including unit labour costs. The experience of many countries highlights the risks associated 
with such competitiveness losses.  
One has to fully understand that in a single currency area which ensures price stability in line 
with the definition given by the ECB – annual inflation less than two, but close to two percent – 
it is imperative for each economy belonging to this area to ensure that national increases of 
wages, of unit labour costs and of prices are broadly in line with the euro area average. This 
is  essential.  Otherwise  the  economy  will  lose  competitiveness,  year  after  year,  and  will 
trigger low growth and low employment. This is also true for Cyprus.  
Politis: For the Cyprus economy, several organisations (IMF, European Commission etc) list 
as major threats its big government sector, its current account deficit and the projection for its 
mid term pension and health costs. With the exception of the first (current fiscal deficit) for 
the others, the European Commission can only issue warnings. Is the ECB’s assessment on 
the same lines?  
Trichet: At the time when Cyprus joined the euro area it featured a relatively sound fiscal 
position. Now the situation is different: the rapid aging of the population (one of the fastest 
across  EU  countries)  and  the  deficit  generated  via  increases  in  the  public  wage  bill  and 
social  transfers  pose  very  serious  structural  problems.  These  have  to  be  addressed  by 
means of a strong fiscal consolidation strategy and an important pension reform to ensure 
the  long-term  sustainability  of  the  pension  system.  As  you  see,  the  ECB  fully  shares  the 
diagnosis of the European Commission and of the IMF. 
losses 
in 
BIS Review 153/2010 
 1
 Politis:  In  your  keynote  address  at  the  EUROFI  Financial  Forum  2010  you  described  the 
Basel III reform package as a cornerstone intended to put the global financial system on a 
sounder footing. Some academics call the whole Basel framework an excuse for mainly big 
banks and countries that do not want really to take the drastic and effective reform measures 
needed.  Can  the  EU  citizens  be  assured  that  the  new  framework  (not  just  Basel  III)  will 
prevent a financial crisis of a similar of what we experienced two years ago? 
Trichet: On Basel concretely: the agreement reached has two great achievements. First, the 
end results are tough standards. The required common equity has been increased from 2% 
to 7%; this is an increase by a factor of 3.5. (For some institutions, having 1% capital, it’s 
7 times bigger). Second, the agreement is global. It encompasses industrial economies as 
well as emerging economies.  
Overall, I consider that our agreement strikes the right balance between the objective of a 
very significant strengthening of the resilience of the financial sector while not endangering 
the progressive consolidation of the recovery, thanks to an appropriate transition period. Also 
to  be  noted  is  that  these  standards  are  global  minimum  standards:  national  regulators  or 
supervisors can set tougher standards if they deem that appropriate. 
On your last point I will say that it is imperative that we make as sure as possible that a new 
crisis  of  that  dimension  would  not  erupt  again.  We  could  avoid  a  great  depression  only 
because  governments,  in  all  advanced  economies,  provided  the  financial  sector  with 
considerable public support. This in my view will not be repeated because our democracies 
will not mobilize such an amount of tax payers’ financial risk taking twice. This is why it is 
absolutely essential that we make the whole financial system much more resilient, including 
through the Basel III agreement.  
Politis:  Some  still  insist  that  the  banking  problems  still  exist.  We  have  seen  Ireland  just 
recently injecting capital into one of its major banks. Are you confident about the soundness 
of euro zone banks?  
Trichet:  As  you  know,  a  comprehensive  stress  test  exercise,  covering  91  EU  banks,  was 
finalized in late July. The ECB welcomed this exercise, which was prepared and conducted 
by  the  Committee  of  European  Banking  Supervisors  (CEBS)  and  national  supervisory 
authorities, 
the  ECB.  This  stress-testing  exercise  was 
comprehensive and rigorous, and the results confirmed the resilience of EU and euro area 
banking systems as a whole to severe economic and financial shocks. The stress test has 
also significantly enhanced transparency regarding the current financial conditions and risk 
exposures of the 91 institutions that participated in the exercise.  
We also welcome the commitment made by national authorities with regard to the provision 
of  support  facilities  for  banks  where  private  sector  means  are  insufficient.  Sound  balance 
sheets,  effective  risk  management  and  transparent,  robust  business  models  are  key  to 
strengthening  banks’  resilience  to  shocks  and  to  ensuring  adequate  access  to  finance, 
thereby laying the foundations for sustainable growth, job creation and financial stability. 
Politis:  Will  the  break  up  of  banks  into  investment  banks  and  traditional  banks  make  the 
ECB’s  and  other  regulators  task  easier?  Will  this  be  beneficial  for  the  whole  economy  in 
general? 
Trichet: The proposals aiming at affecting the structure of the financial sector, by limiting the 
scope of activities an institution can undertake, are important contributions to the debate on 
how  to  best  regulate  the  banking  sector.  However,  as  regard  the  specific  European 
framework,  I  believe  that  introducing  a  separation  between  investment  and  commercial 
banking would raise a number of complex issues. First, it would be in contradiction with the 
established model of universal banking, which has historically served well the needs of the 
European  productive  sector.  Second,  it  could  hinder  the  smooth  provision  of  financial 
services in the European Union, thus hampering the objective of further financial integration 
in the Single Market. Third, in some cases, it might trigger unintended consequences such as 
in  close  cooperation  with 
2 
 BIS Review 153/2010
 the migration of riskier activities to less regulated and less capitalized areas of the financial 
system. Hence, the functional separation does not seem the most promising way forward in 
the European context. Rather, we should focus our efforts on enhancing and enlarging the 
perimeter  of  both  supervision  and,  when  warranted,  regulations  to  a  wider  range  of 
potentially riskier activities and institutions. 
Politis:  It  is  apparent  that  the  global  tendency  now  is  for  a  more  uniform  regulatory 
framework.  On  a  European  level  we  even  see  steps  to  move  towards  euro  rather  than 
national regulators. But countries still insist on their own models. In Cyprus we even have 
two supervising authorities for the banking sector. One for Commercial Banks and one for 
the Cooperatives. What is the ECB’s position on this?  
Trichet: The ECB considers that it is up to the member states to decide upon the national 
supervisory model they wish to adopt whilst fully respecting the necessary level playing field. 
It is also necessary that the cooperation and coordination between the national authorities, at 
the  level  of  the  EU  as  a  whole,  will  be  exemplary.  The  new  European  Supervisory 
Authorities, recently created and operational as soon as next year,  must be fully effective. 
And  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  –  which  will  have  the  responsibility  to  identify  the 
systemic risks at the level of the European Union – will be operational next January. 
Politis: You visited Cyprus on the occasion of the 6th Euro-Mediterranean seminar, where 
Eurosystem  central  banks  meet  their  Mediterranean  counterparts.  What  are  the  aims  and 
expectations of such a seminar? 
Trichet:  This  forum  is  one  of  the  major  contact  points  between  the  Eurosystem  and  the 
Mediterranean  central  banks.  After  we  had  initiated  it,  we  were  happy  to  see  that  the 
colleague central banks were very keen to participate in a forum which accommodates an 
open discussion on issues related to central banking. Our major stake, which we all share, is 
maintaining  price  stability  over  the  medium  and  long  term.  This  common  stake  creates  an 
element of proximity. We are united in purpose, even though we may apply different specific 
policy measures targeted to our economies. 
BIS Review 153/2010 
 3
