Subir Gokarn: G20 after the crisis – an Indian perspective 
Keynote address by Dr Subir Gokarn, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
Indian  Council 
International  Economic  Relations/InWent/German 
Development Institute (ICRIER/InWent/DIE) Conference on “Policies for growth and financial 
stability beyond the crisis – the scope for global cooperation”, Mumbai, 27 October 2010.  
for  Research  on 
 Introduction  
I  would  like  to  thank  the  organizers  of  this  event  for  inviting  me  to  deliver  this  keynote 
address. While the title of the session is “What India expects from the G20”, I think it would 
be extremely presumptuous of me to speak on behalf of the country as a whole. I have, of 
course, been involved with the G20 process as the Central Bank deputy and, in that capacity 
have had the opportunity to contribute to the shaping of the Indian position on various issues. 
So, rather than assert a national position, I would prefer to share some of the thinking that 
underlies the stance that is taken at various G20 forums. With this in mind, my presentation 
is divided into three broad segments. First, I look at what the G20 did to avert a potentially 
severe crisis a couple of years ago, which essentially provides the context to whatever role it 
may play in more “normal” circumstances. Second, I explore the inherent differences within 
the group, which will naturally impose limits on what it can realistically hope to achieve by 
way of global co-ordination on structural issues. Third, I build on these two foundations to try 
and  articulate  a  general  “emerging  market  economy”  position,  which,  I  think,  would  be 
reflective of the Indian stance on a range of issues.  
The context of crisis  
The G20 had its origins in a previous crisis that also began in the financial sector and which 
threatened  to  spill  over  from  one  country  to  the  next.  This  was  the  East  Asian  crisis  of  
1997–98, the roots of which lay in the increasing presence of foreign capital in economies 
that perhaps didn’t quite have the capabilities to handle it. The fact that one of the factors 
underlying  the  crisis  –  foreign  capital  –  linked  the  advanced  and  emerging  economies 
provided  the  basis  for  countries  from  both  groups  coming  together  to  look  for  ways  to 
minimize  the  vulnerability  of  emerging  economies  on  the  one  hand  and  global  financial 
institutions domiciled in advanced economies on the other.  
Of  course,  the  East  Asian  crisis  wound  down,  with  the  affected  countries  showing  strong 
resilience in the years following. The need for collective solutions, such as those which might 
have been provided by the G20 was felt less and less as emerging economies, both those 
most impacted by the crisis and those which escaped it, found their own, individual buffers 
against the next crisis. Since the crisis had had no significant macroeconomic impact on the 
advanced economies, they also had no particular interest in pursuing any collective strategy 
for structural change, which might have helped to stabilize the global economy and make it 
less  vulnerable  to  a  crisis.  Of  course,  one  important  outcome  of  keeping  the  group  going 
despite  the  absence  of  a  particularly  significant  agenda  was  that  the  institutional 
representatives from the member countries got to know each other, making communication 
during the most recent crisis when the group really came into its own perhaps a little easier 
and more effective than otherwise.  
In effect, then, a group that was born in the wake of one crisis really got the opportunity to 
demonstrate its effectiveness when another one precipitated. This crisis also had its genesis 
in the financial sector, which helped retain the relevance of the group’s structure, with its core 
constituencies  being  finance  ministries  and  central  banks.  This  time  round,  however,  the 
origins of the crisis lay squarely in the financial sectors of the advanced economies, a factor 
BIS Review 145/2010 
 1
that  has  created  some  special  challenges  for  the  group’s  attempts  to  deal  with  post-crisis 
structural issues, a point that I shall return to later.  
My essential point is that the origins and structure of the group made it an appropriate and, 
eventually,  effective  mechanism  to  deal  with  a  crisis  that  threatened  to  spiral  into  a  deep 
global recession. There have been many questions raised about what exactly the group did 
that contributed to mitigating the impact of the crisis. Some have argued that the measures 
that  each  country  took  to  deal  with  the  crisis  would  have  essentially  been  the  same  even 
without the coming together of the G20. That may well be the case, but I would argue that it 
was precisely the show of strength and collective resolve of the group that helped reinforce 
the  confidence  of  global  stakeholders  that  the  crisis  would  indeed  be  averted.  Individual, 
uncoordinated  responses,  to  my  mind,  would  not  have  had  the  same  impact  on  global 
perceptions that the G20 solidarity did, even if the policy measures in each country had been 
exactly the same.  
Beginning  with  the  Washington  Summit  in  November  2008  and  through  2009,  the  visible 
focus  of  the  group  on  both  the  proximate  aspects  of  the  crisis  and  the  more  fundamental 
causes was, I believe, a major reason for the restoration of global confidence. The economic 
recovery has been slow and somewhat choppy, but potential disruptions have also been met 
with collective responses, which have, in turn, reinforced the belief that the recovery can be 
sustained. Further, the prominence that the group gave to structural reforms of various kinds 
sent  the  signal  that  it  was  committed  not  just  to  dealing  with  the  immediate  crisis  but  to 
putting in place measures that would significantly reduce the probability of recurrence. As we 
know  from  our  own  experience  with  structural  reform,  crisis  always  presents  a  window  of 
opportunity to obtain a consensus on reform measures that would just not be possible under 
normal circumstances. It is for the leadership to grasp this and to push through reforms that 
meet  the  needs  of  changing  global  circumstances.  The  group’s  focus  on  structural  issues 
was itself an important reason for the credibility it gained for its efforts to manage the crisis.  
In short, I think that it is a reasonable assessment that the global economy would have been 
in somewhat different shape today if the G20, or any collective process involving the world’s 
largest economies, had not taken place. The group can certainly draw strength from this as it 
now  shifts  focus  from  dealing  with  the  crisis  to  dealing  with  the  structural  issues  that  are 
perceived  to  have  caused  it.  But,  it  is  precisely  at  this  stage  in  the  process  that  the 
challenges to change management arise. As the crisis abates, the common threat perception 
and collective responsibility inevitably begins to dissipate and the consensus that was visible 
in  the  crisis  management  phase  gives  way  to  more  individualistic  priorities  and  agendas. 
How are these manifesting in the G20?  
Dividing lines  
A number of factors have contributed to the emergence of differences within the group. This 
should not be surprising in and of itself, given the fact that this is an enormously disparate set 
of countries. The 20 countries in the group can be classified into categories based on a large 
number  of  parameters,  each  of  which  implies  different  policy  priorities  and,  consequently, 
different  approaches  to  deal  with  domestic  and  global  conditions.  Large  or  small,  more  or 
less affluent, net importers or exporters, commodities producers or manufacturers, aging or 
young populations – whichever way one looks at it, the composition of the group should not 
inspire much confidence that it can agree on common approaches to the structural issues 
that  confront  the  global  economy.  Let  me  explore  a  few  of  these  dividing  lines  and  their 
implications for the group.  
At this juncture, the variability of the recovery across the members of the group is a critical 
difference. In fact, with some economies having consolidated their domestic recoveries while 
others struggle to do so, there are legitimate concerns about whether the crisis has actually 
abated;  in  other  words,  whether  the  primary  objective  of  the  group  has  actually  been 
achieved.  Perceptions  about  the  robustness  of  the  global  recovery  have  oscillated  quite 
2 
 BIS Review 145/2010
widely  during  the  past  several  months  and  the  outlook  today  is  somewhat  more  negative 
than it was at the beginning of 2010. But, within this overall shift, while the outlook for several 
economies  has  deteriorated,  it  has  remained  constant  or  improved  for  others.  This  has 
immediate implications for the domestic policy priorities of each country. In a group that is 
ostensibly  committed  to  doing  no  harm  to  each  other,  these  differences  may  pose  a 
challenge.  
The  most  visible  dilemma  is  on  the  issue  of  continued  quantitative  easing  by  advanced 
economies whose recoveries are showing some signs of stalling. As the capacity for further 
fiscal stimulus abates, more so as countries attempt to pull back from huge fiscal overhangs, 
more liquidity being pumped in appears to be the only avenue remaining for stimulating the 
economy. From the viewpoint of individual countries, there isn’t much choice; not using the 
instrument significantly increases the risks of the recovery reversing course. Apart from the 
domestic impact of this, given the relative size of the economies involved, this could clearly 
have global implications as well. So, it may well be that individual and collective interests are 
aligned on this issue.  
But, while there may be alignment over a somewhat longer time horizon, in the immediate 
future,  there  are  signs  of  misalignment.  More  liquidity,  even  the  prospect  of  it,  in  some 
advanced economies, is spilling over into fast-recovering emerging economies, introducing 
several  complications  into  their  domestic  policy  environment.  Some  are  worried  about 
currency  appreciation  and  the  impact  that  this  might  have  on  their  recovery  as  domestic 
producers  lose  competitiveness.  Others  are  worried  about  the  short-term  nature  of  the 
inflows  and  the  disruption  that  might  be  caused  if  there  is  a  sudden  exit  in  response  to  a 
global shock or new developments in the source countries. There are widespread concerns 
among energy and commodity importers that global liquidity is flowing into commodities and 
driving up prices, with consequent inflationary implications. In short, the immediate impact of 
quantitative easing may represent a dividing line within the group, even if, over time, it may 
be in the collective interest.  
Financial  safety  nets  represent  another  potential  dividing  line,  not  necessarily  on principle, 
but on the different approaches that groups of countries have used to develop them. Self-
insurance  by  way  of  reserve  accumulation  may  be  the  safest  way  to  protect  oneself  from 
global shocks from the viewpoint of individual countries. But, beyond some threshold levels 
of magnitude, it begins to generate externalities. To return to a point that was made earlier in 
the context of the East Asian crisis of the late 1990s, the effective choice made by countries 
affected or threatened by that crisis to build up self insurance capacity was both a response 
to  perceived  inadequacies  in  the  collective  safety  nets  available  at  the  time  and  a 
contributory  factor  to  some  of  the  imbalances  that  have  been  associated  with  the  global 
transmission of the recent crisis.  
The analytical debate on this issue will go on, but the practical implication for many countries 
is to decide on their acceptable mix of insurance options within the overall consideration of 
doing  no  harm  to  other  countries.  Even  while  collective  options,  such  as  those  that  have 
recently been introduced by the International Monetary Fund become more accommodating 
of  individual  country  requirements,  the  benefits  of  self-insurance  that  many  countries 
experienced first-hand during the recent crisis are difficult to deny. Meanwhile, the perceived 
link between the building up of individual safety nets and global imbalances makes this issue 
a dividing line within the group.  
Another example of a dividing line is financial regulation. It is now generally accepted that a 
significant  contributory  factor  to  the  recent  crisis  was  the  opportunity  that  the  existing 
regulatory and supervision framework in some advanced economies provided for highly risky 
investments to be made. However, even as this was happening, there are several countries 
in  the  group  whose  regulatory  frameworks  did  not  provide  such  opportunities  and  whose 
financial systems emerged from the crisis relatively unscathed. Notably, there seems to be a 
BIS Review 145/2010 
 3
significant  correlation  across  countries  between  the  degree  of  damage  that  domestic 
financial systems suffered and the speed and robustness of their recoveries.  
However,  there  is  little  question  that  there  is  a  strong  and  inexorable  process  of  global 
financial integration, which, with all the risks it entails, does have large potential benefits for 
all  countries  concerned.  One  important  requirement  for  realizing  these  benefits  is  a  set  of 
common  regulatory  principles,  standards  and  practices  across  countries.  These  are 
necessary to ensure that capital flows across the world based on genuine consideration of 
fundamental  returns  and  risks  and  not  on  arbitrage  between  different  regulatory 
environments.  Certainly  in  theory,  this  should  not  be  the  cause  of  any  division;  there  is  a 
clear common and shared interest in the outcome. In practice, however, divisions could arise 
on  what  exactly  these  standards  and  practices  should  be;  whether  they  are  driven  by  the 
specific conditions prevailing in the worst hit financial systems and, therefore, inappropriate 
and  burdensome  for  the  relatively  healthy  ones;  and,  the  knowledge  and  human  capital 
requirements to implement them effectively across a diverse set of countries.  
I have tried to provide some examples of potential dividing lines, drawing on my experience 
and observations of the process in the finance track. Let me conclude this segment of the 
presentation by reiterating the point on which it began. This is an extremely differentiated and 
heterogeneous set of countries, whose conditions and priorities differ both in the short term 
and over the long run. It would be extremely naive to expect that such a group would be able 
to reach agreement on anything beyond the immediate crisis at hand, despite their ambition 
to  tackle  structural  issues.  From  this  perspective,  any  consensus  on  any  issue  is  an 
achievement. It reflects the recognition that, notwithstanding differences between countries, 
global integration is a process that can be chaotic and disruptive if not handled in a collective 
and  coordinated  way.  What  is  true  for  crisis  management  is  also  valid  for  the  range  of 
structural  issues  that  the  G20,  as  well  as  those  which  other  multilateral  processes  are 
dealing with.  
An emerging market economy/Indian perspective  
Against  this  backdrop,  let  me  now  attempt  to  articulate  what  I  would  call  an  “Emerging 
Market  Economy”  perspective,  but  which  also  reflects  my  characterization  of  the  Indian 
perspective.  An  important  premise  in  this  perspective  is  the  point  I  concluded  the  last 
segment with. The process of globalization has enormous potential benefits for EMEs in all 
its forms. But, it also brings with it significant risks, such as the vulnerability to shocks which 
emanate outside their sphere of control. The best way to optimize on the “risk-return” tradeoff 
from  globalization  is  to  adhere  to  a  common  set  of  standards  and  rules,  which,  as  I  said 
earlier,  forces  the  process  to  be  driven  by  fundamental  factors  rather  than  by  regulatory 
arbitrage,  broadly  speaking.  On  the  basis  of  this  argument,  EMEs  will  see  a  clear  benefit 
from  engaging  in  any  process  that  can  develop  and  enforce  such  common  standards  and 
practices. The G20 is one such process, with the distinct advantage that, being a relatively 
small group, reaching consensus where it can be found is not too difficult a task.  
However,  EMEs  have  significant  domestic  objectives  and  challenges  and  these  must  take 
priority in their policy decisions. Many are dealing with the critical challenge of providing a 
large proportion of their population access to the most basic necessities, let alone education, 
health  and  financial  services.  An  integrated  and  balanced  development  strategy  makes 
several demands of the financial system. This, in turn requires a careful balancing between 
rapid expansion in capacity and the kinds of products and services offered on the one hand 
and safety and prudence on the other. This balancing act, at one level common to EMEs, but 
at another, differentiated by the vastly different conditions within the EMEs themselves may 
not  be  amenable  to  a  reasonable  set  of  common  standards,  except  at  a  lowest  common 
denominator level, which is then unlikely to serve the purpose of achieving a safe and secure 
global financial system.  
4 
 BIS Review 145/2010
The financial safety nets issue is also one on which a distinct EME perspective may emerge. 
The difference in concerns between advanced and emerging economies is heightened in the 
current  environment  in  which  increasing  liquidity  in  some  advanced  economies  is  driving 
possibly short term capital flows into emerging economies. In such a situation, self-insurance 
needs  to  be  given  due  consideration.  When  economic  fundamentals  are  sound,  would 
reserves not constitute the most effective way of dealing with reversals in short-term capital 
flows?  If  self-insurance  were  done  away  with,  reliance  on  external  insurance  mechanisms 
might conceivably have two negative implications. One, procedure and due diligence might 
take  time,  thereby  diluting  the  effectiveness  of  the  safety  net.  Two,  global  investors  may 
suspect that something is fundamentally wrong, aggravating the pressure of exit.  
I have used the issues of financial regulation and safety nets to illustrate my point about the 
balancing  act  that  EMEs  need  to  perform  between  addressing  domestic  priorities  and 
aligning  with  a  meaningful  set  of  global  standards  or  mechanisms.  However,  this  can  be 
taken as a more general issue for EMEs as they engage in global forums on a whole range 
of  issues  on  which  the  benefits  of  integration  have  to  be  viewed  in  conjunction  with  the 
pursuit of domestic policy objectives.  
Essentially, from the emerging market perspective, the value of the G20 process lies in how 
effectively it is able to accommodate this need for balance. As I have tried to argue through 
this presentation, both on short-term and long-term issues, the differences and divergences 
between countries in the group are wide and, perhaps, inevitable. This puts the group at an 
immediate  disadvantage  when  it  comes  to  addressing  issues,  because,  given  the 
differences, even agreeing on a common objective, let alone a common approach may be a 
difficult, if not impossible task.  
However, it is reassuring that, in the face of these inherent handicaps, the group seems to 
have made significant achievements, which go beyond the immediate compulsions of crisis 
management  and  address  some  of  the  key  structural  issues.  The  underpinning  for  this 
progress,  as  I  have  alluded  to  earlier  in  the  presentation,  is  the  recognition  by  all  parties 
involved that the process of globalization has potential benefits for everybody as long as it is 
controlled  in  some  way.  The  basis  of  control  is,  as  the  G20  demonstrates,  common 
principles, on which are based common, or at least compatible standards for both conduct 
and  enforcement.  But,  control  does  not  mean  homogenization.  As  long  as  common 
standards  can  be  reconciled  with  differences  in  practices  and  institutions,  which  allow 
individual  countries  to  effectively  address  their  domestic  priorities,  the  arrangement  is 
eminently workable.  
Just  as  each  country  needs  to  maintain  a  balance  between  acceptance  and  adherence  to 
global standards, the group needs to accommodate a possibly thin and blurred line between 
conformity  and  autonomy.  Its  effectiveness  on  all  the  issues  that  it  seeks  to  address,  but 
particularly  on  the  structural  ones,  will  depend  heavily  on  this  accommodation.  Every 
member  of  the  group  must  feel  that  there  are  some  tangible  benefits  from  continuing  to 
associate and in turn, that perception depends on the space that the is available to pursue 
legitimate domestic priorities, which do not impinge on the interests of the other members of 
the group.  
By  this  benchmark,  the  group  has  done  quite  well.  In  the  midst  of  significant  differences, 
some  of  which  I  have  pointed  out,  meaningful  consensus  on,  for  example,  safety  nets, 
financial regulation and reform of the International Monetary Fund suggest that it has found a 
way  to  accommodate  the  balance  on  a  number  of  significant  issues.  The  nature  of  this 
consensus  has  been  widely  reported  on  and  debated  in  the  wake  of  the  recent  Finance 
Ministers and Central Bank Governors’ meeting in Gyeongju, Korea, so I do not want to go 
into the details here. The point I want to emphasize, though, is that the common feature of 
both the process of arriving at consensus and the agreements themselves was precisely the 
acceptance of common principles and standards, which do not come in the way of allowing 
each country to organize its internal systems in ways that it thinks is best.  
BIS Review 145/2010 
 5
This is not to say that there are no disagreements or unresolved issues within the group. It 
would  be  naive  to  expect  that  there  wouldn’t  be.  However,  as  in  the  case  of  all  collective 
activity,  the  presence  of  disagreements,  even  intractable  ones,  does  not  in  any  way 
undermine the legitimacy of the process. It should be judged by what it is able to achieve, not 
by what it is not.  
Concluding remarks  
At the very least, the G20 provides a compact forum for knowledge and experience sharing 
between  the  largest  economies  in  a  structured  way.  The  network  that  it  creates  certainly 
facilitates co-ordination on policy actions, should an occasion for this arise. In this respect, it 
is certainly a useful and effective crisis management mechanism.  
But,  from  an  emerging  market  perspective,  its  utility  can  and  has  gone  beyond  crisis 
management. These countries do recognize that the benefits of globalization will not be fully 
realized  and  the  risks  will  be  heightened  in  the  absence  of  some  meaningful  collective 
activity. The effectiveness of this collective activity is, in turn, enhanced by its emphasis on 
common principles and standards, its recognition of national autonomy in deciding on policy 
priorities and strategies and, very importantly, its insistence on the principle of “do no harm”. 
A  realistic  assessment  of  the  performance  of  the  group  over  the  past  two  years  would 
suggest  that,  while  it  may  not  have  had  equal  success  on  all  fronts,  its  achievements  are 
significant and, in many ways, a vindication of its approach.  
I would like to thank the organizers once again for inviting me and thank you all for listening. 
6 
 BIS Review 145/2010
