Duvvuri Subbarao: Mint road milestones 
Talking  points  by  Dr  Duvvuri  Subbarao,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
inauguration of NEWSIBITION, Kolkata, 8 December 2010. 
 I am delighted to inaugurate this Newsibition of the Reserve Bank in this City of Joy.  
Last year, the Reserve Bank celebrated our Platinum Jubilee. As part of the celebrations, we 
documented the 75 years of the Reserve Bank’s history in the form of a book – Mint Road 
Milestones.  Milestones  is  rich  treasure  trove  of  archival  material  including,  photographs, 
news clippings, documents along with a commentary which weaves them all together in an 
interesting narrative. In fact, the material that we collected was so interesting and rare that 
we thought it would be a great public service to put it up all in the form of an exhibition and 
make it accessible to a much wider audience.  
But why are we setting up the exhibition in Kolkata? Because, Kolkata is where it all began. 
The  Reserve  Bank’s  first  central  office  was  located  here  in  this  very  building.  It  is  thus 
appropriate that any effort to document the banks past and project its future be located here.  
This exhibition is a part of the Bank’s outreach efforts to demystify the central bank. It seeks 
to introduce the viewer to the broad canvas, considerations and changing facets of thought 
that lay behind the Bank’s policy efforts over the years.  
The  display  is  divided  into  nine  sections  representing  different  phases  in  the  Bank’s 
evolution. These take the viewer down 75 years of central banking history covering critical 
events and policies.  
The  Reserve  Bank  took  birth  here  in  Kolkata  on  April  1,  1935  as  a  private  shareholders 
institution. It shifted to Mumbai shortly thereafter and was nationalized in 1949. Soon after 
independence,  the  bank  repositioned  itself  to  meet  the  aspirations  of  an  infant  democracy 
and dovetailed its functions to the demands of a poor country with ambitious development 
goals.  
The  60s  were  a  period  of  institution  building  where  the  Reserve  Bank  helped  formalize 
systems for agricultural and industrial credit; catalyzed institutions such as the State Finance 
Corporations and helped set up the Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Unit Trust of India as 
the first mutual fund, the IDBI as an apex development bank , etc.  
The 70s saw the nationalization of banks which heralded a new era when banking was taken 
from the classes to the masses. This was also the period when banks performed a critical 
role in poverty alleviation programmes of the government.  
In the 80s, we started sowing the seeds of libralisation following the recommendations of the 
Sukhomoy Chakrabarty Committee. We focused on developing markets in a sequenced and 
calibrated manner.  
Early  in  the  90s,  we  headed  into  a  balance  of  payments  crisis.  The  stabilization  and 
structural  adjustment  programmes  that  followed  marked  an  inflexion  point  in  India’s 
economic and financial development. Banking sector reforms helped strengthen the banking 
system and made it more competitive.  
The new millennieum brought with it a new momentum where India made a decisive break 
from the “Hindu rate” and shifted onto a higher growth trajectory. This was also the period 
when Basel II norms were adopted, the payments system was substantially revamped, and 
the focus shifted to issues of inclusion. India weathered the global financial crisis where the 
Reserve Banks’ policy response and role brought it into a new public focus.  
BIS Review 168/2010 
 1
As we turn into the second decade of the new millennium, our endeavour is to position the 
RBI as a knowledge institution; conduct outreach efforts as well as a financial literacy and 
inclusion drive; and finally make efforts to document the bank’s history and traditions.  
The  75  year  journey  of  RBI  gives  us  a  glimpse  of  the  spirit  of  the  times  and  the  Policy 
concerns of the age. We also have delightful anecdotes on “the note that never was”. This 
was a note signed by the first governor Osborne Smith. It was not issued ‘cos Edward VII’s 
heart had its reasons. The King’s abdication delayed the note issues of the Reserve Bank 
and the first RBI notes were signed by the second governor James Taylor.  
The  exhibition  also  chronicles  anecdotes  about  the  Reserve  Bank’s  brush  with  art  (artists 
and  philistines)  and  public  prudery  in  the  commissioning  of  the  imposing  statues  of  the 
Yaksha  and  Yakshini  on  the  frontage  of  the  Bank’s  New  Delhi  office.  These  offended  the 
sensibilities of many and evoking a host of parliamentary questions.  
This exhibition tries to document events not only as they happened but also how they were 
viewed  by  the  public  at  large  through  media  reports.  Earlier,  the  RBI  Monetary  Museum 
documented the history of money in India and served as the focal point of the Bank’s public 
education and outreach endeavours.  
This is a concept exhibition. We hope to expand and refine it to showcase how the Reserve 
Bank contributed to economic policy formulation in the country over time.  
As the Bank looks forward to the future, we trust that this exhibition would be the RBI’s mite 
to the cause of financial literacy in India. We trust it will evoke interest and take banking and 
finance not only to bankers and students of economics but also to the common person. 
2 
 BIS Review 168/2010
