Yves Mersch: After the EMU rescue – which way for Europe? 
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Governor of the Central Bank of Luxembourg, at a lecture in 
memory of Mr Pierre Werner, organised by the Official Monetary and Financial Institutions 
Forum (OMFIF), London, 14 October 2010. 
 Your Excellencies,  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Neither  the  European  Coal  and  Steel  Community  Treaty  of  1950,  nor  the  1957  Treaty  of 
Rome  dealt  extensively  with  currency.  This  might  have  been  because  convertibility  after 
World War II was not very wide-spread and capital controls were the norm. 
Belgium was one of the first countries to establish free movement of capital but only within a 
dual exchange rate regime. This particularity had been one of the reasons for Luxembourg to 
emerge as a financial activities center for Europe. 
The principle of fixed exchange rates had been a feature of the international framework for 
currency stability after World War II for the economies of Europe, North America and Japan. 
The  Bretton  Woods  System  was  based  on  gold  and  the  US  dollar  as  the  predominant 
monetary standard and worked for several years with almost no frictions. By 1968 a new era 
of  currency  instability  threatened  when  market  turbulence  forced  the  revaluation  of  the 
German  Mark  and  the  devaluation  of  the  French  Franc.  These  developments  clearly 
revealed the weaknesses of the Bretton Woods System as well as the threats to the common 
market and specifically the common agricultural policy. 
Ideas of a new European currency framework gained momentum and Luxembourg’s Prime 
Minister  Werner,  also  Minister  of  Finance,  was  asked  to  steer  a  Committee  mandated  to 
design the path to an increased economic and monetary integration of the six then members 
of the European Economic Community. That report, finished on the 8 October 1970 and sent 
to the Ministers of Finance in the first instance, laid down the achievement of Economic and 
Monetary Union by 1980. 
The  youngest  member  of  the  Committee  and  the  only  one  still  alive  is  Prof.  Dr.  Hans 
Tietmeyer. It was he who at the first meeting of the Governing Council of the ECB insisted on 
the seating arrangements to be changed from countries in alphabetical order to  members’ 
family name in alphabetical order. In doing so, he was truly loyal to the spirit of the Werner 
plan. 
In deed, if it took another 20 years after the Werner plan deadline before a single currency 
was established –, for reasons that would take another conference to explain – it is worth 
revisiting the Werner report finalized 40 years ago. We can call it truly visionary. Although 
many of the proposals of the original Werner plan have been realized, some of the original 
thoughts were ignored or diluted and we might with the benefit of hindsight, ask ourselves 
whether this has not been a mistake. Of course, the Werner report originated in a different 
environment when the Union with its original six members still was aiming at a final goal of 
something like a federal Europe. When, after several run-ups, turbulences and tensions, the 
goal of a single currency was eventually achieved with the introduction of the Euro in 1999, 
not only had the number of member states increased, but it had become clear that despite 
the single currency, there would not be a political union to accompany that currency. National 
sovereignty  in  the  economic  policy-making  area  would  be  preserved.  Nonetheless,  recent 
turbulences highlight the inherent tensions of European integration, especially those between 
a  monetary  policy  in  which  sovereignty  is  pooled  while  economic  policy  remains  under 
national sovereignty. Tensions translate into dynamics either for progress or for regression. 
BIS Review 134/2010 
 1
True  enough,  even  during  the  intergovernmental  conference  that  was  to  lead  to  the 
Maastricht Treaty, there were parallel negotiations for the development of a political union. 
The political union made only limited progress, while the detailed draft for EMU was hailed as 
a breakthrough for European integration. In truth, it was once again a compromise between 
the pooling of sovereign competences at the European level in the monetary area – with opt-
in  and  opt-out  clauses  for  some  countries  –  and  the  economic  union  where  ultimate 
responsibilities  remained  at  the  national  level.  Many  features  were  similar  to  the  Werner 
report like a three stage approach with a warming up period (ten years in the Werner plan, 
eight years in the Maastricht Treaty) or the abolition of all capital controls. 
Inside the Werner Committee, the discussions had centered on the sequence of transfer of 
powers to the European level. Foremost Germany argued that monetary union should follow 
political union. This so-called crowning theory was inspired by historic developments in other 
countries.  The  others  on  the  contrary  considered  monetary  policy  union  as  a  powerful 
catalyst for deeper integration in other policy fields that must follow. 
Today,  I  want  to  focus  on  another  feature.  The  Werner  report  supported  the  idea  of  an 
independent institution for fiscal monitoring and coordination. This thought clearly reflected 
the concept that a single monetary policy would be supported by sound public finances. More 
concretely,  the  report  called  for  ever  closer  economic  policy  coordination  with  an  agreed 
framework for national budgetary policies. At the institutional level, it suggested a “centre of 
decision  for  economic  policy”.  This  coordination  body  for  economic  policies  should  have 
been  established  alongside  the  European  system  of  central  banks,  i.e.  the  monetary 
authority.  Both  institutions  were  to  be  independent  from  the  national  governments,  being 
politically accountable only to a European Parliament. This independent economic authority 
should have influenced the national budgets with a focus on the level and the direction of the 
balances  as  well  as  the  financing  of  deficits  and  the  use  of  surpluses,  respectively.  The 
Werner  report  also  advocated  a  certain  degree  of  tax  approximation  especially  for  cross 
border activities. 
When the Intergovernmental Conference on EMU started, Europe had endowed itself with a 
Parliament, but with limited powers and no capacity to levy taxes and to control centralized 
policy  making  at  European  level.  Most  European  resources  were  transfers  from  national 
budgets. Tax sovereignty was left untouched after a timid attempt to change tack in the so-
called Guigou group set up by President Mitterrand to prepare the Conference. During the 
Conference  an  attempt  by  Belgium  and  Italy  to  move  into  the  tax  area  ran  into  massive 
resistance. 
Political union was off the agenda and loose coordination of economic policies was deemed 
sufficient.  It  was  believed  that  market  discipline  would  install  responsible  behavior  in  the 
fiscal  and  competitive  position  of  countries.  The  land  grabbing  attitude  of  the  European 
Commission  pretending  to  be  the  economic  and  fiscal  authority  in  the  event  of  more 
integration indirectly strengthened the case for the intergovernmental approach and the so-
called own responsibility of each individual country in this respect. 
It  can  seem  surprising  that  governments  were  so  confident  about  market  discipline  and 
reactive  national  policies  when  one  major  factor  of  self-correction  within  a  currency  union 
was by design rather weak in Europe, namely labour mobility. 
True,  progress  has  been  made  in  language  knowledge,  university  students  exchange, 
diploma recognition and access to professions. Mobility is good at the lower and higher skill 
ends, but the high share of closed public service in Europe, non-portability of pension rights, 
rigid labour laws and cultural differences make labour mobility a slow process. 
Therefore in 1997 the Treaty was complemented by the Stability and Growth Pact which has 
mostly  focused  on  fiscal  deficits.  The  result  proved  insufficiently  coercive  and  was  even 
further  weakened  when  Germany  and  France  failed  to  abide  by  the  rules  in  2003.  The 
absence  of  a  meaningful  macro-economic  surveillance  led  to  heterogeneity  which  was 
2 
 BIS Review 134/2010
further  accommodated  by  the  absence  of  expected  market  reactions.  Today  we  have  to 
acknowledge that market reactions often come with delays and then tend to overreact. 
But let me be clear: Forty years after the Werner report and eleven and a half years after the 
introduction of the single currency, for me, the verdict is unambiguous: Monetary policy within 
the Euro area has been a success. It is widely accepted that the best a central bank can do 
in  supporting  economic  growth  is  delivering  price  stability.  The  ECB  has  delivered  price 
stability. Even though real GDP in the Euro zone has grown by only 1.5 % per year in the first 
decade since its establishment, while the US economy expanded by 2.2 %, this difference 
can to a large extent be explained by the greater population growth on the other side of the 
Atlantic. On a per capita basis annual real GDP growth rates are very similar, 1.2 % in the 
US versus 1.0 % in the Euro area. The Euro area’s economic growth rebounded strongly in 
the second quarter of 2010, driven by higher investment and replenishment of inventories. 
Last week the IMF revised its figures for growth in the Euro area upwards in line with earlier 
ECB projections. Incoming hard and soft data for the second half of the year do not warrant 
increased pessimism. 
In the course of the crisis of the past three years the ECB and the Eurosystem were forced to 
act very fast, boldly and innovatively in order to ensure their long term goal of price stability 
and the functioning of the transmission mechanism. Their monetary policy interventions were 
successful.  The  recovery  of  the  European  economy  is  ongoing  and  the  tensions  in  the 
financial systems have eased somewhat, although it is still too early to claim victory. 
But we have to draw the lessons from the recent experience. With the eruption of the crisis in 
September  2008  the  accumulation  of  private  debt  was  suddenly  stopped.  The  problem  of 
excessive  indebtedness  was  not  solved,  however.  Fiscal  rescue  packages,  the  impact  of 
automatic  stabilizers,  and  the  support  of  the  financial  system  including  guarantees  to  the 
banking  sector  led  to  a  significant  increase  in  public  leverage  to  levels  unprecedented  in 
peacetime. In other words, parts of the excessive private debt load were shifted to the public 
sector. 
The  crisis  exposed  institutional  weaknesses.  Some  had  their  source  inside  the  financial 
system. Despite some initial temptations for re-segmentation of prudential competences, the 
response will be at the European and at the EU27 level. It will consist of the implementation 
of  new  concepts  and  institutions  aiming  at  de-risking  the  financial  industry.  Liquidity 
monitoring through a monthly liquidity coverage ratio and a yearly net stable funding ratio will 
be complemented by macro prudential surveillance in a European System Risk Board closely 
associated with the General Council of the European Central Bank. The US equivalent to this 
Systemic risk Board held its inaugural meeting at the beginning of this month. 
Three European Agencies for banking, securities markets and insurance start with a mostly 
coordination  function,  but  have  certain  evolutionist  competence  clauses  in  their  statutes. 
They have to walk the narrow line between cross border activities of banks and integration of 
markets  on  the  one  hand  and  competences  remaining  at  national  levels  like  deposit 
guarantee  schemes,  resolution  procedures,  insolvency  legislation,  i.e.  everything  that 
pertains to the tax payer who remains fiercely protected by national governments despite the 
spill-over effects of cross border activities, on the other hand. 
To tackle these effects through a potential 351 bilateral Treaties in so many areas among 
27 member states, can hardly be seen as a stable equilibrium in decision making nor a level 
playing field for economic activities in a single area. 
The  new  institutional  set-ups  at  EU  level  therefore  face  some  of  the  same  problems  we 
experience  within  the  Euro-area.  The  ultimate  goal  will  however  be  the  same:  foster 
economic welfare through integration of markets and market players. 
This obviously will also be beneficial for the optimal functioning of a single monetary policy at 
Euro area level. The transfer of private debt into public debt as such was similar to what was 
observed  in  the  whole  industrialized  world.  But  the  weak  institutional  framework  for  fiscal 
BIS Review 134/2010 
 3
discipline at national and at Euro area level as well as the absence of control by financial 
markets was emphasized in some countries by three developments: 
1. 
2. 
an overextended national financial system 
an  insufficiently  strong  starting  position  in  the  cyclical  downturn  in  terms  of  deficit 
and debt 
a rapidly deteriorating competitive position as shown for example in unit labour costs 
or current account balances 
3. 
Suddenly markets reacted and overreacted while Governments excelled in denial and cloak 
and dagger stories. 
This slow reaction forced the ECB into action as a back-stop exposing the unfinished work of 
the institutional set-up of EMU just as the financial crisis had exposed failures in the macro-
prudential area throughout the industrial world. 
In both cases, the welfare price of overly relying on market reaction only has become clear. 
Now  credible  deleveraging  has  been  implemented  in  many  countries.  This  action  should 
allow those countries to be back on a sustainable trajectory of growth in the medium term. 
A crisis management facility, the EFSF, has been set up as a symbol for the existence of a 
“community of destiny” that is a monetary union. A common destiny engulfs solidarity. But 
solidarity  presupposes  responsibility.  This  means  that  crisis  prevention  mechanisms  are 
even more important than crisis management facilities. And we have to recognize that before 
a fiscal deterioration occurs and needs corrective actions, we ought to detect early signals in 
the macro economic imbalances of economies that share a single currency. 
To overcome the macro-economic heterogeneity within the Euro area, an explicit and clear 
framework for the surveillance of competitiveness is needed with the aim of correcting large 
imbalances. Despite having a single currency and central bank, national economic policies 
remain insufficiently aligned. Forty years ago (!) the Werner plan was very outspoken on this 
issue:  “Having  regard  to  the  marked  differences  between  the  member  countries  in  the 
realization of the objectives of growth and stability, there is a grave danger of disequilibria 
arising if economic policy cannot be harmonized effectively”. 
The needed framework is not aimed at increasing the power of the Commission in macro-
economic surveillance in the EU but at highlighting the Euro area dimensions of surveillance 
and policy adjustments. This dimension requires more automaticity with a focus on countries 
with  vulnerabilities,  competitiveness  deterioration  and  high  debt  levels.  It  should  foresee 
graduated sanctions at a sufficiently early stage to reinforce compliance. It should take aim at 
national  rigidities  that  are  incompatible  with  a  currency  union,  like  automatic  indexation 
mechanisms of wages and pensions. 
On the fiscal side, it is also worth remembering the emphasis that the Werner report put on 
an independent fiscal authority. 
The quality and independence of economic analysis is crucial. 
Several  suggestions  could  be  made  in  this  respect,  for  instance  increasing  the  role  of  the 
Commissioner  in  charge  of  Economic  and  Financial  Affairs  akin  to  the  role  of  the 
Commissioner  in  charge  of  competition.  External  assessment  could  also  be  provided  by  a 
Committee  of  “wise  persons”.  Quality  and  reliability  of  statistics  need  to  be  reinforced, 
deadlines in procedures reduced, scope of discretion of exceptional circumstances curtailed 
and  more  automaticity  introduced.  I  hope  that  the  Van  Rompuy  Task  Force  is  bolder  on 
those issues than were the Commission’s proposals. 
To conclude: 
In  line  with  the  vision  of  the  Werner  Plan,  the  integration  of  Europe  as  an  evolutionary 
process  has  to  continue.  The  financial  crisis  of  the  last  three  years  has  uncovered  the 
4 
 BIS Review 134/2010
institutional  shortcomings  of  the  current  framework  and  exposed  gaps  in  the  existing 
economic governance regime.  
To  make  sure  that  the  Euro  will  continue  to  be  a  stable  and  credible  currency,  monetary 
policy has to be supported by sound public finances and balanced and sustainable economic 
growth in the member states of the Euro area. A strengthening of the Stability and Growth 
Pact,  preventing  and  correcting  macroeconomic  imbalances  at  an  early  stage,  and  more 
effective enforcement via gradual sanctions for non-compliant euro-area countries will help to 
achieve  this  goal.  An  independent  fiscal  authority  would  help  to  advance  the  institutional 
deepening of the Euro zone and, in this respect, reflect the spirit of Pierre Werner. 
BIS Review 134/2010 
 5
