Duvvuri Subbarao: Five frontier issues in Indian banking 
Inaugural address by Dr Duvvuri Subbarao, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
“BANCON 2010” conference, Mumbai, 3 December 2010. 
 1. 
First  of  all,  many  thanks  to  the  organizers  of  BANCON  2010  for  inviting  me  to 
inaugurate this conference. I understand this is a premier banking conference on the annual 
calendar where the top managements of banks and their economists brainstorm on current 
issues.  The  theme  for  this  year’s  conference  “Ideate,  Innovate  and  Inspire”  is  thoughtful, 
imaginative, and most importantly, inspirational.  
2. 
In the aftermath of the crisis, banks, banking and bankers are very much in public 
consciousness. Bankers around the world are not only doing a lot of soul searching, but are 
also reviewing their business models and work ethics. At the same time, there are vigorous 
efforts  internationally  to  reform  banking  regulation  reflecting  the  lessons  of  the  crisis.  The 
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) has come out with several components of 
a new package – Basel III – aimed at better guarding banks against systemic risks of the 
type that plunged the world into the crisis. The Financial Stability Board (FSB) is currently 
engaged in addressing issues relating to systemically important financial institutions (SIFIs) 
and  resolution  regimes,  improving  over-the-counter  (OTC)  derivatives  markets,  developing 
macroprudential  frameworks  and  expanding  and  refining  the  regulatory  perimeter  (hedge 
funds, securitization, credit rating agencies). 
3. 
We  in  India  have  been  spared  the  worst  impact  of  the  crisis.  This  should  by  no 
means imply that we have no compulsion to reform. In a globalizing world, we are vulnerable 
to  instability  anywhere  in  the  global  financial  system.  Indian  banks  should,  therefore,  be 
adapting the best global practices in risk management to the Indian context. Moreover, as a 
nation,  we  aspire  to  double  digit  and  inclusive  growth.  There  are  many  challenges  to 
achieving this including the challenge of making our financial intermediation more efficient. 
This too presents a formidable reform agenda for banks.  
4. 
Given  that  overall  scenario,  I  struggled  hard  to  decide  what  I  should  say  at  this 
inaugural session. I am quite impressed by the way the theme “ideate, innovate and inspire” 
has been fleshed out, and by the depth and breadth of topics for discussion in the follow-on 
sessions. After looking through the conference programme, I determined that the best way I 
can add value to your deliberations will be by putting across some of the important issues 
that should engage the attention of Indian banks. I will present each issue, and on some of 
them I may present a point of view. But I want to add that even as I may present a point of 
view, all these issues are as yet open. My presenting a point of view is merely to provide a 
reference frame for debate and discussion.  
First issue: Are Indian banks prepared for Basel III? 
5. 
The first issue that comes to mind, particularly in the background of the recent global 
regulatory developments is: Are Indian banks prepared for Basel III? The building blocks of 
Basel  III  are  by  now  quite  well  known:  higher  and  better  quality  capital;  an  internationally 
harmonised leverage ratio to constrain excessive risk taking; capital buffers which would be 
built up in good times so that they can be drawn down in times of stress; minimum global 
liquidity  standards;  and  stronger  standards  for  supervision,  public  disclosure  and  risk 
management. 
BIS Review 163/2010 
 1
Capital 
6. 
Our  assessment  is  that  at  the  aggregate  level  Indian  banks  will  not  have  any 
problem in adjusting to the new capital rules both in terms of quantum and quality. A quick 
estimate of the capital ratios of the banking system after taking into account the regulatory 
adjustments under Basel III is indicated in the table below. This estimate, based on the data 
furnished  by  banks  in  their  off-site  returns,  is  approximate.  We  expect  to  have  a  more 
accurate  picture  when  banks  review  their  Basel  III  compliance  position  following  the 
publication of the final Basel III rules scheduled around the year end. 
 
Parameter 
Basel III 
requirement 
Actual value for Indian banks 
as on June 30, 2010 
Under Basel II 
Under Basel III 
  14.4% 
10.5% 
11.7% 
Capital to risk weighted 
assets ratio (CRAR) 
Of which 
  Tier I capital 
  Common equity 
  
7. 
As  the  numbers  in  the  above  table  show,  Indian  banks  are  comfortably  placed  in 
terms  of  compliance  with  the  new  capital  rules.  One  point  to  note  though  is  that  the 
comparative position is at the aggregate level; a few individual banks may fall short of the 
Basel III norms and will have to augment their capital. However as the phase-in time allowed 
is  long  enough,  these  banks  should  be  able  to  make  a  comfortable  adjustment  to  the 
enhanced requirement.  
10.0% 
8.5% 
9.0% 
7.4% 
8.5% 
7.0% 
   Pro-cyclicality  
8. 
The  Basel  III  package  includes  capital  buffers  to  contain  the  pro-cyclicality  of  the 
financial sector. Building capital buffers will entail additional costs for banks with consequent 
implications for investment and hence for overall growth. Apart from the general concern in 
this regard, in India there is an additional concern about the variable used to calibrate the 
countercyclical capital buffer. Credit to GDP ratio is put forward as a natural candidate for 
this calibration. It is not clear that this will be an appropriate indicator in the Indian context. 
Unlike  in  advanced  economies  where  this  ratio  is  stable,  in  emerging  economies  such  as 
India,  it  will  likely  go  up  for  structural  reasons  –  enhanced  credit  intermediation  owing  to 
higher  growth  as  well  as  efforts  at  deepening  financial  inclusion.  However,  the  proposed 
framework  is  flexible  enough  to  allow  national  discretion  to  suit  the  country  situation  in  a 
“comply or explain” framework. In India, for instance, sectoral approaches to countercyclical 
policies have stood the test in the past and we could continue with such sectoral approaches.  
9. 
To  effectively  deploy  countercyclical  measures,  we  also  need  to  improve  our 
capabilities to predict business cycles at the aggregate and sectoral levels, and identify them 
in  real  time.  This  will  require  better  quality  of  economic  and  financial  data  as  well  as 
improved analytical capabilities. 
Leverage 
10. 
Estimates show that the leverage in the Indian banking system is quite moderate. 
Notwithstanding the fact that the SLR portfolio of our banks will be included in computing the 
leverage  ratio,  Indian  banks  will  not  have  a  problem  in  meeting  the  leverage  ratio 
requirement since the Tier 1 capital of many Indian banks is comfortable (more than 9%) and 
their derivatives portfolios are also not very large.  
2 
 BIS Review 163/2010
Liquidity  
11. 
The major challenge for Indian banks in implementing the liquidity standards will be 
to  develop  the  capability  to  collect  the  relevant  data  accurately  and  granularly.  We  do  not 
have much experience to fall back on since our financial markets have not experienced the 
levels  of  stress  that  advanced  country  markets  have.  Predicting  the  appropriate  stress 
scenario is, therefore, going to be a complex judgment call. On the positive side, most of our 
banks  follow  a  retail  business  model  and  their  dependence  on  short  term  or  overnight 
wholesale funding is limited. They also have a large amount of liquid assets which should 
enable them to meet the new standards.  
12. 
There  is  an  issue  about  the  extent  to  which  statutory  holdings  of  SLR  should  be 
reckoned in the estimation of the proposed liquidity ratios. An argument could be made that 
they should not be counted at all as they are expected to be maintained on an ongoing basis. 
However, it would be reasonable to treat at least a part of the SLR holdings in calculating the 
liquidity ratio under stressed conditions, particularly as these are government bonds against 
which the central bank provides liquidity. 
13. 
On the whole, our assessment is that Indian banks are well positioned to adjust to 
the  Basel  III  norms  well  within  the  phase-in  period.  That  does  not  mean  there  will  be  no 
challenges. There will be the challenge of upgrading risk management systems and there will 
be the challenge of learning to make complex judgement calls. Most importantly, there will be 
the challenge of meeting the credit needs of a rapidly growing economy even while adjusting 
to a more demanding regulatory regime. I trust you will “ideate” on these challenges in the 
course of this conference.  
Second issue: Should Indian banks aim to become global? 
14. 
The second issue I want to address is one that comes up frequently – that Indian 
banks should aim to become global. Most people who put forward this view have not thought 
through the costs and benefits analytically; they only see this as an aspiration consistent with 
India’s growing international profile. 
15. 
In its 1998 report, the Narasimham (II) Committee envisaged a three tier structure 
for the Indian banking sector: 3 or 4 large banks having an international presence on the top, 
8–10 mid-sized banks, with a network of branches throughout the country and engaged in 
universal  banking,  in  the  middle,  and  local  banks  and  regional  rural  banks  operating  in 
smaller  regions  forming  the  bottom  layer.  However,  the  Indian  banking  system  has  not 
consolidated in the manner envisioned by the Narasimham Committee. The current structure 
is that India has 81 scheduled commercial banks of which 26 are public sector banks, 21 are 
private sector banks and 34 are foreign banks. Even a quick review would reveal that there is 
no segmentation in the banking structure along the lines of Narasimham II.  
16. 
A  natural  sequel  to  this  issue  of  the  envisaged  structure  of  the  Indian  banking 
system  is  the  Reserve  Bank’s  position  on  bank  consolidation.  Our  view  on  bank 
consolidation 
the  process  should  be  market-driven,  based  on  profitability 
considerations and brought about through a process of mergers & amalgamations (M&As). 
The  initiative  for  this  has  to  come  from  the  boards  of  the  banks  concerned  which  have  to 
make a decision based on a judgement of the synergies involved in the business models and 
the compatibility of the business cultures. The Reserve Bank’s role in the reorganisation of 
the banking system will normally be only that of a facilitator. 
17. 
It should be noted though that bank consolidation through mergers is not always a 
totally  benign  option.  On  the  positive  side  are  a  higher  exposure  threshold,  international 
acceptance and recognition, improved risk management and improvement in financials due 
to economies of scale and scope. This can be achieved both through organic and inorganic 
growth. On the negative side, experience shows that consolidation would fail if there are no 
that 
is 
BIS Review 163/2010 
 3
synergies in the business models and there is no compatibility in the business cultures and 
technology platforms of the merging banks.  
18. 
Having given that broad brush position on bank consolidation, let me address two 
specific questions: (i) can Indian banks aspire to global size?; and (ii) should Indian banks 
aspire to global size? 
19. 
On the first question, as per the current global league tables based on the size of 
assets, our largest bank, the State Bank of India (SBI), together with its subsidiaries, comes 
in at No.74  followed by  ICICI Bank  at No.145 and Bank of  Baroda at 188. It is, therefore, 
unlikely  that  any  of  our  banks  will  jump  into  the  top  ten  of  the  global  league  even  after 
reasonable consolidation.  
20. 
Then  comes  the  next  question  of  whether  Indian  banks  should  become  global. 
Opinion on this is divided. Those who argue that we must go global contend that the issue is 
not  so  much  the  size  of  our  banks  in  global  rankings  but  of  Indian  banks  having  a  strong 
enough global presence. The main argument is that the increasing global size and influence 
of Indian corporates warrant a corresponding increase in the global footprint of Indian banks. 
The opposing view is that Indian banks should look inwards rather than outwards, focus their 
efforts on financial deepening at home rather than aspiring to global size.  
21. 
It  is  possible  to  take  a  middle  path  and  argue  that  looking  outwards  towards 
increased global presence and looking inwards towards deeper financial penetration are not 
mutually exclusive; it should be possible to aim for both.  
22. 
With the onset of the global financial crisis, there has definitely been a pause to the 
rapid expansion overseas of our banks. Nevertheless, notwithstanding the risks involved, it 
will  be  opportune  for  some  of  our  larger  banks  to  be  looking  out  for  opportunities  for 
consolidation  both  organically  and  inorganically.  They  should  look  out  more  actively  in 
regions which hold out a promise of attractive acquisitions.  
23. 
opportunistically even if they do not get to the top of the league table.  
The  surmise,  therefore,  is  that  Indian  banks  should  increase  their  global  footprint 
The next issue I want to address is whether we should mandate foreign banks to 
Third issue: Should we mandate foreign banks to come in only as subsidiaries? 
24. 
come in only as subsidiaries. 
25. 
The  road  map  for  the  presence  of  foreign  banks  in  India  put  out  by  the  Reserve 
Bank  in  2005  allows  foreign  banks  the  option  of  coming  in  either  as  a  branch  or  as  a 
subsidiary, but not both at the same time. Even so, all foreign banks have so far opted to 
come in only in the branch mode. There are currently 34 foreign banks operating in India with 
a  total  of  315  branches  and  they  account  for  about  7.2  per  cent  of  the  total  assets  of 
scheduled commercial banks.  
26. 
One of the big issues thrown up by the recent crisis is the systemic risk and moral 
hazard  associated  with  what  have  come  to  be  called  Systemically  Important  Financial 
Institutions  (SIFIs).  The  underbelly  of  the  recent  crisis  was  the  failure  of  SIFIs  which, 
because  of  their  size,  complexity  and  interconnectedness,  brought  enormous  disruption  to 
the  global  financial  system.  Among  the  issues  presently  engaging  the  attention  of  the 
Financial  Stability  Board  is  improving  the  procedure  for  orderly  resolution  of  SIFIs  in  the 
event  of  stress.  Two  considerations  are  particularly  important.  First,  SIFIs  must  be  able  to 
continue  to  function  at  a  minimum  level  even  in  a  period  of  stress,  and  second,  their 
resolution  should  not  expose  tax  payers  to  loss.  It  is  these  potential  constraints  in  the 
resolution of SIFIs that have triggered a vigorous debate on the form of presence of foreign 
banks – branch or subsidiary. 
4 
 BIS Review 163/2010
The  subsidiary  form  of  presence  provides  several  comforts  to  regulators.  First, 
27. 
managerial decisions in subsidiaries are mainly driven by local economic conditions; second, 
there  is  a  clear  delineation  of  the  capital  of the  domestic  bank  from  its  parent  bank  which 
protects the interests of domestic depositors; third, independent directors on the boards of 
the subsidiaries provide sufficient separation between the bank and its owners to ensure that 
the board does not have unfettered ability to lean in favour of the owners and against the 
interest of domestic depositors, especially in times of stress; and finally, local incorporation 
affords  greater  leverage  to  host  country  authorities  than  does  a  branch  operation  to  ring-
fence the operations of the bank.  
28. 
But  local  incorporation  of  foreign  banks  is  not  without  costs.  A  possible  downside 
risk  is  that  foreign  banks  will  dominate  the  domestic  banking  system.  This  could  have 
systemic  implications  during  normal  times  which  would  amplify  in  times  of  crisis.  Many 
countries  where  foreign  banks  dominate  have  seen  them  vigorously  acquiring  business  at 
the expense of local banks in boom times but retrenching their operations equally vigorously 
in  times  of  stress.  This  has  been  the  experience  in  varying  degrees  of  all  emerging 
economies, including countries like India where foreign banks are present only in the branch 
mode.  
29. 
Post-crisis,  we  know  that  mandatory  subsidiarization  is  not  a  sure  fire  method  of 
protecting  domestic  interests  since  foreign  banks  facing  a  crisis  at  home  could  very  well 
abandon their subsidiaries. A good illustration of this tendency is what we saw happen in the 
EU in the wake of the sovereign debt crisis. It was only after very concerted effort that EU 
could  pressurize  or  persuade  foreign  banks  to  maintain  support  to  their  EU  subsidiaries. 
Even so, credit supply was seriously impaired.  
30. 
On balance, the subsidiary mode has potential advantages over the branch mode 
both  from  regulatory  and  resolution  perspectives.  However,  a  number  of  issues  arise: 
(i) Should subsidiaries be given full national treatment by virtue of their local incorporation? If 
not what should be the nature and extent of restrictions? (ii) Should the subsidiary form of 
presence  be  mandated  for  all  new  entrants  or  should  it  be  selectively  applied  based  on 
certain  parameters?  and  (iii)  What  approach  should  be  adopted  towards  the  existing 
branches of foreign banks – whether incentives should be provided to them to convert into 
subsidiaries? These and other related questions will be debated in the discussion paper that 
the Reserve Bank expects to put out shortly.  
Fourth issue: Why do we need to rewrite laws governing the banking sector? 
31. 
The current statutory arrangement we have is a baffling plethora of laws governing 
different  segments  of  the  banking  industry.  The  nationalized  banks  are  governed  by  the 
Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertaking) Acts of 1970 and 1980. State 
Bank of India and its subsidiaries are governed by their respective statutes. Private sector 
banks come under the purview of the Companies Act, 1956 and the Banking Regulation Act, 
1949. Foreign banks which have registered their documents with the registrar under Section 
592 of the Companies Act are also banking companies under the Banking Regulation Act. 
Certain provisions of the Banking Regulation Act have been made applicable to public sector 
banks.  Similarly,  some  provisions  of  the  RBI  Act  too  are  applicable  to  nationalized  banks, 
SBI and its subsidiaries, private sector banks and foreign banks.  
Notwithstanding  this  wide  array  of  legislations  of  varying  vintage,  the  statutory 
32. 
arrangement has served the system well by helping maintain an orderly banking system. The 
Banking Regulation Act has not only stood the test of time, but several of its provisions such 
as  the  requirement  of  minimum  paid  up  capital  and  reserves,  restrictions  on  payment  of 
dividend, transfer of a percentage of profits to reserves, maintenance of SLR, restrictions on 
connected lending, maintaining a percentage of domestic liabilities as assets in India have all 
helped the Reserve Bank in preventing crises and maintaining financial stability.  
BIS Review 163/2010 
 5
legislation  applicable 
IFRS,  empowering  RBI 
to  all  banks  will  provide 
for  consolidated  supervision,  supervision  of 
Needless  to  say,  each  of  the  statutes  was  crafted  in  a  contemporaneous  setting 
33. 
reflecting  the  needs  and  concerns of  the  time;  and  almost  all  the  statutes  have  had  to  be 
amended  from  time  to  time  to  reflect  changes  in  circumstances  and  context.  There  is  a 
strong  case  for  reviewing  all  the  various  legislations  and  recasting  them  for  a  number  of 
reasons. First, the fact that different banks are governed by different laws has created in an 
uneven playing field and that needs to be levelled to provide for fair competition. Second, a 
single,  harmonized 
transparency, 
comprehensiveness  and  clarity.  Third,  there  is  also  a  need  to  iron  out  inconsistencies 
between  the  primary  laws  governing  the  banking  sector  and  other  laws  applicable  to  the 
banking  sector.  Illustratively,  the  procedure  for  combination  of  enterprises  under  the 
Competition  (Amendment)  Act,  2007  is  inconsistent  with  the  provisions  of  the  Banking 
Regulation Act dealing with amalgamation of banking companies. Such inconsistencies need 
to be removed while reviewing banking laws.  
34. 
The need for revisiting the statutes has been buttressed by the experience of the 
global  financial  crisis.  The  crisis  has  thrown  up  a  number  of  areas  requiring  significant 
legislative action either because there is no legislation or because the prevailing legislation is 
inadequate. Illustratively, issues requiring legislative attention include the orderly resolution 
of  failing  banks  and  financial  institutions,  domestically  as  well  as  cross-border,  home-host 
regulatory cooperation in information sharing, convergence of Indian Accounting Standards 
with 
financial 
conglomerates, etc. 
35. 
The  task  of  rewriting  the  laws  governing  the  banking  sector  should  be  driven  by 
several somewhat inter-related motivations. First, there is a compelling need to integrate the 
various  statutes  governing  different  segments  of  the  banking  industry  and  different 
dimensions  of  the  banking  business  into  a  harmonized  law  to  provide  clarity  and 
transparency. The second motivation is to build provisions into our banking sector legislative 
framework that reflect the lessons of the crisis, acknowledge the dynamics and complexity of 
a globalized financial system, have a futuristic perspective and aid maintenance of financial 
stability. Finally, revision of banking sector laws should also be motivated by the recognition 
that  the  banking  sector  has  been  and  remains  a  critical  instrumentality  not  only  for 
accelerating India’s growth but for making it inclusive.  
36. 
The decision of the Finance Minister, as announced in the last budget, to set up a 
Financial  Sector  Legislative  Reforms  Commission  “to  rewrite  and  clean  up  the  financial 
sector laws to bring them in line with the requirements of the sector” is therefore very timely 
and very vital.  
37. 
It is important, however, to recognize the bringing about changes in policy or in the 
regulatory  architecture  cannot  be  the  remit  of  a  legislative  reforms  commission.  Such 
changes have to be debated and decided upon as a prelude to the work of the commission 
so  that  the  commission  has  a  clear  mandate  on  the  policy  directions.  In  short,  policy 
directions  should  drive  the  work  of  the  legislative  reforms  commission,  not  the  other  way 
round.  That  underscores  why  it  is  important  for  all  of  us  –  the  banks  and  the  banking 
regulator – to deliberate on the policy directives. I hope this conference will set the ball rolling 
by discussing the various aspects of legislative changes required in the banking sector.  
Fifth issue : Where do Indian banks stand on efficiency parameters? 
38. 
The  growth  acceleration  that  we  saw  in  India  during  2003–08  is  attributable  to  a 
number of factors, both tangible and intangible. One of the less acknowledged factors that 
drove  this  growth  was  the  contribution  of  the  financial  sector  by  way  of  larger  and  better 
quality  of  financial  intermediation.  Just  one  statistic  will  evidence  this  –  bank  credit  as  a 
proportion  of  GDP  rose  from  29  per  cent  as  at  end  March  2000  to  55  per  cent  by  end 
March 2010.  
6 
 BIS Review 163/2010
The  analysis  in  the  Reserve  Bank’s  Report  on  Currency  and  Finance  2006–08 
39. 
shows  that  the  Indian  banking  sector  has  recorded  an  impressive  improvement  in 
productivity over the last 15 years; many of the productivity/efficiency indicators have moved 
closer to the global levels. There has been a particularly discernible improvement in banks’ 
operating efficiency in recent years owing to technology upgradation and staff restructuring. It 
is  noteworthy  that  operating  efficiency  continued  to  improve  even  over  the  last  2–3  years 
despite the turbulence in the global financial system. Importantly, the performance of public 
sector banks has converged with that of new private sector and foreign banks. Even, more 
importantly, contrary to popular perception, there is also no significant relationship between 
ownership  and  efficiency  –  the  most  efficient  banks  straddle  all  three  segments  –  public 
sector banks, private sector banks and foreign banks. 
40. 
Indian banks can justifiably be proud of this record of achievement. But they can’t 
rest  on  those  laurels.  To  achieve  our  collective  aspiration  of  double  digit  and  inclusive 
growth,  we  need  to  raise  the  level  of  national  savings  and  channel  those  savings  into 
investment.  This  means  banks  need  to  raise  the  interest  rates  offered  to  depositors  and 
reduce the lending rates charged on borrowers – in other words, reduce their intermediation 
costs, or in technical terminology, reduce the net interest margin (NIM). 
41. 
At  the  aggregate  level,  the  net  interest  margin  of  the  Indian  banking  system  has 
narrowed from 3 per cent in 1999/2000 to 2.5 per cent in 2009/10. There has also been a 
significant  improvement  in  terms  of  the  standard  supervisory  parameters:  capital,  asset 
quality, management, earnings, liquidity and systems (CAMELS). Even so, the net interest 
margin of the Indian banking system is higher than that in some of the other emerging market 
economies  even  after  accounting  for  mandated  social  sector  obligations  such  as  priority 
sector lending and credit support for the government’s anti-poverty initiatives. 
42. 
The efficiency gap between us and our peer group of countries is indicative of the 
catch-up job we have to do. There are several ways of improving efficiency. By far the most 
important  task  is  to  further  improve  operating  efficiency  on  top  of  what  has  already  been 
achieved  by  optimizing  operating  costs  i.e.  non-interest  expenses  including  wages  and 
salaries,  transaction  costs  and  provisioning  expenses.  This  will  enable  banks  to  lower 
lending rates while preserving their profitability.  
43. 
Indian banks have typically posted higher earnings than those of other leading Asian 
economies  as  measured  by  return  on  assets  (RoA)  and  return  on  equity  (RoE).  Even  so, 
they  are  burdened  by  a  higher  operating  cost  ratio  measured  in  terms  of  non-interest 
expenses  to  total  assets  which  impedes  their  pricing  efficiency  and  affects  their  ability  to 
rationalise NIM in a competitive manner. The task for Indian banks clearly is to press on with 
efforts for sustainable reduction in operating costs through productivity improvement and skill 
enhancement and by leveraging of technology. Reduction in operating costs will also come 
through nurturing asset quality, diligent loan restructuring of viable assets and reducing non-
performing loans through recovery or upgradation. The efficiency of some of the larger banks 
in particular has to improve in line with their domestic peers and relative to global standards. 
44. 
While on the issue of efficiency, I am both troubled and intrigued by the fact that our 
banks  see  financial  inclusion  as  an  obligation  rather  than  as  an  opportunity.  If  pursued 
effectively, financial inclusion will provide banks access to sizeable low cost funds as also 
opportunities for lending in the small volume segment. The latter should be possible since 
the Reserve Bank has since deregulated the interest rate that can be charged on small value 
loans.  To  gainfully  pursue  financial  inclusion,  banks  will  need  to  constantly  reinvent  their 
business models and design products and services demanded by a growing economy and 
one that is growing through a rapid structural transformation. 
BIS Review 163/2010 
 7
Conclusion 
45. 
deliberation at this conference: 
Let  me  now  summarize.  I  have  raised  the  following  five  issues  for  further 
Are Indian Banks Prepared for Basel III?  
(i) 
(ii)  Should Indian Banks Aim to Become Global? 
(iii)  Should We Mandate Foreign Banks to Come in Only as Subsidiaries?  
(iv)  Why Do We Need to Rewrite Laws Governing the Banking Sector?  
(v)  Where Do Indian Banks Stand on Efficiency Parameters? 
46. 
I must admit that this is by no means a comprehensive listing of frontier issues in 
Indian banking. Indeed, in preparation for this talk, I asked my office for a list of issues that I 
can raise. They gave me a first list of 50 issues and added for good measure that they can 
expand  it  should  I  so  desire.  Just  shows  how  much  banking  reform  is  on  the  mind  of  the 
Reserve  Bank.  Needless  to  say,  I  had  to  be  quite  ruthless  in  winnowing  down  to  just  five 
issues  so  that  I  do  not  overstay  my  welcome  in  this  inaugural  session.  I  will  be  happy  to 
share with you other issues and our thoughts on them when we meet formally and informally 
in due course.  
After  this  inaugural  session,  you  will  go  into  specific  topic  sessions  to  “ideate, 
47. 
innovate and inspire”. This theme is broad and deep, and encourages you to reflect on the 
big picture. The financial crisis has taken a devastating toll on global well-being and put the 
world  economy  back  by  several  years.  As  we  all  know,  in  India  we  have  been  relatively 
unscathed by the crisis. But note that this is true only in relative terms. We should not forget 
that India too paid a heavy price as the crisis interrupted our growth momentum and thereby 
the translation of that growth into poverty reduction. We owe it to hundreds of millions of poor 
people in the country to make up for lost time and get cracking on an action plan to make our 
aspiration of double digit and inclusive growth a reality. Towards this endeavour, the banking 
sector must ideate on what needs to be done, innovate strategies for converting those ideas 
into action and inspire their staff to implement those strategies.  
48. 
two days and beyond. 
I wish you all the best as you get down to ideate, innovate and inspire over the next 
8 
 BIS Review 163/2010
