Shahid H Kardar: Understanding inflation and SBP’s monetary policy 
stance 
Address by Mr Shahid H Kardar, Governor of the State Bank of Pakistan, to the Federation 
of Pakistan Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Karachi 13 December 2010. 
 The debate on the role of monetary policy in ensuring macroeconomic stability in general and 
price  stability  in  particular  has  intensified  after  the  global  financial  and  economic  crisis  of 
2008/2009.  While  it  may  take  some  time  before  a  consensus  emerges  on  the  appropriate 
monetary policy strategy, almost all economists and central bankers in global policy circles, 
whether they favor or criticize the current monetary policy stance, still believe that containing 
inflation is and should be the fundamental objective of monetary policy.  
In Pakistan, a similar debate, albeit with different backdrop and parameters, on the causes of 
inflation and role of monetary policy has intensified over the last few years. Most observers 
agree that inflation, which is persisting at a high level for almost three years now, is one of 
the major economic issues currently faced by the country. However, they are skeptical about 
the effectiveness of monetary policy in bringing it down. Some commentators believe that it is 
entirely a “supply-side” phenomenon and monetary policy cannot play any role in containing 
inflation. Others cite fiscal weaknesses and the large budgetary deficit as the main reason for 
inflation and point out that monetary policy cannot influence the behavior of the government.  
In my remarks today, I would like to share with you my thoughts and perspectives on this 
important  topic.  We,  at  SBP,  firmly  believe  that  implementing  a  coherent  strategy  for 
monetary policy may not be enough if the elements of the strategy are not sufficiently well 
communicated  or  understood,  and  if  the  responsibility  for  the  outcomes  of  the  monetary 
policy  stance  is  not  clearly  delineated.  But,  before  I  get  into  the  specifics  of  inflationary 
phenomenon in Pakistan and discuss the rationale for SBP’s current monetary policy stance, 
I would like to discuss three conceptual points. First, the process of price determination at the 
basic  level.  Second,  the  behavior  of  inflation.  Third,  understanding  the  trade-offs  faced  by 
policy  makers.  This  discourse  would  not  only  help  us  in  appreciating  the  scope  and 
effectiveness of monetary policy but also the limits and constraints faced by the State Bank 
in achieving its objectives.  
It is important to understand the relationship between the cost of producing a good and its 
price  at  the  firm  level  before  any  discussion  on  the  causes  of  inflation  in  an  economy. 
Suppose it costs Rs10 to produce a good, which includes the wage bill, cost of raw-material, 
acquiring  and  installing  machines,  and  all  other  expenses.  To  remain  in  the  business  and 
earn profits, the producer would like to sell it at Rs10 plus “x”. The Rs“x” is generally termed 
as  a  mark  up  and  depends  on  the  degree  of  competition  in  the  industry,  nature  of  the 
product, overall administrative efficiency of producers and government authorities, adequate 
supply-chain infrastructure etc. 
What  is  over-looked  in  this  simplistic  example  is  the  role  of  productivity  of  the  factors  of 
production, be it workers or machines. If the productivity is low and declining, then the final 
price tends to be higher even if the cost of acquiring the factors of production remains the 
same.  Put  differently,  the  price  can  be  kept  stable  or  even  reduced  by  increasing  the 
productivity  of  workers  and  better  and  efficient  use  of  technology.  The  monetary  policy 
stance geared towards containment of overall inflation and thus stability of prices eases the 
pressures on the cost of production but cannot increase the productivity. Factors positively 
influencing productivity include stable law and order conditions, a healthy and skilled labor 
force, effective governance, and uninterrupted availability of energy. 
A micro-level understanding of the price determination process is helpful, but a discussion on 
the  behavior  of  prices  or  inflation  at  the  aggregate  level  is  also  important.  Three  broad 
BIS Review 171/2010 
 1
parameters  are  worth  mentioning  in  this  regard:  i)-  expectations  about  the  continuation  of 
inflationary trends; ii)- the output gap or the difference between aggregate domestic demand 
and  the  ability  and  capacity  of  the  economy  to  meet  that  demand;  and,  iii)-  cost  push  or 
supply shocks. 
Expectations  of  likely  inflation  path  have  strong  feedback  effects  on  actual  inflation.  Such 
expectations could be based on past inflationary trends or may be formed by the expected 
impact  of  government  policies,  or  lack  thereof,  on  inflation.  For  example,  if  an  economy 
experiences high and rising inflation for some time then people tend to expect that this trend 
would continue and seek higher wages to at least maintain their purchasing power. Typically, 
adjustment in wages tends to be slower than increases in the prices of goods and services 
that  people  consume.  This  leads  to  discontent  and  pressure  on  government  authorities  to 
control inflation and keep it stable. 
Thus,  managing  the  expectations  of  inflation  by  devising  and  implementing  consistent  and 
predictable economic policies is a critical task which is normally performed by central banks 
around  the  globe.  However,  the  supporting  role  of  other  policies,  such  as  fiscal  policy,  in 
assuring  the  public  that  the  government  is  pursuing  anti-inflationary  policies  should  not  be 
underestimated. Failure to do so in a credible manner creates uncertainty and distorts the 
decisions  of  the  general  public  and  businesses.  In  turn,  this  exacerbates  inflationary 
pressures. 
Regarding the impact of a “gap” in output on inflation, an important point is that aggregate 
demand alone cannot explain inflation. It should be compared to the ability of the economy to 
produce and supply that demand. Thus, inflationary pressure can exist in an economy even if 
the aggregate demand is relatively contained. In other words, if the productive capacity of the 
economy is decreasing, inflation can persist with the same level of aggregate demand.  
However,  assessing  the  prevailing  output  gap  is  a  difficult  task  for  economic  mangers.  It 
involves  judging  the  capacity  or  potential  of  the  economy,  which  is  almost  impossible  to 
measure.  Lack  of  timely  availability  of  relevant  data  on  aggregate  demand,  such  as 
consumption  and  investment  expenditures  of  the  private  and  public  sector,  further 
complicates the task. The authorities, therefore, tend to rely on available indicators that help 
in assessing aggregate demand pressures and the productive capacity of the economy.  
The behavior of monetary variables, such as credit demand of the private sector and fiscal 
authorities  and  trends  in  the  foreign  exchange  reserve  position  of  the  country,  serve  as 
useful leading indicators of aggregate demand. The reason is that most transactions taking 
place  in  the  economy  involve  the  use  of  money,  whether  in  the  documented  or 
undocumented parts of  an economy. Not surprisingly, phrases like “inflation is always and 
everywhere  a  monetary  phenomenon”  and  “too  much  money  chasing  too  few  goods”  are 
used to describe inflationary pressures. 
Supply  shocks  include  unexpected  shocks  to  the  cost  of  production,  natural  disasters  that 
affect the production and the supply chain, and intervention in markets through administrative 
measures. Such factors typically have a temporary effect on the level of prices but do not 
influence the rate of change of prices, that is, inflation. Importantly, if such shocks continue to 
hit the economy at regular intervals, as is the case with reduction in electricity and petroleum 
subsidies  in  Pakistan,  then  their  effect  filters  into  other  prices  and  fuels  inflationary 
expectations. 
The  last  conceptual  point  that  I  want  to  highlight  is  that  every  economic  policy  decision 
entails a trade-off among desirable impact on key variables. We cannot have everything that 
we  wish  without  paying  a  price.  For  example,  we  all  understand  that  a  rise  in  aggregate 
demand  relative  to  the  available  productive  capacity  leads  to  inflation.  An  effort  to  contain 
inflation  through  a  tight  monetary  policy  stance  tends  to  have  a  dampening  effect  on 
economic activity. In most instances, the adjustments that the private sector has to make are 
more pronounced compared to those made by the public sector. 
2 
 BIS Review 171/2010
Similarly,  deterioration  in  the  external  accounts,  either  because  of  a  large  gap  between 
payments and receipts or lack of funds to finance it, cannot continue without an adjustment in 
the  exchange  rate.  Attempts  to  maintain  stability  in  the  exchange  rate  by  supplying  the 
required  foreign  currency  cannot  be  achieved  on  a  sustained  basis  without  interest  rate 
increases. The reason is because injection of foreign currency by a central bank, when the 
outflow  of  foreign  currency  in  the  country  is  greater  than  the  inflow,  requires  purchase  of 
domestic  currency  in  exchange.  This  reduces  availability  of  liquidity  of  domestic  currency, 
which pushes up market interest rates. To ease the liquidity pressures, the central bank can 
inject  the  domestic  currency  through  its  normal  Open  Market  Operations.  However,  this 
strategy  becomes  difficult  to  maintain  if  the  foreign  currency  outflows  continue  to  remain 
higher  than  inflows  and  if  the  domestic  inflation  starts  to  increase  because  of  ample 
availability of domestic currency. 
The  same  principle  applies  to  fiscal  matters.  The  governments  cannot  for  long  periods 
continue to spend more than the revenues it mobilizes. The amount of borrowings required to 
close  the  gap  comes  with  a  cost  –  interest  payments  in  the  future.  Failure  to  increase 
revenues in proportion to increases in expenditures compounds the problem as the interest 
expense  continue  to  rise,  leading  to  more  borrowings  and  rising  debt  levels.  Measures  to 
raise  revenues  such  as  increases  in  taxes  or  cuts  in  expenditures  such  as  reduction  in 
subsidies tend to increase the cost of production and possibly inflation. 
The  point  I  am  essentially  trying  to  make  is  that  for  a  policy  decision  to  be  effective 
adjustment in some area of the economy is required. If the required adjustment is not taking 
place  or  if  there  are  other  policies  that  are  diluting  or  neutralizing  it,  then  the  credibility  of 
decision  makers  suffers,  leading  to  uncertainty.  What  is  required  is  that  policy  makers 
articulate an agenda of priorities for the future of the economy, communicate it to the general 
public,  develop  political  consensus,  take  timely  and  coordinated  decisions,  and  implement 
the  agenda  over  a  number  of  years.  Delays  or  uncertainty  in  any  aspect  of  this  strategy 
results in less than desirable outcomes making the trade-offs among key priorities tougher.  
Against  this  conceptual  backdrop,  let’s  talk  about  the  specifics  of  the  current  high  inflation 
phenomenon  in  Pakistan  and  the  role  of  monetary  policy  in  dealing  with  the  issue.  In 
cumulative terms, Pakistan’s economy has experienced an inflation of 66 percent between 
October  2010  and  June  2007.  This  is  almost  twice  the  level  of  inflation  seen  during  June 
2003 and June 2007, which was 36 percent. What makes the last three years so different 
from the three years before that? 
To begin, let’s dissect the inflation data a bit to shed light on this issue, starting with food 
prices. The behavior of food group, which has a share of 40 percent in the overall Consumer 
Price Index (CPI), is not much different across these periods. It is true that food prices grew 
by 88 percent between June 2007 and October 2010 and by 47 percent between June 2003 
and June 2007. But, their share in CPI inflation in both these periods is not much different; 
56 and 51 percent respectively. Moreover, virtually the same items across these time periods 
are  responsible  for  80  percent  of  food  inflation.  Key  among  these  are  wheat  flour,  sugar, 
fresh  milk,  meat,  and  vegetables.  So,  is  this  food  inflation  entirely  because  of  “supply 
shocks”? Is there anything different that can be highlighted? 
Let’s take the example of wheat and sugar. Between June 2003 and June 2007, the price of 
a  10  kg  bag  of  wheat  increased  from  Rs85  to  Rs119;  a  cumulative  price  increase  of 
40 percent.  In  the  next  three  years,  it  increased  to  Rs260;  a  cumulative  price  increase  of 
120 percent.  But,  the  international  price  of  wheat  increased  by  only  22  percent.  So,  what 
happened?  Did  productivity  collapse  or  input  prices  just  shot  up?  We  all  know  that  the 
government increased the “support price” of wheat. Would we consider it a supply shock or a 
policy decision? Same is the case with sugar prices. After increasing by 46 percent during 
June 2003 and June 2007, the sugar prices increased by 184 percent in the next three years. 
The point here is that such price increases cannot be considered as pure supply shocks. For 
instance, the government would not have been able to procure more than 10 million tons of 
BIS Review 171/2010 
 3
wheat  at  higher  than  its  international  price  without  borrowing  extensively  from  the  banking 
system.  Not  surprisingly,  the  credit  extended  for  “commodity  operations”,  including  both 
wheat and sugar, grew by 288 percent during the last three years compared to 33 percent in 
the three years before that. Borrowings of this scale would not have been possible without an 
upward pressure on market interest rates. Thus, the borrowings of government agencies for 
financing  its  wheat,  urea,  and  sugar  trading  operations  is  Rs382  billion  at  just  under 
3 percentage points above KIBOR, indicating the interest rate regime that the private sector 
would have to face in competition with the sovereign. Further, this led to an injection of a lot 
of  cash  in  the  rural  areas,  which  was  used  for  higher  expenditures  on  consumer  durables 
and possibly other food items as well. Thus, an initial “supply shock” turned into a “demand 
shock” and adversely affected expectation of inflation remaining high. 
To further understand the difference between price setting at the commodity level and the 
aggregate level, let’s look at the evolution of prices of petroleum products, electricity and gas. 
Traditionally, these prices have been heavily subsidized by the government. So, one would 
expect that this approach would keep a lid on the prices of these products in the market. And 
when these subsidies are scaled back, the increase in their prices and the impact on overall 
inflation  would  become  pronounced.  A  careful  look  at  the  data  reveals  that  this  is  not 
necessarily  the  case.  For  example,  the  price  of  diesel  increased  from  Rs20  per  liter  to 
Rs38 per liter during June 2003 and June 2007 – a cumulative increase of 90 percent – and 
has increased to Rs79 per liter by October 2010 – an increase of another 108 percent. The 
difference is not that large to claim that this is the main reason for a relatively higher rate of 
inflation in the last three years. In fact, in case of price of petrol the opposite is true. It grew 
by 37 percent between June 2007 and October 2010 and by 72 percent between June 2003 
and  June  2007.The  increases  in  the  price  of  electricity  were,  however,  sharper  in  recent 
years; 62 percent on average compared to 5 percent respectively. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  borrowings  of  Public  Sector  Enterprises,  which  partially  explains 
transfer  of  subsidies  from  the  government’s  budgetary  expenditures  directly  to  the  power 
sector entities, grew by 305 percent during October 2010 and June 2007 compared to only 
17 percent during 2003 and June 2007. The contribution of this towards growth in money and 
thus  overall  inflation  should  not be  discounted.  However,  even  if  we exclude  the  food  and 
energy  group  prices  from  CPI,  we  observe  substantial  increase  in  inflationary  pressures. 
Both  non-food-non-energy  (NFNE)  and  trimmed  measures  of  core  inflation  validate  this 
observation.  For  example,  NFNE  grew  by  58  percent  in  the  last  three  years  compared  to 
28 percent in the three years before that. 
Did  the  reduction  in  subsidies  help  in  reducing  the  fiscal  deficit  and  easing  aggregate 
demand  pressure?  Unfortunately,  it  did  not  happen.  In  cumulative  terms,  the  fiscal  deficit 
grew  by  146  percent  in  nominal  terms  during  June  2007  and  June  2010  compared  to 
113 percent during June 2003 and June 2007. If we take out the interest payments, which 
have  been  mentioned  as  a  factor  adding  to  the  fiscal  problems,  and  look  at  the  primary 
deficit,  the  fiscal  driven  aggregate  demand  pressures  look  more  pronounced.  The  primary 
deficit  grew  by  3182  percent  in  the  last  three  years  compared  to  an  improvement  of 
140 percent in the three years before that. The same is the case with revenue deficit – the 
difference  between  current  expenditures  and  total  revenues.  This  deficit  increased  by 
298 percent compared to only 27 percent respectively. 
Thus,  there  is  an  unquestionable  increase  in  aggregate  demand  pressure  because  of  the 
public sector. What is more worrying is the trend in the financing pressures of this substantial 
fiscal expansion on the resources of the banking system. During June 2007 and November 
2010,  the  cumulative  borrowings  from  the  banking  system  increased  by  187  percent 
compared  to  58  percent  during  June  2003  and  June  2007.We  all  know  that,  within  the 
banking system, the government has substantially increased its reliance on borrowing from 
the SBP. The stock of outstanding borrowings of the government from the SBP is in excess 
of Rs1500 billion today compared to only Rs53 billion at end-June 2003. Imagine the effect 
on  market  interest  rate  if  the  government  had  borrowed  this  amount  from  the  scheduled 
4 
 BIS Review 171/2010
banks.  Undoubtedly,  interest  rates  would  have  been  much  higher.  Moreover,  since  the 
interest  rate  by  definition  is  the  price  one  has  to  pay  to  bring  future  resources  into  the 
present,  the  borrowings  and  the  increase  in  debt  of  this  scale  is  not  possible  without  a 
corresponding  increase  in  interest  rates.  The  continuation  of  these  trends  is  fueling 
expectations of inflation and, resultantly, in interest rates remaining high. Thus, if anything, 
the  criticism  on  SBP’s  current  monetary  policy  stance  could  be  that  it  has  not  been  tight 
enough. 
The reason for the SBP pursuing a relatively “loose” monetary policy is our concern that it 
would further crowd out the private sector and negatively impact the growth rate. Faced with 
this  trade-off,  SBP  has  been  trying  to  strike  a  very  difficult  balance  between  such 
considerations.  There  is  no  denying  that  private  sector  has  borne  the  brunt  of  required 
adjustment in the economy and government has considerably crowded out the private sector 
both  through  reduced  availability  and  price  of  credit.  Between  June  2003  and  June  2007 
private sector credit cumulatively grew by 162 percent, while it increased by only 24 percent 
between  June  2007  and  November  2010.  In  turn,  this  has  negatively  affected  the  future 
productive  capacity  of  the  economy,  making  it  more  difficult  to  meet  the  relatively  lower 
aggregate demand and bring inflation down. 
Another downside of the heavy presence of the government and its borrowings from the SBP 
has  been  the  deterioration  of  the  currency  to  deposit  ratio  of  the  banking  system.  During 
June 2007 and June 2003, currency in circulation grew by 70 percent and total deposits of 
the banking system, excluding government deposits, grew by 104 percent. In the following 
three years, currency in circulation increased by 82 percent while deposits increased by only 
40  percent.  While  currency  in  circulation  has  a  strong  positive  relationship  with  overall 
inflation,  deposits  represent  the  main  funding  source  for  the  banking  system.  A  decline  in 
deposits  tends  to  have  a  contractionary  effect  on  market  liquidity  and  puts  an  upward 
pressure on market interest rates. 
How did the economy cope with these aggregate demand pressures? During 2003 and 2007, 
the  contribution  of  the  private  sector  and  the  government  sector  were  “balanced”. 
Nonetheless,  aggregate  demand  pressures  relative  to  the  available  productive  capacity  of 
the economy were substantial. This can be gauged by observing the cumulative growth of 
2605 percent increase in the trade deficit. Which raises the obvious question of why inflation, 
interest rates, and even the exchange rate were relatively stable? The reason is because the 
economy was largely able to finance this demand from capital inflows from abroad, as can be 
seen  in  a  growth  of  1462  percent  in  foreign  investments  and  83  percent  growth  in  Net 
Foreign Assets (NFA) of the banking system. 
The  situation  looks  totally  different  when  we  look  at  the  period  between  June  2007  and 
November 2010. In response to growing demand pressures, SBP had started tightening its 
monetary  policy  stance  and  it  did  have  an  effect.  Helped  by  a  decline  in  international 
commodity  prices,  the  trade  deficit  grew  by  only  18  percent  during  this  period.  And  the 
reason SBP has continued with this stance is because foreign investments have contracted 
by 74 percent and NFA declined by 37 percent. In other words, while aggregate demand has 
declined but so has the ability of the economy to meet this demand and flow of resources 
from abroad to fill this gap. 
Had SBP not responded, the inflation outlook and reserve position of the country would have 
been  worse.  For  instance,  the  growth  in  broad  money  and  thus  inflation  would  have  been 
much higher if the private sector had also continued to borrow unchecked from the banking 
system along with the public sector. Some observer can comment that availability of cheap 
credit to the private sector would have added to the productive capacity, helping reduce the 
output  gap.  However,  given  the  deterioration  in  the  law  and  order  conditions  and  energy 
sector problems in the last three years, it is highly unlikely that investments in the country, by 
both local and foreign investors, would have grown rapidly. In any case, rising inflation would 
have made the businesses uncompetitive by increasing the cost of production. 
BIS Review 171/2010 
 5
So,  what  have  we  learned  about  the  dynamics  of  inflation  in  Pakistan?  In  broad  terms, 
inflationary  pressures  have  been  a  mix  of  upward  adjustments  in  administrated  prices,  a 
persistence  of  output  gap  and  inconsistent  macroeconomic  policies  negatively  influencing 
expectations of inflation. Monetary policy has played its part in correcting the macroeconomic 
imbalances, but other government policies have not been that supportive. The future strategy 
to  control 
to  changing 
macroeconomic conditions along with a concerted effort to raise the productive capacity of 
the economy. Delays in implementing such a strategy would only make the policy trade-offs 
much  more  difficult  resulting  in  continuing  uncertainty  regarding  desirable  economic 
outcomes. 
include  coordinated  and 
inflation  must 
response 
timely 
6 
 BIS Review 171/2010
