 Muhammad bin Ibrahim: The polemics of governing law in Islamic 
finance – recent developments and the way forward 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Muhammad  bin  Ibrahim,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Malaysia,  at  the  International  Shariah  Research  Academy  for  Islamic  Finance–Institute  of 
Islamic  Banking  and  Insurance  (ISRA-IIBI)  2nd  Annual  International  Thematic  Workshop 
2010: “The Polemics of Governing Law in Islamic Finance”, London, 29 November 2010. 
 Let  me  first  thank  the  organizers  for  inviting  me  to  speak  at  this  ISRA-IIBI  2nd  Annual 
International Thematic Workshop 2010. Although I very much regret not being able to be in 
London  in  person,  I  am  thankful  for  the  many  advances  of  modern  technology  for  the 
opportunity to briefly address all of you this morning. I am also happy to note that this event 
is  a  continuation  of  international  collaboration  between  the  organizers,  the  International 
Shariah Research Academy for Islamic Finance (ISRA), the Institute of Islamic Banking and 
Insurance (IIBI) and Thomson Reuters, following the success of the inaugural workshop held 
last  year.  The  theme  of  this  year’s  workshop,  “The  Polemics  of  Governing  Law  in  Islamic 
Finance: Recent Developments and the Way Forward”, is most apt. With the emergence of 
Islamic  finance  as  a  new  growth  area  in  the  global  financial  landscape,  this  Workshop 
provides  an  excellent  forum  to  exchange  views  and  information  on  topical  legal  issues  in 
Islamic finance. As Islamic financial activities are increasingly crossing national boundaries, it 
is critical for more such dialogues to take place at an international level, in order to gain wider 
perspectives that can contribute to the development of a legal framework for Islamic finance 
that is internationally facilitative. 
Islamic finance today has become a major industry worldwide with over 300 institutions and 
an  estimated  asset  size  of  more  than  USD1  trillion.  Its  continuing  advances  in  the 
international  financial  landscape  have  recently  been  accompanied  by  several  major  efforts 
aimed at strengthening its international financial infrastructure. A key structural enhancement 
achieved recently was the establishment of the Islamic Financial Services Forum (IFSF) that 
serves  as  a  platform  for  cross-border  engagement  among  regulators  to  achieve  financial 
stability  in  the  Islamic  financial  system.  Another  important  development  achieved  more 
recently was the establishment of the International Islamic Liquidity Management Corporation 
(IILM) as a mechanism for more efficient management of liquidity across borders for Islamic 
financial institutions. These continuing efforts to strengthen the foundations of Islamic finance 
have  served  to  ensure  its  preparedness  in  meeting  the  challenges  on  the  path  of 
internationalisation. As we open a new chapter of global growth and development with the 
unfolding of a new decade, Islamic finance is in a position of strength to play a greater role in 
the global financial landscape.  
Today,  many  jurisdictions  are  interested  in  Islamic  finance  and  have  taken  initiatives  to 
develop the industry. The increasing interest in Islamic finance is a positive development as 
a  larger  number  of  institutions  can  contribute  to  more  rapid  growth  of  the  industry.  An 
increasing number of jurisdictions are now taking steps to modify their legislations to cater for 
Islamic  finance.  Ireland  earlier  this  year  published  its  Finance  Bill  2010  which  introduced 
significant amendments that are aimed at facilitating Islamic finance. France has also taken 
significant steps to push through changes to their tax and legal codes. Australia, Jordan and 
Lebanon are all reportedly working towards reviewing their legislations to be accommodative 
to  Islamic  finance.  Given  the  importance  of  developing  a  supportive  legal  system,  these 
global  moves  augur  well  for  sustainable  global  growth  of  Islamic  finance.  In  light  of  this 
development, I would like to make some remarks on the evolving legal framework for Islamic 
finance. In sharing my thoughts, I will draw heavily on some of the strategies and initiatives 
undertaken by Malaysia.  
BIS Review 161/2010 
 1
 One of the key determinants for successful development of Islamic finance in any jurisdiction 
is the existence of a conducive legal framework that supports the operations and growth of 
the  industry.  Given  that  the  legal  infrastructure  in  any  jurisdiction  has  evolved  over  the 
centuries  to  cater  for  conventional  finance,  understandably,  governing  legislations  of  a 
country have typically required modifications to accommodate Islamic financial transactions 
and structures. It is therefore of no surprise that jurisdictions that are able to quickly amend 
their legal framework have managed to achieve significant growth in Islamic finance. 
The starting point in revising laws is therefore to ensure that the governing laws allow for the 
conduct of Islamic finance business. A closely related goal is to consider removing elements 
in existing laws, including the non-regulatory laws, which may render the conduct of Islamic 
finance business uncompetitive or inefficient. Initial considerations would involve changes to 
ensure that Islamic finance is placed on a level playing field with conventional finance. The 
purposes and objectives of the governing laws for Islamic finance are known to be largely 
similar to conventional finance from the financial regulation standpoint. Notwithstanding this, 
an  ideal  approach  is  devising  a  legal  framework  for  Islamic  finance  that  sanctions  the 
statutory obligations for Shariah compliance in the governing law. This approach however, 
may not be feasible as preference for religions concerns can be seen to be contradictory to 
the principles of secularism and parity of beliefs rights in certain jurisdictions. We may need 
alternative approaches. I will revisit and elaborate on these points in greater detail at a later 
part of this speech. 
In Malaysia, the new Central Bank of Malaysia Act 2009 explicitly codifies the duality of the 
Malaysian financial system which shall consist of the conventional financial system and the 
Islamic financial system. In this regard, Malaysia has taken the approach to enact regulatory 
laws  that  are,  at  least  for  banking  and  takaful  (Islamic  insurance)  industry,  separate  from 
conventional finance as the legal foundation for the conduct of Islamic finance business. This 
approach  has  proven  to  be  successful  and  critical  in  instilling  public  confidence  in  the 
Shariah integrity of the industry. Whilst enacting a separate governing law avoids the trap of 
confining  the  scope  and  operation  of  Islamic  finance  within  the  mould  of  conventional 
finance,  this  approach  has  proven  in  Malaysia  to  be  the  most  efficient  way  possible  to 
regulate Islamic finance.  
Recently, Malaysia has undertaken the initiative to establish a Law Harmonisation Committee 
with  the  main  objectives  to  review  existing  Malaysian  laws  which  are  applicable to  Islamic 
financial  transactions  and  to  propose  necessary  amendments  to  give  legal  recognition  to 
Islamic financial transactions under the law. The mandate of the Committee extends beyond 
those that are regulatory in nature to include all laws relevant to execute the whole chain of 
Islamic  finance  practices.  The  desired  outcome  of  the  Committee’s  work  is  the creation  of 
laws  that  are  facilitative,  contemporary,  and  easily  enforceable.  Another  objective  is  to 
provide  facilitative  legal  framework  for  the  Islamic  finance  industry  and  develop  Malaysian 
laws  as  the  law  of  choice  for  international  Islamic  financial  transactions.  This  initiative  is 
consistent with our continuous effort to foster an efficient, innovative and competitive Islamic 
financial system, given the more globalised and liberal operating environment within which 
Islamic finance will operate.  
The consideration for evolving the legal framework in Islamic finance would not be complete 
without  extending  due  regard  to  the  robustness of  Shariah  governance  framework.  This  is 
inevitable given that Islamic finance has its roots in Shariah. The overarching requirement for 
an  Islamic  financial  institution  is  to  ensure  that  its  objectives  and  operations  are  in 
accordance  with  Shariah.  In  Malaysia,  our  experience  suggests  that  mandating  this 
requirement in the laws governing Islamic finance is fundamental not only in the context of 
defining  the  business  scope  of  an  Islamic  financial  institution,  but  also  in  preserving  the 
sanctity of Shariah in Islamic finance.  
This  legal mandate  is also  crucial for  the  Bank  to  take  supervisory  and  regulatory  remedy 
against  an  Islamic  financial  institution,  which  may  include  revocation  of  licence,  in  cases, 
2 
 BIS Review 161/2010
 where  a  violation  by  the  institution  poses  reputational  risk  that  might  cause  an  erosion  of 
confidence  and  could  threaten  the  systemic  stability  of  the  Islamic  financial  system.  The 
integrity and credibility of Shariah governance framework in Malaysia is also fundamentally 
supported by the role of the Bank’s Shariah Advisory Council (SAC), a centralized referral 
body for Islamic finance community, which is statutorily positioned as the highest authority in 
the determination of Shariah matters relating to Islamic finance. In preserving the sanctity of 
the Shariah, the SAC itself ensures the robustness of its rulings through a rigorous process 
before arriving at a decision. 
Another  essential  element  in  developing  an  effective  legal  infrastructure  is  the  role  of  an 
adjudication system. A supportive adjudication system in the context of Islamic finance is one 
which  can  authoritatively  enforce  the  principles  of  Shariah  in  dispute  settlements  involving 
Islamic financial transactions. An efficient and authoritative adjudication system helps create 
certainty  and  establishes  the  legitimacy  of  Islamic  financial  contracts.  Islam  places  great 
importance  on  contracts  and  on  parties  to  a  contract.  The  ability  of  parties  to  enforce  a 
contract is thus critical as it constitutes the core of maintaining the confidence of the public at 
large. Therefore, there is a crucial need for a dispute settlement mechanism that is able and 
competent to dissect in a judicious manner Shariah matters in contracts, so that issues of 
dispute  in  Shariah  interpretation  could  be  resolved  and  enforced  accordingly.  Whilst  it  is 
neither  practical  nor  desirable  to  change  the  entire  court  system,  a  potential  solution  is  to 
create  a  special  Islamic  bench  that  deals  with  financial  transactions  undertaken  in 
accordance with the Shariah. This could be a viable option particularly for Muslim majority 
countries, as is the case in Malaysia. The use of market discipline is another option to ensure 
the sanctity of Shariah via mandating sufficient check and balance in adherence to Shariah 
matters including a minimum disclosure requirement, certification by the Shariah committee 
or an external audit done on the Shariah compliance aspects of an institution’s operations. 
In Malaysia, we have taken the approach in ensuring that the sanctity of contracts is always 
paramount and enforceable in our court of law. For adjudication purposes, a dedicated judge 
in the commercial division of the High Court in Malaysia has been assigned to preside over 
litigations  relating  to  Islamic  banking  and  finance.  The  court’s  adjudication  role  in  Islamic 
finance is reinforced by the support from the SAC in its capacity as a consultative body to the 
Malaysian judiciary system. Under the law, the Central Bank of Malaysia Act 2009 prevails, if 
a question concerning a Shariah matter arises in any proceedings relating to Islamic financial 
business, where the court or the arbitrator shall take into consideration any published rulings 
of the SAC or refer the matter to the SAC for its ruling. The SAC’s rulings are binding on the 
courts and arbitrators. This referral system preserves and enhances the sanctity of Shariah 
rulings  and  the  consistency  in  the  interpretation  and  application  of  Shariah  principles  in 
Islamic financial transactions. To complement the court system, specific arbitration rules for 
Islamic banking and financial services have also been developed, enabling disputes for both 
domestic and international cases to be dealt with by the Kuala Lumpur Regional Centre for 
Arbitration (KLRCA).  
Such  comprehensive  legal  infrastructure  for  Islamic  finance  is  unique  to  Malaysia  and 
essentially reflects the support and dedication by the legal fraternity in keeping abreast with 
the  development  of  Islamic  finance.  Adding  to  the  strength  of  the  institutional  and  legal 
framework in Malaysia is our continuing emphasis on human capital development. Various 
measures have been implemented to ensure that our market players, including the judges 
and  lawyers,  are  well-trained  in  Islamic  finance.  Moving  forward,  with  the  existence  of  a 
dedicated  court  for  Islamic  finance,  competent  human  capital  and  consistent  legal 
precedents,  Malaysia  is  well-placed  to  serve  as  a  platform  for  adjudication  and  dispute 
settlement.  The  KLRCA  in  particular  can  be  leveraged  upon  as  an  alternative  dispute 
settlement mechanism for arbitrating international disputes relating to Islamic finance.  
Another  important  legal  aspect  in  the  conduct  of  Islamic  finance  is  in  ensuring  good 
documentation  of  contracts  underlying  Islamic  financial  transactions.  Legal  documentation 
forms  an  integral  part  of  Islamic  finance  sector  as  it  provides  a  critical  “bridge”  between 
BIS Review 161/2010 
 3
 Shariah and Islamic finance practices. There are two major considerations in ensuring good 
legal documentation of Islamic financial transactions. Firstly, there is a need to ensure that 
the documentation conforms to Shariah in such a way that it enables the operationalisation of 
Shariah principles into legally enforceable Islamic finance contracts. This is crucial to avoid 
legal and reputational risks arising from the failure to faithfully reflect the principles of Shariah 
which could undermine public confidence in the industry. It also underscores the importance 
of  legal  advisors,  Shariah  advisors,  and  other  key  organs  such  as  the  compliance  and 
internal audit functions, as well as the board in performing their obligations towards ensuring 
Shariah compliance. The importance of these various components is reflected in the newly 
revised guidelines on Shariah governance framework that was issued recently. 
The second consideration relates to the importance of moving towards greater standardization 
in  the  legal  documentation  of  Islamic  financial  transactions.  A  more  standardized  contract 
creates greater certainty and predictability about the characteristics of the financial contracts. 
When  the  parties  involved  are  better  able  to  understand  their  rights  and  obligations, 
stakeholders’  confidence  in  the  market  would  correspondingly  improve.  In  essence, 
standardization  of  documentation,  products  and  practices  are  essential  to  ensure  that  the 
markets  are  fair,  efficient  and  transparent.  Whilst  contract  and  product  standardization  is 
encouraged  to  the  greatest  extent  possible,  we  also  need  to  be  mindful  not  to  let  it  stifle 
innovation. As a nascent industry, the need for innovation and competition in Islamic finance 
is so important that its absence might impede its growth. One important area is the need to 
appreciate  and  subscribe  to  the  value  of  diversity  in  Shariah.  I  believe  that  diversity  in 
Shariah  interpretation  is  the  seed  to  harness  innovation  in  Islamic  finance.  Diversity  in 
opinions and practices generate wider options for consumers and practitioners. I believe that 
this is very fundamental. It is also for this reason that Malaysia subscribes to the concept of 
mutual  recognition  of  the  interpretations  and  decision  of  Shariah  principles  reached  by  a 
recognized Shariah body across countries. We believe in the need for diversity as it is an 
impetus for sustainable global growth of Islamic finance.  
While diversity would create a conducive environment for Islamic finance to prosper, varying 
interpretations  of  Shariah  within  a  country  can  add  to  the  complexity  of  the  operating 
framework  of  Islamic  financial  institutions.  The  progressive  harmonisation  of  Shariah 
interpretations,  in  this  particular  respect,  can  be  viewed  as  an  important  driver  towards 
greater acceptance and avoid possible confusion by the public. Malaysia had addressed the 
issue through a centralised SAC, which through collective wealth of experience and expertise 
of its members, its independence and its rigorous process of rule-making, has ensured the 
credibility of Shariah ruling on Islamic finance transactions. But at another level, facilitating 
the internationalisation of Islamic finance would involve a delicate balancing act in nurturing 
innovation  and  pushing  for  greater  Shariah  convergence,  harmonization  and  acceptance. 
One  option  is  to  standardize  contracts  for  mature  and  widely  acceptable  concepts  and 
structures  as  it  leads  to  consistency  and  efficiency  and  in  some  instances  promote  inter-
jurisdiction  transactions.  Given  that  majority  of  Shariah  interpretations  are  actually  very 
similar,  more  attention  needs  to  be  given  to  translate  these  rulings  that  are  commonly 
practised into documentation, products and services in a unified manner. However, this could 
only  happen  if  there  is  common  understanding  on  the  issues  or  fatwas  involved.  To 
contribute towards this process, Bank Negara Malaysia has taken the initiative to enhance 
the transparency on juristic reasoning in Islamic finance through the publication of Shariah 
resolutions  by  the  SAC.  We  have  also  been  issuing  a  series  of  “Shariah  Parameters”  for 
several major Shariah contracts which are aimed at promoting consistent application of these 
contracts in Islamic finance. By leading these various efforts, we hope it can pave the way 
towards  greater  understanding  and  contributes  towards  international  convergence  on 
Shariah matters across jurisdictions. 
Before I end my remarks, I would like to take this opportunity to highlight the importance of 
continuing a close and effective partnership in Islamic finance between Malaysia and the UK. 
Collaboration between financial centres in Islamic finance is an important part of the process 
4 
 BIS Review 161/2010
 that would contribute towards expanding global development of the industry. With London’s 
keen ambition to establish itself as the center in Islamic finance in Europe, there is certainly 
much  room  for  cooperation  between  Kuala  Lumpur  and  London.  The  importance  of  our 
relationship  has  been  cemented  not  long  ago  with  the  signing  of  the  Memorandum  of 
Understanding  between  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  and  the  UK  Trade  and  Investment.  Our 
strong  collaborative  endeavors  are  already  visible  in  the  area  of  education  and  capacity 
building, evidenced by the growing number of strategic alliances between several Malaysian 
and  the  UK  education  and  training  institutions  in  recent  years.  Several  UK  financial 
institutions  have  also  successfully  established  presence  through  joint-venture  with  local 
partners  in  our  takaful  market.  I  am  most  hopeful  that  there  will  be  more  collaborative 
endeavors  going  forward  to  exploit  the  strength  and  synergies  between  the  two  centers, 
particularly in areas that will lead to enhancing the efficiency of Islamic finance and greater 
cross-border transactions.  
On that note, I wish all of you a successful Workshop. Thank you. 
BIS Review 161/2010 
 5
