Mervyn King: Changes in the UK economy and the role the Bank of 
England can play in supporting them 
Speech by Mr Mervyn King, Governor of the Bank of England, at the Black Country Chamber 
of Commerce, West Midlands, 19 October 2010. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen,  
It is good to be back in the heart of Britain – in the Black Country – because the Bank of 
England has strong connections with the area. Both I and Deputy Governor Paul Tucker hail 
from  Wolverhampton.  And  I  am  delighted  that  all  nine  members  of  the  Bank’s  Monetary 
Policy  Committee  are  in  the  West  Midlands  this  week  on  an  MPC  road-show  to  see  for 
themselves the state of business in the region.  
The Black Country is the home of the original Industrial Revolution. Too often those historic 
events are painted as just that – past glories of little relevance today. But there is no better 
place  to  see  evidence  of  how  the  British  economy  can  adapt  than  in  the  Black  Country. 
Indeed, one example can be found behind this building. Dudley Canal No. 1 was part of a 
network of canals, central to the Industrial Revolution, along which the products made here – 
especially iron and steel – were transported throughout the country. At its peak, there were 
5,000  miles  of  canals  in  Britain.  Of  course,  the  importance  of  canals  as  the  arteries  of 
industry  later  declined  and  by  the  late  1960s  only  2,775  miles  were  navigable.  But  the 
regeneration of urban communities, and the efforts of British Waterways, have reversed this 
decline.  The  number  of  miles  is  now  increasing.  Last  year,  13  million  people  visited  our 
canals and the number of boats is actually higher now than during the Industrial Revolution. 
Such  examples  are  important  because  our  economy  faces  the  prospect  of  change  again. 
After  an  unprecedented  financial  crisis  and  deep  recession,  the  UK  economy  needs  to 
rebalance. Tonight I want to talk about what those changes will entail and the role which the 
Bank of England can play in supporting them.  
The Bank of England’s key role has always been to ensure that the economy is supplied with 
the right quantity of money – neither too much nor too little. For fifty years, my predecessors 
struggled to prevent there being too much, so leading to inflation. I find myself in the opposite 
situation having to explain that there is too little money in the economy. But, in the wake of 
the  financial  crisis,  and  the  sharp  downturn  that  followed,  the  amount  of  money  in  the 
economy as a whole – broad money – is now barely growing at all. That is restraining activity 
and pushing down the outlook for inflation. So the Bank of England has taken extraordinary 
monetary policy measures – through our so-called “quantitative easing” programme of asset 
purchases – to ensure that the amount of money starts growing again in order to support a 
recovery and keep inflation on track to meet our target in the medium term.  
My first speech as Governor – in 2003 – was also in the Midlands. In it, I talked about the 
non-inflationary consistently expansionary – or “nice” – decade from the early 1990s to the 
early 2000s. I argued that the next decade was unlikely to be as nice because, and I quote, 
“when shocks, as they will, hit our economy it is almost inevitable that there will be somewhat 
greater volatility of both output and inflation than the remarkable stability to which we have 
become used in recent years”. I certainly did not anticipate the scale of the downturn in the 
world economy that followed the collapse of the banking system in 2008. But I did point to 
the  need  for  a  rebalancing  of  demand  in  the  UK  economy  because,  as  I  said  then,  “the 
strategy  which  the  MPC  has  pursued  in  recent  years  –  stimulating  domestic  demand  to 
compensate for weak external demand in the face of a strong exchange rate – carries the 
risk that there could be a sharp correction to the level of consumer spending at some point in 
the future”.  
BIS Review 136/2010 
 1
The counterpart to strong consumption in the past was low saving. Having averaged close to 
20% in the 1960s and 70s, gross national savings fell to just 12% of income in 2009 – the 
lowest since the War. This was all the more remarkable because one might have expected 
saving to increase as life expectancy rose. In the coming years, we will have to save more, 
even  though  the  immediate  concern  is  to  ensure  a  recovery  in  demand.  So  the  case  for 
rebalancing is even stronger in the wake of the financial crisis and recession that followed 
the nice decade.  
To achieve a rebalancing we need to sell more to, and buy less from, economies overseas. 
To close the gap between exports and imports, more than half a million jobs will probably 
need  to  be  created  in  businesses  producing  to  sell  overseas  –  compensating  for  fewer 
employment opportunities serving UK consumers or the public sector.  
Such an adjustment is unlikely to be smooth. Unless the fall in domestic spending coincides 
with the necessary increase in net exports, the path for the economy  will be bumpy. As a 
result, it is dangerous to become fixated by the precise profile of quarterly growth rates. The 
sensible  approach  is  to  focus  on  the  big  picture.  And  the  big  picture  is  that  total output  is 
roughly 10% below where it would have been had the crisis not occurred. The conditions are 
in place to support a rebalancing at home: in particular the past depreciation of sterling will 
make  UK-produced  goods  more  competitive  at  home  and  abroad.  But  domestic  spending 
has  already  fallen  before  a  pickup  in  net  exports.  This  highlights  a  key  role  for  monetary 
policy: smoothing the adjustment process by providing temporary stimulus to demand while 
the rebalancing takes place, so reducing the risk of inflation falling below the target in the 
medium term.  
The  biggest  risk  to  an  orderly  rebalancing  of  our  economy  comes  from  abroad.  Efforts  to 
restore  world  demand  are  impeded  by  the  scale  of  the  imbalances  in  trade,  which  are 
beginning  to  grow  again.  If  the  UK  and  other  low-savings  countries  are  to  rebalance  their 
economies, demand for their products must increase overseas. Lower domestic demand in 
the  deficit  countries  must  be  accompanied  by  strong  growth  in  domestic  demand  in  the 
surplus  countries  if  the  world  economy  is  not  to  slow.  That  will  require  a  change  in  the 
strategy of those countries that have built their own policies around export-led growth.  
In searching for a solution, some ask who is to blame. But that misses the point. Before the 
crisis,  all  the  main  players  were  rationally  pursuing  their  own  perceived  self-interest. 
Policymakers  in  countries  like  China  wanted  to  develop  via  an  export-led  strategy,  and 
policymakers in the low-saving countries took actions to maintain an adequate level of overall 
demand,  consistent  with  steady,  low  inflation.  But  what  seemed  to  make  sense  for  each 
player individually did not make sense in aggregate, and we can see the consequences. A 
key  lesson  from  the  crisis  is  that  we  must  find  better  ways  of  ensuring  the  right  collective 
outcome.  
That  challenge  is  clearly  visible  today.  All  countries  accept  that  global  rebalancing  is 
necessary.  But  there  is  a  clear  difference  between  the  path  of  adjustment  desired  by  the 
surplus countries, which are faced with the need for a longer-term structural shift away from 
reliance on exports, and the path of adjustment preferred by the deficit countries, which are 
under  greater  near-term  pressure  to  reduce  the  burden  of  debt  in  both  private  and  public 
sectors.  Tensions  between  the  two  groups  were  evident  at  last  week’s  IMF  meetings  in 
Washington  where  all  the  talk  was  of  currency  conflicts.  Such  conflicts  are,  however, 
symptoms of a deeper disagreement on the appropriate time path of real adjustment. Since 
surpluses and deficits must add to zero for the world as a whole, differences between these 
desired  ex  ante  adjustment  paths  are  reconciled  ex  post  by  changes  in  the  level  of  world 
output. And the risk is that unless agreement on a common path of adjustment is reached, 
conflicting  policies  will  result  in  an  undesirably  low  level  of  world  output,  with  all  countries 
worse off as a result.  
The  international  monetary  system  today  has  become  distorted.  The  major  surplus  and 
deficit  countries  are  pursuing  economic  strategies  that  are  in  direct  conflict.  And  there  are 
2 
 BIS Review 136/2010
some  innocent  victims.  Those  emerging  market  economies  which  have  adopted  floating 
currencies  are  now  suffering  from  the  attempts  of  other  countries  to  hold  down  their 
exchange  rates,  and  are  experiencing  uncomfortable  rates  of  capital  inflows  and  currency 
appreciation. So there is more to this issue than a bilateral conflict between China and the 
United States.  
At the G7 meeting in October 2008, I was part of the group of ministers and central bank 
governors  who  threw  away  the  prepared  communiqué,  and  replaced  it  by  a  bold  short 
statement of our determination to work together. That spirit, so strong then, has ebbed away. 
Current exchange rate tensions illustrate the resistance to the relative price changes that are 
necessary for a successful rebalancing. The need to act in the collective interest has yet to 
be recognised, and, unless it is, it will be only a matter of time before one or more countries 
resort  to  trade  protectionism  as  the  only  domestic  instrument  to  support  a  necessary 
rebalancing. That could, as it did in the 1930s, lead to a disastrous collapse in activity around 
the  world.  Every  country  would  suffer  ruinous  consequences  –  including  our  own.  But,  to 
borrow  a  phrase,  in  order  to  be  tough  on  protectionism,  we  need  also  to  be  tough  on  the 
causes of protectionism.  
So what needs to be done? Let me suggest two principles for the way ahead. First, focus 
discussion on the underlying disagreement about the right speed of adjustment to the real 
pattern of spending. Without agreement on this, policies will inevitably conflict. Once broad 
agreement is reached, it should be easier to agree on the instruments of policy. Second, in 
terms of policy instruments, put on the table many potential policy measures – not just the 
single issue of exchange rates. That should include, in addition to exchange rates, rules of 
the  game  for  controlling  capital  inflows,  plans  to  raise  saving  in  the  deficit  countries, 
structural  reforms  to  boost  demand  in  the  surplus  countries,  and  even  the  role  and 
governance of the international financial institutions.  
What is needed now is a “grand bargain” among the major players in the world economy. A 
bargain that recognises the benefits of compromise on the real path of economic adjustment 
in order to avoid the damaging consequences of a move towards protectionism. Exchange 
rates will have to be part of such a bargain, but they logically follow a higher level agreement 
on rebalancing and sustaining a high level of world demand.  
A natural forum in which to strike such a bargain is the G20. But to turn the regular round of 
international meetings into a real agreement will require a revolution, different in nature but 
no less significant, than that which put the Black Country on the map. Landlocked though the 
Black  Country  may  be,  our  local  economy  has  always  been  linked  to  a  wider  world  –  by 
canal,  rail,  road,  and  air,  even  fibre-optic  cable.  So  the  manner  and  speed  with  which  the 
global  imbalances  unwind  will  have  a  direct  impact  on  the  Black  Country  and  the  UK 
economy as a whole.  
Such  developments  in  the  real  economy  are  important  also  for  the  Monetary  Policy 
Committee, because they are an important influence on our primary goal of ensuring inflation 
is on track to meet our 2% inflation target.  
Recently, inflation has been high and volatile. It is currently above our 2% target. And the aim 
of the MPC is to bring it down. But as demand rebalances, we should expect some volatility 
in inflation as well as in the path of output. During 2008, CPI inflation rose to a peak of 5.2%, 
fell  to  a  low  of  1.1%  in  2009,  before  increasing  again  to  stand  at  3.1%  now.  Those 
movements have mainly reflected changes in VAT, volatile energy prices and pass-through 
from  the  past  exchange  rate  depreciation.  Together  they  have  pushed  up  on  measured 
inflation.  
Though uncomfortable, it is not surprising that inflation has been more volatile than during 
the nice decade. In 1998, before he joined the Bank, Charlie Bean estimated that the normal 
variation in the economy would lead inflation to be more than 1 percentage point away from 
target for around 40% of the time. And in the past three years, inflation has been more than 
1 percentage point away from target in 17 months, or 47% of the time. Yet that was a period 
BIS Review 136/2010 
 3
of extraordinary volatility in the economy and at the same time we managed to absorb a 25% 
fall in sterling’s effective exchange rate, something that historically would have created far 
more serious inflationary problems.  
The key question is whether the current inflation rate signals that inflation will persist above 
target. The MPC is conscious that the continuing high level of inflation poses the risk that 
inflation  expectations  may  move  up.  And  it  may  be  some  while  before  inflation  returns  to 
target.  But  at  present,  there  is  also  a  risk  –  at  least  as  large  –  that  once  the  temporary 
upward influences on inflation dissipate, the influence of spare capacity in the economy will 
push inflation below the target. Consistent with that possibility, a range of other indicators – 
growth in broad money, pay, and the pressure of demand on supply, that together are likely 
to  be  a  more  reliable  guide  to  inflationary  pressure  looking  ahead  –  all  remain  extremely 
subdued. So not only can monetary policy play a role in smoothing the rebalancing process, 
it  needs  to  do  so  if  the  outlook  for  inflation  is  to  remain  in  line  with  the  2%  target  in  the 
medium term.  
Because there are risks on both sides of the outlook, reasonable people can disagree about 
the  monetary  policy  judgement.  In  recent  speeches,  different  MPC  members  have 
emphasised upside and downside risks to inflation. After the event, no doubt whichever risk 
has crystallised will be described by the critics as inevitable. Unfortunately, we do not have a 
crystal  ball. So  in  setting  policy  today  the  only  coherent  approach  is  to  balance  those  two 
risks.  
The next decade will not be nice. History suggests that after a financial crisis the hangover 
lasts for a while. So the next decade is likely to be a sober decade – a decade of savings, 
orderly  budgets,  and  equitable  rebalancing.  Our  prospects  remain  closely  linked  to 
developments  in  the  rest  of  the  world.  But  we  can  influence  the  outcome,  with  monetary 
policy still a potent weapon to ensure that the amount of money in the economy is growing 
neither too slowly, as in the recent past, nor too quickly so as to reignite inflation. With that, 
and  the  inspiration  provided  by  the  Black  Country’s  example  of  how  to  adapt  to  economic 
change, I am sure of one thing. A sober decade may not be fun but it is necessary for our 
economic health. 
4 
 BIS Review 136/2010
