Ardian Fullani: Latest economic and financial developments in Albania  
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the press conference on 
the  monetary  policy  decision-making  of  the  Supervisory  Council  of  the  Bank  of  Albania, 
Tirana, 26 October 2010. 
 At  today’s  meeting  of  26  October  2010,  the  Supervisory  Council  of  the  Bank  of  Albania 
analyzed and approved the Monetary Policy Report for the third quarter of 2010.  
After  scrutinizing  the  latest  economic  and  financial  dynamics  at  home  and  the  expected 
performance in the future, the Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania decided to keep 
the key interest rate unchanged at 5.00%. 
In what follows, I will elaborate upon the analysis and the main conclusions today’s decision-
making of monetary policy was based on.  
 The  performance  of  the  Albanian  economy  during  the  third  quarter  of  2010  reinforced  the 
main  developments  in  the  first  half  of  the  present  year,  featuring  gradual  recovery  of 
aggregate demand, lower risk premiums and consolidation of macroeconomic stability. 
Broadly in line with our projections:  
 
economic  growth  has  accelerated  (resurged)  and  its  base  seems  to  have 
broadened; 
CPI inflation and expectations have been anchored close to the Bank of Albania’s 
target for inflation; 
The  external  position  of  the  Albanian  economy  has  recovered  and  the  exchange 
rate is more stable; 
liquidity  in  the  system  has  increased  and  the  interest  rates  have  generally  been 
downward. 
   These highlights reflect, inter alia, the macroeconomic policies pursued over the course of 
this  period.  Monetary  and  fiscal  policies  have,  in  a  concerted  manner,  aimed  at  fuelling 
aggregate  demand  and  economic  growth,  ensuring  at  the  same  time  the  preservation  of 
macroeconomic balances. 
July’s state budget revision put emphasis on the measures required to be taken in view of 
maintaining medium and long-term fiscal sustainability, hence implying lower budget deficit 
and lesser impact of fiscal stimulus on aggregate demand in the short run. 
This  revision  paved  the  way  for  pursuing  an  easier  monetary  policy.  The  key  interest  rate 
lowered by 0.25 p.p., hence yielding the most stimulating monetary conditions during the last 
decade.  
Nevertheless,  complex  challenges  remain  for  the  Albanian  economy  and  the  economic 
agents. Economic growth rate, albeit positive, seems insufficient to yield improvements in the 
labour market and to lower unemployment. In addition, the sustainability of economic growth 
remains frail in the short run. 
Its  reliance  on  foreign  demand  and  export  growth  may  be  insufficient  against  a 
background of a non-consolidated global economic outlook. 
The  waning  of  fiscal  stimulus  also  requires  greater  contribution  of  the  private  sector  to 
economic  growth,  hence  bringing  consumer  and  business  behaviour  to  the  forefront  and 
accentuating the role of bank credit to their financing. Setting proper equilibrium between 
BIS Review 170/2010 
 1
short-term  stimulus  and  long-term  stability  requires  courage  and  diligence  from  the 
policy-makers.  
Ongoing  structural  reforms  remain  a  priority  in  the  long  run.  The  latter  should  aim  at 
broadening  the  potential  growth  rate  of  Albania  and  underpinning  its  macroeconomic 
sustainability.  
In what follows I will elaborate on these issues, beginning first with a brief overview of the 
recent developments in global economy.  
The  recovery  of  global  economic  activity  persisted  in  the  second  quarter  of  2010,  while 
indirect or preliminary data show more moderate growth rates in the third quarter. Economic 
outlook remains highly uncertain due to the fiscal stimulus withdrawal and the private sector’s 
(unsatisfactory) soundness. 
Growth in advanced economies and in our main trading partners was moderate due to the 
correction  of  private  sector’s  balance  sheets,  weak  lending  and  labour  market,  and  low 
consumer confidence.  
The low capacity utilization rate has yielded weak inflationary pressures at a global level. The 
financial markets continue to show high levels of volatility in response to the concerns over 
the economic outlook and the long-term sustainability of fiscal indicators.  
In  political  terms,  maintaining  macroeconomic  co-ordination  at  a  global  level  and  keeping 
open  channels  of  the  movement  of  goods,  capital  and  technology,  are  considered  priority 
measures to avoid a second recession. 
This would certainly provide substantial contribution to the Albanian economy, which remains 
a net borrower in the global market and that has benefited largely from the growth of demand 
and global trade in the form of higher exports in 2010. 
In light of these developments, and being largely affected by them, the Albanian economy 
has grown progressively over the year.  
According to INSTAT, GDP grew by 3.3% y-o-y in the second quarter of 2010, considerably 
higher than 2.0% in the first quarter the same year. This growth was mainly driven by foreign 
demand, while domestic demand performed at more stable rates.  
This  performance  was  reflected  in  improved  figures  in  industry,  particularly  in  its  export-
related sub-branches. Construction and services did not perform alike:  
 
 
The gradual recovery of domestic demand boosted further the activity in services. 
By contrast, the construction sector continues to suffer from the weak demand in the 
real estate market, the limited financial resources and structural concerns related to 
its regulation. Subsequently, activity in the construction sector posted a high annual 
contraction rate in the second quarter, 28.9%.  
Indirect economic and financial indicators suggest that economic growth performed 
similarly in the third quarter as well.  
The  weaker  impact  of  the  fiscal  stimulus  and  the  deeper  trade  deficit  seem  to  have 
been offset by a better performance in tourism over this period.  
The more positive economic outlook in the second quarter of 2010 was also reflected 
in  the  labour  market.  Although  unemployment  rate  remained  almost  unchanged  at 
13.8%,  the  higher  activity  in  industry  and  services  increased  employment  by  1.8%. 
Nonetheless,  the  dynamics  of  these  indicators  is  less  promising  than  the  pre-last 
quarter of 2008 period.  
The  analysis  of  economic  activity  by  aggregate  demand  components  allows  for  a  more 
thorough assessment of the current and expected developments. (In the absence of direct 
data, it continues to be based on indirect quantitative and qualitative indicators.) 
2 
 BIS Review 170/2010
Available indicators suggest that the economy grew in the second quarter in response to the 
higher  foreign  demand.  The  performance  of  domestic  demand  attests  to  a  more  positive 
private consumption, higher private investment and a more positive contribution of the public 
sector,  albeit  more  moderately  than  in  the  previous  year.  Except  for  a  more  pronounced 
waning of fiscal stimulus effect, these developments are considered to have persisted in the 
third quarter as well.  
Although private consumption indicators are often contradictory, the overall setting shows a 
better  performance  compared  to  the  first  quarter  of  2010.  The  rise  in  average  wage  and 
employment, the increase in the import of consumer goods and the substantial improvement 
of the consumer confidence index reinforce and signal the resurgence of consumption in the 
second and third quarter of 2010. 
On the other hand, the further decline of remittances and the contraction of consumer loans, 
the drop in the retail trade index and the higher consumers’ propensity to save suggest that 
the growth rates of consumption remain below the expectations.  
Private investment recorded positive growth rates as evidenced by the increase of capacity 
utilization, higher import of capital goods and better performance of investment loans. 
The  further  increase  of  investment  in  economy  is  reciprocally  related  to  banking  system 
lending; but ultimately, it will depend on the performance of domestic and foreign demand for 
Albanian goods and services. 
The  gradual  increase  of  the  capacity  utilization  rate  in  economy,  as  reported  by  business 
surveys,  shows  that  there  is  more  room  at  the  current  juncture  for  increasing  private 
investment.  
Fiscal policy has been more prudent in 2010 owing to the narrower room for fiscal expansion 
and the public debt approaching the threshold of 60% of GDP. 
Despite the public sector’s positive contribution to sustaining economic activity, the fiscal 
indicators point to its lesser impact on economic growth. 
The Government’s prudent approach in the first eight months of 2010 in view of meeting the 
planned deficit figure for 2010 actualized in the annual reduction of public expenditure and 
budget deficit. The latter amounts to ALL 23.2 billion, which is within the projected figure in 
the budget and about 51% lower than in 2009.  
The 2010 state budget revision in July, which established the reduction of expenditure and 
budget deficit by 10% and 23%, respectively, is an expression of the fiscal authority’s firm 
commitment to safeguarding economic stability and ensuring fiscal sustainability in the long 
run.  
The high growth rates of exports and the contained performance of imports yielded a positive 
contribution of foreign demand to economic growth in the second quarter of 2010. Foreign 
trade data on July and August attest to moderate annual growth rates of exports and positive 
annual growth rates of imports, hence leading to higher trade deficit in this period.  
The  growth  of  exports  in  2010  was  fuelled  by  the  recovery  of  global  economy  and  the 
favourable conjuncture of prices in the global markets, the depreciation of the exchange rate, 
the  Albanian  entrepreneurship  efforts  to  expand  the  market  and  by  some  other  factors  of 
transitory nature.  
Therefore,  promoting  exports  in  a  stable  and  long-term  fashion  requires  undertaking 
structural reforms, which will in turn enhance the competitiveness of the Albanian economy. 
This would ultimately serve to the transition to a more stable economic growth model and, at 
the same time, to curbing the reliance on foreign financial sources.  
Our  analysis  of  monetary  indicators  concludes  that  the  growth  of  money  in  economy  is 
concurrent with the economic agents’ demand for monetary assets, hence creating no room 
for inflationary pressures in the future.  
BIS Review 170/2010 
 3
Aggregate M3’s average growth was 11.2% in July and August, being in line with the nominal 
economic growth and the enhanced confidence in the banking system.  
Its growth during this period was mainly determined by the increase of the banking system’s 
net foreign assets. Private sector credit grew by 9.8% y-o-y, close to the previous quarter’s 
rate.  Although  the  better  liquidity  figures  and  the  improved  banks’  balance  sheets  led  to 
higher  banking  supply and  provided  greater  room  for  lending,  the  latter  has  progressed  at 
moderate rates.  
Our analyses on lending in economy show that demand remains contracted and the number 
of worthy projects to lend is still low. The foregoing remains a constant concern for the Bank 
of Albania. 
To this purpose, alongside the banking system, we are considering the required measures 
that  may  lead  to  the  growth  of  lending  in  line with  the  cyclical  and structural  needs  of  the 
economy.  
Economic  and  monetary  developments  elaborated  above  yielded  an  environment  of 
contained inflationary pressures. Average annual inflation marked 3.4% in the third quarter. 
Against  a  background  of  below-potential  economic  growth,  and  given  the  absence  of 
monetary-related  inflationary  pressures,  inflation  was  largely  affected  by  the  rise  in 
administered prices. The contribution of the latter’s rise to headline inflation is 1 p.p.  
In  the  absence  of  second-round  effects,  the  effect  of  the  rise  in  administered  prices  is 
expected  to  be  transitory,  while  the  inflationary  pressures  arising  from  domestic  demand 
remain well contained.  
On  the  other  hand,  the  depreciation  of  the  national  currency  has  been  declining,  hence 
offsetting  the  rise  of  primary  commodity  prices  in  the  world  markets  and  the  increase  of 
inflation in Albania’s main trading partners.  
The  absence  of  inflationary  pressures  in  the  medium  run  and  the  contained  fiscal  policy 
provided room for pursuing a stimulating monetary policy that sustains economic activity. In 
July, the Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania cut the key interest rate by 0.25 p.p. 
bringing it to the historical low of 5.00%.  
In  addition,  the  Bank  of  Albania  continued  to  supply  the  banking  system  with  the  required 
liquidity  in  order  to  ensure  the  smooth  operation  of  the  money  markets  and  to  enhance 
financial intermediation in economy.  
The favourable liquidity situation facilitated the rapid transmission of the key interest rate cut 
to the interbank and the primary market, hence allowing for the reflection of this cut in other 
interest rates in the economy as well.  
The  Bank  of  Albania  considers  that  the  inflationary  pressures  remain  well  contained  all 
through  the  time  frame  of  the  monetary  policy  effect:  the  effect  of  supply-side  factors  is 
expected to be offset by the downward pressures arising from the performance of demand in 
economy.  
The  projections  for  inflation  and  inflationary  expectations  remain  well-anchored  around  the 
Bank of Albania’s target. Therefore, the central bank considers that monetary conditions in 
economy are adequate to warrant the safeguard of price stability in the medium-run and to 
boost economic development further.  
The  Bank  of  Albania  will,  in  response  to  actual  and  expected  economic  and  monetary 
developments,  continue  to  pursue  a  prudent  monetary  policy,  thus  providing  the  required 
monetary  conditions  for  achieving  the  inflation  target  and  safeguarding  macroeconomic 
stability. 
4 
 BIS Review 170/2010
