Lars E O Svensson: Some problems with Swedish monetary policy and 
possible solutions 
Speech  by  Mr  Lars  E  O  Svensson,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  the 
Fastighetsvärlden’s conference, Stockholm, 24 November 2010. 
 The opinions expressed here are my own and are not necessarily shared by other members of the Riksbank’s 
Executive Board or staff. I would like to thank Claes Berg, Karolina Ekholm, Stefan  Gerlach, Jesper Hansson, 
Per Jansson,  Pernilla  Meyersson,  Ulf  Söderström  and  Staffan  Viotti  for  our  discussions  and  their  comments. 
Johanna Jeansson, Lina Majtorp and Magnus Åhl have contributed to this speech. 
At the most recent monetary policy meeting in October, I entered a reservation against the 
majority decision. I, like my colleague Karolina Ekholm, instead advocated holding the repo 
rate  unchanged  and  having  a  much  lower  repo  rate  path  that  rises  steadily  to  a  level  of 
2.7 per cent at the end of the forecast period. My reason for entering a reservation on this 
occasion and at earlier monetary policy meetings is because I see several problems with our 
current monetary policy.  
In  this  speech  I  shall  present  the  problems  I  currently  see  in  Swedish  monetary  policy, 
discuss these problems and describe the motives for my reservation, as well as proposing 
possible solutions to the problems.  
An unwarrantedly tight monetary policy  
According to the Riksbank’s booklet “Monetary policy in Sweden” (2010a), and the Sveriges 
Riksbank  Act  and  its  preparatory  works,  monetary  policy  shall  aim  to  stabilise  inflation 
around the inflation target and resource utilisation around a normal level. But in practice the 
Riksbank  appears  to  have  conducted  a  tighter  monetary  policy  than  is  justified,  given  our 
task,  over  several  quarters.  The  arguments  put  forward  for  conducting  this  policy  are  that 
growth is good, interest rates are very low and need to be normalised, that we need to signal 
to house-buyers that interest rates will increase, that the rise in house prices and household 
debts needs to be limited, and that financial imbalances could build up if we do not conduct 
such  a  policy.  At  the  same  time,  our  forecast  for  inflation  (measured  as  the  CPIF  inflation 
rate) has been low in relation to the inflation target, and our forecast for unemployment has 
been  high  in  relation  to  a  reasonable  interval  for  equilibrium  unemployment.  Moreover, 
research and practical experiences indicate that the interest rate increases that have been 
made and are planned will probably have only minor effects on house prices and household 
debts – and if anything, negligible effects on financial stability.  
Several problems with Swedish monetary policy  
In my opinion, there are now several problems with monetary policy in Sweden:  
 
Monetary policy appears to have been aimed at trying to limit the increase in house 
prices  and  in  household  indebtedness.  However,  no  thorough  analysis  has  been 
made  of  whether  house  prices  and  indebtedness  entail  problems  or  have  any 
significance  for  future  inflation  and  resource  utilisation.  At  the  same  time, 
widespread research points to the policy rate being an unsuitable instrument for this, 
as it has small effects on house prices, but sizable effects on production, jobs and 
unemployment.  
Recently, monetary policy appears to have been aimed at slowing down growth in 
GDP,  and  thus  the  recovery  from  what  is  called  the  Great  Recession.  This  is 
because the motivation given for the repo rate raises has been that growth in the 
 BIS Review 158/2010 
 1
   Monetary policy also appears to have strived, through references to the abnormally 
low repo rate, to normalise the level of the repo rate. This is despite the fact that the 
repo  rate  should  not  be  a  target  variable  for  monetary  policy,  but  merely  an 
instrument without any inherent value.  
The repo rate path in the main scenario is now far above market expectations, the 
market repo rate path according to implied forward rates.1
 The intended monetary 
policy  –  the  Riksbank’s  repo  rate  path  –  is  thus  much  tighter  than  the  actual 
monetary policy – the market repo rate path. The fact that the market repo rate path 
differs from the Riksbank’s repo rate path means that the intended repo rate path is 
not  credible.  The  more  expansionary  actual  monetary  policy  has  probably 
contributed  to  the  strong  growth  and  the  recovery.  However,  if  the  repo  rate  path 
becomes  credible,  the  long  market  interest  rates  will  increase  substantially  and 
actual  monetary  policy  will  be  much  tighter.  This  risks  cutting  off  the  recovery. 
Higher  long  market  rates  would  also  lead  to  a  much  stronger  krona.  A  stronger 
krona  would  lower  inflation  and  in  particular  affect  exports,  entailing  a  further 
tightening of monetary policy, in addition to the increase in long market rates.  
In  my  opinion,  the  krona  appreciation  that  would  ensue  if  the  repo  rate  path  is 
credible is underestimated in the main scenario of the Riksbank’s Monetary Policy 
Report.  This  appears  to  be  because  it  is  assumed  in  the  main  scenario  that  long 
market rates abroad are much higher than the observed market rates. Alternatively, 
it  is  assumed  that  the  long  market  rates  abroad  will  rise  gradually  in  pace  with 
Swedish  long  interest  rates.  However,  these  questions  have  not  been  properly 
analysed. Behind this is an assumption that certain central banks, namely the US 
Federal Reserve, the European Central Bank (ECB) and the Bank of England, will 
begin  to  raise  their  policy  rates  long  before  what  is  indicated  by  market  pricing. 
These assumptions appear unrealistic, given the statements and signals from these 
central banks regarding continuing low policy rates.  
I would like to propose the following possible solutions to the monetary policy problems:  
 
Consistently choose a repo rate path that best stabilises inflation around the inflation 
target and resource utilisation around a normal level, regardless of whether growth 
is high or low, and regardless of whether the repo rate is high or low.  
If the chosen repo rate path then offers a threat to financial stability – which would 
appear to be a rare situation – take this into account and exclude the repo rate path 
if this is appropriate, with a clear justification.  
Take into account house prices and household borrowing if they affect the forecasts 
for inflation and resource utilisation in the short or long term.  
If the level of house prices and household borrowing become unsustainable, or are 
otherwise judged to entail problems, use other and better instruments to deal with 
this than the repo rate. Trying to use the repo rate to slow down house prices and 
household  debt  could  lead  to  high  costs  for  the  real  economy  in  terms  of  lower 
production and employment, and higher unemployment. However, before choosing 
the right instrument we must specify the problems more precisely.  
Start the decision-making process by forecasting inflation and resource utilisation on 
the  basis  of  market  expectations  in  Sweden  and  abroad  according  to  implied 
                                                     
1   The market expectations and market interest rates discussed in this speech are those at the monetary policy 
meeting in October. 
2 
 BIS Review 158/2010
   forward  rates,  to  determine  whether  a  higher  or  lower  repo  rate  path  than  these 
market expectations is needed.  
Then make forecasts of inflation and resource utilisation on the basis of alternative 
repo  rate  paths  to  determine  which  path  best  stabilises  inflation  and  resource 
utilisation. As I discuss in more detail later on, these forecasts can be constructed 
using  what  are  known  as  anticipated  or  unanticipated  deviations,  depending  on 
whether or not the repo rate paths are expected to be credible.  
Normally,  the  repo  rate  path  that  is  included  in  the  main  scenario  of  the  report 
should be chosen so that it best stabilises inflation and resource utilisation when it is 
credible.  
Use  as  an  initial  basis  the  actual  market  rates  abroad  and  market  expectations 
according to implied forward rates, and only assume different policy rate paths for 
central banks abroad if there are particular and clear reasons for doing so. As I will 
discuss  in  more  detail  later  on,  other  policy  rate  paths  than  the  expected  ones 
require special treatment to correctly determine the exchange rate effect.  
Stabilise inflation around the inflation target and resource utilisation around a normal 
level  
The booklet “Monetary policy in Sweden” states that the Riksbank, in addition to stabilising 
inflation  around  the  inflation  target,  also  strives  to  stabilise  production  and  employment 
around  sustainable  paths,  and  thereby  conducts  a  policy  of  flexible  inflation  targeting. 
Monetary policy thus involves choosing the repo rate path that best stabilises inflation and 
resource  utilisation.  Stabilising  inflation  stems  from  the  objective  of  price  stability  in  the 
Sveriges  Riksbank  Act.  Stabilising  resource  utilisation  stems  from  the  emphasis  in  the 
preparatory works for the Sveriges Riksbank Act, that the Riksbank, without prejudice to the 
price  stability  target,  should  support  the  goals  of  general  economic  policy  with  a  view  to 
maintaining sustainable growth and a high rate of employment.  
House prices and household debt  
The  arguments  for  raising  the  repo  rate  more  than  is  justified  by  inflation  and  resource 
utilisation  have  emphasised  developments  in  house  prices  and  household  indebtedness. 
There  have  also  been  references  to  potential  financial  imbalances  building  up.  However, 
these arguments do not show what effect the repo rate is expected to have on house prices 
and indebtedness, or which financial imbalances are referred to. Nor is it clear what effects 
and risks might be involved, or how we can evaluate the effects and risks in relation to the 
cost of inflation and resource utilisation being too low.  
As household debt mostly consists of mortgages and these are used to buy housing, house 
prices and household debt are really two sides of the same coin. If house prices increase, 
then  household  debt  increases.  If  we  want  household  debt  to  increase  more  slowly,  then 
house prices must increase more slowly.  
Thus,  slowing  down  the  increase  in  house  prices  and  the  increase  in  household  debt  is 
essentially  the  same  thing.  Regardless  of  whether  or  not  these  factors  are  a  problem,  the 
repo  rate  would  appear  an  unsuitable  instrument  for  influencing  house  prices  and  debts. 
Widespread theoretical and empirical research shows that changes in policy rates have little 
effect  on  house  prices,  but  a  substantial  effect  on  production,  jobs  and  unemployment.  A 
typical conclusion is that, all else being equal, an increase in the policy rate of 1 percentage 
point reduces house prices by around 1.5 per cent, but at the same time reduces GDP by 
around one third, that is, about 0.5 per cent. So to reduce house prices by 15 per cent may 
require raising the repo rate by as much as 10 percentage points. But this would cause GDP 
BIS Review 158/2010 
 3
to fall by around 5 per cent. These estimates are of course uncertain, but nevertheless imply 
very high real costs in terms of GDP.2  
If  house  prices  and  household  indebtedness  would  be  regarded  as  a  problem,  there  are 
more effective instruments than the policy rate, which also have less negative effects. Some 
examples are the mortgage ceiling introduced by Finansinspektionen (the Swedish Financial 
Supervisory Authority),  a mortgage tax or limited tax deductions for mortgages, a property 
tax, a reserve requirement for mortgages, and so on. As a comparison, a higher repo rate 
functions not only as a tax on mortgages, but also a tax on loans for production, investment 
and trade. This in turn leads to the large costs to the real economy I mentioned earlier.  
Are house prices and household indebtedness a problem?  
More  generally,  if  house  prices  and  household  indebtedness  are  regarded  as  a  problem, 
then  this  problem  needs  to  be  analysed  and  specified  in  greater  detail  to  assess  which 
means  can  be  used  to  deal  with  it.  Is  the  problem  some  form  of  market  failure?  Does  it 
involve  an  externality?  Is  it  due  to  a  lack  of  information  to  borrowers,  and  is  it  thus  a 
consumer  protection  issue?  It  is  only  when  we  have  specified  the  problem  that  we  can 
determine suitable measures to deal with it.  
However, as far as I can see, there is hardly any indication that current house prices and 
household indebtedness are a problem.  
In  Sweden,  mortgages  do  not  present  any  threat  to  financial  stability.  This  is  because  
–  unlike  in  the  United  States  –  mortgages  are  personal  (what  are  known  as  full  recourse 
loans).  They  do  not  lead  to  any  loan  losses  of  significance  for  the  mortgage  institutions. 
Mortgages did not lead to any loan losses worth mentioning even in the 1990s crisis – the 
banks’ loan losses were primarily caused by loans for commercial property. Household debt 
thus does not present any threat to financial stability in Sweden.  
Can  house  prices  and  household  debt  involve  any  other  problems?  I  cannot  see  any 
indications  that  a  house  price  bubble  is  building  up  or  that  house  prices  will  become 
unsustainable  in  the  longer  run.  The  house  price  indicator  published  by  The  Economist 
usually points to Swedish house prices in relation to rent levels being over-valued by up to 
40 per cent. However, this indicator disregards the fact that Swedish rent control means that 
rents are much lower than the corresponding market rents. Most indications are that house 
prices are compatible with the high demand and modest supply. In Sweden, there is no “buy 
to  let”,  only  “buy  to  live”.  Homes  are  primarily  bought  to  live  in,  rather  than  as  objects  for 
investment  or  speculation.  Moreover,  households  have  strong  balance  sheets.  When  it 
comes  to  assessing  possible  vulnerabilities,  the  levels  of  the  balance  sheet  are  more 
important than the flows. A lot of fuss is made of household debt now being around 165 per 
cent of households’ disposable income and increasing (see Figure 1). But at the same time, 
household wealth is about 500 per cent of their disposable income. Moreover, the debt share 
of the assets remains stable over time. The average household thus has debts equivalent to 
only one-third of its assets, while its equity is equivalent to two-thirds of its assets. This low 
leverage and high equity implies a large buffer against a fall in house prices.  
According  to  the  report  of  Finansinspektionen  (2010)  (the  Swedish  Financial  Supervisory 
Authority),  borrowers  who  have  new  mortgages  and  thus  the  largest  ones,  are  not 
particularly vulnerable and can manage extreme stress tests with higher unemployment and 
large falls in house prices. In general, these borrowers’ debt-servicing ability is very good, 
even  when  mortgage  rates  are  much  higher.  The  banks’  credit  assessments  and  housing 
                                                 
2   See, for instance, Assenmascher-Wesche and Gerlach (2010), Bean, Paustian, Penalver and Taylor (2010), 
Del Negro and Otrok (2007), Dokko, Doyle, Kiley, Kim, Sherlund, Sim and Van den Heuvel (2009), Edge, Kiley 
and Laforte (2008), Iacoviello and Neri (2008), Jarocinski and Smets (2008) and Walentin and Sellin (2010). 
4 
 BIS Review 158/2010
cost calculations are actually conservative; based on high mortgage rates, from 6.5 per cent 
and up to 10 per cent. With an interest rate of 7.5 per cent, 92 per cent of households will 
have a surplus in a “left-to-live-on” calculation that includes generous standard deductions for 
the cost of living. Most households have very large surpluses, because it is the households 
with  very  high  incomes  that  have  the  largest  debts.  If  unemployment  increases  by  a  good 
10 percentage points, that is, from almost 9 per cent to almost 19 per cent, and house prices 
fall  by  20  per  cent,  according  to  the  report  only  4.5  per  cent  of  these  households  will 
experience both a deficit in their “left-to-live-on” calculation and a loan-to-value ratio of more 
than 100 per cent.  
One  important  circumstance  is  that  households’  savings  ratios  are  currently  high,  from  an 
historical  perspective  (see  Figure  1).  This  indicates  that  mortgages  are  not  being  used  to 
fund consumption to any great extent. Things were different prior to the 1990s crisis. At the 
end of the 1980s, increased mortgages were used to fund household consumption to a large 
degree. This is a dangerous situation, as continued price increases then become a condition 
for  continued  mortgage  increases  and  to  uphold  consumption.  But  this  is  evident  in  a  low 
saving ratio. The saving ratio at the end of the 1980s was strongly negative. This indicates 
that households were living above their means, which is an unsustainable situation. This was 
also the case in the United States before the recent crisis, when the saving ratio was very 
low and consumption was funded by higher mortgages. The situation in Sweden now is quite 
different.  House  prices  may  rise  or  fall  because  of  changes  in  the  real  economy.  The 
consequences for monetary policy of a fall in house prices need not be so problematic. If this 
led to a fall in consumption, it would be a demand shock, which would cause lower inflation 
and  resource  utilisation.  However,  this  could  to  a  large  degree  be  counteracted  by  more 
expansionary monetary  policy, particularly if a relatively high percentage of borrowers with 
variable-rate mortgages meant that monetary policy had a greater impact.3
 Levels are more important than growth  
The main message in the most recent Monetary Policy Reports and Updates has been that 
the Swedish economy is strong. GDP growth is good and unemployment has begun to fall. 
This has justified raising the repo rate. But at the same time, the levels of GDP, investment 
and exports are still low, compared with the pre-crisis levels. At the same time, the level of 
unemployment is much higher. The forecast for CPIF inflation is also lower than the inflation 
target.  
Given this, my view at the October meeting was that it would be better to hold the repo rate 
unchanged  than  to  raise  it.  Raising  the  repo  rate  will  slow  down  the  upturn,  keep 
unemployment high and hold down CPIF inflation. In contrast, an unchanged repo rate would 
reduce  unemployment,  bringing  it  closer  to  a  normal  level,  and  increase  CPIF  inflation, 
bringing  it  closer  to  the  target.  This  is  also  shown  in  the  repo  rate  scenario  with  an 
unchanged rate in the October Monetary Policy Report. Figure 2 shows the repo rate path 
given in the main scenario, and also a higher path and a lower path, with the corresponding 
forecasts for CPIF inflation and unemployment and also the mean squared gap for inflation 
and  unemployment.4  A  lower  mean  squared  gap  for  inflation  or  unemployment  entails  a 
                                                 
3   See the discussion at the monetary policy meeting in July (Sveriges Riksbank 2010b) and my criticism of the 
article on house prices in the July Monetary Policy Report. 
4   The  mean  squared  gap  for  the  inflation  forecast  is  defined  as 
  where  πt+,t  signifies  the 
forecast  in  quarter  t  for  inflation  in  quarter  t+,  π*  signifies  the  inflation  target,  and  T  signifies  the  forecast 
horizon  (normally  12  quarters).  The  mean  squared  gap  for  the  unemployment  forecast  is  defined  as 
,  where  ut+,t  signifies  the  forecast  for  unemployment  and  u*  signifies  equilibrium 

1)

unemployment rate. 

0(
  
u
T
*) /(
2

tu
0(
t
,


T
*) /(
2
1)
,

T


T

 t
,

t
BIS Review 158/2010 
 5
 better stabilisation of the variable in question (see Svensson 2010a, b for further discussion). 
The mean squared gap shows that the lower repo rate path entails better-balanced monetary 
policy, as both inflation and unemployment are stabilised better.5
The fact that a majority of the Executive Board chooses to raise the repo rate despite the 
forecast for inflation undershooting the target and the forecast for unemployment being high, 
indicates  that  monetary  policy  is  addressing  something  other  than  inflation  and  resource 
utilisation.  The  fact  that  high  GDP  growth  is  used  as  an  argument  in  favour  of  raising  the 
repo rate could be interpreted to mean that monetary policy in practice aims to slow down 
growth.  
Figure 3 shows GDP developments in Sweden, the eurozone, the United Kingdom and the 
United States. Compared with the  other economies, GDP  fell most in Sweden – a total of 
almost 8 per cent. It has now recovered to a level that is about the same as the eurozone, 
higher than in the United Kingdom but far below that in the United States.  
One  could  claim  that  the  other  economies  have  substantial  structural  problems,  including 
problems in the financial sector. Sweden has suffered a pure demand shock through exports, 
but the Swedish economy has no comparable structural problems in the financial sector or 
elsewhere in the economy. One might then claim that the level of potential production and 
perhaps also its growth may have fallen more in the other countries than in Sweden. In that 
case,  the  output  gap  is  more  negative  in  Sweden  than  in  the  other  countries,  with  the 
possible exception of the United Kingdom. Using the output gap as a measure of resource 
utilisation, the situation in Sweden does not look too good.  
Unemployment  has  increased  in  Sweden,  the  eurozone,  the  United  States  and  the  United 
Kingdom (see Figure 4). Since the first quarter of 2008, unemployment has risen most in the 
United  States  and  around  the  same  amount  in  Sweden,  the  eurozone  and  the  United 
Kingdom (see Figure 5).  
The  unemployment  gap,  which  is  the  difference  between  unemployment  and  equilibrium 
unemployment,  is  shown  in  Figure  6.  For  Sweden  I  am  assuming  that  equilibrium 
unemployment  is  5.5  per  cent,  and  for  the  other  economies  I  have  used  common 
conventional estimates. We see that the unemployment gap is biggest in the United States, 
next biggest in Sweden and lowest in the United Kingdom and the eurozone. If we assume 
that equilibrium unemployment in Sweden is 6 per cent instead of 5.5 per cent, we have the 
same ranking for the unemployment gap. If we assume that equilibrium unemployment is as 
high as 6.5 per cent in Sweden, the unemployment gap is about the same as in the euro-
zone and the United Kingdom.  
These level figures showing GDP and unemployment undoubtedly provide a more nuanced 
picture of the Swedish economy and the level of resource utilisation than merely looking at 
GDP  growth.  Given  these  figures,  we  can  wonder  what  justification  there  is  for  tightening 
monetary  policy  in  Sweden  when  the  central  banks  in  the  other  three  countries  are  still 
conducting very expansionary policies.  
In the United States, Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke (2010) recently held a much-
publicised speech, in which he observed that the forecast for inflation was too low and the 
forecast  for  unemployment  too  high,  in  relation  to  the  levels  compatible  with  the  Federal 
Reserve’s  mandate.  He  therefore  drew  the  following  conclusion:  “given  the  Committee’s 
                                                 
5  
In Figure 2 the unemployment gap, which is the difference between the unemployment rate and equilibrium 
unemployment rate, is used to measure resource utilisation. I consider the unemployment gap to be a more 
robust,  transparent  and  less  easily  manipulated  indicator  of  resource  utilisation  than  the  alternatives. 
Moreover,  until  new  and  better  estimates  are  made,  I  consider  equilibrium  unemployment  to  be  around 
5.5 per cent.  I  gave  more  detailed  motives  for  this  at  the  most  recent  monetary  policy  meeting  (Sveriges 
Riksbank  2010c).  It  is  also  easy  to  do  sensitivity  analysis  with  different  assumptions  about  the  equilibrium 
unemployment rate. 
6 
 BIS Review 158/2010
objectives, there would appear – all else being equal – to be a case for further action”. Since 
then,  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC)  has  announced  that  interest  rates  will 
remain  low  and  announced  a  new  programme  for  buying  government  bonds  (called 
Quantitative Easing, QE2). As we saw in Figure 3, GDP in the United States fell less than 
that in Sweden during the crisis. As I noted earlier, potential GDP in the United States may 
well  have  fallen  more  than  that  in  Sweden.  A  correct  GDP  gap  could  then  very  easily  be 
more negative in Sweden than in the United States.  
The repo rate is not a target variable that needs to be “normalised”  
Another argument in favour of raising the repo rate has been that it needs to be “normalised”. 
According to this argument, it would be better – all else being equal – to have a repo rate 
closer to a normal level. As the repo rate is now so abnormally low, a “crisis rate”, it should 
be raised or at least not cut, even if this means we are further from the inflation target and 
resource utilisation is even lower than normal.  
I do not agree with the normalisation argument. In my opinion, the repo rate and the repo 
rate path have no value in themselves – they are not target variables. A “normal repo rate” is 
not a target for monetary policy. There is nothing to say this would be the case, neither in the 
Sveriges  Riksbank  Act  or  its  preparatory  works,  nor  in  the  booklet  “Monetary  policy  in 
Sweden”. Instead, I believe that the repo rate should in all situations be set so that inflation 
and resource utilisation are stabilised as far as possible, regardless of whether this requires 
a high or a low repo rate and regardless of whether there is a crisis or not.  
A repo rate path way above market expectations  
The  repo  rate  path  is  much  higher  than  market  expectations  according  to  implied  forward 
rates. The repo rate path corresponds to much higher market rates than the current ones. If 
the repo rate path were to become credible, it would lead to a significant increase in long 
interest rates and a large appreciation in the Swedish krona, which would risk strangling the 
recovery in exports and GDP, raising unemployment and lowering inflation.  
The  reasoning  can  be  explained  with  the  aid  of  some  figures.  In  Figure  7  the  red  curve 
shows  the  repo  rate  path  in  the  main  scenario,  and  the  blue  curve  shows  implied  forward 
rates  according  to  Swedish  market  rates.  The  curves  gave  been  extrapolated  beyond  the 
usual three-year horizon, to a five-year horizon.6  
Figure 8 shows the yield curves corresponding to the curves in Figure 7. The yield curves 
show  short  and  long  interest  rates,  more  precisely  a  zero  coupon  rate  as  a  function  of 
maturity  according  to  the  horizontal  axis.  The  difference  between  the  red  and  blue  yield 
curves shows what would happen to interest rates for various maturities if the repo rate path 
were to become credible. This would cause the blue yield curve to shift upwards to the red 
one. A three-year interest rate would thus increase by approximately 60 basis points, and a 
five-year interest rate would increase by closer to 90 basis points.  
Normally,  the  Riksbank’s  wish  and  endeavour  is  that  the  repo  rate  path  is  credible,  and 
incorporated into market expectations and market pricing. In this way, monetary policy has 
the  largest  possible  impact.  This  time,  it  seems  to  be  less  desirable.  If  the  repo  rate  path 
were  to  become  credible,  long  interest  rates  would  rise  drastically,  which  would  mean  a 
substantial tightening of monetary policy in relation to the present situation. In my opinion, 
the repo rate path in the main scenario should be one that we want to immediately become 
                                                 
6  
I have extended the repo rate path beyond the three-year horizon so that the repo rate rises steadily up to a 
long-term level of 4 per cent. 
BIS Review 158/2010 
 7
credible, if it is not already credible. That is, the repo rate path of the main scenario should 
be chosen such that is best stabilises inflation and resource utilisation when it is credible.  
Why such a modest krona appreciation in the main scenario?  
The  main  scenario  includes  a  fairly  modest  appreciation  of  the  krona.  Why  isn’t  it  bigger? 
There are two possible explanations and equivalent interpretations of the main scenario. One 
is  that  the  main  scenario  in  reality  assumes  higher  long  interest  rate  abroad  than  current 
market rates. As the exchange rate is affected by the difference between long domestic and 
foreign  market  rates,  that  is,  the  difference  between  domestic  and  foreign  market  yield 
curves, the main scenario thus underestimates the appreciation in the krona.  
In Figure 7 the grey curve shows TCW-weighted implied forward rates according to market 
rates abroad. In Figure 8 the grey curve shows the corresponding TCW-weighted yield curve. 
The difference between the blue and grey curves in Figure 8 for a 5-year maturity shows that 
the current difference between a Swedish and a foreign five-year rate is around 70 points. If 
the  repo  rate  path  becomes  credible,  the  difference  between  the  red  and  grey  curves  in 
Figure 8 shows that the difference between a Swedish and a TCW-weighted foreign five-year 
rate  would  rise  to  around  160  points.  This  large  interest  differential  in  the  main  scenario 
should lead to a large krona appreciation. Such an appreciation of the krona would in turn 
contribute to significant tightening over and above the increase in long interest rates, which 
would have a particularly severe impact on exports and inflation. The reason why this does 
not occur in the main scenario is that the main scenario assumes higher long-term market 
rates abroad than the actually prevailing market rates.  
More  specifically,  the  main  scenario  assumes  a  forecast  for  TCW-weighted  interest  rates 
abroad  that  are  much  higher  than  the  current  market  expectations  a  couple  of  years  from 
now.  In  Figure  7  the  yellow  curve  shows  the  main  scenario’s  forecast  for  TCW-weighted 
interest  rates  abroad.  The  main  scenario  moreover  assumes  that  all  market  agents  in 
Sweden and abroad will not only believe in the repo rate  path, but will also believe in the 
Riksbank’s  forecast  for  interest  rates  abroad.  The  main  scenario  in  the  Riksbank’s  report 
assumes that this belief is incorporated in market expectations of foreign interest rates and 
included in the pricing of foreign market rates. The yellow curve in Figure 8 shows the foreign 
yield curve  that would then arise. The main scenario thus assumes that long-term interest 
rates  abroad  are  much  higher  than  prevailing  market  rates  (which  are  represented  by  the 
grey curve in Figure 8). The difference between a Swedish and a foreign five-year interest 
rate  is  approximately  60  basis  points,  much  less  than  the  difference  of  around  160  basis 
points  described  above.  According  to  the  latter,  greater  difference,  the  main  scenario  will 
lead to a much stronger krona appreciation.  
It is important to understand that it is the actual difference between long-term Swedish and 
long-term  foreign  market  rates  that  affects  the  prevailing  exchange  rate.  This  is  the  case 
regardless  of  whether  or  not  these  long-term  interest  rates  correspond  to  market 
expectations  of  short-term  rates.  It  thus  applies  regardless  of  whether  or  not  long-term 
interest rates are affected by depressed forward premiums (for instance, as a result of the 
Federal Reserve’s purchases of government securities). It also applies regardless of whether 
market  expectations  are  good  and  reliable  forecasters  of  future  interest  rates.  The 
assumptions we make about long-term Swedish and foreign interest rates are thus important.  
This  was  one  possible  explanation  why  the  main  scenario  contains  such  a  modest  krona 
appreciation.  The  other  possible  explanation  and  corresponding  interpretation  of  the  main 
scenario  can  be  described  as  follows.  In  Figure  7  the  red  and  yellow  curves  show  the 
Riksbank’s  forecasts  for  the  repo  rate  and  the  TCW-weighted  policy  rates  abroad, 
respectively. At the same time, the blue and grey curves show market expectations of the 
repo rate and the TCW-weighted policy rates abroad, respectively. If the current repo rate 
and the actual policy rates abroad develop over time according to the red and grey curves, 
the market will be surprised if the repo rate and foreign policy rates are raised more quickly 
8 
 BIS Review 158/2010
than expected. The market will then gradually raise its expectations of future interest rates. 
That is, over time the blue and grey curves will show an upward shift. This means that the 
corresponding blue and grey yield curves in Figure 8 will shift upwards over time. If they shift 
upwards  in  tandem,  the  interest  rate  differential  between  long-term  Swedish  interest  rates 
and interest rates abroad does not change, and there is thus no large krona appreciation.  
According to one of the interpretations of the main scenario, the assumption is thus that long-
term  market  rates  abroad  are  much  higher  than  the  prevailing  observed  market  rates. 
According to the other interpretation, the assumption is that long-term market rates abroad 
will  rise  gradually  in  pace  with  Swedish  long-term  interest  rates.  It  is  not  clear  from  the 
Monetary  Policy  Report  which  interpretation  is  correct.  The  questions  regarding  the  two 
interpretations have not been thoroughly analysed.  
Unrealistic assumption regarding foreign policy rates  
In both of these interpretations of the main scenario the high TCW-weighted foreign policy 
rate path plays an important role. Behind the main scenario’s TCW-weighted repo rate path 
lies the assumption, in my opinion an unrealistic one, that the Federal Reserve, the ECB and 
the Bank of England will start to raise their policy rates sooner than is indicated by prevailing 
market rates. For example, both the Federal Reserve and the Bank of England are assumed 
to start raising their policy rates within a year.  
If  one  is  to  produce  a  forecast  for  foreign  policy  rates  that  deviates  from  market  pricing,  I 
believe  that  great  emphasis  should  be  placed  on  the  assessments  made  by  the  Federal 
Reserve, the ECB and the Bank of England themselves, as well as on the signals they give. 
These  institutions  have  better  information  on  their  own  economies,  greater  resources  for 
analysis and investigation and, above all, better information regarding their own plans. In my 
opinion, one must have strong and clear reasons for arriving at another conclusion than that 
stated and signalled by these central banks themselves.  
The statements and signals from the Federal Reserve are hardly compatible with a forecast 
that  they  will  begin  raising  their  policy  rate  in  2011.  Here  I  refer  for  instance  to  Ben 
Bernanke’s recent speech (2010) and to the most recent decision by the FOMC on a new 
round  of  Quantitative  Easing  (QE2),  which  means  that  the  Federal  Reserve  will  buy 
government  bonds  regularly  up  to  summer  2011  for  the  purpose  of  lowering  long-term 
interest rates in the United States.  
As regards the ECB, in my opinion the best information and signals are those presented in 
the ECB Staff Forecast (2010) at the beginning of September. The forecast is based on an 
assumption that the Eonia interest rate, the overnight rate in the eurozone, will follow market 
expectations. The forecast shows that inflation will be below the ECB’s target of “below, but 
close to, 2 per cent” and that the real economy will be weak. If anything, it indicates that the 
ECB will follow a policy rate path that is lower than market expectations.  
With  regard  to  the  Bank  of  England,  their  Inflation  Report  published  in  August  (Bank  of 
England  2010a)  contains  a  forecast  that  is  also  based  on  the  policy  rate  following  market 
expectations,  where  inflation  falls  slightly  below  the  target  in  two  years’  time,  and  GDP 
growth is close to its historical average, and the GDP level is still lower than before the crisis. 
This and the minutes from the meeting in October (Bank of England 2010c) do no indicate 
that  the  Bank  of  England  will  follow  a  policy  rate  path  that  is  higher  than  market 
expectations.7  
                                                 
7   After the Riksbank’s monetary policy meeting the Inflation Report and minutes from the meeting in November 
have been published (Bank of England 2010b, c). Neither do they indicate a policy rate path above market 
expectations. 
BIS Review 158/2010 
 9
If the statements and signals from these central banks indicate interest rate paths in line with 
or below market expectations, it is not reasonable, in my opinion, to assume – as the main 
scenario does – that foreign interest rate paths will be clearly above market expectations. In 
this  situation  it  is  more  reasonable,  at  the  very  least,  to  proceed  on  the  basis  of  market 
expectations according to implied forward rates.  
One reason for assuming higher future policy rates than the market pricing may be that these 
abnormally low nominal and real interest rates are not compatible with the Riksbank’s usual 
models  and  with  the  historical  patterns  for  how  foreign  inflation,  GDP  and  interest  rates 
interact. Such low real interest rates would normally lead to GDP and inflation abroad being 
unreasonably high. If reality and models differ, it is in my opinion reality that applies. In the 
current abnormal times, models and historical patterns do not work so well and should to a 
great extent be replaced by judgement. In my opinion, the forecasts for inflation and GDP 
abroad under the current abnormal circumstances are compatible with the low interest rates 
abroad.  
Monetary policy alternatives in October  
I would thus claim that the assumption in the main scenario that policy rates abroad will be 
high is unrealistic, and that it is more reasonable to assume a forecast for policy rates abroad 
that  is  compatible  with  market  expectations  of  interest  rates  abroad.  This  also  means 
assuming  the  prevailing  actual  long  interest  rates  abroad  with  regard  to  the  effect  on  the 
exchange rate.  
Figure 9 shows monetary policy alternatives, all under the assumption of a forecast for policy 
rates abroad in line with market expectations, that is, a forecast for policy rates abroad that 
follows  the  grey  curve  in  Figure  7.  Figure  9a  shows  different  interest  rate  paths.  The  red 
broken curve, called “Main scenario repo rate path”, is the main scenario’s repo rate path. 
The  blue  broken  curve,  called  “Riksbank’s  reaction  function”,  shows  the  repo  rate  path 
arising  from  the  Riksbank’s  historical  reaction  function  when  policy  rates  abroad  are 
compatible with the prevailing market expectations. The yellow broken curve, called “Market 
repo rate path”, shows the prevailing market expectations for the repo rate. The grey broken 
curve called “Low interest rate path without initial increase” shows an interest rate path with 
an unchanged repo rate in October and then a gradual increase up to around 2.7 per cent at 
the end of the forecast period, that is, the repo rate path advocated by Karolina Ekholm and 
myself at the monetary policy meeting in October.  
Figures 9c and 9d show with the same colours the corresponding forecasts for CPIF inflation 
and unemployment, all conditional on policy rates abroad according to market expectations.  
Figures 9c and 9d clearly show that the low repo rate path without initial increase provides 
the  best  outcome,  with  a  CPIF  forecast  closest  to  the  target  and  with  the  lowest 
unemployment  forecast.  This  is  also  illustrated  with  the  aid  of  the  mean  squared  gaps  in 
Figure  9b,  in  which  this  repo  rate  path  results  in  a  point  corresponding  to  a  lower  mean 
squared  gap  for  both  the  CPIF  and  unemployment.  The  mean  squared  gap  for  the 
unemployment  gap  is  calculated  on  the  basis  of  an  equilibrium  unemployment  rate  of 
5.5 per cent. The low repo rate path dominates, even if the equilibrium unemployment rate is 
assumed to be as high as 6.5 per cent.  
Judging from this figure, an even lower repo rate path could provide an even better outcome 
for CPIF inflation and unemployment. One example of this is a repo rate path that initially 
coincides with the grey repo rate path, but then from the middle of 2012 onwards changes 
over to the yellow path given by market expectations. It may very well be the case that an 
even lower repo rate path provides an even better outcome for inflation and unemployment. 
However,  more careful analysis and alternative forecasts are needed before the best repo 
rate path can be established, particularly because so much of the analysis at the most recent 
10 
 BIS Review 158/2010
monetary policy meeting focused on what I consider to be the unrealistic main scenario in the 
Monetary Policy Report.  
Given  this,  I  therefore  considered  at  the  meeting  that  the  grey  repo  rate  path  shown  in 
Figure 9a, with an unchanged repo rate at the meeting and then a gradual rise to a level of 
2.7 per cent at the end of the forecast period, which is roughly mid-way between the main 
scenario and market expectations, would be a reasonable compromise for now, until a new 
review is made prior to the next monetary policy meeting. Such a discussion could well result 
in a lower repo rate path.  
Proposals for possible solutions  
From this discussion, I would like to propose the following possible solutions to the Swedish 
monetary policy problems:  
We  should  consistently  choose  the  repo  rate  path  that  best  stabilises  inflation  around  the 
inflation  target  and  resource  utilisation  around  a  normal  level,  regardless  of  whether  GDP 
growth is high or low, and regardless of whether the repo rate is high or low.  
If the chosen repo rate path then offers a threat to financial stability – which would appear to 
be a rare situation – this should be taken into account and this repo rate path excluded if it is 
appropriate. The motives for these actions should then be explained.  
When choosing a repo rate path, we should take into account house prices and household 
borrowing if they affect the forecasts for inflation and resource utilisation in the short or long 
term. If such considerations affect the repo rate path, we must carefully justify our decision. 
For instance, we should explain why potential advantages in the longer run are greater than 
potential disadvantages for inflation and resource utilisation in the short run.  
If house prices and household borrowing become unsustainable, or are judged to entail other 
problems, then other and better instruments should be used to deal with this than the repo 
rate. Trying to use the policy rate to slow down house prices and household debt could lead 
to high costs for the real economy in terms of lower production and employment, and higher 
unemployment. There are several measures that have a greater effect on house prices and 
household borrowing than the policy rate, and at the same time entail lower costs for the real 
economy. In general, the problem needs to be analysed and specified, for instance, in the 
form  of  which  market  failures  or  which  externalities  or  which  consumer  protection 
inadequacies it entails, to determine what measures can be used to deal with the problem 
closest to its source and at the lowest cost. The most suitable measure is probably one that 
is currently under the jurisdiction of another government agency, and not the Riksbank.  
To avoid the current problems with large differences between the repo rate path and market 
expectations,  the  decision-making  process  should  start  with  forecasts  for  inflation  and 
resource  utilisation  conditional  on  market  expectations  of  interest  rates  in  Sweden  and 
abroad, that is, forecasts for the repo rate and policy rates abroad that are in line with market 
expectations according to implied forward rates in Sweden and abroad. The Riksbank used 
to make such forecasts earlier, before forecasts conditional on an own repo rate path were 
introduced, and the Bank of England and the ECB make such forecasts now. The methods 
for producing these forecasts may need improvement. The forecasts can then be used as a 
starting point for assessing whether a repo rate path that deviates from market expectations 
is necessary to best stabilise inflation and resource utilisation.  
The  decision-making  process  can  then  continue  with  forecasts  for  inflation  and  resource 
utilisation  conditional  on  alternative  repo  rate  paths,  to  determine  which  repo  rate  path  is 
judged to best stabilise inflation and resource utilisation. These forecasts can be made under 
two different assumptions. One assumption is that the alternative repo rate path will become 
credible and be incorporated into market expectations. Forecasts under this assumption can 
be  constructed  by  using  what  are  known  as  anticipated  deviations  of  the  repo  rate  path 
BIS Review 158/2010 
 11
(Laséen  and  Svensson  2010  and  Svensson  2010b).  The  other  assumption  is  that  the 
alternative  repo  rate  path  is  not  credible,  that  market  participants  are  surprised  when  the 
actual  repo rate  deviates  from  the  expected  one.  Forecasts  under  this  assumption  can  be 
constructed by using what are known as unanticipated deviations of the repo rate path. The 
assumption used should depend on the circumstances and the motives for this choice should 
be stated.  
Normally,  the  repo  rate  path  that  is  included  in  the  main  scenario  of  the  report  should  be 
chosen such that it best stabilises inflation and resource utilisation when it is credible. The 
starting point should be that the analysis in the Monetary Policy Report/Update and in other 
information from the Riksbank is so complete, well-reasoned and convincing that it gives the 
repo rate path credibility.  
Forecasts  for  policy  rates  abroad  should  primarily  be  based  on  market  expectations 
according  to  implied  forward  rates.  This  has  the  advantage  that  there  is  no  contradiction 
between long market rates abroad and the forecast for policy rates abroad, which makes it 
easier  to  determine  the  effects  on  the  exchange  rate.  If  there  are  special  reasons  for 
assuming forecasts for policy rates abroad that deviate from market expectations, this should 
be  explained  and  justified.  In  these  cases  one  should  construct  forecasts  for  inflation  and 
resource utilisation using unanticipated deviations, where market participants are surprised 
by  the  actual  policy  rates  abroad  deviating  from  what  was  expected.  The  exchange  rate 
determination  will  then  be  correctly  based  on  long  market  rates  abroad,  even  when  the 
Riksbank’s forecast for policy rates abroad deviates from that implied by these market rates.  
 
 
 12 
 BIS Review 158/2010
  BIS Review 158/2010 
   13
  14 
   BIS Review 158/2010
  BIS Review 158/2010 
   15
 16 
   BIS Review 158/2010
References 
Assenmascher-Wesche, Katrin and Stefan Gerlach (2010), “Credit and Bubbles”, Economic 
Policy July 2010, 437–482.  
Bank of England (2010a), Inflation Report, August 2010, www.bankofengland.co.uk.  
Bank of England (2010b), Inflation Report, November 2010, www.bankofengland.co.uk.  
Bank  of  England  (2010c),  Minutes  of  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  Meeting  6  and 
7 October 2010, www.bankofengland.co.uk.  
Bank  of  England  (2010d),  Minutes  of  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  Meeting  3  and 
4 November 2010, www.bankofengland.co.uk.  
Bean, Charles, Matthias Paustian, Adrian Penalver and Tim Taylor (2010), “Monetary Policy 
after the Fall,” in Macroeconomic Challenges: The Decade Ahead, Federal Reserve Bank of 
Kansas City, www.kansascityfed.org.  
Bernanke,  Ben  S.  (2010),  “Monetary  Policy  Objectives  and  Tools  in  a  Low-Inflation 
Environment”,  speech  at  the  conference  Revisiting  Monetary  Policy  in  a  Low-Inflation 
Environment  Conference,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Boston,  Boston,  15  October  2010, 
www.federalreserve.gov.  
Del  Negro,  Marco  and  Christopher  Otrok  (2007),  “99  Luftballons:  Monetary  Policy  and  the 
House  Price  Boom  across  U.S.  States”,  Journal  of  Monetary  Economics  54,  2007,  
1962–1985.  
Dokko,  Jane,  Brian  Doyle,  Michael  T.  Kiley,  Jinill  Kim,  Shane  Sherlund,  Jae  Sim  and 
Skander Van den Heuvel (2009), “Monetary Policy and the Housing Bubble”, FEDS paper 
2009–49, Federal Reserve Board, www.federalreserve.gov.  
Edge,  Rochelle  M.,  Michael  T.  Kiley  and  Jean-Philippe  Laforte  (2008),  “The  Sources  of 
Fluctuations  in  Residential  Investment:  A View from a Policy-Oriented  DSGE  Model of the 
U.S.  Economy”,  report  presented  at  the  annual  meeting  of  the  American  Economic 
Associations, 3–5 January 2009.  
European Central Bank (2010), ECB Staff Forecast, September 2010, www.ecb.int.  
Finansinspektionen,  Swedish  Financial  Supervisory  Authority 
(2010),  Den  svenska 
bolånemarknaden  och  bankernas  kreditgivning,  (the  Swedish  mortgage  market  and  the 
banks’ granting of credit) www.fi.se.  
Forslund,  Anders  (2008),  “Den  svenska  jämviktsarbetslösheten  –  en  översikt”  (Swedish 
equilibrium unemployment – a review), Report to the Swedish Fiscal Policy Council, 2008/4, 
www.finanspolitiskaradet.se.  
Iacoviello,  Matteo  and  Stefano  Neri  (2008)  “Housing  Market  Spillovers:  Evidence  from  an 
Estimated DSGE Model”, Working Paper, Boston College.  
Jarocinski, Marek and  Frank R. Smets (2008), “House Prices and the Stance of Monetary 
Policy”, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review 90, July 2008, pp. 339–365.  
Laséen,  Stefan  and  Lars  E.O.  Svensson  (2010),  “Anticipated  Alternative  Instrument-Rate 
Paths in Policy Simulations”, Working Paper, www.larseosvensson.net.  
Svensson, Lars E.O. (2010a), “Inflation Targeting”, published in Friedman, Benjamin M., and 
Michael Woodford, eds., Handbook of Monetary Economics, Volume 3a and 3b, Elsevier.  
Svensson,  Lars  E.O.  (2010b),  “Why  a  lower  repo-rate  path?”  speech  held  at  Umeå 
University, 24 February 2010, www.riksbank.se.  
Sveriges Riksbank (2010a), Monetary Policy in Sweden, www.riksbank.se.  
BIS Review 158/2010 
 17
Sveriges  Riksbank  (2010b),  Minutes  of  the  monetary  policy  meeting  on  30  June  2010, 
www.riksbank.se.  
Sveriges  Riksbank  (2010c),  Minutes  of  the  monetary  policy  meeting  on  26  October  2010, 
www.riksbank.se.  
Walentin, Karl, and Peter Sellin (2010), “Housing Collateral and the Monetary Transmission 
Mechanism”, Sveriges Riksbank Working Paper No. 239, www.riksbank.se. 
18 
 BIS Review 158/2010
