DeLisle Worrell: The initiative of the Financial Stability Board on “non-
cooperative jurisdictions” from a Caribbean perspective 
Remarks by Dr DeLisle Worrell, Governor of the Central Bank of Barbados, on behalf of the 
Caribbean Group at Breakfast with the Managing Director of the International Monetary Fund 
(IMF), Washington DC, 10 October 2010. 
 The international business and financial sector is vital to Caribbean growth 
The international business and financial sector (IBFS) plays a key role in the strategies for 
diversifying the sources of growth for the small countries of the Caribbean. These countries 
are all very open and dependent on foreign-exchange earnings as the engine of growth and 
employment. Already the IBFS is the principal source of foreign exchange and growth for the 
smallest  countries,  and  for  others  it  is  second  in  importance  only  to  tourism.  Yet  other 
Caribbean countries look to the sector as a potential source of diversification.  
All  Caribbean  jurisdictions  ground  their  IBFS  sectors  on  their  competitive  advantages  of 
geographical  location,  environmental  appeal,  a  superior  quality  of  life,  a  relatively  stable 
economic  and  political  environment,  and  a  highly  skilled  labour  force.  In  addition,  well 
established  Caribbean  jurisdictions  like  The  Bahamas  and  Barbados  now  boast  a  strong 
infrastructure  of  professional  and  technical  skills,  in  law,  accounting,  finance  and  related 
disciplines,  and  can  provide  those  services  to  international  financial  institutions  at  highly 
competitive prices.  
Furthermore, the Caribbean is dedicated to the business of high quality institutions operating 
through fully legitimate channels and in accordance with the best international standards and 
practices. In order to guarantee the quality of our international financial services Caribbean 
jurisdictions have been fully involved for the past decade in the Financial Sector Assessment 
Programs  (FSAP)  and  Reviews  of  Standards  and  Codes  (ROSCs),  conducted  by  the  IMF 
and  World  Bank,  and  actively  participate  in  the  work  of  the  Financial  Action  Task  Force 
(FATF)  and  the  Caribbean  regional  body  CFATF.  There  are  published  reports  on  these 
reviews available for all jurisdictions.  
As is inevitably the case, there are, in every case, areas where financial regulation needs to 
be  upgraded  and  legislation  and  guidelines  need  to  be  revised.  There  is  universal 
commitment to address the issues identified, as swiftly as resources and skills permit. In this 
effort  the  Caribbean  benefits  from  technical  assistance  from  the  Caribbean  Regional 
Technical Assistance Centre (CARTAC), the IMF, the Association of Supervisors of Banks of 
the  Americas  (ASBA)  and  financial  supervisory  agencies  of  the  US,  Canada,  the  UK  and 
others.  
The  Caribbean  welcomes  any  further  assistance  which  the  international  community  might 
offer. 
The  Caribbean  welcomes  offers  of  additional  assistance  in  the  upgrading  of  financial 
surveillance. In particular, we are concerned about the inadequacy of data on regional and 
international linkages and cross border risk exposures. This is an issue of vital importance for 
domestic financial stability in the Caribbean region, as well as for the stability of the region’s 
international financial business. In this connection we would be glad to be involved with the 
joint initiative of the IMF and the Financial Stability Board (FSB) on “The financial crisis and 
information gaps”, which speaks to these issues.  
However, the FSB’s “non-cooperative jurisdictions” initiative is puzzling and unhelpful. 
Caribbean jurisdictions were in no way implicated in the recent international financial crisis, 
and  there  were  no  failures  in  IBFS  sectors  in  Caribbean  jurisdictions.  Since  the  FSB’s 
BIS Review 142/2010 
 1
mandate  is  international  financial  stability,  its  selection  process,  which  has  placed  some 
Caribbean jurisdictions on its priority list, appears to be flawed.  
The  Caribbean  jurisdictions  are  fully  involved  in  the  FSAP  and  ROSC  processes,  and  are 
adequately  served  by  technical  assistance.  The  FSB  appears  to  be  questioning  the 
assessments  published  in  the  Financial  System  Stability  Assessments  for  Caribbean 
countries. Moreover,  the  FSB  has  not  published  the  criteria  by  which  it  will  supercede  the 
judgment of FSAP teams, reflected in the published FSSAs. In any case, what is required in 
order  to  strengthen  financial  surveillance  is  improved  data  and  methodologies,  not  an 
additional review of information which will already be out of date. Furthermore, it is unclear 
that the FSB has the technical capacity to render a balanced and informed judgment on the 
adequacy of financial systems.  
The fact that the FSB contemplates declaring as “non-cooperative” countries which are fully 
involved  with  the  FSAP  and  FATF  processes,  if  taken  at  face  value,  implies  a  totally 
unjustified lack of confidence in the FSAP process. The FSAP was developed on the basis of 
intensive  research  and  analysis,  and  the  tools,  techniques  and  processes  of  the  FSAP 
continue to be refined, in particular to incorporate the lessons of the international financial 
crisis.  The  FSB  appears  to  discount  this  considerable  intellectual  investment,  without 
providing an adequate substitute. In short, the FSB “non-cooperative jurisdictions initiative” 
lacks transparency, legitimacy, intellectual integrity and justification. Rather than contribute to 
strengthening  international  financial  stability  it  represents  a  disincentive  for  international 
financial  cooperation  and  the  development  of  a  level  playing  field  in  international  financial 
transactions, and it is therefore a threat to international financial stability.  
The Caribbean is requesting that the IMF, through its membership of the FSB, insist that the 
FSB refocus its engagement with the Caribbean to concentrate on issues where the FSB can 
reinforce the efforts which the Caribbean has been engaged in for many years, to upgrade 
and  maintain  surveillance  of  domestic  and  international  financial  sectors  which  offer 
international  financial  services  of  the  highest  quality  and  integrity.  These  activities  are 
undertaken  with  the  assistance  of  and  in  collaboration  with  the  IMF,  the  World  Bank  and 
other international institutions, and the FSB should support already established processes. In 
this connection, the Caribbean identifies the statistical data gaps as a priority for attention.  
2 
 BIS Review 142/2010
