 K C Chakrabarty: Inclusive growth – role of financial sector 
Address  by  Dr  K  C  Chakrabarty,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
National Finance Conclave 2010, Bhubaneswar, Orissa, India, 27 November 2010. 
 Assistance provided by Shri A K Misra in preparation of this address is gratefully acknowledged. 
1. 
Prof  Ashok  Kolaskar,  Vice  Chancellor,  KIIT  University,  Dr  Achyuta  Samanta, 
Founder, KIIT University & KISS, Dr Karmarkar, MD, NABARD, distinguished guests, ladies 
and gentlemen. It is a pleasure and privilege to be here at the National Finance Conclave – 
2010  being  organized  by  School  of  Management,  KIIT  University,  Bhubaneswar.  KIIT 
University under the leadership of Dr Samanta is a living example to the society of the way of 
practicing social inclusion through spread of education. I take this opportunity to congratulate 
the  University  for  the  pioneering  role  it  plays  in  spreading  quality  education  and  also  for 
organizing this Conclave. The theme of the Conclave, which is “Inclusive Growth: Role of the 
Financial Sector”, focuses on an issue having a great significance not only for a country like 
ours but the entire world. Since the term inclusive growth is used very widely and loosely, I 
wish to spend some time in discussing this in little detail.  
2.  
Inclusive growth as the literal meaning of the two words refers to both the pace and 
the  pattern  of  the  economic  growth.  The  literature  on  the  subject  draws  fine  distinction 
between  direct  income  redistribution  or  shared  growth  and  inclusive  growth.  The  inclusive 
growth approach takes a longer term perspective as the focus is on productive employment 
rather than on direct income redistribution, as a means of increasing incomes for excluded 
groups. Inclusive growth is, therefore, supposed to be inherently sustainable as distinct from 
income distribution schemes which can in the short run reduce the disparities, between the 
poorest  and  the  rest,  which  may  have  arisen  on  account  of  policies  intended  to  jumpstart 
growth.  While  income  distribution  schemes  can  allow  people,  to  benefit  from  economic 
growth  in  the  short  run,  inclusive  growth  allows  people  to  “contribute  to  and  benefit  from 
economic growth”.  
3.  
The  “inclusive  growth”  as  a  strategy  of  economic  development  received  attention 
owing to a rising concern that the benefits of economic growth have not been equitably shared. 
Growth is inclusive when it creates economic opportunities along with ensuring equal access to 
them. Apart from addressing the issue of inequality, the inclusive growth may also make the 
poverty reduction efforts more effective by explicitly creating productive economic opportunities 
for the poor and vulnerable sections of the society. The inclusive growth by encompassing the 
hitherto excluded population can bring in several other benefits as well to the economy. The 
concept “Inclusion” should be seen as a process of including the excluded as agents whose 
participation  is  essential  in  the  very  design  of  the  development  process,  and  not  simply  as 
welfare targets of development programmes (Planning Commission, 2007).  
4.  
The Indian economy, though achieved a high growth momentum during 2003–04 to 
2007–08, could not bring down unemployment and poverty to tolerable levels. Further, a vast 
majority of the population remained outside the ambit of basic health and education facilities 
during  this  high  growth  phase.  In  recent  decades,  economic  and  social  inequalities  have 
increased  alongside  high  growth  rates  which  have  exacerbated  regional  inequalities.  Over 
25% of Indians continue to live in abject poverty. As a result, Inclusive growth has become a 
national  policy  objective  of  the  Union  Government.  The  11th  five-year  plan  (2007–2012) 
envisions inclusive growth as a key objective. The Plan document notes that the economic 
growth has failed to be sufficiently inclusive particularly after the mid-1990s. It has identified 
agriculture,  infrastructure,  health  care  and  education  as  critical  areas  for  achieving  higher 
inclusive growth. Thus, the Eleventh Plan Document tries to restructure the policies in order 
to make the growth faster, broad-based and inclusive by reducing the fragmentation of the 
society. Huge investments in agriculture, education and health, and rural infrastructure were 
BIS Review 161/2010 
 1
 the key elements of the inclusive growth strategy as envisaged. Broadly, the policies aim at 
increasing the income and employment opportunities on the one hand and on the other; it 
tries to finance programmes which are capable of making the growth more inclusive.  
Inclusive growth: role of financial sector 
5.  
There are supply side and demand side factors driving Inclusive Growth. Banks and 
other financial services players largely are expected to mitigate the supply side processes 
that  prevent  poor  and  disadvantaged  social  groups  from  gaining  access  to  the  financial 
system. Access to financial products is constrained by several factors which include: lack of 
awareness about the financial products, unaffordable products, high transaction costs, and 
products  which  are  not  convenient,  inflexible,  not  customized  and  of  low  quality.  Financial 
Inclusion promotes thrift and develops culture of saving and also enables efficient payment 
mechanism  strengthening  the  resource  base  of  the  financial  institution  which  benefits  the 
economy  as  resources  become  available  for  efficient  payment  mechanism  and  allocation. 
The  empirical  evidence  shows  that  countries  with  large  proportion  of  population  excluded 
from the formal financial system also show higher poverty ratios and higher inequality. If we 
are talking of financial stability, economic stability and inclusive growth with stability, it is not 
possible without achieving Financial Inclusion. Thus financial inclusion is no longer a policy 
choice  but  is  a  policy  compulsion  today.  And  banking  is  a  key  driver  for  inclusive  growth. 
However, we must bear in mind that apart from the supply side factors, demand side factors, 
such  as  lower  income  and/or  asset  holdings  also  have  a  significant  bearing  on  inclusive 
growth. Owing to difficulties in accessing formal sources of credit, poor individuals and small 
and macro enterprises usually rely on their personal savings or internal sources to invest in 
health, education, housing, and entrepreneurial activities to make use of growth opportunities. 
What is different this time?  
6.  
The role of the financial sector in the financial inclusion efforts in India, date back to 
early  60s  when  the  focus  was  on  channeling  of  credit  to  the  neglected  sectors  of  the 
economy  and  weaker  sections  of  the  population.  Starting  with  1990s  the  focus  shifted  to 
strengthening financial institutions as part of financial sector reforms. The merits of financial 
sector  reform  need  to be  seen  through  the  prism  of  what finance could  do  to  harness  the 
growth potential with stability, and financial inclusion represents a critical component of the 
policy  process  that  intends  to  make  the  financial  system  serve  the  needs  of  the  real 
economy.  The  1990s  also  saw  introduction  of  self-help  groups  –  bank  linkage  programme 
and  launch  of  Kisan  credit  cards  in  the  country.  The  present  phase  of  pursuing  financial 
inclusion as a declared policy objective started in 2005. So, if financial inclusion efforts has 
been going on for that long, and clearly we have not succeeded, what is different this time 
and why are we talking so confidently about achieving universal financial inclusion now. It is 
because of the following reasons:  
 
 
the focus on inclusive growth which has become the mantra of the times;  
the  Information  and  Communication  Technology  required  by  the  formal  financial 
sector  for  penetrating  widespread  unbanked  areas  in  a  cost  effective  way  is  now 
available;  
the realization that the “Poor is Bankable”. FMCG companies, telecom companies 
and other retailers are all concentrating on the untapped rural markets for growth. 
Formal  financial  sector  players  also  have  realized  that  vast  untapped  excluded 
areas  have  growth  opportunities  not  only  for  low  cost  deposits/funds  but  also  for 
other products such as micro-credit, micro-insurance, and micro-pension etc.  
7.  
In the remaining part of my address, I wish to devote on the objectives, bottlenecks 
and  strategies  in  achieving  financial  inclusion  in  India.  I  would  give  you  a  glimpse  of  the 
 2 
 BIS Review 161/2010
 present phase of financial inclusion efforts including some misunderstood definitions and the 
initiatives being taken by the Reserve Bank of India. I would end my speech with a sneak 
peek at some of the targets that banks in India have set for themselves in next 3 years or so.  
Definition: financial inclusion 
8.  
A lot of confusion prevails amongst a lot of people about what constitutes Financial 
Inclusion. So, let me define it for you. Financial inclusion is the process of ensuring access to 
appropriate  financial  products  and  services  needed  by  vulnerable  groups  such  as  weaker 
sections and low income groups at an affordable cost in a fair and transparent manner by 
mainstream  institutional  players.  The  Governor  of  RBI  has  announced  that  we  need  to 
achieve financial inclusion through the mainstream financial institutions whether by mobile or 
card.  We  have  reposed  our  faith  in  mainstream  financial  institutions  to  achieve  financial 
inclusion. But, he has also made it clear that we cannot wait indefinitely for banks to come 
forward and exploit this opportunity of financial inclusion, otherwise we may have to look for 
other models of furthering financial inclusion. But, for the time being these issues have been 
resolved. 
Objectives 
9.  
What are the objectives of our financial inclusion efforts? It is to take banking services 
to everybody to meet their entire savings, credit and remittance needs initially, and needs for all 
other  financial  products  and  services  subsequently.  It  is  initially  focused  on  villages  with 
population above 2000 but the banks need to plan to cover villages with population below 2000 
in an integrated manner over a period of next 3 to 5 years. The objective is also to provide 
banking services to entire population residing in Urban and Metro Centers. 
Bottlenecks  
10.  
country are fairly well known. The major obstacles are:  
(i) 
The  bottlenecks  and  difficulties  in  achieving  complete  financial  inclusion  in  our 
The gigantic nature of the task, keeping in view the number of financially excluded 
people.  
 
 
 
In India, almost half the country is unbanked.  
Of the 6 lakh villages in India, only approximately 50,000 have bank branches.  
India  has  the  highest  number  of  households  (145  million)  excluded  from 
Banking.  
Only  10%  of  the  population  has  any  kind  of  life  insurance  and  9.6%  of  the 
population has non-life insurance coverage.  
  I may hasten to add that this is not an India specific problem but a global one indeed. 
2.5 billion adults, just over half of world’s adult population, do not use formal 
 
financial services to save or borrow.  
2.2 billion of these unserved adults live in Africa, Asia, Latin America, and the 
Middle East.  
Of the 1.2 billion adults who use formal financial services in Africa, Asia, and 
the Middle East, at least two-thirds, a little more than 800 million, live on less 
than $5 per day.  
 (Source: “Half the World is Unbanked”, 2009, Financial Access Initiative) 
BIS Review 161/2010 
 3
  However,  some  of  the  critical  indicators  for  access  to  finance  in  India  along  with 
benchmark indicators for selected high-income OECD member countries (Table 1) 
reveal that while there have been improvements during 2001–08 but it is still very 
adverse as compared to OECD economies. 
 (ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
Non-availability  of  appropriate  banking  technology  till  a  few  years  ago.  Lack  of 
proper physical infrastructure, digital connectivity, etc. in some parts of the country. 
If  Financial  Inclusion  is  to  take  place,  it  can  only  be  through  Information  and 
Communication Technology (ICT) based models.  
Lack  of  proper  Business  Models.  Banks  still  perceive  this  as  a  burden  and  an 
imposition and not as a viable Business Model.  
Lack of cost effective scalable Delivery Models. There is no facilitating and effective 
Delivery Model especially when problems are encountered. Business Correspondent 
(BC) based Delivery Model is still in the evolutionary stage.  
The costs of administering low value transactions and of financial intermediation are 
perceived to be on the higher side.  
Planned,  strategic  and  concerted  efforts  were  lacking.  It  requires  massive  efforts 
from all stakeholders.  
Strategy 
11.  
What has been our broad strategy for achieving planned, sustained and structured 
Financial Inclusion? It is through a planned approach to the entire gamut of issues whose 
detailed steps are enumerated below:  
(i) 
We  have  advised  banks  to  formulate  a  board  approved  Financial  Inclusion  Plan 
(FIP) for the next three years. We have not imposed a uniform model so that each 
bank is able to build its own strategy in line with its Business Model and comparative 
competitive advantage.  
FIPs  must  be  integrated  with  the  normal  Business  Plans  of  the  banks.  We  have 
freed interest rates and have also allowed banks to charge their customers for other 
transactions. We believe that banking to the poor is a viable business opportunity 
but  a  cost-benefit  analysis  needs  to  be  done  by  the  banks  to  make  Financial 
Inclusion congruent with their Business Models. Banks must view Financial Inclusion 
as a viable Business Model.  
Banks  must  view  Financial  Inclusion  as  a  huge  business  opportunity  and  perfect 
their Delivery Models. BC based delivery model has been made more flexible and 
inclusive.  
(ii) 
(iii) 
4 
 BIS Review 161/2010
 (iv) 
(v) 
 (vi) 
(vii) 
(viii) 
(ix) 
For  effective  implementation  of  the  Financial  Inclusion  strategies,  banks  must  fix 
technology aspects first including completion of Core Banking Solution (CBS) in all 
their branches and those of sponsored RRBs, and seamless integration of front-end 
devices with the back-end systems. Without this, it would not be possible to scale up 
the activities.  
There is a need to increase the bouquet of products currently being offered. During 
discussions on their FIPs, banks have been advised to provide a minimum of four 
products to the account holder, viz:  
(a)  A savings cum overdraft account  
(b)  A pure savings account, ideally a recurring or variable recurring deposit  
(c)  A remittance product to facilitate EBT and other remittances, and  
(d)  Entrepreneurial credit products like a General Purpose Credit Card (GCC) or a 
Kisan Credit Card (KCC)  
Apart  from  these  minimum  basic  products,  banks  can  offer  any  other  product  like 
insurance, mutual funds, etc. to the account holders.  
On  the  issue  of  coverage,  we  have  clarified  that  for  a  village  to  be  considered 
covered by banking services, either a bank branch has to be present or a BC has to 
be visiting/present in that village. There must be a bifurcation between villages with 
more  than  2000  population  and  those  with  less  than  2000  population.  The  plan 
needs to cover in an integrated manner both categories of villages. The name of the 
BC/branch covering a particular village needs to be indicated on the banks website.  
Special focus on Financial Inclusion at Urban and Metro centers through a functional 
approach.  
Involve all the stakeholders in the process. Governments, both Central and State, 
NGOs,  technology  vendors,  Industry  Associations,  Insurance  and  Mutual  Fund 
companies, society at large. 
RBI’s efforts have been to remove all regulatory bottlenecks for facilitating greater 
Financial Inclusion. Pricing has also been made free.  
Myths about financial inclusion  
12.  
Let me now come to a couple of myths surrounding Financial Inclusion and the first 
of which is that Banks are not willing to do greater Financial Inclusion. In reality, the truth is 
that without appropriate technology, they could not have done it even when willing. It is not 
their willingness but the lack of ability to deliver which is coming in the way. The second myth 
is  that  the  cost  of  achieving  Financial  Inclusion  is  too  high.  In  reality,  costs  can  easily  be 
borne by banks. Overall cost of Financial Inclusion will not be more than Rs 3000/4000 crore 
per year. State and Central Governments can obviously provide a helping hand. Thus, the 
basic  problem  is  not  the  cost  or  willingness,  but  the  absence  of  Business  Model  and  ICT 
based Delivery Model.  
What do the FIPs indicate? 
13.  
In the end, I only wish to say that the above steps initiated for creating a framework 
of sustainable Financial Inclusion are conceptually very sound. However, the real test is in 
successful  execution  and  implementation.  Just  to  give  you  a  sense  of  the  numbers  being 
compiled from the FIPs submitted by the banks to understand the enormity of the task in next 
two and a half years.  
 
BIS Review 161/2010 
 5
 Close to 2,00,000 BCs/CSPs (customer service points) to be deployed  
Over 4,000 rural brick and mortar branches to be opened in unbanked villages  
Over 10 crore no frills accounts to be opened  
Over 3 crore KCCs and about 70 lakh GCCs to be issued  
 
 
 
 
The banks will really have to gear up for implementation of these plans. The numbers look 
good  and  if  we  can  successfully  execute  the  plans  India  can  present  a  role  model  to  the 
world.  
Conclusion 
14.  
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that the current policy objective of inclusive 
growth  with  stability  is  not  possible  without  achieving  universal  Financial  Inclusion.  Thus, 
financial inclusion is no longer a policy choice today but a policy compulsion. And as agents 
entrusted with the task of achieving financial inclusion, the role of the mainstream financial 
sector in achieving inclusive growth becomes central. I am sanguine that with the concerted 
efforts  of  all  the  stakeholders,  our  planned,  sustained  and  structured  Financial  Inclusion 
efforts would bear fruits and we can take the country not only towards an even higher growth 
rate but a growth which is inclusive and all encompassing. I am quite sure the students and 
faculty  of  KIIT  will  play  a  pioneering  role  in  innovating  and  establishing  an  appropriate 
Business  Delivery  Models  through  the  involvement  of  all  stakeholders  to  make  Financial 
Inclusion  a  reality.  This  Conclave  will  definitely  throw  up  some  innovative  ideas  in  this 
direction. I am pleased to inaugurate this Conclave and wish it all the success!  
Thank you.  
References 
Chakrabarty, Dr K. C. (2009): “Banking: Key Driver for Inclusive Growth”, Address delivered 
at the Mint’s “Clarity Through Debate” series in August 2009 at Chennai. 
Government of India (2006): Report of the Working Group on Savings Eleventh Five Year 
Plan, Planning Commission, December. 
Government of India (2007), Eleventh Five Year Plan Document, Planning Commission.  
Government of India (2008), The Committee on Financial Inclusion (Chairman: C. Rangarajan). 
Inclusive  Growth  Analytics:  Framework  and  Application  (2009).  Elena  Ianchovichina  and 
Susanna Lundstrom, World Bank.  
Reserve Bank of India (2008), Report on Currency and Finance 2006–08.  
6 
 BIS Review 161/2010
