Choongsoo Kim: Central banks and financial stability – lessons and 
challenges from the crisis 
Opening address by Mr Choongsoo Kim, Governor of the Bank of Korea, at the 18th Central 
Banking Seminar, Seoul, 23 November 2010. 
 Opening remarks 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Let me extend a hearty welcome to all central bankers from around the world taking part in 
the Bank of Korea’s “Central Banking Seminar”. I would also like to thank Dr. Dosoung Choi 
of  the  Bank’s  Monetary  Policy  Committee  for  being  here  to  deliver  the  keynote  address 
shortly. 
This  seminar,  now  in  its  18th  year,  has  contributed  greatly  to  the  sharing  of  diverse 
experiences  and  ideas  among  central  banks  in  various  countries.  It  has  also  provided  an 
opportunity for broadening the networks linking the staff of central banks. 
Since the outbreak of the global financial crisis, countries around the world, with the G20 to 
the  fore,  have  been  preparing  frameworks  that  can  underpin  sustainable  and  balanced 
growth. 
In this context, the role of central banks, in securing financial stability needs to be heightened 
further to prevent any recurrence of the crisis. The theme of this seminar, “Central Banks and 
Financial Stability: Lessons and Challenges from the Crisis”, is accordingly one that deserves 
our particular attention. 
Central bank tasks after the global financial crisis 
The recent crisis is regarded as the severest since the Great Depression of the 1930s. The 
crisis  has  shown  us  how  massive  are  the  imbalances  accumulated  in  the  global  economy 
during  the  period  called  as  the  time  of  “Great  Moderation”,  and  how  vulnerable  it  is  to 
systemic risk. We have also come to realize that the development of financial engineering, 
once  believed  to  disperse  risks,  has  in  fact  worked  to  weaken  economic  agents’  vigilance 
toward them. 
The  G20,  along  with  international  financial  institutions  including  the  IMF,  the  FSB  and  the 
BCBS, have devoted much effort to tackling these problems. For their part central banks, in 
conducting monetary policy, need to consider these problems so as to prevent crises. 
First  of  all,  we  should  seek  to  find  the  desirable  role  of  the  central  bank  within  a 
macroprudential policy framework that ensures overall economic and financial stability. The 
crisis has taught us that, even under low and stable inflation, financial sector imbalances can 
accumulate through a rapid expansion of credit and sharp run-ups in asset prices, and that 
these can trigger crises. It is also never simple for us, as the lender of last resort, to mop up 
a crisis without paying due consideration to the massive social costs that it causes. 
It  follows  that  central  banks  should  pursue  both  price  stability  and  financial  stability  in  a 
balanced  and  harmonized  way  to  promote  macroeconomic  soundness.  The  central  bank 
must  make  full  use  of  its  expertise  in  evaluating  macro  financial  risks  as  well.  And  when 
necessary, it should work to counter these risks jointly with the government and the financial 
supervisory authorities. 
As a next step, from a global perspective, we need to work to enhance policy effectiveness 
through collective policy actions involving governments and central banks around the world. 
The world economy has become highly integrated, and the complexity and inter-connectivity 
BIS Review 158/2010 
 1
of  economic  and  financial  phenomena  have  greatly  increased.  It  has  therefore  become 
tremendously difficult for any one central bank alone to either prevent a crisis or deal with its 
aftermath. 
In this light, the recent crisis has triggered a realization among policy-makers worldwide of 
just how important policy cooperation is between the government, the central bank and the 
financial supervisory authorities. And the building-up of networks to support this cooperation 
is  of  course  equally  important.  As  I  am  sure  you  are  aware,  the  construction  of  global 
financial  safety  nets  was  adopted  as  an  agenda  for  the  Seoul  G20  Summit  as  a  Korean 
initiative. This may be seen as one prominent example of a collective policy action, having 
the characteristic of the supply of global public goods. 
Lastly, I would point out the need for identifying exactly what influence monetary policy will 
have in the transformed economic and financial environment following the crisis. This crisis 
has  had  a  devastating  impact  on  the  balance  sheets  of  households,  corporations  and 
financial institutions, not to mention the government’s fiscal position. The experience of the 
crisis and the tightening of global financial regulations will also cause vast shifts in economic 
agents’ behavior. Furthermore, the changes in global macroeconomic conditions after the US 
Federal Reserve’s recent additional quantitative easing are looming as new challenges for 
central banks’ monetary policy. 
In  order  to  cope  with  this  new  world  economic  regime,  we  will  need  to  devise  necessary 
countermeasures  to  deal  with  the  possible  changes  in  the  monetary  policy  transmission 
channels  and  the  limitation  on  policy  effectiveness.  Particularly,  given  that  changes  are 
always  and  everywhere  accompanied  by  uncertainty,  we  should  endeavor  even  more 
strongly to heighten the predictability and credibility of our monetary policy. 
Closing remarks 
Fellow central bankers, 
I hope this seminar provides an opportunity for constructive discussions on how the central 
bank  contributes  to  economic  and  financial  stability  within  the  macroprudential  policy 
framework.  It  will  also  be  good  to  share  ideas  on  how  Basel  Ⅲ  and  the  strengthened 
supervision of SIFIs can be put into place seamlessly, without detracting from financial sector 
dynamism. 
Drawing my remarks to a close, let me express my wish that this seminar will contribute to 
strengthened  cooperation  among  central  banks  by  fostering  good  fellowship  among  all 
participants.  I  hope  as  well  that,  despite  your  jam-packed  schedules,  you  will  enjoy  the 
opportunity to savor the tradition and attractiveness of our Korean culture. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 158/2010
