Már Guðmundsson: Up from the depths? 
Speech by Mr Már Guðmundsson, Governor of the Central Bank of Iceland, at the Annual 
General  Meeting  of  the  Federation  of  Icelandic  Fish  Processing  Plants,  Reykjavík, 
24 September 2010. 
 Honoured guests: 
I have called this speech, “Up from the depths?”, a title that could refer to a number of things: 
analysis of the current situation and prospects for the future, for example, or the economic 
policy  that  could  perhaps  make  the  path  swifter  and/or  safer.  As  regards  the  former,  the 
questions are these: whether we have hit bottom, what the prospects are for an upswing, and 
how far we have to go until we achieve internal and external economic equilibrium, with a 
sustainable current account balance, inflation close to target, and labour and other factors of 
production utilised to a degree consistent with low, stable inflation. As regards the latter, the 
questions centre on what should be the contribution of various components of public policy in 
order for us to move forward on an even keel.  
I will touch on some of these factors in my speech today. I will assess the current situation 
and  the  economic  outlook.  Then  I  will  discuss  how  Iceland  can  emerge  from  a  capital 
controls regime and reintegrate into global financial markets – which are prerequisites for a 
strong  upswing  in  investment  and  output.  Finally,  I  will  say  a  few  words  about  the  growth 
outlook over a longer horizon.  
Before I turn to Iceland’s situation now and in the near future, I would like to place us in a 
wider  international  and  historical  context.  Iceland  is  truly  a  small  country,  and  individual 
positive  or  negative  shocks  can  trigger  economic  short-term  developments  that  deviate 
markedly  from  those  in  the  rest  of  the  world.  But  in  the  end,  the  possibilities  are  always 
limited by global trends.  
Since the latter half of 2009, the global economy has begun to grow again after the recession 
that followed the peak of the 2008 financial crisis, but there are still a number of questions 
about what will come next. Output growth varies greatly from region to region, with a number 
of emerging economies soaring ahead while many of the developed economies hit hardest 
by  the  crisis  are  not  growing  fast  enough  to  reduce  unemployment,  and  near-term 
developments  are  a  source  of  concern.  At  work  here,  to  some  extent,  is  the  long-term 
tendency for the divide between emerging and developed countries to narrow. The trend is 
not necessarily a linear one, though; it tends to play out in fits and starts.  
But in my opinion, more is involved. Last month I had the opportunity to attend a conference 
held annually in Jackson Hole, Wyoming, by the US Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.1 
At  the  conference,  Professors  Carmen  and  Vincent  Reinhart  presented  the  results  of  a 
broad-based  study  of  output  growth  and  other  economic  variables  during  the  ten  years 
before  and  after  economic  crises  (40–70  countries  in  connection  with  major  global  crises, 
and  16  individual  country  crises).2  The  findings  are  very  clear:  economic  activity  has  a 
tendency  to  be  much  weaker  in  the  decade  after  a  financial  crisis  than  in  the  decade 
beforehand. There are probably a number of explanations for this:  
                                                 
1   See http://www.kansascityfed.org/publications/research/escp/archive.cfm. 
2   See Reinhart, Carmen M., and Vincent R. Reinhart (2010): After the Fall,  
http://www.kansascityfed.org/publicat/sympos/2010/reinhart‐paper.pdf. 
BIS Review 130/2010 
 1
   GDP  growth  is  often  abnormally  strong  and,  to  a  degree,  unsustainable  in  the 
prelude to a financial crisis.  
Financial crises are preceded by debt accumulation and followed by a long process 
of deleveraging.  
Risk  appetite  subsides  after  a  financial  crisis,  and  what  Keynes  called  “animal 
spirits” are tempered for a prolonged period of time.  
Production capacity is destroyed in a financial and economic crisis.  
Finally, economic policy becomes more complex, and there is more risk of error.  
 
 
Of course, these developments are not inevitable, and the ultimate outcome depends also on 
policy  choices.  For  example,  it  is  clear  that  a  number  of  mistakes  played  a  key  role  in 
shaping the disaster that unfolded following the crash of 1929. I think, though, that we should 
be prepared for less output growth in the next few years than we expected before the crisis 
struck.  The  same  can  be  said  for  profits  in  business  overall,  not  to  mention  the  financial 
sector,  where  return  on  equity  was  puffed  up  through  leveraging  that  represented  an 
unacceptable level of risk. It should also be borne in mind that economic policy based on an 
unrealistic level of growth in potential output has decidedly negative consequences. 
But  let  us  return  to  Iceland  in  the  here  and  now.  There  have  been  a  number  of  positive 
developments in the Icelandic economy in the past few months. We have managed to put a 
floor under the exchange rate: since the beginning of the year, the króna has appreciated by 
over 12% in trade-weighted terms, and nearly 17% against the euro, without any intervention 
by  the  Central  Bank.  External  imbalances  have  disappeared,  and  the  underlying  current 
account balance is now in surplus. Inflation has fallen from about 18% at the beginning of 
2009 to the present 4½%. It is moving rapidly down to the Central Bank inflation target of 
2½% and, excluding the effects of tax increases on price levels, will be at target early next 
year. Concerns that the Icelandic Government will fail to pay instalments on foreign loans in 
2011  and  2012  have  vanished  as  the  foreign  exchange  reserves  have  grown,  as  I  will 
expand on in a moment. In spite of the market’s grave concerns about the debt situation in 
many  smaller  European  countries,  and  in  spite  of  rising  CDS  spreads  on  those  same 
countries and the tendency towards contagion and a herd mentality in the market, Iceland’s 
CDS spread has declined and is now considerably below those in the European countries 
whose debt problems have received the most press coverage.  
But  output  growth  is  slow  in  coming,  and  in  that  regard,  Iceland  is  far  behind  most  other 
countries  whose  GDP  began  to  grow  late  last  year.  At  the  moment  it  is  quite  difficult  to 
interpret  the  signs,  which  are  quite  changeable  in  the  current  post-crisis  turbulence.  For 
example, quarterly GDP figures and various other statistics are quite volatile, changing from 
one revision to the next – a problem that is global in scope at present.  
As a result, the Central Bank was sceptical when figures from Statistics Iceland indicated that 
GDP  had  begun  to  grow  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  2009.  The  most  recent  numbers,  which 
indicate a contraction, are more accurate, although I would not be surprised if the contraction 
proved somewhat smaller in the final figures. Most indicators suggest that we have hit bottom 
and that GDP will begin to grow in the latter half of this year, but I do not expect that growth 
to be strong.  
In order for GDP growth to gain any real momentum, investment must rise from its current 
historical  low.  Gross  capital  formation  will  be  just  over  14%  of  GDP  this  year,  the  lowest 
investment  ratio  since  World  War  II.  In  my  opinion,  although  lower  real  interest  rates  will 
stimulate  investment  (other  things  being  equal),  other  factors  are  more  important,  such  as 
post-crisis  risk  aversion,  bruised  corporate  balance  sheets,  uncertainty  about  demand  and 
operating environments in the future, and drastically reduced access to foreign credit.  
I  think  this  chart,  which  shows  the  limited  connection  between  real  policy  rates  and 
investment  ratios  in  OECD  countries  last  year,  supports  this  view.  There  is  no  significant 
2 
 BIS Review 130/2010
relationship between the two, and if we exclude three outliers (Israel, Hungary, and Ireland), 
the inverse emerges. The UK and Iceland had similar investment ratios, even though the real 
policy  rate  was  negative  there  and  positive  here.  Of  course,  any  simple  cross-sectional 
correlation of this type should be interpreted with extreme caution, as the economic structure 
of  countries  varies  and  other  important  influencing  factors  are  not  taken  into  account. 
Furthermore, correlation is not the same as causation. Thus, in many countries, real policy 
rates  are  historically  low  because  investment  is  weak.  On  the  other  hand,  the  relationship 
should  be  stronger  than  is  shown  here  if  real  interest  rates  currently  exert  the  strongest 
influence on investment ratios.  
 It  is  important  for  future  output  growth  that  Iceland  re-establish  a  normal  business 
relationship with the rest of the world, including lifting the capital controls and gaining access 
to foreign credit markets on acceptable terms. We have said that the prerequisites for capital 
account liberalisation are macroeconomic stability, sufficient foreign exchange reserves, and 
a  financial  system  that  can  stand  on  its  feet  without  capital  controls.  The  first  of  these 
conditions has been met, and the next will be met upon successful conclusion of the third 
IMF review. The prospect of meeting the third condition in the next few months has improved 
in view of strong interim earnings reports from two of Iceland’s large commercial banks and 
the recent Supreme Court judgment concerning the interest rate to be used for loans with 
nonbinding  (illegal)  exchange  rate  linkage  clauses.  But  it  would  be  a  misunderstanding  to 
assume that the timeframe can be measured in terms of weeks rather than months. We must 
receive  the  next  tranche  of  the  IMF  loan  after  the  third  review,  and  we  probably  cannot 
pronounce the banks sound with respect to capital account liberalisation until late November. 
Furthermore, it is appropriate to bear in mind, as the recent unrest in the bond market shows, 
that there are short-term risks related to the removal of the controls; thus it is important that 
each step be well prepared. But if nothing unexpected arises, the time is coming closer, and 
preparation is underway within the Central Bank.  
BIS Review 130/2010 
 3
Of course, we won’t make much progress in lifting the controls or gaining access to foreign 
credit markets if the Icelandic Government is considered unlikely to be able to fulfil its foreign 
loan obligations. Fortunately, though, once the next IMF review is complete, there will be no 
doubt about it. The foreign exchange reserves now total 1.7 billion euros, apart from short-
term  obligations.  In  the  next  few  months,  they  will  expand  by  453  million  euros  due  to 
transactions related to Avens, 255 million euros from the sale of FIH bank in Denmark, and 
620  million  euros  following  the  third  IMF  review.  The  reserves  will  then  exceed  3  billion 
euros.  In  comparison,  the  next  two  years’  interest  and  instalments  on  two  Treasury  bond 
series  total  1.5  billion  euros,  400  million  of  which  have  already  been  bought  back  at  a 
discount.  
The following two charts show clearly how much foreign liquidity will improve. They show that 
the foreign exchange reserves will grow as large as 4 billion euros if Iceland draws the full 
amount of the loan facilities available through the IMF programme, and that they will cover 
the Treasury’s instalments and interest payments through 2015. Of course, access to foreign 
credit markets will open up long before that time, and a part of the debt will be refinanced in 
the market.  
 4 
 BIS Review 130/2010
 I know that all of you who are assembled here today are very interested in how the exchange 
rate will develop once the Icelandic economy rights itself, hopefully within a few quarters. The 
chart below shows the real exchange rate of the króna, which is currently about 20% below 
its historical average but dropped as far as 33% below that average during the crisis. In my 
opinion, which is based on experience from other financial crises, it will take a very long time 
for it to return to that historical average. In this context, it is worth mentioning that after the 
Asian crisis, real exchange rates rose from their lowest point, but for many years afterward 
they were between 15% and 30% below their levels seven years pre-crisis, depending on the 
country.  The  equilibrium  real  exchange  rate  is  now  lower  than  before,  and  in  the  medium 
term it will remain lower than it will eventually be. The Central Bank is of the opinion that the 
real  exchange  rate  is  below  equilibrium,  but  it  is  uncertain  just  how  much.  How  the 
equilibrium real exchange rate will rise in coming years is uncertain as well.  
BIS Review 130/2010 
 5
 While  this  complicates  monetary  policy,  dealing  with  uncertainties  is  nothing  new  for 
monetary policy-makers. Furthermore, Iceland needs to substitute its borrowed reserves for 
non-borrowed reserves in the next few years. To that end, we have begun modest foreign 
exchange purchases in the market. These total 14 million euros, including special purchases 
in late August, before the regular purchasing programme began. So far, these transactions 
have not weakened the króna, and it could be argued that the long-term effects could just as 
well be in the other direction.  
In closing, I wish to say this: If we succeed in restoring confidence in the Icelandic economy, 
which is the cornerstone of the IMF programme – and this includes lifting the capital controls 
and regaining access to foreign credit markets – we will be able to rise up from the depths. 
How quickly we can travel once we’ve reached the surface is another matter. It could be that 
we will have to content ourselves with less than before, but that is not a given. If we play our 
cards right, our small country – with its location and natural resources – can enjoy a wealth of 
possibilities.  What  we  may  never  do  again,  however,  is  force  our  economy  to  grow  faster 
than it is able to do – which has dire consequences for stability.  
6 
 BIS Review 130/2010
