 Bandid Nijathaworn: Challenges for central banks in the new globalisation 
Remarks by Mr Bandid Nijathaworn, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the Bank of 
Thailand International Symposium 2010 “Challenges to Central Banks in the Era of the New 
Globalisation”, Bangkok, 15 October 2010. 
 I think it is clear from the discussion we had that the post-crisis global economy will not be 
the same as the one we remember three or four years ago. The global financial crisis was 
serious, causing much dislocation to the global economy, the banking sector and financial 
markets, and the process of regaining full normality will take time. Therefore, at least for the 
next  few  years,  the  post-crisis  global  environment  will  be  characterized  by  a  world  of  two 
halves:  the  advanced  economies  and  emerging  markets,  each  exhibiting  different  growth 
prospects,  different  economic  challenges,  and  different  policy  stance.  And  it  is  this 
divergence  in  policies  and  performance  that  will  drive  uncertainty  and  volatility  in  global 
financial markets, accompanied by shifts in risk appetite, global asset allocation, and relative 
prices. This, in essence, is the context in which new challenges for central banks are being 
shaped.  
What  implications  will  this  post-crisis  environment  have  on  central  banks’  roles  and 
responsibilities  in  maintaining  economic  stability?  To  me,  three  implications  are  clear.  The 
first is the need for central banks to expand their mandates to formally recognize both price 
and financial stability as their core policy objectives. An important lesson learned from the 
current  crisis  is  that  price  stability  alone  is  not  sufficient  to  ensure  financial  stability. 
Therefore, financial instability or crisis can occur even in the environment of stable prices and 
well-anchored  inflation  expectations.  This  implies  that  to  ensure  overall  economic  stability, 
central  banks  will  need  to  go  beyond  the  primary  objective  of  price  stability  and  to 
systematically embrace financial stability as another policy objective. The relevance of this 
dual  mandate  has  become  very  clear  in  the  last  few  years,  in  light  of  the  global  financial 
crisis, implying greater roles and responsibility for central banks.  
The  second  implication  from  the  global  crisis  is  that,  under  the  new  globalisation 
underscored by more integrated financial markets, the major source of risk and instability that 
central banks will have to deal with to ensure stability will be external. Typically, this includes 
the  impulse  on  domestic  inflation  from  global  prices,  especially  fluctuations  in  commodity 
prices. Another is the risk to financial stability steming from unintended consequences linked 
to the spillover effects of policies implemented by other economies.  
But for most emerging markets at this time, the most serious external risk is the challenges 
posed by large and persistent capital inflows. The first challenge involves a macroeconomic 
dilemma that centres around the tension between appreciation pressures, inflation dynamics, 
and  growth  prospects.  The  second  stems  from  financial  stability  concerns  associated  with 
potential  build-ups  of  macroeconomic  imbalances,  risk  of  asset  price  bubbles,  and  the 
possibility of an abrupt reversal of inflows. In the past, as we all know, reversals of capital 
have trigged serious debt defaults, banking distress, and currency crises.  
So, with the nature of risk becoming more external, the abilities of central banks to respond 
effectively to the new challenge based on domestic measures will be limited. This calls for a 
reconsideration of policy coordination, both in the context of within-country coordination, and 
cross-country coordination.  
The third implication from the global crisis is the heightened expectation and trust that the 
public now has on central banks, as guardian of stability, to do its utmost to avoid financial 
crisis,  and  to  do  it  professionally  and  independently.  In  the  west,  the  current  crisis  has 
diminished public trust on the roles of government and financial institutions in safeguarding 
and  upholding  public  interest.  To  this  end,  central  bank  independence  is  seen  as  an 
BIS Review 138/2010 
 1
 in  Thailand,  combining 
from  our  experience  here 
important pre-condition for ensuring safety, continuity, and stability. This is a challenge that 
central banks will need to recognize in performing their duties.  
So,  given  this  backdrop,  challenges  facing  central  banks  going  forward  will  be  more 
demanding. And to meet these challenges, central banks will need to be thinking clearly on 
at least two issues.  
The first is the right policy framework to respond to the challenge. In the case of monetary 
policy, 
inflation-targeting  with 
macroprudential measures under a flexible exchange rate regime has proven to be a good 
workable  policy  framework  for  meeting  the  challenge  posed  by  the  dual  mandate  of 
maintaining  price  and  financial  stability.  Nonetheless,  in  an  environment  of  large  and 
persistent  capital  flows,  having  the  right  policy  framework  alone  may  not  be  adequate. 
Monetary policy will need to be supported by and coordinated with other policies to ensure 
the best outcome.  
For example, well-aligned fiscal and monetary policy is important at a time of strong capital 
inflows  to  help  moderate  the  adverse  impact  of  capital  flows  on  domestic  demand.  This 
means  fiscal  policy  will  need  to  be  less  procyclical  as  domestic  interest  rates  rise.  Next, 
deeper  and  more  diverse  local  financial  markets  will  help  lessen  the  chance  that  volatile 
capital inflows will create substantial risk to the economy. This calls for the need to continue 
with policies to strengthen and reform the financial system. And to the extent that sustained 
inflows  generate  the  need  for  real  resources  to  be  reallocated  across  the  economy  in 
response to changes in relative prices, a high degree of flexibility in the local economy will be 
needed  to  support  these  adjustments,  which  will  lessen  the  risks  of  imbalance  and  price 
pressures.  
The second issue to think more clearly about is the disconnect between the global nature of 
the problems facing central banks and the domestic orientation of the policy response. As I 
noted  earlier,  effectiveness  of  the  domestic  policy  response  tends  to  weaken  when  the 
challenge is of a global nature. A case in point is the current cycle of capital flows which, in 
essence,  is  a  global  phenomenon  driven  by  exceptionally  low  interest  rates  in  the  major 
economies.  Hence,  policy  response  calibrated  with  domestic  orientation  may  be  of  limited 
use if the problems at the source remain. This means that the thinking on policy needs to 
broaden to explore possible benefits of a closer coordination of policies between countries, 
especially  when  central banks  face similar  challenges  of  a global  nature  like  capital  flows. 
Such  coordination  will  elevate  central  banks’  policy-making  to  a  new  level,  commensurate 
with the new challenge posed by the post-crisis globalisation. 
2 
 BIS Review 138/2010
