 Rudolf Böhmler: Central banker education and financial stability 
Welcome  address  by  Dr  hc  Rudolf  Böhmler,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  
Deutsche Bundesbank, at the Education Congress as part of the 13th Euro Finance Week,  
Frankfurt am Main, 17 November 2010. 
 Mr Gierenstein, 
Professor Hackethal (GBS), 
Professor Tilmes (EBS), 
Professor Steffens (FSFM),  
Bundesbank colleagues, 
Ladies and gentlemen,  
I  am  delighted  to  be  able  to  welcome  so  many  of  you  here  today.  On  the  Bundesbank’s 
Executive  Board,  one  of  my  areas  of  responsibility  is  Human  Resources  –  including  the 
training.  Our  Training  Centre  covers  further  education,  the  Bundesbank’s  university  of 
applied  sciences  in  Hachenburg  and  the  Centre  for  Technical  Central  Bank  Cooperation. 
Having  previously  held  the  post  of  Director  General  of  the  Baden-Württemberg  Ministry  of 
Science, Research and Art, today’s topic “education” is at last very well-known to me. 
Inviting  a  member  of  the  Bundesbank’s  Executive  Board  to  hold  a  speech  usually  is  risky 
business.  The  Stern  magazine  once  wrote:  “Bundesbank  Executive  Board  members  are 
boring.  They  talk  of  interest  rates  and  monetary  aggregates  from  each  and  every  angle, 
lulling their audience into a deep sleep.” But today I will be speaking about education and 
thereby avoid giving you any chance for dozing. 
Today’s conference on “Central Banker Education and Financial Stability” is making its debut 
appearance  in  the  Euro  Finance  Week.  It  is  the  first  time  that  the  topic  of  education  has 
featured so prominently in the financial market stability arena. I am sure you all agree that 
both  the  financial  market  crisis  and  the  special  role  of  central  banks  across  the  globe  in 
resolving  the  crisis  and  containing  its  effects  are  justification  enough  for  this  decision. 
However, I will briefly come back to this point later on. 
Education has long been an integral part of how financial centres tick and of their competitive 
environment. The focus is traditionally often on research and higher education. In the past, 
further  education,  that  is  the  transfer  of  sound  knowledge  to  practitioners,  has  been 
somewhat neglected; but now – thanks not least to business school initiatives – it is starting 
to catch up in ever greater leaps and bounds. 
Today’s  programme  is  dedicated  to  central  banker  education.  This  morning’s  agenda 
features presentations by speakers from the Goethe Business School’s House of Finance on 
the topic of “Leadership Challenges for Central Bankers – An Academic Perspective”. This 
afternoon  the  focus  shifts  to  central  bank  operations  from  a  technical  perspective  – 
presented  by  representatives  from  the  European  Business  School  in  Oestrich-Winkel.  The 
third session begins at two o’clock when the Frankfurt School of Finance and Management 
will analyse in more detail “current and international challenges” faced by central banks.  
Frankfurt is the ideal place to promote central banker education – and not just because of its 
geographic location in the heart of Europe. As the home of two Central Bank’s, the Deutsche 
Bundesbank  and  the  European  Central  Bank,  Frankfurt  lives  and  breathes  the  single 
currency. But what does this mean for education? 
Central  banks  produce  knowledge  in  such  wide-ranging  areas  of  central  banking  as 
monetary policy, cash management and payments. However, practical knowledge is mainly 
only  available  and  applicable  within  central  banks,  which  is  only  to  be  expected  because 
central  bank  operations  are  very  different  from  those  of  a  “normal”  bank.  For  the 
BIS Review 153/2010 
 1
 Bundesbank, as the “bank of banks”, this also has an impact on recruitment channels. The 
Bundesbank thus provides training programmes for all career paths as it is generally not so 
easy to find a sufficient level of central bank knowledge on the market. For us, this means 
that  knowledge  has  to  be  transferred  internally.  For  instance,  we  bring  in  many  of  our 
employees  from  a  wide  variety  of  business  areas  to  teach  at  the  Bundesbank’s  own 
university  of  applied  sciences  in  Hachenburg,  where  we  train  the  next  generation  of  our 
central bankers. 
It is of particular importance to us to communicate practical experience; as the German writer 
Wolfgang Eschker once said “practically speaking, we can save ourselves a lot of theory”. It 
is precisely just the financial crisis that has shown us that it can be necessary, even in such a 
sensitive environment as central banking, to roll up our sleeves and face new challenges with 
a hands-on, goal-oriented approach.  
We  believe  that  on-the-job  further  training  is  essential  and,  once  again,  we  call  almost 
exclusively on the services of our own internal specialists. After all, we have to ensure that 
our members of staff are kept up-to-date with the latest knowledge and that they have the 
opportunity to develop their soft skills. There are many factors behind the constant changes 
and  increasing  complexity  and  thus  growing  requirements:  political  decisions,  such  as 
establishing monetary union, the advance of globalisation and new technical innovations all 
require  a  continual  examination  of  brand  new  processes  and  a  high  degree  of  mental 
flexibility. Today’s central bankers have their finger on the pulse – “action” is guaranteed. 
Central  banker  education  has  therefore  long  played  an  important  role  in  Europe.  In  the 
European System of Central Banks, the ESCB, a special training and development task force 
was  set  up  to  organise  seminars  throughout  Europe.  Its  main  focus  is  on  introductory 
seminars  to  the  ESCB  as  well  as  leadership  and  soft  skill  training.  The  work  is  shared 
between the European Central Bank and the national central banks but it is quite common for 
courses initially conceived by and for a specific central bank to be later “opened up” to other 
central banks. However, the typical scenario is a training course that is designed as a joint 
project  by  the  national  central  banks  together  and  then  provided  to  all.  The  creation  of  a 
European central banking system itself gave rise to completely new aspects, also for training: 
since then the aim has been to network and multiply knowledge throughout Europe. The idea 
is to develop a common understanding of (monetary) policy processes to a joint culture. 
But  that’s  not  all:  for  more  than  20  years  now,  in  its  technical  central  bank  cooperation 
programme,  the  Bundesbank  has  also  been  providing  a  wide  range  of  tailor-made 
international seminars for central banks in transition, emerging and developing countries on 
request. The main focus of these seminars is on exchanging knowledge and experience with 
partner central banks that request such services. The interest in these services is still high. 
To celebrate twenty years of central bank cooperation, last month we held a conference in 
our  Convention  Centre  in  Eltville  am  Rhein  attended  by  central  bankers  from  over 
40 countries. To quote Mark Twain, “a little education makes the whole world related”. 
The ESCB regularly uses our Convention Centre in Eltville to host conferences and events 
on the topic of education. The centre’s location in the Rheingau valley, with the river Rhine, 
vineyards, ruins and castles is ideal, as this is the image of Germany that we would like to 
project. 
On  balance,  Bundesbank  spends  a  lot  of  money  for  education  and  their  training 
establishments. So we act according to the statement of John F. Kennedy who once said: 
“There is only one thing that costs more than education in the long run – the lack of it”. 
But which approach is the Deutsche Bundesbank currently taking with its cooperation with 
the business schools that feature on today’s agenda? 
The  answer  is  simple:  we  want  to  promote  central  banker  education.  By  using  external 
experts and combining these with internal expertise, we can develop tailor-made seminars 
for  an  international  target  group.  If  we  can  successfully  pair  research  and  practical 
2 
 BIS Review 153/2010
 experience,  we  will  have  created  “authentic  education”.  This  is  where  we  want  to  position 
ourselves.  As  the  former  Federal  President,  Richard  von  Weizsäcker,  once  said  “as  many 
people as possible should know as much as possible”. That is our aim. 
As  I  said  at  the  start,  a  solid  grounding  in  the  central  banks’  role  and  functions  is  key  to 
understanding  how  markets  operate  and  interact.  As  a  result  of  the  crisis,  in  particular, 
central banks throughout the world have now become more important but have also had to 
take on added responsibility. 
After  all,  financial  crises  pose  a  particular  challenge  for  central  banks.  Disruptions  in  the 
financial system can not only delay the transmission of monetary policy impulses to the real 
economy,  but,  in  the  worst  case,  even  nullify  them  altogether.  This  close  link  between 
monetary policy and the financial markets also explains why central banks require a great 
deal of financial market expertise.  
The extensive provision of liquidity and decisive interest rate cuts by central banks made a 
crucial  contribution  towards  containing  the  crisis.  Or  to  put  it  in  medical  terms:  monetary 
policy  played  the  role  of  the  “emergency  doctor  on  the  intensive  care  unit”  in  helping  the 
almost crippled financial system back to recovery. 
Now that the patient is in a better condition, our next step is to slowly but surely get him back 
on his feet again. The patient now needs to be slowly weaned off the strong medication to 
prevent him from becoming addicted; the patient is now on the road to recovery.  
And at the end of the financial crisis, it is time to define the medium to long-term “lessons to 
be  learned  from  the  crisis”.  To  bring  our  analogy  to  a  close:  by  the  end  of  the  recovery 
process, if not beforehand, it will be time to sit down and think about how we can prevent a 
future relapse. 
The  first  issue  that  needed  to  be  tackled  in  order  to  contain  the  crisis  was  to  restore  the 
confidence of the financial market players. Although policymakers did not waste any time in 
implementing measures to boost confidence, these were not all available straightaway. 
In  the  Eurosystem,  these  emergency  measures  consisted  primarily  of  three  components. 
First, banks were provided with unlimited amounts of central bank liquidity at the prevailing 
key interest rate, provided that they had sufficient collateral. Second, in order to avoid any 
bottlenecks in lending, the range of eligible securities was expanded for a limited period of 
time.  Third,  more  longer-term  refinancing  operations  were  carried  out  so  that  banks  can 
ensure that their liquidity needs will be met over maturities of up to one year. 
Monetary policy did not just play an important role in stabilising the financial markets; it also 
contributed towards stabilising the economy. As you know, the financial crisis in the autumn 
of 2008 escalated into a global economic crisis shortly thereafter. The Governing Council of 
the  ECB  reacted  by  decreasing  the  main  policy  rate  from  4.25%  to  an  all-time  low  of  1% 
within the space of just a few months. However, these interest rate cuts were only possible 
thanks to a sharp decline in inflation risks owing to the economic downturn. 
There  are  only  few  things  in  life  which  we  Germans  fear  more  than  inflation.  We  can, 
however,  place  our  trust  in  the  ECB  Governing  Council’s  commitment  to  stability.  No 
concessions will be made when it comes to upholding its definition of price stability, namely 
to keep inflation in the euro area below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. This is a 
policy  that  Bundesbank  President  Axel  Weber  holds  close  to  his  heart  and  one  which  he 
firmly believes is in the finest tradition of the Bundesbank. 
There have been a number of experts in recent times, particularly from the “other side of the 
pond”, who thought they were giving central banks good advice by suggesting that they allow 
higher  inflation  targets,  at  least  for  the  time  being.  IMF  Chief  Economist  Olivier  Blanchard 
spoke of 4% to 5%, and Kenneth Rogoff went as far as to say 6%. Let me put this bluntly: 
inflating  debt  away  might  seem  like  the  ideal  solution  for  some,  but  that  is  someplace 
Germany and the rest of Europe do not want to go. We will not tolerate a monetisation of 
BIS Review 153/2010 
 3
 government  debt.  Even  today,  the  wise  words  of  Otmar  Emminger,  a  former  Bundesbank 
President, still hold true: “If you flirt with inflation, you’ll end up marrying her”. 
All in all, the Eurosystem central banks – and for this we may also give ourselves a pat on 
the back – successfully managed to contain the crisis. 
The fact that the Eurosystem is obliged to pursue the objective of price stability is precisely 
the reason why it was time to start planning a suitable exit strategy once the economy and 
the financial markets had gotten back on their feet again in the autumn of last year. With that 
I mean an exit from both the extremely expansionary orientation of monetary policy and the 
various non-standard measures, as these can entail risks for price stability if we wait too long 
to scale them back. As you can see, we are walking on very thin ice. 
This is why monetary policy has to perform a kind of balancing act: on the one hand, it has to 
swiftly counter any risks to price stability, but at the same time it must ensure that no new 
turbulence is triggered on the financial markets when scaling back its non-standard monetary 
policy measures. The Bundesbank’s overarching mandate cannot be seen in isolation from 
the stability of the financial system, as financial stability is an important prerequisite for price 
stability. Distortions on the financial markets can have an impact on monetary policy, either 
directly or indirectly, by substantially dampening economic momentum and growth. Financial 
market crises make it more difficult for monetary policymakers to maintain price stability. 
The main reason why the stability of the financial system is so important is because financial 
crises cause substantial damage to the real economy, too. This was clearly illustrated by the 
recent financial crisis. The panic in the financial markets following the insolvency of Lehman 
Brothers  spilled  over  to  the  real  economy  at  an  incredible  speed.  The  global  economy 
plunged into the most serious crisis since the Second World War. There were even fears of a 
prolonged depression just like 80 years ago. Fortunately, today we do not need the comfort 
of  Mark  Twain  who  betimes  realised,  that  only  “Education  remains  when  the  last  dollar  is 
gone”. 
It is therefore essential that the financial markets are better and more stringently regulated in 
future  –  although  “regulation”  should  not  be  confused  with  “strangulation”  –  and  that  the 
financial  system  becomes  more  resilient  on  the  whole.  The  central  banks  will  play  an 
important role in safeguarding the stability of the financial system; the primary objective of 
monetary policy, however, will still be to maintain price stability. This is what the Bundesbank 
and the European Central Bank stand for. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  hope  I  was  able  to  spark  your  interest  in  central  banking  topics. 
Topics which are of interest to members of staff of one central bank may also be of interest 
to  members  of  staff  of  other  central  banks.  This  is  why  selected  seminars  should  be 
packaged  and  also  offered  to  other  central  banks  as  a  collective  further  education 
programme.  The  opening  up  of  seminars  to  foreign  participants  promotes  intercultural 
exchange  and  also  helps  to  develop  a  common  understanding,  especially  with  regard  to 
stability-oriented policies. 
And, of course, I also have a positive example of this to share with you: just over a year ago, 
the  Bundesbank  –  in  cooperation  with  the  Oesterreichische  Nationalbank,  BaFin  and  the 
Goethe Business School – launched the European Supervisor Education Initiative (ESE), a 
seminar  programme  for  financial  supervisors  from  all  over  Europe,  which  was  a  great 
success. 
The Bundesbank, together with the Business Schools, would like to cordially invite you to join 
us for the actual launch of our further education and training initiative, which will kick off with 
our  “Summer  School”  in  July  2011  to  be  held  at  the  Bundesbank’s  Convention  Centre  in 
Eltville. The focus will be on topical central banking issues. 
Today’s conference provides you with a platform for exchanging ideas about specific topics 
and educational issues. This education congress is, of course, also a perfect opportunity for 
4 
 BIS Review 153/2010
 the  Business  Schools  represented  here  today  to  give  us  some  interesting  presentations 
about themselves. 
I  hope  that  this  event  will  be  a  great  success  and  that  you  enjoy  some  stimulating 
discussions. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS Review 153/2010 
 5
