Brian P Sack: Managing the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet 
Remarks by Mr Brian P Sack, Executive Vice President of the Markets Group of the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, at the 2010 Chartered Financial Analyst (CFA) Institute Fixed 
Income Management Conference, Newport Beach, California, 4 October 2010. 
 It  is  a  pleasure  to  be  here  today  to  discuss  the  management  of  the  Federal  Reserve’s 
balance sheet. The Federal Reserve currently holds more than $2 trillion of securities in its 
portfolio, making it a key participant in U.S. fixed-income markets. Moreover, the portfolio is 
managed  in  a  manner  that  differs  from  any  other  market  participant,  as  the  Federal  Open 
Market Committee (FOMC) has adjusted the size and composition of the portfolio with the 
intention  of  achieving  its  monetary  policy  objectives  of  full  employment  and  price  stability. 
Thus, it is important for market participants to understand the balance sheet decisions of the 
FOMC and the implementation of those decisions to fully assess the implications for fixed-
income markets.  
The evolution of the balance sheet going forward will depend on how the economic outlook 
unfolds.  The  current  forecasts  of  FOMC  members  show  the  economy  moving  in  the  right 
direction, with a sustained recovery in GDP, a gradual reduction in the unemployment rate 
over  time,  and  an  increase  in  inflation  towards  the  level  that  FOMC  members  see  as 
desirable  over  the  intermediate  term.  However,  the  anticipated  recovery  is  relatively  tepid 
and thus delivers only slow progress toward meeting the Federal Reserve’s dual mandate. 
Indeed, according to their most recently published forecasts, most FOMC members expect 
the unemployment rate to remain above 8.25 percent through 2011 and the inflation rate to 
remain below its mandate-consistent level through 2012. In addition, the economy remains 
vulnerable to downside surprises that could take both output and inflation further away from 
the FOMC’s objectives. 
The sluggish outlook for the economy and the risks that surround that outlook have raised 
the possibility of further monetary policy accommodation. The most recent FOMC statement 
indicated that the Committee “is prepared to provide additional accommodation if needed to 
support the economic recovery and to return inflation, over time, to levels consistent with its 
mandate.” 
The  FOMC  has  several  policy  tools  that  it  could  use  to  achieve  more  accommodative 
financial  conditions,  as  Chairman  Bernanke  discussed  in  his  speech  at  the  Jackson  Hole 
symposium in August. My remarks today will focus on one of those options – changing the 
size of the Federal Reserve’s holdings of securities. In particular, I will review the FOMC’s 
recent  decision  to  keep the  size  of  those  security  holdings at  their  current  level,  and  I  will 
discuss  some  of  the  issues  to  be  considered  in  any  decision  on  whether  to  expand  them 
further. As always, the views I express are my own and do not represent those of the FOMC 
or the Federal Reserve System. 
Decision to reinvest maturing asset holdings 
The  initial  decisions  by  the  FOMC  to  expand  the  Federal  Reserve’s  holdings  of  securities 
came at the height of the financial crisis. Before that time, the Federal Reserve maintained a 
relatively simple portfolio of between $700 billion and $800 billion of Treasury securities – an 
amount largely determined by the volume of dollar currency that was in circulation. In late 
November  2008,  in  the  face  of  tightening  financial  conditions  and  a  deep  downturn  in 
economic activity, the Federal Reserve announced that it would purchase up to $600 billion 
of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS). In March 2009, it expanded 
the program to include cumulative purchases of up to $1.75 trillion of agency debt, agency 
BIS Review 128/2010 
 1
MBS, and longer-term Treasury securities. The use of the balance sheet in this manner was 
spurred in part by the inability to ease further using the traditional policy instrument, as the 
federal funds rate effectively reached the zero lower bound in late 2008. 
The  asset  purchases  were  carried  out  from  December  2008  through  March  2010  by  the 
Trading Desk (the Desk) at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, resulting in a significant 
expansion  of  the  Federal  Reserve’s  portfolio.  As  the  settlement  of  those  purchases 
progressed,  the  amount  of  domestic  securities  held  in  the  System  Open  Market  Account 
(SOMA) reached a peak of $2.1 trillion in June 2010. From that point, the portfolio began to 
shrink because the agency debt and agency MBS held in the SOMA were being allowed to 
run off without reinvestment as they matured or were prepaid. 
Against that backdrop, an important policy decision regarding the Federal Reserve’s portfolio 
was  made  at  the  August  FOMC  meeting,  when  the  Committee  decided  to  halt  this  run-off 
and instead hold the size of the SOMA portfolio steady. To achieve this, the FOMC directed 
the  Desk  to  purchase  longer-term  Treasury  securities  as  needed  to  offset  any  principal 
payments realized on our holdings of agency debt and agency MBS.1 
That was not just a symbolic policy decision, but instead involved a meaningful shift in the 
path  of  the balance sheet.  At  the  time  of  the meeting,  the  Desk  was  projecting  that  about 
$340 billion of the Federal Reserve’s MBS holdings would be paid down from that time to the 
end of 2011. In addition, another $55 billion of agency debt holdings would mature over that 
period. Thus, the total portfolio was expected to shrink by nearly $400 billion by the end of 
2011.  The  reinvestment  decision  therefore  amounted  to  a  sizable  program  to  purchase 
longer-term Treasury securities. 
The effect of asset purchases on the economy remains a point of ongoing debate, with some 
uncertainty about the channels through which such purchases operate and the magnitude of 
those effects. My own perspective is aligned with the view expressed by Chairman Bernanke 
in Jackson Hole – that the effects arise primarily through a portfolio balance channel.2 Under 
that  view,  our  asset  holdings  keep  longer-term  interest  rates  lower  than  otherwise  by 
reducing the aggregate amount of risk that the private markets have to bear. In particular, by 
purchasing  longer-term  securities,  the  Federal  Reserve  removes  duration  risk  from  the 
market,  which  should  help  to  reduce  the  term  premium  that  investors  demand  for  holding 
longer-term securities. That effect should in turn boost other asset prices, as those investors 
displaced by the Fed’s purchases would likely seek to hold alternative types of securities. 
Some  research  studies  have  estimated  that  the  effects  of  the  earlier  expansion  of  our 
securities  holdings  by  just  over  $1.5  trillion  lowered  longer-term  Treasury  yields  by  about 
50 basis  points  through  this  portfolio  balance  channel.3  These  effects  on  Treasury  yields 
appear  to  have  been  transmitted  into  lower  rates  on  private  credit  instruments  and  higher 
asset prices more broadly. 
                                                 
1   Reflecting the long-standing practice of the Desk, principal payments on our holdings of Treasury securities 
were already being fully reinvested at Treasury auctions. 
2   The Fed’s asset purchases initially had an additional and important effect on mortgage rates by improving the 
functioning  of  the  MBS  market.  As  I  have  noted  in  earlier  speeches,  the  use  of  the  central  bank’s  balance 
sheet can  be  particularly  effective  when focused on markets in  which  liquidity and market functioning have 
become  impaired.  The  focus  here  is  whether,  in  addition  to  those  effects,  the  size  and  composition  of  the 
Fed’s  balance  sheet  have  a  lasting  impact  on  financial  conditions  in  well-functioning  and  relatively  liquid 
markets. 
3   See,  for  example,  Joseph  Gagnon,  Matthew  Raskin,  Julie  Remache,  and  Brian  Sack,  “Large-Scale  Asset 
Purchases  by  the  Federal  Reserve:  Did  They  Work?”  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  Staff  Report 
no. 441,  March  2010.  Several  private-sector  firms  have  estimated  yield  effects  of  similar  magnitude.  In 
addition, a working paper by James Hamilton and Jing Wu, “The Effectiveness of Alternative Monetary Policy 
Tools  in  a  Zero  Lower  Bound  Environment,”  finds  that  changes  in  the  Federal  Reserve’s  asset  holdings 
produce considerable yield effects. 
2 
 BIS Review 128/2010
Under this view, the FOMC’s influence on financial conditions is associated with the size and 
composition  of  its  securities  portfolio.  This  perspective  provides  a  clear  rationale  for  the 
reinvestment  decision  made  at  the  August  FOMC  meeting.  The  decline  in  the  size  of  the 
Federal  Reserve’s  portfolio  that  would  have  occurred  in  the  absence  of  the  reinvestment 
program would have amounted to a passive tightening in the stance of monetary policy, as 
the  portfolio  balance  effect  would  have  gradually  reversed.  Moreover,  the  extent  of  this 
tightening  was  increasing  in  response  to  the  weakening  of  the  economy,  as  lower  longer-
term yields were leading to more rapid repayment of MBS. This perverse effect was seen by 
the FOMC as working against its efforts to reach its dual mandate. 
In effect, the policy approach that was implemented before the August meeting acted to mute 
the amplitude of movements in longer-term interest rates. As rates declined in response to a 
weakening of the economy, the Federal Reserve’s MBS holdings would decline more rapidly, 
effectively adding to the supply of duration held by the market.4 This increase in the duration 
held by the market would tend to damp the decline in yields. With the change in strategy at 
its August meeting, the FOMC no longer lets its aggregate duration holdings flow back into 
the market. This approach allows long-term interest rates to adjust fully to a weakening of the 
economy, which should act to better stabilize the economy. 
Implementing the reinvestment policy 
So  far,  I  have  focused  on  the  FOMC’s  August  policy  decision;  however,  you  may  also  be 
interested in the details of how the Desk has actually implemented the reinvestment policy. 
The instructions from the FOMC to the Desk, from both the August FOMC statement and the 
directive  that  was  adopted  at  that  meeting,  were  to  keep  the  total  face  value  of  domestic 
securities held in the SOMA portfolio near their level at that time. The published size of the 
securities portfolio just ahead of the August meeting was $2.054 trillion, so the Desk adopted 
this  level  as  the  target  for  the  portfolio.  This  is  a  notable  development  by  itself,  as  the 
directive  from  the  FOMC  now  involved  two  targeted  variables  –  the  target  range  for  the 
federal funds rate, and the target size for its asset holdings. 
To implement this directive, the Desk has been purchasing Treasury securities on a monthly 
schedule.  In  particular,  we  announce  a  plan  around  the  middle  of  each  month  for  the 
purchase operations to take place through the middle of the following month, once we know 
the principal repayments that will be received over that period.5 We are running at a pace of 
$27  billion  in  purchases  this  month,  and  we  expect  that  pace  to  bump  up  to  around 
$30 billion for the next several months. Looking further ahead, we currently project that the 
cumulative amount of principal payments on agency debt and agency MBS through 2011 will 
be somewhat higher than the estimates provided at the August FOMC meeting. 
I should note that the directive to the Desk is expressed in terms of the overall size of the 
portfolio. However, under the portfolio balance model described above, the effect on markets 
will  be  tied  to  the  amount  of  duration  risk  that  such  purchases  encompass.  Thus,  the 
composition of purchases across maturities will be quite important in governing the effects on 
financial conditions. 
The  strategy  that  the  Desk  has  employed  for  the  reinvestment  program  is  to  follow  the 
pattern of purchases that was implemented in the earlier Treasury purchase program. The 
purchases  will  be  concentrated  in  nominal  Treasury  securities  with  remaining  maturities 
                                                 
4   Most of the prepayments of MBS in the Federal Reserve’s portfolio are associated with refinancing activity that 
will result in the production of new MBS that have to be purchased by other market participants. 
5   Details of the Desk’s approach  were described in an operating statement released by the Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York: Operating Policy Statement, August 10, 2010. 
BIS Review 128/2010 
 3
between 2 and 10 years, but with some purchases also occurring outside this segment. The 
average duration of the securities purchased is expected to be just over 5 years, although 
the exact realized outcome will depend on the offers that we receive in our operations. Under 
this approach, the purchases will remove a considerable amount of duration from the market 
relative to what the market would have held without reinvestments by the Federal Reserve. 
The reinvestment strategy, of course, also involves a reallocation of our portfolio from agency 
debt and MBS into Treasury securities. The FOMC’s decision to reallocate was based on a 
variety  of  factors.  However,  one  crucial  consideration  was  whether  purchasing  Treasury 
securities  would  have  an  effect  on  longer-term  interest  rates  comparable  with  that  of 
purchasing MBS. My view was that the effects would be similar, because purchasing longer-
term  Treasury  securities  removes  as  much  duration  risk  from  the  market  as  purchasing 
current-coupon MBS.6 
The two approaches differ, however, in that purchasing MBS also removes prepayment risk 
from the market. If the market were to begin having trouble digesting that prepayment risk, 
the spread between MBS rates and Treasury yields could widen. A significant widening of 
MBS spreads to Treasuries, whether due to this or other factors, could affect policymakers’ 
decisions about which assets to purchase. The Chairman’s speech in Jackson Hole and the 
August FOMC minutes both indicated that reinvesting in MBS rather than Treasury securities 
might become desirable if market conditions were to change. 
Balance sheet expansion as a policy option 
As  you  can  see,  the  decision  to  simply  keep  the  balance  sheet  unchanged  involved  a 
number  of  considerations  and  choices.  Let  me  now  turn  to  the  possibility  that  the  FOMC 
could go a step further and expand the balance sheet beyond its current levels. 
This  policy  option  has  been  the  subject  of  intense  focus  among  market  participants. 
Chairman  Bernanke  has  indicated  that  any  decision  about  expanding  the  balance  sheet 
would depend on the FOMC’s assessment of the costs and benefits involved. Of course, that 
assessment  is  difficult  to  calibrate.  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  President  William 
Dudley discussed many of the relevant issues in his speech last Friday.7 
In terms of the benefits, balance sheet expansion appears to push financial conditions in the 
right direction, in that it puts downward pressure on longer-term real interest rates and makes 
broader financial conditions more accommodative. One can reach that judgment based on 
the empirical evidence from the earlier round of asset purchases, as mentioned before. In 
addition, the market responses to more recent news about the balance sheet also lean in this 
direction. The market response to the reinvestment decision at the August FOMC meeting 
seemed largely in line with the estimated effects from the earlier round of asset purchases, 
once we account for the size of the surprise and the anticipatory pricing that occurred ahead 
of  its  announcement.  And  the  increased  expectations  for  balance  sheet  expansion  in 
response to the September FOMC statement also generated a sizable market response. 
To  be  sure,  I  think  it  is  fair  to  say  that  this  is  an  imperfect  policy  tool.  Even  under  the 
estimates  noted  earlier,  the  Federal  Reserve  had  to  increase  its  securities  holdings 
considerably  to  induce  the  estimated  50  basis  point  response  of  longer-term  rates.  In 
addition,  there  is a  large  degree  of uncertainty  surrounding  the  estimates  of  these  effects, 
given our limited experience with this instrument. Lastly, it is reasonable to assume that the 
effects of balance sheet expansion would diminish at some point, especially if yields were to 
                                                 
6   The  duration  of  our  Treasury  purchases  are  modestly  higher  than  the  duration  of  the  MBS  that  are  being 
produced in the market. 
7   See “The Outlook, Policy Choices and Our Mandate,” October 1, 2010. 
4 
 BIS Review 128/2010
move  to  extremely  low  levels.  Nevertheless,  the  tool  appears  to  be  working,  and  it  is  not 
clear that we have yet reached a point of diminishing effects. 
Some observers have argued that balance sheet changes, even if they influence longer-term 
interest rates, will not affect the economy because the transmission mechanism is broken. 
This  point  is  overstated  in  my  view.  It  is  true  that  certain  aspects  of  the  transmission 
mechanism  are  clogged  because  of  the  credit  constraints  facing  some  households  and 
businesses, and it is true that monetary policy cannot directly target those parties that are the 
most constrained. Nevertheless, balance sheet policy can still lower longer-term borrowing 
costs  for  many  households  and  businesses,  and  it  adds  to  household  wealth  by  keeping 
asset prices higher than they otherwise would be. It seems highly unlikely that the economy 
is  completely  insensitive  to  borrowing  costs  and  wealth,  or  to  other  changes  in  broad 
financial conditions. 
In  terms  of  the  costs  of  balance  sheet  expansion,  the  assessment  is  perhaps  even  more 
complicated.  I  will  not  attempt  a  comprehensive  discussion  of  all  of  the  potential  costs  of 
balance sheet expansion, as that assessment falls to the FOMC. However, as manager of 
the  SOMA,  I  will  speak  about  two  of  the  potential  operational  challenges  involved  –  one 
associated  with  implementing  additional  asset  purchases,  and  one  associated  with  exiting 
from them. 
On  the  implementation  of  a  program,  an  important  operational  consideration  is  whether 
Federal Reserve purchases would strain the functioning of financial markets and cause an 
erosion  of  market  liquidity.  This  consideration  would  be  particularly  relevant  if  the  FOMC 
decided  that  a  fairly  sizable  program  was  needed  to  have  a  meaningful  effect  on financial 
conditions and the economy. This issue was present during the first asset purchase program, 
especially  when  the  pace  of  weekly  purchases  reached  a  peak  of  about  $40  billion  in  the 
middle  of  last  year.  The  pace  of  those  purchases  at  times  put  pressure  on  liquidity  in  the 
MBS market, leading the Desk to take mitigating actions when possible.8 
In  the  current  circumstances,  there  would  seem  to  be  room  for  the  Federal  Reserve  to 
expand its holdings of Treasury securities without creating difficulties for market functioning. 
The  SOMA  currently  holds  about  12  percent  of  the  outstanding  stock  of  Treasury  coupon 
securities – a smaller share than it held before the financial crisis. Moreover, the supply of 
Treasury  securities  will  remain  ample,  as  the  Treasury  is  expected  to  issue  around 
$1.2 trillion of securities over the next year. 
Any purchase program that the FOMC decides upon, whether aimed at Treasury securities 
or  MBS,  would  be  designed  to  support  market  functioning  as  much  as  possible  while  still 
achieving  the  program’s  economic  objectives.  The  deep  liquidity  of  these  markets  has 
considerable  value  to  our  economy,  and  we  should  take  whatever  steps  possible  to  leave 
this liquidity intact. 
The second operational challenge I mentioned comes at the other end of the program – the 
exit.  In  particular,  it  is  important  to  consider  whether  balance  sheet  expansion  would 
complicate the eventual exit of the Federal Reserve from its accommodative policy stance. 
I am confident that our ability to exit will not be compromised by any further expansion of the 
balance sheet. The exit strategy that is ultimately implemented will have to take into account 
the  size  and  structure  of  the  balance  sheet  at  that  time.  However,  in  all  potential 
circumstances  the  Federal  Reserve  should  be  able  to  tighten  financial  conditions  to  a 
sufficient degree when appropriate. The ability to pay interest on reserves, in combination 
with  the  ability  to  drain  reserves  as  needed,  will  give  us  sufficient  control  of  short-term 
interest rates. On that front, it is worth noting that both of the Fed’s reserve draining tools 
                                                 
8   For  example,  the  Desk  began  to  sell  dollar  rolls  to  allow  for  smoother  settlement  of  the  Federal  Reserve’s 
purchases. 
BIS Review 128/2010 
 5
– the reverse repurchase program and the term deposit facility – are already operational, and 
their  capacity  to  drain  reserves  will  continue  to  expand.  In  addition,  the  Federal  Reserve 
could always sell assets to reduce the size of its balance sheet if it desired. 
Designing a purchase program 
If  the  FOMC  were  to  move  forward  with  an  expansion  of  the  balance  sheet,  it  would 
presumably want to take into consideration the perspective gained from the asset purchases 
conducted from late 2008 to early 2010. The FOMC would have to decide the extent to which 
a new purchase program would follow the approach from the earlier round of purchases. 
An  alternative  approach  would  be  to  design  a  purchase  program  that  shares  more  of  the 
features  of  the  FOMC’s  adjustment  of  the  federal  funds  rate  in  normal  times.  After  all, 
adjustments to the balance sheet are in many respects a substitute for changes in the federal 
funds  rate.  Both  instruments  attempt  to  influence  broader  financial  conditions  in  order  to 
achieve a desired economic outcome. However, the way in which the FOMC implemented 
asset  purchases  differed  in  important  ways  from  the  manner  in  which  it  has  historically 
adjusted the federal funds rate. With this contrast in mind, I raise a set of policy questions 
that could be considered in designing a purchase program. 
First, should the balance sheet be adjusted in relatively continuous but smaller steps, or in 
infrequent  but  large  increments?  The  earlier  round  of  asset  purchases  involved  the  latter 
approach, which caused the market response to be concentrated in several days on which 
significant announcements were made. That might have been appropriate in circumstances 
when  substantial  and  front-loaded  policy  surprises  had  benefits,  but  different  approaches 
may be warranted in other circumstances. Indeed, it contrasts with the manner in which the 
FOMC  has  historically  adjusted  the  federal  funds  rate,  which  has  typically  involved 
incremental changes to the policy instrument. 
Second, how responsive should the balance sheet be to economic conditions? Historically, 
the  FOMC  has  determined  the  federal  funds  target  rate  based  on  the  Committee’s 
assessment of the outlook for economic growth and inflation. If changes in the balance sheet 
are now acting as a substitute for changes in the federal funds rate, then one might expect 
balance sheet decisions to also be governed to a large extent by the evolution of the FOMC’s 
economic  forecasts.  The  earlier  purchase  program,  in  contrast,  did  not  demonstrate  much 
responsiveness to changes in economic or financial conditions. Indeed, the execution of the 
program largely involved confirming the expectations that were put in place by the two early 
announcements. 
Third, how persistent should movements in the balance sheet be? An important feature of 
traditional  monetary  policy  is  that  movements  in  the  federal  funds  rate  are  not  quickly 
reversed, which makes them more influential on broader financial conditions. A change that 
was expected to be transitory would instead move conditions very little. For similar reasons, 
one  could  argue  that  movements  in  the  balance  sheet  should  have  some  persistence  in 
order to be more effective. 
Fourth, to what extent should the FOMC communicate about the likely path of the balance 
sheet? The FOMC often communicates about the path of the federal funds rate or provides 
other forward-looking information that allows market participants to anticipate that path. This 
anticipation of policy actions is beneficial, as it brings forward their effects and thus helps to 
stabilize the economy. For the same reason, providing information about the likely course of 
the  balance  sheet  could  be  desirable.  In  fact,  such  communication  might  be  particularly 
important in the current circumstances, because financial market participants have no history 
from which to judge the FOMC’s approach and anticipate its actions. 
6 
 BIS Review 128/2010
Fifth,  how  much  flexibility  should  the  FOMC  retain  to  change  its  policy  approach?  The 
original asset purchase programs specified the amount and distribution of purchases well in 
advance.9 However, the FOMC would be learning about the costs and benefits of its balance 
sheet changes as it implemented a  new program. This might call for some flexibility to be 
incorporated  into  the  program,  providing  some  discretion  to  change  course  as  market 
conditions evolve and as more is learned about the instrument. 
Conclusion 
I  hope  that  my  remarks  today  have  offered  some  insight  into  the  recent  balance  sheet 
programs  undertaken  by  the  Federal  Reserve.  Adjustments  to  the  size  of  the  Federal 
Reserve’s  securities  holdings  are  a  new  policy  instrument  for  the  FOMC.  That  presents 
challenges, both to policymakers in terms of determining how to use the instrument and to 
market participants in terms of anticipating that usage and understanding its effects. Given 
these challenges, I believe it is important for the Federal Reserve to communicate effectively 
about  the  factors  affecting  its  balance  sheet  decisions  and  the  implementation  of  those 
decisions. 
In my view, the evidence suggests that the expansion of the securities portfolio to date has 
helped to foster more accommodative financial conditions, and further expansion would likely 
provide  additional  accommodation.  Of  course,  whether  the  FOMC  decides  to  take  such  a 
step  will  be  determined  by  its  assessment  of  whether  the  benefits  of  additional  policy 
stimulus outweigh the perceived costs of expanding the balance sheet. 
                                                
 
9   Some  flexibility  was  incorporated  into  the  program  because  the  directives  from  the  FOMC  specified  the 
amount of purchases “up to” the stated thresholds. That flexibility was used to stop the agency debt purchases 
at around $175 billion instead of the originally stated maximum of $200 billion. However, this flexibility was not 
used more broadly. 
BIS Review 128/2010 
 7
