Júlia Király: A policy recipe for successful convergence of CESEE 
countries1 in the post crisis world 
Speech by Ms Júlia Király, Deputy Governor of Magyar Nemzeti Bank (the central bank of 
Hungary),  at  the  Conference  on  European  Economic  Integration  (CEEI)  2010,  Vienna, 
15 November 2010. 
 I would like to thank the contribution of my colleagues Csajbók, Attila and Kovács, András Mihály. 
Dear Ladies and Gentlemen, 
First of all, I would like to thank for the opportunity of being invited to this very interesting 
conference. The topic “Catching-up strategies after the crisis” could not be more relevant. As 
I will argue in the next few minutes, we should not consider the financial crisis as something 
fading quickly away, its aftermath will most probably stay with us for several years. Let me 
put it another way, my impression is that the crisis clearly changed the rules of the game for 
countries with the intention to converge to Western-European income levels. This road will 
be  much  bumpier  compared  to  what  it  seemed  from  the  past,  therefore  it  requires  a  very 
conscious strategy in policy making. 
 In the next few minutes I would speak about four interrelated topics. First, I sketch the new 
rules  of  the  game  in  the  post  crisis  world.  Second,  monetary  policy  options  and  macro-
prudential  challenges  in  the  years  ahead  will  be  outlined.  Finally,  I  would  make  a  few 
remarks regarding my opinion on euro-area accession. Most remarks of mine, I believe will 
be general, valid for all CESEE countries. Others will be more valid for countries with high FX 
debt burden.  
Taking stock of the starting position: the financial crisis forces changes in the 
convergence model of CESEE countries 
The  financial  crisis  brought  a  reassessment  of  risk  attitude  toward  debt  financing.  Those 
countries,  where  real  convergence  was  accompanied  by  current  account  deficits  and 
excessive debt flows did face deeper recession. 
The  reliance  of  CESEE  countries  on  foreign  funding  depended  on  two  key  elements  of 
macroeconomic  framework:  fiscal  and  exchange  rate  policies.  Countries  with  tight  fiscal 
policies and low government debt ratios ceteris paribus had lower external imbalances (for 
example  Czech  Republic  and  Poland  versus  Hungary).  Second,  flexible  exchange  rate 
system ceteris paribus helped avoiding large credit booms (flexible inflation targeting versus 
currency  board  regimes).  Naturally,  these  two  parameters  do  not  capture  all  the  relevant 
information on whether a country became fragile in macroeconomic terms prior to the crisis. 
However, research has shown,2 that they were instrumental in the resilience of countries with 
respect  excessive  capital  inflows  and  sudden  stops.  In  addition,  differences  in  macro 
prudential policies in controlling capital flows helped somewhat mitigating excessive capital 
flows, but their effectiveness were very far from perfect. 
Though the situation on financial markets consolidated somewhat in the last year or year and 
a half, I believe, that lower risk tolerance compared to pre-crisis levels will prevail in the next 
                                                 
1   Countries of Central, Eastern and Southeastern Europe. 
2   See for example Bakker, B. B. and Gulde, A. M. (2010) “The Credit Boom in New Member States: Bad Luck or 
Bad Policies?” IMF WP 10/130. 
BIS Review 150/2010 
 1
few years. This is a natural consequence of global deleveraging, which takes several years 
after  a  financial  crisis.3 As  is  shown  in  several  papers,4  deleveraging  means,  that  CESEE 
countries  in  the  post  crisis  world  might  rely  on  external  financing  to  a  lesser  extent,  than 
previously.  Unless  these  countries  find  more  domestic  savings  to  finance  the  catch-up 
process, real convergence will slow down. 
Lower  risk  tolerance  at  the  end  of  the  day  might  lead  to  higher  uncertainty,  and  higher 
volatility. Lower risk tolerance means, that economic sustainability had become a key issue, 
and there are very few if any countries among CESEE who are surely on a sustainable path. 
The closer is a country to a point where the sustainability of a country’s economic policy is 
questioned,  the  more  sensitive  it  becomes  to  both  global  and  country  specific  economic 
news. As a Hungarian central banker, I had to learn this lesson already several years ago. 
We need economic policies that push countries towards sustainability. 
As  already  mentioned,  on  the  fiscal  side,  sustainability  requires  tight  policies,  we  have  to 
decrease  indebtness  to  levels,  where  countries  do  not  become  excessively  reliant  on 
external  financing  sources.  As  CESEE  countries  are  less  developed  than  core  Europe  
– contrary to the traditional macroeconomics – the same level of government debt can not be 
afforded.  As  lower  GDP/capita  implies  lower  household  wealth,  the  same  level  of 
government debt as e.g., in Germany, would require much more external financing, hence 
external  debt.  This  is  also  a  lesson,  you  must  learn  from  the  Hungarian  case.  Tight  fiscal 
policy also helps private savings to finance private investments, and hence we can avoid a 
slowdown in real convergence in a period of scarce external financing. 
However,  it  is  clear  that  –  apart  from  Hungary  –  most  problems  among  CESEE  countries 
were  rather  caused  by  excesses  in  the  private  sector,  than  by  excessive  government 
spending.  Though,  as  is  shown  in  case  of  “peripheral  Europe”,  this  picture  can  change 
quickly, systemic risk in the private sector can easily turn to government debt. 
Regarding private sector imbalances, the issue is even more complex, as we cannot identify 
one actor, responsible for the behavior of a whole sector. Here we have two policy optimon: 
monetary  and  macro-prudential,  and  one  should  not  forget  about  their  interaction.  Let  me 
look at them in turn. 
Monetary policy in a post-crisis world: living together with permanent level of high 
uncertainty 
As  I  argued,  the  crisis  brought  a  reassessment  of  risk,  resulting  in  the  reassessment  of 
sustainable  external  balances.  Foreign  investors  are  not  the  only  actors  to  change  their 
opinion  regarding  the  most  likely  path  of  future  variables.  Households,  corporates  and  all 
economic actors should reassess, what they thought sustainable previously about the future. 
With forward looking agents, this means that they react now stronger in output, expenditures 
and  prices  compared  to  how  they  did  in  the  past.  All  this  means  an  extreme  level  of 
uncertainty. 
We need a robust monetary strategy that helps to live together, with high level of uncertainty. 
We need a transparent framework, flexible enough to absorb risk premium shocks, but such, 
that ensures price and financial stability in the long run. Flexible inflation targeting might be 
considered  as  such  a  system.  Inflation  target  as  a  final  nominal  anchor  is  transparent  but 
flexible  enough  to  (1)  avoid  reacting  to  excessive  risk  premium  volatility  with  interest  rate 
policy (2) incorporate other type of policy considerations, like macro-prudential ones.  
                                                 
3   See Tang and Upper (2010) “Debt reduction after crisis” BIS Quarterly Review, September 2010. 
4   See  MNB  (2010)  “Analysis  of  the  Convergence  Process,  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  financial  crisis”  and 
Atoyan, R. (2010) “Beyond the crisis: Revisiting Europe’s new growth model” IMF WP 10/92. 
2 
 BIS Review 150/2010
It  is  also  obvious  however,  that  one  instrument,  namely  interest  rate  policy,  cannot  be 
enough to achieve both price, and financial stability. One of the most important lessons from 
the  financial  crisis  is  that  there  can  be  conflicts.  The  empirical  evidence  shows,  that 
increasing  price  and  macroeconomic  stability  gives  extreme  incentives  to  financial  risk 
taking, as risk aversion declines due to observed stability.5 
As  almost  every  problem,  the  conflict  of  price  stability  and  financial  stability  among  small 
open  emerging  economies  is  mostly  linked  to  the  volatility  of  capital  flows.6  During  “good 
times”,  excessive  capital  inflow  appreciates  the  exchange  rate,  and,  as  a  consequence, 
overheating  does  not  necessary  appear  in  inflationary  pressure,  but  in  rising  external 
imbalances,  credit  booms.  During  “bad  times”,  on  the  contrary,  capital  outflows  cause 
depreciation and inflationary pressure, when financial sector imbalances are closing. From 
financial  stability  point  of  view  traditional  inflation  targeting  seems  to  be  too  loose  when 
imbalances  are  building  up,  and  too  tight,  when  financial  imbalances  are  closing.  Macro-
prudential policies can help to tackle this problem, though their effectiveness largely depends 
on the fact whether they are implemented internationally or only nationally. National policy 
can easily be circumvented in a world of globalized capital markets and multinational banking 
sector. 
We also know however, that CESEE countries are not uniform regarding their fragility of their 
financial  systems.  In  fact  there  are  more  countries  in  the  region  that  relied  on  excessive 
foreign funding prior to the crisis, than those who did not. Hungary is one of the countries 
where external deficit was relatively large prior to the crisis, though we did not achieve the 
level of fixed exchange rate countries. These countries could only run these sizeable deficits 
absorbing FX based capital flows, as in line with international observations, foreign investors 
were reluctant to take the FX risk associated with quick debt accumulation.7 In other worlds, 
the “original sin” syndrome created sizeable currency mismatches in them. 
There  is  an  increasing  complexity  of  the  monetary  transmission  mechanism  (MTM)  in 
countries, moving from sizeable external deficit to more sustainable path. The first point is a 
likely strengthening of the interest rate channel on new flows. Prior to the crisis, the interest 
rate channel was circumvented by FX borrowing, which meant that only the exchange rate 
channel of the monetary transmission mechanism did really work. As a result, after the crisis, 
macro-prudential  regulation  has  been  implemented  in  several  countries  to  constrain  FX 
lending (in Hungary FX base mortgage lending is already legally prohibited), and it is also 
true that observed exchange rate volatility also induced a reassessment of risk associated 
with  FX  lending.  These  factors  in  the  future  should  mean  that  on  new  credit  flows,  the 
domestic  interest  rate  will  be  the  dominant  price,  contributing  to  a  strengthening  of  the 
traditional interest rate channel. However we cannot estimate the exact magnitude of these 
new parameters, as there is not available data for the new regime. 
A  second  point  regards  the  inheritance  of  the  past:  we  have  to  live  together  with  the 
unhedged  FX 
is  no  possibility  of  quick 
redenomination.8  This  would  require  transferring  FX  risk  to  the  foreign  sector,  which  by 
definition is hardly feasible due to the problem of original sin. 
Due to these factors, the stock and flow channels of monetary policy might counteract each 
other. While the effect of monetary loosening/tightening on output and hence inflation might 
for  several  years,  as 
loan  stock 
there 
                                                
 
5   See Csermely, Á. and Szalai, Z. (2010): “The role of financial imbalances in monetary policy” MNB Bulletin 
2010 June. 
6   See.  De  Gregorio  (2009)  “Monetary  Policy  and  Financial  Stability:  An  Emerging  Markets  Perspective” 
International Finance 13:1. 
7   See MNB (2010) op. cit. 
8   Balás, T. és Nagy, M. (2010) “Re-denomination of FX loans” MNB Bulletin, 2010 October. 
BIS Review 150/2010 
 3
increase  if  we  only  consider  new  flows,  the  unhedged  FX  debt  stock  effect  works  in  the 
opposite direction. A given change in the exchange rate has a smaller effect on output and 
hence on inflation as in the past. A weakening of the HUF increases household indebtness, 
which causes a drop in the domestic demand, weakening the effect of stronger net exports. 
The exact magnitude of different channels, and most notably the FX stock channel can vary 
from time to time, depending on the level of the exchange rate.  
Furthermore, there can be serious nonlinearities in the MTM mechanism depending on the 
levels of the risk premium, exchange rate, and hence banking sector resilience: the higher 
the risk premium, the weaker the exchange rate and the banking sector’s capital base, the 
more likely, we will enter in a situation, where monetary loosening has recessionary effects, 
when  the  banking  sector  cuts  back  lending  seriously,  this  situation  might  hinder  financial 
stability. 
The crisis has highlighted the importance of macroprudential policies and their 
cross-border coordination 
I  already  mentioned  macroprudential  policies  here  and  there,  let  me  now  turn  to  them  in 
more detail. The crisis had made it clear that in order to achieve long-lasting macroeconomic 
stability,  striving  for  price  stability  is  not  enough:  it  has  to  augmented  by  stability  in  the 
financial  system.  These  two  goals  often  conflict,  therefore  monetary  policy  alone  is  not 
capable of continuously facilitating both of them. Additional policy tools are needed. As I said 
earlier, in small open economies the conflict often manifests in volatile capital flows. A first 
policy  reaction  to  such  a  situation  often  is  the  introduction  of  capital  controls,  just  like  the 
ones  we  currently  observe  in  Latin  American  and  Asian  emerging  countries.  Now,  the 
CESEE region may not currently be a target of hot money inflows, but this may change in the 
future. The use of capital controls is a controversial issue, and excessive reliance on them in 
the CESEE region (at least in the countries that are already EU members) is off the cards 
anyway, as it is against the fundamental EU principle of free capital movement. This leaves 
macroprudential regulation as a potential policy tool in these countries to mitigate systemic 
risk, either inherent or stemming from volatile capital flows. 
Macroprudential  tools  are  generally  categorized  into  two  types  according  to  their  primary 
aims,  which  can  be  (a)  enhancing  systemic  resilience  or  (b)  leaning  against  the  financial 
cycle  (reducing  procyclicality).  Systemic  resilience  tools  are  typically  microprudential 
instruments recalibrated for macroprudential purposes. These may include the regulation of 
various ratios, such as loan-to-value (LTV) or payment-to-income (PTI), or forbidding “toxic” 
products.  Hungary  recently  has  deployed  such  tools  in  order  to  discourage  unhedged  FX 
lending, which proved to be a major source of systemic risk. Regulation may be stricter in the 
case of systemically important (e.g. too-big-to-fail) financial institutions. Typical examples of 
countercyclical tools are dynamic provisioning (e.g. the one in place in Spain even before the 
crisis)  or  a  countercyclical  capital  buffer  (e.g.  the  one  proposed  in  the  new  Basel  III 
regulatory standards). 
Similarly  to  monetary  policy,  macroprudential  policy  can  be  tight  or  loose.  In  other  words 
macroprudential policy may be characterised by its stance, just like monetary policy.  
As I mentioned earlier, an important factor in the effectiveness of macroprudential policies is 
cross-border  consistency.9  Cross-border  coordination  in  the  end  should  boil  down  to 
coordination of macroprudential stances. The key motives for cross-border coordination are 
to avoid regulatory arbitrage on the one hand and to provide a level playing field for financial 
                                                 
9   For  a  detailed  discussion  about  coordination  issues,  see  Csajbók,  A  and  J.  Király  (2010):  “Cross-border 
coordination  of  macroprudential  policies”,  forthcoming  in  a  Chicago  Fed  –  IMF  conference  proceedings 
volume. 
4 
 BIS Review 150/2010
institutions on the other. I believe that this is especially true in the case of the CESEE region 
as these countries are deeply integrated in the European banking system, with the branches 
and subsidiaries of Western European banks being dominant players in the CESEE domestic 
financial systems. Home-host coordination is therefore of primary importance.  
If  macroprudential  policy  stances  substantially  differ  in  home  and  host  countries,  this  may 
encourage regulatory arbitrage. Regulatory arbitrage stems from the feature of the globalised 
financial  system  that  many  financial  transactions  between  two  parties  in  the  same  country 
can  in  fact  be  executed  in  another  country  (through  e.g.  subsidiaries/branches  of 
internationally active financial institutions). In a home-host setting for example, tightening the 
macroprudential stance in the host could be circumvented if the home stance is loose and 
allows for a re-direction of intermediation through e.g. branches.  
The  flipside  of  this  story,  which  gets  less  attention,  is  that  a  cross-border  rechanelling  of 
financial activity from a country with a tougher regulatory regime to a more lightly regulated 
one increases the potential for contagion to the more disciplined country (think of the decline 
in share prices of the large internationally active Austrian banks when the markets started to 
focus on their Eastern European exposures). 
While regulatory arbitrage seems to be a home-host issue, the “level playing field” argument 
for macroprudential coordination is probably more relevant in host-host relations. This stems 
from  the  fact  that  the  financial  systems  in  CESEE  countries  often  share  the  same  parent 
banks. As a result they are to some extent competitors in the cross-border allocation of funds 
from  parent  banks.  In  such  a  situation,  loosening  the  macroprudential  stance  in  one  host 
country  might  channel  intermediation  activity  from  another  host.  In  addition  to  violating 
fairness,  such  beggar-thy-neighbour  regulatory  policies  can  lead  to  a  mutually  detrimental 
‘race to the bottom’ regarding regulatory standards,10 leading to the increase of region-wide 
systemic risk.  
In  a  nutshell,  the  case  is  strong  in  the  CESEE  region  for  a  cross-border  coordination  of 
macroprudential policies both in the home-host and in host-host directions in order to avoid 
regulatory arbitrage and to create a level playing field. While bilateral coordination may be 
sufficient in certain home-host issues, multilateral coordination seems to be superior in most 
of the cases and certainly in host-host coordination. As of today, however, the institutions for 
such  coordination  are  not  in  place.  Supervisory  colleges  may  come  close,  but  they  don’t 
have a macroprudential angle. The planned cross-border stability groups seem to be better 
suited  for  this  purpose,  but  if  they  are  organised  according  to  banking  groups  instead  of 
geographical areas with significant exposures to each other, they will probably not turn out to 
be  efficient  macroprudential  coordination  fora.  It  remains  to  be  seen  whether  the  soon-to-
turn-operational  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB)  can  serve  as  an  effective 
coordination vehicle for CESEE macroprudential policies. 
Finally,  allow  me  to  make  a  precautionary  warning  against  too  much  reliance  on 
macroprudential  policies  in  facilitating  financial  stability.  In  my  opinion,  although  they  are 
necessary,  they  certainly  are  not  sufficient  in  themselves  for  this  purpose.  First,  without 
sustainable macro  policies  (fiscal  in  particular) and  price  stability  the  financial  system  may 
easily find itself in trouble or may intermediate insufficiently. Secondly, although its aim is to 
reduce  system-wide  risk,  macroprudential  policy  in  the  end  is  a  set  of  particular  tools 
targeting particular problems in particular parts of the financial system. In other words it is not 
as general as monetary policy, which affects virtually all economic agents. If, for example, 
there  is  a  long-lasting  general  tendency  of  increased  (and  excessive)  risk-taking  in  the 
economy,  macroprudential  policy  in  itself  can  at  best  slow  it  down  but  cannot  offset  it 
                                                 
10   Goodhart,  C.  (2010):  “How  should  we  regulate  the  financial  sector”  in  “The  Future  of  Finance:  the  LSE 
Report”. 
BIS Review 150/2010 
 5
permanently.  In  such  situations  support  from  monetary  policy,  e.g.  in  the  form  of  leaning-
against-the-wind behavior, is necessary.  
Euro entry: our ultimate safe harbor or compulsory task 
Prior  to  the  crisis,  it  seemed  a  safe  bet  to  assume,  that  euro  entry  brings  stability  and 
prosperity in the region, especially in Central Europe. Arguments in this respect were based 
on  three  main  results.  First,  there  is  a  deep  economic  integration  with  core  European 
countries, like Germany: high trade share, with high intra-industry component, high level of 
FDI  in  the  traded  sector.  Second,  deep  financial  integration,  mainly  due  to  high  level  of 
foreign ownership in the financial sector, with core European countries. Finally institutional 
similarity and convergence also made it probable, that most of the region forms an optimal 
currency area, with the eurozone.11 
In  Hungary,  with  probably  the  largest  swings  in  fiscal  policy  in  the  last  decade,  we  soon 
realized that we should – at least in fiscal terms – “put our house in order”, before entry. We 
also carefully watched the performance and sustainability of Mediterranean countries. 
However, relatively small care was taken when analyzing the institutional weakness of euro-
area  set-up.  The  unexpectedly  large  shock  of  the  crisis  brought  up  these  institutional 
weaknesses of the euro: the enforceability of the Stability and Growth pact, and imbalances 
with fixed exchange rate in the private sector. With the hope, that recent reform efforts tackle 
area-wide problems, we still cannot sit back and relax. We have to draw conclusions from 
small, acceding country point of view, which are necessary for successful membership. It is 
especially important, given that (1) weak economic performance of some countries became 
obvious  only  after  several  years  of  entry,  (2)  prevention  seems  much  cheaper,  than  crisis 
resolution. 
The first lesson is, that formal convergence criteria are necessary, but more care should be 
taken  with  respect  to  sustainability  of  fulfilling  them,  and  a  careful  monitoring  of  general 
economic sustainability. Unsustainable fiscal policies, and private sector imbalances are hard 
to  correct  inside  the  euro-area,  as  countries  has  less  policy  tools  to  adjust  by  giving  up 
exchange  rate  flexibility.  Though  it  is  also  true,  that  in  the  short  term  with  high  FX  debt 
burden, the room for exchange rate adjustment is also limited. 
Second,  it  turned  out  that  deep  economic  and  financial  integration  without  monetary 
integration  raises  coordination  issues:  the  exchange  rate  is  not  just  a  handy  tool,  but  a 
source  of  shocks  as  well.  Thus,  from  this  point  of  view,  new  member  states  should  enter 
EMU as soon as possible, because outside countries are more vulnerable. However, this is 
only an option if policies are proved to be sustainable. 
Finally,  we  have  to  admit  that  being  a  sustainably  successful  country  in  the  euro-area  is 
going to be an extremely challenging task. It’s like a labyrinth, and it is easy to loose the way 
at every step. First we need a disciplined government, to keep fiscal reserves for bad times. 
Second,  we  need  anchored  inflation  expectations,  to  avoid  artificially  low  interest  rates 
fuelling  a  credit  boom  in  the  private  sector,  and  to  minimize  the  possibility  of  wage 
competitiveness problems. Finally we need flexible prices and wages, so that they can adjust 
relatively easily inside, given that corrections in the real exchange rate are necessary. If we 
have all of these, we can probably exploit all of the benefits of a single market. In my view 
however, we should not pretend, that staying outside in the long term is a feasible solution. 
It’s  not  just  a  compulsory  task,  in  a  highly  globalized  world  domestic  policies  can  have 
smaller and smaller role in controlling the economy, so the overall trend should be obvious 
for us. 
                                                 
11   See for example MNB (2002). 
6 
 BIS Review 150/2010
