Jean Boivin: Where the economy and finance meet 
Remarks  by  Mr  Jean  Boivin,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Okanagan  
CFA  Society  and  University  of  British  Columbia  Okanagan  (Faculty  of  Management), 
Kelowna, British Columbia, 18 November 2010. 
 Introduction 
Thank you for having me here tonight. I’m delighted to be in Kelowna to deliver my first public 
speech as deputy governor of the Bank of Canada. As you heard in the introduction, I used 
to be a business school professor, so I am especially happy to be back among a group of 
business professionals, students and former colleagues. 
As the title of my speech suggests, I would like to discuss the connections between the real 
economy – the tangible world of jobs, goods and services – and the more intangible world of 
finance – of money flows, interest rates and the stock market. They have a long and eventful 
history. 
When  a  crisis  strikes,  their  connections  are  very  evident  and  we  pay  attention.  Our 
understanding  of  these  connections  has  been  extremely  useful  in  the  development  of  a 
timely  and  coordinated  policy  response  at  the  onset  of  the  last  crisis.  In  times  of  stability, 
however, we have an unfortunate tendency to downplay their connections. This is a mistake. 
The  main  theme  of  my  remarks  tonight  is  that  the  connection  between  finance  and  the 
economy is always relevant – not only in times of crisis. And while crises occur abruptly, their 
seeds are sown long before they happen, during periods of stability.  
For those of us working in economics and finance, this has two key implications: 
 
First,  we  need  better  tools  to  understand  the  highly  complex  dynamics  by  which 
financial imbalances build up and affect the real economy. 
Second,  we  need  to  improve  our  understanding  of  how  the  real  economy  can 
contribute to the development of financial imbalances, particularly through risktaking 
behaviour. 
 As  I  will  highlight,  the  Bank  of  Canada,  together  with  international  partners,  is  making 
progress on both fronts, but we still have a long way to go. 
Before I continue, I want to stress that this speech is not about what we could have done in 
Canada to avoid the most recent financial crisis. The source of the crisis was outside of our 
control and our financial sector has proven extremely resilient in the face of this huge global 
shock. 
But it did provide us with an opportunity to refine our understanding of the constantly evolving 
economy and how to avoid future crises. We cannot be complacent. 
Teaching economics in a pre-crisis world 
I have been thinking about the links between the real economy and finance for many years 
now, starting with my career as a professor in the late 1990s, when I taught macroeconomics 
to MBA students. 
One of the most striking features of a business school environment is the palpable energy of 
the  students,  their  keen  interest  to  learn,  their  drive  and  ambition.  That  made  teaching 
challenging,  interesting  and  rewarding.  But  all  this  genuine  interest  and  energy  was  not 
automatically granted to a core macroeconomic course. 
BIS Review 155/2010 
 1
We need to remember  the mood of the time. Buzzwords like: “new economy,” “Dot Com,” 
“Great  Moderation,”  were  on  everyone’s  lips.  Questions  like  “Is  the  business  cycle  dead?” 
were seriously being asked and the Dow 36,000 was seen by some as the likely next frontier. 
Many  students  wanted  to  pursue  a  career  in  finance.  In  such  an  environment,  where 
macroeconomic stability was taken as a permanent feature of the economy, students asked 
why they should “waste time and money” sitting through a core macroeconomics class. Why 
not jump immediately to the important stuff – finance? We even changed the name of the 
course  to  make  it  more  appealing:  “Macroeconomics”  became  “The  Global  Economic 
Environment.” 
I don’t know that this was very effective… 
To be fair to my former students, at the turn of the century, they weren’t the only ones to 
downplay the links between finance and the macroeconomy. Professionals and academics 
alike  shared  this  view.  I  noticed  a  big  change  in  attitude,  however,  when  I  last  taught  this 
course in the summer of 2009. Students took for granted that the connections between the 
economy and finance were crucial. 
There  is  an  obvious  explanation  for  this  new-found  awareness.  Between  the  first  and  last 
time I taught this course, the world experienced its worst financial crisis since the 1930s, with 
real, dramatic consequences on people throughout the world. In the G-7, excluding Canada, 
GDP fell by 5.6 per cent from the peak in 2008 to the trough in 2009, and almost 12 million 
jobs were lost. The United States alone shed almost 9 million jobs, and even today, fewer 
than 15 per cent of those have been regained. In Canada, things were better, thanks to a 
financial  system  that  has  held  up  remarkably  well  and  buffered  us  from  the  worst  of  the 
financial storm. Nevertheless, in Canada, real GDP fell by more than 3 per cent from peak to 
trough and more than 400,000 jobs were lost. We have now recouped those lost jobs, but not 
the lost momentum and opportunities the crisis left behind. After living through this, how can 
we ignore the obvious links between the economy and finance? 
The  short  answer  is  that  when  times  are  good,  we  can  make  the  mistake  of  becoming 
complacent. 
The economy and finance have been meeting for a long time 
As I said at the outset, the economy and finance have a long and eventful history. 
When  financial  markets  are  functioning  well,  they  play  a  background  role  in  the  overall 
behaviour  of  the  real  economy.  At  the  same  time,  when  the  economy  is  stable, 
macroeconomic considerations might appear to play a more secondary role in the functioning 
of financial markets. Taken together, this suggests that in stable times it might be tempting to 
analyze the behaviour of the real economy and financial markets separately, each of them 
being a black box to the other, not worth opening. 
This  approach  is  also  convenient:  Economists  can  build  economic  models  without 
introducing too many financial details; financial wizards can price assets without thinking too 
much  about  macroeconomic  risks;  and  business  schools  can  build  curricula  where 
economics and finance are taught with little reference to each other. 
This  is  all  very  well  in  a  stable  world.  But  a  stable  world  is  not  a  perfect  world.  And 
imperfections can eventually break the stability. 
It  has  long  been  understood  that  imperfections  in  the  financial  market  can  generate  and 
amplify economic fluctuations, driving the dynamics of a crisis. These imperfections typically 
stem from transaction costs or asymmetric information. 
This is economist jargon, but let me give you an example. 
2 
 BIS Review 155/2010
An entrepreneur who needs to borrow funds typically knows more about the quality of her 
project than the lender. Moreover, the success of the project – and the likelihood of the loan 
being repaid – will depend on the behaviour of the entrepreneur. This information gap is an 
imperfection  that  the  financial  system  needs  to  address.  Financial  intermediaries  –  for 
instance,  banks  –  play  an  important  role  in  partly  bridging  this  information  gap  through 
screening and monitoring of prospective borrowers. Another way is for the borrower to put 
some skin in the game by pledging collateral – for example, real estate – which becomes a 
key determinant of borrowing capacity. 
Appreciating the role of information and the importance of collateral helps to explain how a 
financial  crisis,  such  as  the  Great  Depression,  can  unfold  by  setting  in  motion  an  adverse 
feedback loop between the real economy and financial markets. Collateral facilitates credit. If 
a  weakening  economy  reduces  the  value  of  collateral,  access  to  credit  will  be  reduced. 
Reduced access to credit constrains consumption and capital investment, further weakening 
the economy and – closing the loop – the value of collateral that can be pledged. And if along 
the way, some banks are forced to shut their doors, the information gap at the origin of this 
problem becomes even harder to bridge.1 
These are crucially important mechanisms. They have been understood for a long time and 
formed part of the economist toolkit.2 This understanding proved to be a huge asset during 
the  last  crisis,  motivating  policy-makers  throughout  the  world  to  act  swiftly  to  break  the 
adverse feedback loop once the crisis started. 
Meeting in unsuspected places 
Many of the connections between the economy and finance were perceived to be relevant 
mainly to countries in crisis, limiting interest to the study of historical episodes or economies 
with  poorly  developed  financial  markets.  Consequently,  many  of  the  models  used  by 
economists to analyze usually stable, advanced economies abstracted from features of the 
financial sector. This was seen as a reasonable approximation. 
But as we know, the recent crisis detonated in advanced economies after a long period of 
exceptional calm, often referred to as the “Great Moderation.” 
How does the economy shift from stability to crisis? 
While  the  links  between  the  financial  sector  and  the  real  economy  are  sometimes  smooth 
and  continuous,  they  can  also  be  highly  non-linear.  These  non-linear  effects  can  manifest 
themselves by the slow buildup of imbalances in stable times – when many have been lulled 
into a false sense of security – followed by abrupt crashes. 
This underlines the need to improve our understanding of where the economy and finance 
meet during stable times and how crises erupt: 
                                                 
1   Many important breakthroughs in our understanding of the role of financial market imperfections on the real 
economy are rooted in the work of Joseph Stiglitz, Michael Spence and George Akerlof, who were awarded 
the  2001  Bank  of  Sweden  Nobel  Prize  in  economics  for  their  1970s  analysis  of  markets  with  asymmetric 
information. Bernanke and Gertler (1989) later formalized these financial market imperfections in a macroeconomic 
model to improve our understanding of the Great Depression. This is often referred to by economists as the 
financial accelerator model. See Bernanke (2007a) for a summary of the financial accelerator and the credit 
channel. Models incorporating the financial accelerator in the business sector are found in Bernanke, Gertler, 
and  Gilchrist  (1999);  Kiyotaki  and  Moore  (1997);  Christiano,  Motto,  and  Rostagno  (2010);  and  Christensen 
and Dib (2008). Models demonstrating how the balance sheets of households affect their borrowing capacity 
are described in Iacoviello (2005), Christensen and Meh (2010), and Christensen et al. (2009). 
2   There is a long history of macroeconometric models that incorporate financial variables, for example, the Bank 
of Canada MUSE model used in the context of international analysis. 
BIS Review 155/2010 
 3
  First,  we  need  better  tools  to  understand  the  highly  non-linear  dynamics  through 
which  financial  imbalances  build  up  and  affect  the  real  economy.  This  involves 
improving our models, but also developing indicators that can help us to better track 
the risk of potential financial disruptions to the overall economy.  
Second,  we  need  to  improve  our  understanding  of  how  the  real  economy  and 
system-wide  forces  can  contribute  to  the  development  of  financial  imbalances, 
particularly through risk-taking behaviour. 
Developing better tools 
Regarding better tools, we are developing a new generation of models that, unlike those that 
came  before,  consider  the  financial  sector,  including  banks,  not  just  as  a  transmitter  of 
shocks, but as a potential shock in its own right. 
We are developing macroeconomic frameworks that take into account the balance sheets of 
financial intermediaries, multiple interest rates and credit spreads so that we can understand 
better how developments in the financial sector affect economic performance. This work is 
being  done  by  academics  and  central  bank  researchers,  including  those  at  the  Bank  of 
Canada.3 
Research at the Bank of Canada has made important strides in modelling balance sheets of 
banks  into  standard  macroeconomic  frameworks  with  financial  frictions.4  Bank  staff  have 
also  introduced  multiple  financial  assets  into  the  Bank  of  Canada’s  main  policy  model 
(ToTEM), as well as credit and banking into the Global Economic Model (BoCGEM-FIN). 
The Bank of Canada has used this research to make important contributions to international 
reports  by  the  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB)  and  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking 
Supervision (BCBS), assessing the impact of stronger capital and liquidity requirements on 
economic activity. Bank staff ran simulations to provide a comprehensive assessment of the 
potential impact on the Canadian economy of the new Basel III global capital and liquidity 
standards. A report was published summarizing the Bank’s core results for Canada, including 
a comparison with the results published by the FSB and the BCBS.5 
It  is  also  critical  that  economists  and  financial  professionals  develop  empirical  tools  that 
provide  statistical  indicators  of  increased  risks  to  the  whole  financial  system  –  including 
various measures of credit. A credit boom – a positive feedback loop sparked by a sustained 
increase  in  collateral  value  –  is  a  key  feature  of  the  buildup  towards  financial  crisis. 
Historically,  finding  such  indicators  has  been  a  difficult  task  and  we  should  not  expect  a 
magic bullet. But the information gleaned from a collection of these indicators could serve as 
an important guide for stabilization policies, including a system-wide regulatory policy. In that 
respect, I am encouraged to see the large amount of work being done at the International 
Monetary Fund, the Financial Stability Board  and the Bank for International Settlements in 
developing statistical tools to serve as “early warning indicators” and evaluating a variety of 
statistical  indicators  of  excessive  credit  growth.6  The  Bank  of  Canada  and  other  central 
 
                                                
3   See Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2010); Curdia and Woodford (2010); Christensen, Meh, and Moran (2010); 
Dib  (2010);  Gertler  and  Karadi  (2010);  Gertler  and  Kiyotaki  (2010);  Gerali  et  al.  (2010);  Meh  and  Moran 
(2010); and Van den Heuvel (2008). 
4   See Meh and Moran (2010) and Dib (2010). 
5   See Bank of Canada (2010), Basel Committee on Banking and Supervision (2010), and Basel Committee on 
Banking and Supervision and Financial Stability Board (2010). 
6   See Drehmann, et al. (2010). 
4 
 BIS Review 155/2010
banks  are  also  actively  developing  tools  to  support  their  financial  system  surveillance 
activities.7 
financial 
incentives  encourage  risk-taking  at 
Financial imbalances, risk-taking behaviour and system-wide forces 
The second key area of work for economists and financial professionals concerns the need 
to  understand  better  risk-taking  behaviour  and  how  system-wide  forces  contribute  to  the 
development of imbalances.8 
We  see  excessive  risk-taking  behaviour  develop  during  periods  of  stability  when  people 
become  complacent  and  believe  the  good  times  are  here  to  stay.  They  become 
overconfident  and  underestimate  risk.  Contract  incentives  can  also  induce  excessive 
risktaking behaviour. 
Let’s take an example of an insurance company that has promised premium holders returns 
of 6 per cent, while the long-term bond rate is 4 per cent. To meet its obligations when the 
short-term  rate  is  low,  the  insurance  company  has  no  choice  but  to  take  on  greater  risk, 
either directly or through investments in alternative assets.9 
We  also  see  how 
institutions  where 
compensation depends on short-run returns. Although, the financial crisis is seen as having 
many  significant  causes,  the  compensation  structure  of  some  institutions  is  viewed  as  an 
important contributing factor. 
Through these channels, a tranquil macroeconomic environment can lead to the buildup of 
risks  and  financial  imbalances  on  the  balance  sheets  of  banks.  These  imbalances  can 
increasingly  expose  the  wider  economy  to  the  risk  of  financial  crisis.  If  confidence 
disappears,  banks  call  back  credit,  balance  sheets  shrink  and  a  difficult  readjustment  is 
needed, with negative effects on financial and economic stability. In particular, the buildup of 
big leverage within the financial system can unwind swiftly, causing more stringent general 
financing conditions. 
So what needs to be done? 
First,  we  need  to  be  collectively  aware  of  these  connections  and  better  understand  their 
importance.  Firms  are  run  by  people.  Risk  is  taken  by  people.  The  more  complete  the 
understanding,  the  better  the  chance  of  properly  assessing  risk  and  designing  appropriate 
contracts. 
But there is also a need to adopt measures to make the financial system as a whole more 
resilient. This includes enhanced system-wide supervision and regulation.  
The recent Basel III agreement will go far to enhance supervision and regulatory practices in 
the financial sector. G-20 leaders have agreed to strengthen their banking systems by raising 
the  amount  and  quality  of  capital  and  liquidity  that  financial  institutions  must  carry.  These 
higher standards will lower the incidence of financial crises, reduce their severity and provide 
for smoother economic cycles. They will also reduce the risk that resources are misallocated. 
The  agreement  also  includes  a  countercyclical  capital  buffer  that  provides  for  additional 
capital to be built up during the periods of excessive credit growth that are associated with an 
increase in system-wide risk. This will provide additional loss-bearing capacity in a downswing 
                                                 
7   See Misina and Tkacz (2009) and Gauthier, He, and Souissi (2010). 
8   See Adrian and Shin (2009), Borio and Zhu (2008), Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2010), Diamond and Rajan 
(2009), and Farhi and Tirole (2009). 
9   See Rajan (2005). 
BIS Review 155/2010 
 5
in  a  credit  cycle.  The  countercyclical  buffer  itself  should  also  help  dampen  excess  credit 
growth. 
Recent  research  at  the  Bank  of  Canada  estimated  that  for  Canada,  the  net  economic 
benefits  to  be  gained  from  improving  the  safety  and  robustness  of  the  Canadian  and 
international financial system could amount to about $200 billion – or about 13 per cent of 
GDP.10 
While  it  is  neither  possible,  nor  desirable,  to  eliminate  risk-taking,  by  understanding  it, 
identifying  it,  tracking  it,  and  spotting  dangerous  trends,  we  can  do  much  to  prevent  the 
buildup of imbalances that can lead to a crisis erupting. 
There  is  no  magic  bullet  to  safeguard  the  financial  system.  We  work  in  an  exceedingly 
complex and dynamic environment, one that presents new – and very difficult – challenges. 
The task we have set for ourselves is far from easy, but when the best and the brightest in 
the fields of economics and finance combine their efforts and work together, we can make 
important progress. Complacency is the enemy.  
Conclusion 
As we move away from the crisis, we all have an obligation to remember that imbalances 
build during periods of calm. Our vigilance is required at all times, not just during a crisis. 
Better tools will help us to identify risks and better understand the human behaviour behind 
risk-taking.  And  certainly,  system-wide  supervision  and  regulation  will  do  much  to  improve 
the global financial system. 
However, as I conclude tonight, I would like to reinforce the fact that all of us here are part of 
the  “system.”  Economists,  finance  professionals,  business  school  professors  and  students 
are part of this “system.” We have a role, and a responsibility, to improve our understanding 
of,  and  account  for,  the  system-wide  consequences  of  our  individual  actions.  We  have  a 
chance  to  ensure  that  the  painful  lessons  of  the  last  few  years  lead  to  a  better  financial 
system, and by extension, to a more prosperous and stable world. 
Thank you very much. 
Bibliography 
Adrian, T. and H. S. Shin. 2009. “Money, Liquidity, and Monetary Policy.” Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York Staff Report No. 360. 
Akerlof,  G.  A.  1970.  “The  Market  for  “Lemons”:  Quality  Uncertainty  and  the  Market 
Mechanism.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 84 (3): 488–500. 
Bank  of  Canada.  2010.  “Strengthening  International  Capital  and  Liquidity  Standards:  A 
Macroeconomic Impact Assessment for Canada.” August. 
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS). 2010. “An Assessment of the Long-Term 
Economic Impact of the New Regulatory Framework.” LEI Report. 
Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision/Financial  Stability  Board.  2010.  “Assessing  the 
Macroeconomic  Impact  of  the  Transition  to  Stronger  Capital  and  Liquidity  Requirements.” 
Interim Report, MAG Report. 
                                                 
10   See Bank of Canada (2010). 
6 
 BIS Review 155/2010
Bernanke,  B.  S.  2007a.  “The  Financial  Accelerator  and  the  Credit  Channel.”  Speech 
delivered  at  the  The  Credit  Channel  of  Monetary  Policy  in  the  Twenty-first  Century 
Conference held at the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia, 14–15 June.  
——— . 2007b. “Housing, Housing Finance, and Monetary Policy.” Speech delivered at the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City’s Economic Symposium. 
Bernanke,  B.  S.  and  M. Gertler.  1989.  “Agency  Costs,  Net  Worth,  and  Business 
Fluctuations.” American Economic Review 79 (1): 14–31. 
Bernanke,  B.  S.,  M.  Gertler,  and  S.  Gilchrist.  1999.  “The  Financial  Accelerator  in  a 
Quantitative  Business  Cycle  Framework.”  In  Handbook  of  Macroeconomics,  edited  by  
J. B. Taylor and M. Woodford, edition 1, 1 (21): 1341–393. 
Borio, C. and M. Drehmann. 2009. “Assessing the Risk of Banking Crises – Revisited.” BIS 
Quarterly Review (March): 29–46. 
Borio, C. and H. Zhu. 2008. “Capital Regulation, Risk-Taking and Monetary Policy: A Missing 
Link  in  the  Transmission  Mechanism?”  Bank  for  International  Settlements  Working  Paper 
No. 268. 
Brunnermeier, M. and Y. Sannikov. 2010. “A Macroeconomic Model with a Financial Sector.” 
Princeton University. May. 
Christensen,  I.,  P.  Corrigan,  C.  Mendicino,  and  S.  N.  Nishiyama.  2009.  “Consumption, 
Housing  Collateral,  and  the  Canadian  Business  Cycle.”  Bank  of  Canada  Working  Paper 
No. 2009–26. 
Christensen, I. and A. Dib. 2008. “The Financial Accelerator in an Estimated New Keynesian 
Model.” Review of Economic Dynamics 11 (1): 155–78. 
Christensen,  I.  and  C.  Meh.  2010.  “Counter-Cyclical  Loan-to-Value  Ratio  and  Monetary 
Policy.” Bank of Canada. Manuscript. 
Christensen, 
Macroeconomic Dynamics.” Bank of Canada and Université Laval. Manuscript. 
Christiano,  L.,  R.  Motto,  and  M.  Rostagno.  2010.  “Financial  Factors  in  Economic 
Fluctuations.” European Central Bank Working Paper No. 1192. 
Curdia, V. and M. Woodford. 2010. “The Central Bank Balance Sheet as an Instrument of 
Monetary  Policy.”  Columbia  University,  Department  of  Economics,  Discussion  Paper 
No. 0910–16. 
Diamond,  D.  and  R.  Rajan.  2009.  “The  Credit  Crisis:  Conjectures  about  Causes  and 
Remedies.” American Economic Review 99: 606–10. 
Dib  A.  2010.  “Banks,  Credit  Market  Frictions,  and  Business  Cycles.”  Bank  of  Canada 
Working Paper No. 10–24. 
Drehmann,  M.,  C.  Borio,  L.  Gambacorta,  G.  Jiménez,  and  C.  Trucharte.  2010. 
“Countercyclical  Capital  Buffers:  Exploring  Options.”  Bank  for  International  Settlements 
Working Paper No. 317. 
Farhi, E. and J. Tirole. 2009. “Leverage and the Central Banker’s Put.” American Economic 
Review 99 (2): 589–93. 
Gauthier,  C.,  Z.  He,  and  M.  Souissi.  2010.  “Understanding  Systemic  Risk:  The  Trade-Offs 
between Capital, Short-Term Funding and Liquid Asset Holdings.” Bank of Canada Working 
Paper No. 2010–29. 
Gerali,  A.,  S.  Neri,  L.  Sessa,  and  F. M. Signoretti.  2010.  “Credit  and  Banking  in  a  DSGE 
Model of the Euro Area.” Bank of Italy Working Paper No. 740. 
I.,  C.  Meh,  and  K.  Moran.  2010.  “Bank  Leverage  Regulation  and 
BIS Review 155/2010 
 7
Gertler,  M.  and  P.  Karadi.  2010.  “A  Model  of  Unconventional  Monetary  Policy.”  New  York 
University Working Paper. 
Gertler,  M.  and  N.  Kiyotaki.  2010.  “Financial  Intermediation  and  Credit  Policy  in  Business 
Cycle Analysis.” New York University and Princeton University Working Paper. 
Iacoviello,  M.  2005.  “House  Prices,  Borrowing  Constraints  and  Monetary  Policy  in  the 
Business Cycle.” American Economic Review 95 (3): 739–64. 
International  Monetary  Fund.  2010.  “The  IMF-FSB  Early  Warning  Exercise:  Design  and 
Methodological Toolkit.” September. http://www.imf.org/external/np/exr/facts/ewe.htm 
Kiyotaki,  N.  and  J.  Moore.  1997.  “Credit  Cycles.”  Journal  of  Political  Economy  105  (2):  
211–48. 
Meh,  C.  and  K.  Moran.  2010.  “The  Role  of  Bank  Capital  in  the  Propagation  of  Shocks.” 
Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 34 (3): 555–76. 
Misina,  M.  and  G.  Tkacz.  2009.  “Credit,  Asset  Prices,  and  Financial  Stress.”  International 
Journal of Central Banking 5: 95–122. 
Rajan, R. 2005. “Has Financial Development Made the World Riskier?” National Bureau of 
Economic Research Working Paper No. 11728. 
Rothschild, M. and J. Stiglitz. 1976. “Equilibrium in Competitive Insurance Markets: An Essay 
on the Economics of Imperfect Information.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 90: 629–49. 
Van den Heuvel, S. J. 2008. “The Welfare Cost of Bank Capital Requirements.” Journal of 
Monetary Economics 55 (2): 298–320. 
8 
 BIS Review 155/2010
