Prasarn Trairatvorakul: Challenges to central banks in the era of the new 
globalisation 
Opening  remarks  by  Dr  Prasarn  Trairatvorakul,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the 
Bank of Thailand International Symposium 2010 on “Challenges to central banks in the era of 
the new globalisation”, Bangkok, 15 October 2010. 
 Professors, Fellow Central Bankers, Distinguished Participants, Ladies and Gentlemen,  
It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  welcome  you  to  the  Bank  of  Thailand  International 
Symposium 2010 on “Challenges to Central Banks in the Era of the New Globalisation”. 
This  event  is  the  fourth  in  a  series  of  International  Symposiums  organized  by  the  Bank  of 
Thailand,  which  have  been  a  forum  for  prominent  academics,  policy  makers  and  market 
practitioners  to  meet  and  discuss  current  issues  related  to  central  banking  and  monetary 
policy, especially from an international perspective.  
As the world begins to recover from the global financial crisis, a new stage of globalisation 
has emerged and brought along a transformation of the economic and financial landscape. 
The  meeting  today  will  again  be  an  opportunity  for  us  to  share  views  and  address  key 
challenges facing central banks during this time of change. I will highlight three of them.  
First, the global financial crisis has brought to the fore the importance of financial stability 
as a necessary condition for economic stability. The need to fulfill this objective will forever 
change the way central banks conduct their policy. The most important question is how the 
central bank can embrace this objective without impairing price stability and without creating 
unrealistic expectations about what it can and cannot do given limited tools at its disposal.  
Second,  with  the  global  financial  crisis  revealing  many  regulatory  gaps,  especially  in 
advanced  economies,  many  new  proposals  have,  understandably,  been  made  to  reform 
international financial regulations. However, it is important to note that attempts to fix the 
last  crisis  may  not  prove  effective  in  preventing  the  next  one,  as  crises  always  come  in 
different  shapes  and  forms.  In  addition,  some  proposed  new  standards,  such  as  Basel  III, 
appear  to  mainly  address  the  problems  of  banking  systems  in  developed  countries  whose 
business models and risk-taking behaviour may well be very different from those of emerging 
markets. Therefore, the key challenge for policymakers in these countries, going forward, is 
how to adapt the global standards to best suit local needs, bearing in mind the enormous 
economic costs of over-regulation.  
Third, differential growth outlook between advanced and emerging markets in the aftermath 
of  the  global  financial  crisis  is  inducing  large  and  persistent  capital  flows  to  emerging 
markets with implications for the exchange rate, inflation, and the risk to financial stability. In 
light of this, policymakers in emerging markets would find it more difficult to use traditional 
instruments  to  achieve  domestic  objectives.  They  must  be  more  wary  of  the  buildup  of 
financial imbalances and may even have to rethink the exchange rate management strategy. 
On  a  larger  scale,  uncertainties  pertaining  to  the  post-crisis  international  monetary  and 
reserve currency system – the one in which dominant currencies are likely to grow weaker 
and  newly  emerging  currencies  grow  stronger  –  will  also  pose  important  challenges  to 
monetary, exchange rate, and reserve management policies.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
To  tackle  some  of  these  challenges,  we  are  very  fortunate  to  have  with  us  today  many 
distinguished speakers from both academia and central banks. In the morning sessions, we 
will  hear  from  the  academic  point  of  view  the  implications  of  the  changing  financial  and 
regulatory landscape. During lunch time, our keynote speaker will share his insights on the 
future  of  the  international  monetary  system  and  what  implications  entail  for  policymakers. 
BIS Review 146/2010 
 1
Later  in  the  afternoon,  we  hope  to  bridge  academic  thinking  with  practical  policy 
considerations.  
Let me conclude by saying that it is impossible to have answers to all the big questions in a 
one-day conference like this. But I am sure we can contribute to the better understanding of 
many difficult issues and come up with useful policy recommendations. Most of all, I hope 
that  this  forum  will  be  followed  by  continuing  discussions  and  cooperation  among  all 
participants, which would be a true measure of success of the conference.  
I wish you all a fruitful meeting and memorable stay in Bangkok. Thank you.  
2 
 BIS Review 146/2010
