Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: Western democracy and its discontents – 
economic and political challenges 
Speech by Mr Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, at the Aspen Transatlantic Dialogue: “Western Democracies under Pressure”, Rome, 
14 October 2010. 
 The  theme  of  this  conference,  especially  this  first  session,  which  concerns  the  ability  of 
democratic systems to cope with the challenges of economic and financial crisis, has been 
addressed in the past by distinguished scholars such as Ralf Dahrendorf. He observed that: 
“To stay competitive in a growing world economy [the OECD countries] are 
obliged  to  adopt  measures  which  may  inflict  irreparable  damage  on  the 
cohesion  of  the  respective  civil  societies.  If  they  are  unprepared  to  take 
these  measures,  they  must  recur  to  restrictions  of  civil  liberties  and  of 
political participation bearing all the hallmarks of a new authoritarianism... 
The  task  for  the  first  world  in  the  next  decade  is  to  square  the  circle 
between growth, social cohesion and political freedom.”1 
This  comment  was  written  in  the  mid-1990s,  but  the  current  crisis  makes  it  even  more 
pertinent. It’s an expression of doubt about the ability of (so-called) advanced countries to be 
able  to  take  unpopular  but  necessary  measures  to  overcome  the  crisis  that  is  prompting 
financial  markets  to  disinvest,  or  even  bet  on  those  countries’  bankruptcy,  resulting  in  an 
outflow of capital that prolongs the crisis. 
What  lessons  can  we  draw  from  this  crisis  in  respect  of  the  functioning  of  democratic 
systems, and in particular their ability to meet the challenges of the global economy? Let me 
try to provide some answers, starting with three thoughts on the current crisis. 
The first one concerns the causes of the crisis. Reams of commentary have been produced 
on the factors that unleashed it. Some commentators have focused on the shortcomings of 
the financial regulations, or on the ineffective supervision of markets and market participants. 
Others  have  pointed  to  the  excessive  monetary  expansion  in  some  countries.  Others  still 
have  remarked  that  the  lack  of  international  coordination  has  generated  large  global 
imbalances. There is a grain of truth in each of these analyses. But if we stay at this level of 
detail we risk missing the essence of the problem and not finding a remedy for it. We have to 
ask  why  the  regulations  were  inadequate,  why  monetary  policies  were  so  loose,  why 
international cooperation was insufficient. Were they simple human errors, or errors caused 
by factors more deeply rooted in our societies – ones which touch on the subject of today’s 
discussion? 
Few have embarked on this kind of reflection – an essential one if we are to understand the 
crisis  and  how  to  get  out  of  it.  Raghu  Rajan,  for  example,  takes  as  a  starting  point  the 
increase in inequality that has occurred in recent years in advanced societies. It has resulted 
in a stagnation of the incomes of the middle classes.2 Technological change in recent years 
has  increased  the  productivity  gap  in  various  sectors  of  the  economy  and  led  to  sharp 
differences in income. Another contributing factor has been, in my view, the rapid change in 
the  comparative  advantage  of  advanced  economies  associated  with  the  globalisation 
process, which has hurt the less well-educated members of the population. 
                                                 
1   R. Dahrendorf, “Quadrare il Cerchio. Ieri e Oggi.”, Laterza, 2009. 
2   R. Rajan, “Fault Lines”, Princeton University Press, 2010. 
BIS Review 134/2010 
 1
Technological  change  and  economic  integration  have  been  taking  place  for  centuries  and 
have  driven  economic  systems  towards  new  equilibria  in  which  well-being  has  generally 
increased for all. There is no reason why these processes should come to an end now. But 
they involve periods of transition during which a significant dislocation of resources may take 
place and some segments of the population may incur a relative impoverishment. Economic 
growth  may  even  slow  down  and  make  the  inequalities  worse.  The  transition  may  also 
persist if the factors that triggered the changes are systemic in nature and scale, as is the 
shift  by  hundreds  of  millions  of  people  to  the  market  economy  which  started  in  the  late 
1980s. 
It  is  during  the  transition  that  financial  engineering  comes  into  play.  Finance  makes  it 
possible to bring the future forward. Those who expect an increase in income can, thanks to 
new financial instruments, i.e. debt, immediately increase their consumption and move on to 
a higher standard of living. They can, say, purchase a house, send their children to college 
and buy a powerful car. Financial engineering meets the needs of those who are not yet able 
to afford them, increases the revenue of financial institutions – and thus of the shareholders 
and managers – and raises government revenues too. Financial engineering helps to solve 
the  transition  problems  of  advanced  societies  facing  changes  arising  from  technological 
innovation and globalisation, especially for the poorer segments of the population. Financial 
innovation is thus favoured and encouraged by all the political forces, as Rajan notes. This 
explains  the  “affordable  housing”  measures  taken  by  the  Clinton  administration  and  the 
“ownership society” of the Bush administration. Financial innovation has also been facilitated 
by the interest rates kept low for an extended period of time. 
The problem arises – and arose – when the transition to the new equilibrium is very long, 
longer  than  expected.  If  the  transition  is  longer  than  expected,  financial  engineering  is  no 
longer a solution and can become a problem. The debt burden becomes unsustainable and 
cannot be repaid, starting by the less well-off, whose incomes do not keep pace with property 
values  inflated  by  low  interest  rates.  The  sub-prime  crisis  was  created  by  excessive  debt, 
taken on not by the wealthy, as happened on other occasions in the past, but by the less 
well-off, whose relative position in society was slipping. Debt had given them the illusion of 
being able to live for a few years beyond their means. 
The gist of this first thought is that the crisis sprang from an unsuccessful attempt to square 
Dahrendorf’s  circle.  The  failure  involved  not  recognising  that  technological  and  global 
processes bring about a longer and more difficult than expected transition for one part of the 
population. It consisted of deluding oneself that such a transition can be facilitated by easy 
debt and low interest rates. Recognising this failure is the first step towards not failing again. 
The second thought comes from the way in which our societies have responded to the crisis. 
Without  making  a  value  judgement,  but  considering  only  the  efficiency  and  timeliness  of 
actions  that  have  been  implemented  to  tackle  the  crisis  and  counter  its  negative  effects, 
there is no denying that in most cases the reaction has been slow. This slowness has added 
to  the  cost  of  the  crisis  itself  and  to  the  scale  of  the  adjustment  required.  Let  me  offer  a 
couple of examples. If Lehman Brothers’ bankruptcy had been avoided in September 2008, 
through an effective and timely intervention, there would probably not have been the collapse 
of confidence that in the months thereafter affected the global economy. The rescue package 
–  TARP  –  would  very  probably  have  been  much  less  than  the  USD  700  billion needed  to 
restore calm to the markets. In Europe – to take another example – if the Greek government 
had  decided  to  intervene  with  corrective  action  as  early  as  autumn  2009,  having  just 
discovered the budget hole left by its predecessor, it could have avoided the sovereign debt 
crisis and the drastic adjustment programme which it then had to put in place under pressure 
from the markets. If the European countries had agreed in early February to provide financial 
support  for  Greece’s  adjustment  programme,  they  would  probably  have  avoided  the 
escalation  of  tensions  in  the  markets  last  spring  and  the  associated  crisis  of  confidence. 
They  would  have  avoided  paying  out  the  enormous  sums  which  became  necessary  when 
Greece lost access to the financial markets. 
2 
 BIS Review 134/2010
These examples show that in developed countries the economic policy measures necessary 
to maintain the confidence of the markets tend to be taken only when  markets are on the 
brink  or  in  the  middle  of  a  crisis.  Only  under  pressure  from  the  markets  do  governments 
seem  to  find  the  strength  and  the  consensus  to  adopt  the  necessary  measures  to  ensure 
financial stability. This increases the scale of the adjustment required and consequently the 
negative repercussions for the economy. The doubts about the ability of governments to take 
the  necessary  measures  in  turn  increases  the  distrust  of  financial  markets  and  tends  to 
intensify the crisis. 
How  does  this  vicious  circle  come  about?  Let  me  try  to  identify  some  factors  that 
characterise the problems that our societies face in reaching a consensus on decisive action 
in a crisis. 
The first factor concerns how the financial crisis is perceived by the public and sometimes 
even by economic policy-makers. In our affluent societies, accustomed to economic growth 
and well-being, most people do not understand the risks to financial stability. Moreover, there 
were  few,  even  in  the  inner  circle  of  decision-makers,  who  understood  the  gravity  of  the 
situation in which the markets found themselves in early May this year. 
The second factor is that, in the face of systemic crises, such as the one through which we 
have passed, those who govern must sometimes take decisions that infringe long-term rules. 
The most striking case is the rescue of a bank or a country. In theory this should not occur 
because taxpayers’ money should not be used to save those who have misbehaved or failed 
to comply with the rules. But in some cases it is necessary in order to avoid a systemic crisis 
that  can  have  even  more  devastating  effects.  In  a  democratic  system  it  is  very  difficult  to 
convince voters, especially if they do not perceive any imminent danger, that in some cases 
a discretionary interpretation of the rule is needed to avoid the worst. This was shown clearly 
in  Europe  when  it  came  to  deciding  on  the  support  package  for  Greece.  In  the  U.S.,  the 
administration was unable to go against the widely held sentiment, which was opposed to the 
use of public funds to save a bank, and decided to let Lehman Brothers fail. The subsequent 
rescue of AIG to avoid panic and financial ruin then turned out to be much more expensive 
for taxpayers. Fortunately we avoided this in Europe. 
Let  me  move  on  to  my  third  and  last  thought.  It  concerns  the  post-crisis  period.  The 
industrialised countries are emerging from the  crisis poorer, more indebted and with lower 
prospects  for  growth.  The  process  of  fiscal  consolidation  must  remain  the  cornerstone  of 
economic policy and form the basis for a radical overhaul of the economies in order to create 
more growth. But in the current environment I see two risks facing our democracies in the 
coming years. 
The  first  one  is  the  illusion  that  this  crisis  is  cyclical  rather  than  structural,  that  it  has  no 
impact  on  the  long-term  growth  potential  of  our  economies.  We  may,  in  this  case,  be 
deluding ourselves that traditional macroeconomic policies (monetary and fiscal) are per se 
able  to  restore  growth  to  pre-crisis  levels.  Thus  there  is  a  risk  of  triggering  again 
unsustainable policies which in turn create new imbalances that sooner or later implode. 
The second risk is an attitude of resignation, of being resigned to not having the capacity and 
strength to untie the knots that restrict our growth potential, or of being resigned to economic 
stagnation. This state of mind is associated with the politician’s dilemma neatly articulated by 
the President of the Eurogroup, Jean-Claude Juncker: “We all know what to do, but we don’t 
know how to get re-elected once we have done it ”. This type of reasoning occasionally leads 
some people to argue that democratic systems are not up to making our societies swallow 
the medicine needed in order to grow again. Structural reforms in fact involve a redistribution 
of  income  to  the  detriment  of  the  less  efficient  sectors,  which  are  characterised  by 
monopolistic rents and are strongly opposed to change. The idea is often floated that some 
emerging countries are better able to manage the current crisis because they have “stronger” 
regimes, which do not need to justify their actions vis-à-vis their electorates very often. 
BIS Review 134/2010 
 3
These  are  dangerous  positions  in  my  view  and  are  not  justified  by  empirical  evidence. 
Juncker’s provocative remark is not in fact substantiated by the facts. He himself is one of 
Europe’s veteran political leaders, who has brought rigour and development to his country 
and was re-elected three times in a row. An analysis of the correlation between economic 
variables  and  political  popularity  in  Europe  reveals  that,  contrary  to  what  many  believe, 
budgetary  austerity  and  reforms  do  not  penalise  governments.  Indeed,  in  recent  years  in 
Europe  there  has  been  a  positive  correlation  between  political  popularity  and  budgetary 
rigour  (see  Chart  1).  The  correlation  is  much  stronger  than  the  one  between  political 
popularity  and  economic  growth  (see  Chart  2),  which  indicates  that,  for  a  given  level  of 
growth, healthy public finances reward governments. This suggests that political leaders who 
have  the  courage  and  the  ability  to  reconcile  balanced  public  finances  with  the  economic 
growth are rewarded over time. 
Democratic systems should not to be blamed if advanced economies risk stagnation and do 
not grow. They are in danger only if people succumb to the illusion or become resigned to 
thinking  that  democracies  do  not  allow  change.  Centuries  of  history  demonstrate  just  the 
opposite: that without democracy there is no change, and sooner or later there is decline. 
Thank you for your attention. 
Chart 1 
Trust in national government vs. government  
balance (average 2005–2009) – EU 
Sources: Eurostat, Eurobarometer and ECB calculations. 
Note:  “Tend  to  trust  government”  is  the  proportion  of  respondents  to  the  May  2010 
Eurobarometer survey who reported trusting their national government. 
 4 
 BIS Review 134/2010
Chart 2 
Trust in national government vs. growth  
per capita (average 2005–2009) – EU 
Sources: Eurobarometer, EC and ECB calculations. 
Note:  “Tend  to  trust  government”  is  the  proportion  of  respondents  to  the  May  2010 
Eurobarometer survey who reported trusting their national government. 
 BIS Review 134/2010 
 5
