Brian Wynter: Improving credit conditions and the role of credit bureaus 
Speech by Mr Brian Wynter, Governor of the Bank of Jamaica, at the Jamaica Employers 
Federation’s CEO breakfast, Kingston, 16 November 2010. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Thank  you  for  inviting  me  to  speak  at  one  of  the  Jamaica  Employers  Federation’s  CEO 
Breakfast. As is well known but perhaps not sufficiently emphasised, the Jamaican economy 
is in the middle of implementing a comprehensive set of policy reforms. As the transformation 
unfolds,  economic  agents  will  be  called  on  to  make  changes  in  the  way  we  do  business. 
Accordingly, this morning I want to speak to you on an initiative that has gained increasing 
importance  in  the  world  at  large  and  on  which  Jamaica  is  about  to  embark.  Specifically,  I 
would like to share with you some thoughts on how to improve credit conditions and the role 
of credit bureaus in doing so.  
In  recent  months  there  have  been  loud  cries  for  commercial  banks  to  lower  their  lending 
rates. These calls have come against the background of the Central Bank lowering its 30-day 
signal rate fairly sharply over the past nine months (most recently by half a percentage point 
to  7.50%  last  week  Friday).  Also,  there  have  been  steady  and  substantial  declines  in  the 
market-determined yields on Government instruments. Successful completion of the Jamaica 
Debt Exchange heralded an era of low interest rates for the Jamaican economy and interest 
rates in the money market are currently at the lowest they have been in over two decades. 
Not  surprisingly,  while  economic  agents  are  willing  to  accept  these  lower  rates  on  their 
financial investments, they would also like to access loan funds at lower costs. 
The Bank of Jamaica would also like to see a reduction in lending rates but as the supervisor 
of  deposit-taking  institutions,  we  have  a  responsibility  to  ensure  that  the  institutions  we 
supervise operate their businesses in such a way that the stability of the financial system is 
not compromised. It is in this vein that I will speak to you this morning on one initiative that 
will improve the efficiency of the market for credit while at the same time lowering costs to 
borrowers. 
The  subject  of  my  remarks  today  was  also  motivated  by  the  recent  release  of  the  report 
“Doing Business 2011: Making a Difference for Entrepreneurs” by the World Bank and the 
International  Finance  Corporation.  In  the  report,  Jamaica  was  ranked  81st  out  of 
183 countries that were surveyed. At a more granular level, we were ranked 89th in the area 
of “Getting Credit” and this ranking was in part associated with Jamaica not having a credit 
bureau or credit registry. Well, Jamaica is now at an advanced stage in setting up a credit 
reporting  system  so  there  are  good  reasons  to  believe  that  by  the  time  the  next  report  is 
released the existence of the new system will contribute to an improvement in our ranking 
and that you will all see a difference through its impact on your businesses. 
In line with international best practices, Jamaica enacted legislation in August 2010 in order 
to facilitate the sharing of credit information. The Credit Reporting Act, which came into effect 
on 1 October 2010, provides the legal framework for a credit reporting regime in Jamaica and 
is  designed 
facilitate  enhanced  risk 
management and loan pricing strategies throughout the financial sector. The Act prescribes 
or specifies such matters as: 
– 
– 
– 
– 
licensing of persons who wish to offer credit reporting services;  
eligible credit information providers;  
the nature of credit information;  
the use of credit information;  
improve  credit  assessment  processes  and 
to 
BIS Review 165/2010 
 1
persons who can request a credit report;  
access by customers to their own credit information;  
the handling of customer complaints; and  
supervisory oversight by the regulatory authority, that is, Bank of Jamaica. 
– 
– 
– 
– 
On  2  November  2010,  the  Credit  Reporting  Regulations  were  affirmed  by  the  House  of 
Representatives and, a few days later, the Senate began its deliberations on the matter. The 
regulations prescribe such operational matters as the licence application process, forms and 
fees.  The  Bank  of Jamaica  having  been  designated  as  the  supervisor  of  credit  bureaus  is 
now preparing to take up its oversight responsibilities. This includes:  
1.  
reporting and the mechanics of the regime. This involves: 
– 
Public education to make consumers aware of the objectives and benefits of credit 
media features (during February 2010, the Bank published an item under its “Central 
Banking 101 feature” titled “Credit Bureau Explained” as part of public sensitisation 
exercises);  
pamphlets with “Frequently Asked Questions” (FAQs) – which will shortly be made 
available; and  
a dedicated webpage on the Bank of Jamaica website, once official copies of the 
Act and the Regulations are made available to the Bank for posting on the site along 
with a set of frequently asked questions and other useful information (such as the 
procedures  for  filing  complaints  about  how  your  credit  information  has  been 
handled). 
  Licensing 
The  Bank  also  published  a  helpful  article  on  “Credit  Bureaus  and  the  Efficiency  of  Credit 
Markets” in its latest Quarterly Monetary Policy Report released on 10 November 2010.  
2.  
The Bank will be taking similar approaches and using similar methodologies to those applied 
in the review of applications for licences under deposit-taking legislation. These will include: 
– 
“fit  and  proper”  reviews  of  principals  (that  is,  prospective  owners,  directors  and 
managers);  
assessments of financial capacity and the source and adequacy of capital;  
reviews  of  business  plans  and  feasibility  studies  including  an  assessment  of  the 
proposed governance structure and a review of operational projections inclusive of 
proposed staffing levels;  
assessments  of  proposed  IT  infrastructure  and  control  system  to  assess  the 
capacity  and  controls  that  must  be  in  place  in  order  to  ensure  the  security  and 
integrity of credit information; and 
an assessment of procedures that will be put in place for handling complaints from 
the public. 
   The Bank is anticipating that licensing will take place in two phases. The first phase will result 
in conditional approval being granted where an applicant has satisfactorily met the required 
criteria  with  the  exception  of  having  fully  in  place  the  necessary  IT  and  operational 
infrastructure. The second phase which will lead to the actual granting of the licence on the 
establishment  of  IT  and  operational  systems  and  when  all  the  relevant  requirements 
pertaining to capacity, flexibility, security and integrity of information will be met. 
Discussions with other jurisdictions which have a credit reporting regime in place reveal that 
from  a  practical  standpoint,  the  establishment  of  operations  can  take  in  excess  of  a  year 
2 
 BIS Review 165/2010
given the IT infrastructure and the database of information required in order to commence 
services.  
The introduction of credit bureaus is aimed at addressing the problem that banks and other 
creditors have in not having sufficient information on their borrowers that is readily available 
and reliable; in other words, the inability to assess the risk of the borrower properly. Where 
there is a lack of reliable information, high risk borrowers sometimes obtain loans where they 
otherwise might not while those with low risk may be denied loans or may face higher costs 
than necessary. 
Credit information sharing will help loan officers to assess objectively the creditworthiness of 
borrowers. With credit bureaus, a credit history where repayment patterns can be observed 
will be developed for borrowers. This will improve access to credit and the terms for loan 
repayment. The transparency afforded by the availability of credit information will also allow 
greater access to loans by individuals as well as small and medium-sized enterprises. As you 
will know, in the context of information gaps, banks tend to protect themselves by lending to 
larger companies which often are able to be more transparent than smaller companies and 
individuals.  
Credit  bureaus  will  reduce  the  informational  advantage  currently  enjoyed  by  large  banks 
leading to greater competition and lower spreads. In such an environment, all institutions 
will be able to compete for “good” borrowers while borrowers, armed with their credit history, 
will be able to shop around for the best terms. Lending will therefore not be left solely to the 
qualitative judgement of the loan officer as there will be objective criteria on which clients can 
be assessed.  
Potential clients will be able to challenge an assessment as this information will also be 
available  to  them.  In  fact,  in  countries  where  credit  information  includes  the  payment  of 
utility  bills,  the  incentives  for  a  greater  volume  of  lending  to  small  and  medium-sized 
borrowers has been observed to increase significantly. We hope, therefore, that in the next 
stage of development, utility companies in Jamaica will be encouraged to participate in credit 
bureaus.  
The  laws  and  regulations  that  are  being  put  in  place  by  the  Government  are  aimed  at 
generating trust in the system – trust that the information is stored in a secure manner 
and that it will remain secret and confidential. Permission will have to be given by borrowers 
if their information is to be shared with a financial institution. It is quite clear that the benefits 
to be derived from the establishment of credit bureaus will be eroded if there is no trust in the 
system.  
In conclusion, I would urge all of you to prepare to list your information in a credit bureau and 
to encourage others to do so. This will provide borrowers with greater negotiating tools with 
regard to the cost of loans and more desirable repayment periods. For lending institutions, 
there will be significant cost savings, both in processing time and loan preparation. Putting in 
place the infrastructure and policies to facilitate lower interest margins represents one more 
critical step in the process of securing the foundation for higher levels of growth and greater 
prosperity for Jamaica. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 165/2010 
 3
