Brian Wynter: The International Monetary Fund’s regional economic 
outlook 
Opening remarks by Mr Brian Wynter, Governor of the Bank of Jamaica, at the launch of the 
International Monetary Fund’s regional economic outlook, Kingston, 20 October 2010. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Welcome to the Bank of Jamaica. 
We are especially glad to have our colleagues and partners from the International Monetary 
Fund – both resident, Dr Gene Leon, and itinerant, Mr Gilbert Terrier (Senior Advisor in the 
Western  Hemisphere  Department  of  the  IMF)  –  and  our  fellow  Caribbean  central  banker, 
Dr Shelton  Nichols,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Trinidad  and  Tobago.  I  know 
that none of you are strangers to Jamaica, personally or professionally, and I hope that you 
will find this visit pleasant and fulfilling. I am also happy to recognise the Jamaican members 
of  the  panel  who  will  speak  later:  the  Financial  Secretary,  Dr  Wesley  Hughes,  Mr  Keith 
Collister, member of the Economic Policy Committee of the Private Sector Organisation of 
Jamaica and Dr Damien King, Head of the Department of Economics at the University of the 
West Indies Mona Campus. 
Many of you in the audience are accustomed to gather in this forum for a discussion of the 
quarterly  developments  in  the  Jamaican  economy  and  the  role  of  the  Bank  in  the  way 
forward. There will be some of that today but the point of view will be more panoramic and 
will cover the whole region, including Central and South America. Sufficient account will be 
taken  of  the  Jamaican  situation  to  enable  us  to  appreciate  the  context  and  the  parallels 
across the region. 
For most of the last two years, policymakers around the world have focused their attention on 
attenuating the impact of the fallout in the global economy; repairing the damage to financial 
infrastructure;  supporting  those  sectors  and  persons  that  were  hit  hardest;  and  stimulating 
recovery as fast and as far as possible. The review of the outcomes in different countries will 
no  doubt  reveal  that  those  with  flexible  or  growing  links  to  the  new  poles  of  growth  fared 
much  better  than  those  without  such  links.  Here  in  Jamaica,  we  did  not  experience  the 
collapse of financial firms as many others did owing mainly to the reform and recapitalization 
of  the  sector  that  took  place  over  the  previous  decade.  Neither  did  we  undergo  the  sharp 
declines in housing and other asset prices that others did. Jamaica, however, found itself in a 
position where it faced the prospect of a slow, uncertain path to economic recovery not only 
because of its own inertia and uncompetitiveness but also because its fortunes were tied to 
the pace of recovery in the most severely affected economies. Moreover, with the economy 
already hamstrung by a legacy of vast and growing public debt, there was little room for local 
fiscal stimulus. 
Adopting  a  longer  view  of  growth  and  development,  the  authorities  took  the  opportunity  of 
using the support on offer from the multilaterals to formulate and implement a broad slate of 
reforms.  At  the  end  of  the  process,  the  programme  promises  an  even  stronger  financial 
architecture,  a  clear  path  towards  fiscal  and  debt  sustainability  and,  importantly,  the 
entrenchment of macroeconomic stability as a basis for more investment and steady growth. 
Since February 2010, we have embarked resolutely on the reform path and have made good 
progress to date. 
The  International  Monetary  Fund,  which  has  played  a  key  role  in  global  surveillance  and 
advice, has a unique and privileged view of cross-country developments. It is not very often, 
however, that we have the opportunity to have senior officials from that institution discuss the 
issues and solutions that are specific to our region and for them to receive feedback on those 
BIS Review 143/2010 
 1
views  from  practitioners  across  the  region.  Discussions  at  events  such  as  the  Annual 
Meetings of the Fund and the World Bank need to satisfy the needs of a large number of 
constituents. They therefore tend to be either too “global” in their plenary discussions or too 
fragmented in their selection of issues related to the Caribbean for there to be meaningful 
regional perspectives. We therefore welcome this initiative to present the Regional Economic 
Outlook right here in Jamaica and the Bank of Jamaica is happy to be the appointed place 
for what will follow over the next two hours or so. 
So, again, let me welcome you to this presentation of the Regional Economic Outlook by the 
IMF and the discussion to follow. We look forward to your active participation. Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 143/2010
