William C Dudley: How goes the recovery? Challenges for the nation, the 
region and the Fed 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, at Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, 25 October 2010. 
 Good  morning.  I  am  pleased  to  have  this  opportunity  to  speak  to  you  as  I  travel  through 
Upstate New York to meet with various communities in the region. This afternoon I will focus 
on national and regional economic conditions and what the Fed is doing about them – with 
particular attention to the housing sector and to conditions in Upstate New York. As always, 
what  I  have  to  say  reflects  my  own  views  and  not  necessarily  those  of  the  Federal  Open 
Market Committee (FOMC) or the Federal Reserve System.  
Introduction to the New York Fed 
As many of you know, this is my first chance to speak at Cornell University since I became 
president of the New York Fed. So, by way of introduction, let me start with a synopsis of 
what the New York Fed is, what we do and what makes my job so interesting. 
The New York Fed is part of the Federal Reserve System, America’s central bank, and was 
created  by  Congress  in  1913.  With  this  act,  Congress  delegated  to  the  Fed  System  its 
constitutional  authority  to  manage  the  money  supply  –  and  designed  it  be  decentralized, 
representative of all of America and independent of the political process. The Fed System is 
comprised  of  the  Board  of  Governors  in  Washington,  D.C.  –  a  federal  agency  led  by 
Chairman Ben Bernanke – plus 12 autonomous Reserve Banks that span the country. For 
example, the district overseen by the New York Fed includes all of New York, the 12 northern 
counties  of  New  Jersey;  Fairfield  County,  Connecticut;  Puerto  Rico  and  the  U.S.  Virgin 
Islands.  Each  Reserve  Bank  is  autonomous,  with  its  own  charter  and  a  board  of  directors 
drawn  from  its  district,  but  overseen  by  the  Board  of  Governors.  The  law  that  created  the 
Federal  Reserve  made  us  independent  so  we  can  make  decisions  in  the  national  interest 
free from political pressure. However, the Fed is accountable to Congress. 
Congress  has  set  an  explicit  objective  for  monetary  policy:  To  pursue  the  highest  level  of 
employment  consistent  with  price  stability.  This  objective  is  often  referred  to  as  our  “dual 
mandate,” because it combines two goals: high employment, and low and stable inflation. In 
order to promote these objectives, we also pay close attention to financial stability, because 
without financial stability, it is very hard to achieve our goals for jobs and inflation. 
The  FOMC  meets  in  Washington,  D.C.,  eight  times  per  year  to  deliberate  and  vote  on 
monetary  policy.  As  New  York  Fed  president,  I  am  vice  chairman  at  these  meetings  and 
have a permanent vote. At these meetings, the 16 other members (the Board of Governors 
and  the  other  Reserve  Bank  Presidents)  and  I  each  present  our  current  outlook  for  the 
economy.  For  these  assessments,  we  augment  input  from  our  research  departments  with 
critical  information  about  local  economic  conditions  supplied  by  our  boards  of  directors, 
regional advisory councils and conversations with local stakeholders. You may know that one 
of my councils, the Upstate New York Regional Advisory Board, is designed specifically to 
provide me with timely information from this area. In this way, decisions by the FOMC are 
continually informed by views gathered from all parts of the country, including Upstate New 
York. 
One thing that makes my job even more interesting is that New York has some roles unique 
within the Fed. Let me tell you about some of them. We, alone, implement monetary policy. 
At the direction of the FOMC, we buy and sell Treasury securities. We are also the eyes and 
ears of the Fed on Wall Street, and we supervise many of the largest financial institutions in 
BIS Review 141/2010 
 1
the country. We operate Fedwire® – the conduit for large money transfers between banks. 
And, we provide banking services to the U.S. Treasury, and central banks and governments 
from around the world. Finally, I must mention that the New York Fed’s district could be the 
most  diverse  in  the  System:  ranging  from  the  urban  density  of  Manhattan  to  the  forested 
sparseness  of  the  northern  Adirondacks,  to  the  Caribbean  islands  of  Puerto  Rico  and  the 
Virgin Islands. All in all, there is a lot to keep my colleagues and me quite busy – even in 
normal times. 
The crisis and response 
Of course these are anything but normal times. The financial crisis that broke in mid-2007 
and  intensified  dramatically  following  the  failure  of  Lehman  Brothers  has  been  among  the 
most  virulent  ever.  And  it  was  followed  by  the  longest  and  one  of  the  deepest  recessions 
since World War II, called by many the “Great Recession.” 
The Fed responded aggressively and creatively in an effort to pursue our dual mandate. Our 
actions fell into two broad buckets. 
First, we took steps to supply liquidity to the financial system, so that financial markets could 
continue to function properly and to enable households and businesses to maintain access to 
credit.  Carrying  out  an  age-old  central  banking  role,  we  loaned  funds  to  financial  firms, 
secured against their high-quality collateral. 
Traditionally, such loans were only made to depository institutions, such as banks. Of course, 
the  modern  U.S.  financial  system  includes  many  lenders  that  are  not  banks.  These 
companies  and  markets  provide  vital  financing  for  credit  card  loans,  short-term  business 
needs and many other activities. Many years ago, Congress gave the Fed the emergency 
authority to lend to nonbanks in “unusual and exigent circumstances.” During the crisis – in 
order to limit damage to the wider economy – we exercised this authority to lend to a wide 
variety of financial firms and markets. 
A handful of times, we made the difficult decision to make emergency loans to prevent the 
disorderly failure of particular firms. We did so not because we wanted to help the firms, but 
because allowing them to collapse in a disorderly fashion in the midst of a global crisis would 
have  harmed  households  and  business  throughout  the  United  States.  All  the  Fed’s  loans 
were collateralized and we are confident they will be repaid in full. 
Second,  we  took  aggressive  steps  to  ease  monetary  policy  in  order  to  support  economic 
activity and employment. By the end of 2008 we reduced short-term interest rates to virtually 
zero – the lowest level in the history of the Fed. In order to provide still further support for the 
economy, we bought more than $1.5 trillion of long-term assets – principally mortgage bonds 
guaranteed by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac with the support of U.S. Treasury – between 
December 2008 and March 2010. 
When the Fed buys long-term assets, it pushes down long-term interest rates. This supports 
economic  activity  in  a  number  of  ways,  including  by  making  housing  more  affordable  and 
boosting  consumption  in  households  that  can  refinance  their  mortgages  at  lower  rates.  In 
addition,  low  long-term  rates  reduce  the  cost  of  capital  for  businesses,  thereby  fostering 
more  hiring  and  investment  spending  (on  equipment,  construction  and  machinery,  for 
example) for any given economic outlook. 
National economic conditions 
So  where  are  we  today?  Let  me  start  my  discussion  of  economic  conditions  with  a  few 
comments about national economic conditions. 
As  I  discussed  in  a  recent  speech,  the  Great  Recession  has  been  followed  by  a  tepid 
recovery. Since June 2009, economic activity has grown – but not robustly. 
2 
 BIS Review 141/2010
In  recent  months,  the  momentum  has  slowed.  After  rising  at  a  3.25  percent  annual  rate 
during  the  second  half  of  2009,  real  gross  domestic  product  growth  has  slowed.  With 
demand growth barely keeping pace with firms’ ability to increase productivity, job creation 
has been too weak to significantly reduce unemployment, which stands today at 9.6 percent. 
And,  as  is  typical  in  such  circumstances  of  considerable  slack,  the  rate  of  inflation  has 
declined. 
Why are we experiencing this soft patch now? There are several reasons: 
 
In its first year, this recovery – as is typical – benefited from firms replenishing their 
inventories. But this effect is now petering out.  
The growth impulse from the 2009 fiscal stimulus package is beginning to wane.  
The usual hand-off from inventory-led growth to private final demand is not yet fully 
established. Instead, we have ongoing sluggishness in two key sectors that have led 
past recoveries: consumer spending and housing. 
 The  slow  recovery  of  consumer  spending  and  housing  in  the  face  of  very  substantial 
monetary and fiscal stimulus reflects the painful unwinding of the dynamics at work during 
the  expansion  that  preceded  it.  Beginning  around  2003,  underwriting  standards  for 
residential  mortgages  were  significantly  relaxed,  leading  to  a  sharp  rise  in  household 
borrowing and in home prices. The rise in home prices helped support more borrowing as 
households used lines of credit and second mortgages to tap into their rising home equity. 
This also fueled a strong boom in home construction. But house price increases could not be 
sustained  without  limit.  When  home  prices  peaked  and  started  to  turn  down,  the  dynamic 
linking house prices, credit and consumption went into reverse. 
Let’s  consider  first  what  this  means  for  consumption.  Consumption  of  goods  and  services 
rose at a slow 2 percent annual rate over the first half of 2010 and with no sign of a rebound. 
Several  factors  are  inhibiting  families  from  spending,  including:  job  or  income  losses,  low 
confidence and declines in wealth as real estate and stock prices dipped. Households have 
been saving more and paying down their debts. Of course, lenders have also reinforced this 
tendency  with  tightened  underwriting  for  credit  relative  to  prerecession  standards.  Have 
households  completed  their  deleveraging,  so  they  will  soon  spend  more?  Although  we 
believe  that  substantial  progress  has  been  made,  it  is  hard  to  tell  how  much  further  this 
process has to run. 
Now, let’s consider why housing market activity – both new construction and sales – remains 
depressed. One reason for this is that many existing homes stand vacant. We estimate that 
there are roughly 3 million vacant housing units more than usual. This stock of vacant homes 
will shrink when foreclosures fall and more empty homes are sold or rented out. 
On  the  sales  side,  even  though  low  mortgage  interest  rates  and  falling  home  prices  have 
together  boosted  housing  affordability  to  its  highest  level  in  40  years,  the  current  pace  of 
sales is quite sluggish. Impediments to home sales include tight lending standards, a weak 
job market and continued uncertainty about home prices. Importantly, the large drop in home 
prices  between  2006  and  2008  also  reduced  homeowner  equity  broadly,  making  it  more 
difficult to “trade-up” and move into better homes. 
With lower home prices, many families now owe more on their mortgages than their homes 
are worth. This means that they cannot refinance or sell their homes easily if they experience 
a  crisis  such  as  a job  loss  or  a  serious  illness.  Foreclosure  completions  are  at  an  all-time 
high, although the initiation of new foreclosures may be finally slowing. Recently, attention 
has  focused  on  cases  where  some  of  the  documentation  used  in  the  foreclosure  process 
may  have  been  flawed.  The  Fed  actively  encourages  efforts  to  find  viable  alternatives  to 
foreclosure.  Not  many  people  know  this,  but  a  team  of  New  York  Fed  officials  work  with 
mortgage  counselors  and  community  activists  to  support  distressed  homeowners,  and  our 
lawyers  support  legal  aid  programs  for  people  facing  foreclosure.  At  the  same  time,  it  is 
BIS Review 141/2010 
 3
important  that  foreclosures  that  comply  with  the  law  can  ultimately  take  place.  This  is  a 
necessary part of returning the housing market to more normal conditions. 
Along with two other agencies, the Fed is reviewing the foreclosure practices at the major 
bank mortgage servicers. We are also keeping an eye on banks’ potential liabilities where 
they  made  representations  about  mortgages  bought  by  investors  that  may  not  have  been 
correct in all cases. We want to ensure that the housing finance business is supported by 
robust back-office operations – for processing of new mortgages as well as foreclosures – so 
that  homebuyers  and  investors  have  full  confidence  in  the  process.  We  are  monitoring 
developments  closely  in  order  to  evaluate  any  potential  impact  on  housing  or  financial 
markets and the overall economy. 
Economic conditions in Upstate New York 
Now let me turn to economic conditions in Upstate New York. It is no secret that this region 
has struggled with weak economic growth and population loss in recent decades. The region 
has experienced some very painful economic restructuring, particularly as it lost so many of 
its  high-paying  manufacturing  jobs.  Yet  the  process  has  yielded  a  productive  and  more 
diversified economy, with a larger service sector. For this and other reasons I will discuss, 
the Upstate New York economy has weathered the Great Recession relatively well. 
While  the  Upstate  economy  generally  underperformed  the  nation  during  the  1980s  and 
1990s, its recent experience has been quite different. During the Great Recession, Upstate 
New York’s job losses began later than they did for the United States as a whole, and those 
losses were generally less severe. 
The relatively strong economic performance of the region of late is clearly tied to its stable 
housing  markets.  Upstate  New  York’s  relatively  slow  economic  performance  and  lack  of 
population  growth  during  the  expansion  in  the  2000s  supported  only  modest  increases  in 
home  prices  and  sales  during  the  housing  boom.  When  home  prices  and  sales  began  to 
decline quite rapidly in many parts of the nation, they held steady across the region. As a 
result, Upstate New York has largely been spared the boom-and-bust cycle in housing that 
occurred  in  other  parts  of  the  country.  In  fact,  many  of  Upstate  New  York’s  metropolitan 
areas  even  experienced  home  price  appreciation  during  the  housing  bust,  making  these 
places among the best performing in the country during this period. Many parts of the country 
experienced  severe  housing  busts,  with  sharp  drops  in  housing-related  activity  (such  as 
construction and purchases of major appliances). For example, in fast-growing places such 
as California and Florida, construction jobs grew to be a large share of employment, but the 
number of these jobs then plummeted during the recession. This dynamic did not occur in 
places like Ithaca, where the housing sector was small and thus, had few jobs to lose. 
Another part of the story is that homeowners in Upstate New York did not take on as much 
debt,  and  households  have  been  less  strained  here  than  elsewhere.  One  reason  is  that 
home prices did not appreciate rapidly here, so homes remained affordable. Moreover, there 
was generally lower penetration of risky nonprime loans into the region’s housing markets. 
So, Upstate New York’s home loans have generally performed better than elsewhere in the 
country, with fewer delinquencies and foreclosures. Indeed, much of the region was spared 
the worst effects of the nonprime mortgage boom and bust. 
Thus, compared with other parts of the nation, the Upstate economy has performed well over 
the past few years. As a large and growing sector, local colleges and universities have surely 
contributed  to  the  region’s  economic  stability  over  the  past  few  years.  Indeed,  Cornell 
provides a clear example of how a university can play a key role in its local economy. The 
benefits of the higher education industry go beyond their direct economic contributions, such 
as employment and spending, for a very important reason: they can increase a region’s stock 
of human capital – that is, the total supply of knowledge and skills in its workforce. 
4 
 BIS Review 141/2010
A region’s human capital contributes to its economic success and resiliency. The educational 
activities of a region’s colleges and universities help build the skills of the local workforce. In 
addition, the knowledge created by colleges and universities through research activities can 
play a key role in starting and supporting local businesses. Businesses can use university 
expertise,  infrastructure  and  research  findings  to  help  them  develop  cutting  edge  products 
and  services.  Furthermore,  universities  often  employ  local  businesses  to  develop  and 
commercialize  products  that  arise  from  their  research  activities.  This  dynamic  can  expand 
local economic activity and consequently create new jobs for high-skilled workers in a region. 
These dynamics are clearly visible in Ithaca, where a large number of local companies – in 
industries  ranging  from  information  technology  to  medical  equipment  to  agriculture  –  are 
closely  tied  to  Cornell.  Many  of  these  companies  were  started  by  Cornell’s  faculty  and 
students and have remained in the local economy to stay connected to the university. Other 
companies  have  been  attracted  to  the  region  because  of  the  access  afforded  to  specific 
knowledge or new products and processes invented at Cornell. Higher education institutions 
such as Cornell play a vital role in upstate New York’s economy. 
The relative stability of the higher education industry has, not surprisingly, contributed to a 
strong  economic  performance  in  recent  years.  Ithaca’s  housing  market  is  among  the 
healthiest  in  the  state,  and  it  has  experienced  relatively  strong  employment  growth  during 
and  since  Great  Recession.  Indeed,  unlike  most  of  its  Upstate  peers,  Ithaca  has  gained 
population throughout the past decade. 
What is the Fed doing now? 
Since  the  beginning  of  the  downturn,  the  Fed  has  actively  used  monetary  and  regulatory 
policy  to  help  support  economic  activity  and  improve  economic  outcomes  –  here  in  Ithaca 
and across the nation – relative to what would have happened in the absence of this support. 
With regard to monetary policy, the Fed has in place a highly accommodative stance. The 
FOMC has said that it will keep short term interest rates at exceptionally low levels for an 
extended  period  of  time.  The  Fed  also  retains  large  amounts  of  mortgage-backed  bonds 
acquired  in order  to  support  the  housing  market  and  help  bring  down  mortgage  and  other 
long-term interest rates to the historically low rates in place today. 
The FOMC and the Chairman have stated their commitment to take further actions to bring 
interest rates down further should economic conditions warrant. In a recent speech, I said 
that both the current levels of unemployment and inflation and the timeframe over which they 
are  likely  to  return  to  levels  consistent  with  our  mandate  are  unacceptable.  I  said  that  I 
thought further Fed action was likely to be warranted unless the economic outlook were to 
evolve  in  a  way  that  made  me  more  confident  we  would  see  better  outcomes  for  both 
employment and inflation before too long. 
Turning to regulatory policy, the biggest lesson of the financial crisis is that severe financial 
disruptions  can  inflict  very  large  and  persistent  costs  on  people’s  lives  and  jobs.  Over  the 
past year, with Fed leadership and support, important new regulatory initiatives have been 
advanced to create a global financial system where the players cannot slide back into the 
risky “business as usual” that created this crisis. These include the recent agreement with 
international bank regulators (sometimes called “Basel III”) to impose stricter standards for 
globally active banks and the considerable regulatory changes embodied in the Dodd-Frank 
Act. 
These measures recognize that to avert or contain future financial crises, we need a financial 
system  that  can  withstand  large  negative  shocks.  First,  market  participants  must  not  have 
incentives  to  take  excessive  risks.  Instead,  incentives  should  reward  actions  that  support 
economic  growth  and  financial  stability.  And  financial  firms  must  set  aside  enough  capital 
and liquidity so that when things go wrong they can absorb losses with their own resources. 
Finally, if these buffers prove inadequate and a financial firm veers toward failure, the official 
BIS Review 141/2010 
 5
sector needs the tools to wind them down in an orderly manner without having to make the 
terrible  choice  between  a  chaotic  failure  that  harms  the  whole  economy  and  a  taxpayer-
funded rescue. 
Conclusion 
I appreciate the opportunity to talk to you about how my job at the New York Fed ties in with 
your lives and work here in Upstate New York. The links are many, including 
 
How  the  Fed’s  dual  mandate  for  full  employment  and  stable  prices  guides  our 
actions and affects your lives;  
How we rely on understanding economic conditions in Upstate New York as input 
when we formulate our policies; and  
How our efforts to restore financial stability have provided a more solid foundation 
for lending to households and businesses – including small businesses. 
  To summarize conditions at the moment: after a recession that was milder in Upstate New 
York than in many parts of the country, the region is showing signs of a modest recovery. A 
more  diversified,  more  knowledge-based  economy  and  a  relatively  small  housing  sector 
helped  to  limit  the  recession’s  impact  on  many  communities.  Nevertheless,  the  Great 
Recession  spread  much  pain  throughout  this  region  and  unemployment  remains  much 
higher than we would like. 
The Fed cannot wave a magic wand and make the problems remaining from the preceding 
period of excess vanish immediately. But we can provide essential support for the needed 
adjustments. Even with our best efforts, the road to full recovery here in Upstate New York 
and across the nation is likely to be long and bumpy. But I am confident that we will make it. 
And,  the  dynamism  that  is  represented  in  this  room  –  the  private  sector  combined  with 
academic learning and research – will provide a strong underpinning for future prosperity. 
Thank you for your kind attention. I will now be happy to take some questions. 
6 
 BIS Review 141/2010
