 William C Dudley: Basel and the wider financial stability agenda 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  2010  Institute  of  International  Finance  (IIF)  Annual 
Membership Meeting, Washington DC, 10 October 2010. 
 Over  the  past  year,  important  new  regulatory  initiatives  have  been  advanced  both  at  the 
national  and  international  level.  These  include  the  recent  agreement  in  Basel  on  stronger 
capital and liquidity standards for internationally active banks and the considerable regulatory 
changes embodied in the Dodd-Frank Act (DFA).  
Today  I  want  to  discuss  some  of  these  initiatives,  with  a  special  focus  on  the  recent 
agreement in Basel on capital and liquidity for large, internationally active banks. I will give 
my perspective on how these efforts have been informed by the lessons of the financial crisis 
and  discuss  what  some  of  the  likely  consequences  may  be  as  these  measures  are  put  in 
place.  Given  the  breadth  of  the  changes,  my  remarks  will  be  by  no  means  complete.  As 
always, my remarks reflect my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve 
System. 
The biggest lesson of the financial crisis is that severe financial disruptions can inflict very 
large and persistent costs on real economic activity and employment. Thus, lawmakers and 
regulators  must  make  widespread  changes  to  create  a  more  resilient  and  robust  global 
financial system. But, at the same time, this must be done in way that ensures the financial 
system  retains  sufficient  dynamism  so  that  it  can  allocate  capital  efficiently  to  support 
innovation and economic growth. 
The crisis revealed a number of significant weaknesses in the global financial system. First, 
many leading financial institutions at the core of the system did not have enough high-quality 
capital to be able to retain access to private funding markets in the face of the large credit 
and mark-to-market losses. In particular, they often held grossly inadequate capital against 
their trading book exposures and the counterparty credit risk generated by activities such as 
their over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives business. 
Second,  individual  firms  and  the  system  as  a  whole  had  inadequate  liquidity  buffers  to 
withstand marketwide disruptions. Indeed, there was widespread overreliance on short-term 
funding  to  finance  long-term  illiquid  assets.  This  was  especially  evident  among  the  major 
securities  dealers,  which  depended  on  tri-party  repo  funding  to  finance  much  of  their 
securities inventories, and in the so-called shadow banking system, in which entities such as 
structured  investment  vehicles  and  conduits  were  dependent  on  short-term  funding  to 
finance their long-term assets. Banks that had provided liquidity guarantees to these shadow 
banks were in turn exposed to runs on those entities. 
Third,  a  lack  of  transparency  exacerbated  uncertainty  about  the  creditworthiness  of  many 
institutions.  Some  of  this  was  due  to  the  complexity  of  the  assets  –  collateralized  debt 
obligations (CDOs), in particular, were very hard to value even in normal times. But, some of 
this was also due to the lack of transparency about certain markets – the OTC derivatives 
market for credit default swaps is one notable example. 
Fourth, an inappropriate structure of incentives encouraged excessive risk-taking. This was 
evident  within  firms  in  the  form  of  “the  trader’s  option”,  in  which  compensation  was  based 
mainly  on  fiscal  year  results  with  no  clawback  when  mark-to-market  profits  on  illiquid 
securities and other assets turned into losses. It was also evident in the ability of the largest 
firms to benefit in terms of their funding costs via a perception that they would be “too big to 
fail”. 
BIS Review 131/2010 
 1
     Fifth,  regulators  and  market  participants  did  not  appreciate  how  the  financial  system  was 
interconnected so that shocks were transmitted broadly through the financial system, often 
intensifying rather than dampening as they spread. 
The severe economic costs generated by the crisis indicate that the primary goal must be to 
reduce the likelihood and the severity of future financial crises. To accomplish this, we need 
a financial system that is better suited to withstand shocks of all kinds, regardless of their 
source. We need a financial system in which market participants face the appropriate set of 
economic  incentives  so  that  they  do  not  take  excessive  risks,  but  instead  behave  in  ways 
that  generate  outcomes  that  are  supportive  to  economic  growth  and  ongoing  financial 
stability. This requires financial institutions to internalize the costs of their risk-taking activities 
up  front  and  to  hold  capital  and  liquidity  buffers  sufficient  to  handle  a  plausible  range  of 
adverse  outcomes.  Finally,  on  occasions  when  these  buffers  prove  inadequate  and  a 
financial firm does reach the brink of failure, the official sector needs the capacity to smoothly 
wind down such firms so that future taxpayer-funded rescues prove unnecessary. 
Regulatory and supervisory efforts to accomplish these goals are proceeding down several 
distinct but related paths: 
 
Increase  the  capital  and  liquidity  standards  for  all  internationally  active  banks, 
measured by both quantity and quality of capital and liquidity, so that they are better 
able  to  absorb  financial  shocks  without  disrupting  the  flow  of  credit  to  the  real 
economy.  
Introduce  a  credible  resolution  mechanism  for  managing  the  failure  of  a  large 
systemic bank or nonbank financial institution, to reduce the economywide costs of 
such failures and, by making them less disruptive, further reduce moral hazard by 
diminishing expectations of future public support.  
Ensure that the largest and most interconnected financial institutions – whether or 
not they are chartered as banks – face even more stringent prudential standards, in 
order to reduce moral hazard for the largest firms and lower the probability of their 
failure to below that of smaller and less systemically important institutions.  
Strengthen financial market infrastructures so that when failures inevitability occur, 
the  shocks  generated  by  these  failures  are  dampened,  not  amplified  as  they 
propagate through the financial system.  
Broaden the oversight of the financial system in order to identify sources of systemic 
risk that may emanate from nonbank financial firms or from other areas of activity. 
Turning first to the Basel III capital and liquidity standards agreed upon by the Governors and 
Heads  of  Supervision  Committee  (GHOS)  in  Basel  last  month,  I  believe  these  standards 
address  some  of  the  major  shortcomings  revealed  by  the  crisis.  In  particular,  the  new 
standards  will  require  banking  organizations  to  significantly  increase  the  amount  of  high-
quality,  loss-absorbing  capital  that  they  hold;  significantly  improve  risk  capture  in  trading, 
counterparty  credit,  securitization  and  other  activities  that  the  prior  regulatory  capital 
requirements  did  not  adequately  capture;  make  it  more  expensive  for  banks  to  provide 
liquidity  guarantees  to  shadow  banks;  constrain  the  leverage  that  banking  companies  can 
take by introducing a credible, non-risk-based backstop; and increase the capacity of banks 
to  absorb  shocks  that  might  temporarily  impede  their  ability  to  access  short-term  funding 
markets. While these changes apply directly only to large internationally active banks, they 
will have wider ramifications for the financial system as a whole, including nonbanks and the 
capital markets. 
Furthermore,  I  believe  that  the  agreement  achieves  an  appropriate  balance  between 
significantly increasing the minimum capital and liquidity requirements for the major banks, 
while  doing  so  in  a  way  that  recognizes  the  current  state  of  the  global  economy  and  that 
seeks to minimize adjustment costs. The international regulatory community consciously has 
2 
 BIS Review 131/2010
 been willing to trade off a relatively slow phase-in period for the new standards in order to 
reach a much higher level of standards. 
The  new  capital  rules  are  intended  to  provide  strong  incentives  for  banks  to  change  their 
business models in ways that make the system more stable and reduce the negative impact 
their  actions  have  on  others  –  for  instance,  by  providing  incentives  to  standardize  OTC 
derivatives contracts and clear such standardized trades through central counterparties. To 
understand  what  these  new  requirements  mean  for  the  amount  of  capital  banks  will 
ultimately have to hold, it is important to note that one of the intended consequences of these 
changes  is  for  banks  to  adjust  their  business  models  in  ways  that  reduce  the  risks  their 
activities generate. This adjustment will likely reduce the amount of extra capital that banks 
would need relative to a world in which they kept their business models unchanged even as 
the  new  rules  were  phased  in.  In  other  words,  the  impact  on  banks  must  be  evaluated 
dynamically, not by taking a snapshot of the banks’ activities and balance sheets today. 
That  said,  the  new  capital  standards  are  much  tougher  than  the  existing  regime.  The 
requirements  have  been  strengthened  in  several  different  dimensions.  First,  the  standards 
emphasize  common  equity  by  creating  an  explicit  quantitative  capital  standard  for  this 
highest form of capital, as compared with an implicit qualitative standard under the previous 
rules. This is important because the crisis demonstrated that bank investors and debt holders 
have  a  strong  presumption  that  only  common  equity  is  truly  loss  absorbing  outside 
bankruptcy.  In  the  crisis,  as  losses  climbed,  Tier  1  capital  ratios  were  eroded  from  the 
bottom,  with  tangible  common  equity  ratios  sometimes  shrinking  to  levels  that  raised 
questions  about  a  bank’s  viability  and  its  ability  to  access  the  equity  and  debt  markets. 
Although common equity is typically a higher-cost form of capital for banks, it absorbs losses 
on a going-concern basis and so preserves an institution’s viability in the eyes of the market 
much  better  than  other  forms  of  Tier  I  capital,  such  as  perpetual  preferred  stock  or  trust 
preferred securities (TRUPS). 
Second,  the  standards  create  a  new  definition  of  what  constitutes  common  equity.  The 
emphasis is on the ability of common equity to be loss absorbing. For that reason, there are 
limits on the amount of the assets that are not readily saleable or loss absorbing that can be 
counted toward a bank’s tangible common equity. These include assets such as mortgage 
servicing rights and deferred tax assets. Also, there is strict treatment of equity tied up in the 
form of minority interests. That is because this invested equity is not immediately available to 
the parent company to absorb losses in that company’s operations. 
Third, the minimum required ratio of total tangible common equity to risk-weighted assets will 
be increased significantly. Once the new standards are fully phased in, it will have to equal 
4.5 percent of risk-weighted assets. 
Fourth, the measure of risk-weighted assets – the denominator of the capital adequacy ratio – 
is constructed to better capture the risks that banks are taking in their activities. For example, 
the  risks  weights  on  trading  account  assets  and  for  counterparty  exposures  have  been 
increased substantially to reflect the lessons of the crisis. Note that due to better capture of 
the underlying risks, at least initially, aggregate risk-weighted assets in the system are likely to 
increase. This is not because the inherent riskiness of bank balance sheets has increased, 
but rather because that riskiness will be better captured. 
In addition to the 4.5 percent minimum common equity standard, there is also a new capital 
conservation buffer requirement equal to 2.5 percent of risk-weighted assets. If a bank were 
to  incur  losses  and  fall  deeper  and  deeper  into  this  buffer,  increasingly  tough  limitations 
would  come  into  play  in  terms  of  the  bank’s  ability  to  make  capital  distributions  by  paying 
dividends or buying back shares. This capital conservation buffer is designed to forestall the 
type  of  behavior  that  we  saw  during  the  crisis  –  banks  continuing  to  dissipate  capital  by 
paying out dividends in order to demonstrate that they were strong. Instead, banks will have 
an incentive to raise additional equity to exit the buffer and its restrictions on distributions. 
BIS Review 131/2010 
 3
 In  order  to  maintain  operational  flexibility  in  terms  of  their  business  operations  and  an 
ongoing ability to distribute capital to their shareholders, we expect that banks will want to 
maintain  their  level  of  tangible  common  equity  at  or  above  7  percent,  the  sum  of  the 
minimum requirement and the conservation buffer. However, we do anticipate that the buffer 
may be penetrated from time to time during adverse economic environments. 
Finally, the risk-based ratios will be back-stopped by a new leverage ratio standard, which 
will constrain the amount of overall leverage that a banking organization can take relative to 
the sum of its non-risk-weighted assets and off-balance-sheet exposures. 
Together,  these  changes  represent  a  very  significant  upgrade  of  the  standards:  A  much 
higher  proportion  of  this  ratio  is  now  met  by  common  equity;  that  common  equity  is  much 
better quality than before; the amount of risk-weighted assets against which capital must be 
held has increased and better reflects underlying risk; a new capital conservation buffer is 
added, and there is a new backstop against excessive leverage. 
So what were the considerations that went into constructing this new standard? The basic 
goal  was  to  enable  the  big,  internationally  active  banks  covered  by  the  Basel  Accord  to 
absorb the type of losses associated with a major marketwide financial shock and still retain 
sufficient market confidence so that they could continue to be able to fund themselves and, if 
necessary, to raise additional equity without the need for unusual government support. 
I believe that the requirements were the outgrowth of at least four major considerations: 
1.  
What type of losses could banks expect to occur in a crisis? In other words, how 
thick a buffer was needed to absorb shocks? This is represented by the 2.5 percent capital 
conservation buffer. Although this is not thick enough to protect every bank in every crisis, it 
does  create  a  loss-absorbing  cushion  so  that  banks  will  retain  their  ability  to  access  the 
capital markets even after incurring significant losses. 
2.  
How  much  common  equity  must  a  bank  hold  to  be  viewed  as  viable  by  financial 
market  participants?  This  is  important  because  beyond  a  certain  point  banks  lose  their 
access  to  the  capital  markets,  and  this  makes  failure  much  more  likely.  The  4.5  percent 
minimum common equity requirement is set at a high enough level so that a bank operating 
above this level would very likely still be able to access the capital markets to replenish its 
capital base after large losses. 
3.  
international 
convergence in terms of standards. This is necessary to minimize competitive inequity and to 
avoid creating incentives for a race to the bottom. If standards differed markedly around the 
world, then the conversation would inevitably shift to “what will help my banks competitively” 
from “what levels of capital do we need to have a sound financial system”. 
4.  
What is the appropriate tradeoff between benefits and costs? There are diminishing 
returns in terms of the benefits of ever higher capital requirements. Setting the bar at too high 
a  level  would  increase  intermediation  costs  too  much  and  drive  activities  offshore  or  into 
areas that are not as closely regulated. At some point, higher requirements would not make 
the financial system safer, just the regulated sector much smaller. 
On this last point, some argue that the new standards are too severe. They argue that, in the 
short run, the higher standards could lead to a significant constraint in credit that could hurt 
the  nascent  economic  expansion.  And,  they  argue,  in  the  long  run,  that  the  higher  capital 
standards will inevitably drive up lending costs and that this will hurt economic performance. 
Although I believe the new standards do impose some real costs on the financial system in 
order to achieve real benefits, I believe that concerns over the costs are exaggerated. 
Turning first to the issue of the transition to the new regime, we cannot precisely predict the 
size of the adjustment costs as they will depend importantly on the strategies bank managers 
employ  to  meet  the  new  requirements,  and  how  bank  investors  respond  to  these  actions. 
Nonetheless, I believe the transition is likely to be quite manageable for three reasons. 
What  was  achievable 
internationally? 
important 
to  have 
is 
It 
4 
 BIS Review 131/2010
 First, many of the large U.S. banks already have large amounts of tangible common equity. 
In  part,  this  represents  the  regulatory  response  during  the  crisis.  The  Supervisory  Capital 
Assessment  Program  (SCAP)  in  2009  required  the  large  banks  to  have  a  capital  buffer 
consistent  with  achieving  a  Tier  I  common  ratio  of  4  percent  under  a  stress  environment 
considerably worse than what was anticipated (or did, in fact, occur). Banks that fell short of 
this  were  forced  to  raise  additional  capital.  On  top  of  this,  Troubled  Asset  Relief  Program 
(TARP)  repayment  terms  provided  strong  incentives  for  banks  to  issue  common  equity  to 
repay  the  TARP  preferred  stock.  In  addition,  several  banks  converted  preferred  stock  into 
common equity. Roughly speaking, the 19 banks subject to the SCAP generated more than 
$100 billion of common equity via share issuance and $80 billion via conversion of preferred 
stock into common equity in 2009. 
Second, as noted above, the standards are being phased in slowly. For example, in 2013, 
the  tangible  common  equity  standard  will  be  only  3.5  percent.  In  2013,  there  will  be  no 
conservation buffer requirement and banks will still get credit for items that will ultimately be 
deducted  from  common  equity,  such  as  deferred  tax  assets.  The  Federal  Reserve,  as  the 
consolidated  supervisor  of  the  largest  and  most  complex  banking  companies,  does  not 
expect  these  banks  to  meet  the  fully  phased  in  standards  today.  Instead,  the  Federal 
Reserve  will  require  firms  to  develop  an  adequate  capital  plan  to  meet  the  Basel  III 
requirements as they become effective and will track progress toward meeting those plans 
over time. 
Third,  banks  have  many  ways  they  can  adjust  their  business  models  to  meet  the  new 
standards  as  they  are  phased  in.  Many  of  these  changes  can  occur  without  any  risk  of 
disruption to the flow of credit to households and business. For instance, banks can sell non-
strategic assets to investors and can modify their minority investments in non-consolidated 
interests. 
Low-quality  legacy  assets,  such  as  subprime  mortgage  loans  and  second  mortgages,  will 
mature  and  run  off.  Risk-weighted  assets  will  tend  to  fall  as  the  economy  recovers. 
Moreover, as banks book profits, deferred tax assets will shrink, reducing the magnitude of 
these future deductions from common equity. 
Finally,  it is  important  to  note  the significant  potential  earnings  power  of  large  U.S.  banks, 
which have historically tended to have higher rates of return on their average assets relative 
to  many  of  their  foreign  counterparts.  Banks  that  currently  are  short  of  the  2019  standard 
could retain these future earnings to build up their capital ratios. Equity analysts project that 
the 20 largest U.S. banks will earn more than $80 billion in 2010, and consensus estimates 
expect  that  figure  will  increase  to  around  $110  billion  in  2011.  Of  course,  because  these 
estimates are dependent on an economy that continues to recover, we need to be cautious 
about relying entirely on as-yet-unrealized earnings as the primary means to meet the higher 
capital standards. 
So  what  about  the  long-run  consequences?  It  would  be  prudent  to  assume  that  requiring 
banks  to  hold  more  capital  and  higher  cost  capital  is  likely  to  result  in  somewhat  higher 
lending spreads. Bank managements will need to generate sufficient income to support the 
rate of return on equity at a sufficient high level so banks can continue to attract capital from 
investors. 
Of critical importance is whether the increase in lending spreads is likely to be large or not. 
Those who argue that the new capital standards will necessitate a large increase in lending 
spreads  generally  start  with  a  rigid  set  of  assumptions.  These  include:  1)  Return  on  bank 
equity  is  unchanged;  2)  the  increase  in  bank  equity  does  not  affect  funding  costs;  and 
3) there is no change in the banks’ book of business or on banks’ ability and willingness to 
adjust other expenses, such as compensation. 
Such  rigid  assumptions  are  unrealistic.  This  is  particularly  important  because  each 
assumption is likely to be wrong in the direction that reduces the impact on lending margins. 
First, the necessary return on equity that banks will have to generate to be able to attract 
BIS Review 131/2010 
 5
 capital will likely fall. Because banks with more capital should be safer and have less volatile 
earnings, investors should demand a lower return on equity than before. 
Second, by increasing the soundness of banks, an increase in bank equity, everything else 
equal, should also reduce funding costs. Third, higher bank lending spreads almost certainly 
will push some activity into the capital markets, constraining the magnitude of the rise in total 
lending  costs.  Finally,  banks  may  be  forced  via  competitive  pressures  to  lower  their 
compensation  levels.  By  cutting  compensation  costs,  banks  could  have  smaller  lending 
margins  and  still  earn  sufficient  profits  to  generate  a  level  of  returns  necessary  to  attract 
capital. Given all the potential margins for adjustment, there are good reasons to expect that 
the increase in lending margins will actually turn out to be quite modest. 
Although any increase will be a real cost, this appears to be a necessary and appropriate 
price  to  pay  for  a  much  more  resilient  financial  system.  The  cost  represented  by  higher 
lending  spreads  has  to  be  weighed  against  the  benefits  of  a  more  robust  and  resilient 
banking  system.  Recent  years  have  surely  taught  us  that  easy  access  to  credit  that  is 
underpriced  because  it  is  not  backed  by  sufficient  capital  is  not  a  sustainable  route  to 
prosperity. Indeed, to the extent that tougher standards reduce the misallocation of resources 
in  the  real  economy  that  often  accompanies  periods  of  financial  excess,  ensure  more 
consistent  access  to  finance  over  time  and  encourage  investment  by  holding  out  the 
prospect of greater economic stability, the new standards could be consistent with a more 
rapid sustainable growth rate over the long run. 
Turning next to the new Basel liquidity requirement, the new standard will likely necessitate a 
significant  adjustment  in  behavior  for  those  banks  that  historically  relied  on  short-term 
wholesale funding and those that had negligible buffers but instead had relied on the Federal 
Reserve and the Federal Home Loan Bank System to be their liquidity backstops. However, 
the  transition  costs  are  likely  to  be  quite  manageable  because,  as  was  the  case  for  the 
capital standards, there are many margins available for adjustment. 
Before  I  assess  the  transition  costs  of  the  liquidity  coverage  ratio  (LCR)  standard,  a  few 
words about what the LCR is intended to do and how it operates. The notion behind the LCR 
standard is that large, internationally active financial institutions should have a liquidity buffer 
that enables them to operate for 30 days in a stress environment without having to rely on 
government  support,  including central  bank  liquidity  backstops.  Banks  would  have  to  have 
sufficient liquid assets that they could sell to be able to meet outflows stemming from deposit 
withdrawals; bank debt that matures and is unable to be rolled over; and drawdowns from 
committed credit and liquidity facilities provided to financial firms and other entities. The size 
of  the  required  liquidity  buffer  depends,  in  part,  on  the  maturity  of  the  bank’s  assets  and 
liabilities, the stickiness of its deposit liabilities, the amount of irrevocable liquidity backstops 
and composition of its assets. 
The adjustment costs associated with the LCR standard should be low because, like capital, 
there are different, relatively low-cost ways to adjust to the standards. For example, because 
the liquidity buffer only needs to last for 30 days, a bank that extends the maturity of its short-
term wholesale borrowing or its deposit liabilities by a month or two will find that this goes a 
long way in helping to meet this standard. Banks could also cut the level of their backstop 
liquidity  lines  and  other  commitments  to  financial  firms.  The  standard  assumes  that  such 
lines of credit can be fully drawn upon and thus, count as potential draws against the buffer. 
Because the common international liquidity standards are relatively untested, regulators are 
implementing LCR with an “observation period”. What this means is that unanticipated and 
unintended consequences generated by the new liquidity standard will be closely scrutinized 
and,  if  necessary,  adjustments  will  be  made  to  the  rules  if  undesirable  effects  become 
evident  over  time.  For  example,  the  tough  requirements  on  backstop  liquidity  lines  could 
potentially be modified if such rules generated unintended negative consequences for short-
term  corporate  funding  markets,  such  as  the  nonfinancial  corporate  commercial  paper 
market. 
6 
 BIS Review 131/2010
 Moving on from the changes to capital and liquidity standards, I now want to discuss how 
firms,  markets  and  the  official  sector  deal  with  distress  in  the  event  that  it  does  occur.  Of 
paramount importance in making the financial system more robust is the need for a viable 
resolution  mechanism  for  large, complex  financial  firms.  The  Dodd-Frank  Act does  this  for 
the  nonbank  operations  of  systemically  important  U.S.  financial  firms  by  authorizing  the 
Federal  Deposit  Insurance  Corporation  (FDIC),  under  certain  conditions,  to  establish  a 
“bridge” bank to liquidate the troubled firm’s operations in an orderly manner. Any net outlays 
incurred by the FDIC in this process must be recovered by assessing levies on the financial 
industry. 
This  resolution  process  is  beneficial  because  an  orderly  resolution  prevents  the  type  of 
catastrophic collapse that leads to widespread market disruption. And it does so in a way that 
taxpayer  funds  are  not  at  risk.  However,  much  work  needs  to  be  done  so  that  market 
participants can understand how such resolutions would work in practice. In particular, there 
will  be  some  uncertainty  about  the  precise  conditions  that  will  trigger  a  resolution  under 
Title II of DFA. Even after DFA, the alternative of a normal Bankruptcy Code filing remains. In 
fact,  DFA  requires  an  evaluation  as  to  why  a  filing  under  the  Bankruptcy  Code  is  not 
appropriate.  In  addition,  the  Dodd-Frank  resolution  process  is  complex,  requiring  multiple 
steps. 
Moreover, the resolution regime in Title II of Dodd Frank could be very difficult to implement for 
complex, globally active firms. These banks operate in diverse legal regimes worldwide and it 
is very doubtful that DFA will apply to these banks’ operations outside the United States. 
One  approach  to  this  problem  would  be  to  harmonize  the  diverse  insolvency  laws  in  the 
various jurisdictions in which globally active firms have significant operations. But achieving 
this objective will be hard and take many years at a minimum. 
This  is  one  reason  to  require  additional  loss-absorbing  capacity  for  systemically  important 
firms, most (if not all) of which tend to be complex global organizations. Such a surcharge 
would be a mechanism to reduce the probability of failure for such firms below that of smaller 
firms. 
A  surcharge  for  systemically  important  financial  institutions  has  two  motivations.  First,  it 
compensates  for  the  distortion  created  by  the  fact  that  a  large  financial  firm  may  still  be 
resolved differently than smaller firms and that this could conceivably, by being an orderly 
resolution process, reduce the costs imposed upon creditors. To the extent creditors see this 
as a benefit, this might enable large banks to retain some funding advantage over smaller 
firms  not  likely  to  be  resolved  in  the  same  fashion.  Second,  it  recognizes  the  large  costs 
imposed on the broader financial system by the failure of systemically important banks. 
Such an approach is being pursued both internationally and in the United States. The recent 
Governors  and  Heads  of  Supervision  meeting  in  Basel,  for  example,  endorsed  additional 
loss-absorbing  capacity  for  systemically  important  firms.  Similarly,  the  Dodd-Frank  Act 
provides  that  the  Federal  Reserve  shall  establish  prudential  standards  for  systemically 
important  financial  companies,  including  capital  and  liquidity  standards  that  are  “more 
stringent” than for other institutions that do not present systemic risk. 
Strengthening  financial  market  infrastructures  is  another  important  initiative  underway  to 
make the financial system more resilient and robust. In this regard, there are two important 
strands  of  work  underway.  First,  there  is  strong  momentum  both  in  the  United  States  and 
abroad  to  require  that  standardized  OTC  derivative  products  be  cleared  through  central 
counterparties (CCPs) and that the information associated with all OTC derivatives trades be 
reported to trade repositories, with this information then being available to regulators around 
the world. 
Second, the Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems (CPSS) and the International 
Organization  of  Securities  Commission  (IOSCO)  are  undertaking  a  review  of  international 
standards for financial market infrastructures. This review will lead to a comprehensive set of 
BIS Review 131/2010 
 7
 recommendations  as  to  what  constitutes  best  practice  with  respect  to  the  operations  of 
financial  market  infrastructures.  These  recommendations  will  apply  to  a  broad  array  of 
financial market infrastructures, including CCPs and trade repositories. The final report will 
be completed during the first half of 2011. The goal will be to have these standards endorsed 
by the Financial Stability Board and the G-20 leaders. With those endorsements, it should be 
possible to harden the recommendations into more substantial standards. 
In all of the reforms that we are implementing it is important that we pay close attention to the 
shadow banking system. By shadow banks, I mean the largely unregulated financial entities 
that  take  credit  risk  and/or  engage  in  maturity  transformation  without  access  to  explicit 
governmental  backstops  such  as  the  Federal  Reserve’s  discount  window  and  or  deposit 
insurance. As we saw in the crisis, without such support, these institutions are vulnerable to 
runs.  When  this  occurred,  the  shadow  banking  sector  imploded  in  a  way  that  imposed 
significant costs on the regulated sector. 
The  risk  is  that  tighter  capital  and  liquidity  requirements  for  the  large  financial  institutions 
could push much of the business of credit intermediation and maturity transformation from 
the regulated sector to the unregulated sector. However, this risk is mitigated by the fact that 
shadow banks heavily rely on credit support and liquidity lines from the regulated sector. The 
costs of such facilities will be affected by the new capital and liquidity standards for banks. 
Thus, the economics of the shadow-banking sector are likely to change in a way that makes 
such activities less attractive. In addition, by increasing transparency and requiring some risk 
retention  by  issuers,  Dodd-Frank  should  make  the  securitization  markets  in  which  shadow 
banks  operate  less  likely  to  support  poorly  underwritten  credit.  Taken  together,  these 
changes mean it is less likely that there will be widespread movement of credit and maturity 
transformation  from  the  regulated  sector  to  the  unregulated  sector.  Nonetheless,  as  my 
colleague Governor Tarullo noted in a recent speech,1 more will need to be done to increase 
the  stability  of  the  unregulated  sector,  and  developments  in  this  area  will  need  to  be 
scrutinized carefully in the years ahead. 
Before closing, let me reiterate the importance to achieve harmonized global standards. As 
noted  earlier,  this  is  important  for  competitive  equity  reasons.  But  more  importantly,  it  is 
necessary  to  ensure  that  banks  and  other  financial  firms  cannot  move  their  activities  to 
evade regulation. If that were to occur, we would just have a race to the bottom and a less 
transparent and even more complex financial system. 
In this respect, it is important that we regulate the U.S. operations of foreign banks in a way 
that is consistent with how U.S. banks are treated. It is also important that we work for the 
same  type  of  national  treatment  abroad,  and  when  there  are  differences  in  regulatory 
regimes, that we find ways of reducing or eliminating the substantive differences over time. 
Finally, it is important that we clarify the responsibilities of the home and host countries and 
work to better share information across the regulatory community. This can help ensure that 
regulatory decisions are made and applied in a consistent and fair manner. It is also my hope 
that  by  establishing  a  robust  global  regime,  we  can  mitigate  the  incentives  for  national 
regulators  and  supervisors  to  impose  local  rules  that  make  it  hard  for  globally  active 
institutions  to  manage  their  operations  on  a  global  basis,  thereby  undermining  the  global 
integration of markets that has supported economic globalization. 
Over  the  next  12  to  18  months,  regulators  will  be  particularly  busy  in  implementing  these 
reform efforts. Broad legal statutes now have to be turned into specific rules and regulations 
governing  business  practices,  conduct  and  operations.  Doing  this  well  –  in  particular,  in  a 
way that is sufficiently informed, deep and broad – will be very important. Basel III and the 
                                                 
1   Governor  Daniel  K.  Tarullo,  Comments  on  “Regulating  the  Shadow  Banking  System”.  Brookings  Panel  on 
Economic Activity, September 17, 2010. 
8 
 BIS Review 131/2010
 Dodd-Frank Act are important markers on this road, but it will always be a journey to a never-
reached destination of perfection. 
Thank you for your kind attention. I would be happy to take a few questions. 
BIS Review 131/2010 
 9
