 Zeti Akhtar Aziz: South East Asia – potential and perspectives in the New 
Asia 
Luncheon address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 
2010  Institute  of  International  Finance  (IIF)  Annual  Membership  Meeting,  Washington  DC, 
8 October 2010. 
 Generating growth and a long lasting recovery is the primary priority for the global economy 
in this aftermath of the recent crisis. The massive life support that was provided to avert a 
deep recession was to be temporary – to provide the opportunity to address the weakness in 
the system and to rebuild the capacity for a self-sustaining recovery. Recent indications are 
that this prospect has not been realised. The emerging world has however performed well 
with the potential to generate such a sustained recovery. These developments have drawn 
significant interest to the Asian emerging economies and on their changing role in the global 
economy and in the international financial system. 
It  is  my  honour  and  great  pleasure to  speak  at this  2010  Institute  of  International  Finance 
Annual  Membership  Meeting.  My  remarks  today  will  focus  on  the  challenges  in  managing 
such a sustained recovery with specific focus on the potential for emerging Asia to rise to 
these challenges in this new global economic and financial environment. The final part of my 
remarks will be on the changes taking place in the international financial environment from 
the perspective of emerging Asia. 
As growth in the developed world slows, weighed down by structural factors, will the global 
environment  of  increasing  interdependence  then  dampen  the  prospects  for  the  Asian 
emerging  economies?  Asia  comprises  highly  diverse  economies.  South  East  Asia,  with  a 
population of more than 500 million people is strategically located south of China and east of 
India, has been since the 13th century an important trading hub connecting Asia to the West. 
Being the most open economies in Asia, and perhaps in the world, we, therefore stand to be 
the most vulnerable to global developments. 
While economic stimulus is vital for crisis containment, it will not, however, be sufficient to 
produce a self-sustaining recovery. The challenge is essentially the economic restructuring 
and  transformation,  the  reform  and  rebuilding  of  the  institutional  capacity  so  as  to  remain 
effective in the new environment and to be well positioned to manage future shocks. 
As emerging economies in Asia transition into this post crisis era, three important structural 
shifts are transforming the region. The first is the economic restructuring and the strategy to 
pursue more balanced sources of growth. This has involved significant shifts to new areas of 
comparative  advantage  and  new  areas  of  growth,  and  the  greater  emphasis  on  domestic 
demand as a driver of growth. While the export sector continues to be important, the pattern 
of  trade  has  changed  significantly  with  the  growing  importance  of  trade  with  emerging 
economies, in general, and with Asia, in particular. 
Perhaps  the  most  important  factor  that  has  for  several  decades  sustained  the  economic 
success of the emerging Asian economies is its economic flexibility to adjust to the changing 
conditions  in  the  global  environment.  This  economic  flexibility  is  supported  by  the  high 
degree  of  labour  and  capital  mobility  within  the  national  economies  and  the  significant 
investment  accorded  to  education  and  to  infrastructure  development.  The  region  has  also 
adopted a pragmatic approach to policy that is not constrained by rigid ideology. In this more 
recent  decade,  institutional  development,  extensive  financial  reforms,  and  the  adoption  of 
new business models have been an important part of this transformation process.  
Several of the economies in emerging Asia’s have transformed their production capacity in 
the manufacturing and services sector to meet the changing demands of the global economy 
BIS Review 131/2010 
 1
 and  the  growing  consumer  market  in  Asia.  Given  the  different  stages  of  development  and 
endowment  of  natural  resources  in  the  region,  the  emerging  economies  in  Asia  have  also 
leveraged  on  their  respective  distinct  comparative  advantages.  This  has  resulted  in  intra-
regional  division  of  labour  and  specialisation,  and  the  capacity  to  undertake  the  entire 
spectrum of the supply chain for a wide range of products and services.  
Part  of  the  economic  restructuring  has  also  involved  the  greater  emphasis  on  domestic 
demand  as  an  important  source  of  growth.  This  has  involved  significant  increases  in 
domestic  private  consumption  and  investment  activities.  Rising  income  levels  and  the 
presence of a young demographic structure with a high propensity to consume has resulted 
in a huge consumer market and the development of an extensive modern retail sector across 
the  region.  The  potential  sustainability  of  this  trend  is  supported  by  the  absence  of 
inflationary trends, of large scale unemployment, or of high levels of indebtedness.  
The  second  fundamental  trend  is  the  intensification  of  regional  economic  and  financial 
integration. This has been facilitated by the ability to leverage on complementarities in the 
region arising from diversity and differences in comparative advantage. Intra-regional trade 
has been a major contributor to the recent recovery in Asia. Intra-regional investment flows 
have  also  gained  momentum.  Businesses  in  the  region  are  increasingly  leveraging  on 
regional  complementarities  and  taking  advantage  of  the  growing  markets  in  the  region 
through  regional  trade  agreements  to  achieve  the  aspiration  for  ASEAN  to  become  an 
Economic Community by 2015.  
As  high  saving  economies,  it  is  recognized  that  there  is  an  important  need  for  a  more 
efficient  intermediation  of  the  surplus  funds  in  the  region.  This  is  to  not  only  effectively 
channel  these  funds  into  productive  investment  opportunities  in  the  region,  but  also  to 
finance  the  massive  development  of  infrastructure  required  by  the  region.  As  part  of  the 
increased  regional  financial  integration,  there  is  now  increased  regional  presence  and 
participation  in  the  domestic  financial  systems  of  the  region.  This  phenomenon  has  been 
supported by the progressive financial liberalisation, the development of domestic financial 
markets,  the  greater  use  of  domestic  currency  to  facilitate  bilateral  trade  activities  and  the 
development of the payments and settlement systems. 
The economic and financial regional integration has also been reinforced by a higher level of 
regional cooperation. Earlier regional cooperation had focused mainly on trade, investment 
and development. This decade has seen the cooperation shift to efforts to address financial 
stability issues, including in surveillance, crisis management, liquidity support arrangements, 
financial supervision and financial market development.  
The  approach  in  forging  greater  financial  integration  in  Asia  will  be  different  from  that 
adopted by Europe. The region does not have centralised institutions to coordinate financial 
integration but has leveraged on the existing intra-regional groupings and networks to forge 
greater cooperation and collaboration in areas of common interest. The region has its own 
monetary  and  financial  stability  committee  that  is  supported  by  arrangements  for  regional 
surveillance to identify risks and vulnerabilities to the region. Also in place is an integrated 
crisis  management  framework  that  will  be  operationalised  in  the  event  of  an  imminent 
financial  crisis  in  the  region.  Recently  the  region  successfully  organised  two  schemes  for 
reserve pooling, the Asian Bond Fund and the ASEAN+3 Chiang Mai Multilateralised Swap 
arrangement as a liquidity support facility.  
As economic and financial systems in Asia continue to transform and as the region becomes 
more  integrated  and  cohesive,  this  has  not  only  enhanced  the  potential  for  the  region  to 
contribute to global growth but also enhanced the resilience of the region and thus its role in 
contributing to global financial stability. These trends support the global efforts by the various 
international groupings and multilateral agencies in the search for solutions to achieve global 
financial stability and sustainable growth. 
The transition from G7 to G20 is recognised as a positive step forward that extends its reach 
beyond  the  developed  world.  But  the  representation  in  G20  is  by  virtue  of  the  size  of  the 
2 
 BIS Review 131/2010
 economy  and  not  by  representation  of  specific  groups  of  countries.  Its  outreach  and 
inclusiveness is therefore limited, and small and medium sized emerging economies are not 
part  of  this  process.  The  G20  is,  nevertheless,  an  important  global  forum  for  considering 
global  issues  and  will  have  an  important  role  in  setting  the  direction  for  global  policies. 
Earlier,  the  cohesiveness,  the  sense  of  purpose  and  urgency  of  the  G20  did  indeed 
contribute to restoring confidence in the global financial system and the coordinated policy 
stimulus  was  an important  catalyst  for  the  economic  recovery.  In  recent  months, however, 
the  momentum  for  this  coordinated  actions  have  dissipated  and  there  have  been  differing 
positions on several important issues. At the same time, a number of the major crisis affected 
countries  have  implemented  their  own  financial  reform  plans.  In  view  of  the  far  reaching 
implications of any reform agenda, it is an important global responsibility to ensure that the 
reforms achieve their intended results and that this new phase of globalisation will result in a 
more inclusive international financial system that will allow for the effective participation in the 
global  economy  and  international  financial  system  regardless  of  size  or  stage  of 
developments. 
On the specific regulatory reforms to address the issues and problems that caused the crisis, 
of  importance,  is  that  the  goal  of  such  regulatory  reform  should  not  be  overlooked  – 
promoting  financial  stability  is  a  means  to  an  end  and  the  ultimate  goal  is  to  achieve 
sustainable growth and development. Many have already highlighted the potential increased 
regulatory  costs  on  intermediation  and  hence  on  economic  activity.  This  is  even  more 
relevant  in  Asia  where  there  is  greater  reliance  on  the  banking  sector  for  financing.  The 
efforts  undertaken  to  comprehensively  assess  the  macroeconomic  impact  including  by  the 
IIF is highly relevant and will be important to the reform process. 
A further concern and one that is less discussed is on the implementation of the regulatory 
reform. With greater capital mobility across borders, the stricter regulations could result in the 
migration  of  financial  business  to  less  regulated  market  segments,  institutions  or  financial 
centres. Important to this is the need for the development of the framework for cross border 
policy  coordination  and  resolution.  In  Asia,  efforts  are  underway  to  address  these  specific 
issues  recognising  that  in  this  interconnected  environment,  the  execution  of  remedial  and 
containment measures will be highly complex and challenging. Focus is also being given to 
having enhanced surveillance and oversight that is complemented by a robust framework for 
governance, transparency and accountability. 
Given  the  strong  presence  of  international  institutions in  the  Asian  region,  we  have  strong 
interest in the establishment of an effective cross border resolution mechanism so that any 
failure of such large and systemically important institutions with cross border representations 
can  be  dealt  with  effectively  in  an  orderly  manner.  This  will  require  cooperation  and 
coordination  across  countries,  taking  into  consideration  their  differing  regulatory  and  legal 
systems. 
A  further  priority  in  emerging  Asia  is  the  promotion  of  responsible  market  practices  and 
consumer protection given the stage of development and level of financial literacy. There is 
significant  scope  for  creating  greater  global  momentum  for  improvements  in  regulatory 
standards on market practices.  
Much  work  still  remains  ahead  and  would  require  resolve  and  commitment  in  this  reform 
agenda.  The  more  inclusive  global  process  is  critical  to  this  effort  and  should  be  further 
deepened to truly reflect the global dimension of the financial system in this 21st century. 
On the recent increasingly intense debate on the role of the exchange rate as the solution to 
the global imbalances, it needs to be recognised that the foreign exchange market is not like 
any other markets. With a daily transaction amounting up to USD4 trillion, it is the most liquid 
and dynamic market in the world. It is a market that is prone to excessive movements and 
overshooting.  Any  effort  to  engineer  a  significant  exchange  rate  adjustment  within  a  short 
period of time carries the risk of highly destabilising consequences. Global imbalances that 
have been built up over several years need to be unwound by a combination of adjustments 
BIS Review 131/2010 
 3
 thus 
the  necessary  due  diligence,  disclosure  and 
in  demand,  prices  and  exchange  rates.  Over  reliance  on  the  exchange  rate  to  do  the 
adjustment may not only not produce the desired result, but it also risks becoming a trigger 
factor to causing instability and future crisis. 
The final development that I wish to say something on is the global development of Islamic 
finance  and  its  increasing  role  in  enhancing  global  economic  and  financial  linkages 
particularly  among  emerging  economies.  Islamic  finance  is  all  about  basic  banking  that  is 
always supported by underlying economic activity. Its profit sharing feature provides for risk 
sharing  and 
transparency,  risk 
management  and  governance.  The  industry  is  also  well  supported  by  the  regulatory  and 
supervisory  standards  issued  by  the  Islamic  Financial  Services  Board  (IFSB).  While  the 
focus  has  been  on  keeping  the  regulation  abreast  with  the  developments  in  the  financial 
system,  emphasis  is  also  given  on  the  supervisory  oversight,  capacity  building,  and 
institutional and financial infrastructure development as part of the efforts to ensure financial 
stability. The most recent significant development was the establishment of the International 
Islamic  Liquidity  Management  Corporation  (IILM)  that  will  issue  highly  rated  short-term 
Islamic  instruments  to  facilitate  more  efficient  liquidity  management  of  cross  border 
investments.  
The  global  challenges  call  for  a  collaborative  approach  to  strengthen  the  prospects  for  a 
global recovery. The way forward is also to recognise the relative strengths of different parts 
of the world and the potential to leverage on these strengths. The transformation of Asia in 
this  new  environment  offers  the  prospects  for  a  greater  shared  responsibility  towards  a 
greater shared prosperity in the world. 
4 
 BIS Review 131/2010
