Daniel K Tarullo: Problems in mortgage servicing 
Testimony  by  Mr  Daniel  K  Tarullo,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal 
Reserve System, before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, US Senate, 
Washington DC, 1 December 2010. 
 Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Shelby, and other members of the Committee, thank you for 
your invitation to this morning’s hearing on problems in mortgage servicing.  
In the first portion of my testimony, I will explain our current understanding of the nature and 
extent of the deficiencies in mortgage documentation that have been so apparent in the robo-
signing misconduct, as well as what the banking agencies are doing in support of a broader 
interagency effort to develop a full picture of these problems. I also want to address the issue 
of  so-called  put  backs  of  mortgage-backed  securities  (MBS)  to  mortgage  originators  or 
securitization  sponsors.  Though  only  indirectly  related  to  robo-signing  and  associated 
servicing  flaws,  financial  exposure  resulting  from  put  backs  could  be  more  significant  for 
some institutions than that from documentation flaws.  
In  the  second  portion  of  my  testimony,  I  will  turn  to  the  question  of  appropriate  policy 
responses – with respect to specific regulated financial institutions, to supervisory practices 
more generally, and to the structural problems we have observed in the mortgage servicing 
industry, including the discouragingly sluggish pace of mortgage modifications. This last point 
is  a  matter  of  concern  not  only  because  of  its  significance  for  the  millions  of  American 
families  who  are  unable  to  maintain  their  mortgage  payments  on  homes  that  have  lost 
considerable value in recent years, but also because of the importance from a macroeconomic 
perspective  of  realizing  as  quickly  and  efficiently  as  possible  a  clearing  of  housing  prices, 
which would help create the conditions for a market recovery.  
Mortgage documentation and other servicing issues 
Foreclosure is a legal process initiated to terminate a borrower’s interest in a property and is 
permitted only when the borrower has defaulted on the debt obligation for a specified period. 
The  process  allows  the  lender  to  sell  the  property  and  use  the  proceeds  to  satisfy  the 
borrower’s unpaid debt to the extent it is secured by the property. Foreclosure requirements 
are generally established by state laws and each state has its own statutes, rules, and court 
decisions pertaining to foreclosures.  
Some  23  states,  known  as  judicial  foreclosure  states,  require  foreclosures  to  be  reviewed 
and  approved  by  a  court.  Nonjudicial  foreclosure  states  have  different  processes  for 
foreclosures  that  do  not  require  the  creditor  to  obtain  court  approval  for  a  foreclosure,  but 
instead  impose  varying  waiting  periods  and  documentation,  filing,  and notice  requirements 
after a default occurs and before a foreclosure sale may take place. In nonjudicial foreclosure 
states, the homeowner typically has access to the court in a foreclosure matter only if the 
homeowner  initiates  a  suit  to  stop  the  foreclosure  process  or  seeks  protection  in  a 
bankruptcy court.  
Because mortgage servicers maintain the official accounting of all amounts paid and owed 
by  borrowers,  they  serve  as  the  critical  link  between  borrowers  and  mortgage  holders.  In 
addition, servicers manage loan defaults, including the negotiation of loan modification and 
repayment plans with borrowers. Should the servicer decide to initiate foreclosure, it would 
often  do  so  as  the  agent  for  third  parties,  such  as  securitization  trusts.  In  this  regard, 
servicers  have  responsibilities  to  investors  holding  residential  MBS.  Servicers  also  have 
responsibilities  to  borrowers  to  maintain  accurate  and  complete  records  of  payments 
BIS Review 162/2010 
 1
received,  amounts  advanced,  notifications  made  to  borrowers,  and  changes  of  payment 
terms with respect to any mortgage modification discussions.  
Foreclosure  documentation  typically  requires  an  assertion  that  the  agent  bringing  forth  the 
action has the legal right to foreclose and that the loan is in default. The document filings 
contain details of the transactions and the amounts owed. These documents typically include 
attestations  signed  by  individuals  who  have  personal  knowledge  of  the  facts  and  who  are 
properly authorized to make such assertions. In most jurisdictions, the documents must be 
signed  by  these  individuals  in  the  presence  of  a  notary,  following  proper  notarization 
procedures. Lenders and servicers are responsible for ensuring that the individuals who sign 
these  documents  are  duly  authorized  and  have  appropriate  knowledge  of  the  facts  and 
circumstances. In addition, lenders and servicers are responsible for ensuring the accuracy 
of records and the facts recited in the foreclosure documents.  
State and local laws govern the recordation process for real estate transfers and mortgage 
filings and assignments. Given the multiple sales and assignments of mortgage loans that 
often  occur,  concerns  have  been  raised  regarding  investors’  or  servicers’  rights  to  initiate 
foreclosure  actions.  Although  state-by-state  practices  vary  considerably,  generally  the 
noteholder has the right to initiate foreclosure, once default has occurred, if an original note 
can  be  produced  and  the  current  holder’s  ownership  is  verified.  If  there  is  no  controversy 
concerning  ownership  of  the  note,  but  rather  an  inability  to  locate  original  documents, 
processes usually allow for foreclosure to proceed, albeit at some cost and delay. If there is 
some question of ownership, the investor or servicer may be required to produce evidence of 
ownership before a foreclosure can proceed.  
Since matters regarding real estate titles and foreclosures are generally governed by state 
law, state attorneys general are undertaking a joint review of lenders and servicers focusing 
on  the  reported  problems  in  foreclosures.  In  addition,  numerous  federal  agencies  have 
launched  investigations,  including  the  examinations  in  process  by  the  federal  financial 
regulators.  
The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Office of Thrift Supervision, the Federal 
Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Federal Reserve are conducting an in-depth review 
of practices at the largest mortgage servicing operations. The interagency examinations and 
reviews focus on foreclosure practices generally, but with an emphasis on the internal control 
breakdowns that led to inaccurate affidavits and other questionable legal documents being 
used in the foreclosure process. The agencies are reviewing firms’ policies, procedures, and 
internal controls, including sampling loan files. We have also solicited the views of consumer 
organizations to help detect problems at specific servicers. The agencies expect the initial 
on-site  portion  of  our  work  to  be  completed  by  the  end  of  the  year.  The  agencies  plan  to 
publish a summary overview in early 2011 that will describe the range of industry practices 
found in the examinations and identify weaknesses requiring remediation.  
The Federal Reserve has supervisory and regulatory authority for bank holding companies 
and their nonbank subsidiaries, as well as for approximately 800 state-chartered banks that 
are  members  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  (state  member  banks),  and  certain  other 
financial  institutions  and  activities.  We  work  with  other  federal  and  state  supervisory 
authorities to ensure the safety and soundness of the banking industry, foster the stability of 
the  financial  system,  and  provide  for  fair  and  equitable  treatment  of  consumers  in  their 
financial  transactions.  The  Federal  Reserve  is  engaged  in  both  regulation,  which  involves 
establishing  the  rules  within  which  banking  organizations  must  operate,  and  supervision, 
which  involves  reviewing  the  efforts  of  banking  organizations  to  abide  by  those  rules  and 
remain, overall, in safe and sound condition.  
The  Federal  Reserve  serves  as  the  primary  federal  regulator  for  two  of  the  10  largest 
servicers affiliated with banking organizations, one a holding company affiliate and the other 
a  state  member  bank.  The  Federal  Reserve  is  participating  with  the  other  federal  banking 
agencies in examining the foreclosure policies and practices of the other large institutions. 
2 
 BIS Review 162/2010
For  additional  information  on  foreclosure  processes,  we  have  sent  a  self-assessment 
questionnaire  to  other  Federal  Reserve-regulated  institutions  that  engage  in  mortgage 
servicing but are not part of the interagency examination effort.  
While quite preliminary, the banking agencies’ findings from the supervisory review suggest 
significant weaknesses in risk-management, quality control, audit, and compliance practices 
as  underlying  factors  contributing  to  the  problems  associated  with  mortgage  servicing  and 
foreclosure documentation. We have also found shortcomings in staff training, coordination 
among loan modification and foreclosure staff, and management and oversight of third-party 
service providers, including legal services. It is for this reason that we expanded the review 
to  include  an  examination  of  pre-foreclosure  loans,  or  those  past  due  but  not  yet  in  the 
foreclosure  process,  and  certain  third-party  service  providers.  As  examiners  identify 
weaknesses,  they  will  require  firms  to  take  remedial  action  and,  when  necessary,  require 
servicers  to  address  resource  shortfalls,  training  and  coordination  problems,  and  control 
failures.  
It is important to recognize that the extent of these problems is not the same across all firms. 
Nonetheless, the problems are sufficiently widespread that they suggest structural problems 
in  the  mortgage  servicing  industry.  The  servicing  industry  overall  has  not  been  up  to  the 
challenge  of  handling  the  large  volumes  of  distressed  mortgages.  The  banking  agencies 
have been focused for some time on the problems related to modifying mortgage loans and 
the large number of consumer complaints by homeowners seeking loan modifications. It has 
now  become  evident  that  significant  parts  of  the  servicing  industry  also  failed  to  handle 
foreclosures properly.  
While we are still in the process of determining the extent of these problems and the required 
supervisory response, it is clear that the industry will need to make substantial investments to 
improve its functioning in these areas and supervisors must ensure that these improvements 
occur.  Moreover,  fixing  the  problems  in  the  mortgage  servicing  industry  may  also  require 
thinking about some fundamental structural changes to the current mortgage system. I will 
discuss the issue of structural solutions to these issues in more detail later in my testimony.  
Investor repurchase requests 
The  cost  associated  with  foreclosure  documentation  problems,  including  robo-signing,  are 
not the only potential liabilities facing financial institutions in the wake of the mortgage and 
housing crisis. As losses in MBS have been escalating, investors in MBS and purchasers of 
unsecuritized  whole  loans  are  more  frequently  exploring,  and  in  some  cases  asserting, 
contractual and securities law claims against the parties that originated the loans, sold the 
loans,  underwrote  securities  offerings,  or  had  other  roles  in  the  process.  The  essence  of 
these  claims  is  that  mortgages  in  the  securitization  pools,  or  sold  as  unsecuritized  whole 
loans,  did  not  conform  to  representations  and  warranties  made  about  their  quality  – 
specifically that the loan applications contained misrepresentations or the underwriting was 
not in conformance with stated standards.  
The potential liability associated with contract claims in securitizations is usually called put 
back risk because many of the relevant agreements permit the buyer of the mortgages to put 
them back to the seller at par. Buyers can demand that the seller or another party that makes 
representations  repurchase  the  mortgages  if  defects  are  found  in  the  underlying  loan 
documentation  or  in  the  underwriting  that  conflict  with  the  sale  agreements.  Although  the 
representations and warranties in the various agreements vary considerably, they frequently 
require that the defect materially and adversely affect the value of the loan before put back 
rights can be exercised. At the time of the put back, the mortgage loan may have become 
seriously  delinquent  or  entered  into  default.  Because  underperforming  mortgages  are 
typically valued substantially less than par, the put back transfers any potential loss from the 
buyer back to the original seller or mortgage securitizer.  
BIS Review 162/2010 
 3
Given  the  poor  performance  of  the  mortgage  assets,  investors,  including  the  Government 
Sponsored Enterprises (GSEs), have sought to pursue put back claims through various legal 
avenues, including requesting that mortgage servicers provide underlying mortgage files and 
the requisite documents. A GSE will generally buy a loan out of an MBS pool when the loan 
becomes 120 days delinquent. The GSE will then conduct a review of the delinquent loan 
file, and if it finds that the loan did not comply with its underwriting standards, it will request 
that the loan be repurchased by the originator/seller or that the GSE be made whole on any 
credit losses incurred.  
During the third quarter of 2010, Fannie Mae collected $1.6 billion in unpaid principal balance 
(UPB)  from  originators,  and  currently  has  $7.7  billion  UPB  in  outstanding  repurchase 
requests, $2.8 billion of which has been outstanding for more than 120 days. Freddie Mac 
has  $5.6  billion  UPB  in  outstanding  repurchase  requests,  $1.8  billion  of  which  has  been 
outstanding for more than 120 days. As of the third quarter of 2010, the four largest banks 
held $9.7 billion in repurchase reserves, most of which is intended for GSE put backs.  
There are also pending claims by some investors alleging that underwriters and sponsors of 
securitizations  failed  to  comply  with  the  federal  securities  laws  covering  the  offering 
documents and registration statements. These suits specifically reference descriptions of the 
risks  to  investors,  the  quality  of  assets  in  the  securitization,  the  order  in  which  investors 
would  be  paid,  or  other  factors.  Most  of  these  lawsuits  are  in  the  early  stages,  and  it  is 
difficult to ascertain the probability that investors will be able to shift a substantial portion of 
the losses on defaulted mortgages back to the parties that sold the loans or underwrote the 
offerings.  
While the full extent of put back exposure is for this reason hard to specify with precision, the 
risk has been known for some time and has been an ongoing focus of supervisory oversight 
at  some  institutions.  However,  in  light  of  recent  increased  investor  activity,  the  Federal 
Reserve has been conducting a detailed evaluation of put back risk to financial institutions. 
We  are  asking  institutions  that  originated  large  numbers  of  mortgages  or  sponsored 
significant MBS to assess and provide for these risks as part of their overall capital planning 
process.  
Supervisory responses 
The revelation of documentation flaws in foreclosure processes raise two kinds of questions 
for  supervisors:  First,  what  actions  are  appropriate  and  sufficient  to  respond  to  problems 
identified  at  specific  regulated  banking  organizations?  Second,  what  does  the  failure  of 
supervisory examinations to uncover these flaws counsel for future supervisory practice?  
With  respect  to  the  question  of  actions  aimed  at  specific  institutions,  the  Federal  Reserve 
and the other federal banking agencies have significant supervisory and enforcement tools 
that  can  be  used  to  address  certain  types  of  deficiencies  in  the  foreclosure  and  mortgage 
transfer process. For example, numerous enforcement tools are available to address safety 
and  soundness  issues  such  as  inadequate  controls  and  processes,  weaknesses  in  risk-
management and quality control, and certain types of compliance weaknesses in foreclosure 
operations. These tools include supervisory enforcement actions that require an institution to 
correct deficient operations in a prescribed period of time and Civil Money Penalties (CMPs) 
for egregious actions. The agencies may also lower examination ratings, which can result in 
limiting  the  permissible  activities  and  affiliations  of  financial  firms  and  trigger  other 
supervisory  reviews  and  limitations,  and  restrict  the  ability  of  institutions  to  expand.  The 
agencies  also  have  the  authority  to  assess  CMPs  on  individuals  who  are  responsible  for 
violations,  to  issue  cease  and  desist  orders  on  responsible  individuals,  or,  if  the  statutory 
criteria  are  met,  to  remove  them  from  banking.  In  addition,  we  may  make  referrals  to  law 
enforcement  agencies,  or  require  institutions  to  file  Suspicious  Activity  Reports,  as 
appropriate.  
4 
 BIS Review 162/2010
Although  the  examinations  are  not  yet  fully  completed,  based  on  what  we  have  already 
learned, the Federal Reserve expects to use many or all of these tools through the course of 
our review of foreclosure and other mortgage matters. In particular, the Federal Reserve has 
already  emphasized  to  the  industry  and  to  institutions  we  supervise  the  importance  of 
addressing identified weaknesses in risk-management, quality control, audit, and compliance 
practices. The problems that are evident to date raise significant reputation and legal risk for 
the major mortgage servicers. These weaknesses require immediate remedial action. They 
will also affect the rating assigned by Federal Reserve supervisors to management of bank 
holding  companies,  even  where  the  servicing  activity  was  in  a  banking  subsidiary  of  a 
holding  company.  In  addition,  the  federal  banking  agencies  expect  that  employees  are 
adequately  trained  and  have  sufficient  resources  to  appropriately  review  the  facts  and 
circumstances  of  files  when  preparing  documents,  and  that  legal  processes  are  fully  and 
properly  followed.  Banking  organizations  also  must  ensure  quality  control  for  third-party 
service providers, including legal services.  
With  respect  to  future  supervisory  practice  more  generally,  two  points  for  increased 
emphasis are already apparent. First, this  episode has underscored the importance of our 
using  the  new  authority  given  the  Federal  Reserve  in  the  Dodd-Frank  Wall  Street  Reform 
and Consumer Protection Act to send our examiners into non-bank affiliates of large bank 
holding  companies,  including  those  in  large  institutions  that  have  become  bank  holding 
companies only in the last couple of years.  
Second, our experience suggests that the utility of examining and validating internal control 
processes within firms may extend beyond improvements to the specific processes subject to 
the exam. We have found that problems in foreclosure practices do not seem as pervasive in 
institutions  in  which  we  had  previously  examined  other  internal  control  processes,  found 
shortcomings, and insisted on corrective action. While we would not draw strong conclusions 
from  such  a  limited  experience,  it  seems  possible  that  a  firm  may  improve  its  general 
approach  to  control  processes  once  it  has  been  required  to  remedy  problems  in  discrete 
areas.  If  this  relationship  is  borne  out,  it  could  be  a  significant  advance  in  supervisory 
practice,  insofar  as  resource  constraints  will  always  limit  the  number  of  supervisory 
examinations.  
Possible need for structural solutions 
Beyond remedial or punitive measures directed at specific firms and future-oriented changes 
in supervisory practice, structural solutions may be needed to address the range of problems 
associated with  mortgage  servicing.  Similarly,  the  foreclosure  documentation  problems  are 
another  reminder  of  the  degree  to  which  foreclosure  has  been  preferred  to  mortgage 
modification, notwithstanding various efforts to change this imbalance. Here again, a more 
structural solution may be needed.  
The  explosive  growth  of  securitization  as  a  vehicle 
financing  mortgages  was 
accompanied by the emergence of a sizeable mortgage servicing industry – that is, a group 
of  firms  servicing  mortgages  that  they  did  not  own  or,  in  many  cases,  that  they  had  not 
originated. While there have surely been economies associated with this industry, there have 
also  been  chronic  problems.  It  has  been  increasingly  apparent  that  the  inadequacy  of 
servicer  resources  to  deal  with  mortgage  modifications  –  an  area  that  was  a  point  of 
supervisory  emphasis  –  was  actually  a  reflection  of  a  larger  inability  to  deal  with  the 
challenges  entailed  in  servicing  mortgages  in  many  jurisdictions  and  dealing  with  a 
complicated investor base. For example, foreclosure procedures are specifically the province 
of real property law governed by the states, and can vary not only by state, but also within 
states  and sometimes  even  within  counties.  With  or  without  regulatory  changes,  it is  quite 
probable that servicer fees to securitization trusts will increase to reflect the costs associated 
with the complexities of the contemporary mortgage model.  
for 
BIS Review 162/2010 
 5
The impetus for change in the mortgage servicing industry is likely only to increase as the 
advantages of servicing rights for regulatory capital purposes become limited after the new 
Basel  III  requirements  are  implemented.1  It  is  possible  that  servicing  issues  can  be 
satisfactorily  addressed  through  the  actions  of  the  various  primary  regulators.  However,  in 
light of the range of problems already encountered, and the prospect of further changes in 
the  industry  –  including  the  possible  migration  of  more  servicing  activity  to  non-banking 
organizations – it seems reasonable at least to consider whether a national set of standards 
for mortgage servicers may be warranted.  
The case for concerted, coordinated action is much clearer with respect to the slow-moving 
pace  of  mortgage  modifications.  Regardless  of  the  findings  that  emerge  from  the 
examinations underway, and remedial actions required to correct past mistakes, this episode 
has again drawn attention to what can only be described as a perverse set of incentives for 
homeowners  with  underwater  mortgages.  Homeowners  who  try  to  obtain  a  modification  of 
the terms of their mortgages are all too frequently subject to delay and disappointment, while 
those who simply stop paying their mortgages have found that they can often stay in their 
homes  rent  free  for  a  time  before  the  foreclosure  process  moves  ahead.  Moreover,  many 
homeowners believe, reportedly on the basis of communications from servicers, that the only 
way  they  can  qualify  for  modifications  is  by  stopping  their  mortgage  payments  and  thus 
becoming delinquent.  
Quite  apart  from  the  impact  upon  families  who  lose  their  homes,  the  dominance  of 
foreclosures over modifications raises macroeconomic concerns. The number of foreclosures 
initiated  on  residential  properties  has  soared  from  about  1  million  in  2006,  the  year  that 
house prices peaked, to 2.8 million last year. Over the first three quarters of this year, we 
have seen a further 2 million foreclosure filings, and an additional 2.3 million homes were in 
foreclosure at the end of September. All told, we expect about 2.5 million foreclosure filings 
this year and next year and about 2.4 million more in 2012. While our outlook is for filings to 
decline in coming years, they will remain high by historical standards. Currently, more than 
4.5 million mortgage loans are 90 days or more past due or in foreclosure. These numbers 
compare  to  just  520,000  permanent  loan  modifications  executed  under  the  Treasury 
Department’s Home Affordable Modification Program (HAMP) and an additional 1.6 million 
proprietary  loan  modifications  by  servicers  participating  in  the  HOPE  NOW  Alliance 
program.2  
The Federal Reserve believes that in most cases the best way to assist struggling borrowers 
is a mortgage modification allowing them to retain their home with an affordable mortgage 
payment.  In  a  housing  market  where  values  have  declined  so  much,  following  a  period  in 
which all actors relied upon rising house prices to sustain mortgage practices, foreclosures 
simply do not make sense as a preferred response. Foreclosures are costly to all parties and 
more broadly to our economy. Lenders and investors incur financial losses arising from the 
litigation  expenses  associated  with  the  foreclosure  process  and  the  loss  on  the  defaulted 
mortgage when the foreclosed property sells at a liquidation price that is substantially less 
than the loan balance. Local governments must contend with lower property tax revenue and 
the  ramifications  of  neglected  properties  that  may  threaten  public  safety.  Additionally, 
neighbors  and  neighborhoods  suffer  potential  spillover  effects  from  foreclosure  sales 
because foreclosures may reduce the attractiveness of the neighborhood or  may signal to 
                                                 
1   The proposed Basel III capital rules would simultaneously introduce a specific minimum common equity ratio 
and  define  “common  equity”  so  as  to  limit  or  exclude  consideration  of  items  that  may  not  provide  the  loss 
absorbing capacity that common equity is supposed to represent. 
2   Written testimony of Phyllis Caldwell, Chief  of Homeownership Preservation Office, U.S. Department of the 
Treasury,  before  the  House  Financial  Services  Subcommittee  on  Housing  and  Community  Opportunity 
hearing  on  “Robo-Signing,  Chain  of  Title,  Loss  Mitigation  and  Other  Issues  in  Mortgage  Servicing,” 
November 18, 2010. 
6 
 BIS Review 162/2010
potential buyers a forthcoming decline in neighborhood quality. In the end, an overhang of 
homes awaiting foreclosure is unhealthy for the housing market and can delay a recovery in 
housing markets and the broader economy.  
Several possible explanations have been suggested for the prominence of foreclosures: the 
lack of servicer capacity to execute modifications, purported financial incentives for servicers 
to  foreclose  rather  than  modify,  what  until  recently  appeared  to  be  easier  execution  of 
foreclosures  relative  to  modifications,  limits  on  the  authority  of  securitization  trustees,  and 
conflicts  between  primary  and  secondary  lien  holders.  Whatever  the  merits  and  relative 
weights  of  these  various  explanations,  the  social  costs  of  this  situation  are  huge.  It  just 
cannot be the case that foreclosure is preferable to modification for a significant proportion of 
mortgages where the deadweight costs of foreclosure, including a distressed sale discount, 
are  so  high.  While  some  banks  and  other  industry  participants  have  stepped  forward  to 
increase the rate of modifications relative to foreclosures, many have not done enough. We 
need  renewed  attention  in  many  quarters  of  government  and  the  financial  industry,  and 
among investors in mortgage-backed securities, to the lagging incidence of modifications.  
Conclusion 
In conclusion, I regret to say that the hangover from the housing bubble of this past decade 
is still very much with us, as revealed both in the inadequate capacity of mortgage servicers 
and the continued impact of foreclosed homes on the housing market. While bank regulatory 
agencies  can  and  should  respond  to  specific  failings  that  are  being  identified  in  our 
interagency  examination,  there  is  a  strong  case  to  be  made  that  broader  solutions  are 
needed  both  to  address  structural  problems  in  the  mortgage  servicing  industry  and  to 
accelerate the pace of mortgage modifications or other loss mitigation efforts.  
Thank you very much for your attention. I would be happy to answer any questions you might 
have. 
BIS Review 162/2010 
 7
