 Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Financial services industry – opportunities and 
challenges for Asia and Europe 
Speech by Mr Muhammad bin Ibrahim, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at 
the 12th Asia-Europe Business Forum: “The Potential Role of Islamic Finance in Contributing 
to Global Financial Stability”, Brussels, 4 October 2010. 
 I am honoured to be invited to speak at this Asia-Europe Business Forum themed “Financial 
Services  Industry:  Opportunities  and  Challenges  for  Asia  and  Europe”.  During  a  time  of 
global  economic  challenge  and  uncertainty,  following  the  recent  unprecedented  global 
financial  and  economic  crisis,  it  is  timely  for  this  forum  to  take  place  as  a  platform  for 
business leaders and policymakers across Asia and Europe to reflect on the challenges and 
to discuss on solutions that can contribute to restoration of global financial stability. 
My address has a specific focus on Islamic finance since over the last ten years it has grown 
phenomenally and it will play an important role in promoting greater global financial stability. 
In the current search for an enduring solution to ensure stability of financial systems, Islamic 
finance offers tremendous potential in shaping more resilient financial systems that enables 
financial intermediaries to function efficiently within national economies and across borders. 
The much talk about discussions that banking should return to its fundamental functions of 
providing  financial  services  which  add  value  to  the  real  economy,  represents  the  very 
principle of Islamic finance that explains its relative resilience during the crisis.  
Effects of the 2008/09 global financial crisis and Asia’s response  
The recent crisis had the global financial system badly shaken with widespread effects of an 
unprecedented  scale  across  the  world.  The  Asian  region  has  however  demonstrated 
remarkable resilience during the crisis as most countries in Asia entered the crisis period with 
a sound set of economic and financial fundamentals, mainly attributed to the lessons learned 
from  the  Asian  financial  crisis  of  the  late  1990s.  It  was  painful.  It  was  a  bitter  lesson.  We 
embarked on a bold reform that fundamentally alters the landscape of our financial system. 
But the payouts have been tremendous. The governments of the Asian economies have now 
the  flexibility  to  implement  large  stimulus,  given  the  strong  economy  and  low  public  debt 
levels  in  the  region.  Credit  flows  to  the  private  sector  remain  undisrupted  as  financial 
institutions  in  the  Asian  countries  were  strong  and  well  capitalised.  The  household  and 
corporate  sectors  in  Asia  were  also  not  over  leveraged.  Furthermore,  Asia  was  not 
confronted  by  widespread  unemployment.  The  various  reform  measures  had  enabled  the 
Asian economies to build more shock absorbers and reduced the number of shock amplifiers 
in their economies following the 1997/98 financial crisis. What we have learnt is that there 
are no short cuts in reforming a broken system. We also learnt that we should always have 
an open mind in looking at probable solutions. Just like what a good doctor would prescribe, 
some time, administering bitter medicines are the only way to go. 
The  international  community  is  now  intensifying  its  efforts  to  strengthen  the  international 
financial  system,  with  the  aim  to  build  the  foundations  for  a  stronger  and  more  inclusive 
global economy. In this post-crisis era, the role and relevance of Islamic finance have gained 
increasing  attention.  Islamic  finance  emphasises  on  achieving  socio-economic  goals  in 
congruence with the Shariah objectives, thus reinforcing the fundamental disciplines that are 
essential to preserve financial stability. 
BIS Review 129/2010 
 1
 Overview of Islamic finance and linkages between Islamic finance and conventional 
financial system 
In this last decade, Islamic finance has evolved to become a complete and competitive form 
of  financial  intermediation  that  serves  both  Muslim  and  non-Muslims  consumers  and 
businesses.  The  Islamic  finance  industry  is  currently  worth  more  than  US$1  trillion  and 
growing  at  a  rate  of  15–20  percent  annually,  with  anticipation  of  further  growth  to  reach 
US$2 trillion  in  the  next  3  to  5  years,  as  more  countries  around  the  world  seek  to  further 
develop Islamic finance within their jurisdictions. Its appeal as a competitive and innovative 
form  of  intermediation  has  led  a  number  of  established  conventional  players  to  enter  the 
Islamic  finance  industry,  thus  widening  the  diversity  of  Islamic  financial  institutions  and  its 
product range. 
Exceptional  growth  in  Islamic  finance  is  registered  not  solely  in  the  Muslim  world,  but  now 
spans  across  the  western  world  and  the  Asia  Pacific  region  where  the  growth  is  driven  by 
commercial  and  business  considerations.  The  emerging  interest  in  Islamic  finance  includes 
countries  such  as  Australia,  Germany,  United  Kingdom,  France, 
Italy,  Luxembourg, 
Hong Kong,  Japan,  Korea  and  China,  with  initiatives  in  introducing  Islamic  finance  in  their 
financial systems. Such developments would create a dynamic and competitive environment 
for the global Islamic finance industry. 
The development of the Islamic financial system is guided by Shariah principles that form the 
very  foundation  which  contributes  to  its  overall  stability  and  resilience.  Shariah  embodies 
Islamic law with rules and regulations derived from the Quran and Sunnah, or practices of 
Prophet  Muhammad.  The  intrinsic  value  propositions  embedded  in  Islamic  finance  are 
universal and subscribe to the values of ethical finance and socially responsible investment. 
In  essence,  it  is  a  requirement  for  Islamic  financial  transactions  to  be  supported  by  an 
underlying  economic  activity,  with  business  and  trade  activities  that  generate  legitimate 
profits.  This  precondition  ensures  that  the  funds  are  channelled  into  productive  economic 
activity,  thus  strengthening  the  link  between  financial  and  productive  flows.  This  serves  to 
protect the Islamic financial system against the excesses, in terms of leveraging, imprudent 
risk  taking  and  speculative  activities  that  were  root  causes  of  the  recent  global  financial 
crisis. 
Profit and risk sharing are also fundamental elements in Islamic finance which strengthens 
incentives for appropriate due diligence to be undertaken to ensure the economic viability of 
business  activity  and  profits  that  are  commensurate  with  the  risks  involved.  This  in  turn 
increases  for  greater  transparency  and  disclosure  in  Islamic  financial  transactions. 
Embedded  in  this  arrangement  are  also  good  governance  and  ethics,  together  with  the 
upholding of the universal values of justice and fairness provide implicit checks and balances 
in the system.  
These  very  elements  of  Islamic  finance,  which  are  essential  features  as  required  by  the 
principles  of  Shariah,  provide  an  in-built  mechanism  that  enhances  the  prospects  for  its 
soundness  and  stability.  These  explicit  elements  address  several  of  the  issues  that  have 
surfaced in the conventional financial system during the current crisis, including in particular 
the  breakdown  in  governance  that  led  to  indiscriminate  lending,  excessive  risk  taking  and 
irresponsible financial innovations that were motivated by greed and short-term gains. 
In Islamic finance, the process of innovation and formulation of Islamic financial products and 
services must also be done carefully and in accordance with Shariah. As it is recognised that 
unfettered  financial  innovation  can  become  a  major  source  of  instability  in  the  financial 
system, financial innovation in Islamic finance must have the primary objective of realising 
benefits to its users, thus incorporating ethical value propositions. The explicit risk sharing 
element between the financier and customer further ensures that these mutual benefits are 
well-supported through requirements for necessary information to be provided to the market 
on the risks borne by Islamic financial institutions. There is also the governance structure in 
2 
 BIS Review 129/2010
 place, for example, the need for the establishment of Shariah committees at Islamic financial 
institutions and Shariah audit. 
Innovation of competitive Shariah compliant products is exemplified by the sukuk or Islamic 
bonds  which  is  a  significant  and  vibrant  component  of  the  international  Islamic  financial 
system.  The  sukuk  are  structured  based  on  the  specific  contract  of  exchange  of  Shariah-
compliant assets with a risk sharing mechanism between issuers and investors. The sukuk 
instrument  is  seen  by  issuers  as  an  attractive  alternative  method  to  raise  capital  and 
investors are enthusiastically embracing it as a new asset class in their investment universe.  
Dynamism of the sukuk in the Islamic capital market is evident with the large variety of sukuk 
being  structured  and  issued,  including  exchangeable,  convertible  and  hybrid  sukuk.  The 
sukuk market stands at almost US$130 billion today and is growing at a rate of 40 percent 
annually. New issuance of sukuk in the global sukuk market has remained robust despite the 
challenging economic environment, with an increase of 43 percent to US$20 billion in 2009 
while linkages with Europe have resulted in a more cautious market in the first half of 2010 
which saw decline by about 20 percent in the global sukuk issuance, the trend is expected to 
reverse with initiatives by the Governments in Asia and the Middle East to raise funds for the 
implementation of infrastructure development and investment projects. 
In Malaysia, the Islamic financial system operates in parallel with the conventional financial 
system.  With  a  humble  beginning  of  establishing  the  first  Islamic  bank  in  1983,  Islamic 
finance  in  Malaysia  has  evolved  to  become  a  comprehensive  domestic  Islamic  financial 
system, comprising the Islamic banking institutions, the takaful industry, the Islamic money 
and  capital  markets.  Malaysia’s  Islamic  banking  sector  grew  20%  annually  since  2001  in 
terms of assets and as at the end of June 2010, the share of Islamic banking assets in the 
total  banking  sector  has  expanded  to  reach  20.9  percent  as  compared  to  6.9  percent  a 
decade ago. Malaysia  also remains the world’s largest sukuk market, accounting for  more 
than 60 percent of global sukuk issuances. Islamic finance prospers in Malaysia because it is 
competitive, innovative and in sync with what the market want. 
Recent developments of Islamic finance that strengthen its resilience 
Significant  milestones  achieved  in  the  recent  decade  in  the  area  of  international  financial 
infrastructure  provides  further  support  for  sustainable  and  orderly  development  and 
continued growth of Islamic finance. In 2002, the Islamic financial Services Board or IFSB 
was established with the role as an international prudential standard setting body for Islamic 
finance.  The  IFSB  has  been  instrumental  in  developing  and  issuing  global  prudential 
standards and guiding principles for the industry. 
Further efforts to ensure sustainability of Islamic finance in this new and more challenging 
environment include the formation of a Task Force on Islamic Finance and Global Financial 
Stability  by  the  Islamic  Development  Bank  and  IFSB.  The  report  by  the  Task  Force  was 
completed  in  April  this year  and  highlights  eight  building blocks to  strengthen  the  financial 
infrastructure  of  Islamic  finance,  drawing  also  on  important  lessons  learnt  from  the  global 
financial  crisis.  The  building  blocks  include  first,  ensuring  the  effective  implementation  of 
prudential standards; second, the development of robust liquidity management infrastructure; 
third,  the  establishment  of  strong  financial  safety  net;  fourth,  having  in  place  an  effective 
crisis management and resolution frameworks; fifth, further strengthening of the accounting, 
auditing  and  disclosure  standards;  sixth,  putting  in  place  an  effective  macro  prudential 
surveillance;  seventh,  having  credible  credit  rating  institutions  and  processes;  and  eighth; 
enhancing close international cooperation and coordination among countries, which includes 
capacity building and talent development. 
The  report  further  recommends  the  establishment  of  an  Islamic  Financial  Stability  Forum 
(IFSF) based at the IFSB as a strategic platform for productive dialogues to promote financial 
stability  in  the  Islamic  financial  system.  The  IFSF  would  be  an  important  institutional 
BIS Review 129/2010 
 3
 arrangement for the Islamic financial system to interface with the conventional system via the 
Financial Stability Board. With the growing significance of Islamic finance in the international 
financial  system,  this  is  critical  to  constructive  dialogue  and  promotes  a  comprehensive 
approach in efforts to strengthen global financial stability. 
Concluding remarks 
Let  me  conclude.  The  recent  international  financial  crisis  has  been  a  defining  event  in 
economic  history  and  its  effects  will  likely  cast  a  long  shadow  over  policymaking  in  the 
coming years.  
As  we  enter  into  a  gradual  stabilisation  and  recovery  period,  policymakers  are  now  faced 
with  the  challenge  to  find  an  enduring  solution  to  ensure  the  stability  of  financial systems. 
Islamic finance has a role in shaping the future of the global financial system and reinforcing 
ethical  and  moral  values  that  are  inherent  in  Islamic  finance  principles  and  fundamental 
towards  promoting  the  stability  of  the  global  financial  system.  Ongoing  efforts  to  further 
strengthen the resilience of Islamic financial industry would enhance the prospects for global 
growth and the potential of Islamic finance to contribute towards global financial stability. 
4 
 BIS Review 129/2010
